Electrochemical determination of the gallium-nitride photocorrosion potential in acidic media  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA04545J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA04545J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20978-20984Electrochemical determination of the gallium-nitride photocorrosion potential in acidic media

        
          
            D. R. 
            Baker
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            C. A. 
            Lundgren
          
        
      
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Sensors and Electron Devices Directorate, Adelphi, MD 20783, USA. E-mail: david.r.baker175.civ@mail.mil
Received 
      24th May 2017
    , Accepted 23rd September 2017First published on 23rd September 2017AbstractGallium nitride-based semiconductors have demonstrated their usefulness as efficient light absorbers with fast kinetics for photoelectrochemical water splitting, but they still need to demonstrate long lifetime stability in aqueous solutions. It is therefore necessary to understand how corrosion reaction potentials relate to the water splitting reactions, and to the conduction and valence bands of the semiconductor light absorber/reactor. In this study the previously established acidic media photocorrosion reaction of GaN to Ga3+ and 1/2N2 is electrochemically investigated. By using Mott–Schottky analysis the photocorrosion potential is found to be −0.66 ± 0.07 V vs. RHE (pH 1) relating it to Ga surface states acting as hole traps. The photocorrosion potential found by Mott–Schottky analysis is found to also relate to the Fermi level of GaN before and after etching as determined by XPS. SEM imaging is additionally used to confirm the photocorrosion potential, and shows that introducing hole scavengers to the electrolyte can limit the rate of photocorrosion.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical water splitting by semiconductors famously has three fundamental requirements for any technology to gain widespread use. They are (1): spectral overlap of absorbed radiation with the incident solar spectrum, (2): proper alignment of the valence and conduction bands to efficiently transfer photogenerated charges to the water splitting reactions, and (3): long-term stability in the highly reactive environment of a photoreactor.1 In both the photoelectrochemical-water splitting and photovoltaic fields III–V semiconductor materials have demonstrated the highest power conversion efficiencies. Despite promising advances in other materials, like perovskites2 and hematite,3 III–V systems will likely stay at the lead for the foreseeable future, even to achieve the near term goal of 20% solar to hydrogen (STH) efficiency by 2020.4 With respect to STH reactions, the attractiveness of III–V semiconductors comes from the fact that there are established practices to manipulate and align the band positions with the water splitting reactions. Simultaneously, the bandgap becomes modified allowing for absorption of the visible spectrum at nearly thermodynamically optimal conditions. These band manipulation techniques therefore fulfill the first two fundamental requirements. The final hurdle is then to create a high performing water splitting device that will resist degradation for a long operating life (>10000 h).
GaN is one of the most promising starting materials for photoelectrochemical water splitting due to its proper band alignments with the water splitting reactions. By alloying with group-similar elements (such as indium to replace gallium, or antimony for nitrogen) the bandgap and band positions are readily tuned to the needs of any desired application.5,6 For LED development these doping techniques have targeted various emission wavelengths ranging from the UV for pure GaN, through the visible spectrum, to the IR for InN (340–1700 nm), simply based on the stoichiometry.7,8 The optimal bandgap for maximum STH efficiency (30.6%) by a single-junction architecture is 1.56 eV,9 which can be met when In alloying of an InxGa1−xN structure is near 50%.7 In a high efficiency dual-junction device the optimal conditions are met when one of the layers has a bandgap of 1.4 eV, which relates to 40% In alloying. The band positions have also been previously calculated for various doping schemes, and have been shown to maintain proper alignment with water splitting reactions up to the 50% In composition. This implies that high efficiency, unbiased water splitting from visible light is reasonable and achievable.7 A recent effort by Young and co-workers reported the current record STH efficiency of 16.7% with a tandem AlGaAs/GaInAs cell which had good spectral overlap and band alignment.10 However, the researchers' cell degraded rather quickly due to photocorrosion, underlining the necessity to satisfy all three fundamental requirements. Investigating photocorrosion mechanics of GaN can help future efforts to prevent photocorrosion in more advanced III–V water splitting systems.
GaN is known to photocorrode readily under illumination in alkaline media and can be roughened controllably to create an anti-reflective surface, useful to increase the diffusivity of LEDs and absorption in solar cells.11,12 The photocorrosion reaction in these high pH environments is thought to be the oxidation of GaN by photoholes and OH− ions to the soluble species GaO33− after first forming the intermediate state of Ga2O3, the rate of which is dependent on the OH− concentration and defect density, this process also breaks the surface into fragile “needle” structures which form along thread dislocations.13 The corrosion reaction in acidic media, GaN + 3h+ → Ga3+ + 1/2N2, causes pitting of the surface, but doesn't require an oxide of gallium to form. This reaction is pH independent, though becomes thermodynamically unfavorable after a pH of 3.14 Corrosion in low pH environments is investigated less frequently in literature, though is arguably more important for STH devices since H2 generation is commonly performed in acidic media to enhance H2 evolution rates. This study aimed to develop an electrochemical method for constructing the energy level picture of the acidic photocorrosion by determining GaN's photocorrosion potential. This will help with developing methods for preventing dissolution of GaN-based photoelectrodes in future STH architectures.
Experimental
Polished free-standing GaN 1 cm × 1 cm samples (∼0.5 mm thick) were purchased from Kyma Technologies with an epi-ready c-plane Ga-polar orientation. On the reverse side a metal contact layer was deposited by e-beam evaporation consisting of 25 nm Ti, 220 nm Al, 60 nm Ni, and 50 nm Au. The samples were annealed at 650 °C for 1 min in a N2 atmosphere to form an alloyed ohmic contact. The GaN chips were cut into smaller samples ∼0.5 cm × 0.5 cm. Silver paste was then used to join the ohmic contact with Cu foil electrodes. The Cu foil was coated with tape determined to be resistant to the acidic media to isolate the electrochemical signal from the GaN/liquid interface. The tape had an access cut into it for the silver paste to contact the Cu foil. Apiezon wax, dissolved in toluene, was used to seal the edges of the GaN chip and complete the isolation of the GaN c-plane, then allowed to air dry.
The electrochemical cell was constructed with a Pt-wire counter electrode and a separate Pt-wire reference electrode calibrated against a 3 M KCl Ag/AgCl reference electrode from CH Instruments (+0.150 V vs. RHE, pH 1). The electrolyte solution was aqueous 0.5 M H2SO4. The active area of the GaN electrode was ∼0.1 cm2. Illumination was provided with a Newport solar simulator set to 1-sun power incident on the electrode surface with an internal shutter to control illumination. Illumination was provided by a 150 W Xe bulb and an AM 1.5 filter. Electrochemical data was collected using a Gamry Reference 600 potentiostat. Cyclic-voltammetry (I–V) was performed at 50 mV s−1 and cycled three times starting at open-circuit potential. I–V cycles reported in this paper are from the third cycle to reflect stable cycling. Mott–Schottky analysis was performed with a 7 mV rms 1 kHz AC potential signal imparted on the DC potential bias using a parallel R-C model to fit each data point, the fitting was performed by the Gamry Echem Analyst software.
SEM images were obtained after holding the GaN sample at a desired potential for 15 min under illumination, unless otherwise stated. The samples were rinsed with DI-H2O and dried with a N2 stream prior to entering the SEM. The microscope was a FEI-Quanta 200F environmental SEM in high-vacuum mode.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to monitor the surface of GaN electrodes before and after a 3 hour illuminated potential hold of +0.5 V vs. RHE. Samples were tested with a Versaprobe III constructed by Physical Electronics, Inc. To prevent any surface charging the samples were exposed to an electron-neutralizer and Ar-ion neutralizer resulting in an operational pressure of 1–4 × 10−6 Pa. The monochromated Al Kα beam for elemental scans was 100 μm in diameter with a power of 25 W, a pass energy of 55 eV, and the signal came from a 45 degree take-off angle to the analyzer. Valence band spectra were run in “High power” mode, 84 W, a beam diameter of 100 μm and a pass energy of 69 eV to improve signal. All scans, including valence spectra, were shifted to fix the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV.
GaN samples were also investigated with UV-Vis spectroscopy before and after an illuminated potential hold at +0.5 V vs. RHE for 3 hours. Because of the electrode construction an integrating sphere was used to collect reflection spectra. The spectrometer was an Avantes AvaSpec 2048 with a halogen source (AvaLight-Hal) using an AvaSphere-30-REFL integrating sphere, and a PTFE puck as a reflection standard.
Hole scavengers were tested by adding 10 mM of 2,2′-bipyridyl (bpy) or methanol (MeOH) to 0.5 M H2SO4. The GaN electrodes were held at +0.5 V vs. RHE for 3 h while under 1-sun illumination. After the potential hold samples were washed with DI-H2O in the dark then dried with a N2 stream before transferring to the SEM for imaging.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows current–voltage (I–V) scans of back-contacted free-standing GaN in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 1). Sweeps performed in the dark showed typical diode-like performance for a semiconductor in an electrochemical medium. The only current observed was a reduction current (<−1 V vs. RHE) resulting from electrons in the conduction band (CB) performing the reduction reaction of 2H+ to H2. When illuminated with 1 sun white light the H2 evolution reduction current persisted, though reduced due to photocarrier recombination. Additionally, in oxidative regimes positive of −0.5 V vs. RHE there was a steady current caused by the generation of photocarriers combined with the photocorrosion of the surface by some of those photocarriers. After the first cycle the illuminated I–V behavior, demonstrated in Fig. 1, remained stable even up to 20 cycles indicating that the combination of photocorrosion and photocurrent was constant. The free standing c-plane GaN was Ga-polar and n-type so band bending at the surface caused photogenerated holes to travel to the GaN/liquid interface while the photoelectrons were passed to the counter electrode. When electrochemical solar cells are illuminated they will commonly demonstrate a shift of the dark diode-like behavior along the y-axis corresponding to photocarriers transferring to the electrolyte, causing a rise in current. GaN electrodes showed this behavior except for the potential region adjacent to the H2 reduction reaction (around −0.4 V to −0.8 V vs. RHE in Fig. 1) which was a result of the space charge layer at the interface.13
 Fig. 1  SEM images of GaN surfaces after illuminated 15 min potential holds of −1.5 V (a), −1.0 V (b), −0.5 V (c), 0.0 V (d), and +0.5 V vs. RHE (e); scale bar is 2 μm. The I–V cycles are of GaN in 0.5 M H2SO4 scanned at 50 mV s−1 in dark and 1 sun white light. I–V scans shown are from the third cycle to reflect the steady state response. 
To observe corrosion, and narrow down the photocorrosion potential of GaN the SEM images Fig. 1a–e were obtained after potential holds of 15 min at 0.5 V steps within the I–V trace while under illumination. No corrosion was observed when GaN was passing electrons to the electrolyte solution performing the H2 evolution reaction, even under illumination. Pitting was first observed after a potential hold at −0.5 V vs. RHE, the same potential regime where oxidative currents are first observed in the I–V sweep. Pitting continued to occur at potentials positive of this onset. Without illumination no pitting was observed, even up to +3 V vs. RHE. The photocorrosion potential in 0.5 M H2SO4 was therefore somewhere between −1 V and −0.5 V vs. RHE, but SEM is an expensive and crude method for measuring corrosion dynamics, an electrochemical method was required to determine a more exact value. Since GaN displayed corrosion only under illumination these two processes could not be isolated in an I–V linear scan. Therefore, using the traditional potentiodynamic method to find corrosion potentials was hindered due to the inherent conflation of the corrosion current and steady state photocurrent. Finding the corrosion potential electrochemically must therefore be found with another electrochemical method.
Mott–Schottky (MS) analysis, Fig. 2, was used to determine the flatband potential of the GaN by extrapolating the linear regime of the MS plot out to the x-intercept.15 MS correlated the I–V of Fig. 1 with the band structure of GaN. In the dark, a flatband potential of −1.1 V vs. RHE was determined, coinciding with H2 evolution onset from the GaN working electrode. Under illumination there was a significant deviation from the linear relationship found in the dark. Proceeding from oxidative to reductive potentials (positive to negative) a sharp increase of capacitance was found with an onset near −0.4 V vs. RHE resulting in a dip in the MS curve. The dip region displayed its own linear relationship with a sharper slope indicating that fewer free carriers were present at the interface. The extrapolation of this photoinduced linear region to the x-axis in Fig. 2 met at −0.58 V vs. RHE. Dips, as observed in this system, have been described to be a result of populated surface states.16–18 A possible origin of this state has been calculated with density functional theory whereby two surface states were found on the Ga polar surface of c-plane GaN in vacuum. The first is an unpopulated state near the CB minimum, and the second is a populated state 1.7 eV above the valence band (VB) maximum causing a pinning of the Fermi level.19 The CB and VB positions are affected by the activity of H+ in the electrolyte medium, but the hole trap level (populated surface state) would be pH independent. The reaction GaN + 3h+ → Ga3+ + 1/2N2 occurs at or near −0.6 V vs. RHE and is thought to be the primary corrosion reaction for GaN in low pH environments with the exact value dependent on the activity of Ga3+.14 The known variability of this reaction potential with Ga3+ concentration is reflected when multiple samples are measured with the MS technique and show a range of x-axis extrapolated intercepts from −0.55 to −0.71 V vs. RHE for an average value of −0.66 ± 0.07 V vs. RHE (1σ, n = 3).
 Fig. 2  Mott–Schottky scans of GaN in 0.5 M H2SO4 in dark and light conditions. 
One can deduce that populated surface states are the origin of photocorrosion for GaN, whereby the holes are supplied by surface state hole traps. Upon illumination, photoholes will enter into the surface trap states and manifest in the MS as a dip in the linear region from the increased capacitance. The electron traps (unpopulated surface states) were likely shifted to be within the CB and did not participate in charge carrier dynamics.
Etched and unetched samples were analyzed using XPS and diffuse reflectance UV-Vis to look for any chemical surface change caused by photocorrosion. The Ga 3d peak was monitored for chemical shifts in the XPS peak. Additionally the O 1s peak was monitored to look for any indication of a Ga2O3 phase growing on the surface since this is the primary mechanism for etching in KOH. The third region monitored with XPS was the valence electron region from 0–15 eV of binding energy. This region corresponds to the density of states in the valence band with 0 eV corresponding to the Fermi level. Due to the nature of Ga to produce Auger peaks with Al-Kα radiation which overlap with the N 1s peak any N 1s signal was too convoluted to track Ga:N atomic ratios in this study.
In Fig. 3 the Ga 3d signal shows a shift of around 0.45 eV toward lower binding energies after photocorrosion, beginning at 20.14 eV and shifting to 19.69 eV, as determined by peak fitting. This shift has been identified before as the difference between Ga-terminated and N-terminated surfaces of GaN.20 The O 1s XPS peak did not show any shift or significant change in peak height after etching indicating that any surface oxide state was constant between the two samples. The binding energy of the O 1s peak was 532.1 eV, consistent with a native oxide layer made of Ga2O.21 These results suggest a direct etch of the GaN surface whereby Ga3+ ions are liberated as the soluble species not an oxide of Ga such as GaO33−. As Ga atoms were etched from the Ga-polar GaN structure pits opened, as was seen in the SEM images, leaving behind more, if not mostly, N-terminated surfaces.
 Fig. 3  XPS spectra of GaN before and after photocorrosion in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 sun white light. Ga 3d and O 1s spectra are normalized to the peak height to highlight peak shifts. The valence spectra are not normalized. All spectra were shifted to align the C 1s peak with 284.8 eV. 
In the valence region of the XPS data, seen in Fig. 3, the onset of photoelectron emission begins at approximately 1.9 eV below the Fermi level. These spectra were corrected so as the C 1s peak from adventitious carbon was set to 284.8 eV. This value of 1.9 eV matches closely the reported 1.7 eV value for the separation between the Fermi level pin and valence band maximum previously reported by calculation in a vacuum.19 The step size between data points in this region was limited to 0.05 eV limiting a more exact value for the separation between the Fermi level and the valence band maximum. Additionally it should be noted that the shape of the valence band spectra are similar between bare and etched samples leading further credence that the electronic structure of the surface did not change from photocorrosion as expected from the direct corrosion of GaN to Ga3+ and 1/2N2 instead of first becoming needles of Ga2O3 as in the alkaline corrosion mechanism.
The pitting structures formed during the etching process also resulted in a change to the absorption spectra between the unetched and etched samples. In Fig. 4 the visible portion of the absorption spectrum for the bare sample showed only a slight linear increase in absorption towards bluer wavelengths. This absorption was attributed to the metallized ohmic contact on the backside of the GaN sample since the GaN starting material was transparent in the visible region with no ohmic contact layer. After corrosion, pits populated the surface and the absorbance spectrum changed to a more scattering-like behavior, increasing non-linearly towards bluer wavelengths. Upon visible inspection one could see the surface had clearly roughened, and had a slight reddish hue caused by the scattering observed in Fig. 4. No other spectral features were seen in the visible region.
 Fig. 4  Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of GaN before and after photocorrosion for 3 h in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 sun white light. 
As mentioned above, the traditional potentiodynamic investigation failed to apply for GaN photocorrosion due to the convolution of photocarrier generation with corrosion currents. Using MS analysis to investigate surface carrier potentials allows one to determine the photoinduced corrosion potential for GaN. With the aid of this measurement an energy diagram, Fig. 5, was constructed to show the photocorrosion potential of GaN and its position within the bandgap. It is important to note that the GaN + 3h+ → Ga3+ + 1/2N2 corrosion reaction potential in low pH environments is pH independent (though is still mildly affected by Ga3+ activity), while the CB and VB positions of GaN shift Nernstianly with pH.22Fig. 5 then is a snapshot for the system described here which will change with the medium until the corrosion mechanism changes at higher pH (neutral and basic conditions). If developing a solar water splitting system optimized for hydrogen generation, the pH is typically low to enhance the H2 evolution rate. The photocorrosion depicted in this study was therefore critical because it applied for these low pH environments.
 Fig. 5  Energy level diagram of GaN displaying the relationship between the corrosion reaction (Vcorr), the water splitting reactions, and the CB and VB of GaN in an aqueous medium of 0.5 M H2SO4. 
A useful tactic to avoid oxidative photocorrosion is incorporating electron donors in the electrolyte to scavenge holes prior to their participation in the corrosion reaction.23 This eliminates the need for atomically perfect surfaces, and low throughput fabrication methods. The only limitation with this method is that the kinetics of hole transfer must be significantly faster for the scavenger than for the hole traps on the surface.24 Both methanol and 2-2′-bipyridine (bpy) were tested as hole scavengers in 0.5 M H2SO4. Bpy has a redox potential (−1.0 V vs. RHE in the single protonated form) negative of the determined GaN corrosion potential and was used to scavenge holes both from the bulk valence band and the surface trap states.25 Methanol has an oxidation potential which can scavenge holes from the valence band of GaN, but not from surface states.26Fig. 6 shows SEM micrographs of GaN electrodes after illumination and potential holds at +0.5 V vs. RHE for 3 h, which without hole scavengers as in the 15 min holds of Fig. 1 would have resulted in significant pitting. Both systems displayed partial passivation of the GaN surface with reduced pitting, but corrosion was clearly still existent. The photocorrosion reaction therefore slowed with the introduction of hole scavengers, though was not eliminated. Based on SEM analysis methanol qualitatively displayed more passivation than bpy indicating that the rate of hole transfer from the VB may have been more important than the ability to scavenge holes directly from the surface trap states, which were still observed on MS scans. More work is still needed to quantify the corrosion rate.
 Fig. 6  Energy diagram of GaN with trap level and hole scavengers (a). The red solid arrows depict thermodynamically allowable hole transitions, the dashed red arrow is a thermodynamically unfavored hole transfer pathway. SEM images of GaN after photocorroding in 0.5 M H2SO4 and hole scavengers for 3 h ((b), 10 mM MeOH; (c), 10 mM bpy). The scale bar is 2 μm. 
Other photocorrosion prevention techniques have reported employing surface termination species to essentially prevent Ga surface states from contacting aqueous media.27,28 However, passivation and hole scavenging are not reliable long term solutions, and are still susceptible to pinholes and side reactions. A more robust solution would be to fabricate semiconductor architectures preventing photocorrosion by altering the position of the CB through the previously discussed alloying methods. A material designed to have the GaN + 3h+ → Ga3+ + 1/2N2 corrosion potential within the CB while still maintaining the requirement of band alignment with the H+/H2 reaction would avoid holes entering into the trap states. For example, an In content of 40% in InxGa1−xN would satisfy this condition. This is applicable only for the GaN + 3h+ → Ga3+ + 1/2N2 corrosion reaction, alloyed elements would have similar corrosion reactions, such as the reaction In → In3+ at approximately −0.4 V vs. RHE,14 and need to be accounted for, though the trap states of InN are thought to be in the CB already.19 This approach results in a narrow, but attainable, window of approximately 0.35 V to place the CB edge between the corrosion reactions and the H2 evolution (in a pH 1 environment). Efforts to fabricate and test this material are currently underway.
Conclusions
The photocorrosion potential of GaN and related chemistries can now be found using MS analysis as described in this letter. Photocorrosion of GaN was monitored in 0.5 M H2SO4 under white light. Illumination was required to perform the corrosion reaction GaN + 3h+ → Ga3+ + 1/2N2, as confirmed by SEM imagery. The SEM analysis bounded the corrosion potential between −1 and −0.5 V vs. RHE. SEM also showed that hole scavenging species can be used to slow the corrosion reaction. MS analysis, when illuminated, deviated from typical linear behavior indicating that a surface population of charges became trapped on the GaN. An extrapolation of the illuminated MS deviation placed the surface states at a potential of −0.66 ± 0.07 V vs. RHE consistent with the GaN + 3h+ → Ga3+ + 1/2N2 reaction potential and the Fermi level found with XPS. Thus, the corrosion potential for GaN in this system was determined to be −0.66 ± 0.07 V vs. RHE where the variability is caused by the activity of Ga3+ in the electrolyte medium. With this newfound information efforts can be made towards combatting the photocorrosion of water splitting devices and maintain lifetimes of use for general application.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Drs Michael Wraback, Anand Sampath, Ryan Enck, Meredith Reed and Vijay Parameshwaran for discussions related to GaN.
References
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kment, F. Riboni, S. Pausova, L. Wang, L. Wang, H. Han, Z. Hubicka, J. Krysa, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716 RSC .
Multi-Year Research, Development, and Demonstration Plan. U. S. Department of Energy, 3.1 Hydrogen Production, 2015.
T. G. Deutsch, C. A. Koval and J. A. Turner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25297–25307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Yu, W. L. Sarney, S. V. Novikov, N. Segercrantz, M. Ting, M. Shaw, S. P. Svensson, R. W. Martin, W. Walukiewicz and C. T. Foxon, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 083001 CrossRef .
P. G. Moses and C. G. Van de Walle, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 021908 CrossRef .
Z. Dridi, B. Bouhafs and P. Ruterana, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, 850–856 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Fountaine, H. J. Lewerenz and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. Döscher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef CAS .
F. Decker, D. A. Soltz and L. Cescato, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 95–99 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Minsky, M. White and E. L. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 1531–1533 CrossRef CAS .
L. Macht, J. J. Kelly, J. L. Weyher, A. Grzegorczyk and P. K. Larsen, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 273, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of electrochemical equilibria in aqueous solutions, Pergamon Press, Oxford, New York, 1st English edn.,  1966 Search PubMed .
F. Cardon and W. P. Gomes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1978, 11, L63–L67 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nogami, R. Shiratsuchi and K. Ohno, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2015–2021 CrossRef CAS .
R. Degryse, W. P. Gomes, F. Cardon and J. Vennik, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975, 122, 711–712 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goossens and J. Schoonman, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 289, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Van de Walle and D. Segev, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 081704 CrossRef .
H. Kim, Z. L. Guan, Q. A. Sun, A. Kahn, J. Han and A. Nurmikko, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 113707 CrossRef .
R. Carli and C. L. Bianchi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1994, 74, 99–102 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujii and K. Ohkawa, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2006, 3, 2270–2273 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, Science, 1980, 207, 139–144 CAS .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 82, 133–143 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Krishnan, C. Creutz, H. A. Schwarz and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 5617–5623 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Anderson and H. A. Asiri, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10587–10599 RSC .
F. A. Chowdhury, Z. Mi, M. G. Kibria and M. L. Trudeau, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 104408 CrossRef .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of GaN surfaces after illuminated 15 min potential holds of −1.5 V (a), −1.0 V (b), −0.5 V (c), 0.0 V (d), and +0.5 V vs. RHE (e); scale bar is 2 μm. The I–V cycles are of GaN in 0.5 M H2SO4 scanned at 50 mV s−1 in dark and 1 sun white light. I–V scans shown are from the third cycle to reflect the steady state response.	 

 	Fig. 2  Mott–Schottky scans of GaN in 0.5 M H2SO4 in dark and light conditions.	 

 	Fig. 3  XPS spectra of GaN before and after photocorrosion in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 sun white light. Ga 3d and O 1s spectra are normalized to the peak height to highlight peak shifts. The valence spectra are not normalized. All spectra were shifted to align the C 1s peak with 284.8 eV.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of GaN before and after photocorrosion for 3 h in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 sun white light.	 

 	Fig. 5  Energy level diagram of GaN displaying the relationship between the corrosion reaction (Vcorr), the water splitting reactions, and the CB and VB of GaN in an aqueous medium of 0.5 M H2SO4.	 

 	Fig. 6  Energy diagram of GaN with trap level and hole scavengers (a). The red solid arrows depict thermodynamically allowable hole transitions, the dashed red arrow is a thermodynamically unfavored hole transfer pathway. SEM images of GaN after photocorroding in 0.5 M H2SO4 and hole scavengers for 3 h ((b), 10 mM MeOH; (c), 10 mM bpy). The scale bar is 2 μm.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
