Microbial fuel cells (MFC) and microalgae; photo microbial fuel cell (PMFC) as complete recycling machines  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00354A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00354A
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2546-2560Microbial fuel cells (MFC) and microalgae; photo microbial fuel cell (PMFC) as complete recycling machines

        
          
            John 
            Greenman
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Iwona 
            Gajda
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ioannis 
            Ieropoulos
          
          
        
      a
aBristol BioEnergy Centre (BBiC), University of the West of England, T-Building, Frenchay Campus, Bristol, BS16 1QY, UK. E-mail: john.greenman@uwe.ac.uk
bFaculty of Applied Sciences, University of the West of England, Bristol, BS16 1QY, UK
Received 
      5th June 2019
    , Accepted 16th August 2019First published on 19th August 2019AbstractHumans can exploit natural processes by microorganisms by using Microbial Fuel Cells and integrated Photo Microbial Fuel Cells (MFC/PMFC) chambers containing electrodes to maximise microbial oxidation rates and rapidly recycle mass and elements at the quickest possible rates by control over both the microbes (choice of algae and bacteria) and the applied physicochemical conditions. This review focuses on natural recycling of essential elements by microbes, the productivity of bacteria and micro-algae as a fuel, decomposition and the use of microbial fuel cells to integrate both primary biomass production (in the cathode) with its decomposition and transformation by heterotrophic microbes (at the anode). The review discusses the potential future uses of photomicrobial fuel cells as complete recycling machines with advantages over all other biological recycling systems and these include rapid re-cycling rates, production of water, removal of carbon dioxide, evolution of oxygen, and the generation (rather than utilisation) of electrical power.John GreenmanProfessor John Greenman (E-mail: john.greenman@uwe.ac.uk) is an Emeritus Professor at the University of the West of England, Bristol with a specialty in microbiology, biofilms, continuous culture and Microbial Fuel Cells. He has worked on continuous culture systems, including chemostats, turbidostats, thick and thin biofilm growth systems using perfusion systems. Greenman (with Ieropoulos) was one of the originators of the term Symbot to describe the symbiotic relationship between robots and biological entities such as biofilm-electrodes, as exemplified through the EcoBot series of Robots. Greenman (with Ieropoulos) also discovered the advantages of small scale MFC over large chamber MFC and played an important role in developing a self-powered, floating biosensor for online water quality monitoring and MFC stacks for treating urine. His work with MFC goes back over 20 years, and Greenman is now working on new applications of MFC, especially MFC integrated with microalgae using PMFC.Iwona GajdaDr Iwona Gajda – Research Fellow (E-mail: Iwona.Gajda@uwe.ac.uk) Dr Gajda is part of the team working on Urine-tricity Project founded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, looking into clean energy recovery from waste through the MFC functionality as a direct power source for powering LEDs and as a filtration device for clean, purified catholyte that can be used for elemental recovery, carbon capture and disinfection. Her work with microalgae used in the cathode has indicated the feasibility of developing photo-microbial fuel cells into the future. Her research interests include the design and architecture of MFC reactors and stacks, power improvement through improved materials, stacking and multiplication of MFCs for usable power levels and possible uses in robotics and sensing.Ioannis IeropoulosIoannis Ieropoulos – Professor in Bioenergy and Self-sustainable Systems (E-mail: ioannis.ieropoulos@brl.ac.uk). Prof. Ieropoulos has an interest in waste utilisation and energy autonomy and produced the EcoBot family of robots, which are powered by microbial fuel cells (MFCs) fed on organic waste; the latest self-sustainable robot is Row-bot. He is a Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation grantee for the “Urinetricity/Pee Power” project, which is advancing the MFC technology for Developing World Countries.
Introduction
As the consequences of global warming continue to affect the climate, there is an increased need for new technologies that decrease dependence on fossil fuel consumption and promote sustainability.
Overpopulation along with over consumption, where resource use has outpaced the sustainable capacity of the ecosystem, are primary factors affecting the severity of all the other potential threat issues including global warming/climate change, biodiversity loss, desertification, deforestation, habitat destruction, ocean acidification, water pollution, waste (and its disposal), and resource depletion. The pressure to replace fossil fuels as soon as possible is building, but at the cost of introducing many more alternative power systems such as wind, hydro-, solar and combustible biomass. None of these conventional technologies, however well developed, can by themselves directly transform chemicals or recycle water or chemical elements in a useful way, and large scale conventional water treatment technologies are dependent upon the use of large amounts of electricity in order to function (e.g. for purposes of pumping, mixing, aerating, filtration, ozonolysis, electro-osmosis or standard electrolysis for producing peroxide or bleach). What is urgently required is a technology that can efficiently clean up wet organic waste streams using the chemical energy contained within the waste itself to energise the rest of the system and therefore to recognise that all such wet organic material may be seen as a fuel, rather than being a negative value waste. The technology is one which oxidises reduced organic substrates by electron abstraction using anodic electrodes; an old technology1 now brought up to date in the form of modern microbial fuel cells.
Nature's food chains, productivity and re-cycling by bacteria and microalgae
Regarding the productivity of lifeforms in nature, both bacteria and microalgae play the most important roles and make the highest contribution to the planet as a whole for recycling life's essential elements, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus and sulphur (CHONPS). Primary biomass is produced by a group of life forms called autotrophs which make their own organic molecules. Primary producers (usually plants and other photo-synthesizers) are the gateway for energy and matter to enter food chains or webs. In general, the smaller the size of the particular living species (at the multi-cellular or unicellular levels of complexity) then the faster the growth rate (μ) and productivity can be. Oak trees are less productive than grass species, and elephants “grow” much more slowly than mice.2 The same is true at the unicellular level for free living single celled microbes.3 The smallest photosynthetic cell species (microalgae) grow much faster than any other type of plant, but this is still relatively slow compared to heterotrophic bacteria (a decomposer or consumer), the fastest of which is thought to be Vibrio natriegens, which (at NTP) has a mean generation time (mgt – the average time that a cell splits into two) of as little as 10 minutes4 (i.e. μ = 4.17 h−1). This μ should be compared to the equivalent of 1–2 days for most species of microalgae. For example, the mean growth rates of eight different cyanobacteria and eight different chlorophytes at 20 °C, were 0.42 d−1 [0.017 h−1] and 0.62 d−1 [0.026 h−1] respectively, but μ were very similar at higher temperatures, between 0.92 and 0.96 d−1 at 29.2 °C.5 Comparison of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 with the green algae Chlorella sorokiniana 211-8K showed that the calculated biomass yield on light in continuous culture experiments, gave nearly equal values for both species.6 The fastest natural photosynthetic cyanobacterium that has been reported,7 is thought to be Synechococcus leopoliensis UTEX 625 with a μ close to 0.1 h−1 [2.4 d−1] and with a corresponding mgt of 6.93 h, which although fast for an algae is some 40 times slower than the heterotrophic V. natriegens.
Food chains and food webs
A food chain is a linear sequence of organisms through which nutrients and energy pass as one organism eats another. In nature's food chains, each organism occupies a different trophic level, defined by how many energy transfers separate it from the basic input of the chain. There can be as many as 5 or 6 trophic levels. Food webs consist of many interconnected food chains and are a more realistic representation of consumption relationships in ecosystems. It is well known that the energy transfer between trophic levels is inefficient—with a typical efficiency of around 10% at each step of the chain. However, this is not the case for some organisms (trophic level zero) that are categorised into detritivores; scavengers or decomposers of which the most important by far are the microbial (i.e. prokaryotic) decomposers, since their efficiency is much higher than 10%, and many species of heterotrophs and archaea have high μ.8 Heterotrophic prokaryotes, both bacteria and archaea represent the major living biomass in the oceans and play a vital role in marine food webs.9,10 Their secondary production or bacterial production, resulting from the consumption of labile dissolved organic matter, represents a key pathway in the transfer of matter and energy to higher trophic levels.11 The amount of carbon transferred ultimately depends on the amount and quality of organic matter and the composition of the microbial communities involved. It has been estimated that about half of the ocean's total primary biomass production has been processed by microbes.12 In the simplest scheme, the first trophic level (level 1) is plants (primary producers), then herbivores (level 2), and then carnivores (level 3) and so on (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Ecological pyramids as visual representations of energy flow, biomass accumulation, and populations at different trophic levels. The horizontal dimension represents the abundance or biomass at each level.13 A biomass pyramid shows the total mass of the organisms that each trophic level occupies in an ecosystem. There must be higher amounts of biomass at the bottom of the pyramid to support the energy and biomass requirements of the higher trophic levels.14 In general, growth rates, metabolic rates and recycling rates decrease with increase in size (weight) of the animal or plant species, and/or size of the individual cell, if unicellular. 
However, for high rates of recycling at the trophic level of zero, prokaryotic (heterotrophic bacteria and archaea) detritivorus consumers are by far the most important group since the prokaryotic types can kill, degrade, break down, digest, utilise and recycle any types of biomass at the higher trophic levels. In a detritus web, decomposers ultimately break down both plant and animal matter and the microbial processes of decomposition are described below.
Microbial decomposition
The carbon and nutrients in dead organic matter are broken down by decomposition, which consists of three physicochemical processes: leaching, fragmentation and chemical or biochemical (enzymatic) alteration of the dead material. The released nutrients can then be used for microbial growth and metabolism, which returns carbon dioxide to the atmosphere where it can be (re-) used for photosynthesis. Approximately 90% of terrestrial net primary production goes directly from plant to decomposer.15
Decomposition rates vary among ecosystems and depend upon the physicochemical environmental conditions (e.g. temperature, pH, redox), the type and quantity of nutrients (especially the main growth rate limiting nutrients), and the types of microbial species present in the microbial community of decomposers. It should be noted that in soils, decomposition rates are highest in wet or moist conditions with adequate levels of oxygen.15
Since heterotrophic species are involved as decomposers, the breakdown rate by bacteria on dead matter is the most important feature for re-cycling elements. If the dead organic matter is polymeric (e.g. starch, cellulose, protein, pectin, chitin), then the best decomposers will be those with suitable extracellular hydrolytic digesting enzymes, since the digestion/solubilisation rate depends on depolymerisation activity external to the cells.
On the planet as a whole there are many different environments producing primary biomass (trees, forests, grasslands, marine macroalgae, algal blooms on lakes and at sea etc.) so there is no shortage of primary biomass as fuel, fuel that ultimately gets broken down and transformed into new secondary biomass, by the various life-forms that eat the plants, or eat the plant-eaters. The end result of all the food chains is (ultimately) wet biomass formed via heterotrophic bacteria, which degrade, putrefy and otherwise break down or add to the organic matter; into more sludge and CO2.
The slower μ of photosynthetic species compared to heterotrophic bacteria is thought to be due to the heavy energy cost of carrying out photosynthesis and low efficiency of the photosynthetic processes within the algal cells. Efficiency is the amount of solar energy used in photosynthesis as a percentage of the total available solar energy and only about half of the incoming sunlight is of the right frequencies to power photosynthesis. Only about 8% to 11% is absorbed by the plant and only 3% to 6% is actually used to drive the chemistry. But this depends on the kind of plant, the time of year, time of day, latitude, and other factors.16 Heterotrophs, in contrast with photosynthetic autotrophs, obtain their energy from any previously formed organic biomass, rather than from sunlight and photosynthesis. There is no shortage of dead/living biomass to work with as fuel from almost anywhere on the planet. If it could be efficiently utilised as a fuel, it would represent an endless supply of energy, which on a per annum basis could be greater than that currently obtained through fossil fuel extractions.
Microbial fuel cells
The microbial fuel cell has its origins some 100 years ago from its discovery and invention by Potter1 in 1911. However, the fuel cells were regarded as being a laboratory curiosity at the time since the power levels produced were incredibly small (nW). Cohen17 in 1931 created batch culture microbial half fuel cells that, when connected in series, were capable of producing over 35 volts, suggesting a half-cell equivalent of 75–80 MFC; but with only a current of around 2 milliamps (i.e. giving 70 mW of power). Six decades later, Habermann and Pommer (1991)18 first reported that electrochemically active bacteria can produce natural shuttle molecules (hydrogen sulphide – H2S) for electron transfer, instead of synthetic mediators – which had been used up to that time – and demonstrated the first MFC wastewater treatment system, based upon mixed sludge consortia. Up until this time, nearly all MFC were based on synthetic chemical mediators (e.g. neutral red or methylene blue), and nearly all systems were based on batch culture. Bond and Lovley (2003)19 demonstrated the anodophilic/exoelectric electron transport conduction properties of Geobacter species. Since this time, publications regarding experiments using pure or mixed species MFC have been growing exponentially, demonstrating increasing interest by researchers and groups from all around the world.20 MFC are composed of two electrodes, with a gap or membrane between them. This allows charge to be transferred between the electrodes, the anode chamber, where the bacteria grow, and the cathode chamber, where the electrons react with oxygen in air to form water and/or hydrogen peroxide depending on conditions.21
Anode (acetate):C2H4O2 + 2H2O → 2CO2 + 8e− + 8H+
Anode (sucrose):C12H22O11 + 13H2O → 12CO2 + 48H+ + 48e−
Cathode:O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2OO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2
The MFC is the only known technology that generates electricity from the breakdown of multiple substrates and sources of waste (i.e. fuel).22 The technology is versatile as it offers direct power but also feedstock treatment, nutrient recovery and re-cycling capabilities23 and sensing24 for real-time monitoring of processed substrates. With regard to improvements in power density and scale up, a large dichotomy of opinion has now surfaced regarding the best way to scale up MFC; large (>25 ml up to 100's of litres) or small MFC (<25 ml). Small MFC can be typically from 10 ml down to microfluidic volumes (<1 ml), with highest power densities at the smallest scale. However, there is a theoretical minimum limit at the micro-fluidic scale due to the increasing energy requirements of moving liquids through micro-capillary sized tubes, which at some point require more power that can be produced by the micro-sized units. However, very small scale MFC may be used for purposes other than producing electrical energy, e.g. as sensing devices, where the advantage of having a fast response time outweighs the energy loss for function. Alternatively, very small MFC could be fed via capillary-surface action, not relying on gravity or fluidic pumping. In contrast, MFC at large scale have been proposed or built with thousands of litre volumes by increasing volume of all main “dimensions”. The first large scale (660 gallon; 2500 L) microbial fuel cell system25 was expected to produce 2 kilowatts of power – enough to power a single household. But in the end the maximal current that could be measured was 2 A at 400 mV (0.8 W) per unit (6 large units), which equals a total of 4.8 W, a value that is only 0.24% of the predicted value of 2 kW. In contrast, Ieropoulos et al. used small scale MFC to energise Ecobot-1 and continued with small scale systems for building EcoBots II and III,26 and all further experimentation with EcoBots. Ieropoulos et al.27 adopted the strategic view that miniaturisation and multiplication of small scale MFC was the best way to scale up for power density (of a stack) and also for creating small scale cascades28 to produce a complete “treatment channel” so that BOD/COD could be reduced to the levels required for safe disposal. If a particular type of wastewater with high BOD was to be treated, the cascade could be increased in length (e.g. from 4 to 6 units per cascade) whilst for treating relatively clean wastewater, the cascade could be reduced in length (e.g. from 4 to 2 units). One obvious advantage of small volume over large is that for small-MFC, scale-up is just a question of building multi-unit modules and multi-modular stacks, using components that can be mass produced. Providing each channel is isolated from all the others with regard to fluid-conductance of the liquid streams29 the system will scale up proportionally with power to whatever size of stack is required in terms of either amount of power or amount of treatment required, providing the design does not allow for short-circuiting by fluidic conductance of electrons across the channels, so that channels can be successfully wired in series to boost voltage. There are fluid conductance problems when multiple electrodes are immersed in large volumes (large scale MFC or benthic systems), which suggests another advantage of remaining small; to avoid fluidic short-circuiting. Nevertheless, important improvements in power production have been reported recently for both large30 as well as small31 types of MFC, and both may have a future role to play in liquid waste treatments in the future. Other marked differences between large and small scale MFC units are set out in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparisons of large volume (>100 ml) scale MFC and small volume (<25 ml scale)




Feature compared
Large scale (>100 ml)
Small scale (<25 ml)




Dilution rate
Zero for batch culture or low < 0.1 h−1 (i.e. MFC-digester)
High (>0.1 h−1)


Perfusible electrodes (e.g. carbon veil) with high surface area of electrode at the micron scale
No: a tendency to use solid electrodes
Yes


High surface area to volume ratio for the anode electrode and chamber
No: a tendency towards being low
Yes: and higher at decreasing volumes


Biofilm structure growing around the anode
High likelihood of being a thick diffusion limiting biofilm
Thin biofilm: not diffusion limited at moderate to high flow rates, mixture of types at low flow rate


Electron transfer mechanisms
Mediators and direct conductance
Direct conductance at high flow rates


Carbon-energy fuels
Rich: with excess C/E (e.g. blackwater)
C/E limited (e.g. urine)


Need for digestion time for insoluble polymeric particles
Yes, zero or low flow rates and a long residence time (or HRT) required which large scale systems can meet
Yes, but more easily controlled in cascades by applying feedback of digestate containing hydrolase enzymes


Theoretical approach to biofilm formation and function
Locked into conventional biofilm paradigm (see Fig. 2 and 3)
Recognises exception to paradigm (see Fig. 2 and 3)


Portability of basic units
Low: cannot be described as portable
High: from wearable (ultra-small) to large stacks of transportable modules


Manufacturing costs
High per unit
Low per unit, module and stack


Market sector
Restricted to bespoke water industries
For households and individuals as well as bespoke industries


Models of economic expansion, mass production and world distribution
Technology will be available to particular markets (e.g. wastewater companies) but not individuals or public at large since units too large or expensive for most individuals
Technology will be available across wide markets including individuals, households, farms, villages as well as large or small companies




The work by Ledezma et al.,32 showed that the anodic biofilm specific growth rate can be both determined and controlled by changing substrate supply rate as found with other experimental loose matrix perfusion systems. This is an important finding, suggesting that for thin biofilms at moderate flow, diffusion limitation does not strongly feature and that nearly all current theoretical models of MFC are fine for thick film biofilms but do not particularly apply for thin perfusion films. For small scale MFC the rate-limiting step is the supply rate of growth limiting substrate by hydrodynamic flow and perfusate transport through the perfusion matrix. Feeding with nutrient-limiting conditions at a critical flow rate (50.8 ml h−1) resulted in the first experimental determination of maximum specific biofilm growth rate, μmax of 0.82 h−1 for Shewanella species as attached cells in biofilm mode.32 This is considerably higher than those predicted or assumed via conventional modelling approaches. It is also shown that, under carbon-energy limiting conditions there is a strong direct relationship between growth rate and electrical power output, with μmax coinciding with maximum electrical power production. Moreover, dynamic steady states of growth were apparent from 0.1 h−1 up to 0.82 h−1. The data are incompatible with the conventional biofilm paradigm (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Biofilm paradigms: attachment (A), formation of a mature biofilm (B and C) and dispersal of cells by detachment (D). The diagram below the blue boxes depicts an alternative view (Alt) and shows how this differs from the conventional view. However, if detachment can take place following growth of a monolayer or thin film layer, the behaviour of the system will be different to that of a conventional biofilm, particularly with regard to growth-diffusion effects of thick biofilms. These stages do not occur for “naturally” thin biofilms. For some species of bacteria the biofilm will be very stable with time with mother layers lasting for the whole lifetime of the system which may be many years. 
Biofilms
Helmstetter and Cummings (1963)33 first demonstrated that populations of bacteria could be reliably produced when grown as a biofilm deposited on to a microporous membrane and perfused from the obverse side with sterile nutrient medium. New cell production reached a constant rate with time (quasi-steady state) suggesting that the attached biofilm layer was firmly attached to the membrane and could be described as a “mother layer” for all later progeny from the processes of cell division. The new cells detached and were described as “daughter cells” and production rate of these equalled their detachment-dissemination rate. A similar phenomenon was more closely observed by Gander and Gilbert (1997)34, and again their work showed the possibility of precisely controlling the growth rate and physicochemical parameters in a similar way to that achieved in a chemostat, providing that the attachment matrix allowed for homogeneous perfusion of fresh nutrient medium to all cells.35 A final elaboration of what has been termed an “in vitro matrix perfused biofilm” is a flat bed, described as a flatbed perfusion biofilm model.36 All such models appear to show that under the right physicochemical conditions the biofilm remains fully viable as a fixed population of attached cells, with a long half-life of biofilm attachment (weeks), whilst daughter cells are splitting away constantly from the mother layer with a very short residence time equal to the growth rate of the system. However, careful analysis of the data from such perfusion systems suggest that steady states only last for a few weeks whilst the biofilm population density continues to slowly increase over days which suggests that the system is only quasi- or pseudo-steady state in behaviour, leading to the question of whether a close to true or ideal steady state biofilm bioreactor will ever be possible. However, the finding that perfusion type MFC can continue to function successfully over many years (>10 years in one experiment that is still ongoing) suggests that the biofilms that form are very stable with an ongoing fixed population number that does not build up into a thick, diffusion limited form. The special features that may account for the electrode biofilms to remain in close to perfect steady states for long periods of time are outlined in Fig. 2 and 3. Either naturally, or else depending on the hydrodynamic shear forces (set from the speed of the flow pump) the biofilm grows in steady state for as long as it is supplied with appropriate nutrients at a constant rate of flow. MFCs based on perfusable carbon veil electrodes have already demonstrated such dynamic steady states,32,37 even for complex mixed species, providing the system is carbon-energy limited and at moderate to high flow rates.38
 Fig. 3  Illustrating the main differences between thick film and thin film biofilms: although the phases of initial colonisation (weak and strong attachment followed by growth and extension) are the same, the way the biofilm processes proceed from this point onwards are very different. One type (A) forms diffusion limiting thick biofilm (only capable of quasi-steady state in a flow system), whilst the other (B) produces a thin perfusible biofilm consisting of permanently attached cells with new cell progeny (daughter cells) which, due to natural processes of detachment and/or hydrodynamic shear forces, wash away from the fixed and stable mother layer. In the case of the thick biofilm, the matrix does not include the impermeable electrode substratum, and as a result builds up a thick diffusion limiting biofilm with gradients and resultant heterogeneity of matrix. In the case of the thin biofilm, the matrix consists of liquid channels and voids in addition to cells and (if C/E limited) produces little in the way of cell EPS-material. 
In contrast, for large scale volume MFC in batch culture or low flow mode, the C/E nutrients are usually supplied at high concentration, particularly at the start of the batch cycle. The biofilm that forms is thick containing large amounts of EPS (see Fig. 3). This is particularly true for electrode substrata that are impermeable to nutrient substrates. Daughter cells of the inner layer become entrapped as well as exogenous species, thickening the population; diffusion limitation builds up; chemical gradients form (Fig. 3) and the biofilm becomes very heterogeneous with starved inner layers and fast growing outer layers; the collective growth rate of the cells decrease because the inner layers become starved of nutrients; the system becomes sluggish and power output decreases. Moreover, dissemination of new cell growth is by erosion of clumps or aggregates – see Fig. 3a. For small-scale volume MFC this is not the case – see Fig. 3b. Here, dissemination is by random single cell release producing a fine suspension of cells in suspension. This is in contrast with the large volume system that produces large aggregate clumps of biofilm material appearing stochastically.
Spontaneous release of daughter cells may be a naturally occurring process for some species of bacteria (see later comments). However, the importance of hydrodynamic flow and fluidic shear forces cannot be ignored. Work by Boks et al.,39 studied the forces involved in bacterial adhesion to hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces. These workers concluded by showing that the hydrodynamic force to prevent adhesion (Fprev) is lower than the hydrodynamic force to stimulate detachment of a mature biofilm, (Fdet) showing that the bond between a substratum surface and a bacterium becomes much stronger after initial adhesion. Fdet is important to consider for biofilms. If the Fdet for cells to substratum is higher than the Fdet between mother cells and daughter cells after full septum formation, then liquid shear stress could be used to ensure a non-accumulative steady state by using high shear/high flow rates. The nearest description from a chemical engineering view is that the system behaves as a plug-flow reactor with biotransformations occurring by whole cell biocatalyst(s) attached to a stationary matrix within the system. The system is non-accumulative and can maintain dynamic steady state output for steady state conditions yet show changes in growth rate and electrical output that correspond to changes or perturbations in the physicochemical conditions. For a well-perfused biofilm in steady state (i.e. non accumulative), the specific biofilm growth rate (μ) is given by: μ = rate of elution of daughter cells (h−1)/total biofilm population.32,37 The relationships between growth rate, growth yield and concentration of growth limiting substrate (as previously proposed by Monod) can be applied to steady state perfused biofilm-electrodes. The power output of the small scale MFC is the electron abstraction rate and this is strictly proportional to the metabolic rate (Qmet) of the microbial community around the anode electrode (the electrode-biofilm). In theoretical modelling, for a well-functioning small scale MFC at moderate to high flow rate, all terms for diffusion (such as Fick's law) are redundant. All mainstream models of MFC assume that the biofilm is strongly diffusion limiting, requiring complex models to make predictive statements about its kinetic features. Providing the fuel nutrient supply is carbon-energy limited, the Exocellular Polymeric Substance (EPS) production will be minimised. In addition the metabolic rate of the cells has also been strongly associated with the growth rate (since anabolism and catabolism are closely linked in C/E limiting conditions). It has been shown40 that in continuous flow MFC differences in external resistance affect cellular electron transfer rates on a per cell basis as well as relate to the overall biofilm development in Shewanella oneidensis strain MR-1. When a low external resistance (100 Ω) was used, estimates of current per cell reached a maximum of 204 fA per cell, while when a higher (1 MΩ) resistance was used, only 75 fA per cell was produced. The 1 MΩ anode biomass consistently developed into a mature thick biofilm with tower morphology greater than 50 μm thick, whilst only a thin biofilm (<5 μm thick) was observed with the more powerful output with the 100 Ω anode. Likewise, for G. sulfurreducens biofilm,41 which reached the highest electrochemical activity with a biofilm thickness of less than 20 μm, whilst with increasing thickness, the electrochemical activity decreased until the biofilm growth ceased at a thickness of ∼45 μm. The electrochemical analysis and the metabolic spatial variability showed that (in batch culture development) a great many inactive cells accumulated resulting in high diffusion resistance. The authors concluded that although the G. sulfurreducens can always form thick biofilms, its highest electrochemical activity was reached at a much thinner thickness, suggesting that the inner layer(s) of live-cell mass, rather than the biofilm thickness per se, is responsible for the high current generation. Moreover, fast accumulation of inactive cells caused lower current generation in the thick biofilm. More recently, the same phenomena (high external resistance load, thick biofilm and low power output versus low resistance load, thin biofilm and high power output) was observed by Pasternak et al.,42 but using more diverse mixed culture MFC.
The biofilm structure within an MFC depends upon many things resulting in either a thick (diffusion limiting) or thin (monolayer, bilayer or very thin multi-layer) perfusible structure. Whereas large scale, rich carbon-energy source biofilms at low or zero flow rate obey the current “thick” biofilm paradigm (see Fig. 2) this appears not to be the case with highly perfusible electrodes [see Box 1 for biofilm paradigms, stages from formation to dissipation].
The biofilm matrix for thick biofilm includes live and dead cells plus extracellular fluid, plus EPS. The turnover rate for the matrix fluid is relatively slow, due to diffusion. In contrast, the biofilm matrix for the thin biofilm includes living attached cells, the carbon veil substratum, liquid voids and channels. The voids and channels contain fluid but with very rapid turnover since it is perfused rather than diffused.
Studies on the control of biofilm formation and cell detachment by Shewanella oneidensis biofilms43 have identified a set of genes responsible for both formation and detachment of biofilms and that cyclic di-GMP was a key intracellular regulator for controlling biofilm stability, by shifting the state of a cell between attachment and detachment in a concentration-dependent manner. Such switching involves sophisticated signalling and tight regulation, with gene function and expression producing orchestrated protein interactions, many in response to the signalling molecule, cyclic-di-GMP. More recently, workers44 have shown that three important genes, BpfA, (a biofilm-promoting protein), BpfG (a periplasmic transglutaminase-like cysteine proteinase) and BpfD (a bifunctional diguanylate cyclase/phosphodiesterase LapD-like protein), and together these regulate biofilm formation and detachment in Shewanella oneidensis. The genes and their expressed gene products were very similar to three homologous genes (the LapA–LapB–LapD network) found in the phylogenetically related Pseudomonas fluorescens.45 A critical 1:1 ratio of BpfG and BpfD allows BpfA localization on the outer membrane, and biofilm forms. However, cyclic-di-GMP hydrolysation may allow disassociation from BpfD leading to BpfG release and activation of its proteinase activity such that BpfA is subsequently digested and the biofilm disperses. However, all the above Shewanella studies were conducted using plastic coated multiwell plates rather than on carbon matrix-flow substrata, nor were biofilms formed (or dispersed) from a polarised anodic electrode (MFC).
Power-producing bacteria
Electroactive bacteria transfer electrons to the anodes either directly or via self-produced mediators. In the direct mechanism,46,47 electron transfer occurs via membrane-associated c-cytochrome or through conductive pili or appendages. In mediated mechanisms, electron transfer between the bacterial cell and the anode surface occurs through artificial or self-produced soluble redox compounds such as flavins or pyocyanin.47Shewanella sp. appears to have both mechanisms; outer-membrane cytochromes and conductive pili as well as soluble mediators such as flavins, whilst Pseudomonas sp. appear to be entirely dependent on production of soluble mediators that shuttle electrons from the bacteria through the biofilm to the anode.48
The ability to produce electrical power in MFC in the presence of artificial or natural redox mediator compounds is thought to be a fairly common property of most types of living cells, including bacterial heterotrophs. However, power-producing bacterial species that have evolved specific exoelectrogenic activity without requiring exogenous mediators are more infrequent. A published list49 includes: Shewanella species, Geobacter species, Rhodoferax ferrireducens, Rhodopseudomonas palustris, Ochrobactrum anthropi, Desulfovibrio desulfuricans, Desulfuromonas acetoxidans, Acidiphilium sp. Thermincola sp. and Cupriavidus basilensis. Mixed bacteria usually produce higher power densities in MFCs than pure bacterial strains, but no single species can be directly compared with another, unless all environmental parameters are identical; yet identical parameters means that some species may be close to their optimum, whilst others would be sub-optimum.
Photobioreactors (PBRs)
A very wide range of types or designs of photobioreactors have been built for growing microalgae at large volume scale. A critical overview by Huang et al.,50 of the key parameters that most influence the performance of PBRs, shows that both light intensity and spectral composition can most influence algal growth when light levels are growth rate limiting. However, mixing and mass transfer characteristics, temperature, pH, and also the capital and operating costs were all considered important. The lifespan and the costs of cleaning and temperature control are also emphasized for commercial exploitation, and four types of PBRs—tubular, plastic bag, column airlift, and flat-panel airlift reactors are recommended for large-scale operations.51 Carbon dioxide and the laws governing algal growth when CO2 levels are growth-rate-limiting, as well as laws governing algal growth rate and temperature are well established.52 Algal species suitable for tropical climates may not suit temperate or cold regions of the planet. In addition, essential micro-nutrients and tolerance of salt (i.e. freshwater or marine) are also important considerations.
More recently the value of immobilisation of algal cells has begun to be realised, in particular in a design or type of reactor known as a porous substrate bioreactor (PSBR),53 also known as the twin-layer system54 considered to be a new principle to separate the algae from a nutrient solution by means of a porous reactor surface on which the microalgae are trapped in biofilms. This procedure reduces the amount of liquid needed for operation by a factor of up to one hundred compared to conventional PBR technology, which cultivates algae solely by planktonic suspensions. As such, the PSBR procedure significantly reduces the energy needed while increasing the portfolio of algae that can be cultivated. It also allows for much higher growth rates and purity levels than found anywhere in nature.
Photoautotrophic cultivation of microalgae in suspensions is usually associated with a relatively low biomass content in the suspension of about 0.1–0.5% dry matter requiring high volumes of water. Moreover, the relatively low surface-to-volume ratio at high volume generates long path lengths for essential gases (CO2 and O2) and nutrients to diffuse into or out of the cell. The diffusion processes are thus too slow to support mass demands for efficient biomass growth, so mass transfer has to be driven actively, mostly by energy intensive mixing of liquid and/or bubble aeration adding to cost. Processing the algal biomass at low cell density is also problematic since it needs separating from a large volume of water using centrifugation or flocculation which are either energy- or cost-intensive procedures.
Generally, biofilm-based PBRs can be divided into submerged systems and porous substrate photobioreactors (PSBRs).54 In submerged-biofilm PBRs, the biofilms are usually immobilized/attached on to impermeable substrata either constantly, or periodically submerged, whilst in PSBR, the biofilm is attached to a microporous material, confined to one side of the substratum, separating the biofilm from the flow of medium.54–56
Biofilm-based PBRs have been used for production of microalgal biomass, production of microalgal-derived products (e.g. lipids, pigments, food), wastewater treatment and CO2 sequestration.57,58 All of these applications rely on rapid microalgal growth (i.e. high productivity), requiring high fixation rates of inorganic carbon. A comparison (by review) of algal raceway ponds, closed planktonic PBRs, biofilm PBRs [conventional] and biofilm PSBR59–61 showed the PSBR to have the highest maximal biomass density (g dry weight per L) and the lowest consumption of water (i.e. volume to produce 1 kg of dry matter biomass). For example, such bioreactors have a surface productivity of 2 g m−2 day−1 and a flow rate of 6 L h−1 per meter of lighted photo module.62,63 Moreover, approximately 1 kW h is required for pumping to produce 1 kg of algal dry mass. In biofilms, the homogenous mixing of the biomass and the culture medium does not occur and mass transfer through dense biofilms relies largely on diffusion. It is well known that compared to advection (liquid flow), mass transfer through diffusion is much slower above the micrometer scale64–66 as slow as it is for thick bacterial biofilms.
Integrating MFC with PSBR to produce PMFC
Photobiological systems based on microalgae or other photosynthetic microbes at the anode
There are a number of interesting combinations of MFC with photoelectric, photobioelectric, or simply photosynthetic systems.67–70 Photobiological systems at the anode have been proposed based on cyanobacteria including Synechocystis PCC-680371 and Anabaena variabilis52 and other photosynthetic microbes e.g. Spirulina platensis72,73 and Rhodospirillum rubrum74 and Rhodobacter sphaeroides.75 Generally speaking, the use of an oxygenic species at the anode results in low performance due to the high redox produced by oxygen at the anode, in contrast with anoxygenic (anaerobic) species which appear to show more promise. Photosynthesis close to the anode is also a property of “Plant Microbial Fuel Cells”. Living plants are known to release a wide range of organic matters through their roots into the rhizosphere via photosynthesis.76–78 The exudates contain water-soluble, water-insoluble and volatile compounds including a wide range of organic compounds that can be utilised by soil microbes and stimulate growth of the rhizospheric microorganisms79 representing a large chemical energy flow into the soil matrix.80 Plant species belong to one of three main types according to which of three pathways (C3, C4 and CAM) are used for photosynthesis and in general C4 plants have the highest photosynthesis efficiency for converting solar energy into bioelectricity81 although some C3 plant species may exhibit higher efficiency than C4 plants.82 Examples of named species includes Oryza sativa (Asian rice) or Oryza glaberrima (African rice),83–85G. maxima,86L. minuta and V. duckweed,87,88 and others, including ornamental plants.89 However, the use of plants as sources of root exudate to the anodic microflora is an indirect process relying on soil diffusion to transport the nutrient components of the exudate to the anodic biofilms and this process is likely to be a relatively slow rate-limiting step compared with advective transport, or indeed the potential speed and growth rate of the microbes colonising the anodic electrodes.
Photobiological systems based on microalgae or other photosynthetic microbes at the cathode
PMFC that work with oxygenic cyanobacteria or microalgae in the cathode can improve the performance of the MFC by as much as 20%,90 probably due to oxygen being generated around the electrode within the chamber, but the system is also advantageous for sequestration of CO2 in the presence of sunlight. This application helps in the wastewater treatment (through anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction) and sequestration of CO2 (through cathodic reduction into cell biomass). Newly produced biomass in the cathode half-cell is supplemented by the cationic species (Na+, K+, NH4+) that are recycled from the anode to the cathode thanks to the proton/cation flow. New biomass grown in the cathodic photoreactor can then be used as a feedstock for the microbial anode in the same system.91 It has been shown previously that algae powders (obtained by centrifugation or filtering, dried, ground into powder, and/or treated by acid-thermal processes) are suitable for bioelectricity production and are easily digested by the anodic MFCs.92 An alternative is to use a flow-through system whereby the MFCs are continuously fed by algal biomass. Walter et al.93 used a photo-chemostat to produce continuous culture of Synechococcus leopoliensis which continuously supplied a pre-digester initiating the digestion of the phototrophs and producing a fuel devoid of oxygen, and finally the outputs were fed continuously to a cascade of 9 MFCs, hydraulically and electrically independent. An earlier integrated photo-bioelectrochemical system for contaminants removal and bioenergy production has been reported94 as well as an MFC with an algae-assisted cathode.95
What MFC/PMFC can do in terms of treatment, recycling and power
The range of useful applications where MFC/PMFC could be utilised to benefit humanity is considerably wide (see Fig. 4). As such, MFC/PMFC processes and systems have been described as being a “platform technology” with uses and applications across a wide range of economic and industrial sectors (see Table 2). An ideal PMFC would balance the elements by matching the digestion/utilisation rates of the detritivores with the primary biomass production rate of the microalgal cathodic side. It is unknown to what extent such a recycling machine could be adapted to recycle in the wider context of actual physical extraction of key bespoke elements such as P, S, and N. However, all machines should be able to utilise CO2 and produce oxygen, water, biomass and energy.
 Fig. 4  Potential capability of MFC/PMFC in terms of treatment, products, recycling and power MFC treatment of organic waste: MFC are capable of utilising a very wide range of substrates, including volatile organic compounds (including methane) and some types of plastics. MFC special products: MFC carboxylate platform, extracellular hydrolases, intracellular products from natural or genetically engineered heterotrophs to make vaccine peptides, and many other kinds of therapeutic or industrial proteins. MFC/PMFC synthesises water: from the cathode reactions. MFC/PMFC cathodic products: by fine tuning the electrode properties, different catalytic events can be made to occur such as the production of hydroxyl radical and hydrogen peroxide and therefore the use of solutions as disinfecting agents. PMFC ability to utilise CO2: PMFC ability to generate oxygen using oxygenic microalgae: PMFC ability to generate other special algal products when integrated with suitable algal species PMFC ability to act as repository of active (exponentially growing) algae as inoculum for larger scale photoalgal bioreactors to expand biomass production as well as rates of CO2 utilisation and oxygen generation. PMFC ability to produce algal biomass that may be recycled via the anodic chamber. PMFC algal biomass may consist of edible strains that can be used for human or animal nutrition, or species that produce lipids and biodiesel. PMFC algal biomass may be used for carbon capture and storage: e.g. biomass can be pyrolysed and buried: PMFC ability to produce electrical power: to do all above whilst producing, rather than consuming electrical energy. PMFC system that can be monitored and controlled in situ and fully automated or roboticised. 
Table 2 Future examples of where the MFC platform may fit in as New Techa




Sectors
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Quaternary





a Definitions: ‘Platform Technology’: one that can use the same fundamental system or base technology to drive a wide range of functions, applications or technologies across various sectors of the economy. Primary sectors: industries whose main function is to extract resources or make raw materials (e.g. coal, oil, water, minerals, agricultural produce). Secondary sectors: industries that process resources/raw materials into manufactured goods and products [includes fermentation biotechnologies and green chemistry]. Tertiary sectors: design, manufacturing, repair, maintenance, investment, insurance [i.e. service industries]. Quaternary: IT, robotics, electronics, A-Life, artificial intelligence.







Energy & resource recovery water re-cycling & mineral extraction
Light & heavy industries: chemicals, food medical/pharma, paper/pulp, biofuels, wastewater treatment, bioreactors
Manufacturing & marketing services, repair & maintenance design, patents, insurance, financial
IT, robotics, electronics, A-life, artificial intelligence






Role for MFC/PMFC
Yes
Some
Increasingly
Possibly







e.g. green chemistry; bulk chem fine chem. Energy and resource recovery water recycling carbon capture

e.g. biotechnologies: specific utilisation and/or specific production of: biomass, proteins, enzymes, polymers, algal food, etc. (including GEM products).

e.g. future need for MFC/PMFC “servicing” investment and insurance for those using the technology

e.g. bioelectronics, biohybrid devices, living sensors, EcoBots




Their useful properties may include the following:
(1) Utilisation capability: what kind of materials can work as fuels:
From the literature it is obvious that MFC (whatever scale employed) are capable of utilising a very wide range of substrates, from monomers such as acetate, lactate, glucose, to a wide range of carboxylic and hydroxyl-carboxylic acids, monosaccharides, disaccharides, polysaccharides (including cellulose, chitin, pectin), alcohols and aldehydes, amino acids, di-peptides, tri-peptides, peptides, proteins, phospholipids, amines, pentose, ribose, deoxyribose, nucleotides and nucleosides, RNA and DNA. It is generally thought that the best inocula to use for experiments are obtained from MFC already adapted to grow on a particular target substrate by species enrichment. Of particular interest is the ability of MFC to utilise methane96 and other volatile compounds.
Some of the most difficult waste streams to treat are complex mixes of different substrate classes, such as sewage sludge, urine,97,98 brewery waste99 and wastes that are polluted by heavy metals, examples including landfill leachate100 but MFC appear to work in a satisfactory manner when supplied with almost anything organic, including petroleum hydrocarbons101 and would probably utilise some of the many types of plastic materials, providing these were supplied in suitable form (e.g. as microplastic spheres).
(2) Special products:
Biomass can be converted into liquid “pre-fuel” bulk chemicals (acetate, propionate, and n-butyrate) by fermentation using the carboxylate platform.102–104 The carboxylate platform operates under non-sterile conditions and uses a mixed community of anaerobic microorganisms to convert lignocellulosic materials into the carboxylic acids. These pre-fuels are converted into real fuels by conventional chemical or enzymatic derivatisation (e.g. methylation or esterification) which can transform the carboxylic acids into alcohols, jet fuel, and gasoline. These features allow the platform to be flexible in terms of the variety of feedstocks it can accommodate, and cost-effective in that it does not necessarily require any additional chemicals or exogenous enzymes to carry out conversions.
It should be noted that in MFC, two important groups of microflora can be distinguished; the anodophile and the fermentative heterotrophs. Most electroactive species utilise short chain fatty acids, but not saccharides or polysaccharides. Most heterotrophs can hydrolyse the polymers and ferment the products of hydrolysis. In other words, the front–end reactions (hydrolysis of polymers and fermentation into short chain fatty acids) is common to both systems. The difference is that the fatty acids produced in the MFC are rapidly utilised in situ by the electron-generating organisms. However, by switching the electrical load of an MFC towards open circuit, it is possible to turn off the cells utilisation of the fatty acids, thereby allowing the anodic chamber to actually produce the products in question. The switching of MFC's within a stack should be periodic in order to maintain the ecological stability of the biofilm system.
Although mixed species consortia will be used in many types of MFC applications, it is likely that for producing particular bacterial products, a specific mixture of two species (heterotrophic species plus anodophile) would still allow for expression and harvesting of particular bacterial products such as exocellular enzymes (protease, nuclease, lipase, amylases, pectinases, chitinases, phospholipase) from natural or genetically engineered heterotrophs (e.g. Escherichia coli). Genetic constructs are available to make vaccine peptides, and many kinds of therapeutic or industrial proteins.
(3) Cathodic products:
Under ideal conditions the cathode reactions should utilise oxygen, protons and electrons to produce water. However, on non-noble metal catalysts such as carbon electrodes, the reduction of oxygen in alkaline media usually follows a 2-electron mechanism (peroxide pathway) and hydrogen peroxide degradation into OH–105 resulting in local pH increase in the cathode and production of caustic agents.
Methods to harvest cathodic liquids have been previously discussed. Kim et al.106 observed that anolyte loss varies with external resistance due to ionic flux driving the electro-osmotic transport of water and resulting in formation of liquid in a previously empty cathode. Of particular note is the finding107 by Gajda et al., that liquid (water) production rate increases in proportion to the power output of the MFC and that under sub-optimum electrode voltages, different catalytic events can be made to occur such as the production of OH− and possibly hydroxyl radical and hydrogen peroxide that may have use as disinfecting agents.108 Electro-osmotic production of purified catholyte can extract water from urine against osmotic pressure. Recovering valuable resources from urine such as energy and nutrients would help to transform energy intensive treatments to resource production.98,109 Moreover, the use of transition metal ion catalysts particularly copper and iron coupled with low pH is an interesting way to produce an MFC-Fenton machine. An anodic Fenton system has been described110 that was developed for both energy-saving and efficient treatment of organic pollutants by incorporating microbial fuel cell (MFC) into the process. The system was composed of an anodic Fenton reactor and a two-chamber air-cathode MFC. The power generated from the two-chamber MFC was used to drive the anodic Fenton process for Acid Orange 7 (AO7) degradation through accelerating the in situ generation of Fe(2+) from sacrificial iron. The high AO7 degradation rate clearly showed that the integrated MFC-anodic Fenton process could offer cost-effective and energy-saving electrochemical wastewater treatment. However, it is more usual to employ the cathodic compartment for breaking down recalcitrant compounds. For example, an in situ Fenton-enhanced cathodic MFC using a Fe–Fe2O3/carbon felt (CF) composite cathode has been described,111 that can both increase the power output of the MFC as well as offering a potential solution towards the degradation of many types of recalcitrant contaminants, including enhanced estrogen degradation.112
Additional abilities when integrated with suitable algal species in PMFC:113
(4) Ability to utilise CO2 and generate oxygen.
(5) Ability to “inoculate” larger volumes of photobioreactors to expand biomass production and rates of CO2 utilisation and oxygen generation (i.e. to act as a small repository of exponentially growing algae).
(6) Algal biomass may be recycled via the anodic chamber.
(7) Algal biomass may consist of edible strains that can be used for human or animal nutrition.
(8) Algal biomass may consist of species that produce lipids and biodiesel.
(9) Algal biomass may consist of species that produce useful chemical compounds114,115 including biomass, biomass protein, polysaccharides, pigments, lutein, β-carotene, fucoxanthin, canthaxanthin, astaxanthin, phycocyanin and fatty acids including docosahexaenoic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid, arachidonic acid, and γ-linolenic acid.
(10) Algal biomass can be used for carbon capture and storage: algal biomass can be pyrolysed and buried.
(11) Ability to do all above whilst producing, rather than consuming electrical energy.
(12) System can be monitored and controlled in situ and fully automated or roboticised.
Future developments
In the near future it may be possible to develop and build machines consisting of both MFC and PMFC that could be described as “Energy Autonomous Biomass Transformers, or Recyclers, or Trans-cyclers” for relatively quick re-cycling of all of life's essential elements (CHONPS), using natural microbes (bacteria and microalgae) and utilising the power of autonomous robotic systems116–119 and artificial intelligence,37,120–122 to treat waste to make it clean whilst producing electricity, but also to produce safe fertiliser, algal biofuels or edible algae. The machine may treat a wide range of different types of waste; from urine to sludge and be used anywhere in the world where there is a supply of organic matter as fuel. As well as recycling elements important for life it could be used to recover by extraction, water, phosphate, sulphur, oxygen or recover new biomass for carbon-capture and deep burial. All MFC/PMFC systems have the advantage of generating electricity and operating autonomously.
Conclusions
The prokaryotic bacteria and archaea exhibit an astonishing metabolic diversity, which far exceeds that of animals, plants, fungi and other higher organisms “put together”. The prokaryotes literally keep our biological world turning by recycling all the mineral elements necessary for life support. For recycling purposes, the question is, which groups of bacteria and microalgae are the fastest growing, and how can we best exploit their superior growth rates.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the supportive environment provided by Bristol BioEnergy Centre (BBiC), University of the West of England, Bristol and thank the whole team in order to produce this review.
References
M. C. Potter, Proc. R. Soc. B, 1911, 84, 260–276 CrossRef .
J. Greenman and I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. DeLong, J. G. Okie, M. E. Moses, R. M. Sibly and J. H. Brown, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12941–12945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Weinstock, E. D. Hesek, C. M. Wilson and D. G. Gibson, Nat. Methods, 2016, 13, 849–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lürling, F. Eshetu, E. J. Faassen, S. Kosten and V. L. M. Huszar, Freshwater Biol., 2013, 58, 552–559 CrossRef .
R. M. Schuurmans, P. van Alphen, J. M. Schuurmans, H. C. P. Matthijs and K. J. Hellingwerf, PLoS One, 2015, 10, e0139061 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, M. Liberton, P. F. Cliften, R. D. Head, J. M. Jacobs, R. D. Smith, D. W. Koppenaal, J. J. Brand and H. B. Pakrasi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Silva, M. L. Calleja, T. M. Huete-Stauffer, S. Ivetic, M. I. Ansari, M. Viegas and X. A. G. Morán, Frontiers in Microbiology, 2019, 9, 3244 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Cotner and B. A. Biddanda, Ecosystems, 2002, 5, 105–121 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Kirchman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 8487–8488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Kirchman, Annual Review of Marine Science, 2016, 8, 285–309 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. H. Mann, Ecology of coastal waters: a systems approach, University of California Press,  1982 Search PubMed .
J. E. Duffy, B. J. Cardinale, K. E. France, P. B. McIntyre, E. Thébault and M. Loreau, Ecology Letters, 2007, 10, 522–538 CrossRef PubMed .
N. G. Hairston and N. G. Hairston, Am. Nat., 2002, 142, 379–411 CrossRef .

          F. S. Chapin, P. A. Matson and P. M. Vitousek, in Principles of Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2011, pp. 3–22 Search PubMed .

          D. Y. Goswami, F. Kreith and F. Kreith, Handbook of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, CRC Press,  2007, vol. 20070849 Search PubMed .
B. Cohen, J. Bacteriol., 1931, 21, 18–19 CAS .
W. Habermann and E. Pommer, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1991, 35, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bond and D. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 1548–1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Santoro, C. Arbizzani, B. Erable and I. Ieropoulos, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 225–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pandey, V. N. Shinde, R. L. Deopurkar, S. P. Kale, S. A. Patil and D. Pant, Appl. Energy, 2016, 168, 706–723 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kuntke, K. M. Smiech, H. Bruning, G. Zeeman, M. Saakes, T. H. J. a. Sleutels, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Water Res., 2012, 46, 2627–2636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Yang, P. Liang, P. Liu and X. Huang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 292–305 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Keller and K. Rabaey, in Microbial Fuel Cells First International Symposium,  2008, p. 13 Search PubMed .

          I. Ieropoulos, C. Melhuish and J. Greenman, in Advances in Artificial Life,  2003 Search PubMed .
I. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman and C. Melhuish, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 1228–1240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Winfield, I. Ieropoulos and J. Greenman, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 110, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Winfield, J. Greenman and C. Melhuish, in ECS Transactions, The Electrochemical Society,  2010, vol. 28, pp. 1–9 Search PubMed .
B. Min and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 5809–5814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Gajda, A. Stinchcombe, I. Merino-Jimenez, G. Pasternak, D. Sanchez-Herranz, J. Greenman and I. A. Ieropoulos, Frontiers in Energy Research, 2018, 6, 84 CrossRef .
P. Ledezma, J. Greenman and I. Ieropoulos, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 118, 615–618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Helmstetter and D. J. Cummings, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1963, 50, 767–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gander and P. Gilbert, J. Antimicrob. Chemother., 1997, 40, 329–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gilbert, D. G. Allison, D. J. Evans, P. S. Handley and M. R. Brown, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1989, 55, 1308–1311 CAS .
R. M. S. Thorn and J. Greenman, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2009, 107, 2070–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Greenman, I. Ieropoulos and C. Melhuish, Biological Computing Using Perfusion Anodophile Biofilm Electrodes (PABE),  2006, vol. 4, pp. 23–34 Search PubMed .
J. You, J. Greenman, I. Ieropoulos, J. You, J. Greenman and I. Ieropoulos, Energies, 2018, 11, 2377 CrossRef .
N. P. Boks, W. Norde, H. C. van der Mei and H. J. Busscher, Microbiology, 2008, 154, 3122–3133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. McLean, G. Wanger, Y. A. Gorby, M. Wainstein, J. McQuaid, S. Ichi Ishii, O. Bretschger, H. Beyenal and K. H. Nealson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 2721–2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, J. Chen, H. Huang, W. Liu, Y. Ye and S. Cheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16523–16528 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pasternak, J. Greenman and I. Ieropoulos, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 392–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Thormann, S. Duttler, R. M. Saville, M. Hyodo, S. Shukla, Y. Hayakawa and A. M. Spormann, J. Bacteriol., 2006, 188, 2681–2691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, J. Yuan and H. Gao, Frontiers in Microbiology, 2015, 6, 790 Search PubMed .
L. Wu, X. Liu, M. W. Fields, D. K. Thompson, C. E. Bagwell, J. M. Tiedje, T. C. Hazen and J. Zhou, ISME J., 2008, 2, 642–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mehta, M. V. Coppi, S. E. Childers and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 8634–8641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Reguera, K. D. McCarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Marsili, D. B. Baron, I. D. Shikhare, D. Coursolle, J. A. Gralnick and D. R. Bond, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Schechter, A. Schechter, S. Rozenfeld, E. Efrat and R. Cahan, in Technology and Application of Microbial Fuel Cells, InTech,  2014 Search PubMed .
Q. Huang, F. Jiang, L. Wang and C. Yang, Engineering, 2017, 3, 318–329 CrossRef .
S. P. Singh and P. Singh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 38, 172–179 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Murphy and H. Berberoglu, Biotechnol. Prog., 2014, 30, 348–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, B. Podola and M. Melkonian, J. Appl. Phycol., 2007, 19, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
B. Podola, T. Li and M. Melkonian, Trends Biotechnol., 2017, 35, 121–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Naumann, Z. Çebi, B. Podola and M. Melkonian, J. Appl. Phycol., 2013, 25, 1413–1420 CrossRef CAS .
T. Naumann, Z. Çebi, B. Podola and M. Melkonian, J. Appl. Phycol., 2013, 25, 1619 CrossRef .
L. Gouveia, A. E. Marques, J. M. Sousa, P. Moura and N. M. Bandarra, Food Science & Technology Bulletin: Functional Foods, 2010, 7, 21–37 Search PubMed .
M. I. Khan, J. H. Shin and J. D. Kim, Microb. Cell Fact., 2018, 17, 36 CrossRef .
T. Li, M. Strous and M. Melkonian, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2017, 364 Search PubMed .
G. Olivieri, P. Salatino and A. Marzocchella, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2014, 89, 178–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gross, D. Jarboe and Z. Wen, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2015, 99, 5781–5789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Katarzyna, G. Sai and O. Avijeet Singh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 1418–1427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kesaano, R. D. Gardner, K. Moll, E. Lauchnor, R. Gerlach, B. M. Peyton and R. C. Sims, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 180, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Cuellar-Bermudez, G. S. Aleman-Nava, R. Chandra, J. S. Garcia-Perez, J. R. Contreras-Angulo, G. Markou, K. Muylaert, B. E. Rittmann and R. Parra-Saldivar, Algal Res., 2017, 24, 438–449 CrossRef .
D. Hoh, S. Watson and E. Kan, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 287, 466–473 CrossRef CAS .
H. Siegrist and W. Gujer, Water Res., 1985, 19, 1369–1378 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 259–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cereda, A. Hitchcock, M. D. Symes, L. Cronin, T. S. Bibby and A. K. Jones, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e91484 CrossRef .
Y. Zou, J. Pisciotta, R. B. Billmyre and I. V Baskakov, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 104, 939–946 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Liehr, M. T. Suidan and J. W. Eheart, Journal of Environmental Engineering, 1989, 115, 320–335 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bombelli, M. Zarrouati, R. J. Thorne, K. Schneider, S. J. L. Rowden, A. Ali, K. Yunus, P. J. Cameron, A. C. Fisher, D. Ian Wilson, C. J. Howe and A. J. McCormick, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12221 RSC .
C.-C. Lin, C.-H. Wei, C.-I. Chen, C.-J. Shieh and Y.-C. Liu, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 135, 640–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Fu, T.-C. Hung, W.-T. Wu, T.-C. Wen and C.-H. Su, Biochem. Eng. J., 2010, 52, 175–180 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Gomez, G. Mai, T. Greenwood and J. P. Mullins, J. Emerg. Invest., 2014, 3, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. K. Cho, T. J. Donohue, I. Tejedor, M. A. Anderson, K. D. McMahon and D. R. Noguera, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2008, 104, 640–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Rovira, Plant Soil, 1959, 11, 53–64 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Goto, N. Yoshida, Y. Umeyama, T. Yamada, R. Tero and A. Hiraishi, Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 2015, 3, 42 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Nitisoravut and R. Regmi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
E. Paterson, Eur. J. Soil Sci., 2003, 54, 741–750 CrossRef .
F. D. Dakora and D. A. Phillips, Plant Soil, 2002, 245, 201–213 CrossRef .
C. Wang, L. Guo, Y. Li and Z. Wang, BMC Syst. Biol., 2012, 6, S9 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Helder, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers, A. J. Kuhn, C. Blok and C. J. N. Buisman, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3541–3547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kaku, N. Yonezawa, Y. Kodama and K. Watanabe, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 79, 43–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Moqsud, J. Yoshitake, Q. S. Bushra, M. Hyodo, K. Omine and D. Strik, Waste Management, 2015, 36, 63–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Schamphelaire, L. Van den Bossche, H. S. Dang, M. Höfte, N. Boon, K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 3053–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers, J. F. H. Snel and C. J. N. Buisman, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 870–876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hubenova and M. Mitov, Bioelectrochemistry, 2012, 87, 185–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hubenova and M. Mitov, Bioelectrochemistry, 2015, 106, 226–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Azri, I. Tou, M. Sadi and L. Benhabyles, Int. J. Green Energy, 2018, 15, 254–263 CrossRef .
I. Gajda, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish and I. Ieropoulos, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11559–11564 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gajda, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish and I. Ieropoulos, Biomass Bioenergy, 2015, 82, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Velasquez-Orta, T. P. Curtis and B. E. Logan, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 103, 1068–1076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. A. Walter, J. Greenman, B. Taylor and I. A. Ieropoulos, Algal Res., 2015, 11, 103–107 CrossRef .
L. Xiao, E. B. Young, J. a. Berges and Z. He, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 11459–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. González del Campo, P. Cañizares, M. a. Rodrigo, F. J. Fernández and J. Lobato, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 638–645 CrossRef .
M. J. McAnulty, V. G. Poosarla, K.-Y. Kim, R. Jasso-Chávez, B. E. Logan and T. K. Wood, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman and C. Melhuish, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 94–98 RSC .
I. Gajda, J. Greenman, C. Santoro, A. Serov, P. Atanassov, C. Melhuish and I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2019, 94, 2098–2106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhuang, Y. Yuan, Y. Wang and S. Zhou, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 123, 406–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greenman, A. Gálvez, L. Giusti and I. Ieropoulos, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2009, 44, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
O. Adelaja, T. Keshavarz and G. Kyazze, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 283, 211–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Hollister, A. K. Forrest, H. H. Wilkinson, D. J. Ebbole, S. A. Malfatti, S. G. Tringe, M. T. Holtzapple and T. J. Gentry, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 88, 389–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Agler, B. A. Wrenn, S. H. Zinder and L. T. Angenent, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 70–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Hollister, A. K. Forrest, H. H. Wilkinson, D. J. Ebbole, S. G. Tringe, S. A. Malfatti, M. T. Holtzapple and T. J. Gentry, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e39689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Kinoshita, Carbon Electrochemical and Physicochemical Properties, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,.,  1988 Search PubMed .
J. R. Kim, G. C. Premier, F. R. Hawkes, R. M. Dinsdale and A. J. Guwy, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 393–399 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gajda, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish, C. Santoro, B. Li, P. Cristiani and I. Ieropoulos, Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, 2014, 7, 187–194 CrossRef .
I. Gajda, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish and I. A. Ieropoulos, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu, H. Li, G. Tan, F. Wen, M. T. Flynn and X. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 1072–1080 CrossRef CAS .
X.-W. Liu, X.-F. Sun, D.-B. Li, W.-W. Li, Y.-X. Huang, G.-P. Sheng and H.-Q. Yu, Water Res., 2012, 46, 4371–4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhuang, S. Zhou, Y. Li, T. Liu and D. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1379–1382 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, Y. Zhang, H. Tao, S. Zhou and Y. Zeng, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 138, 136–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shukla and S. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 402–414 CrossRef CAS .
O. Pulz and W. Gross, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2004, 65, 635–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Cuellar-Bermudez, I. Aguilar-Hernandez, D. L. Cardenas-Chavez, N. Ornelas-Soto, M. A. Romero-Ogawa and R. Parra-Saldivar, Microb. Biotechnol., 2015, 8, 190–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish and I. Horsfield, Artificial Life, 2010, 733–740 Search PubMed .
G. Papaharalabos, J. Greenman, A. Stinchcombe, I. Horsfield, C. Melhuish and I. Ieropoulos, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ledezma, A. Stinchcombe, J. Greenman and I. Ieropoulos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2278–2281 RSC .
I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish and I. Horsfield, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1020–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Greenman, I. A. Ieropoulos and C. Melhuish, Microbial Fuel Cells – Scalability and their Use in Robotics, Springer, New York, NY,  2011, pp. 239–290 Search PubMed .

          I. A. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman, C. Melhuish and I. Horsfield, in Artificial Life Models in Hardware, Springer London, London,  2009, pp. 185–211 Search PubMed .
M.-A. I. Tsompanas, A. Adamatzky, G. C. Sirakoulis, J. Greenman and I. Ieropoulos, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0177528 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
John Greenman	Professor John Greenman (E-mail: john.greenman@uwe.ac.uk) is an Emeritus Professor at the University of the West of England, Bristol with a specialty in microbiology, biofilms, continuous culture and Microbial Fuel Cells. He has worked on continuous culture systems, including chemostats, turbidostats, thick and thin biofilm growth systems using perfusion systems. Greenman (with Ieropoulos) was one of the originators of the term Symbot to describe the symbiotic relationship between robots and biological entities such as biofilm-electrodes, as exemplified through the EcoBot series of Robots. Greenman (with Ieropoulos) also discovered the advantages of small scale MFC over large chamber MFC and played an important role in developing a self-powered, floating biosensor for online water quality monitoring and MFC stacks for treating urine. His work with MFC goes back over 20 years, and Greenman is now working on new applications of MFC, especially MFC integrated with microalgae using PMFC.
Iwona Gajda	Dr Iwona Gajda – Research Fellow (E-mail: Iwona.Gajda@uwe.ac.uk) Dr Gajda is part of the team working on Urine-tricity Project founded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, looking into clean energy recovery from waste through the MFC functionality as a direct power source for powering LEDs and as a filtration device for clean, purified catholyte that can be used for elemental recovery, carbon capture and disinfection. Her work with microalgae used in the cathode has indicated the feasibility of developing photo-microbial fuel cells into the future. Her research interests include the design and architecture of MFC reactors and stacks, power improvement through improved materials, stacking and multiplication of MFCs for usable power levels and possible uses in robotics and sensing.
Ioannis Ieropoulos	Ioannis Ieropoulos – Professor in Bioenergy and Self-sustainable Systems (E-mail: ioannis.ieropoulos@brl.ac.uk). Prof. Ieropoulos has an interest in waste utilisation and energy autonomy and produced the EcoBot family of robots, which are powered by microbial fuel cells (MFCs) fed on organic waste; the latest self-sustainable robot is Row-bot. He is a Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation grantee for the “Urinetricity/Pee Power” project, which is advancing the MFC technology for Developing World Countries.

 	Fig. 1  Ecological pyramids as visual representations of energy flow, biomass accumulation, and populations at different trophic levels. The horizontal dimension represents the abundance or biomass at each level.13 A biomass pyramid shows the total mass of the organisms that each trophic level occupies in an ecosystem. There must be higher amounts of biomass at the bottom of the pyramid to support the energy and biomass requirements of the higher trophic levels.14 In general, growth rates, metabolic rates and recycling rates decrease with increase in size (weight) of the animal or plant species, and/or size of the individual cell, if unicellular.	 
C2H4O2 + 2H2O → 2CO2 + 8e− + 8H+
C12H22O11 + 13H2O → 12CO2 + 48H+ + 48e−
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2

Dilution rate	Zero for batch culture or low < 0.1 h−1 (i.e. MFC-digester)	High (>0.1 h−1)
Perfusible electrodes (e.g. carbon veil) with high surface area of electrode at the micron scale	No: a tendency to use solid electrodes	Yes
High surface area to volume ratio for the anode electrode and chamber	No: a tendency towards being low	Yes: and higher at decreasing volumes
Biofilm structure growing around the anode	High likelihood of being a thick diffusion limiting biofilm	Thin biofilm: not diffusion limited at moderate to high flow rates, mixture of types at low flow rate
Electron transfer mechanisms	Mediators and direct conductance	Direct conductance at high flow rates
Carbon-energy fuels	Rich: with excess C/E (e.g. blackwater)	C/E limited (e.g. urine)
Need for digestion time for insoluble polymeric particles	Yes, zero or low flow rates and a long residence time (or HRT) required which large scale systems can meet	Yes, but more easily controlled in cascades by applying feedback of digestate containing hydrolase enzymes
Theoretical approach to biofilm formation and function	Locked into conventional biofilm paradigm (see Fig. 2 and 3)	Recognises exception to paradigm (see Fig. 2 and 3)
Portability of basic units	Low: cannot be described as portable	High: from wearable (ultra-small) to large stacks of transportable modules
Manufacturing costs	High per unit	Low per unit, module and stack
Market sector	Restricted to bespoke water industries	For households and individuals as well as bespoke industries
Models of economic expansion, mass production and world distribution	Technology will be available to particular markets (e.g. wastewater companies) but not individuals or public at large since units too large or expensive for most individuals	Technology will be available across wide markets including individuals, households, farms, villages as well as large or small companies

 	Fig. 2  Biofilm paradigms: attachment (A), formation of a mature biofilm (B and C) and dispersal of cells by detachment (D). The diagram below the blue boxes depicts an alternative view (Alt) and shows how this differs from the conventional view. However, if detachment can take place following growth of a monolayer or thin film layer, the behaviour of the system will be different to that of a conventional biofilm, particularly with regard to growth-diffusion effects of thick biofilms. These stages do not occur for “naturally” thin biofilms. For some species of bacteria the biofilm will be very stable with time with mother layers lasting for the whole lifetime of the system which may be many years.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustrating the main differences between thick film and thin film biofilms: although the phases of initial colonisation (weak and strong attachment followed by growth and extension) are the same, the way the biofilm processes proceed from this point onwards are very different. One type (A) forms diffusion limiting thick biofilm (only capable of quasi-steady state in a flow system), whilst the other (B) produces a thin perfusible biofilm consisting of permanently attached cells with new cell progeny (daughter cells) which, due to natural processes of detachment and/or hydrodynamic shear forces, wash away from the fixed and stable mother layer. In the case of the thick biofilm, the matrix does not include the impermeable electrode substratum, and as a result builds up a thick diffusion limiting biofilm with gradients and resultant heterogeneity of matrix. In the case of the thin biofilm, the matrix consists of liquid channels and voids in addition to cells and (if C/E limited) produces little in the way of cell EPS-material.	 

 	Fig. 4  Potential capability of MFC/PMFC in terms of treatment, products, recycling and power MFC treatment of organic waste: MFC are capable of utilising a very wide range of substrates, including volatile organic compounds (including methane) and some types of plastics. MFC special products: MFC carboxylate platform, extracellular hydrolases, intracellular products from natural or genetically engineered heterotrophs to make vaccine peptides, and many other kinds of therapeutic or industrial proteins. MFC/PMFC synthesises water: from the cathode reactions. MFC/PMFC cathodic products: by fine tuning the electrode properties, different catalytic events can be made to occur such as the production of hydroxyl radical and hydrogen peroxide and therefore the use of solutions as disinfecting agents. PMFC ability to utilise CO2: PMFC ability to generate oxygen using oxygenic microalgae: PMFC ability to generate other special algal products when integrated with suitable algal species PMFC ability to act as repository of active (exponentially growing) algae as inoculum for larger scale photoalgal bioreactors to expand biomass production as well as rates of CO2 utilisation and oxygen generation. PMFC ability to produce algal biomass that may be recycled via the anodic chamber. PMFC algal biomass may consist of edible strains that can be used for human or animal nutrition, or species that produce lipids and biodiesel. PMFC algal biomass may be used for carbon capture and storage: e.g. biomass can be pyrolysed and buried: PMFC ability to produce electrical power: to do all above whilst producing, rather than consuming electrical energy. PMFC system that can be monitored and controlled in situ and fully automated or roboticised.	 



	Energy & resource recovery water re-cycling & mineral extraction	Light & heavy industries: chemicals, food medical/pharma, paper/pulp, biofuels, wastewater treatment, bioreactors	Manufacturing & marketing services, repair & maintenance design, patents, insurance, financial	IT, robotics, electronics, A-life, artificial intelligence


	
e.g. green chemistry; bulk chem fine chem. Energy and resource recovery water recycling carbon capture	
e.g. biotechnologies: specific utilisation and/or specific production of: biomass, proteins, enzymes, polymers, algal food, etc. (including GEM products).	
e.g. future need for MFC/PMFC “servicing” investment and insurance for those using the technology	
e.g. bioelectronics, biohybrid devices, living sensors, EcoBots

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
