Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites in electrocatalysis  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0MH00477D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0MH00477D
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2519-2565Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites in electrocatalysis

        
          
            Xiaomin 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yangli 
            Pan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yijun 
            Zhong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ran 
            Ran
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *ac
aWA School of Mines, Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering (WASM-MECE), Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia 6102, Australia. E-mail: zongping.shao@curtin.edu.au
bCentre for Future Materials, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield Central, Queensland 4300, Australia
cState Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University (NanjingTech), Nanjing, 210009, P. R. China
Received 
      20th March 2020
    , Accepted 9th July 2020First published on 9th July 2020AbstractElectrocatalysis lies in the center of many clean energy conversion and storage technologies. Developing efficient electrocatalysts to promote the kinetics of the key chemical reactions involved in these processes represents an important research topic. Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites (An+1BnX3n+1), as a layered derivative of the perovskite family (ABX3), are an important class of solid-state materials, and are emerging as high-performing electrocatalysts due to their unique layered structure and rich chemical compositions. In this review, we provide a comprehensive understanding of the structure and properties of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites in the context of their electrocatalysis applications. We also summarize the recent developments of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites for catalyzing a breadth of electrochemical reactions at both low and high temperatures. We highlight how Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites can be tailored through a range of design strategies to achieve improved electrocatalysis. Finally, we provide perspectives on future research directions that further expand the electrocatalytic possibilities of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites.
Xiaomin Xu
Xiaomin Xu is now pursuing a PhD degree in Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia. He received his Bachelor (2013) and Master (2016) degrees in Chemical Engineering from Nanjing Tech University, China. His research interests include the structure, synthesis, and characterization of perovskite materials and their application in electrocatalysis, including the oxygen reduction reaction, oxygen evolution reaction, and hydrogen evolution reaction.
Zongping Shao
Zongping Shao is a professor of chemical engineering at Curtin University, Australia, and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China, in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and postdoc at California Institute of Technology, USA, from 2000 till 2005. His current research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes, and low-temperature energy conversion devices.
1. Introduction
Moving into the 2020s, humanity continues to face formidable challenges from energy and the environment. According to the International Energy Agency,1 world primary energy demand in 2017 reached 5.8 × 108 TJ (terajoule, 1 TJ = 1012 J), of which fossil fuels (oil, coal, and natural gas) have a major share of more than 80% (about 81%). Projections indicate that with the growth in population and economy, this energy demand will further increase to 7.4 or 8.1 × 108 TJ in 2040 under the “New Policies Scenario” or “Current Policies Scenario”, respectively, with a corresponding increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from 32.6 Gt (gigatonne, 1 Gt = 109t = 1012 kg) in 2017 to 35.9 or 42.5 Gt in 2040.1 As a consequence, great concerns have been raised regarding the environmental issues associated with the continued use of fossil fuels, for example, global warming.
One way to address the energy and environmental problems is to utilize renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind, to power our planet.2 For instance, solar power is by far the most abundant source of renewable energy. It is approximated that the Earth's surface receives 1.2 × 105 TJ of solar energy at every second,3 meaning that with just 1–2 hours of direct sunlight, one could collect enough energy to satisfy the global energy demand for one entire year. However, solar or wind supplies power only when the sun shines or wind blows. To overcome the problem of energy supply intermittency, energy storage technologies will be required. The existing energy storage technologies, with many commercial installations worldwide, are largely based on mechanical energy storage, such as pumped-storage hydroelectricity (i.e., pumped hydro),4 compressed air energy storage,5 and flywheels.6 According to statistics, the world's total installed capacity of pumped hydro was about 1.3 × 105 MW (megawatt, 1 MW = 106 W) in 2010, accounting for 99% of the worldwide storage capacity.7,8 When coupled with the renewable energy sources, these mechanical energy storage technologies, in particular pumped hydro, can bring about reduced emissions.9 Nonetheless, these currently available technologies can be dependent on limited resources or geographic locations and thus may not be affordable for or accessible to all users.10 As an alternative, electrochemical energy storage represents an excellent platform for the integration of renewable resources. For example, battery technologies including sodium–sulfur batteries, redox-flow batteries, and lithium-ion batteries have been commercialized in grid storage, stationary storage, and portable electronics and electric vehicles, respectively.8 Despite their different operational characteristics, these battery technologies face several common challenges for further development, including the enhancement in performance, reduction in cost, and improvement in safety.
Recently, electrochemically storing renewable energy in chemical products of global importance has been proposed to be a feasible and promising option.11 For instance, the electrochemical reduction of water (H2O), nitrogen (N2), and CO2,12–14 which are universal feedstocks provided by the Earth's atmosphere, can produce a large variety of energy carriers (hydrogen (H2), ammonia (NH3), and carbon-containing species such as carbon monoxide (CO), hydrocarbons, and alcohols) that enable the storage of renewables-derived electricity in the form of chemical energy. These electrochemical transformations can be facilely realized using an electrolysis cell under (near) ambient conditions, allowing the on-site production of chemicals at a reduced capital cost. Furthermore, the chemicals produced can be employed as sustainable fuels in electrochemical devices such as fuel cells to generate electrical energy,15,16 which offers a cleaner alternative for power generation compared to the combustion of fossil fuels. Likewise, the conversion between electrical energy and chemical energy can be achieved in metal–air batteries upon charging and discharging (in which the metal plays the role of a fuel), which allows greater energy storage than the widely adopted lithium-ion batteries.17 Furthermore, this kind of electrochemical transformations can take place with increased rates in solid oxide electrochemical cells (SOCs) operating at elevated temperatures.18 In the solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) mode, a great variety of fuels including H2 and hydrocarbons can be oxidized to produce electricity,19–21 whereas in the solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) mode, fuels can be generated as electrical energy are supplied to drive the reversed reactions.22–24 In addition, a reversible solid oxide cell (RSOC) which operates reversibly in both the SOFC and SOEC modes can allow the interconversion of electrical energy and chemical energy,25 analogous to the functioning of a rechargeable battery.
Unfortunately, the practical use of these electrochemical devices is hindered by the low efficiency associated with the sluggish kinetics of key reactions involved. For instance, the efficiency of a metal–air battery is primarily limited by the slow kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) during discharge and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) during charge.17 Similarly, the efficient operation of RSOCs would also require fast reaction kinetics for both the ORR and OER at high temperatures.26 Very often, electrocatalysts made of noble metals such as platinum (Pt), iridium (Ir), and ruthenium (Ru) are needed to facilitate these processes because they are reported to show optimum catalytic activity, for example, Pt toward the ORR27 and iridium/ruthenium oxide (IrO2/RuO2) toward the OER28 for Zn–air batteries utilizing an aqueous electrolyte. However, the scarcity and high cost of these noble metals impede their widespread market penetration. Therefore, inexpensive alternatives that comprise Earth-abundant elements and have high electrocatalytic performance should be developed to meet the requirements for next-generation energy conversion and storage devices.
Among many candidates, inorganic materials belonging to the perovskite family, in particular the simple perovskites, have been intensively studied as electrocatalysts for catalyzing relevant reactions under both low- and high-temperature conditions.29–42 For instance, Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF) was demonstrated with not only excellent ORR activity in SOFCs working at elevated temperatures,19 but also remarkable OER activity that even surpasses the IrO2 benchmark in alkaline solutions under ambient conditions.43 With a nominal chemical formula of ABX3, simple perovskites are known for their great flexibility in terms of the chemical composition, in which the A-site can be a rare-earth, alkaline-earth, or alkali metal and the B-site can be a transition metal, which are 12-fold and 6-fold coordinated with the X anion (very often X is the oxygen), respectively.40 The incorporation of foreign elements as well as the introduction of anion non-stoichiometry can lead to a vast array of perovskite compositions featuring tunable chemistries,41 which in turn can alter the perovskite structure, for example, from the ideal cubic structure to structures with lower symmetries such as orthorhombic, rhombohedral, and tetragonal.29 Adding together, the electronic structure of simple perovskites can be easily regulated, making them highly suited for the study of the structure–performance relationships in electrocatalysis. Furthermore, a range of perovskite derivatives including double perovskite,44 triple perovskite,45 and quadruple perovskite46 further add to the diversity of the perovskite family.
Very recently, Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskites with a general formula of An+1BnX3n+1 or AX(ABX3)n (n = 1, 2, 3,…), which consist of alternating rock-salt layers (AX) and perovskite-like layers (ABX3) along the crystallographic c-axis direction, have emerged as a new category of layered perovskite derivatives with increasing research attention.47,48 Actually, the ABX3 simple perovskites can be considered as the end member of the RP series where n approaches infinity (∞). For this reason, RP perovskites share many similar characteristics to simple perovskites, such as rich chemical compositions and changeable oxygen stoichiometries. The ideal RP structure has a tetragonal symmetry, which would deviate to lower symmetries with the change in compositions or stoichiometries,49–51 similar to that found in simple perovskites. In addition, the RP perovskites can allow the presence of at least two different chemical environments within a two-dimensional layered structure, i.e., the perovskite slab and the rock-salt slab, which differs significantly from the three-dimensional simple perovskite structure. The layered structure also leads to distinct cationic coordination environments as well as unique anionic defect forms.52,53 Moreover, changing the layer number of n modifies the dimensionality of the layered structure and further adds to the chemical space of the RP perovskites. Such tunability in the composition and structure of RP perovskites can give rise to unique electronic structures along with a multitude of fascinating physicochemical properties that are unattainable in the conventional simple perovskites and many other crystalline metal compound phases, thus providing ample opportunities for the design of electrocatalysts based on RP perovskites in terms of chemical, structural, and electronic properties.
Depending on the nature of the constituent elements, RP perovskites have been demonstrated with a broad spectrum of functional properties that are either different from or completely absent in simple perovskites, such as superconductivity,54,55 magnetoresistance,56,57 ferromagnetism,58,59 piezoelectricity,60,61 ferroelectricity,62,63 and optoelectronic properties.64–66 For example, enormous research efforts have been devoted to deploying RP-structured organic–inorganic halide materials as alternatives to simple perovskite materials for high-performance solar cells.64–66 Furthermore, RP perovskites have been reported with intriguing catalytic properties in a wide range of research directions, including thermocatalysis,67 photocatalysis,68 electrocatalysis,69 and photoelectrocatalysis.70 Of importance, there is a growing interest in the exploration of RP perovskites as electrocatalytic materials, for chemical reactions key to both low- and high-temperature energy devices mentioned above. In this work, we provide a comprehensive review of the recent developments of RP perovskites in electrocatalysis. We begin by introducing the fundamentals of RP perovskites in terms of structure, properties, and synthesis, followed by summarizing their applications in electrocatalyzing a variety of chemical transformations, including the oxygen (O2) reduction/evolution, H2 evolution, N2 reduction, CO2 reduction, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) reduction, and urea/methanol/ethanol oxidation for low-temperature electrochemical devices such as electrolysis cells, fuel cells, and metal–air batteries, as well as the O2 reduction/evolution, fuel oxidation, and H2O/CO2 reduction for high-temperature electrochemical devices such as SOFCs, SOECs, and RSOCs. In each electrochemical conversion process, we highlight how RP perovskites stand out as competitive candidates showing electrocatalytic performance that compares favorably to or even exceeds that of simple perovskites. We also outline useful materials design strategies to achieve improved electrocatalysis on RP perovskites, with a special emphasis on the oxygen electrocatalysis. In a further effort to electrochemically enable production and use of sustainable fuels in a more efficient way, we provide our perspectives on future research directions for guiding the design and expanding the possibilities of RP perovskite-based electrocatalysts.
2. Structure, properties, and synthesis of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites
2.1 Structure
RP perovskites are named after S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, the first researchers who conducted coherent investigation of a series of oxide compounds with the composition of Srn+1TinO3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3).47,48 Formulated as An+1BnX3n+1 or AX(ABX3)n (n = 1, 2, 3,…), the RP phases are characterized by alternating rock-salt layers (AX) with perovskite-like layers (ABX3) along the crystallographic c-axis direction (Fig. 1). In this homologous series, the positive integer n represents the number of the consecutive perovskite-like layers (consisting of corner-sharing BX6 octahedra) that are sandwiched between two rock-salt layers. Currently, RP phases having single (n = 1), double (n = 2), or triple (n = 3) perovskite layers are the most widely studied. As n approaches infinity (n → ∞), it corresponds to the well-known simple perovskite phase (ABX3). This layer number n is often correlated with the “dimensionality” of the perovskite structure, evolving from the two-dimensional (2D) RP layered structure to the three-dimensional (3D) simple perovskite structure as n increases from 1 to ∞.
 Fig. 1  A schematic depicting the ideal tetragonal crystal structure (space group: I4/mmm) of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, An+1BnX3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3). The ideal cubic crystal structure (space group: Pmm) of simple perovskite ABX3, which is equivalent to the n = ∞ case of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, is also shown. For comparison and simplicity, the unit cell of the simple perovskite structure is only repeated along the c direction. 
For RP oxides, their chemical composition resembles that of simple perovskite oxides, where A is an alkali, alkaline-earth, or rare-earth metal (e.g., Li, Na, K, Ca, Sr, Ba, La, Pr, Nd, etc.), B is a transition metal (e.g., Ti, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Nb, Ta, Ir, Ru, etc.), and X is oxygen and can be partially replaced by other non-metal elements such as N, S, and Cl. As is well known, the crystallographic stability and structural symmetry of the simple perovskites can be deduced by the so-called Goldschmidt tolerance factor t, given by t = (rA + rX)/[√2(rB + rX)],71 where rA, rB, and rX are the respective ionic radii of the A, B, and X ions, based often on Shannon's ionic radii data.72 In general, t ≈ 1 corresponds to the ideal cubic symmetry (space group: Pmm), and the simple perovskite structure is stable in the range of 0.75 < t < 1.00, with different distortions observed as t decreases.29 The same tolerance factor can also be used to describe the tolerance limits for cation radii in the A and B lattice sites of the n = 1 RP series. In a similar fashion, t ≈ 1 leads to the ideal tetragonal symmetry (space group: I4/mmm), and the single-layer RP structure remains stable within the limits of 0.85 < t < 1.02, with distorted modifications occurring at reduced t values.49–51 While a near-unity t value may still point to the ideal tetragonal symmetry with space group of I4/mmm for the higher-order RP phases (n = 2 and 3), fundamental research on the correlation between their crystallographic symmetry and the tolerance factor is lacking,73,74 due most likely to the complexity of these structures associated with their varying cationic coordinations with increasing perovskite-layer numbers. As n further increases (n > 3), the RP phase becomes thermodynamically less stable.75
Another common representation of the RP formula is written as A2′An−1BnX3n+1 based on the different coordinations of the A-site cations within the layered structure. For the end member simple perovskites (n = ∞), the A- and B-site cations are 12- and 6-fold coordinated to the X anion, respectively. For the nominal RP series (e.g., n = 1, 2, 3), while the B-site cation keeps the 6-fold coordination within the perovskite octahedra, the A-site cation possesses two kinds of coordination, one with the same coordination number of 12 (i.e., A-site) located in the perovskite layer and the other with a coordination number of 9 (i.e., A′-site) positioned at the boundary between the perovskite and rock-salt layers.52 This distinction in the coordination chemistry has given rise to various crystallographic positions for the same element in RP phases with different layers (Fig. 1). In the ideal symmetry, the single-layer RP phase has the simplest structure, with A and B cations occupying one crystallographic position for each and X anion filling two crystallographic positions (i.e., apical and equatorial). In the double-layer RP phase, there are two crystallographic positions for A cation, one for B cation, and three for X anion. For the triple-layer RP phase, A cation also has two possible positions while B cation has two octahedral positions and X anion has four positions. As a result, there exist greater possibilities for composition variation with increasing dimensionality of RP phases.
Among various RP phases, the n = 1 members are the most well-known, whose structure is also referred to as the K2NiF4 structure.47 In this 2D structure, the BX6 octahedra are linked with one another through the equatorial anions, extending infinitely in the ab plane. For the n = 1 RP oxides, one notable feature is that they can allow a wide variety of oxygen stoichiometries such as oxygen-stoichiometric A2BO4, oxygen-deficient A2BO4−δ (where δ, oxygen hypostoichiometry, is the oxygen vacancy defect), and oxygen-excess A2BO4+δ (where δ, oxygen hyperstoichiometry, is the interstitial oxygen defect), depending on the majority of oxygen defects.53 The oxygen vacancy exists in the perovskite layer, while the interstitial oxygen sits in the rock-salt layer. Both oxygen defects are charge compensated by the B-site transition metals which often possess a mixed valence state. Generally speaking, the oxygen interstitial is more commonly observed in the K2NiF4 structure than the oxygen vacancy.76 By comparison, for higher-order RP series (n = 2 and 3), the oxygen-deficient structures are mostly found, with oxygen vacancies localized within the perovskite layer, hence the general formula of n = 2 and n = 3 RP oxides are often expressed as A3B2O7−δ and A4B3O10−δ, respectively.76 The crystal symmetry of RP perovskites is highly correlated with their oxygen content. For example, La2NiO4+δ at room temperature was found to show an orthorhombic Bmab phase for 0 < δ < 0.02, an orthorhombic Fmmm phase for 0.13 < δ < 0.18, and both phases for δ = 0.07.77 In addition, temperature also has an effect on the RP crystalline structure, as most often observed in superconducting phases such as La2CuO4+δ.78 For changes in oxygen stoichiometry that are not notable enough to lead to phase transitions, they can still affect the oxidation states of transition metal cations in RP oxides, and thus lead to different lattice expansions. This signifies how oxygen content, oxidation state of B-site cations, and the crystal structure are strongly correlated with one another. We caution that readers should be aware of the importance of the oxygen stoichiometry because very often the published results only provide the general formula of the RP perovskite of interest (stoichiometric, hypostoichiometric, or hyperstoichiometric) without looking into more details.
2.2 Properties
The physical properties of RP perovskites are closely associated with their crystalline structures. More specifically, these properties are governed primarily by factors including the number of the perovskite-like layers, the nature of the constituent elements (i.e., identity, valence, and amount), and the anion content. Depending on the combination of these factors, RP perovskites have been demonstrated with a wide variety of functional properties that are either different from or completely absent in simple perovskites. The growing interest in exploring RP perovskites as candidates for electrocatalysis mainly comes from their properties in terms of chemical flexibility, high electrical conductivity, and robust structural stability.
The electrocatalytic effect of an RP perovskite, in most cases, is intrinsically correlated with the nature of the B-site cations, which should have chemical reduction/oxidation (redox) capability during an electrochemical process. Having perovskite slabs comprising transition metals such as Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu within the RP structures makes them highly suitable for this purpose. Just like in simple perovskites,31 chemical substitution, at either A- or B-site, is considered a very powerful tool in RP perovskites to tune the electronic properties of B-site ions as well as the B–O bonding, thus affecting the electrocatalytic ability. Given the versatile oxygen chemistry in the RP layered structures, activating the redox of oxygen may appear to be another promising means to facilitate the electrocatalysis, especially for the oxygen electrocatalysis such as the OER,79 which has been recently reported in a breadth of complex electrocatalysts including simple perovskites,80–83 double perovskites,84 oxyhydroxides,85 and hexagonal structures.86 Furthermore, combining the physicochemical properties of the rock-salt slab with those of the perovskite slab can bring about synergistic effects in electrocatalysis,69 a unique characteristic that is scarcely seen in simple perovskites.
The high electrical conductivity of RP perovskites is another advantage that ascertains their applicability for electrocatalysis because fast charge transfer is considered beneficial to the electrochemical processes.87 Generally, RP-type oxides show mixed oxide-ionic and electronic conductivities, in which the oxide ionic conduction can come from both the oxygen interstitials in the rock-salt layer and oxygen vacancies in the perovskite layer and the electronic conduction originates mainly from the BO6 octahedra in the perovskite layer.88 Of importance, the alternation of two different structural units leads to an anisotropic oxygen ion conducting property in the RP layered structure, especially for the n = 1 A2BO4+δ with highly mobile interstitial oxygen, which differs significantly from the oxygen-deficient ABO3−δ simple perovskites. Furthermore, as n increases, the electronic conductivity is anticipated to grow, due to the increased three-dimensionality of the layered structure (i.e., increased O–B–O interaction along the c direction). For instance, the evolution of metallic conductivity occurs as one goes from La2NiO4 to the higher-order members of the Lan+1NinO3n+1 series.89 For a given RP oxide, the conductivity can be influenced by other structural parameters, such as the oxygen content. For example, a semiconducting-to-metallic transition was observed from converting the oxygen-deficient La3Ni2O7−δ to the fully oxygenated La3Ni2O7.90 More recently, several RP perovskites such as Pr2NiO4+δ and Sr3Fe2O7−δ have been demonstrated, either experimentally or theoretically, with proton conductivity in humid atmospheres,91–94 rendering them to be triple-conductive (O2−/e−/H+). This intriguing triple-conducting property makes RP perovskites highly suitable for use as electrode materials in SOCs that utilize a proton-conducting electrolyte.
Furthermore, RP perovskites exhibit good thermal and chemical stability, which is an essential property for long-term operation of electrocatalysis-based energy devices. For low-temperature electrocatalysis, most of the RP structures reported so far are found to be stable under working conditions in aqueous solutions (either acidic, alkaline, or neutral), unlike the case for simple perovskite counterparts in which evolution of amorphous phases at the surface region has been observed.95 By comparison, electrocatalysis at elevated temperatures under the SOC working conditions (either oxidizing or reducing) poses a stricter requirement on the stability. Despite showing one of the best electrocatalytic performance as SOFC cathodes, simple perovskite La1−xSrxFe1−yCoyO3−δ (LSFC) were found to have unacceptably high thermal expansion and unsatisfactory chemical stability.96,97 On the contrary, the corresponding cobaltites and ferrites having a K2NiF4 structure were reported with moderate thermal expansion and enhanced chemical stability, due likely to the stabilizing effect of the rock-salt layer on the perovskite layer.98 Still, the n = 1 RP phases can be compromised during high-temperature operation. For instance, under the anodic polarization of the SOEC testing, La2NiO4+δ would decompose into La3Ni2O7−δ and La4Ni3O10−δ,99 indicative of the better stability of the higher-order RP phases. Similarly, when used as the cathode of SOFC, La3Ni2O7−δ and La4Ni3O10−δ demonstrated improved chemical and thermal stability compared to La2NiO4+δ.100
2.3 Synthesis
In general, the methods used for the synthesis of simple perovskites, as summarized in our previous review,40 can also be applied to the synthesis of RP perovskites. Until now, the majority of the electrocatalytic research adopts the use of polycrystalline powdery samples, most of which can be prepared through the solid-state reaction route using oxides or carbonates of the constituent elements as the starting materials.101 Despite showing simplicity, this route can be quite time-consuming and labor-intensive, especially for the preparation of higher-order RP perovskites which requires prolonged homogenization and heating procedures. For example, Takahashi et al. synthesized La4Ni3O10−δ by sintering pellets made of well-mixed La2O3 and NiO at 1050 °C for 6 days in air.102 By comparison, solution-based synthesis, including sol–gel process,103,104 citrate-nitrate method (modified Pechini method),105,106 and glycine-nitrate combustion route,107 can enable the formation of RP phases in a more facile way, due to the more homogeneous mixing of the precursors in the solution, often with the aid of a chelating or binding agent. For instance, Lou et al. prepared La4Ni3O10−δ by calcining at 1025 °C for 12 h in air via the sol–gel process using a poly(ethylene oxide)–poly(propylene oxide)–poly(ethylene oxide) tri-block copolymer as the chelating agent.103 In addition, Sharma et al. obtained La4Ni3O10−δ by heating at 1050 °C for just 4 h in air through the citrate-nitrate method where ethanol rather than water was used as the solvent to provide higher dissolving capacity and more homogeneous complexing.105
To facilitate fundamental research into the structure–property relationships, high phase purity of the RP perovskites of interest is often a necessity, which is sensitive to the selection of precursors (e.g., molar ratio of the precursors) as well as the synthesis conditions (e.g., heating temperature, duration, and atmosphere). Generally, stoichiometric proportions of metal precursors should be utilized to obtain a pure phase. For example, the intentional introduction of cation deficiency in La2−xNiO4+δ (x = 0.02–0.10) was found to result in the formation of La3Ni2O7−δ as a secondary phase, even for the sample with a minimum La deficiency of x = 0.02.108 However, it should be noted that pure, cation-deficient RP phases can be stabilized in the Nd2−xNiO4+δ counterparts (x = 0.05 and 0.10),109 which is likely a result of the smaller size of Nd3+ as compared to La3+. The complexity of the phase formation for the Lan+1NinO3n+1 series is further reflected by the La–Ni–O phase diagram along the La2NiO4–LaNiO3 join (Fig. 2),110 from which it is obvious that the formation of a certain RP phase is highly dependent on the La/Ni atomic ratio and the calcination temperature. Furthermore, different RP compositions may require different calcination atmospheres to yield phase-pure materials. One example is the La4Ni3−xCoxO10±δ system (0.0 ≤ x ≤ 3.0), in which for 0.0 ≤ x ≤ 1.8 an air atmosphere is sufficient to achieve phase-pure materials, whereas for 2.0 ≤ x ≤ 3.0 an argon atmosphere is essential to obtain phase-pure materials.111 For the same composition, heating under different atmospheres (e.g., O2, air, argon, or H2 in argon) can often lead to a change in the oxygen content as well as the crystal symmetry, as seen in La3Ni2O7−δ,90 which is due to the different oxygen partial pressures provided during calcinations.
 Fig. 2  Calculated vertical section of the La–Ni–O phase diagram along the La2NiO4–LaNiO3 join in air. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2003, Elsevier B.V. 
While the synthesis methods described above are applicable for the preparation of RP perovskites with high crystallinity, they normally produce bulk particles with large size and featureless morphology, due mostly to the agglomeration and sintering caused during prolonged calcinations at high temperatures. This leads to limited control over the nanostructure of the resultant RP perovskites in terms of size, shape, and porosity, which are important factors relevant to electrocatalysis. Nikolla and coworkers have recently demonstrated the controlled synthesis of RP nanostructures via the use of a reverse microemulsion method.112–117 In this process, two separate microemulsions, one containing metal cations and the other precipitating anions, are mixed to allow the coprecipitation of metal cations and thus the formation of the precursor complex, followed by subsequent calcinations to form the final RP phases.118 By varying synthesis parameters, such as the choice of surfactant and the ratio of surfactant to water in the microemulsion solution, control over the crystallinity as well as the nanostructure of the RP products can be realized. For example, the use of Na2CO3 as the precipitating agent in the reverse microemulsion synthesis led to the formation of La2NiO4+δ at a calcination temperature of 1025 °C, a temperature much lower than that in conventional synthesis (1100 °C or above), which can be further reduced to 825 °C when NaOH was employed as the precipitating agent.112 Moreover, an optimum surfactant to water ratio in the metal cation reverse microemulsion suspension resulted in the formation of rod-shaped La2NiO4+δ nanostructures that are highly surface terminated by (001) facets.112 More details will be given in a later section regarding the nanostructuring of RP perovskites through the reverse microemulsion method. Beyond that, the hydrothermal method was reported for the synthesis of nanoparticulate La2NiO4+δ with a macroporous structure.106 While these synthesis methods have seen applicability in the synthesis of the n = 1 RP perovskites, their extension to the synthesis of the higher-order RP perovskites remains to be explored. Furthermore, common synthesis techniques which have succeeded in fabricating a great number of simple perovskite nanostructures, such as electrodeposition for nanoparticles,119 electrospinning for nanofibers,120 and templating synthesis for 3D ordered macroporous structure,121 await to be developed for the synthesis of RP perovskites with analogous nanostructures. Additionally, exsolution, a phenomenon widely reported in simple perovskites,122,123 can be utilized to design nanocomposite catalysts consisting of metal nanoparticles decorated RP perovskites. A later section will discuss how this process can be tailored to achieve highly efficient RP perovskite-based electrocatalysts. For the fabrication of nanostructured electrode materials in SOCs, infiltration represents a simple yet effective method to impregnate nanoparticulate RP perovskites into the electrode/electrolyte backbone.124 Control over the morphology of the resultant composite electrode is made possible by manipulating the infiltrate solution that is prepared by mixing metal precursors with complexing agents and surfactants.
Apart from polycrystalline samples, single-crystalline samples are also useful for electrocatalysis-related fundamental studies, for example, the oxygen ion transport properties. RP perovskite single crystals are often synthesized from the floating zone method, in which a polycrystalline sample or a seed crystal is molten at an extremely high temperature for the growth of single crystals.125,126 In addition, epitaxial thin films are also used as model systems that can allow for the understanding of the physicochemical properties of RP perovskites as they can be fabricated with delicate control over the crystal orientation, surface termination, and strain between the film and substrate. The growth of high-quality epitaxial thin films can be realized through the use of several deposition methods including pulsed laser deposition (PLD),127–129 atomic layer deposition,130,131 and magnetron sputtering.132 It should be noted that thin films of RP perovskites can also be directly deposited on the electrolyte to serve as the electrode materials in an SOC configuration, in which case they are often polycrystalline. These thin films can be fabricated using methods such as spin coating,133 spray pyrolysis,134 electrostatic spray deposition,135 and magnetron sputtering.136
3. Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites in low-temperature electrocatalysis
In this section, we provide an overview of the recent progress of RP perovskites in electrocatalyzing a wide array of chemical reactions under low temperatures. Spanning the hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen chemistries, these reactions involve the evolution of oxygen and hydrogen, the reduction of oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, carbon dioxide, and dinitrogen, as well as the oxidation of small molecules such as urea, methanol and ethanol. In each part, we discuss the importance of the chemical reaction of interest and highlight how RP perovskites emerge as novel and promising electrocatalysts for facilitating these conversions. We also summarize several important materials design strategies that can aid the development of RP perovskites with improved electrocatalytic performance for low-temperature applications, with emphasis placed on the oxygen electrocatalysis.
3.1 Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites as low-temperature electrocatalysts

3.1.1 Oxygen reduction and evolution reactions (ORR/OER). 
The electrocatalysis of oxygen reactions, namely oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions (ORR/OER), is central to many important energy conversion and storage technologies such as regenerative fuel cells, water electrolysis, and metal–air batteries. For instance, as the redox reactions taking place at the air cathode, the ORR (during discharge) and OER (during charge) largely determine the energy efficiency of a rechargeable metal–air battery,137 a promising type of battery (notably Li–air or Zn–air battery) that is reported with significantly higher theoretical energy density compared with conventional Zn–MnO2, lead-acid, and Li-ion batteries.17 In addition, the OER in aqueous water, also known as the water oxidation reaction, plays a crucial role in many emerging energy processes such as water splitting, CO2 electrolysis, and N2 fixation, because it provides electrons to reduce water to hydrogen, CO2 to carbon-containing fuels, and N2 to ammonia.138–140 Unfortunately, these oxygen reactions suffer from intrinsically poor kinetics, causing large overpotentials and consequently a considerable loss of efficiency. To promote the reaction rates, electrocatalysts made of platinum-group elements have been demonstrated to be the most active, for example, Pt toward the ORR and Ir/Ru toward the OER.27,28 However, implementation of the above-mentioned energy technologies would require the use of cost-effective and high-efficient alternative catalysts. Among many candidates, simple perovskites have been intensively studied and demonstrated with high ORR/OER activities comparable to or even better than those of the noble metal-based benchmarks.43,141–143 As a derivative of the simple perovskites, RP perovskites have recently gained increasing research attention as ORR/OER electrocatalysts, due not only to the similarity in materials cost, synthesis, and composition but also to the unique physicochemical properties.
The use of RP perovskites as oxygen electrocatalysts was initiated by Lee et al. and Takeguchi et al.144,145 In 2012, Lee et al. found that Ca2+ and Cu2+ co-doped La2NiO4 (i.e., La1.7Ca0.3Ni0.75Cu0.25O4) could facilitate the OER process of a nonaqueous electrolyte-based Li–O2 battery (Li2O2 → O2 + 2Li+ + 2e−),144 rendering a remarkably reduced charge overpotential compared to a previously reported simple perovskite La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 catalyst.146 In the following year, Takeguchi et al. reported the charge/discharge performance of a triple-layer LaSr3Fe3O10 RP perovskite at a temperature of 60 °C in an anion-exchange membrane-containing fuel cell unit (Fig. 3a).145 Remarkably, LaSr3Fe3O10 catalyzed both the ORR and OER at an equilibrium potential of 1.23 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) with almost no overpotentials, superior to previously reported LaMnO3/LaNiO3 and RuO2–IrO2 (Fig. 3b).147,148 In addition, when compared to simple perovskite La1−xSrxFeO3 with similar constituent elements,149 RP-structured LaSr3Fe3O10 features more easily removable oxygen, which enables the redox reactions of Fe cations and hence results in improved ORR/OER activity.145 Although primarily focused on the use of RP perovskites in real electrochemical devices, these two studies highlighted the catalytic capability of RP oxides toward the oxygen electrocatalysis and have thus encouraged later research efforts into understanding the fundamentals of the oxygen electrocatalysis on RP perovskites and developing improved oxygen electrocatalysts based on RP perovskites.
 Fig. 3  RP perovskites as ORR/OER electrocatalysts. (a) A schematic illustration of the ORR/OER testing in a fuel cell unit with an anion-exchange membrane (AEM). (b) The ORR/OER performance of RP-structured LaSr3Fe3O10 at 60 °C, in comparison to that of LaMnO3/LaNiO3 and RuO2–IrO2. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Volcano-type relationships between the ORR onset potential at 100 μA cmgeo−2 and the measured surface reduction temperature of a range of simple perovskites ABO3 (A = La, Ca, Sr; B = Cr, Mn, Co, and Ni) and n = 1 RP perovskites A2BO4 (A = La, Sr; B = Mn, Co, and Ni). The gray shaded region indicates that the ORR activity here is dominated by the carbon, which is introduced as a conductive agent for the activity evaluation. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The current research on RP perovskites-catalyzed oxygen electrocatalysis has largely focused on candidates containing one or more transition metals such as Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni. Overall, RP perovskites comprising Mn, Co, and Ni show higher ORR performance compared to the Fe-based counterparts, whereas those made of Co, Ni, and Fe, and especially of dual elements, display better OER performance relative to the Mn-containing RP perovskites. The ORR/OER performance is also correlated with the structural dimensionality of RP perovskites. For instance, the ORR/OER activity of Lan+1NinO3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, and ∞) was found to increase with increasing n, with the end member, i.e., simple perovskite LaNiO3 (n = ∞), showing the highest catalytic activity.104 However, this trend may not hold for RP perovskites with a different composition, as apparently evidenced by the higher ORR activity of RP-type LaSr3Fe3O10 relative to simple perovskite La1−xSrxFeO3 as discussed earlier.145 This suggests that the oxygen electrocatalytic performance of an RP perovskite depends not only on the nature of its constituent elements but also on the property of its layered structure. Therefore, compared to simple perovskites, RP perovskites can allow for more possibilities in tuning their composition and structure, which, in turn, can lead to difficulties in correlating these properties to the electrocatalytic behavior. Probably because of this, systematic studies are currently lacking where a great number of RP perovskites are screened to access potential activity descriptors that can be used to guide the design of active candidates. Such studies have earlier been demonstrated with success in selecting simple perovskites as high-performing ORR/OER electrocatalysts. Based on molecular orbital theory and experimental surveys of more than ten simple perovskites, Shao-Horn et al. found that simple perovskites having a near-unity eg filling (i.e., e1g) of the surface transition metal cations deliver optimum ORR/OER activity, and that for those having an identical eg occupancy, a stronger covalency of the transition metal–oxygen bond can further lead to enhanced catalytic activity.43,141 This activity descriptor based on eg occupancy has identified several important simple perovskites with high electrocatalytic activity, such as LaMnO3,141 LaNi0.85Mg0.15O3,150 and LaFe0.95Pd0.05O3−δ151 for the ORR, and BSCF,43 SrNb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2O3−δ,142 and BaCo0.7Fe0.2Sn0.1O3−δ143 for the OER.
Recently, Nikolla and colleagues investigated the electrocatalytic ORR behavior of a series of simple perovskites ABO3 (A = La, Ca, Sr; B = Cr, Mn, Co, and Ni) and n = 1 RP perovskites A2BO4 (A = La, Sr; B = Mn, Co, and Ni), and established a volcano-type relationships between the ORR activity and the oxide surface reducibility (Fig. 3c).152 The oxide surface reducibility, as characterized by the surface reduction temperature derived from the H2 temperature-programmed reduction experiments, can be used to describe the ORR activity because it is considered to be directly correlated to the binding energetics of the ORR intermediates due to its linear correlation with the binding energy of the O adsorbate as well as the formation energy of the surface oxygen vacancy as obtained from density functional theory (DFT) calculations. However, the efficacy of this descriptor in predicting high-performance RP-type ORR catalysts remains to be testified, as the current research only concerns a limited number of RP candidates, with most of them sitting at the bottom of the volcano plot. In addition, similar research attempts are encouraged to systematically understand the structure–activity relations for RP perovskites.


3.1.2 Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), the other half reaction that occurs at the cathode of a water electrolyzer, is also of prime importance to the water splitting technology in converting renewables-derived electricity into hydrogen as a clean and carbon-neutral fuel.11 While the HER may take place at more moderate overpotentials than the OER,12 it still suffers from sluggish kinetics that can lead to increased voltage penalty to the overall water splitting. This is especially the case for the HER in alkaline solutions (2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−), because the HER kinetics for most catalysts in an alkaline electrolyte is slower than that in an acidic electrolyte by at least two orders of magnitude.153 To date, electrocatalysts based on Pt (e.g., Pt/C) are regarded as the most active toward the HER with a near-zero onset overpotential,154 but the high cost associated with their scarcity hinders the use on a large scale, similar to the scenario in the ORR. Alternatives made of Earth-abundant elements have been widely explored,12 among which oxide materials, such as simple oxides155–157 and complex oxides with simple perovskite or double perovskite structures158–160 have recently been reported with acceptable alkaline HER performance. For example, to afford a 10 mA cmgeo−2 current density in 1 M KOH electrolyte, A-site praseodymium-doped Pr0.5(Ba0.5Sr0.5)0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ simple perovskite delivers an overpotential that is more than 100 mV lower than the parent BSCF does (237 vs. 342 mV), which is ascribed to the Pr-doping induced changes in surface electronic structures and properties.158 Nonetheless, these catalysts still cannot compare with the Pt benchmark.
Very recently, exceptional alkaline HER activity was demonstrated on a ruthenium-based RP-type oxide, Sr2RuO4, which consists of alternating SrRuO3 perovskite layer and SrO rock-salt layer (Fig. 4a).69 DFT calculations revealed a metallic behavior of Sr2RuO4 (Fig. 4b), which is considered favorable to electrocatalysis. When tested as an HER catalyst in 1 M KOH, Sr2RuO4 exhibited ultralow overpotentials of ∼3 and 61 mV to reach 1 and 10 mA cmgeo−2, respectively, much smaller than those observed on another two Ru-based control samples, rutile RuO2 (∼46 and 95 mV) and simple perovskite SrRuO3 (∼28 and 101 mV) (Fig. 4c). Among these different Ru-containing crystal structures, RP-structured Sr2RuO4 also displayed greater exchange current density, higher turnover frequency, and larger specific activity, indicative of its better intrinsic activity. More importantly, Sr2RuO4 outperformed the state-of-the-art Pt/C catalyst when taking into account the catalysts’ cost, although Sr2RuO4 still showed somewhat lower mass activity (Fig. 4d). Overall, these activity metrics place Sr2RuO4 as one of the most active Pt-free electrocatalysts ever reported toward the alkaline HER. As supported by DFT calculations, this exceptional activity is attributable to an unusual synergistic effect in the Sr2RuO4 RP structure, in which the apical oxygen site in the SrRuO3 layer facilitates hydrogen adsorption (with an optimal hydrogen adsorption Gibbs free energy close to that of Pt) (Fig. 4e) and the SrO-terminated surface cleaved in the rock-salt layer enables water dissociation (with a small energy barrier for water dissociation) (Fig. 4f).
 Fig. 4  Experimental and theoretical studies of RP-structured Sr2RuO4 as an HER electrocatalyst in alkaline media. (a) A schematic presentation of the RP layered structure of Sr2RuO4. (b) DFT calculation of the density of states (DOS) of Sr2RuO4. (c) Polarization curves of RuO2, SrRuO3, and Sr2RuO4 catalysts in an Ar-saturated 1 M KOH solution. (d) Mass activity (MA) and price activity (PA) of RuO2, SrRuO3, Sr2RuO4, and Pt/C at an overpotential of 0.10 V. (e) Diagram of the hydrogen adsorption Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) at the metal and oxygen sites on RuO2, SrRuO3, Sr2RuO4, Ru, and Pt. (f) Energy diagram of the various surface reaction species and their simplified structures along the Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway for the alkaline HER on the SrO-terminated surface of Sr2RuO4 at electrode potentials of 0 and 0.83 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). TS: transition state. The green, gray, orange/red, and light gray spheres represent Sr, Ru, O, and H atoms, respectively. (g) Polarization curves of Sr2RuO4 initially in comparison to those recorded after 5 and 1000 continuous CV cycles, indicating an electrochemical activation process. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
The HER activity of Sr2RuO4 was found to further increase after continuous cyclic voltammetry (CV) testing (Fig. 4g), which, as corroborated by postmortem characterizations, is likely caused by an interface synergy between the oxide substrate and the Ru nanoparticles in situ formed during the HER testing.69 However, a complete picture of this catalyst restructuring is not fully understood yet and deserves a more in-depth study. This work highlights how RP-layered oxides can benefit from their unique structural features and thus boost the alkaline HER through combined control over key HER steps such as water dissociation and hydrogen adsorption. We note that the exploitation of RP-layered oxides as the HER electrocatalysts is still in its early stages. One direction of future research is to develop RP-type oxides composed of nonprecious transition metals (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni) as potential catalysts for the HER, since Ru is a costly metal that can impose restrictions on practical applications.


3.1.3 CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). 
The CO2 electrolysis represents an important means to secure a sustainable energy and environment future because it transforms renewables-generated electricity into chemical energy stored in carbon-containing fuels and chemicals while also mitigating environmental issues associated with the increasing CO2 emissions such as global climate change. To realize high-performing overall CO2 electrolysis, while efficient OER electrocatalysts are needed to promote the anodic water oxidation,139 active and selective electrocatalysts for the cathodic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) are more urgently needed to gain high yields of specific products.13,161 Among all the existing CO2RR electrocatalysts, copper (Cu)-based materials are recognized as the only candidate to date that can allow the formation of different reduction products,162 from carbon monoxide, to hydrocarbons and oxygenates that contain one (C1), two (C2) or more (C2+) carbon atoms. For instance, Cu2O oxide-derived Cu particles catalyzed the reduction of CO2 to CO and formic acid at low overpotentials and to C2 hydrocarbons at high overpotentials.163 In another example, product selectivity was reported to be highly sensitive to the exposed Cu surface, in which Cu(751) surface is more selective than Cu(100) and Cu(111) surfaces for the formation of oxygenates at low overpotentials.164
Currently, most of the Cu-based catalysts reported are metallic Cu with a formal oxidation state of Cu0.165 A recent study suggested that the Cu oxidation state of anodically polarized Cu electrodes (e.g., Cu0, Cu+, Cu2+) can have an effect on the CO2RR performance.166 However, whether oxidized Cu species stabilized in an oxide lattice can catalyze the CO2RR remains not fully revealed. One work that dates to the year 1993 reported that RP-structured La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 with a formal oxidation state of Cu2.2+ was active toward the CO2RR for alcohol formation when incorporated into a gas diffusion electrode (GDE) for testing in a 0.5 M KOH electrolyte under ambient pressure and temperature.167 Surprisingly, high Faradaic yields of ethanol (30.7%) and n-propanol (10.0%) were achieved after CO2 electrolysis at a constant current density of 180 mA cm−2 for 1.28 h (Fig. 5a). This catalytic capability was not significantly affected when the A-site La3+ or Sr2+ was replaced by Pr3+/Gd3+ or Th4+, but was totally absent when the B-site Cu was substituted completely or even partially with other transition metals (e.g., Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Ag, and Pd). However, the very same results published elsewhere by the same researchers were attributed to a Cu-containing simple perovskite structure with a closely related chemical formula of La0.9Sr0.1CuO3,168 giving rise to uncertainty regarding the nature of this lanthanum cuprate compound. Later in 2014, Mignard et al. revisited this topic and they found that La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 synthesized by a similar approach was characterized by a mixture of RP-structured (La,Sr)CuO4 and simple perovskite-structured (La,Sr)CuO2.6.169 When loaded into a GDE for the same CO2 electrolysis testing in 0.5 M KOH, this material catalyzed the conversion of CO2 to CO and hydrocarbons (methane and ethylene) as the major products, different from the previous work where alcohols were dominant. More specifically, by varying testing conditions such as potential, temperature and pressure, an optimum current efficiency of 9.4% for ethylene formation was achieved after 20 min of electrolysis at −1.94 V vs. the standard calomel electrode (SCE), 20 °C, and 1 barg (Fig. 5b). These different CO2RR results may arise from the differences in the catalyst composition as well as the reaction system and condition.
 Fig. 5  Electrocatalytic activity of RP-structured La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 oxide toward the CO2RR in GDE-based CO2 electrolyzers. (a) Faradaic efficiency of alcohol formation as a function of CO2 electrolysis time at a 180 mA cm−2 constant current density on the La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 catalyst reported by Schwartz et al. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 1993, The Electrochemical Society. (b) Current efficiency of ethylene formation after 20 min of CO2 electrolysis as a function of potential with respect to the SCE at different temperatures and pressures on the La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 catalyst reported by Mignard et al. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. 
The fact that reduction products were indeed detected during GDE-based CO2 electrolysis processes suggests that RP-structured oxides containing Cu initially in Cun+ chemical states appear active in facilitating the CO2RR. However, the CO2RR activity of a GDE-based catalyst system, which is of more interest to industrial applications, is dependent on many factors, such as integration of catalyst, engineering of electrode, and design of electrochemical cell,170 and thus may not reflect the real catalytic capability of the catalyst of interest. Therefore, it becomes necessary to take one step back to transition from GDE-based, applied research to more fundamental research. Very recently, by using a three-electrode testing system and by following experimental protocols relevant to fundamental studies, Whittingham et al. investigated the electrocatalytic CO2RR over a La2CuO4 oxide in 1 M KOH solution.171 Indeed they confirmed the CO2RR capability of the Cu-based, RP-structured La2CuO4 with electrolysis products of formate and acetate being detected in the alkaline solution. In addition, they found that the relative formate to acetate proportions are highly dependent on the electrochemical conditioning of the La2CuO4 catalyst, varying from 1.5 for the pristine sample to 7.2 and 7.1 for the anodically and cathodically conditioned samples. However, La2CuO4 decomposed to an amorphous metal hydroxide phase at voltages below −0.40 V vs. RHE, inhibiting the CO2RR activity. Accompanying this structural instability is the partial reduction of surface Cu2+, although no evidence supported the formation of metallic Cu. Nonetheless, the tracking of any changes in the electronic state of Cu incorporated in the RP layered structure is believed to be important to deepen our insights into the true active sites in effect during the CO2RR.172 These results are very likely to encourage future research inputs into the use of RP-structured materials as CO2RR electrocatalysts. By selecting suitable catalyst model systems, for example, those with well-designed catalyst compositions, geometries, and surfaces, a good understanding of the structure–activity relationship is expected to be established, which can then hopefully be translated to the design of GDE-based CO2 electrolyzers.


3.1.4 Nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). 
Ammonia (NH3) is best known for its role in the production of artificial fertilizers that have sustained the world population.173 In addition, NH3 is identified as a clean energy carrier, which, compared to H2, allows for easier storage, transportation, and distribution while offering higher energy density in liquid form.174 However, 90% of today's annual production of NH3 comes from the traditional Haber–Bosch process (N2 + 3H2 ↔ 2NH3), an energy-intensive process that is performed under elevated temperatures (300–600 °C) and pressures (150–350 atm) with the consumption of large quantities of H2 precursor supplied from fossil fuels (mainly natural gas).14,175,176 As a result, there is an emerging interest in the electrochemical synthesis of NH3 under mild conditions from the nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) using renewable electricity.
Liu and colleagues were the first to demonstrate the use of RP perovskites as electrocatalysts for the synthesis of ammonia at temperatures below 100 °C and at atmospheric pressures.177,178 In their investigation, they employed a back-to-back cell consisting of n = 1 RP series Sm1.5Sr0.5BO4 (B = Ni, Co, Fe) as the cathode catalyst, Ni–samaria-doped ceria (Ni–SDC) as the anode catalyst, and a proton-conducting membrane as the electrolyte. In this configuration, wet hydrogen fed as the reactant on the anode is oxidized to generate protons, which migrate through the membrane and then react with dry nitrogen on the cathode to produce ammonia with the uptake of electrons (N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3). When using the commercial Nafion membrane (type 102), a type of perfluorosulfonic acid proton-conducting membrane known for its high proton conductivity, they obtained the maximum ammonia synthesis rate on all the three Sm1.5Sr0.5BO4 catalysts at the same optimized condition of 80 °C of temperature and 2.5 V of cell voltage (which vary from 25 to 100 °C and from 0.5 to 3.0 V, respectively).177 Notably, Sm1.5Sr0.5NiO4 delivered the highest NH3 yield rate among these cathode catalysts, peaking at 1.05 × 10−8 mol s−1 cm−2 at the optimum condition. Under identical reaction conditions, this same catalyst was found to give a similar NH3 production rate of 1.03 × 10−8 mol s−1 cm−2 when a home-made sulfonated polysulfone membrane was used as the electrolyte.178 The NRR activity of the different RP perovskite cathodes was found to correlate with their conductivity in wet H2/N2 atmosphere,177 beyond which, however, no further insights were given into why Sm1.5Sr0.5NiO4 shows better catalytic performance. Despite the likelihood of the electrocatalytic effect of RP perovskites toward the NRR, it should be noted that more rigorous experimental protocols should be established, for example, those based on quantitative isotope measurements,179 to confirm the production of ammonia over RP perovskite catalysts, since these earlier studies only adopted the Nessler's reagent method for the quantification of ammonia.177,178


3.1.5 Hydrogen peroxide reduction reaction (HPRR). 
The hydrogen peroxide reduction reaction (HPRR; HO2− + H2O + 2 e− → 3OH−) is considered as an alternative cathodic reaction to the ORR in direct liquid fuel cells. Involving a two-electron transfer, the HPRR has much faster kinetics compared with the four-electron ORR process. In addition, the liquid nature of H2O2 allows easier and safer handling as well as higher concentrations in aqueous solutions, the latter of which is key to increasing the power density of fuel cells.180 Noble metals (e.g., Pt) have been reported with high electrocatalytic activity for the HPRR,181 but their large-scale use is hindered by their prohibitive cost.
Recently, lanthanum cuprates and nickelates with an n = 1 RP structure were screened for electrocatalyzing the HPRR in alkaline media.182 Among several different compositions, La2CuO4 and La1.8Ce0.2NiO4 were the only two that gave considerable reduction currents at around −0.25 V vs. RHE in H2O2-containing electrolytes. The electrocatalytic activity was found to correlate with the surface composition of these two oxides, which, compared to other counterparts, tend to leach out a larger number of surface transition metals under strongly alkaline conditions. An attempt was also made to explain the HPRR activity using the aforementioned eg descriptor.43 For example, Ce-doping in La1.8Ce0.2NiO4 could stabilize Ni3+ with one eg electron, thus affording better activity toward the HPRR. However, CeO2 was revealed as an impurity phase in the as-obtained La1.8Ce0.2NiO4 oxide, which brings difficulty to the identification of the real active sites for the HPRR, due likely to the presence of the Ce3+/Ce4+ redox.183 Further understanding of the relationships between the RP composition and HPRR performance should be established based on results gained from high-purity model catalysts, especially those comprising a range of transition metal elements. In this sense, HPRR studies on Mn-, Fe-, and Co-based simple perovskite oxides may be able to provide insights.184–187


3.1.6 Urea oxidation reaction (UOR) and beyond. 
Urea [CO(NH2)2] is discharged at a huge daily amount into our water systems from sources like industrial synthesis of urea, urea fertilizer, and human/animal urine. This urea, if untreated, can naturally hydrolyze to ammonia, causing both environmental and health problems. The electrochemical oxidation of urea has been established as an effective method for treatment of urea-rich wastewater owing to its simplicity and high efficiency.188 More importantly, the urea oxidation reaction (UOR; CO(NH2)2 + 6OH− → N2 + CO2 + 5H2O + 6e−) can either couple with the ORR in a direct urea full cell to generate electricity,189 or combine with the HER in urea electrolysis to produce hydrogen.190 The latter appears especially intriguing in that the electrolysis of urea requires a much smaller theoretical cell voltage under standard conditions than that of water (0.37 vs. 1.23 V),190 allowing H2 generation to happen in a more energy-efficient manner. Nonetheless, the UOR is a complex 6-electron transfer process with intrinsically slow reaction kinetics, which necessitates the involvement of efficient electrocatalysts. Over the years, research attention has been mainly directed to catalyst materials that contain Ni species as the major active site.191 More recently, the UOR on Ni-based catalysts has been proposed to follow an indirect, electrochemical-chemical (EC′) mechanism,192,193 where Ni2+ in Ni(OH)2 is initially oxidized to the catalytically active state of Ni3+ in NiOOH, with which urea subsequently reacts to form the N2, CO2, and H2O products and regenerate the Ni(OH)2 catalyst, as shown below. 6Ni(OH)2(s) + 6OH− ↔ 6NiOOH(s) + 6H2O(l) + 6e−(1) 6NiOOH(s) + CO(NH2)2(aq) + H2O(l) → 6Ni(OH)2(s) + N2(g) + CO2(g)(2)This reaction pathway suggests that a material with an inherent Ni3+ chemical state may exhibit favorable activity toward the electrocatalytic UOR. Indeed, simple perovskite LaNiO3, in which La3+ forces Ni into the +3 valence via charge compensation, was demonstrated by Forslund et al. to show high UOR activity.194 Going one step further, the same researchers suspected that raising the Ni oxidation state above +3 might lead to even greater UOR activity. Generally, this can be achieved by partial replacement of La3+ with lower-valence cations such as Sr2+, however, the LaNiO3 simple perovskite structure becomes unstable upon any significant level of Sr2+ substitution.195 Alternatively, this purpose was fulfilled by utilizing the n = 1 RP crystal structure. Forslund et al. synthesized a series of phase-pure, Sr-doped La2−xSrxNiO4+δ materials, which gave elevated bulk Ni oxidation state with increasing doping amount of Sr (2.74, 3.21, 3.39, and 3.54 for x = 0.5, 1, 1.25, and 1.5, denoted as LSN75, LSN50, LSN37, and LSN25, respectively).196 Notably, when tested in Ar-saturated 1 M KOH containing 1 M urea, they displayed UOR activity that trends with the bulk Ni oxidation state, peaking at LSN25 with a mass activity of 1252 mA mgox−1 at 0.6 V vs. Hg/HgO (Fig. 6a). The onset of the UOR on these RP catalysts occurs at 0.44 V vs. Hg/HgO, resembling that of the redox peaks that appear in the absence of urea due to the Ni2+/Ni3+ transition (Fig. 6b). This indicates that the UOR on La2−xSrxNiO4+δ proceeds through a process similar to the EC′ mechanism. Additionally, LSN25 displayed considerably higher UOR activity than the LaNiO3 and NiO control samples, further supporting the hypothesis that Ni in the form of elevated oxidation state can bring about improved UOR performance. Of significance, the UOR activity obtained on this RP perovskite is among the highest in comparison to many reported Ni-based catalysts, such as Ni(OH)2, NiCo2O4, and NiMoO4.188,197,198
 Fig. 6  Activity toward the electrooxidation of urea, methanol, and ethanol for the RP-structured La2−xSrxNiO4+δ series (x = 0.5, 1, 1.25, and 1.5, denoted as LSN75, LSN50, LSN37, and LSN25, respectively). (a) CVs performed with 1 M urea. (b) CVs performed in the absence of a small molecule. (c) CVs performed with 1 M methanol. (d) CVs performed with 1 M ethanol. All CVs were collected at 10 mV s−1 in Ar-saturated 1 M KOH and all activities were reported at 0.6 V vs. Hg/HgO on the anodic scan. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Although able to work at very large current densities over extended periods of time, this La2−xSrxNiO4+δ system is prone to deactivation at sufficiently cathodic potentials due to possible carbonate formation.196 In addition, despite the high current density observed on LSN25, it still needs an onset of 0.44 V vs. Hg/HgO (i.e., ∼1.41 V vs. RHE), which represents a large overpotential relative to the equilibrium potential of 0.37 V vs. RHE.190 These issues invite further research efforts in the development of RP-structured UOR catalysts. Considering that this area remains largely underexplored, the insight gained from Forslund et al.'s work that Ni oxidation state as a governing descriptor can be systematically tuned to yield enhanced UOR activity, can, at least as a starting point, aid the design of other advanced UOR electrocatalysts based on an RP layered structure.
Apart from the UOR, the electrooxidation reactions of other small molecules, including methanol (MeOH) and ethanol (EtOH), are also important to electricity production because they serve as the key components in energy conversion devices of direct methanol/ethanol fuel cells.199,200 In an analogous vein, the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR; CH3OH + 6OH− → CO2 + 5H2O + 6e−) and the ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR; C2H5OH + 12OH− → 2CO2 + 9H2O + 12e−) involve a complex 6- and 12-electron process, respectively, and their sluggish kinetics demand the use of efficient catalysts. Interestingly, the La2−xSrxNiO4+δ series were found to be also active toward both the MOR and EOR.196 Similarly, the electrooxidation performance scales with the bulk Ni oxidation state, reaching the optimum at LSN25 with mass activities of 1554 and 1547 mA mgox−1 at 0.6 V vs. Hg/HgO in 1 M KOH containing 1 M MeOH and 1 M EtOH, respectively (Fig. 6c and d). Furthermore, the same onset potential of 0.44 V vs. Hg/HgO suggests that the MOR and EOR may follow a similar EC′ mechanism. Additionally, the same stability issue observed for the UOR was also encountered for the MOR and EOR. This again calls for increased input into this field of research, given the limited literature results to date.201–204 Previous works on the RP-structured rare-earth nickelates and cuprates reveal improved tolerance against the poisoning by intermediates/products during the MOR.201,203,204 Of note, a linear correlation between the MOR activity and the concentration of high-valence Cu3+ species was also observed for Sr-doped lanthanum cuprates.201 However, no report on the use of RP oxides for the EOR has been seen elsewhere. Overall, future investigations that build upon both experimental and theoretical efforts are supposed to offer more insights into the development of RP-based catalysts toward the electrooxidation of urea, MeOH, and EtOH, among many others.

3.2 Strategies toward improved low-temperature electrocatalysis on Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites

3.2.1 Regulating compositions. 
Analogous to the simple perovskites, the RP perovskites can accommodate various elemental compositions, allowing facile tuning of their electrocatalytic properties through doping of foreign elements into both the cationic and anionic sites. In general, the type and amount of the dopant can have a strong impact on the electrocatalytic performance. For the A-site doping, the dopant is typically an alkaline-earth or rare-earth metal. For instance, Jung et al. studied the effect of A-site substitution of Ca2+/Sr2+ for La3+ on the ORR/OER activity of the first-order RP series La1.9A0.1NiO4 (A = La, Ca, Sr) in 0.1 M KOH solution.205 While sharing a same tetragonal structure, the Sr-doped sample exhibited better activity toward both the ORR and OER compared with the Ca-doped and the undoped samples, due likely to a larger Ni valence state and a higher surface hydroxide coverage. The bifunctional ORR/OER performance was found to be further improved when the Sr doping level was increased from 0.1 to 0.3. More recently, La2NiO4 dual-doped by Nd and Pr lanthanides exhibited a mixed nickel valence of Ni2+/Ni3+, leading to a change in the ORR kinetics as well as an increase in the ORR activity.206
In another work, partial replacement of Sr2+ by La3+ in the second-order RP-structured Sr2.6La0.4Fe2O7 stabilized the presence of surface Fe4+ species which could otherwise easily undergo charge disproportionation (2Fe4+ → Fe3+ + Fe5+) in Sr3Fe2O7.207 The Fe4+ cation has a high-spin electron configuration of t32ge1g, which is expected to give high OER activity based on the eg filling activity descriptor used in simple perovskite OER electrocatalysts.43 Later, Abrishami and coworkers studied in more details the structure–property relations of a Pr-doped, n = 1 RP system, Ca2−xPrxMnO4 (x = 0.00, 0.25, and 0.50).208 The crystal structure changes with the Pr stoichiometry, possibly because of the different ordering of Pr and Ca cations. Notably, the OER activity of RP-structured Ca2−xPrxMnO4 was consistently higher than that of simple perovskite Ca1−xPrxMnO3 with a same doping concentration. However, attempt to apply the eg activity descriptor in understanding the relationship between electronic structure and OER activity of RP-structured Ca2−xPrxMnO4 was not successful. The highest OER activity in this RP system was obtained on Ca1.75Pr0.25MnO4 which has an eg = 0.3 Mn cation state and a relative minimum Mn–O covalency. Instead, a volcano-like trend was observed when plotting the OER activity against the energy position of the pre-edge peak in the O K-edge X-ray absorption spectra, an alternative descriptor that considers the combined effects of Mn valence and Mn–O covalency. While this study is only based on a limited number of RP candidates, it nonetheless suggests that in the ORR/OER electrocatalysis our understanding of structure–property relationships for simple perovskites may not be simply transferred to that for RP perovskites.
Compared to the A-site, the B-site of RP perovskites can accommodate a wider range of dopants, be it a redox-inactive element or a redox-active one. The inclusion of catalytically inert dopants can help modify the electronic structure of the neighboring catalytically active elements and can therefore lead to increased electrocatalytic performance. For example, when half of the B-site Fe cations in Sr3Fe2O7 were replaced by Ti cations to obtain Sr3FeTiO7, the charge disproportionation of Fe4+ was suppressed,209 resulting in improved OER activity in neutral electrolyte, similar to the case of La-doping at the A site.207 On the other hand, introducing catalytically active dopants can more directly affect the electrocatalytic behavior of RP perovskite oxides. Samira et al. found that the ORR activity of La2Ni0.88B0.12O4+δ (B = Mn, Co, Cr, and Cu) in alkaline solution was strongly correlated with the nature of the substituted B-site metals; Mn and Co dopants give higher ORR activity with a four-electron transfer in comparison to Cr and Cu with a less favorable two-electron transfer.116 The influence of doping amount was also investigated in a triple-layer RP series, LaSr3Fe3−xCoxO10−δ (x = 0.0, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0).210 Due to the presence of partially oxidized Co cations, increased number of highly active oxygen species O22−/O−, and improved capability for both OH− adsorption and O2 desorption, the sample with a doping level of x = 1.5 demonstrated the best OER activity, requiring an overpotential of only 388 mV to afford a benchmark current density of 10 mA cm−2geo, outperforming the state-of-the-art metal oxide catalysts such as noble metal-based IrO2 and simple perovskite BSCF.
Understating how different transition metals interact at the B-site and contribute to improved electrocatalysis is important to the design of RP perovskite catalysts. Stevenson and coworkers examined the effect of chemical substitution of Fe for Ni on the electrocatalytic OER performance of a homogeneous solid solution La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4+δ (LSNF, 0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (Fig. 7a).79 Concomitant with an increasing trend in oxygen hyperstoichiometry, increasing Fe substitution resulted in an increase in Ni oxidation state from +3.54 in LSN (x = 0) to +3.95 in LSNF85 (x = 0.85), indicative of the increased covalency of Ni–O bonding. Except for the completely substituted sample LSF (x = 1), all the other Fe-substituted samples showed improved OER activity, with LSNF30 (x = 0.30) giving the best activity, more than one order of magnitude higher than the parent LSN (Fig. 7b). DFT calculations using a model system of La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4 (x = 0.00, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 1.00) suggest that Fe substitution led to the cross-gap hybridization between Ni 3d eg, O 2p and Fe 3d eg bands across the Fermi level, which could enhance charge transfer interactions across the Fe–O–Ni bridges (Fig. 7c and d). Based on this, optimum OER activity is expected to occur for a composition between LSNF25 (x = 0.25) and LSNF50 (x = 0.50), agreeing well with the experimental results. Furthermore, the OER on LSNF is likely to follow a lattice oxygen mediated (LOM) mechanism, as evidenced by increased oxygen diffusion rates and decreased oxygen vacancy formation energies. Unlike the conventional adsorbate evolution mechanism,43 this newly proposed LOM mechanism involves the direct participation of lattice oxygen from the catalyst (other than oxygen from the electrolyte) in the OER, and thus represents an effective catalyst design criterion for promoting the OER activity, which was previously seen in simple perovskite catalysts.80–83 The different oxygen environments of RP perovskites, as compared with those of simple perovskites, should be taken into consideration in the future design of new RP perovskite catalysts that utilize the LOM mechanism.
 Fig. 7  Experimental and theoretical studies of RP-structured La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4+δ as OER electrocatalysts in alkaline media. (a) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4+δ showing the same tetragonal I4/mmm symmetry across all the compositions. (b) Tafel plots of La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4+δ showing specific activity as a function of potential. (c) Representations of the two B(B′)O2 layers for each ground state La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4 (x = 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 1) used for DFT modelling; for each x, the ground state Fe arrangement is characterized by equal numbers of Fe in the two B(B′)O2 layers, with the Fe in each layer arranged to maximize the number of Fe–O–Ni bridges. (d) The corresponding spin polarized projected density of states (PDOS) of eg (Ni: gray shaded area and Fe: blue line) and 2p (O: red line) with respect to Fermi level for the B–O–B′ bridges. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Regulating the composition at both the A- and B-site of RP perovskites appears to be more challenging. Again, the substitutional range can directly impact the electrocatalytic performance. For instance, a small amount of Sr and Co substitution for Nd and Ni in Nd2−xSrxNi1−yCoyO4±δ (x = 0.02 and y = 0.01, x = 0.05 and y = 0.05, and x = 0.10 and y = 0.10) did not significantly vary the ORR activity in alkaline solution.211–213 By comparison, higher level Sr and Co co-doping into the La and Ni sites of La2−xSrxNi1−yCoyO4+δ (x = 0.3 and y = 0.5) considerably increased both the ORR and OER activity of the parent La2NiO4+δ, showing higher power density as well as better cycling performance in Zn–air batteries.214 This improved bifunctionality was proposed to be associated with the incorporation of Co as a major active site. In addition, the electrocatalytic processes on the co-doped RP perovskites are closely linked to their surface properties, for example, the nature and the quantity of active species on the catalyst surface.211–214 Due to the complexity related to this, a case-by-case investigation is often needed to locate a multi-element substituted RP perovskite with an optimal composition. In the meantime, whether a pure, monophasic RP perovskite can still be preserved upon the inclusion of multiple dopants should be carefully addressed because formation of any impurity phases can interfere with the research focus here.
Apart from cationic doping, the replacement of the oxygen site by non-oxygen anions, such as F−, Cl−, and Br−, presents as another important means to modify the catalytic properties of RP perovskites.215 Referred to also as oxyhalides, this type of RP perovskite oxides have a common chemical description of An+1Bn(X,X′)3n+1, where X and X′ represent a mixing of O with halogens.216–218 In these structures the halide anions normally take the place of oxygen at a terminal, apical position pointing to the interlayer space and coordinated to the A-site cations. Ghanem et al. were the first to study the oxygen electrocatalysis over a range of RP-type layered iron oxyhalides, including Sr2FeO2Cl2, Sr2FeO3Br, Sr4Fe3O8Cl2, and Pb4Fe3O8Br.219 They reported that RP-type oxyhalides with a higher level of chlorine and a lower level of oxygen, as found in Sr2FeO2Cl2 and Sr4Fe3O8Cl2, showed significantly enhanced bifunctionality toward both the ORR and OER. The incorporation of Br, however, was found to lower the electrocatalytic activity, as seen in Sr2FeO3Br and Pb4Fe3O8Br, which the authors attributed to the poorer adsorption of reaction intermediates on oxybromides than on oxychlorides. Later, Miyahara et al. investigated in more details into the influence of anion incorporation on the ORR/OER performance of cobalt-containing compounds.220 Their electrochemical survey over Cl-incorporated RP perovskites Sr2CoO3Cl and Sr3Co2O5Cl2, purely oxygen-containing RP perovskite LaSrCoO4, and simple perovskite LaCoO3, all having a Co3+ cation oxidation state, reveals that the two oxychlorides exhibited high bifunctionality, with the ORR activity higher than LaSrCoO4 and comparable to LaCoO3 and the OER activity significantly better than both counterparts, even approaching that of the benchmarking BSCF. DFT calculations suggest that the high catalytic activity can be understood by an upshift of the O p-band center resulting from the Cl incorporation, in line with earlier research on double perovskite electrocatalysts.221 These results demonstrate the promise of tuning the anionic site of RP perovskites toward improved oxygen electrocatalysis. Extending from this point, it is interesting to study the electrocatalytic properties of RP perovskites with the O partially replaced by other non-oxygen elements (e.g., N and S).


3.2.2 Nanostructuring. 
Conventionally, bulk-sized materials show insufficient electrocatalytic activity because with a small surface area they only possess a limited number of surface-active sites for the electrochemical reactions to take place. In addition, the lack of pore structures in bulk materials can inhibit the transport of gaseous reactants/products during the electrocatalytic reactions. To address these issues, nanostructuring has been established as a useful and technically viable approach.40 Through the development of advanced synthetic methods, nanostructured RP-based materials with reduced particle size, increased surface area, and rich pore structures can be realized. For example, Wei et al. reported a hydrothermal method to fabricate La2NiO4+δ nanoparticles having a macroporous structure with a 100–200 nm particle size and a ∼10 m2 g−1 surface area.106 Compared to the La2NiO4+δ counterpart synthesized from a modified Pechini route, which exhibited a non-pore structure with a larger size of ∼500 nm and a smaller surface area of ∼1 m2 g−1, the hydrothermally obtained La2NiO4+δ nanoparticles demonstrated considerably enhanced ORR/OER activity in aqueous solutions as well as discharge–charge performance in nonaqueous electrolyte based Li–O2 batteries.
Furthermore, nanostructuring can produce unique materials morphologies with preferentially exposed surface facets that are active toward the electrocatalysis. For instance, rod- and polyhedron-shaped La2Ni0.88Mn0.12O4+δ nanostructures were attained by regulating the surfactant to water ratio during the reverse microemulsion synthesis.116 The rod-shaped structure tends to expose the B-site metal sites through the (001) facet, whereas the polyhedron-shaped structure is terminated by mixed low energy surfaces with diluted concentration of the B-site metals, such as (111), (01), and (13). As a result, higher ORR activity was observed on the rod-shaped La2Ni0.88Mn0.12O4+δ. In another work, La2NiO4+δ nanorods terminated with (001) surface were found with high electrocatalytic activity for the formation and decomposition of the discharge product Li2O2 in nonaqueous Li–O2 batteries.113 Combined theoretical calculations and electrochemical studies further reveal that compared to polyhedron-shaped La2NiO4+δ particles with multiple surface terminations, rod-shaped (001)-terminated La2NiO4+δ nanostructures favor the stabilization of lithium-deficient oxide species during discharge, which in turn leads to the reduction of overpotential losses associated with their oxidation during charge.117 Note, however, that shape-dependent ORR activity in alkaline solutions was not observed for the La2NiO4+δ nanostructures.116 This may present a gap between the ORR in aqueous water and that in nonaqueous electrolytes, and therefore suggests that the effect of the nanostructuring of RP perovskites should be investigated within the context of a certain electrocatalytic application.
Understanding RP-related nanostructures at the atomic scale can help elucidate the structure–activity relations during electrocatalysis. Using scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), Bak et al. observed the formation of RP-type two-dimensional homologous faults with a [LaO]–[LaO] consecutive stack by introducing La-excess in thin-film LaNiO3 during its deposition on a LaAlO3 substrate (Fig. 8a).222 By comparison, such RP-type faults were absent in LaNiO3 thin films with Ni-excess. To reduce local repulsive instability associated with the two adjacent [LaO] layers, the oxygen anions in the apex of the [NiO6] octahedra in the fault plane considerably displaced along the c axis, elongating the Ni–O bond length from 1.9 to 2.3 Å (Fig. 8b and c). Interestingly, this tetragonal distortion was found to lead to enhanced oxygen electrocatalysis in alkaline solution, predominantly for the OER, as evidenced by the more than doubled currents at 1.63 V vs. RHE (Fig. 8d). This suggests that the distorted [NiO6] octahedra induced by the RP-type faults are intrinsically more active than the undistorted [NiO6] octahedra, which is further supported by the ease of surface amorphization at the vicinity of the RP faults during OER testing (Fig. 8e). The same beneficial effects from the generation of RP-type faults, however, were not found in RP layered nickelates Lan+1NinO3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3) although they intrinsically possess two consecutive [LaO] layers in their crystal structures. This may be understood from the fact that RP layered nickelates have a Ni valence lower than that of simple perovskite LaNiO3. Nevertheless, formation of RP faults offers an efficient approach to tuning electrocatalytically active sites at the atomic scale and thereby notably promoting the catalytic performance of RP-related nanostructures.
 Fig. 8  Formation of RP-type faults in LaNiO3 thin films and its effect on the tetragonal distortion of [NiO6] octahedra and the oxygen electrocatalytic properties. (a) STEM images for 5%-Ni-excess (left) and 5%-La-excess (right) films, where the presence of RP-type faults is only seen in the latter case. (b) High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) and annular bright-field (ABF) images showing the visualization of the atomic positions for La, Ni, and O. (c) Magnified ABF images for the bulk and the fault region indicated by a blue square and a red rectangle in (b), respectively. (d) The ORR (left) and OER (right) currents as a function of potentials in both 5%-Ni-excess and 5%-La-excess LaNiO3 thin films. (e) Low-magnification HAADF image showing the overall atomic-scale structure of 5%-La-excess films after 10 cyclic voltammetry scans in a potential range of 1.10–1.90 V vs. RHE, where V-shaped amorphous pits on the surface intersections with the RP fault plane are identified. The two magnified images for the regions denoted by A and B further clarify the amorphization. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Forming composites/hybrids. 
A distinguishing characteristic of composite/hybrid materials is the capability to demonstrate a wider range of functional properties than each individual component. Through the incorporation of a secondary phase in a composite matrix, one can increase the electrocatalytic activity of RP perovskites. One simplest form is the combination with carbon materials. For example, physically mixing LaSr3Fe3O10 with graphene oxide (GO) was found to facilitate its ORR kinetics in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, showing more positive onset and half-wave potentials.223 The GO mainly serves as a conductive agent to compensate for the poor conductivity of LaSr3Fe3O10. The ORR pathway, however, remains to be dominated by a two-electron process, suggesting that the inclusion of GO did not significantly promote the ORR performance, which is likely associated with the weak interaction between LaSr3Fe3O10 and GO. By comparison, the chemical modification of a carbon-coating layer with thickness <5 nm on the surface of La0.6Sr1.4MnO4, which was obtained via a combined pyrolysis and graphitization process, was found to lead to markedly enhanced ORR performance, with a predominately four-electron pathway and a diffusion limiting current density comparable to that of Pt/C.224 The carbon coating not only allows one or two orders of magnitude faster electronic conduction but also offers larger surface area for better contact between the catalyst and electrolyte. Note that aside from the stronger interaction induced by chemical synthesis, the greater ORR activity of the carbon-coated La0.6Sr1.4MnO4 composite is also related to the intrinsically higher activity of the Mn-containing La0.6Sr1.4MnO4, much superior to that of the Fe-based LaSr3Fe3O10. This point was further supported by the good ORR activity of a double-layer RP manganite LaSr2Mn2O7, which exhibited a direct four-electron ORR pathway.225 The ORR performance was found to be further improved after physically composited with acetylene black to afford an electrically conductive network.
Because RP perovskites, especially the K2NiF4-type oxides, suffer intrinsically poor electronic conductivity due to the presence of AO rock-salt layers that are considered insulating, carbon materials, such as Vulcan XC72 carbon,79 Super P Li carbon,104 and carbon nanotubes,226 are often applied as a conductive additive to eliminate any possible electrical conductivity limitations in the evaluation of electrocatalytic performance, a practice commonly observed for simple perovskite catalysts.227–229 However, the catalytic role of carbon should not be neglected. For example, the ORR on carbon/La2Ni0.88B0.12O4+δ (B = Mn or Co) composite electrodes was reported to follow a pseudo four-electron pathway, where carbon catalyzes the reduction of O2 to OOH− which is further reduced to OH− on La2Ni0.88B0.12O4+δ.116 In addition, the reductive nature of carbon materials, which could lead to partial reduction of the transition metal valence state, as found in BSCF/carbon composites,230 should be taken into consideration in the design of RP perovskite/carbon composites. Although rarely seen nowadays, future efforts are anticipated to understand the interaction between added carbon and the pristine RP perovskites and its effect on the electrocatalytic performance.
Furthermore, compositing with other types of functional materials can lead to enhanced electrocatalysis due to the creation of synergistic effects. Yang et al. synthesized a metal oxide–RP perovskite nanohybrid, NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562, by using a one-pot combustion process (Fig. 9a).231 The formation of this nanohybrid was triggered by the excess doping of divalent Ca2+ into the trivalent La3+-site of simple perovskite LaNiO3−δ, causing a phase segregation following the equation of 2La0.6Ca0.4NiO3−δ → NiO + (La0.6Ca0.4)2NiO4−δ. Due to the cogeneration of a small amount of CaCO3, the nanohybrid has a NiO to (La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 molar ratio of 54/46, slightly deviating from the ideal value of 50/50. When used as an OER electrocatalyst in 0.1 M KOH, the nanohybrid exhibited an intrinsic activity that is 3–8 times higher relative to the single-phase NiO and (La0.6Ca0.4)2NiO4−δ (Fig. 9b), indicative of the presence of a synergistic effect between these two phases. Notably, this activity was found to surpass that of precious metal-based catalysts such as RuO2 and simple perovskite catalysts such as BSCF. Moreover, the reduction in Tafel slope implies an alteration in the OER reaction pathway, which might account for the activity enhancement (Fig. 9b). Chronoamperometric measurement further revealed an excellent stability of the nanohybrid during continuous OER operation for 10000 s (Fig. 9c). The cation size-mismatch induced phase separation may be applicable to the exploration of other RP-phase-containing composites. A good knowledge about the formation and transition of perovskite-related structures is likely to aid this process. It is also intriguing to investigate RP perovskite-based composites with novel chemical compositions and structures.
 Fig. 9  Characterization and performance of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid as an OER electrocatalyst in alkaline solution. (a) XRD patterns of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid. Inset shows the crystal structures of NiO (space group: Fmm) and (La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 (space group: I4/mmm). (b) The OER Tafel plots of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid, NiO, and (La0.6Ca0.4)2NiO4−δ. (c) Chronoamperometric test of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid at 1.63 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH. Inset is the linear sweep voltammograms before and after the stability test. Reproduced with permission.231 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. 


3.2.4 Manipulating intercalated Ruddlesden–Popper derivatives. 
Recently, several higher-order RP oxides (n = 2 and 3) have been demonstrated with the ability to accommodate hydroxyl group and/or water molecule in the rock-salt layer, generating oxyhydroxide or hydrated oxyhydroxide derivatives with increased interlayer spacing (Fig. 10a).232 Relevant to electrocatalysis, this topotactic hydrolysis/hydration process can often occur for cobaltites and ferrites upon reaction with humid, moisture, or water.232–236 The presence of oxygen vacancy seems to be a prerequisite for the water intercalation to happen,233,234 which partially explains why such phenomenon is currently not seen in the n = 1 RP perovskites. In addition, the ease for the water intercalation likely depends on the intrinsic chemistry of the RP materials. For example, the n = 2 RP-type Sr3Fe2O7−δ can experience a facile transformation after exposure to ambient air,233 whereas the n = 3 RP-type LaSr3Fe3O10−δ may require a harsher condition (e.g., in water solution with elevated temperatures) to allow a similar conversion.234 Furthermore, the speed of the water intercalation is strongly correlated with the oxygen vacancy amount; the larger the oxygen vacancy amount, the faster the water intercalation.233 These findings, together with the fact that the intercalated RP derivatives can be stabilized under ambient conditions, have implications for evaluating their electrocatalytic performance in aqueous solutions.
 Fig. 10  Structure of intercalated RP derivatives and their electrocatalytic OER properties in alkaline media. (a) Schematic illustrations of the pristine RP structure (left panel) and derivatives with intercalated hydroxyl group (central panel) and intercalated hydroxyl group and water molecule (right panel). The thickness evolution is given as an example to illustrate how water intercalation into the interlayer leads to the elongation along the c direction. The dashed lines are used to suggest the layer number n. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (b) Polarization curves of untreated and NMP-treated (for 7 days) intercalated Sr3FeCoO7−δ as well as IrO2 nanoparticles. (c) XRD patterns of untreated and NMP-treated (for 7 days) intercalated Sr3FeCoO7−δ. The inset shows the change of the R002/110 ratio after different treatment durations. (d) A volcano-shaped plot showing the relationship between the OER activity and the R002/110 ratio. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Using solid-state reaction, Sonoki et al. synthesized n = 2 RP-structured Sr3Co2O7−δ, which spontaneously converted into a hydrated oxyhydroxide Sr3Co2O5(OH)2·2H2O due to reaction with moisture in the air.237 Compared to simple perovskite LaCoO3 and RP perovskite LaSrCoO4 and La4Co3O10, Sr3Co2O5(OH)2·2H2O showed better or comparable ORR/OER activity as well as superior Li–O2 battery performance in a LiCl–LiOH-based electrolyte, which the authors attributed to the unique coordination structure of Sr3Co2O5(OH)2·2H2O. The OER performance of intercalated RP derivatives can be further enhanced through tuning the extent of surface hydroxylation. For example, Xu et al. treated Sr3FeCoO7−δ in five different water-containing solvents, including isopropyl alcohol, formamide, dimethyl sulfoxide, dimethylformamide, and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), to modify the degree of surface hydroxylation after water intercalation.226 The OER activity of the treated samples was found to correlate with the extent of surface hydroxylation, which is closely related to the polarity of the solvents used. The best OER performance was observed in the sample with NMP treatment, showing a reduction of 83 mV in the overpotential to deliver 10 mA cmgeo−2 current density (Fig. 10b). In addition, the degree of hydroxylation increases with prolonging the treatment time, which can be characterized by the relative intensity of XRD peaks corresponding to the (002) and (110) planes (R002/110) (Fig. 10c). To understand the origin of activity improvement, the authors proposed that surface hydroxylation changes the OER behavior by modifying the chemical environment of the active metal sites, which in turn modulates the adsorption energy of the OER intermediates. This is further supported by a volcano-shaped plot showing decreased catalytic activity with further increasing the degree of surface hydroxylation (as manifested by increasing R002/110) (Fig. 10d), consistent with the Sabatier principle which dictates that the maximum catalytic activity is realized at an optimal adsorption state.238 These studies outline the potential of intercalated RP derivatives as efficient oxygen electrocatalysts. It is intriguing to study whether the intercalated species will interact with oxygen intermediates to promote the electrocatalytic processes. Additionally, whether and how these intercalated RP structures will evolve during electrocatalysis in water remains to be revealed, although the current research suggests acceptable operational stability.226,237


3.2.5 Understanding the structural evolution during electrocatalysis. 
While progress has been made in increasing the electrocatalytic activity of RP perovskites, much less attention is paid to their stability during electrocatalysis, which represents another crucial component in the search of an improved electrocatalyst, especially for the purpose of practical use, as it is directly related to the lifetime of an electrochemical device that utilizes this electrocatalyst.41 Previous studies have revealed drastic surface changes (e.g., amorphization and reconstruction) on some highly active simple perovskite electrocatalysts during the OER. For example, the powdery BSCF sample experienced fast surface amorphization upon a few cycles of CV test, concomitant with the leaching of A-site Ba2+/Sr2+ cations.95Operando extended X-ray absorption fine-structure spectroscopy demonstrated the formation of a self-assembled metal oxy(hydroxide) layer on flame spray-synthesized BSCF nanoparticles over the course of OER testing, which is responsible for the improved OER performance in terms of both activity and stability.239 Understanding the structural changes that may occur during electrocatalysis is therefore critical to the design of active and stable RP perovskite catalysts. This can often be achieved through in situ/in operando experiments. For instance, using in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy where a suitable electron beam was employed to induce positive local electrode potentials and to drive the OER in H2O vapor, Mierwaldt et al. compared the electrochemical stability of the simple perovskite Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3 and the RP perovskite Pr0.5Ca1.5MnO4.240 Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3 was found to recrystallize and subsequently decompose after exposure to the electron beam and H2O vapor, whereas Pr0.5Ca1.5MnO4 maintained a substantially higher structural stability. The electrochemical stability difference of these manganite catalysts was primarily attributed to the difference in the ionic character of the Mn–O bond; the more ionic character (i.e., the less covalent character) in Pr0.5Ca1.5MnO4 stabilizes the material against point defect-driven surface degradations.
Electrochemical tools are also useful in the unraveling of the catalyst degradations because they have been demonstrated with the capability to differentiate the contributions arising from the electrochemical reactions of interest from those arising from the degradation processes.241,242 By applying the rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) technique, Yang et al. investigated the electrochemical OER stability of an RP-structured nickelate, La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4, in comparison to the simple perovskite LaNiO3−δ and the state-of-the-art Ni–Fe (oxy)hydroxide catalyst (Ni(Fe)OOH) (Fig. 11a–d).241 For Ni(Fe)OOH, the disk current, ring current, and the collection efficiency (defined as the ratio of ring current to disk current at a fixed potential of 1.60 V vs. RHE where the OER occurs) were found to be rather stable over 30 continuous CV cycles, suggesting that the anodic current on Ni(Fe)OOH originates solely from the electrocatalytic OER. A relatively stable collection efficiency was also observed on LaNiO3−δ after a few cycles. On the contrary, the collection efficiency on La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4 was found to increase with cycling at pH 12.5 and 13, and the low collection efficiency in the initial few cycles is likely associated with the gradual leaching of Li/La/Ni cations from the structure. Notably, a low collection efficiency of <5% was recorded at pH 14, indicative of the occurring of a parasitic oxidation/corrosion phenomenon as the major contributor to the anodic current. The degradation of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4 during cycling was further supported by electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) measurements, where severe mass loss was observed in the OER region, with the first few cycles accounting for most of this loss (Fig. 11e).241 In addition, Ni(Fe)OOH and LaNiO3−δ only exhibited very limited mass loss upon the OER cycling, consistent with the overall stability trend in the RRDE measurements. Very recently, Svengren et al. developed a novel experimental setup that couples electrolysis and mass spectrometry to allow for the determination of Faradaic efficiency under real-time water splitting conditions.242 In the evaluation of simple perovskite La0.1Ca0.9MnO3 as the OER electrocatalyst, a deviation from the ideal Faradaic efficiency of 100% was observed at potentials higher than 2.12 V vs. RHE, indicating loss of catalytic capability ascribed to degrading side reactions such as the oxidation of Mn. By comparison, the RP-structured Sr2.8Pr0.2Fe1.25Ni0.75O7−δ (δ = 0.27 and 1.27) catalysts showed relatively good electrochemical stability, as manifested by the 100% Faradaic efficiency across the OER potential range.
 Fig. 11  The stability of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4 as an OER electrocatalyst studied by the RRDE and EQCM measurements. (a) A schematic for the RRDE experiment. (b–d) RRDE results of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4, LaNiO3−δ, and Ni(Fe)OOH with the increase of cycling number at different pH: (b) disk current, (c) ring current, and (d) collection efficiency. (e) Mass loss of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4, LaNiO3−δ, and Ni(Fe)OOH recorded by EQCM during cycling at pH 13. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In a broad sense, the chemical stability of an electrocatalyst is dependent on many factors, including the solution concentration, temperature, and pressure. As shown earlier, the degradation of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4 during the OER becomes more pronounced at increased pH (Fig. 11d).241 This therefore calls for the search of more stable RP perovskite electrocatalysts in concentrated electrolytes. From the viewpoint of practical application in alkaline water electrolysis, long-term operation at high temperature and pressure conditions is preferred, as compared to that at ambient conditions.243 However, such efforts concerning the RP perovskites are currently not available in the literature. Nevertheless, recent attempts have been made on the evaluation of chemical stability of RP perovskites after exposure to the alkaline electrolytes for extended periods. For example, after three weeks contact of Sr2.8Pr0.2Fe1.25Ni0.75O7−δ with a 1 M KOH electrolyte, the major RP phase was preserved with the formation of a SrCO3 compound (25–53 wt%), implying the fairly slow dissolution of the RP phase under strongly basic conditions.242 In another study, RP-structured La2Ni0.9Fe0.1O4 showed very limited degradation after exposure to 31 wt% KOH at 100 °C for one week, but partially decomposed to La(OH)3, NiO, and Fe2O3 under harsher conditions (45 wt% KOH at 220 °C for one week).244 Despite showing much better stability relative to the simple perovskite LaNiO3−δ at identical conditions, the partial decomposition of La2Ni0.9Fe0.1O4 renders it unsuitable for practical use. In a future effort to increase device lifetime, it is necessary to investigate the thermodynamic stability and decomposition kinetics of the RP perovskite electrocatalysts that may be of potential interest for use in realistic conditions.

4. Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites in high-temperature electrocatalysis
In this section, we summarize the recent developments of RP perovskites as electrode materials in various types of SOCs operating at high temperatures, including SOFCs, SOECs, and RSOCs. For the sake of simplicity, SOCs that utilize oxygen-ion-conducting electrolytes such as yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ), samarium-doped ceria (SDC), gadolinia-doped ceria (GDC), and strontium- and magnesium-doped lanthanum gallate (LSGM) are referred to as O-SOFCs, O-SOECs, and O-RSOCs, whereas those using the proton-conducting electrolytes based on barium cerates, including BaCe0.9Y0.1O3−δ (BCY), BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3−δ (BZCY), BaCe0.5Zr0.3Dy0.2O3−δ (BCZD), and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.1Yb0.1O3−δ (BZCYYb), are denoted as H-SOFCs, H-SOECs, and H-RSOCs. The electrode reactions of interest include the reduction of oxygen and oxidation of H2 and other fuels in the fuel cell mode as well as the evolution of oxygen and reduction of steam or CO2 in the electrolysis mode. In each part, we discuss the basic requirements for a highly efficient electrode and highlight how RP perovskites stand out as competitive alternatives for promoting the electrocatalytic reactions involved, with comparisons made with respect to the simple perovskites (where applicable). We also outline a range of materials design strategies for improving the electrode performance of RP perovskites, including engineering exposed facet/surface termination, introducing strain effect, constructing heterostructures/heterointerfaces, decorating metal nanoparticles through exsolution, and optimizing the electrode architecture/microstructure.
4.1 Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites as high-temperature electrocatalysts

4.1.1 Electrocatalysis in solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). 
Known for their environmental friendliness, high energy conversion efficiency, and fuel flexibility, SOFCs are electrochemical devices that can directly convert chemical energy into electricity under an operational temperature of 400–1000 °C.19 A typical SOFC consists of a cathode where the reduction of gaseous oxidant such as oxygen (i.e., ORR) occurs and an anode where the oxidation of fuels such as H2 and hydrocarbons (i.e., fuel oxidation reaction) takes place, which are separated by a solid electrolyte acting as a barrier to the diffusion of gas reactants and a conduction pathway for the migration of either oxygen ions or protons (namely for O-SOFCs or H-SOFCs, respectively). RP perovskites, thanks to their attractive physicochemical properties, have been intensively researched as SOFC electrode materials for catalyzing both the cathode and anode reactions at elevated temperatures. This section provides an overview of the use of RP perovskites for electrocatalysis in SOFCs.
Cathode for SOFCs. 
Generally, characteristics of an ideal cathode electrocatalyst for O-SOFCs include superior electronic conductivity (∼100 S cm−1 at working temperatures), a thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) matching that of the electrolyte, robust chemical and thermal stability under operating conditions, as well as high activity toward the ORR. The ORR, generally expressed as O2(g) + 4e− → 2O2−, involves a range of elementary reaction steps including adsorption, dissociation, electronation, and diffusion (Fig. 12a and b).53 Conventionally, simple perovskite La1−xSrxMnO3 (LSM) is the best known cathode material due to its high electronic conductivity and good stability.245 However, as a pure electronic conductor, it confines the ORR reaction mostly to a very narrow air/cathode/electrolyte triple-phase boundary (TPB) region (i.e., the ORR proceeds mainly via a surface pathway, as shown in Fig. 12a). As a result, the practical operation of LSM is limited to high temperatures only (e.g., 800–1000 °C). Recently, there is a growing need for reducing the working temperatures of O-SOFCs to the intermediate temperatures (i.e., 650–800 °C) or even lower (i.e., <650 °C), in order to avoid the problems related to high-temperature operation such as high cost and fast degradation.21 To ensure that the electrode kinetics is not compromised at reduced temperatures, cathode materials with mixed ionic and electronic conductivities have been developed, such as oxygen-deficient simple perovskites BSCF, LSFC, and La1−xSrxCoO3−δ (LSC113),88 which allow for the extension of the ORR reaction region to the entire cathode surface (i.e., the ORR proceeds via both the bulk and the surface pathways, as shown in Fig. 12b). However, concern has been noted about the poor chemical/thermal stability and unsatisfactory long-term operational stability of these simple perovskites.88 Due to the structural similarity to simple perovskites, oxygen-deficient RP perovskites such as A2BO4−δ, A3B2O7−δ, and A4B3O10−δ are also expected to functional as effective O-SOFC cathodes. The overall ORR reaction on these oxygen-deficient oxides can be expressed as , where  represents an oxygen vacancy and  a lattice oxygen anion. More importantly, the oxygen-excess, n = 1 RP series A2BO4+δ can store a considerable amount of interstitial oxygen in its structure, rendering high oxide ionic conductivity, which is the main reason for the intense research on this category of RP materials. As illustrated in Fig. 12c, RP-structured Ln2NiO4+δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd) show a much higher ionic conductivity relative to the simple perovskite LSFC.125 For a detailed understanding of the oxygen ion migration in RP perovskites, interested readers are directed to a comprehensive review by Lee et al.88 The ORR reaction on these oxygen-excess RP perovskites can be described as , where  represents an oxygen interstitial. Another motivation for the study of RP perovskites as alternative cathode catalysts comes from the fact that RP perovskites do not necessarily contain alkaline-earth metals, which can circumvent the surface segregation issue associated with their presence that can be detrimental to the electrode performance, as widely found in alkaline-earth metal-containing simple perovskites.246 For example, using a surface-sensitive low energy ion scattering technique, Druce et al. found no segregation of either lanthanide cation in the RP-type PrLaNiO4+δ, contrary to the significant Sr segregation at the LSFC surface.247
 Fig. 12  The n = 1 RP perovskites A2BO4±δ as cathode materials in O-SOFCs for the electrocatalytic ORR at high temperatures. (a and b) Schematics illustrating the possible elementary reaction steps during the ORR and the possible pathways for two different types of cathode materials: (a) pure electronic conductor and (b) mixed ionic and electronic conductor. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. (c) Thermal evolution of the ionic conductivity for Ln2NiO4+δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd), as compared with the best-known simple perovskites, LSFC and La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3−δ (LSFN). Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2004, Elsevier B.V. (d and e) Thermal evolution of (d) the oxygen diffusion coefficient D* and (e) the surface oxygen exchange coefficient k* for Ln2NiO4+δ, as compared with LSFC and LSFN. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2005, Elsevier B.V. (f) The computed O 2p-band center (relative to the Fermi level, EFermi) of the bulk for La2−xSrxMO4+δ (M = Co, Ni, Cu) versus that of the top surface layer (blue), the second surface layer (red), and the top two surface layers (green). The slopes of the linear correlations are given, along with a schematic of the (001) slab of the simulated La2−xSrxMO4+δ (La: green circles, Sr: blue circles, and MO6 octahedra: gray), in which the empty rectangles indicate the surface layers where the O 2p-band centers were computed. (g) The computed bulk O 2p-band center relative to EFermiversus the surface oxygen exchange coefficients of (001)-oriented La2−xSrxMO4+δ thin films measured at 550 °C (La2CuO4: light blue, LaSrCoO4: green, La1.85Sr0.15CuO4: blue, La1.6Sr0.4CuO4: deep blue, and LaSrNiO4: red). The gray dashed lines represent the correlation between the computed bulk O 2p-band center and the surface oxygen exchange coefficients for simple perovskites. Reproduced with permission.272 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Over the last two decades, there is a great body of literature concerned with the use of RP perovskites for O-SOFC cathodes, particularly for the n = 1 members, which in fact has been partly reviewed by several research groups.53,67,246,248,249 As covering all these efforts would be beyond the scope of this review, in the following few paragraphs we attempt to summarize the major developments only. To aid readability, we briefly introduce several parameters that are commonly adopted to compare the ORR activity among different RP perovskites. Normally, the suitability of a certain RP perovskite as a potential cathode material is assessed by measuring the oxygen diffusion coefficient (D*, in cm2 s−1; the higher, the better) and the surface exchange coefficient (k*, in cm s−1; the higher, the better), which are kinetic metrics for evaluating the rates of the bulk oxygen diffusion (or oxygen transport) and the surface oxygen exchange, respectively, two key processes involved in the ORR. Furthermore, the practical use of RP perovskites as electrodes in O-SOFCs can be appraised by the area specific resistance (ASR, in Ω cm2; the smaller, the better) in a symmetrical-cell configuration and the peak power density (PPD, in mW cm−2; the larger, the better) in a single-cell setup, which characterize respectively the cell resistance per electrode surface area and the maximum power output under a given operational condition.
Of all the n = 1 RP perovskites, Ln2NiO4+δ nickelates are the most widely studied due to their intrinsically high oxygen transport and surface exchange kinetics (Fig. 12d and e).53,88,109 Notably, Ln2NiO4+δ show a large anisotropy in the oxygen diffusion and surface exchange, where the D* and k* values in the ab plane can be several orders of magnitude larger than those along the c axis, which is closely associated with the RP layered structure.126,250 Among these nickelates, La2NiO4+δ is the most classical material, whose initial research as a potential O-SOFC cathode dates back to the late 1990s.76,251–254 Nonetheless, the performance of La2NiO4+δ in single cells has not been as extensively studied as in the fundamental research. Escudero et al. assembled a single cell composed of La2NiO4+δ cathode, LSGM electrolyte, and Ni–SDC anode, and reported a PPD of 160 mW cm−2 at 750 °C.254 The good chemical compatibility with the LSGM electrolyte further afforded the cell with stable operation for 144 h at 800 °C. In addition, a higher PPD of 815 mW cm−2 at 750 °C was demonstrated by Lee et al. using a Ni–YSZ anode-supported cell with a GDC interlayer between the YSZ electrolyte and the La2NiO4+δ cathode.255 However, the high reactivity of La2NiO4+δ with the GDC or YSZ electrolytes imposes considerable restrictions on its practical use.256 Of all the three Ln2NiO4+δ oxides, Pr2NiO4+δ was reported with the best ORR activity.246 When evaluated as an O-SOFC cathode supported on a YSZ electrolyte, the La2NiO4+δ and Nd2NiO4+δ electrodes exhibited ASR values comparable to those of the LSM electrode at 500–700 °C, whereas the Pr2NiO4+δ electrode had much lower ASR values.257 Furthermore, anode supported button cells assembled with the Pr2NiO4+δ cathode showed a power density of 650–700 mW cm−2 at a 0.8 V cell voltage at 750 °C, which was very well maintained during long-term operation with a degradation rate of only 1–3% per 1000 h, much more stable than LSFC-based cells (with a 10–20% degradation rate per 1000 h) although showing a similar initial power output.258 However, Pr2NiO4+δ, regardless of its preparation methods, would evolve into Pr6O11 and Pr4Ni3O10 at temperatures below 900 °C.259 This thermodynamic instability of the Pr2NiO4+δ phase might hamper its application as the O-SOFC cathode working at intermediate temperatures, and the good performance of the Pr2NiO4+δ-based single cells is likely attributable to the formation of a multiphase composite. Although showing somewhat inferior ORR activity, Nd2NiO4+δ has strong phase stability and good chemical compatibility with certain electrolytes such as YSZ and GDC at 700–900 °C, unlike La2NiO4+δ and Pr2NiO4+δ, which either undergo chemical reaction or decomposition with the presence of the electrolytes.259 Moreover, Nd2NiO4+δ was reported to have high tolerance against CO2 poisoning and Cr contamination,260,261 which is beneficial to its practical use as an O-SOFC cathode. When tested in an SDC-supported cell, Nd2NiO4+δ displayed a performance comparable to that of the high-performing simple perovskite SrCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ cathode.262
Furthermore, cobaltites, manganites, and cuprates belonging to the n = 1 RP structure have been studied as O-SOFC cathode materials. For instance, La2CoO4+δ exhibited higher oxygen diffusivity than La2NiO4+δ over the temperature range of 450–700 °C.263 However, La2CoO4+δ decomposes into La2O3 and LaCoO3 at temperatures above 700 °C in the air atmosphere,263 hindering its use in the intermediate temperature range. Recent research has thus focused on doped cobaltites, for example, NdSrCo0.75M0.25O4+δ (M = Mn and Fe), which show good chemical stability and low ASR values of 0.18 Ω cm2 at 700 °C.264 Lanthanum strontium manganites (La2−xSrxMnO4+δ) were also studied as a potential O-SOFC cathode, which only showed limited electrocatalytic properties due to their relatively low electrical conductivity (e.g., 5.7 S cm−1 for La0.6Sr1.4MnO4+δ at 800 °C).265 Similarly, lanthanum cuprate (La2CuO4+δ) suffers from insufficient electrical conductivity at the operational temperatures for O-SOFCs (∼10 S cm−1).266 Incorporating Sr dopant at the A-site was found to result in a transition from oxygen-excess La2CuO4+δ to oxygen-deficient La2−xSrxCuO4−δ, concomitant with a significant increase in the electrical conductivity, and La1.7Sr0.3CuO4−δ was reported with a low ASR of 0.16 Ω cm2 at 700 °C when evaluated as a cathode in air.267 It is interesting to note that except for La2CuO4+δ, cuprates with smaller lanthanide cations (e.g., Pr2CuO4+δ and Nd2CuO4+δ), while sharing the same general chemical formula, exhibit a crystalline structure different from the n = 1 RP structure, where Cu is fourfold rather than sixfold coordinated to the O.268 For this reason, the application of Pr2CuO4+δ and Nd2CuO4+δ as O-SOFC cathodes, although seen in the literature,269 is not covered here.
Despite the great promise of the aforementioned n = 1 RP perovskites as O-SOFC cathodes, they show quite low performance at intermediate and low temperatures. To improve their catalytic properties, doping at either the A-site (by rare-earth or alkaline-earth metals) or the B-site (by transition metals) represents one of the simplest yet most effective means. For oxygen-excess A2BO4+δ where oxygen interstitial is the major form of defects, any size difference between the foreign and the original cations in the lattice can cause changes in the volume of the interstitial space, which further results in modifications in the migration energetics of the oxygen anions in the rock-salt layers. Moreover, any charge difference introduced by the substituted cations can have a direct impact on the oxygen hyperstoichiometry, which, according to the electroneutral principle, leads to changes in the B-site transition metal oxidation state, thereby affecting the oxygen exchange properties. As a result, the D* and k* of the oxygen-excess A2BO4+δ oxides can be facilely tuned by the doping strategy, which has been reviewed elsewhere in great detail.67 For oxygen-deficient A2BO4−δ where oxygen vacancy is the major form of defects, as mostly found in cuprates, the differences in size and/or charge of the dopant introduced can also lead to changes in D* and/or k* due to modifications in oxygen vacancy concentration and transition metal oxidation state. For instance, Hu et al. showed that partial substitution of Bi3+ for La3+ in La1.9−xBixSr0.1CuO4−δ could generate extra oxygen vacancies and contribute to improved oxygen transport properties.270 An additional comment is that doping can improve the chemical stability of the host RP phases at operating conditions, as exemplified by the A-site doping of Pr2NiO4+δ with Sr.271
To date, efforts on the search of n = 1 RP perovskites, both undoped and doped, as potential O-SOFC cathodes have been rather scattered, often based on trials and errors. This is closely related with the complexity of the RP perovskites in terms of their unique material anisotropy and defect chemistry. Developing activity descriptors can help understand and predict the complex behavior of the RP perovskites in the cathodic oxygen electroreduction at elevated temperatures, analogous to the case in low-temperature oxygen electrocatalysis. Recently, Shao-Horn and colleagues found through a systematic investigation of a range of n = 1 RP perovskite La2−xSrxMO4+δ (M = Co, Ni, Cu) thin films that their bulk O 2p-band center, an electronic structure descriptor computed from DFT modeling, correlates with the oxygen surface exchange kinetics.272 Fabricated by a controlled PLD process, these thin films not only have thicknesses much smaller than the critical values for bulk transport limitations to ensure that the ORR kinetics are limited by the surface oxygen exchange rather than oxygen ion diffusion, but also have the same (001) orientation to minimize the anisotropy effect that may cause distinct surface oxygen exchange. The O 2p-band center of the bulk was found to show almost identical linear correlations with that of the surface, including the top surface layer, the second surface layer, and the top two surface layers (Fig. 12f), which suggests that the bulk O 2p-band center can be used to describe surface properties within similar surface structures and orientations. As shown in Fig. 12g, the computed bulk O 2p-band center of the thin-film La2−xSrxMO4+δ is strongly correlated to their experimental k* values measured at a temperature of 550 °C and an oxygen partial pressure of 1 atm. According to this correlation, future research should seek for RP perovskite candidates with a lower bulk O 2p-band center in order to attain higher oxygen surface exchange and therefore better oxygen electroreduction activity. It should be noted that such linear correlation also exists for the simple perovskites (indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 12g),273 only with a slope that is of the opposite sign to that of the RP perovskites, which is likely attributable to their different oxygen transport and surface exchange mechanisms under the O-SOFC working condition (i.e., oxygen vacancy-related mechanisms in simple perovskites and oxygen interstitial-mediated mechanisms in RP perovskites).
Aside from the first-order RP series (A2BO4±δ), higher-order RP phases (An+1BnO3n+1 with n = 2 and 3) seem good candidates as mixed ionic and electronic conducting cathode materials because they usually exhibit high thermal stability, good chemical compatibility, and large electrical conductivity under the O-SOFC operating conditions. The interest in the higher-order RP perovskites was initiated from a study by Amow et al.,76 who found that the ASR of symmetrical cells of Lan+1NinO3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3) with LSGM as the electrolyte decreased with increasing n with La4Ni3O10−δ showing the lowest ASR of ∼1 Ω cm2 at 800 °C, which likely correlates with the increasing electrical conductivity with increasing n. An identical trend in the electrical conductivity was observed by Takahashi et al.,102 who further demonstrated that the performance of single cells made of Lan+1NinO3n+1 as the cathode, Ni–SDC as the anode, and SDC as the electrolyte showed the same trend, with that of the La4Ni3O10−δ cathode giving the largest PPD of 88.2 mW cm−2 at 700 °C. The same activity trend was also reported by Kim and coworkers,274 and by using an infiltrated La4Ni3O10−δ–YSZ composite cathode which afforded a better microstructure, they achieved a much higher PPD of 614 mW cm−2 at 700 °C for the Ni–YSZ anode-supported single cell with YSZ as the electrolyte. The higher performance observed on a variety of oxygen-ion-conducting electrolytes suggests that higher-order Lan+1NinO3n+1 (n = 2 and 3), especially La4Ni3O10−δ, are potentially more appropriate than the n = 1 compound as the SOFC cathode. Furthermore, the electrode performance can be improved by cationic doping. For example, Amow et al. observed a great reduction in the ASR when the B-site Ni was partially replaced by Co to obtain La4Ni2.6Co0.4O10−δ, due likely to the catalytic effect of the cobalt introduced.111 In addition, Yatoo and colleagues reported significantly lower ASR values of the A-site Pr-substituted samples in similarly configured LSGM-based symmetrical cells, i.e., 0.34 Ω cm2 at 800 °C for La2Pr2Ni3O10−δ and 0.17 Ω cm2 at 700 °C for LaPr3Ni3O10−δ.275,276
Unlike their lower-order analogues, the higher-order RP-structured ferrites, (Ln,A)n+1FenO3n+1 (where Ln = rare-earth metal, A = alkaline-earth metal, and n = 2 and 3), have been investigated to a much greater extent in high-temperature ORR electrocatalysis. For example, the LnSr3Fe3O10−δ series were reported to show properties suitable for use as O-SOFC cathodes, including a metal-like conductivity and a reasonably good compatibility with the LSGM electrolyte at intermediate temperatures.277 When employed as cathodes in the LSGM-supported single cells, they exhibited electrocatalytic activity following the order of Nd < Gd < Sm < Eu < La < Pr, with PrSr3Fe3O10−δ giving the best PPD of 514 mW cm−2 at 800 °C, higher than that of the cell with simple perovskite LSFC as the cathode (443 mW cm−2 at 800 °C).277 Substituting a small quantity of Ni for Fe (i.e., in PrSr3Fe2.9Ni0.1O10−δ) was found to lead to an increased PPD (679 mW cm−2 at 800 °C), which is closely related with a two times faster surface oxygen exchange upon the incorporation of Ni.278 The Co-doped LaSr3Fe3−yCoyO10−δ series, with monophasic tetragonal crystal structure (space group: I4/mmm) over the range of 0 ≤ y ≤ 1.5, represent another type of n = 3 RP perovskites that are of growing interest.279–281 Substitution of Co for Fe drastically improved the electrical conductivity and oxide ion mobility. As a result, the LaSr3Fe3−yCoyO10−δ cathodes with a GDC interlayer displayed increased electrochemical performance with increasing Co content, with LaSr3Fe1.5Co1.5O10−δ (y = 1.5) showing the highest PPD, slightly better than that of simple perovskite LSC113 tested under identical conditions.280 In addition, when assembled in a YSZ-supported single cell, the LaSr3Fe1.5Co1.5O10−δ cathode gave a PPD that almost doubled that of the simple perovskite LSFC cathode at 800 °C (739 vs. 378 mW cm−2).281 Again, the properties of LaSr3Fe1.5Co1.5O10−δ could be improved by doping, for example, A-site substitution of other lanthanides to achieve increased catalytic activity,282 A-site substitution of Ca to attain better phase stability,283 and B-site substitution of Ga for Co/Fe to yield enhanced thermal compatibility with the electrolyte.284 The double-layer Sr3Fe2O7−δ was also demonstrated with excellent mixed ionic and electronic conductivities acceptable for the O-SOFC application.285 As mentioned earlier, one major concern is expressed about its instability under ambient conditions due to the reaction with moisture.233 To overcome this, research efforts have focused mainly on doped systems such as Sr3−xLnxFe2−yCoyO7−δ (Ln = lanthanides).286–288 For instance, increasing Co doping led to improved single-cell performance at 800 °C, due largely to an enlargement in electrical conductivity.287 Although exhibiting better performance relative to the electronic conductor LSM at intermediate temperatures, the Sr3−xLnxFe2−yCoyO7−δ series showed somewhat inferior performance compared to LaSr3Fe3−yCoyO10−δ and LSC113, which is attributable to its insufficient oxygen mobility and electronic conductivity.287 This in turn is associated with the lower dimensionality of Sr3−xLnxFe2−yCoyO7−δ with two perovskite blocks along the c axis, as compared with three and ∞ number of perovskite blocks in the cases of LaSr3Fe3−yCoyO10−δ and LSC113, respectively.
The higher-order RP-type cobaltites are relatively less explored. The n = 3 RP-structured La4Co3O10 has high electrical conductivity at intermediate temperatures comparable to that of simple perovskites, but undergoes partial decomposition at temperatures above 800 °C, which, along with its large mismatch of TEC with electrolyte materials, inhibits its use in O-SOFCs.289 In addition, Eu2SrCo1.5M0.5O7 (M = Mn and Fe), the transition metal-substituted n = 2 member of the RP-structured cobaltites, show low ASRs in GDC-based symmetrical cells (i.e., 0.15 Ω cm2 for Eu2SrCo1.5Mn0.5O7 and 0.26 Ω cm2 for Eu2SrCo1.5Fe0.5O7 at 700 °C in air).290,291 This together with their chemical and thermal compatibility with the GDC electrolyte makes them potentially useful for application as O-SOFC cathode materials. It is worthy of note that interstitial oxygen is likely present in these higher-order cobaltites, as evidenced by the iodometry and STEM analyses.289–291 This, if solid, can lead to new material properties of higher-order PR perovskites as they are conventionally considered to be dominated by oxygen vacancies. Related to this is that for all the higher-order RP perovskites, the nature of the oxygen ion transport is not fully understood, although it was previously believed to occur by oxygen vacancy-mediated mechanism akin to that in the simple perovskite systems.292 Therefore, further research input is needed to shed light on these matters in order to develop better performing higher-order RP perovskites.
Compared to O-SOFCs, H-SOFCs employing a proton-conducting electrolyte, also known as the protonic ceramic fuel cells, can work at lower temperatures (400–700 °C) while also giving appreciable power outputs,293–295 due mostly to the fact that protons as the charge carriers have higher mobility relative to oxygen ions under reduced temperatures, which is intrinsically associated with the lower activation energy needed for proton conduction than for oxygen ion conduction. Furthermore, H-SOFCs offer better fuel utilization efficiency because water is formed at the cathode without diluting the fuel stream, as indicated by the ORR reaction O2(g) + 4e− + 4H+→ 2H2O(g), unlike the case in O-SOFCs where steam is generated at the anode and its separation from the fuel is required.296 The n = 1 RP nickelates Ln2NiO4+δ have been again assessed as cathode materials in H-SOFCs owing to their mixed ionic and electronic conductivities.297 Electrochemical measurements of symmetrical cells based on the BCY electrolyte suggest that Pr2NiO4+δ shows the highest ORR activity, with ASR values close to that of BSCF (∼1 Ω cm2 at 600 °C).297 More importantly, Pr2NiO4+δ and BSCF have been demonstrated by Grimaud et al. with some proton conductivity under wet atmospheres,91,92 for which they can be labelled as triple conducting oxides (O2−/e−/H+). From a general viewpoint, proton conduction can be induced by means of water insertion either in an oxygen vacant site of a non-stoichiometric oxide (e.g., BSCF) according to  (where  represents a hydroxide defect at a lattice oxygen site), or in an oxygen interstitial site of an over-stoichiometric oxide (e.g., Pr2NiO4+δ) according to  (where  represents a hydroxide defect at an interstitial site).92 The introduction of proton conduction is important because as protons diffuse within the bulk of the cathode, the ORR active area will be extended from the conventional TPB to the whole cathode surface. In addition, the direct use of proton conductors as the H-SOFC cathode is more advantageous compared to that of composite electrodes comprising the electronic conducting oxide and protonic conducting electrolyte,298 in which steam will only generate at the interface between the grains of the two constituents. However, the reported power outputs of single cells made of Ln2NiO4+δ-based cathodes can be quite low, for example, 96 mW cm−2 for Pr2NiO4+δ with a BCY electrolyte,299 60 mW cm−2 for Nd2NiO4+δ with a BCY electrolyte,300 and 196 mW cm−2 for La2NiO4+δ with a BZCY electrolyte,301 all at 600 °C, which leaves much room for improvement. For example, Miao et al. reported a more than doubled PPD (421 mW cm−2 at 600 °C) using a Sr and Fe co-doped La1.2Sr0.8Ni0.6Fe0.4O4+δ cathode based on a BZCY electrolyte.302 Ji and coworkers applied a microwave heat-treatment method to increase the interfacial adhesion between the BaZr0.3Ce0.55Y0.15O3−δ electrolyte and Pr2NiO4+δ cathode, and yielded a high PPD of 560 mW cm−2 at 600 °C.303
The n = 2 RP nickelates have also been utilized as H-SOFC cathodes. For example, Pr2BaNiMnO7−δ, which was derived from Pr3Ni2O7−δ with the doping of Ba at the A-site to stabilize the RP structure and Mn at the B-site to modify the catalytic property, was demonstrated with both high activity and robust stability in an H-SOFC based on a BZCYYb electrolyte, showing a PPD as high as 570 mW cm−2 and stable performance for 100 hours at 600 °C.304 Of note, a viable power density of 135 mW cm−2 can still be obtained at temperatures as low as 400 °C, highlighting the remarkable electrocatalytic activity of Pr2BaNiMnO7−δ in H-SOFCs. As for La3Ni2O7−δ, the incorporation of cobalt into the B-site, i.e., La3Ni2−yCoyO7 (y = 0.1–0.4), was found to lead to reduced polarization resistances, with La3Ni1.6Co0.4O7 (y = 0.4) delivering the best ORR activity with a PPD of 215 mW cm−2 at 600 °C based on a BaZr0.3Ce0.5Y0.2O3−δ electrolyte.305 The increased ORR kinetics is partially associated with the increased covalency of B–O bonds that improves the proton diffusivity. The accelerated proton diffusion in the substituted La3Ni2O7 system with Mn, Fe, Co, or Cu as the dopant was later supported by DFT calculations.306 The n = 2 RP ferrite Sr3Fe2O7−δ is also likely to exhibit proton conducting property in the humid atmosphere, as suggested by DFT computations.93 A single cell using Sr3Fe2O7−δ as the cathode and BaZr0.3Ce0.5Y0.2O3−δ as the electrolyte displayed a good electrochemical performance with a high PPD of 372 mW cm−2 at 600 °C. A more in-depth DFT calculation reveals that Sr3Fe2O7−δ shows a lessened energy barrier for oxygen dissociation in H-SOFCs than in O-SOFCs,94 suggesting the greater ORR activity of Sr3Fe2O7−δ when coupled with a proton conductor. However, the proton conduction in these higher-order RP perovskites remains to be experimentally studied in more details. It should be noted that to date the n = 3 RP perovskites have not yet been studied as candidate cathode materials for H-SOFCs. Given the satisfactory power outputs achieved so far on the abovementioned RP-structured electrode materials, more research efforts are encouraged to enable further developments.
Anode for SOFCs. 
For O-SOFCs working on H2 fuels, the anodic reaction is the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR), which can be written as . Currently, Ni-based cermets are the most widely adopted anode materials owing to their low cost, high electrical/thermal conductivity, and good catalytic activity toward the electrooxidation of H2 as well as hydrocarbon fuels.20 Unfortunately, they also exhibit several disadvantages such as low tolerance to coking and sulfur poisoning when operating on hydrocarbon fuels and volume instability upon repeated redox cycling.307 Therefore, alternative anode materials with good coking resistance, sulfur tolerance, and redox stability should be developed. To date, only two RP perovskites, namely La0.6Sr1.4MnO4308 and LaSrFeO4,309 have been directly employed as the O-SOFC anode materials, mostly because the rest of the candidates are unstable under the anode reducing atmosphere. Jin et al. first reported the use of La0.6Sr1.4MnO4 as anode, which, coupled with a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.8Fe0.2O3 cathode in a La0.8Sr0.2Ga0.83Mg0.17O3−δ electrolyte supported O-SOFC operating on H2, showed a PPD of ∼111 mW cm−2 at 800 °C.308 A larger PPD of 630 mW cm−2 was realized in wet H2 at 800 °C on a LaSrFeO4–SDC composite anode in a scandia stabilized zirconia electrolyte supported O-SOFC with La0.5Sr0.5Fe0.8Cu0.15Nb0.05O3−δ as the cathode.309 Although good operational stability as well as resistance to sulfur and coking were demonstrated, the power output remains quite low, inferior to that of simple perovskite or double perovskite anodes,310,311 and much smaller than that of Ni-based anodes.
One common way to enhance the electrocatalytic activity of ceramic anodes is to have them decorated with nanosized metal catalysts, such as Fe, Co, Ni, and their alloys. In this regard, growth of metal nanoparticles in situ under the anode conditions, through a process called exsolution, has been demonstrated with success, especially for RP-based structures. For example, Ni nanoparticles were homogeneously dispersed on the surface of an RP-structured SrGdNi0.2Mn0.8O4±δ (SGNM28) precursor after its exposure in H2 at 850 °C (Fig. 13a).312 When combined with GDC to serve as the anode in an LSGM electrolyte supported O-SOFC with La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ–GDC as the cathode, it gave a PPD of 1010 mW cm−2 at 800 °C in humidified H2 (Fig. 13b), a record-high performance for O-SOFCs using RP structure-based anodes. As illustrated in Fig. 13a inset, the exsolved Ni nanoparticles on the SGNM28 surface is anticipated to effectively expand the hydrogen adsorption sites, thus enabling rapid H2 dissociation, after which the adsorbed protons would diffuse and spill over onto the anode surface for subsequent electrooxidation at the TPB region. Furthermore, this nanoparticle-decorated RP perovskite electrode exhibited remarkable redox stability under both reducing and oxidizing atmospheres, with minimal increase observed in the ASR after 10 redox cycles at 750 °C.
 Fig. 13  RP-structured SrGdNi0.2Mn0.8O4±δ (SGNM28) as an anode material in O-SOFCs for the electrooxidation of H2 at high temperatures. (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the SGNM28–GDC anode reduced in H2 at 850 °C. Inset shows a schematic depicting the possible mechanism for electrooxidation of H2 at the reduced SGNM28–GDC anode. (b) Cell voltage and power density as a function of current density of the SGNM28-GDC anode operating on wet H2 at 700–850 °C. Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
For RP perovskites to play a role in the exsolution-made anode materials, the precursors used can be not just RP perovskites but also simple perovskites or double perovskites, and the exsolved nanoparticles can be more than monometallic but also bimetallic alloys. For instance, Chang et al. applied a La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ catalyst layer on the Ni cermet anode, which grew into Co–Fe alloys decorated K2NiF4-type (La,Sr)FeO4 under the anode condition.313 Owing to the catalytic effect of the Co–Fe alloys and the oxygen conductivity of (La,Sr)FeO4, this catalyst layer significantly improved the conventional Ni anode performance when operated on both laboratory-based methane and practical coal-bed methane. In another report, in situ reduction of double perovskite Sr2FeMo0.65Ni0.35O6−δ in H2 at 850 °C led to its partial transformation to a combination of RP-phase Sr3FeMoO7−δ and perovskite-phase Sr(Fe,Mo)O3−δ with Fe–Ni alloys anchored on surface.314 Similarly, Fe–Ni alloys function as the highly active catalyst while Sr3FeMoO7−δ together with Sr(Fe,Mo)O3−δ acts as the backbone for fast ionic and electronic conduction, which contributed to a high performance as the O-SOFC anode in wet H2 (793 mW cm−2 at 800 °C). These examples showcase the versatility of the exsolution process in fabricating high-performing RP perovskite-based anode materials. A more rational design of the exsolution process will be given in a later section.
Furthermore, nanoparticle-decorated RP structures have also seen applications as anode in H-SOFCs. For example, Co–Fe alloys in situ grown on RP-structured (Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Mo0.15)2O7 were used as the anode in a BZCY electrolyte supported H-SOFC, and exhibited a PPD of ∼496 mW cm−2 at 750 °C when operated in H2.315 When directly fueled with ethane, the cell realized cogeneration of electricity and ethylene, giving a PPD of ∼349 mW cm−2 along with a high ethylene yield (41.5%) and selectivity (>91%) at 750 °C.
Both cathode and anode for symmetrical SOFCs. 
Recently, symmetrical SOFCs (SSOFCs), in which the same material is applied as both cathode and anode, have emerged as an innovative concept of SOFCs. This simplified configuration can lower the manufacturing cost, minimize the thermomechanical compatibility, and increase the tolerance against coking and sulfur poisoning.316 To realize these advantages, the electrode materials must fulfill stringent requirements of both cathode and anode, including robust structural stability, high electrical conductivity, and good thermal and chemical compatibility with the electrolyte under oxidizing/reducing atmospheres, and most importantly, high electrocatalytic activity toward the oxygen reduction and fuel oxidation reactions.
Simple perovskite La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3−δ was initially investigated as the electrode material for SSOFCs,317,318 but concern has been expressed over its long-term stability in dry diluted H2.319 By comparison, lanthanum strontium manganites having an RP layered structure are thermodynamically more stable under reducing conditions and have been explored as alternatives in SSOFCs.320–322 For example, La0.6Sr1.4MnO4+δ, which was separately investigated as cathode and anode earlier,265,308 was evaluated by Zhou et al. as the electrode material in a H2-fueled, LSGM-based SSOFC, showing a PPD of 59 mW cm−2 at 800 °C.320 The relatively low performance is mainly attributed to the poor activity at the anode. Later, Shen et al. infiltrated approximately 20 wt% SDC and 10 wt% NiO into the scaffold of La0.6Sr1.4MnO4+δ and achieved a PPD of 614 mW cm−2 at 800 °C in pure H2.321 The same authors also attempted to swap the roles of SDC and La0.6Sr1.4MnO4+δ, i.e., to infiltrate La0.6Sr1.4MnO4+δ into the SDC backbone.322 Although the infiltrated La0.6Sr1.4MnO4+δ turned out to be amorphous, the symmetrical cell based on this composite electrode exhibited a PPD of 714 mW cm−2 at 800 °C when operated in H2. In another report, Xia and coworkers designed a new RP composition of (La0.5Sr1.5Mn)Ni0.1O4+δ with excess Ni incorporated into the B-site,323 which was exsolved as nanoparticles embedded in the parent La0.5Sr1.5MnO4+δ phase under the operating condition of the anode, giving rise to a fourfold increase in the PPD of an SSOFC supported on LSGM electrolyte at 800 °C (126.7 vs. 30.7 mW cm−2).
RP-structured lanthanum strontium ferrites have also been applied as SSOFC electrodes.324,325 For instance, a composite electrode made of chemically compatible La0.8Sr1.2FeO4 and LSGM (with a 7:3 mass ratio) delivered a PPD of 73 mW cm−2 at 800 °C in a LSGM-supported SSOFC under humidified H2.324 Replacing a small number of Fe by Co promoted the SSOFC performance by more than 3 times under identical testing conditions, as found in La0.8Sr1.2Fe0.9Co0.1O4±δ with a PPD of 237 mW cm−2 at 800 °C.325 This simple doping strategy optimized simultaneously the cathode and anode performance because at the cathode the inclusion of Co improved the electrical conductivity, while at the anode Co was exsolved to form nanoparticles that are active toward the fuel oxidation.
K2NiF4-type lanthanum nickelates are usually unstable under the anode operating conditions. For example, La2NiO4 was found to decompose into Ni and La2O3 under the anode atmosphere.326 Interestingly, when La2NiO4 was infiltrated into the electrolyte scaffold and applied as the composite electrode for SSOFCs operating on H2 fuel, an attractive PPD of about 550 mW cm−2 was obtained at 800 °C (Fig. 14).326 Such high performance originates from the combined catalytic effects of the intact La2NiO4 for the cathodic ORR and the reduced La2NiO4 for the anodic HOR (where the reduced Ni particles, which are homogeneously diffused onto the exposed electrolyte scaffold, act as the real active catalyst). Furthermore, the symmetrical cell presented a favorable operating stability, with no noticeable performance decay over continuous operation at 650 °C for more than 200 h.
 Fig. 14  RP-structured La2NiO4 as both cathode and anode material in SSOFCs for the electroreduction of O2 and electrooxidation of H2 at high temperatures. (a and b) SEM images of (a) the as-prepared La2NiO4/SDC electrode made from infiltration and (b) the La2NiO4/SDC electrode after reduction in H2. (c) Polarization curves of the SDC electrolyte supported SSOFC with La2NiO4/SDC as the electrode. (d) Stability result of the same SSOFC tested under a 150 mA cm−2 current density at 650 °C. Reproduced with permission.326 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.2 Electrocatalysis in solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs). 
SOECs, which operate in the reverse mode of SOFCs, can produce hydrogen (via H2O electrolysis), carbon monoxide (via CO2 electrolysis), or syngas (via H2O and CO2 co-electrolysis).22–24 Compared with low-temperature electrolysis in liquid electrolytes, SOECs offer advantages such as higher energy conversion efficiency, greater cost effectiveness, and better stability, which is closely related to the simpler electrode reactions at elevated temperatures. In the electrolysis mode, the cathodic reaction is the reduction of H2O, CO2, or both, while the anodic reaction is the evolution of oxygen (OER), i.e., O2− → ½O2 + 2e− in O-SOECs or H2O → ½O2 + 2H+ + 2e− in H-SOECs, depending on the type of the electrolyte used.
RP perovskites have been applied as the anode materials in SOECs mainly because of their mixed ionic and electronic conductivities, flexible stoichiometry, and high electrocatalytic activity for catalyzing the OER. In O-SOECs, the n = 1 RP series Ln2NiO4+δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd) are the most investigated candidates.99,327–330 For instance, the Nd2NiO4+δ anode in combination with a YSZ-based electrolyte and a Ni–GDC cathode delivered a current density of 0.64 A cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.3 V at 800 °C, which is 3 times that of a conventional simple perovskite LSM anode.327 Similarly, a Pr2NiO4+δ/Ce0.8Y0.2O2−δ structured oxygen electrode showed comparable steam electrolysis performance to that of a commercial La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ electrode.328 Using a nanostructured Nd2NiO4+δ–scandia stabilized zirconia made from infiltration as a composite anode, a current density as high as 1.08 A cm−2 was obtained at 1.3 V at 800 °C.330 Despite high activity, these RP layered structures may suffer from stability issues during prolonged electrolysis operation, as evidenced by the case of the La2NiO4+δ anode, which experienced performance degradation due to the formation of higher-order RP phases after a 48 hour anodic polarization at 0.50 A cm−2 at 750 °C.99
In H-SOECs the anode is often exposed to a humidified air atmosphere, thus imposing a prerequisite on the stability of anode materials. In this regard, Ln2NiO4+δ-based materials again are suitable candidates since they do not contain alkaline-earth metals, whose presence in simple perovskites (e.g., BSCF),331 however, was found to lead to partial decomposition of the materials in operating conditions of H-SOECs. Li and coworkers were among the first to employ Pr2NiO4+δ composited with a BaZr0.2Ce0.6Y0.2O3−δ proton-conducting electrolyte as the anode for H-SOECs.332 Despite a structural transition of Pr2NiO4+δ from orthorhombic to tetragonal, which was likely induced by the diffusion of Ba after co-sintering with BaZr0.2Ce0.6Y0.2O3−δ, the composite electrode showed excellent performance, giving a 0.98 A cm−2 electrolysis current at 1.3 V at 700 °C when operated in 40% H2O–air. Importantly, the fact of Pr2NiO4+δ being triple-conductive (O2−, e−, and H+) is expected to transform the entire anode surface into active sites, thereby leading to high catalytic activity. The tolerance against high steam atmospheres may not be affected when a small proportion of alkaline-earth metals is substituted for lanthanides in Ln2NiO4+δ. For instance, A-site Ba-doped Nd1.95Ba0.05NiO4+δ as an oxygen electrode was both stable in 50% H2O–air and compatible with a BCZD electrolyte, and delivered a high current density of 1.40 A cm−2 at 1.6 V and 750 °C.333 The performance can be further improved through anionic doping, which can increase the ionic transport due to the creation of a mixed anion lattice effect. For example, a slight fluorine doping in Nd1.9Ba0.1NiO4+δF0.05 exhibited a notable current density of 1.80 A cm−2 at 1.3 V and 750 °C.334 To improve the stability of alkaline-earth metal-containing RP oxides under moisturized atmospheres, a dopant with higher acidity can be applied. By partially replacing Sr2+ in Sr3Fe2O7−δ with La3+, Huan et al. developed Sr2.8La0.2Fe2O7−δ as a robust air electrode for H-SOECs, which displayed an electrolysis current of 1.08 A cm−2 at 1.3 V and 700 °C when operated in 20% H2O–air with a BaZr0.3Ce0.5Y0.2O3−δ electrolyte.335
Currently, there are no available reports on the application of phase-pure RP oxides as the sole catalytic component for promoting the cathodic reactions in SOECs. However, similar to the case in the anode materials for SOFCs, RP perovskites with transition metal nanoparticles anchored on their surface, which are derived from a well-designed exsolution process using perovskite precursors, can serve as the cathode in SOECs for catalyzing the electrolysis reactions. For example, by reducing simple perovskite Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ in 5% H2/N2 at 850 °C, Liu et al. obtained a double-layer RP perovskite (Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Mo0.15)2O7−δ with Co–Fe alloy nanoparticles embedded in its backbone, which showed a remarkable CO2 electrolysis activity as a composite cathode in YSZ-based O-SOECs under 30% CO/CO2 (1.01 A cm−2 current at 1.6 V and ∼93% Faradaic efficiency at 0.8 V at 850 °C).336 Such high activity is mainly attributed to the catalytic effects of the exsolved Co–Fe alloy as well as the RP phase with increased oxygen vacancies. With good coking resistance, this electrode also presented excellent operational stability for 100 h. In a similar fashion, Co nanoparticles anchoring single-layer RP-structured La1.2Sr0.8Co0.4Mn0.6O4 were grown from the exsolution of a simple perovskite La0.6Sr0.4Co0.7Mn0.3O3 under reducing conditions, and showed high activity as well as robust stability as the cathode material in LSGM-based O-SOECs under 30% CO/CO2.337


4.1.3 Electrocatalysis in reversible solid oxide cells (RSOCs). 
Reversible solid oxide cells (RSOCs), which can operate both as a fuel cell (SOFC mode) and as an electrolysis cell (SOEC mode), have gained increasing attention over the recent years as one of the most efficient electrochemical energy conversion and storage devices.18,25 The switch between the SOEC and SOFC modes in RSOCs, analogous to the charging and discharging in a rechargeable battery, allows the interconversion of electrical energy and chemical energy. In addition, this reversible operation is anticipated to suppress the degradation of electrodes, especially those under the SOEC mode, thus improving the overall performance stability of the cell.338 As the polarization resistance of RSOCs primarily originates from the oxygen electrode in both SOFC and SOEC modes, developing electrode materials that have bifunctional ORR/OER activity at elevated temperatures becomes imperative.
RP perovskites have been demonstrated, both theoretically and experimentally, as bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts at high temperatures. Using spin-polarized DFT calculations, Gu et al. compared the energetics of the elementary steps associated with the surface oxygen exchange of n = 1 RP perovskites.339 The surface oxygen exchange, which governs the ORR and OER activity, is proposed to involve four elementary steps (Fig. 15a), including (1) generation of a surface oxygen vacancy site; (2) dissociation of gaseous O2 on this surface oxygen vacancy with one oxygen atom filling in the oxygen vacancy and the other binding to the surface as an oxygen adatom; (3) evolution of O2 from the oxide to the gas phase via oxygen adatom association with a surface lattice oxygen, leaving behind a surface oxygen vacancy; and (4) transfer of an interstitial oxygen to the surface oxygen vacancy to complete the reaction cycle. Taking into consideration both chemical compositions and surface terminations, a volcano-type relationship was observed between the calculated rate for surface oxygen exchange and the O2 binding strength on a surface oxygen vacancy, as shown in Fig. 15b. Sitting on top of this volcano plot is Co oxide terminated La2CoO4 with an optimal O2 binding energy that allows for the best compromise between the energetics associated with O2 dissociation and oxygen vacancy formation. This suggests that the O2 binding energy could serve as an activity descriptor to identify first-series RP perovskites with optimized ORR/OER performance, the validity of which is also supported by comparing experimentally reported surface oxygen exchange coefficients of several similarly structured RP oxides.339 In a recent experimental work, Huan et al. surveyed a range of Sr- and Co-doped La2NiO4 electrodes to understand the intrinsic effects of RP perovskite catalysts for high-temperature ORR/OER.26 They concluded that unlike the case in simple perovskites, the oxygen vacancy is not the key to high catalytic activity in these RP oxides and that interstitial oxygen with high concentration and mobility as well as lattice oxygen with high activity are beneficial to the oxygen electrocatalysis. Specifically, A-site substitution of low-valence Sr for La does not create oxygen vacancies but instead reduces the interstitial oxygen concentration and the lattice oxygen activity, while B-site substitution of high-valence Co for Ni increases the interstitial oxygen concentration and the lattice oxygen activity, which is very different from observations in simple perovskites, mostly due to the structural difference between RP perovskites and simple perovskites. Electrochemical results from separate SOFC or SOEC testing reveal that La2CoO4 shows the best performance in both cases (with an activity trend of La2CoO4 > La2NiO4 > La1.5Sr0.5NiO4), consistent with Gu et al.'s prediction.339 The similar doping effect was found to be universal in other n = 1 RP perovskites such as La2MnO4 and La2CuO4, and was also applicable in higher-order RP series La3Ni2O7 and La4Ni3O10. The latter, however, may require more in-depth studies to understand the rationales behind the doping effect since higher-order RP perovskites have oxygen positions and contents quite different from those of n = 1 RP perovskites.
 Fig. 15  Theoretical studies of the n = 1 RP perovskites as electrode materials in RSOCs for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis at high temperatures. (a) Proposed mechanism for surface oxygen exchange on n = 1 RP perovskites. Red, dashed white, and white spheres represent the O atoms, vacant interstitial sites, and surface oxygen vacancies, respectively. (b) A volcano-type plot for the relationship between the calculated rate of surface oxygen exchange and the O2 binding strength on a surface oxygen vacancy. “A” represents the A-site-terminated oxides, and the others refer to B-site-terminated oxides. The open and filled symbols represent the superoxo and peroxo states of adsorbed O2 on a surface oxygen vacancy, respectively. Reproduced with permission.339 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Despite these recent fundamental insights into the ORR/OER bifunctionality on RP oxides, experimental research targeting the practical operation of RSOCs, based on either oxygen-ion-conducting electrolytes (O-RSOCs) or proton-conducting electrolytes (H-RSOCs), is lacking. In O-RSOCs, Laguna-Bercero et al. demonstrated the operation of an RP-structured La1.7Sr0.3Co0.5Ni0.5O4.08 oxygen electrode in both fuel cell and electrolysis modes using a scandia and ceria stabilized zirconia electrolyte.340 Due to the flexible oxygen content in this RP composition, a similar performance was obtained under SOFC or SOEC mode at 800–850 °C. Later, the same researcher realized the reversible operation of a microtubular cell using RP phase Pr2NiO4+δ as the oxygen electrode, YSZ as the electrolyte, and Pr2NiO4+δ–GDC as the composite barrier layer.341 Although decomposition and reaction with GDC were observed, the Pr2NiO4+δ electrode maintained operation under the SOFC mode with a slight activity enhancement, and after switching to the SOEC mode, good electrolysis activity was still achieved, higher than that obtained for the standard LSM–YSZ oxygen electrode under similar cell configurations and testing conditions.342 In another report, Shahrokhi and coworkers demonstrated that infiltrating RP phase La2Ni0.5Co0.5O4 into the LSM oxygen electrode improved both the activity and stability under cyclic operation between SOFC and SOEC modes, as compared with infiltrating the simple perovskite LaNi0.5Co0.5O3.343
Compared to O-RSOCs, H-RSOCs have a major advantage of delivering considerable performance at reduced temperatures because of the increased conductivity of protonic conductors than oxygen ionic conductors. Using BCZD as the proton-conducting electrolyte, Lyagaeva et al. demonstrated the use of a composite air electrode consisting of 70 wt% La2NiO4+δ and 30 wt% BCZD in H-RSOCs.344 At 750 °C, this composite electrode displayed a PPD of 221 mW cm−2 in the SOFC mode and a current density of 0.45 A cm−2 at a 1.5 V voltage in the SOEC mode. Yang et al. investigated the feasibility of RP-structured La1.2Sr0.8NiO4 and Pr1.2Sr0.8NiO4 as the air electrode in H-RSOCs based on the use of a BZCY proton-conducting electrolyte,345 which gave PPDs of 460 and 350 mW cm−2 in the SOFC mode and current densities of 1.37 and 1.12 A cm−2 at 1.3 V in the SOEC mode, respectively, at 700 °C. Stable operation for four SOEC/SOFC cycles over a period of 40 h was also realized on these electrodes. Later, the same authors infiltrated La1.2Sr0.8NiO4 into the skeleton of a BaCe0.68Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1Cu0.02O3−δ electrolyte, and obtained an optimized composite electrode (containing 42.2 wt% of La1.2Sr0.8NiO4) with much improved performance in H-RSOCs, i.e., a PPD of 1220 mW cm−2 and an electrolysis current density of 3.02 A cm−2 at 1.3 V at 700 °C.346 However, performance degradation was observed during long-term operation, due likely to the sintering of the infiltrated nanoparticulate La1.2Sr0.8NiO4. Recently, a very stable BZCY-based H-RSOC was established using a Eu- and Co-doped double-layer RP oxide SrEu2Fe1.8Co0.2O7−δ as the oxygen electrode material, which afforded smooth switch between SOFC and SOEC modes over 135 h testing under high-steam-involved atmospheres.347 The robust operational stability is proposed to be related to the unique structure of SrEu2Fe1.8Co0.2O7−δ, in which Sr and Eu atoms occupy respectively the perovskite layer and the rock-salt layer.

4.2 Strategies toward improved high-temperature electrocatalysis on Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites

4.2.1 Engineering exposed facet/surface termination. 
The surface structure of RP-type materials is believed to have a strong influence on the oxygen surface exchange and reduction kinetics. Previous theoretical studies have shown that the (001), (100), and (111) facets dominate in the surface structure of La2NiO4+δ.348 While the (100) and (111) facets have relatively well-defined surface terminations, the (001) surface can terminate with either La oxide (LaO) (i.e., A-site termination) or Ni oxide (NiO2) (i.e., B-site termination). Using DFT calculations, Ma et al. compared the energetics of each reaction pathway on these different La2NiO4+δ surfaces during the oxygen surface exchange (Fig. 16a).114 The barrier for the rate-limiting step was found to be the lowest on the (001) surface with NiO2 termination (1.73 eV), followed by that on the (111) surface (2.08 eV), the (100) surface (6.61 eV), and the (001) surface with LaO termination (6.75 eV), which indicates that the NiO2-terminated (001) surface should exhibit the highest oxygen exchange rate. By applying reverse microemulsion synthesis, the authors were able to experimentally acquire a nanorod-structured La2NiO4+δ catalyst with highly populated (001)-NiO2-terminated surface facets (Fig. 16b). When employed as the cathode in an O-SOFC operating in pure H2, this nanorod-structured catalyst led to a PPD that almost doubles that of a sphere-structured counterpart with different facets exposed (∼600 vs. 300 mW cm−2) (Fig. 16c).
 Fig. 16  The effect of exposed facet/surface termination on the ORR kinetics of La2NiO4+δ. (a) Free energy of the oxygen exchange process on (111), (100), and LaO- and NiO2-terminated (001) surfaces of La2NiO4+δ. (b) Atomic-resolution HAADF image of nanorod-structured La2NiO4+δ with the electron beam parallel to the (001) plane. The upper-right inset shows a [001] projected DFT model structure along the [100] direction with La (blue) and Ni (green) atoms labeled, along with the lattice spacing. (c) Current density versus voltage and power density curves for O-SOFCs comprising La2NiO4+δ cathode catalysts with nanorod and sphere morphologies, operating on H2 at 700 °C. Curves for O-SOFCs with a simple perovskite LSM cathode operating at 700 and 800 °C are shown for reference. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Transition state analysis between the chemisorbed O2 on the La–La bridge position and the dissociated oxygen on the La–La bridge position on the defect-free (001) surface of La2NiO4. (e) Transition state analysis between the chemisorbed O2 on the oxygen vacancy and the incorporated/dissociated oxygen on the La–La bridge position on the oxygen-deficient (001) surface of La2NiO4. ΔEf and ΔEb denote the activation energy of the forward and backward reactions, respectively. La is depicted in green, Ni in grey, O in red, and the adsorbed O2 molecule in purple. Reproduced with permission.352 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Despite the high reactivity of the B-site terminated (001) surface, it remains quite challenging to obtain RP-type materials with this type of surface structure, and the abovementioned example is to date the only demonstration with success. It is interesting to note that the dominance of A-site termination has been seen at the outermost surface layer of many first members of RP oxides, either of single-crystalline, polycrystalline, or of thin-film.349–351 Akbay et al. employed DFT calculations to reassess the viability of LaO termination for activating molecular oxygen on La2NiO4 surfaces.352 They found that the LaO-terminated (001) surface can indeed participate in the oxygen adsorption and dissociation by allowing charge transfer from the surface La atoms to the adsorbed O2. In addition, the activation barrier for oxygen dissociation was found to be lower on the oxygen-deficient (001) surface than on the defect-free (001) surface (0.28 vs. 1.09 eV) (Fig. 16d and e). However, the effect of interstitial oxygen defects on O2 activation was not considered in the calculation, which might require future research input.
As for RP structures doped by alkaline-earth metals such as Sr, the AO termination can take the form of a Sr-enriched surface layer. For instance, Sr enrichment was found at the top surface of the as-prepared (La1−xSrx)2CoO4 (x = 0.25 and 0.50) thin films with (001) and (100) orientations, and was further increased to form segregated Sr-rich particles after annealing treatment at 500 °C in oxygen.351 However, the surface oxygen exchange rate was found to be insensitive to the crystal orientations, which suggests that the surface Sr segregation overrides the effect of structural anisotropy on the oxygen exchange kinetics. In another case, Sr substitution in thin-film La2−xSrxNiO4 (0.0 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) was shown to lead to no formation of phase segregation but rather a change in the surface termination from (100) to (001), which was concomitant with a two orders of magnitude reduction in the surface oxygen exchange kinetics.353 These results suggest that the surface change of RP phases upon aliovalent doping is likely to be a composition-dependent feature. In addition, the AO termination is likely to be predominant in higher-order An+1BnO3n+1 oxides (n = 2 and 3), as exemplified by thin-film La3Ni2O7−δ and La4Ni3O10−δ, both as-deposited and after annealing.354 However, research into the surface structural effect of these higher-order RP materials remains quite rare.
The stability of the preferentially exposed facets or terminations is another important factor for their practical use in high-temperature energy devices. From thermodynamic calculations Wu et al. suggested that the reason for the absence of Ni from the La2NiO4+δ (001) surface is because La2NiO4+δ tends to partially decompose into La2O3 and higher-order Lan+1NinO3n+1 phases (n = 2 and 3) at temperatures ranging from room temperature to around 1100 °C when exposed to air.355 Indeed, the formation of La4Ni3O10−δ crystallites was experimentally observed on the (001) surface of La2NiO4+δ single crystals upon long-term annealing at 1000 °C in air.356 This surface instability can in turn undermine the oxygen exchange rate. After prolonged heat treatment, a more than two orders of magnitude decline in the surface oxygen exchange coefficient was observed for the (001) facet of single-crystalline La2NiO4+δ, where compositional rearrangement was also noticeable at the surface region.357
In short summary, the RP-type materials’ surface, where the adsorption and dissociation of O2 take place, plays a critical role in dictating the electrocatalytic performance. Through fine tuning of exposed facets and/or terminated surfaces, optimal activity can be obtained on PR oxides with a given structure and composition. However, the complexity of their surface chemistry, which is closely related to their intrinsic bulk chemistry as well as the operating conditions they are in, leads to difficulties in accurately attaining well-defined surfaces with both high activity and stability. Therefore, future investigations are expected to further shed light to this research direction.


4.2.2 Introducing strain effect. 
Lattice strain has garnered recent research attention as a new design parameter for promoting the high-temperature electrocatalysis by modifying the energy landscape of a catalytic material of interest.358 Typically, lattice mismatch of two adjacent phases in a nanoscale heterostructure can lead to the formation of lattice strain (ε), which is expressed as ε = (as − a0)/a0, where a0 and as are the unstrained and strained lattice parameters, respectively.359 Specifically, tensile, zero, or compressive strain is formed when as > a0, as = a0, or as < a0. Yildiz and coworkers inspected the impact of lattice strain on the ORR kinetics at the surface of Nd2NiO4+δ.360 Nd2NiO4+δ thin films with tensile (6%), zero (0%), and compressive (−2%) out-of-plane strain (along the c axis) were fabricated by PLD on the (111)-, (100)-, and (110)-oriented single-crystalline YSZ substrates with or without a GDC interlayer (Fig. 17a–c). The ORR kinetics on the tensile strained Nd2NiO4+δ films, as characterized in air atmosphere at 360–420 °C by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), was shown to be 2–10 times faster than that on the compressively strained films (Fig. 17d). The increased ORR kinetics was associated with the expansion of the rock-salt layers in the tensile strained Nd2NiO4+δ films, which affords improved capability to accommodate oxygen interstitials as well as better surface stability.
 Fig. 17  The effect of lattice strain on the ORR kinetics of Nd2NiO4+δ thin films. (a–c) Transmission electron microscopy images and schematic drawings of Nd2NiO4+δ thin films with (a) tensile, (b) zero, and (c) compressive out-of-plane strain as deposited on (111) YSZ, (100) YSZ/GDC, and (110) YSZ substrates, respectively. (d) Surface oxygen exchange coefficient of tensile and compressively strained Nd2NiO4+δ thin films as a function of temperature in air. Reproduced with permission.360 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from out-of-plane tensile strain, in-plane tensile strain can also induce an acceleration of ORR kinetics. For instance, in-plane tensile strain in La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 thin films resulted in a nearly one order of magnitude higher surface oxygen exchange rate than did in-plane compressive strain, regardless of oxygen pressure or temperature.361 In addition, this strain effect may be sensitive to the surface orientation of the thin-film RP structures. For example, Shao-Horn and coworkers found that tensile volumetric strains in the (100)-oriented La2NiO4+δ thin films can cause the thickness-dependent surface oxygen exchange rates, i.e., increasing volumetric strains were correlated with decreasing film thickness and increasing surface exchange kinetics at elevated temperatures.362 However, in the (001)-oriented La2NiO4+δ films with varying strains reported by Burriel et al.,250 such thickness dependency of oxygen exchange kinetics was not seen. Aside from the influence of surface orientation, this discrepancy is also likely related to the much lower lattice mismatch with the substrate for the (001)-oriented films than for the (100)-oriented films.362
Furthermore, based on first-principles calculations Li et al. reported that in-plane tensile strain in RP series Ln2NiO4+δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, and Gd) can promote the ionic transport by lowering the barrier for oxide-ion migration, while compressive strain cannot as it acts to increase the migration barrier.363 To summarize, introducing strain in RP phases appear to be a promising strategy to enhance the oxygen transport, exchange, and reduction kinetics under elevated temperatures. Despite these fundamental studies, the research of strained RP-type electrodes in real SOC devices has not been carried out. Additionally, more in-depth investigations should be conducted to establish correlations between the extent of catalytic activity enhancement and the range of the strain introduced.


4.2.3 Constructing heterostructures/heterointerfaces. 
Constructing RP phase-based heterostructures represents another promising approach for achieving efficient oxygen electrocatalysis at elevated temperatures. One prime example is the La–Sr–Co–O system made by decorating RP phase (La1−xSrx)2CoO4±δ on the surface of simple perovskite phase La1−ySryCoO3−δ, i.e., (La1−xSrx)2CoO4±δ/La1−ySryCoO3−δ, hereafter referred to as LSC214/LSC113 for simplicity (note that for most of the reports x = 0.5 and y = 0.2, 0.4, or 0.5).364–375 Compared to single-phase LSC214 or LSC113, the LSC214/LSC113 heterostructure was demonstrated from secondary ion mass spectrometry with an increase in oxygen exchange kinetics at 500 °C by approximately three orders of magnitude.364,365 Such an astounding enhancement of oxygen exchange kinetics was further confirmed by EIS measurements at 550–600 °C in LSC214/LSC113 heterostructures of both porous electrodes and thin films.366,367 It is believed that the heterointerface between the two phases, as easily distinguishable in the atomic-resolution HAADF image shown in Fig. 18a,367 is responsible for the greatly promoted ORR kinetics. For example, recent computational and experimental studies have suggested that the enhancement is correlated with several different interfacial behaviors, including La/Sr cation interdiffusion across the interface,368 lattice strain near the interface,369 and Sr segregation at the interface.370 By employing in situ scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, Yildiz and coworkers probed the evolution of the local electronic structure at the heterointerface of a model multilayer LSC214/LSC113 system under conditions equivalent to the real operating environments used for analysis of ORR kinetics.371 They revealed that the LSC214 layer is electronically activated through the injection of electrons from the LSC113 layer across their interface, which, coupled with the fast oxygen incorporation kinetics on the LSC214 (100) surface, is one likely mechanism that explains the markedly accelerated ORR kinetics in the LSC214/LSC113 heterostructure (Fig. 18b). Based on this theory, the same researchers fabricated a vertically aligned nanocomposite to maximize the exposure of such LSC214/LSC113 heterointerfaces in a controlled manner, which enabled a 10-times faster surface oxygen exchange kinetics relative to the respective single-phase counterparts.372 Unfortunately, this heterostructure became unstable at temperatures higher than 400 °C, which was claimed to be associated with the intrinsic properties of the LSC214/LSC113 composition itself.
 Fig. 18  The effect of heterointerface on the ORR kinetics of the LSC214/LSC113 heterostructure. (a) Atomic-resolution HAADF image of the LSC214/LSC113 heterointerface for the LSC113 thin-film sample with ∼15 nm coverage of LSC214. The schematic, where La/Sr is depicted in blue and Co in purple, illustrates the unit cell of LSC214 and LSC113 and the structure at the interface. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic illustrating the governing mechanism for the enhanced ORR kinetics at the LSC214/LSC113 heterointerface. Reproduced with permission.371 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Despite progress made fundamentally, it was not until recently that practical application of heterostructured LSC214/LSC113 was seen in SOFC configurations.373–375 For example, Li et al. reported a PPD of 960 mW cm−2 at 800 °C in a H2-fueled O-SOFC using an electrospun fibrous LSC214/LSC113 heterostructure as the cathode, higher than that based on the individual LSC113 and LSC214.375 However, performance degradation was observed for the LSC214/LSC113 cathode during a continuous operation at 750 °C for 16 h, which was already mitigated when compared with the single-component cathodes. Nevertheless, future efforts are needed to stabilize the LSC214/LSC113 heterostructure under SOFC working conditions. In addition, it is worth noting that to what extent this RP/simple perovskite heterostructure can promote the ORR kinetics is highly dependent on the inherent chemistry of both components. For instance, LSC214 decoration on simple perovskite La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ only led to a twofold increase in the surface oxygen exchange rate, which is much less pronounced than that found in LSC214/LSC113.376 In another iron-based system, where (La,Sr)2FeO4±δ was deposited on the surface of La0.8Sr0.2FeO3−δ through infiltration of strontium nitrate followed by annealing, the ORR activity was enhanced by up to one order of magnitude.377
Combining different members of the same RP series (i.e., having varying layer numbers) can take advantage of their complimentary properties and therefore contribute to improved electrocatalytic performance. This is demonstrated by combinations of RP-structured lanthanum nickelates (n = 1 with n = 2 or 3).378–380 For example, compositing La2NiO4+δ with La4Ni3O10−δ could overcome the relatively low electronic conductivity of the former and lead to reduced polarization resistances compared with either phase.378 Unique to solid-state electrochemical devices, creating a compositional gradient in such heterostructures can further increase the performance, as seen from the case of functionally graded La2NiO4+δ/La4Ni3O10−δ electrode, which consists of a porous La2NiO4+δ/La4Ni3O10−δ heterostructure sandwiched between a thin compact layer of La2NiO4+δ with greater ionic conductivity adjacent to the electrolyte and a thin porous layer of La4Ni3O10−δ with higher electronic conductivity serving as the current collector.379 Similar effects were also found for composite or functionally graded electrodes made of La2NiO4+δ and La3Ni2O7−δ.380 Note that these differently layered lanthanum nickelates can coexist within a specific temperature range for operation of SOFCs according to the La–Ni–O phase diagram.110 Beyond nickelates, it remains unexplored with respect to analogous heterostructures containing other transition metals. In addition, the presence of interfacial effect, if any, is currently less investigated in these heterostructures.


4.2.4 Decorating metal nanoparticles through exsolution. 
Exsolution, a chemical process almost exclusive to the perovskite oxide family, refers to the releasing of a transition metal cation from the bulk lattice to the surface to form anchored metal nanoparticles under a reductive driving force. Compared to conventional deposition techniques such as infiltration, exsolution is a more time- and cost-effective means to produce finer and more uniformly distributed metal nanoparticles on RP-structured materials surfaces.40 Although initially found in simple perovskites,122,123 a boom in this phenomenon has later given rise to a variety of RP structures decorated with in situ exsolved metal nanoparticles. In earlier sections we have discussed the use of metal nanoparticle-modified RP perovskites as advanced catalysts in the anode of SOFCs and cathode of SOECs. As generalized in Fig. 19a, these RP-based composites can be derived from precursors of not just RP perovskites but also simple perovskites and double perovskites, and accordingly, can contain metal nanoparticles socketed on either just RP perovskites or other pristine perovskites, depending on the bulk chemistry of the precursors as well as the extent of the reduction. Based on current reports, the as-derived RP phases cover the n = 1 and n = 2 members, while the metal species that can be exsolved vary from monometallic to bimetallic, including Fe,381,382 Co,325,337 Ni,312,383 and Ru,384 and Co–Fe313,315,336,385–387 and Fe–Ni alloys.314,388,389 Interestingly, through retrosynthetic approaches, it is also possible to transform an n = 2 RP phase to an n = 1 RP phase alongside metal exsolution.383 This versatility offers tremendous opportunities for designing metal nanoparticle-decorated RP-based structures as highly efficient electrode materials for operation in SOCs.
 Fig. 19  Rational design of the exsolution process to obtain metal nanoparticle-decorated RP-based structures and their application in high-temperature CO2 electrolysis. (a) A generic representation of the exsolution process and re-oxidation process involving RP-based structures. (b) In situ STEM images of the pristine SFMC sample during exsolution in 10 Pa of H2 at 800 °C. (c) In situ STEM images of the exsolved SFMC sample during re-oxidation in 10 Pa of O2 at 600 °C for 22 s and then at 800 °C after temperature ramping at a 5 °C s−1 rate. (d) The correlations between the reduction time used for exsolution, the size and population density of the exsolved Co–Fe nanoparticles, and the current density of the exsolved samples during CO2 electrolysis at 1.6 V and 800 °C. (e) Redox cycling performance of the SFMC–GDC 2 h sample at 1.2 V and 800 °C. Reproduced with permission.387 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
It is acknowledged that for most of the exsolved composites the cooperation of both components leads to improved activity as well as stability. In particular, the metal nanoparticles play a major role as electrocatalysts effective for fuel oxidation or CO2/H2O reduction, while the RP perovskite scaffold provides the required ionic–electronic conductivities and supports the chemical/structural stability. For example, Fe–Ni alloy decorated LaSrFeO4, which is exsolved from simple perovskite La0.5Sr0.5Fe0.8Ni0.2O3−δ, exhibited SOFC anode performance much higher than that of LaSrFeO4 and comparable to that of Fe–Ni alloy, as well as stability superior to that of Fe–Ni alloy.389 Note that the RP phase still shows catalytic activity in SOFC anode, only somewhat insignificant compared with the metal nanoparticles. In addition, the exsolution-generated oxygen vacancies in RP phases are believed to play an important role for facilitating the CO2 adsorption and O2− migration, thus promoting the CO2 electrolysis performance in SOEC cathode.336,337 Based on the above consideration, the design of the exsolution process can be conducted from mainly two aspects in order to deliver active and stable nanoparticle-decorated RP structures. First, proper control over the composition should be exercised. To have a stable RP phase under operational conditions of SOCs, the precursors need to contain at least one dominant transition metal that is highly tolerant against reduction, such as Mn, Fe, Nb, and Mo. These metals, partnered by other metals that are prone to be exsolved, can often serve as the backbone for stabilizing the RP structure due to their redox-stable nature. Regarding the design of the overall composition of the RP phase, to our knowledge, there have been no reports detailing the rationale behind this, and the current success in literature is likely built on many trials and errors. This is partly because in most cases researchers focus more on the exsolved metal nanoparticles than on the accompanying RP phases. Nevertheless, if one's targets also include the derived RP phase, design strategies such as the retrosynthetic approach may be a viable option.383
Another aspect is to tailor the exsolved nanoparticles’ size, population, and dispersion. This is often done by tuning the reduction conditions such as temperature, atmosphere, and duration. For instance, under a given reductive atmosphere and temperature, the metal nanoparticles emerge, grow, and coarsen with the prolonging of reduction time, as illustrated by the in situ STEM images shown in Fig. 19b.387 This, in turn, can have an influence on the electrocatalytic performance. For instance, Lv et al. studied the CO2 electrolysis behavior using Sr2Fe1.35Mo0.45Co0.2O6−δ (SFMC)–GDC after exsolution for 0, 1, 2, and 4 h as the composite cathode.387 During exsolution in 5% H2/Ar at 800 °C, the double perovskite SFMC partially transformed to an n = 2 RP phase Sr3Fe2−x−yMoxCoyO7−δ (RP-SFMC) together with the generation of Co–Fe alloys, and with increasing the exsolution time this phase transformation aggravated. As shown in Fig. 19d, the reduction time was found to affect the size and population density of Co–Fe nanoparticles, which essentially influences the CO2 reduction activity. The sample with a 2 hour exsolution time (SFMC–GDC 2 h) was found with the highest activity of 1.2 A cm−2 at 1.6 V and 800 °C, showing a gain of 50% compared to the pristine SFMC–GDC sample. The performance enhancement is attributable to the synergistic effect of the exsolved Co–Fe nanoparticles and increased oxygen vacancies in RP-SFMC.387 In addition, increasing reduction time during exsolution is likely to convert the same perovskite precursor to very different RP structures. For example, by reducing simple perovskite Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3−δ in H2 at 900 °C for 1 and 2 h, Yang et al. yielded n = 1 RP-type (Pr0.4Sr0.6)2(Co,Fe)0.8Nb0.2O4+δ and n = 2 RP-type (Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Nb0.15)2O7−δ, respectively.385,386 Hence, the exsolution conditions should be carefully designed to obtain RP-based composites with optimized performance.
One additional advantage of exsolution is that the as-derived nanoparticles can be dissolved back into the perovskite backbone under oxidation conditions (Fig. 19a), allowing for the stable redox cycling operation of SOCs, which is critical during times of emergency shutdown, fuel supply interruption, or regular on–off cycles.312Fig. 19c offers insights into the nanoparticle dissolution process (i.e., re-oxidation) through in situ STEM.387 The Co–Fe alloys did not reincorporate into the host perovskite until the temperature reached 800 °C. The redox cycling at 800 °C and 1.2 V further revealed excellent redox reversibility (Fig. 19e),387 promising the practical use of the SFMC–GDC 2 h sample in SOECs.


4.2.5 Optimizing the electrode architecture/microstructure. 
In general, the electrochemical performance of an SOC is affected to a certain extent by the architecture/microstructure of the electrodes. One common approach to optimize the electrode architecture is by compositing the electrode material with an ionic conductor. Very often, this ionic conductor is the same electrolyte material that is adopted in the cell assembly, and its combination with the electrode material can lead to improved ionic transport properties, enhanced thermomechanical compatibility at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and consequently an increased electrocatalytic activity. For example, in H-SOFCs, the polarization resistance decreased from 0.32 Ω cm2 for the single-phase Pr2NiO4+δ electrode to 0.23 Ω cm2 for the Pr2NiO4+δ–BCY composite electrode at 600 °C in wet air,390 which is a result of the promoted protonic transport in the composite electrode that helps enlarge the electrochemically active area for the ORR. In O-SOFCs, a La2NiO4+δ–SDC composite cathode (with a 4:1 mass ratio) showed a PPD of 370 mW cm−2 at 800 °C when working with an SDC electrolyte and a Ni–SDC anode, much higher than that of the cathode made of solely La2NiO4+δ (170 mW cm−2).391 A similar improvement was also observed in composite electrodes made of higher-order RP phase Lan+1NinO3n+1 (n = 2 and 3) and GDC electrolyte.105 In addition, other types of ionic conducting components can be introduced to form composites with RP perovskites. For instance, He et al. incorporated a highly ion-conductive Er0.4Bi1.6O3 oxide into the La2NiO4+δ cathode, which delivered a >7 times higher PPD at 750 °C compared to the pristine La2NiO4+δ cathode (852 vs. 115 mW cm−2) when operating on a YSZ electrolyte.392 The presence of Er0.4Bi1.6O3 also promotes the operational stability of La2NiO4+δ at 750 °C within a testing period of 200 h, due likely to the mitigated migration of La from La2NiO4+δ to the YSZ electrolyte. It is noted that in the design of such type of composite electrodes, the ionic conductor to be incorporated should be chemically compatible with the RP perovskite material.
To further improve the electrode performance, it is crucial to design an optimal microstructure which includes features such as fine grain size and adequate porosity because it can enable the access of electrons, oxygen, and ionic species between the cathode and the electrolyte and increase the number of TPB reaction sites by expanding the total cathode surface area. Sharma et al. fabricated via electrostatic spray deposition a series of porous, continuous, and crack-free La4Ni3O10−δ cathodes on the GDC electrolyte with various microstructures including isolated cauliflowers, connected round agglomerates, and 3D coral-type films by tuning the synthetic parameters (Fig. 20).135 These microstructures differ qualitatively in terms of the percolation path inside the cathode and of the interfacial contact between the cathode and electrolyte. EIS measurements show that the polarization resistance at 700 °C decreases from 72.41 to 12.78 and further to 2.21 Ω cm2 as the microstructure changes from isolated cauliflowers to connected round agglomerates and further to 3D coral-type films, consistent with the trend of improvement in the percolation path as well as the cathode/electrolyte contact in these microstructures. This clearly signifies the importance of optimizing the microstructure and its impact on the electrocatalytic property. The polarization resistance can be further reduced to 0.30 Ω cm2 at 700 °C by adding a screen-printed La4Ni3O10−δ layer on top of the 3D coral-type cathode acting as a current collector. A similar microstructural tuning strategy was later conducted on a La2NiO4+δ cathode,393 showing significantly decreased polarization resistances with the optimization of microstructures. Yatoo et al. recently achieved the microstructure optimization of a LaPr3Ni3O10−δ cathode on a LSGM electrolyte by ball-milling the electrode material and triple-roll milling the electrode slurries as well as polishing the LSGM electrolyte, which reduced the polarization resistance from 0.61 to 0.17 Ω cm2 at 700 °C.276 Adding an interlayer of the LSGM electrolyte in between the electrolyte and cathode further optimized the interface adherence (a problem often encountered by higher-order RP-type electrodes due to their likely decomposition at temperatures higher than 1050 °C), leading to a considerably improved polarization resistance (0.08 Ω cm2 at 700 °C). The inclusion of a porous electrolyte layer can also lead to increased cell performance, due to an increase in both the contact area and the ionic conducting pathway between the electrolyte and electrode. For example, La2CuO4+δ cathode deposited on a porous backbone of the GDC electrolyte gave a drastically reduced polarization resistance relative to that directly deposited on the GDC electrolyte (0.14 vs. ∼1 Ω cm2 at 600 °C).394 These studies suggest that after the locating of an intrinsically active RP-based electrocatalyst, its electrochemical performance in SOCs can be further improved through careful optimization of the electrode microstructure.
 Fig. 20  SEM images of the La4Ni3O10−δ cathodes with various microstructures. (a–c) Isolated cauliflowers: (a) surface, (b) cross section, (c) cross section of a selected region with a discontinuous interface. (d–f) Connected round agglomerates: (d) surface, (e) cross section, (f) cross section of a selected region with a discontinuous interface. (g–i) 3D coral-type films: (g) surface, (h) cross section, (i) interface with a thin dense layer (TDL). Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

5. Conclusion and perspectives
In this review, we have summarized recent developments of RP perovskites as intriguing and high-performing electrocatalysts for a wide range of chemical reactions at both low and high temperatures. These chemical reactions include the O2 reduction/evolution, H2 evolution, CO2 reduction, N2 reduction, H2O2 reduction, and urea/methanol/ethanol oxidation for low-temperature energy devices such as water electrolyzers, fuel cells, and metal–air batteries, as well as the O2 reduction/evolution, fuel oxidation, and H2O/CO2 reduction for high-temperature electrochemical devices such as SOFCs, SOECs, and RSOCs. In each chemical conversion, we have highlighted how RP perovskites, with their unique physicochemical properties closely linked to the layered structure, have emerged as promising candidates showing electrocatalytic performance that compares favorably to or even surpasses that of simple perovskites. Furthermore, we have also discussed materials design strategies that have proved successful in delivering RP perovskites with improved electrocatalytic capability. We note that many of these strategies applicable to low-temperature electrocatalysis may also be suitable in high-temperature electrocatalysis, and vice versa.
While important strides have been made, RP perovskites remain largely underexplored as compared to the conventional simple perovskites, particularly in the area of low-temperature electrocatalysis. Therefore, more efforts are needed to understand the structure–property relationships of RP perovskites and to enhance their electrocatalytic performance. Given the high tunability of the RP layered structure, as inherently associated with the flexibility in terms of the chemical composition, oxygen defect, and structural dimensionality, it is also desirable to explore new compounds with an RP layered structure and the new catalytic phenomena within them.
5.1 Understanding the structure–property relationships in Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites
The understanding of the structure–property relationships in RP perovskites can guide the design of efficient electrocatalysts, yet investigation in this area is currently limited. One strategy to achieve this goal is to conduct systematic studies, either theoretically or experimentally, that can aid the discovery of activity descriptors, often based on specific physical parameters related to the electrocatalytic processes. In this regard, borrowing insights gained from the well-developed simple perovskite systems seems to be one straightforward and viable approach.43,141,273 Caution, however, should be exercised due to the intrinsic differences of the RP perovskite structure from the simple perovskite structure, as found in the use of the computed bulk O 2p-band center as the activity descriptor for high-temperature ORR electrocatalysis.272,273 Therefore, distinct research methods suitable for RP perovskites should also be developed. Based on these activity descriptors, novel strategies that concern factors such as facet, strain, and composite, should be established to improve the electrocatalytic performance.
Another way is to understand the real active sites in the electrocatalysis occurring on the RP perovskites. To address this, combined theoretical calculations (e.g., the DFT method) and experimental techniques (e.g., in situ/in operando characterizations) are required. In particular, the in situ/in operando experiments are important in that they can probe real-time changes of the RP perovskites during electrocatalytic reactions, for example, changes in the bulk or surface that are associated with any oxygen content change caused by the oxygen surface exchange or bulk diffusion at high temperatures and surface reconstructions due to the metal dissolution or oxygen intercalation at low temperatures.240,242,371,395 For example, Skinner et al. studied in situ the redox chemistry and ORR performance of RP-structured lanthanum nickelates under the SOFC testing condition using X-ray absorption spectroscopy and AC impedance spectroscopy.395 The combination of these powerful techniques represents a leap in further understanding of the processes taking place at SOFC cathodes in operando. Furthermore, in situ/in operando characterizations can offer insights into the reaction mechanism. For instance, using the detailed information obtained from in situ neutron powder diffraction such as the crystal symmetry, lattice parameters, and atomic positions, the oxygen anion transport pathways in RP-structured (La,Sr)n+1(Co0.5Fe0.5)nO3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3) can be predicted.396 More importantly, in situ/in operando studies allow us to have a better understanding of the catalyst stability under realistic electrochemical conditions,240 which can have strong implications for the design of active and stable RP perovskite electrocatalysts.
To further enable the establishment of the structure–property relationships, rigorous experimental design should be developed to allow for improved data quality. This is necessary because in some emerging chemical conversions such as the NRR, the electrocatalytic role of RP perovskites need to be confirmed with the use of more stringent experimental practices.179 The experimental rigor is also needed in the well-developed areas considering the fact that the large scattering of the data reported in the literature, for example, for the La2NiO4+δ system in high-temperature ORR electrocatalysis,272 could lead to difficulties in obtaining a clear statistical trend, which is partly due to the different methods used for the materials synthesis and electrochemical measurements. Adding to this, it is noted that the design of the electrocatalytic system is important for better understanding the structure–property relationships and achieving improved electrocatalytic performance. For example, the search for electrolyte materials with high oxygen conductivities represents a major step toward lowering the operation temperature of SOFCs.397 Future efforts should also be devoted to the optimization of testing conditions for low-temperature electrocatalysis.
5.2 Developing new Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites
One important feature of RP perovskites (An+1BnX3n+1) is their chemical flexibility in accommodating a plethora of elements, whose nature, site, and amount determine the electrocatalytic properties. Compared to the partial substitution of the A- and B-site, that of the X-site remains largely underexplored. Future research efforts should expand the composition space from the currently studied RP-structured oxyhalides (i.e., doped with halogens) to a broader range of alternative candidates such as oxynitrides, oxysulfides, and oxytellurides (i.e., doped with N, S, and Te).398–400 To go one step further, it appears interesting to study the suitability of RP chalcogenide perovskites (e.g., with the complete replacement of O by S) as new electrocatalysts,401,402 for catalytic conversions such as the low-temperature HER. Notably, non-metal elements such as C and S can also be incorporated into the RP systems through oxyanion doping to partially replace the B-site transition metals,403–405 further adding to the compositional versatility for RP perovskites of potential interest.
Moreover, our present research activities concentrate mostly on RP phases with the perovskite layer number limited to n = 1, 2, and 3. Developing new RP structures with higher dimensionality (n > 3) is expected to bring about novel properties that are not attainable in lower-dimensional counterparts.402,406 However, the stabilization of such higher n phases poses a significant challenge due to their tendency to separate into lower n phases and the n = ∞ phase (i.e., simple perovskites).407 In this regard, advanced synthesis techniques, for example, molecular beam epitaxy,406,407 should be developed.
To further expand the family of RP perovskites, another interesting research direction would be to investigate inverse RP perovskites, which are the inverse analogues of RP perovskites with a general formula of X3n+1BnAn+1, similar to antiperovskites (X3BA) as derived from simple perovskites (ABX3).408 Despite rare attempts,409–411 materials with inverse RP structures are likely to open new possibilities for developing RP-based electrocatalysts. Considering the wide chemical space of the RP-structured materials, we note that high-throughput computational approaches may represent a potentially important tool for exploring and screening new members of the RP homologous series.412
5.3 Expanding the electrocatalytic reaction space for Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites
The current research of RP perovskites for electrocatalysis is mainly focused on the oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon chemistries, involving reactions such as the ORR/OER, HER/HOR, and CO2RR. Recently, Fe-based simple perovskites have been demonstrated with activity toward the NRR for ammonia synthesis in aqueous solutions.413 The creation of oxygen vacancies through doping of low-valence cations into LaFeO3 was found to favor the chemisorption of N2 molecules and thus lead to enhanced NRR performance. Given the structural similarity of RP perovskites to allow tunable oxygen vacancies (especially for higher-order phases) and the fact that RP perovskites have already been demonstrated with NRR activity in solid electrolyte membrane-based electrolytic cells at temperatures below 100 °C,177,178 one has every reason to anticipate the use of RP perovskites for electrochemical NH3 synthesis in aqueous water and under ambient conditions, which represents an emerging research topic to be explored in the very near future.
In the context of a complete nitrogen-based energy cycle, it is also intriguing to investigate the possibility of electrocatalyzing other reactions centering on the nitrogen chemistry. Previous reports have revealed the catalytic capability of RP perovskites for the oxidation of NH3 as well as NOx,414–416 where lattice oxygen can play important roles due to its labile nature in the RP layered structure with oxygen deficiency.415,416 However, whether these conversions can be realized under electrochemical conditions remains unknown. Other more complex processes of interest, e.g., electrochemical reactions involving nitrate and nitrite,417–420 are also worthwhile to be further studied using RP-based materials as possible catalyst candidates.
To conclude, the past decades have witnessed a burgeoning development of simple perovskites for electrocatalysis, and the expectation that the RP perovskites will deliver is escalating. By tuning the rich compositional and structural chemistries of RP perovskites, we are looking forward to more progress in this fairly young yet highly dynamic research field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the support from Australian Research Council Discovery Projects (DP150104365, DP160104835, DP200103315, and DP200103332). X. Xu and Y. Pan would like to acknowledge the contribution of an Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship in supporting the research.
References
IEA (2018), World Energy Outlook 2018, IEA, Paris, https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2018.
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rehman, L. M. Al-Hadhrami and M. M. Alam, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 44, 586–598 CrossRef .
M. Budt, D. Wolf, R. Span and J. Yan, Appl. Energy, 2016, 170, 250–268 CrossRef .
S. M. Mousavi, G. F. Faraji, A. Majazi and K. Al-Haddad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 477–490 CrossRef .

          F.-B. Wu, B. Yang and J.-L. Ye, Grid-Scale Energy Storage Systems and Applications, Academic Press,  2019 Search PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Denholm and G. L. Kulcinski, Energy Convers. Manage., 2004, 45, 2153–2172 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Soloveichik, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2011, 2, 503–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, H. S. Shin, K. P. Loh and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 0105 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H.-L. Du, D. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, M. T. Swihart and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 578–589 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Pan, L. An, T. S. Zhao and Z. K. Tang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2018, 66, 141–175 CrossRef .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
J.-h. Myung, D. Neagu, D. N. Miller and J. T. S. Irvine, Nature, 2016, 537, 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shao and S. M. Haile, Nature, 2004, 431, 170–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Su, Y. Wu, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 8104–8151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, R. Knibbe, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and Z. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700132 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bi, S. Boulfrad and E. Traversa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8255–8270 RSC .
Y. Song, X. Zhang, K. Xie, G. Wang and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427–1463 RSC .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen, S. B. Simonsen and M. B. Mogensen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huan, S. Chen, R. Zeng, T. Wei, D. Dong, X. Hu and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901573 CrossRef .
K. Yamamoto, T. Imaoka, W.-J. Chun, O. Enoki, H. Katoh, M. Takenaga and A. Sonoi, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 397–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Suntivich, K. J. May, E. E. Perry and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981–2018 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9869–9921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, W. Kellogg, H. Xu, X. Liu, J. Cho and G. Wu, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 10–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, R. Ran, M. Tadé, W. Wang and Z. Shao, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 11, 338–369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Small, 2017, 13, 1603793 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yang and A. Grimaud, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 149 CrossRef .
P. Tan, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602674 CrossRef .
Y. F. Li, W. Q. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Chen, B. Yu, Y. Chen and M. L. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6345–6378 RSC .
J. Hwang, R. R. Rao, L. Giordano, Y. Katayama, Y. Yu and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2017, 358, 751–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, W. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800071 CrossRef .

          X. Xu, Y. Pan, L. Ge and Z. Shao, in Revolution of Perovskite: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, ed. N. S. Arul and V. D. Nithya, Springer Singapore, Singapore,  2020, pp. 209–250 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, R. Ran, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, M. Ni and Z. Shao, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 121–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Zhong and Z. Shao, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 410–424 CrossRef .
N.-I. Kim, Y. J. Sa, T. S. Yoo, S. R. Choi, R. A. Afzal, T. Choi, Y.-S. Seo, K.-S. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, W. S. Choi, S. H. Joo and J.-Y. Park, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap9360 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yagi, I. Yamada, H. Tsukasaki, A. Seno, M. Murakami, H. Fujii, H. Chen, N. Umezawa, H. Abe, N. Nishiyama and S. Mori, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8249 CrossRef PubMed .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1957, 10, 538–539 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1958, 11, 54–55 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poix, J. Solid State Chem., 1980, 31, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ganguly and C. N. R. Rao, J. Solid State Chem., 1984, 53, 193–216 CrossRef CAS .
R. Patel, C. Simon and M. T. Weller, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 349–359 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Beznosikov and K. S. Aleksandrov, Crystallogr. Rep., 2000, 45, 792–798 CrossRef .
G. Yang, W. Jung, S.-J. Ahn and D. Lee, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 1030 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Müller, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 1986, 64, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maeno, H. Hashimoto, K. Yoshida, S. Nishizaki, T. Fujita, J. G. Bednorz and F. Lichtenberg, Nature, 1994, 372, 532–534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Moritomo, A. Asamitsu, H. Kuwahara and Y. Tokura, Nature, 1996, 380, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Battle, M. A. Green, N. S. Laskey, J. E. Millburn, P. G. Radaelli, M. J. Rosseinsky, S. P. Sullivan and J. F. Vente, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 15967–15977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cao, S. McCall and J. E. Crow, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, R672–R675 CrossRef .
P. D. Battle, D. E. Cox, M. A. Green, J. E. Millburn, L. E. Spring, P. G. Radaelli, M. J. Rosseinsky and J. F. Vente, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1042–1049 CrossRef CAS .
H. Akamatsu, K. Fujita, T. Kuge, A. Sen Gupta, A. Togo, S. Lei, F. Xue, G. Stone, J. M. Rondinelli, L.-Q. Chen, I. Tanaka, V. Gopalan and K. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 187602 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Gupta, H. Akamatsu, M. E. Strayer, S. Lei, T. Kuge, K. Fujita, C. dela Cruz, A. Togo, I. Tanaka, K. Tanaka, T. E. Mallouk and V. Gopalan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500196 CrossRef .
Y. S. Oh, X. Luo, F.-T. Huang, Y. Wang and S.-W. Cheong, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 407–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoshida, K. Fujita, H. Akamatsu, O. Hernandez, A. Sen Gupta, F. G. Brown, H. Padmanabhan, A. S. Gibbs, T. Kuge, R. Tsuji, S. Murai, J. M. Rondinelli, V. Gopalan and K. Tanaka, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801856 CrossRef .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, L. Yan and W. You, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802041 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gao, X. Zhang, W. Yin, H. Wang, Y. Hu, Q. Zhang, Z. Shi, V. L. Colvin, W. W. Yu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, E. Xhafa and E. Nikolla, Catal. Today, 2016, 277, 214–226 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Mi, F. Jiao and X. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3209–3221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, J. Dai, Y. Chen, H. Sun, W. Zhou, M. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. Wang and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 149 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Boumaza, R. Brahimi, L. Boudjellal, A. Belhadi and M. Trari, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 329–337 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
A. T. Mulder, N. A. Benedek, J. M. Rondinelli and C. J. Fennie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4810–4820 CAS .
S. Yoshida, H. Akamatsu, R. Tsuji, O. Hernandez, H. Padmanabhan, A. Sen Gupta, A. S. Gibbs, K. Mibu, S. Murai, J. M. Rondinelli, V. Gopalan, K. Tanaka and K. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15690–15700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Greenblatt, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1997, 2, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .
G. Amow, I. J. Davidson and S. J. Skinner, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1205–1210 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Jorgensen, B. Dabrowski, S. Pei, D. R. Richards and D. G. Hinks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 2187–2199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Jorgensen, B. Dabrowski, S. Pei, D. G. Hinks, L. Soderholm, B. Morosin, J. E. Schirber, E. L. Venturini and D. S. Ginley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 11337–11345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Forslund, W. G. Hardin, X. Rong, A. M. Abakumov, D. Filimonov, C. T. Alexander, J. T. Mefford, H. Iyer, A. M. Kolpak, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3150 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Mefford, X. Rong, A. M. Abakumov, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, A. M. Kolpak, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Grimaud, O. Diaz-Morales, B. Han, W. T. Hong, Y.-L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. M. Koper and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 457–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Yoo, Y. Liu, X. Rong and A. M. Kolpak, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1473–1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, X. Xu, Y. Zhong, L. Ge, Y. Chen, J.-P. M. Veder, D. Guan, R. O’Hayre, M. Li, G. Wang, H. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Grimaud, A. Demortière, M. Saubanère, W. Dachraoui, M. Duchamp, M.-L. Doublet and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16189 CrossRef .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Xi, S. Dou, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, C. Wang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, Z.-G. Chen, W. Zhou, A. C. Komarek, Q. Lin, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, Y. Zhong, M. T. Fernández-Díaz, S. C. Smith, H. Wang, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Meadowcroft, Nature, 1970, 226, 847–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee and H. N. Lee, Materials, 2017, 10, 368 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. M. Ram, L. Ganapathi, P. Ganguly and C. N. R. Rao, J. Solid State Chem., 1986, 63, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, M. Greenblatt and J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 108, 402–409 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, F. Mauvy, J. M. Bassat, S. Fourcade, L. Rocheron, M. Marrony and J. C. Grenier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B683–B694 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, F. Mauvy, J. M. Bassat, S. Fourcade, M. Marrony and J. C. Grenier, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16017–16025 RSC .
Z. Q. Wang, W. Q. Yang, S. P. Shafi, L. Bi, Z. B. Wang, R. R. Peng, C. R. Xia, W. Liu and Y. L. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8405–8412 RSC .
W. Tan, D. Huan, W. Yang, N. Shi, W. Wang, R. Peng, X. Wu and Y. Lu, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 26448–26460 RSC .
K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, J. Suntivich, Y.-L. Lee, A. Grimaud and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petric, P. Huang and F. Tietz, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 719–725 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ullmann, N. Trofimenko, F. Tietz, D. Stöver and A. Ahmad-Khanlou, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 138, 79–90 CrossRef CAS .
M. Al Daroukh, V. V. Vashook, H. Ullmann, F. Tietz and I. Arual Raj, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 158, 141–150 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tong, F. Zhou, S. B. Yang, S. H. Zhong, M. R. Wei and Y. H. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 10927–10933 CrossRef CAS .
G. Amow and S. J. Skinner, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2006, 10, 538–546 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1455–1471 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takahashi, S. Nishimoto, M. Matsuda and M. Miyake, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 2329–2333 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Lou, N. N. Dai, Z. H. Wang, Y. L. Dai, Y. M. Yan, J. S. Qiao, J. Peng, J. W. Wang and K. N. Sun, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 2703–2709 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhu, X. Xu, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2719–2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Sharma, M. Burriel, L. Dessemond, J. M. Bassat and E. Djurado, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 337–345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, Y. Cui, K. Huang, J. Ouyang, J. Wu, A. P. Baker and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 17430–17437 RSC .
M. M. Li, J. G. Cheng, Y. Gan, S. S. Li, B. B. He and W. Z. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, B. Qian, G. Yang, D. Chen and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6501–6508 RSC .
E. Boehm, J. M. Bassat, P. Dordor, F. Mauvy, J. C. Grenier and P. Stevens, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 2717–2725 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zinkevich and F. Aldinger, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 375, 147–161 CrossRef CAS .
G. Amow, J. Au and I. Davidson, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1837–1841 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, B. Wang, E. Xhafa, K. Sun and E. Nikolla, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 137–140 RSC .
A. Nacy, X. Ma and E. Nikolla, Top. Catal., 2015, 58, 513–521 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. S. A. Carneiro, X.-K. Gu, H. Qin, H. Xin, K. Sun and E. Nikolla, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4013–4019 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Gu, J. S. A. Carneiro, S. Samira, A. Das, N. M. Ariyasingha and E. Nikolla, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8128–8137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Samira, J. C. A. Camayang, A. M. Nacy, M. Diaz, S. M. Meira and E. Nikolla, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 833, 490–497 CrossRef CAS .
S. Samira, S. Deshpande, C. A. Roberts, A. M. Nacy, J. Kubal, K. Matesić, O. Oesterling, J. Greeley and E. Nikolla, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7300–7310 CrossRef CAS .
J. Eastoe, M. J. Hollamby and L. Hudson, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 128–130, 5–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-Q. Li, C. Tang, H.-F. Wang, X.-L. Zhu and Q. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600495 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhen, B. Zhao, H.-C. Shin, Y. Bu, Y. Ding, G. He and M. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700146 CrossRef .
J. He, W. Zhou, J. Sunarso, X. Xu, Y. Zhong, Z. Shao, X. Chen and H. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 372–383 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Z. Shao, F. Liang, Z.-G. Chen, Z. Zhu, W. Jin and N. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15343–15351 RSC .
D. Neagu, G. Tsekouras, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 916–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, X. Li, S. Y. Lai, K. Gerdes and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 552–575 RSC .
J. M. Bassat, P. Odier, A. Villesuzanne, C. Marin and M. Pouchard, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 167, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Bassat, M. Burriel, O. Wahyudi, R. Castaing, M. Ceretti, P. Veber, I. Weill, A. Villesuzanne, J.-C. Grenier, W. Paulus and J. A. Kilner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26466–26472 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Palgrave, P. Borisov, M. S. Dyer, S. R. C. McMitchell, G. R. Darling, J. B. Claridge, M. Batuk, H. Y. Tan, H. Tian, J. Verbeeck, J. Hadermann and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7700–7714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Wu, Y. A. Soh and S. J. Skinner, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 3783–3789 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. A. Seo, J. Nichols, J. Hwang, J. Terzic, J. H. Gruenewald, M. Souri, J. Thompson, J. G. Connell and G. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 201901 CrossRef .
M. Jungbauer, S. Huhn, R. Egoavil, H. Tan, J. Verbeeck, G. Van Tendeloo and V. Moshnyaga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 251603 CrossRef .
F. Lyzwa, P. Marsik, V. Roddatis, C. Bernhard, M. Jungbauer and V. Moshnyaga, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 125306 CrossRef .
D.-H. Hop, Y.-W. Heo, J.-J. Kim, S.-Y. Park, I.-K. Kang, Y. Kim and J.-H. Lee, J. Nanoelectron. Optoelectron., 2015, 10, 475–479 CrossRef CAS .
M. Garali, M. Kahlaoui, B. Mohammed, A. Mater, C. b. Azouz and C. Chefi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 11020–11032 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ryll, P. Reibisch, L. Schlagenhauf, A. Bieberle-Huetter, M. Dobeli, J. L. M. Rupp and L. J. Gauckler, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 32, 1701–1709 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, M. Burriel and E. Djurado, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23833–23843 RSC .
P. Laffez, Q. Simon, Y. Kikuchi, R. Retoux, F. Giovannelli and A. Yamamoto, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 693, 137705 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, X. Xu, W. Wang and Z. Shao, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 272–289 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, Y. Liang, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, L. Han, F. P. García de Arquer, M. Liu, C. T. Dinh, T. Regier, J. J. Dynes, S. He, H. L. Xin, H. Peng, D. Prendergast, X. Du and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 149–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, Z.-G. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Su, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3897–3901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, C. Su, W. Zhou, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500187 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-N. Jung, J.-I. Lee, W. B. Im, S. Yoon, K.-H. Shin and J.-W. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9406–9408 RSC .
T. Takeguchi, T. Yamanaka, H. Takahashi, H. Watanabe, T. Kuroki, H. Nakanishi, Y. Orikasa, Y. Uchimoto, H. Takano, N. Ohguri, M. Matsuda, T. Murota, K. Uosaki and W. Ueda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11125–11130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Débart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177–1182 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, C. Wang, N. Wan and Z. Mao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 400–404 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuasa, M. Nishida, T. Kida, N. Yamazoe and K. Shimanoe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A605–A610 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mizusaki, M. Yoshihiro, S. Yamauchi and K. Fueki, J. Solid State Chem., 1985, 58, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, P. Yang, L. Wang, Y. Lu, J. B. Goodenough, J. Zhang and D. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 265, 91–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Yu, X. Xu, C. Su, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3048–3054 CrossRef CAS .
S. Samira, X.-K. Gu and E. Nikolla, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10575–10586 CrossRef CAS .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasché, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255–2260 RSC .
M. Tavakkoli, T. Kallio, O. Reynaud, A. G. Nasibulin, C. Johans, J. Sainio, H. Jiang, E. I. Kauppinen and K. Laasonen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4535–4538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M.-C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M.-C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D.-Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H.-W. Lee, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, P.-C. Hsu, Y. Liu, D. Lin and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ling, D.-Y. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Jiao, Z. Hu, Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, J. Mao, H. Liu, X.-W. Du, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1509 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Z. Zhu, C. Su, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6442–6448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guan, J. Zhou, Z. Hu, W. Zhou, X. Xu, Y. Zhong, B. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Xu, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, J.-Q. Wang and Z. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900704 CrossRef .
N. K. Oh, C. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sun, X. Xu, Y. Qin, S. P. Jiang and Z. Shao, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 39–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, R. M. Arán-Ais, H. S. Jeon and B. Roldan Cuenya, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 198–210 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hahn, T. Hatsukade, Y.-G. Kim, A. Vailionis, J. H. Baricuatro, D. C. Higgins, S. A. Nitopi, M. P. Soriaga and T. F. Jaramillo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 5918–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gu, H. Shen, L. Shang, X. Lv, L. Qian and G. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800121 CrossRef .
J.-J. Velasco-Vélez, T. Jones, D. Gao, E. Carbonio, R. Arrigo, C.-J. Hsu, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, J.-M. Chen, J.-F. Lee, P. Strasser, B. Roldan Cuenya, R. Schlögl, A. Knop-Gericke and C.-H. Chuang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1485–1492 CrossRef .
M. Schwartz, R. L. Cook, V. M. Kehoe, R. C. MacDuff, J. Patel and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 614–618 CrossRef CAS .

          A. F. Sammells and R. L. Cook, in Electrochemical and Electrocatalytic Reactions of Carbon Dioxide, ed. B. P. Sullivan, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1993, pp. 217–262 Search PubMed .
D. Mignard, R. C. Barik, A. S. Bharadwaj, C. L. Pritchard, M. Ragnoli, F. Cecconi, H. Miller and L. J. Yellowlees, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
D. Higgins, C. Hahn, C. Xiang, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Z. Weber, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 317–324 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. H. Whittingham and R. D. L. Smith, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5116–5123 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Luna, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C.-T. Dinh, M. B. Ross, O. S. Bushuyev, P. Todorović, T. Regier, S. O. Kelley, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zamfirescu and I. Dincer, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 459–465 CrossRef CAS .
G.-F. Chen, S. Ren, L. Zhang, H. Cheng, Y. Luo, K. Zhu, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800337 CrossRef .
X. Cui, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800369 CrossRef .
G. Xu and R. Liu, Chin. J. Chem., 2009, 27, 677–680 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu and G. Xu, Chin. J. Chem., 2010, 28, 139–142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Andersen, V. Čolić, S. Yang, J. A. Schwalbe, A. C. Nielander, J. M. McEnaney, K. Enemark-Rasmussen, J. G. Baker, A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, M. J. Statt, S. J. Blair, S. Mezzavilla, J. Kibsgaard, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. Cargnello, S. F. Bent, T. F. Jaramillo, I. E. L. Stephens, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nature, 2019, 570, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Amirfakhri, J.-L. Meunier and D. Berk, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 248–258 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Morais, J. R. C. Salgado, B. Šljukić, D. M. F. Santos and C. A. C. Sequeira, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 14143–14151 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. P. Cardoso, B. Šljukić, N. Sousa, C. A. C. Sequeira, F. M. L. Figueiredo and D. M. F. Santos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 19045–19056 RSC .
T. Masuda, H. Fukumitsu, K. Fugane, H. Togasaki, D. Matsumura, K. Tamura, Y. Nishihata, H. Yoshikawa, K. Kobayashi, T. Mori and K. Uosaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10098–10102 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Y. Bao, Y. Tian, J. Xia and D. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6463–6467 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuang, S. Liu, C. Huang, F. Tu, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 338–344 CAS .
D. M. F. Santos, T. F. B. Gomes, B. Šljukić, N. Sousa, C. A. C. Sequeira and F. M. L. Figueiredo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
T. Poux, A. Bonnefont, A. Ryabova, G. Kéranguéven, G. A. Tsirlina and E. R. Savinova, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13595–13600 RSC .
D. Wang, W. Yan and G. G. Botte, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1135–1138 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, X. Dou, J. Dai, X. An, Y. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Tao, J. Zhao, W. Chu, X. C. Zeng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12465–12469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Boggs, R. L. King and G. G. Botte, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4859–4861 RSC .
K. Ye, G. Wang, D. Cao and G. Wang, Top. Curr. Chem., 2018, 376, 42 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Vedharathinam and G. G. Botte, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 81, 292–300 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vedharathinam and G. G. Botte, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 660–665 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Forslund, J. T. Mefford, W. G. Hardin, C. T. Alexander, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5044–5051 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takeda, T. Hashino, H. Miyamoto, F. Kanamaru, S. Kume and M. Koizumi, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1972, 34, 1599–1601 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Forslund, C. T. Alexander, A. M. Abakumov, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2664–2673 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ding, L. Qi, M. Jia and H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1369–1376 RSC .
Y. Tong, P. Chen, M. Zhang, T. Zhou, L. Zhang, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1–7 CrossRef .
S. Basri, S. K. Kamarudin, W. R. W. Daud and Z. Yaakub, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7957–7970 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. F. Akhairi and S. K. Kamarudin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 4214–4228 CrossRef CAS .
V. Raghuveer, K. Ravindranathan Thampi, N. Xanthopoulos, H. J. Mathieu and B. Viswanathan, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 140, 263–274 CrossRef CAS .
V. Raghuveer and B. Viswanathan, Fuel, 2002, 81, 2191–2197 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Singh, T. Sharma, A. Singh, Anindita, D. Mishra and S. K. Tiwari, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2322–2330 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Singh, A. Singh, D. Mishra, Anindita and P. Chartier, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 776–783 CrossRef CAS .
K.-N. Jung, J.-H. Jung, W. B. Im, S. Yoon, K.-H. Shin and J.-W. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9902–9907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amira, M. Ferkhi, A. Khaled, F. Mauvy, J.-C. Grenier, L. Houssiau and J.-J. Pireaux, Ionics, 2019, 25, 3809–3822 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takashima, K. Ishikawa and H. Irie, ECS Trans., 2014, 61, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Abrishami, M. Risch, J. Scholz, V. Roddatis, N. Osterthun and C. Jooss, Materials, 2016, 9, 921 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Takashima, K. Ishikawa and H. Irie, J. Chem. Eng. Mater. Sci., 2017, 5, 45–55 CAS .
S. Liu, H. Luo, Y. Li, Q. Liu and J.-L. Luo, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferkhi, M. Rekaik, A. Khaled, S. Amira, M. Cassir and J.-J. Pireaux, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 807, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferkhi, M. Rekaik, A. Khaled, M. Cassir and J. J. Pireaux, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 229, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
S. Amira, M. Ferkhi, M. Belghobsi, A. Khaled, F. Mauvy and J.-C. Grenier, Ionics, 2019, 25, 3799–3807 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, B. Wei, Z. Lü, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang and X. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 464, 494–501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, X. Xu, J.-P. Marcel Veder and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7280–7300 RSC .
S. M. Loureiro, C. Felser, Q. Huang and R. J. Cava, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3181–3185 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Hector, J. A. Hutchings, R. L. Needs, M. F. Thomas and M. T. Weller, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 527–532 RSC .
Y. Tsujimoto, C. I. Sathish, Y. Matsushita, K. Yamaura and T. Uchikoshi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5915–5918 RSC .
M. A. Ghanem, P. Arunachalam, A. Almayouf and M. T. Weller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H450–H458 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyahara, K. Miyazaki, T. Fukutsuka and T. Abe, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2713–2716 RSC .
A. Grimaud, K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, Y.-L. Lee, M. Risch, W. T. Hong, J. Zhou and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2439 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bak, H. B. Bae, J. Kim, J. Oh and S. Y. Chung, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3126–3132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, X. Zhou, Z. Wei, G. Du, G. Zhang and N. Chen, J. Rare Earths, 2019, 37, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Yang, F. Lu, C. Jin, J. Wu, M. Shen, R. Yang and F. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 974–980 RSC .
Q. Li, M. Guo, K. Wang, Z. Wei, G. Du, G. Zhang and N. Chen, J. Rare Earths, 2020, 38, 763–769 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, F. Song, J. Gu, X. Xu, Z. Liu and X. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14240–14245 RSC .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1263–B1268 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Pan, W. Zhou, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang and Z. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 553–559 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Y. Zhong, D. Guan and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701693 CrossRef .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, X. Cheng and T. J. Schmidt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402033 CrossRef .
R. Liu, F. Liang, W. Zhou, Y. Yang and Z. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pelloquin, N. Barrier, D. Flahaut, V. Caignaert and A. Maignan, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 773–780 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matvejeff, M. Lehtimäki, A. Hirasa, Y. H. Huang, H. Yamauchi and M. Karppinen, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2775–2779 CrossRef CAS .
V. Øygarden, H. Fjellvåg, M. H. Sørby and A. O. Sjåstad, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 7630–7636 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pelloquin, N. Barrier, A. Maignan and V. Caignaert, Solid State Sci., 2005, 7, 853–860 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pelloquin, J. Hadermann, M. Giot, V. Caignaert, C. Michel, M. Hervieu and B. Raveau, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1715–1724 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sonoki, D. Mori, S. Taminato, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Imanishi, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7454–7457 RSC .
P. Sabatier, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1911, 44, 1984–2001 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B.-J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. Graule, R. Schäublin, L. Wiles, M. Pertoso, N. Danilovic, K. E. Ayers and T. J. Schmidt, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 925–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mierwaldt, V. Roddatis, M. Risch, J. Scholz, J. Geppert, M. E. Abrishami and C. Jooss, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700109 CrossRef .
C. Yang, M. Batuk, Q. Jacquet, G. Rousse, W. Yin, L. Zhang, J. Hadermann, A. M. Abakumov, G. Cibin, A. Chadwick, J.-M. Tarascon and A. Grimaud, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2884–2890 CrossRef CAS .
H. Svengren, M. Chamoun, J. Grins and M. Johnsson, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
F. Allebrod, C. Chatzichristodoulou and M. B. Mogensen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 22–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Adolphsen, B. R. Sudireddy, V. Gil and C. Chatzichristodoulou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F827–F835 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Adler, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4791–4844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, W. Zhou, D. Ding, M. Liu, F. Ciucci, M. Tade and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500537 CrossRef .
J. Druce, T. Ishihara and J. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 893–896 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tarancón, M. Burriel, J. Santiso, S. J. Skinner and J. A. Kilner, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3799–3813 RSC .
A. Aguadero, L. Fawcett, S. Taub, R. Woolley, K. T. Wu, N. Xu, J. A. Kilner and S. J. Skinner, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 3925–3948 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burriel, G. Garcia, J. Santiso, J. A. Kilner, R. J. Chater and S. J. Skinner, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 416–422 RSC .
V. V. Kharton, A. P. Viskup, E. N. Naumovich and F. M. B. Marques, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2623–2629 RSC .
S. J. Skinner and J. A. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 709–712 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Escudero, A. Aguadero, J. A. Alonso and L. Daza, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 611, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Escudero, A. Fuerte and L. Daza, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7245–7250 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee and H. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 5984–5991 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Hernández, L. Mogni and A. Caneiro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 6031–6036 CrossRef .
F. Mauvy, C. Lalanne, J. M. Bassat, J. C. Grenier, H. Zhao, P. Dordor and P. Stevens, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25, 2669–2672 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Zhou, J. W. Templeton, Z. Nie, H. Chen, J. W. Stevenson and L. R. Pederson, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
A. Montenegro-Hernandez, J. Vega-Castillo, L. Mogni and A. Caneiro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15704–15714 CrossRef CAS .
A. Egger, W. Sitte, F. Klauser and E. Bertel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1537–B1541 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, E. Bucher and W. Sitte, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7313–7317 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, J. B. Goodenough and J. H. Zhu, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Munnings, S. J. Skinner, G. Amow, P. S. Whitfield and I. J. Davidson, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 1895–1901 CrossRef CAS .
K. Boulahya, D. M. Gil, M. Hassan, S. G. Martin and U. Amador, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1283–1289 RSC .
S. Liping, H. Lihua, Z. Hui, L. Qiang and C. Pijolat, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 96–100 CrossRef .
E. Boehm, J. M. Bassat, M. C. Steil, P. Dordor, F. Mauvy and J. C. Grenier, Solid State Sci., 2003, 5, 973–981 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, H. Zhao, L. Huo, L. Sun, X. Cheng and J.-C. Grenier, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1508–1512 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Bringley, S. S. Trail and B. A. Scott, J. Solid State Chem., 1990, 86, 310–322 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zheng, A. Gorzkowska-Sobaś and K. Świerczek, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 4089–4095 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, M. Li, Y. Xie, Y. Yang, X. Wu and C. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21593–21602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, F. Zhang, Z. Lü, B. Wei, T. Li, Z. Wang and W. Su, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 665–668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Lee, D. Lee, X. R. Wang, H. N. Lee, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 244–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee, J. Kleis, J. Rossmeisl, Y. Shao-Horn and D. Morgan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3966–3970 RSC .
S. Choi, S. Yoo, J. Y. Shin and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B995–B999 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Yatoo, Z. H. Du, H. L. Zhao, A. Aguadero and S. J. Skinner, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 320, 148–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Yatoo, A. Aguadero and S. J. Skinner, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 013204 CrossRef .
S. Chaianansutcharit, K. Hosoi, J. Hyodo, Y. W. Ju and T. Ishihara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12357–12366 RSC .
S. Chaianansutcharit, Y. W. Ju, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 1853–1860 CrossRef CAS .
T. Armstrong, F. Prado and A. Manthiram, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 140, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1621–1626 CrossRef CAS .
C. Torres-Garibay and D. Kovar, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 396–399 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vega-Castillo and F. Prado, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 325, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Padmasree, K. Y. Lai, W. Kaveevivitchai and A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources, 2018, 374, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
F. Prado, J. H. Kim and A. Manthiram, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 192, 241–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ling, T. M. Guo, X. Z. Zhang, R. A. Budiman, Y. Fujimaki, T. Nakamura, B. Lin, T. Kawada and K. Amezawa, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 16264–16269 CrossRef CAS .
F. Prado, T. Armstrong, A. Caneiro and A. Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, J7–J14 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee, D. M. Bierschenk and A. Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1255–A1260 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim and A. Manthiram, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1478–1483 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Adachi, N. Hatada and T. Uda, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1084–F1090 CrossRef CAS .
K. Boulahya, M. Hassan, D. M. Gil, J. Romero, A. G. Herrero, S. G. Martin and U. Amador, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22931–22939 RSC .
K. Boulahya, D. Muñoz-Gil, A. Gómez-Herrero, M. T. Azcondo and U. Amador, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5601–5611 RSC .
A. Manthiram, J. H. Kim, Y. N. Kim and K. T. Lee, J. Electroceram., 2011, 27, 93–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, J. Tong, M. Shang, S. Nikodemski, M. Sanders, S. Ricote, A. Almansoori and R. O’Hayre, Science, 2015, 349, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, C. J. Kucharczyk, Y. Liang, X. Zhang, I. Takeuchi, H.-I. Ji and S. M. Haile, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, Y. Chen, W. Wang, C. Zhou, Y. Zhong, G. Yang, W. Zhou, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Joule, 2019, 3, 2842–2853 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, D. Pergolesi and E. Traversa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4355–4369 RSC .
J. Dailly, S. Fourcade, A. Largeteau, F. Mauvy, J. C. Grenier and M. Marrony, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5847–5853 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Shen, Z. Du and C. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2800–2807 CrossRef CAS .
G. Taillades, J. Dailly, M. Taillades-Jacquin, F. Mauvy, A. Essouhmi, M. Marrony, C. Lalanne, S. Fourcade, D. J. Jones, J.-C. Grenier and J. Rozière, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 166–173 CAS .
J. Dailly and M. Marrony, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Z. Zhu, J. Qian and W. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 67–75 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miao, J. Hou, Z. Gong, Z. Jin and W. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 7531–7537 CrossRef CAS .
H. An, D. Shin and H.-I. Ji, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2018, 55, 358–363 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Hou, Y. Fan, X.-a. Xi, J. Li, Y. Lu, G. Huo, L. Shao, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7704–7712 RSC .
Z. Z. Chen, J. L. Wang, D. M. Huan, S. J. Sun, G. P. Wang, Z. P. Fu, W. H. Zhang, X. S. Zheng, H. B. Pan, R. R. Peng and Y. L. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 371, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, F. Yao, J. Meng, W. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Liu, J. Meng and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18558–18567 RSC .
M. Liu, M. E. Lynch, K. Blinn, F. M. Alamgir and Y. Choi, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 534–546 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jin, Z. Yang, H. Zheng, C. Yang and F. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 75–77 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Y.-M. Yin, N. Zhou, Z. Wang and Z.-F. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 76, 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 320–323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Huang, R. I. Dass, Z.-L. Xing and J. B. Goodenough, Science, 2006, 312, 254–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Kim, M. K. Rath, H. H. Kwak, H. J. Kim, J. W. Han, S.-T. Hong and K. T. Lee, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1172–1182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, H. Chen, Z. Shao, J. Shi, J. Bai and S.-D. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13997–14007 RSC .
Z. H. Du, H. L. Zhao, S. Yi, Q. Xia, Y. Gong, Y. Zhang, X. Cheng, Y. Li, L. Gu and K. Swierczek, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8660–8669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, K. T. Chuang and J.-L. Luo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 760–768 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, W. Wang, M. Liu, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500188 CrossRef .
D. M. Bastidas, S. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1603–1605 RSC .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, J. Canales-Vázquez, J. Peña-Martínez, D. M. López and P. Núñez, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 278–284 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lay, L. Dessemond and G. Gauthier, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, G. Chen, K. Wu and Y. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 418–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, G. Yang, Z. Zhang, W. Zhou, W. Wang and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10641–10649 RSC .
J. Shen, G. Yang, Z. Zhang, M. O. Tadé, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 644–651 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Wan, S. Zhang and C. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2019, 425, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Chen, G. Chen, K. Wu and Y. Cheng, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 647, 778–783 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, T.-H. Shin, C. Ni, G. Chen, K. Wu, Y. Cheng and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2981–2993 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, C. Su, R. Ran, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 356–362 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chauveau, J. Mougin, J. M. Bassat, F. Mauvy and J. C. Grenier, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 744–749 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogier, J. M. Bassat, F. Mauvy, S. Fourcade, J. C. Grenier, K. Couturier, M. Petitjean and J. Mougin, Fuel Cells, 2013, 13, 536–541 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, A. R. Hanifi, H. Monzón, J. Cunningham, T. H. Etsell and P. Sarkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9764–9770 RSC .
T. Chen, M. Liu, C. Yuan, Y. Zhou, X. Ye, Z. Zhan, C. Xia and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bausá, C. Solís, R. Strandbakke and J. M. Serra, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 306, 62–68 CrossRef .
W. Li, B. Guan, L. Ma, S. Hu, N. Zhang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18057–18066 RSC .
N. Danilov, J. Lyagaeva, G. Vdovin, E. Pikalova and D. Medvedev, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 172, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Tarutin, G. K. Vdovin, D. A. Medvedev and A. A. Yaremchenko, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 337, 135808 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huan, W. Wang, Y. Xie, N. Shi, Y. Wan, C. Xia, R. Peng and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18508–18517 RSC .
S. Liu, Q. Liu and J.-L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17521–17528 RSC .
S. Park, Y. Kim, H. Han, Y. S. Chung, W. Yoon, J. Choi and W. B. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen and S. P. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F3070–F3083 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Gu and E. Nikolla, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5912–5920 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, N. Kinadjan, R. Sayers, H. El Shinawi, C. Greaves and S. J. Skinner, Fuel Cells, 2011, 11, 102–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, H. Monzon, A. Larrea and V. M. Orera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1446–1453 RSC .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, R. Campana, A. Larrea, J. A. Kilner and V. M. Orera, Fuel Cells, 2011, 11, 116–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shahrokhi, A. Babaei and C. Zamani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 23091–23100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lyagaeva, N. Danilov, G. Vdovin, J. Bu, D. Medvedev, A. Demin and P. Tsiakaras, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15390–15399 RSC .
S. J. Yang, Y. B. Wen, J. C. Zhang, Y. Lu, X. F. Ye and Z. Y. Wen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 267, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, S. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Wen, X. Ye and Z. Wen, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227498 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Huan, N. Shi, L. Zhang, W. Z. Tan, W. H. Wang, C. R. Xia, R. R. Peng and Y. L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1761–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. D. Read, M. S. Islam, G. W. Watson and F. E. Hancock, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2597–2602 RSC .
M. Burriel, S. Wilkins, J. P. Hill, M. A. Muñoz-Márquez, H. H. Brongersma, J. A. Kilner, M. P. Ryan and S. J. Skinner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 311–316 RSC .
J. Druce, H. Téllez, M. Burriel, M. D. Sharp, L. J. Fawcett, S. N. Cook, D. S. McPhail, T. Ishihara, H. H. Brongersma and J. A. Kilner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3593–3599 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. Tellez, M. Burriel, F. Yang, N. Tsvetkov, Z. H. Cai, D. W. McComb, J. A. Kilner and B. Yildiz, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5436–5450 CrossRef CAS .
T. Akbay, A. Staykov, J. Druce, H. Tellez, T. Ishihara and J. A. Kilner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13113–13124 RSC .
D. Lee, Y. L. Lee, A. Grimaud, W. T. Hong, M. D. Biegalski, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6480–6487 RSC .
K. T. Wu, H. Tellez, J. Druce, M. Burriel, F. Yang, D. W. McComb, T. Ishihara, J. A. Kilner and S. J. Skinner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9003–9013 RSC .
J. Wu, S. S. Pramana, S. J. Skinner, J. A. Kilner and A. P. Horsfield, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23760–23767 RSC .
N. Gauquelin, T. E. Weirich, M. Ceretti, W. Paulus and M. Schroeder, Monatsh. Chem., 2009, 140, 1095–1102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burriel, H. Tellez, R. J. Chater, R. Castaing, P. Veber, M. Zaghrioui, T. Ishihara, J. A. Kilner and J. M. Bassat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17927–17938 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, Z. Feng, N. Charles, X. R. Wang, D. Lee, K. A. Stoerzinger, S. Muy, R. R. Rao, D. Lee, R. Jacobs, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, Mater. Today, 2019, 31, 100–118 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wen, W. Lv and W. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20031–20050 RSC .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Y. Lu, Y. Chen and B. Yildiz, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1613–1621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Meyer, R. Jacobs, D. Lee, L. Jiang, J. W. Freeland, C. Sohn, T. Egami, D. Morgan and H. N. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 92 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lee, A. Grimaud, E. J. Crumlin, K. Mezghani, M. A. Habib, Z. X. Feng, W. T. Hong, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18789–18795 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Li and N. A. Benedek, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2647–2652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sase, K. Yashiro, K. Sato, J. Mizusaki, T. Kawada, N. Sakai, K. Yamaji, T. Horita and H. Yokokawa, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 178, 1843–1852 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sase, F. Hermes, K. Yashiro, K. Sato, J. Mizusaki, T. Kawada, N. Sakai and H. Yokokawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B793–B797 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yashiro, T. Nakamura, M. Sase, F. Hermes, K. Sato, T. Kawada and J. Mizusaki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, B135–B137 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, S.-J. Ahn, G. J. la O’, D. N. Leonard, A. Borisevich, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3149–3155 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Gadre, Y.-L. Lee and D. Morgan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2606–2616 RSC .
J. W. Han and B. Yildiz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8598–8607 RSC .
Z. X. Feng, Y. Yacoby, M. J. Gadre, Y. L. Lee, W. T. Hong, H. Zhou, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, S. B. Adler, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Cai, Y. Kuru, W. Ma, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1221–1229 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. J. Kim, N. Tsvetkov, T. Daio, Y. Kuru, Z. H. Cai, Y. Chen, K. Sasaki, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 207–219 RSC .
F. Li, L. Jiang, R. Zeng, F. Wang, Y. Xu and Y. Huang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 29463–29471 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Xu, S. Xia, J. Liu, Y. Yan, F. Cheng, L. Jiang and Y. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 819, 152996 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Xu, F. Cheng, Y. Yan, S. Xia, J. Liu and L. Jiang, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 6191–6198 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y. L. Lee, W. T. Hong, M. D. Biegalski, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2144–2157 RSC .
T. Hong, M. Y. Zhao, K. Brinkman, F. L. Chen and C. R. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8659–8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Woolley and S. J. Skinner, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 790–795 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Woolley and S. J. Skinner, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 255, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma and E. Djurado, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22277–22287 RSC .
Y. S. Chung, T. Kim, T. H. Shin, H. Yoon, S. Park, N. M. Sammes, W. B. Kim and J. S. Chung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6437–6446 RSC .
M. Chen, Y. Hu, D. Chen, H. Hu and Q. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 303–313 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vecino-Mantilla, P. Gauthier-Maradei, M. Huvé, J. M. Serra, P. Roussel and G. H. Gauthier, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 4631–4641 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Wan, J. Wang, Z. Zong, Z. Zhang, K. Wu and Y. Cheng, ECS Trans., 2017, 78, 2461–2466 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z. Yang, C. Jin, G. Xiao, F. Chen and M. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1439–1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Yang, J. Li, Y. Lin, J. Liu, F. L. Chen and M. L. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lv, L. Lin, X. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Matsumoto, C. Zeng, N. Ta, W. Liu, D. Gao, G. Wang and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wu, W. Wang, Y. Zhong, G. Yang, J. Qu and Z. Shao, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2378–2384 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Wang, Y. M. Yin, Y. Yu, Y. F. Song, Z. F. Ma and J. W. Yin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 10440–10447 CrossRef CAS .
P. Batocchi, F. Mauvy, S. Fourcade and M. Parco, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 145, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pérez-Coll, A. Aguadero, M. J. Escudero, P. Núñez and L. Daza, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 151–162 CrossRef .
Z. He, N. Ai, S. He, S. P. Jiang, L. Zhang, W. D. A. Rickard, D. Tang and K. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F796–F804 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, M. Burriel, L. Dessemond, V. Martin, J. M. Bassat and E. Djurado, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 17–28 CrossRef CAS .
L. dos Santos-Gómez, J. M. Porras-Vázquez, J. Hurtado, E. R. Losilla and D. Marrero-López, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 788, 565–572 CrossRef .
R. J. Woolley, M. P. Ryan and S. J. Skinner, Fuel Cells, 2013, 13, 1080–1087 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Tomkiewicz, M. Tamimi, A. Huq and S. McIntosh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21864–21874 RSC .
J. Garcia-Barriocanal, A. Rivera-Calzada, M. Varela, Z. Sefrioui, E. Iborra, C. Leon, S. J. Pennycook and J. Santamaria, Science, 2008, 321, 676–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wei and X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 228, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Goga, R. Seshadri, V. Ksenofontov, P. Gütlich and W. Tremel, Chem. Commun., 1999, 979–980 RSC .
J. B. Whalen, T. Besara, R. Vasquez, F. Herrera, J. Sun, D. Ramirez, R. L. Stillwell, S. W. Tozer, T. D. Tokumoto, S. A. McGill, J. Allen, M. Davidson and T. Siegrist, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 203, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, D. Sarkar, K. Williams, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, E. Bianco, H. Huyan, S. B. Cronin, M. E. McConney, R. Haiges, R. Jaramillo, D. J. Singh, W. A. Tisdale, R. Kapadia and J. Ravichandran, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4882–4886 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Chen, B. W. Eichhorn and P. E. Fanwick, Inorg. Chem., 1992, 31, 1788–1791 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demont, S. Hébert, J. Höwing, Y. Bréard and D. Pelloquin, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 1265–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gonano, Y. Bréard, D. Pelloquin, V. Caignaert, O. Pérez, A. Pautrat, P. Bazin, E. Suard and P. Boullay, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 13088–13093 RSC .
A. Jarvis, F. J. Berry, J. F. Marco and P. R. Slater, ECS Trans., 2019, 91, 1467–1476 CrossRef .
C.-H. Lee, N. D. Orloff, T. Birol, Y. Zhu, V. Goian, E. Rocas, R. Haislmaier, E. Vlahos, J. A. Mundy, L. F. Kourkoutis, Y. Nie, M. D. Biegalski, J. Zhang, M. Bernhagen, N. A. Benedek, Y. Kim, J. D. Brock, R. Uecker, X. X. Xi, V. Gopalan, D. Nuzhnyy, S. Kamba, D. A. Muller, I. Takeuchi, J. C. Booth, C. J. Fennie and D. G. Schlom, Nature, 2013, 502, 532–536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Haislmaier, G. Stone, N. Alem and R. Engel-Herbert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 043102 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, G. Chen, Y. Zhong, Y. Chen, N. Ma, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2326 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gäbler, Y. Prots and R. Niewa, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2007, 633, 93–97 CrossRef .
F. Gäbler, D. Bräunling, A. Senyshyn, W. Schnelle and R. Niewa, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2010, 636, 1222–1228 CrossRef .
G. Wang, S. Manni, Q. Lin, P. McVey, R. S. Houk, L. Wu, S. L. Bud’ko and P. C. Canfield, Philos. Mag. Lett., 2018, 98, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Balachandran, J. Young, T. Lookman and J. M. Rondinelli, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, G. Duan, L. Qiao, Y. Tang, Y. Chen, Y. Sun, P. Wan and S. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 8935–8939 CAS .
S. Ramesh, S. S. Manoharan, M. S. Hegde and K. C. Patil, J. Catal., 1995, 157, 749–751 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tamai, S. Hosokawa, H. Okamoto, H. Asakura, K. Teramura and T. Tanaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26985–26993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Ivanov, L. G. Pinaeva, L. A. Isupova, E. M. Sadovskaya, I. P. Prosvirin, E. Y. Gerasimov and I. S. Yakovleva, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 457, 42–51 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Liu, D. Richards, N. Singh and B. R. Goldsmith, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7052–7064 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Mohd Taib, K. Shameli, P. Moozarm Nia, M. Etesami, M. Miyake, R. Rasit Ali, E. Abouzari-Lotf and Z. Izadiyan, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 95, 616–626 CrossRef CAS .
M. Duca and M. T. M. Koper, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9726–9742 RSC .
O. Brylev, M. Sarrazin, L. Roué and D. Bélanger, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 6237–6247 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Xiaomin Xu
	Xiaomin Xu is now pursuing a PhD degree in Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia. He received his Bachelor (2013) and Master (2016) degrees in Chemical Engineering from Nanjing Tech University, China. His research interests include the structure, synthesis, and characterization of perovskite materials and their application in electrocatalysis, including the oxygen reduction reaction, oxygen evolution reaction, and hydrogen evolution reaction.

Zongping Shao
	Zongping Shao is a professor of chemical engineering at Curtin University, Australia, and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China, in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and postdoc at California Institute of Technology, USA, from 2000 till 2005. His current research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes, and low-temperature energy conversion devices.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic depicting the ideal tetragonal crystal structure (space group: I4/mmm) of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, An+1BnX3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3). The ideal cubic crystal structure (space group: Pmm) of simple perovskite ABX3, which is equivalent to the n = ∞ case of Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites, is also shown. For comparison and simplicity, the unit cell of the simple perovskite structure is only repeated along the c direction.	 

 	Fig. 2  Calculated vertical section of the La–Ni–O phase diagram along the La2NiO4–LaNiO3 join in air. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2003, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 3  RP perovskites as ORR/OER electrocatalysts. (a) A schematic illustration of the ORR/OER testing in a fuel cell unit with an anion-exchange membrane (AEM). (b) The ORR/OER performance of RP-structured LaSr3Fe3O10 at 60 °C, in comparison to that of LaMnO3/LaNiO3 and RuO2–IrO2. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Volcano-type relationships between the ORR onset potential at 100 μA cmgeo−2 and the measured surface reduction temperature of a range of simple perovskites ABO3 (A = La, Ca, Sr; B = Cr, Mn, Co, and Ni) and n = 1 RP perovskites A2BO4 (A = La, Sr; B = Mn, Co, and Ni). The gray shaded region indicates that the ORR activity here is dominated by the carbon, which is introduced as a conductive agent for the activity evaluation. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Experimental and theoretical studies of RP-structured Sr2RuO4 as an HER electrocatalyst in alkaline media. (a) A schematic presentation of the RP layered structure of Sr2RuO4. (b) DFT calculation of the density of states (DOS) of Sr2RuO4. (c) Polarization curves of RuO2, SrRuO3, and Sr2RuO4 catalysts in an Ar-saturated 1 M KOH solution. (d) Mass activity (MA) and price activity (PA) of RuO2, SrRuO3, Sr2RuO4, and Pt/C at an overpotential of 0.10 V. (e) Diagram of the hydrogen adsorption Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) at the metal and oxygen sites on RuO2, SrRuO3, Sr2RuO4, Ru, and Pt. (f) Energy diagram of the various surface reaction species and their simplified structures along the Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway for the alkaline HER on the SrO-terminated surface of Sr2RuO4 at electrode potentials of 0 and 0.83 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). TS: transition state. The green, gray, orange/red, and light gray spheres represent Sr, Ru, O, and H atoms, respectively. (g) Polarization curves of Sr2RuO4 initially in comparison to those recorded after 5 and 1000 continuous CV cycles, indicating an electrochemical activation process. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrocatalytic activity of RP-structured La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 oxide toward the CO2RR in GDE-based CO2 electrolyzers. (a) Faradaic efficiency of alcohol formation as a function of CO2 electrolysis time at a 180 mA cm−2 constant current density on the La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 catalyst reported by Schwartz et al. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 1993, The Electrochemical Society. (b) Current efficiency of ethylene formation after 20 min of CO2 electrolysis as a function of potential with respect to the SCE at different temperatures and pressures on the La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 catalyst reported by Mignard et al. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd.	 
6Ni(OH)2(s) + 6OH− ↔ 6NiOOH(s) + 6H2O(l) + 6e−	(1)
6NiOOH(s) + CO(NH2)2(aq) + H2O(l) → 6Ni(OH)2(s) + N2(g) + CO2(g)	(2)

 	Fig. 6  Activity toward the electrooxidation of urea, methanol, and ethanol for the RP-structured La2−xSrxNiO4+δ series (x = 0.5, 1, 1.25, and 1.5, denoted as LSN75, LSN50, LSN37, and LSN25, respectively). (a) CVs performed with 1 M urea. (b) CVs performed in the absence of a small molecule. (c) CVs performed with 1 M methanol. (d) CVs performed with 1 M ethanol. All CVs were collected at 10 mV s−1 in Ar-saturated 1 M KOH and all activities were reported at 0.6 V vs. Hg/HgO on the anodic scan. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Experimental and theoretical studies of RP-structured La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4+δ as OER electrocatalysts in alkaline media. (a) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4+δ showing the same tetragonal I4/mmm symmetry across all the compositions. (b) Tafel plots of La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4+δ showing specific activity as a function of potential. (c) Representations of the two B(B′)O2 layers for each ground state La0.5Sr1.5Ni1−xFexO4 (x = 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 1) used for DFT modelling; for each x, the ground state Fe arrangement is characterized by equal numbers of Fe in the two B(B′)O2 layers, with the Fe in each layer arranged to maximize the number of Fe–O–Ni bridges. (d) The corresponding spin polarized projected density of states (PDOS) of eg (Ni: gray shaded area and Fe: blue line) and 2p (O: red line) with respect to Fermi level for the B–O–B′ bridges. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Formation of RP-type faults in LaNiO3 thin films and its effect on the tetragonal distortion of [NiO6] octahedra and the oxygen electrocatalytic properties. (a) STEM images for 5%-Ni-excess (left) and 5%-La-excess (right) films, where the presence of RP-type faults is only seen in the latter case. (b) High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) and annular bright-field (ABF) images showing the visualization of the atomic positions for La, Ni, and O. (c) Magnified ABF images for the bulk and the fault region indicated by a blue square and a red rectangle in (b), respectively. (d) The ORR (left) and OER (right) currents as a function of potentials in both 5%-Ni-excess and 5%-La-excess LaNiO3 thin films. (e) Low-magnification HAADF image showing the overall atomic-scale structure of 5%-La-excess films after 10 cyclic voltammetry scans in a potential range of 1.10–1.90 V vs. RHE, where V-shaped amorphous pits on the surface intersections with the RP fault plane are identified. The two magnified images for the regions denoted by A and B further clarify the amorphization. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Characterization and performance of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid as an OER electrocatalyst in alkaline solution. (a) XRD patterns of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid. Inset shows the crystal structures of NiO (space group: Fmm) and (La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 (space group: I4/mmm). (b) The OER Tafel plots of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid, NiO, and (La0.6Ca0.4)2NiO4−δ. (c) Chronoamperometric test of the NiO–(La0.613Ca0.387)2NiO3.562 nanohybrid at 1.63 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH. Inset is the linear sweep voltammograms before and after the stability test. Reproduced with permission.231 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure of intercalated RP derivatives and their electrocatalytic OER properties in alkaline media. (a) Schematic illustrations of the pristine RP structure (left panel) and derivatives with intercalated hydroxyl group (central panel) and intercalated hydroxyl group and water molecule (right panel). The thickness evolution is given as an example to illustrate how water intercalation into the interlayer leads to the elongation along the c direction. The dashed lines are used to suggest the layer number n. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. (b) Polarization curves of untreated and NMP-treated (for 7 days) intercalated Sr3FeCoO7−δ as well as IrO2 nanoparticles. (c) XRD patterns of untreated and NMP-treated (for 7 days) intercalated Sr3FeCoO7−δ. The inset shows the change of the R002/110 ratio after different treatment durations. (d) A volcano-shaped plot showing the relationship between the OER activity and the R002/110 ratio. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  The stability of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4 as an OER electrocatalyst studied by the RRDE and EQCM measurements. (a) A schematic for the RRDE experiment. (b–d) RRDE results of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4, LaNiO3−δ, and Ni(Fe)OOH with the increase of cycling number at different pH: (b) disk current, (c) ring current, and (d) collection efficiency. (e) Mass loss of La2Li0.5Ni0.5O4, LaNiO3−δ, and Ni(Fe)OOH recorded by EQCM during cycling at pH 13. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  The n = 1 RP perovskites A2BO4±δ as cathode materials in O-SOFCs for the electrocatalytic ORR at high temperatures. (a and b) Schematics illustrating the possible elementary reaction steps during the ORR and the possible pathways for two different types of cathode materials: (a) pure electronic conductor and (b) mixed ionic and electronic conductor. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. (c) Thermal evolution of the ionic conductivity for Ln2NiO4+δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd), as compared with the best-known simple perovskites, LSFC and La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3−δ (LSFN). Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2004, Elsevier B.V. (d and e) Thermal evolution of (d) the oxygen diffusion coefficient D* and (e) the surface oxygen exchange coefficient k* for Ln2NiO4+δ, as compared with LSFC and LSFN. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2005, Elsevier B.V. (f) The computed O 2p-band center (relative to the Fermi level, EFermi) of the bulk for La2−xSrxMO4+δ (M = Co, Ni, Cu) versus that of the top surface layer (blue), the second surface layer (red), and the top two surface layers (green). The slopes of the linear correlations are given, along with a schematic of the (001) slab of the simulated La2−xSrxMO4+δ (La: green circles, Sr: blue circles, and MO6 octahedra: gray), in which the empty rectangles indicate the surface layers where the O 2p-band centers were computed. (g) The computed bulk O 2p-band center relative to EFermiversus the surface oxygen exchange coefficients of (001)-oriented La2−xSrxMO4+δ thin films measured at 550 °C (La2CuO4: light blue, LaSrCoO4: green, La1.85Sr0.15CuO4: blue, La1.6Sr0.4CuO4: deep blue, and LaSrNiO4: red). The gray dashed lines represent the correlation between the computed bulk O 2p-band center and the surface oxygen exchange coefficients for simple perovskites. Reproduced with permission.272 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  RP-structured SrGdNi0.2Mn0.8O4±δ (SGNM28) as an anode material in O-SOFCs for the electrooxidation of H2 at high temperatures. (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the SGNM28–GDC anode reduced in H2 at 850 °C. Inset shows a schematic depicting the possible mechanism for electrooxidation of H2 at the reduced SGNM28–GDC anode. (b) Cell voltage and power density as a function of current density of the SGNM28-GDC anode operating on wet H2 at 700–850 °C. Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  RP-structured La2NiO4 as both cathode and anode material in SSOFCs for the electroreduction of O2 and electrooxidation of H2 at high temperatures. (a and b) SEM images of (a) the as-prepared La2NiO4/SDC electrode made from infiltration and (b) the La2NiO4/SDC electrode after reduction in H2. (c) Polarization curves of the SDC electrolyte supported SSOFC with La2NiO4/SDC as the electrode. (d) Stability result of the same SSOFC tested under a 150 mA cm−2 current density at 650 °C. Reproduced with permission.326 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Theoretical studies of the n = 1 RP perovskites as electrode materials in RSOCs for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis at high temperatures. (a) Proposed mechanism for surface oxygen exchange on n = 1 RP perovskites. Red, dashed white, and white spheres represent the O atoms, vacant interstitial sites, and surface oxygen vacancies, respectively. (b) A volcano-type plot for the relationship between the calculated rate of surface oxygen exchange and the O2 binding strength on a surface oxygen vacancy. “A” represents the A-site-terminated oxides, and the others refer to B-site-terminated oxides. The open and filled symbols represent the superoxo and peroxo states of adsorbed O2 on a surface oxygen vacancy, respectively. Reproduced with permission.339 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  The effect of exposed facet/surface termination on the ORR kinetics of La2NiO4+δ. (a) Free energy of the oxygen exchange process on (111), (100), and LaO- and NiO2-terminated (001) surfaces of La2NiO4+δ. (b) Atomic-resolution HAADF image of nanorod-structured La2NiO4+δ with the electron beam parallel to the (001) plane. The upper-right inset shows a [001] projected DFT model structure along the [100] direction with La (blue) and Ni (green) atoms labeled, along with the lattice spacing. (c) Current density versus voltage and power density curves for O-SOFCs comprising La2NiO4+δ cathode catalysts with nanorod and sphere morphologies, operating on H2 at 700 °C. Curves for O-SOFCs with a simple perovskite LSM cathode operating at 700 and 800 °C are shown for reference. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Transition state analysis between the chemisorbed O2 on the La–La bridge position and the dissociated oxygen on the La–La bridge position on the defect-free (001) surface of La2NiO4. (e) Transition state analysis between the chemisorbed O2 on the oxygen vacancy and the incorporated/dissociated oxygen on the La–La bridge position on the oxygen-deficient (001) surface of La2NiO4. ΔEf and ΔEb denote the activation energy of the forward and backward reactions, respectively. La is depicted in green, Ni in grey, O in red, and the adsorbed O2 molecule in purple. Reproduced with permission.352 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  The effect of lattice strain on the ORR kinetics of Nd2NiO4+δ thin films. (a–c) Transmission electron microscopy images and schematic drawings of Nd2NiO4+δ thin films with (a) tensile, (b) zero, and (c) compressive out-of-plane strain as deposited on (111) YSZ, (100) YSZ/GDC, and (110) YSZ substrates, respectively. (d) Surface oxygen exchange coefficient of tensile and compressively strained Nd2NiO4+δ thin films as a function of temperature in air. Reproduced with permission.360 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  The effect of heterointerface on the ORR kinetics of the LSC214/LSC113 heterostructure. (a) Atomic-resolution HAADF image of the LSC214/LSC113 heterointerface for the LSC113 thin-film sample with ∼15 nm coverage of LSC214. The schematic, where La/Sr is depicted in blue and Co in purple, illustrates the unit cell of LSC214 and LSC113 and the structure at the interface. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic illustrating the governing mechanism for the enhanced ORR kinetics at the LSC214/LSC113 heterointerface. Reproduced with permission.371 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  Rational design of the exsolution process to obtain metal nanoparticle-decorated RP-based structures and their application in high-temperature CO2 electrolysis. (a) A generic representation of the exsolution process and re-oxidation process involving RP-based structures. (b) In situ STEM images of the pristine SFMC sample during exsolution in 10 Pa of H2 at 800 °C. (c) In situ STEM images of the exsolved SFMC sample during re-oxidation in 10 Pa of O2 at 600 °C for 22 s and then at 800 °C after temperature ramping at a 5 °C s−1 rate. (d) The correlations between the reduction time used for exsolution, the size and population density of the exsolved Co–Fe nanoparticles, and the current density of the exsolved samples during CO2 electrolysis at 1.6 V and 800 °C. (e) Redox cycling performance of the SFMC–GDC 2 h sample at 1.2 V and 800 °C. Reproduced with permission.387 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  SEM images of the La4Ni3O10−δ cathodes with various microstructures. (a–c) Isolated cauliflowers: (a) surface, (b) cross section, (c) cross section of a selected region with a discontinuous interface. (d–f) Connected round agglomerates: (d) surface, (e) cross section, (f) cross section of a selected region with a discontinuous interface. (g–i) 3D coral-type films: (g) surface, (h) cross section, (i) interface with a thin dense layer (TDL). Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
