Fabricating high performance lithium-ion batteries using bionanotechnology  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR06815G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR06815G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3356-3372Fabricating high performance lithium-ion batteries using bionanotechnology

        
          
            Xudong 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yukun 
            Hou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen 
            He
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Guihua 
            Yang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jingjie 
            Cui
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shikun 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Song
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Zhen 
            Huang
          
        
      *e
aInstitute of Materials Science and Engineering, Qilu University of Technology, Jinan 250353, China. E-mail: zxd1080@126.com; hewen1960@126.com;  Fax: +86 531 89631518;   Tel: +86 531 89631080
bKey Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, Qilu University of Technology, Jinan 250353, China
cCollege of Life Information Science & Instrument Engineering, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
dState Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shangdong University, Jinan 250100, China
eDepartment of Chemistry, Georgia State University, Atlanta, USA. E-mail: Huang@gsu.edu
Received 
      18th November 2014
    , Accepted 11th January 2015First published on 12th January 2015AbstractDesigning, fabricating, and integrating nanomaterials are key to transferring nanoscale science into applicable nanotechnology. Many nanomaterials including amorphous and crystal structures are synthesized via biomineralization in biological systems. Amongst various techniques, bionanotechnology is an effective strategy to manufacture a variety of sophisticated inorganic nanomaterials with precise control over their chemical composition, crystal structure, and shape by means of genetic engineering and natural bioassemblies. This provides opportunities to use renewable natural resources to develop high performance lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). For LIBs, reducing the sizes and dimensions of electrode materials can boost Li+ ion and electron transfer in nanostructured electrodes. Recently, bionanotechnology has attracted great interest as a novel tool and approach, and a number of renewable biotemplate-based nanomaterials have been fabricated and used in LIBs. In this article, recent advances and mechanism studies in using bionanotechnology for high performance LIBs studies are thoroughly reviewed, covering two technical routes: (1) Designing and synthesizing composite cathodes, e.g. LiFePO4/C, Li3V2(PO4)3/C and LiMn2O4/C; and (2) designing and synthesizing composite anodes, e.g. NiO/C, Co3O4/C, MnO/C, α-Fe2O3 and nano-Si. This review will hopefully stimulate more extensive and insightful studies on using bionanotechnology for developing high-performance LIBs.Xudong ZhangXudong Zhang is currently a full professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Qilu University of Technology. He received his PhD degree from Shandong University in 2004. His research interests focus on materials chemistry, technology for nanometer material synthesis, lithium batteries and electrode materials.Yukun HouYukun Hou graduated from Qilu University of Technology in 2012. Then, in the same year, he moved to the Institute of Materials Science and Engineering at Qilu University of Technology as a postgraduate student and majored in materials science and engineering.Wen HeWen He is currently a full professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Qilu University of Technology. She received her PhD degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in South China University of Technology in 2009. Her research interests focus on material chemistry and, technology for lithium batteries.Guihua YangGuihua Yang is currently a full professor in the Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Science and Technology of the Ministry of Education at Qilu University of Technology. She received her PhD degree from South China University of Technology in 2009. Her research interests focus on biotechnology and resource utilization of biomass.
1. Introduction
The increasing concerns regarding global warming, coupled with petroleum resource constraints, are driving research in the development of eco-friendly sustainable energies, for instance power from solar, wind, wave, hydroelectricity, or terrestrial heat. Consequently, the development of high power energy-storage devices has been pursued at a quite unprecedented rate over the last decade. The lithium-ion battery is one of the most attractive solutions to fulfill such a strong demand for high-energy storage, because of the remarkable electrochemical performance and high capacity. However, to cater for such a strong demand for higher-capacity storage, the energy density and rate capability of the lithium-ion battery need to be improved, which impels the search for novel composite cathodes and anodes. As is to be expected, the new electrode materials for future vehicles and aircraft or other energy-intensive devices should not only meet safety demands, but should also possess good rate performance for both the charge and discharge of batteries.1–3
Nature is the greatest factory in the world, producing various biomaterials with complicated, elaborate, and efficient hierarchical morphologies and even multiple nanoscale assemblies to satisfy specific requirements. Amongst various techniques, bionanotechnology inspired by nature is one of the most powerful routes to program nanoscale chemical synthesis with the highest possible accuracy and control.4–18 Biomineralization is a source of inspiration for biomimetic synthesis processes using various biotemplates. Numerous materials with various potential applications have been prepared via bionic methods.19–22 Remarkably, biological systems have the ability to fabricate extraordinary inorganic structures and morphologies via the process of biomineralization, and both amorphous and crystalline materials can be synthesized.3,4,23 Compared with other fabrication processes, biomimetic synthesis processes are much more competent at the molecular control of the structure, size, aggregation, morphology and crystallographic orientation of inorganic materials, and can also synthesize materials in a more environmentally mild system.
The development and commercialization of lithium ion batteries and the issues and challenges facing cathode or anode materials have been discussed in several excellent comprehensive reviews to which the reader is referred for details.24–39 Energy shortages, environmental crises, and developing customer demands have driven people to find facile, low-cost, environmentally friendly, and nontoxic routes to produce novel functional materials that can be commercialized in the near future. In the present work, focus is given to the biotemplate synthesis of carbon composite materials for developing high-performance LIBs including: (1) composite cathodes, e.g. LiFePO4/C, Li3V2 (PO4)3/C and LiMn2O4/C; and (2) various anodes, e.g. NiO/C, Co3O4/C, MnO/C, α-Fe2O3 and nano-Si. An insight into the future research and development of bionanotechnology in high performance LIBs studies is given. Our research work is also demonstrated in this article.
2. Fundamentals of bionanotechnologies
2.1. Mechanisms of biomineralization
Biology is a source of inspiration for nanoscience.40 The new strategies for synthesis of functional nanomaterials can be derived from mechanism of biomineralization in nature. In nature, the nucleation and growth of mineralized materials are often controlled by biomacromolecules such as DNA, proteins and polysaccharides (Fig. 1a and b).41 There are main three stages of construction resulting in the development of organized biomineralized architectures. Stage I is supramolecular pre-organization, in which an organized reaction environment is built through self-assembly of the organic matrix before mineral nucleation occurs (Fig. 1c). Stage II is interfacial molecular recognition, in which inorganic mineral nucleates from an inorganic solution at the interface under the direction of the preformed organic supramolecular assemblies (Fig. 1d). Stage III is cellular processing associated with a variety of constructional processes, where higher-order architectures with elaborated ultra- and micro-structural properties are built by supramolecular self-assembly (Fig. 1e). The issue of how to utilize natural biomasses has attracted considerable attention in the light of the scarcity of fossil energy.42–44
 Fig. 1  (a) DNA gene regulation. (b) Biomineralization of bones and teeth. (c) Organization of biomolecules, M: metal ion. (d) Nucleation to the spatial orientation. (e) Supramolecular self assembly and crystal growth. 
2.2. Features and effects of biotemplates
Diverse natural biomaterials have been used as sustainable templates to synthesize various functional materials.45–47 Compared to other artificial templates and commercial graphite materials, natural biotemplates have the following features: (1) Many natural biotemplates from agriculture, forest residues and organisms are available from biomass energy resources, and widely distributed in various countries of the world. (2) The biotemplates have different morphologies, a large surface area and abundant surface charge within a broad range of pHs and ionic strengths. They accumulate metal ions from aqueous solutions by different physico-chemical interactions, adsorption and absorption, or a metabolism-dependent mechanism. (3) The most notable feature of biotemplates is that they possess sophisticated nanostructures with different length scales, and use self-assembly to control the nucleation and mineralization that immobilizes the nanoparticles and forms hierarchical nanomaterials. (4) The high-temperature carbonization of biotemplates forms the mesoporous active biocarbon network structure under a reducing atmosphere, while an external or internal self-created atmosphere can prevent metal ions from oxidation and effectively restricts the growth of the nanoparticles. Also, the mesoporous carbon matrix buffers the stress of the volume changes, keeping the structural integrity in the charging and discharging process. This biocarbon network structure ensures not only intimate contact between the liquid electrolyte and the active nanoparticles, but also high electronic conductivity for both facile mass transfer and charge transfer, which results in good cycle performance and rate performance. Furthermore, the in situ nanocomposite linkages between nanoparticles with the active biocarbon network can effectively increase the tap density of the active particles to give a high volumetric energy density. (5) More importantly, this meticulous design and ingenious nanostructure material provides a simple, cost-effective way to use abundant renewable resources to develop high-performance lithium battery materials. This development would lead to a significant reduction in the cost of large-scale energy storage, thus accelerating its market penetration. Recent studies have shown that various natural materials (such as yeast cells, crab shells, spirulina, pollen grains, rice husks, multiple viruses, proteins, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and DNA etc.) have subtle hierarchical nanostructures and they can be used as nucleating agents, structural templates and carbon sources to fabricate hierarchical carbon-coated-nanostructure composite materials of LIBs.6,8,71,74,79,83,108,115,117
3. Biotemplate synthesis of cathode materials
3.1. LiFePO4
Olivine-structure lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4), a promising cathode with a high theoretical capacity (170 mA h g−1), can satisfy the needs for high-power rechargeable LIBs, which are currently under the research spotlight. However, the semi-conductive nature of LiFePO4 is a key barrier to its commercial application. The poor Li-ion conductivity of LiFePO4 is caused by the one-dimensional diffusion of Li+ ions along the edge-shared chains (b-axis) of the LiO6 octahedron. The lack of mixed valency causes the poor electronic conductivity due to the poor solubility between LiFePO4 and FePO4 and the highly localized Fe2+ or Fe3+ ions.48 In this context, scientists have made efforts to improve the electrical conductivity of LiFePO4, such as designing carbon nanocomposites.49–51 The research results shows that these particular LiFePO4/C nanocomposites can improve the diffusion of lithium ions in the solid state, and the carbon matrix contributes to enhancing the electronic conductivity.52–54 To achieve a high electrochemical performance of LiFePO4 confronting with low intrinsic electronic and ionic conductivities, a decrease in the particle size and the nano-layer of carbon coating on the surface of LiFePO4 nanoparticles are necessary measures. Sun et al.27 summarized how carbon coating quality effects the properties of LiFePO4/C composites. Hosono et al.55 built electron-transfer pathway models for LiFePO4 particles partially coated with carbon (Fig. 2a) and compared them with typical nano-size LiFePO4 particles with complete carbon coating (Fig. 2b). As displayed in Fig. 2a, during the intercalation process, the electrons cannot reach all the positions where Li+ ion intercalation occurs, which generates polarization of the electrode. Considering the one-dimensional Li+ ion diffusion in the framework,56 full coating with carbon ensures that the LiFePO4 particles receive electrons from all directions (shown in Fig. 2b), which, as a result, further alleviates this polarization phenomenon.
 Fig. 2  (a) Electron-transfer pathway for LiFePO4 particles partially coated with carbon. (b) Designed ideal structure for LiFePO4 particles with typical nano-size and a complete carbon coating.55 Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Thus, the ideal structure for high-performance LiFePO4 should contain nano-sized particles completely coated with conductive carbon. With inherent merits including low toxicity, low cost, long cycle ability and high safety,57–59 LiFePO4 has been developed to enhance its low electronic and ionic conductivity.48,60,61 Strategies to surmount the demerits can be classified into four categories62 (Fig. 3): (1) enhancing the bulk properties in terms of electronic and ionic conductivity, such as doping metal ions in the lattice;63–66 (2) forming a Li+-conductive surface layer, such as coating with a lithium super ionic glass phase;67 (3) forming an electron-conductive surface layer, such as carbon coating;27,55,68 and (4) reducing the characteristic length of the particles.49,54,69,70 Whereas the four strategies mentioned above are described separately, actually, the improvement in material properties leading to better rate performances results from a combination of the strategies.
 Fig. 3  Four strategies to enhance rate performance of LiFePO4.62 Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.1.1. LiFePO4 nano-arrays synthesized by tobacco mosaic virus. 
Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) is a cylindrical particle with high aspect ratio, consisting of ∼2100 identical coat protein subunits assembled onto a positive strand of RNA producing a nanorod of 300 nm in length, 18 nm in diameter and containing a 4 nm inner channel. The genetic addition of a cysteine (cys) residue at the N-terminus of each coat protein subunit allows for the self-assembly engineering of LiFePO4 microbatteries with an architectured hierarchical function. Zhang et al.71 used TMV as “bottom-up” templates for fabricating LiFePO4-based nanoforest cathode arrays with a multilayered hierarchy that functions synergistically to store and deliver energy in a small footprint at high-level efficiency and stability. Within the TMV-enabled dense nanoforest cathodes, not only are ionic and electronic migration lengths significantly reduced, but also the mechanical and electrochemical stresses between the intercalation host (LiFePO4) and the main current collector are minimized. The resultant multilayered C/LiFePO4/Ti/Ni composites with a shell–core–shell structure show excellent electrochemical performance; the detailed recombination process is displayed in Fig. 4. Here, in each microbattery cell the Ni layer plays the role of current collector, which directs the electronic pathway. The purpose of the Ti sublayer between Ni and LiFePO4 can be summed up as follows: (1) to prevent the electrochemical oxidation of Ni during charging; (2) to relieve Ni diffusion into LiFePO4 during the high-temperature annealing process;72 and (3) to strengthen the adhesion between LiFePO4 and the “nano current collectors” so as to minimize potential capacity loss caused by the mechanical stresses that occur during the electrochemical lithiation/delithiation process.
 Fig. 4  Schematic description of TMV-templated near-vertical assembly of a LiFePO4 nanoforest on a current collector with multilayered nanohierarchical arrangement of active materials and electron conducting pathway.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) element mapping show the structure and thickness of each layer in a single LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanorod after annealing (Fig. 5).71Fig. 5a shows the hierarchy of Ti/Ni metal nanorods with a diameter of ∼80 nm and an LiFePO4 shell with a thickness of ∼200 nm. Furthermore, we can see within each LiFePO4 nanorod that there is a Ti/Ni core that could straightway connect to the main current collector, which would allow the active shell LiFePO4 to maintain a close electrical connection along the entire length of the nanorod during the electrochemical lithiation/delithiation process. Fig. 5b shows that the lattice spacing of the LiFePO4 nanocrystal is 0.507 nm in accordance with the (200) plane. The angle of 48° marked in Fig. 5b indicates that Li-ions can easily diffuse into the LiFePO4 shell from the electrolyte since the Li-ion can only transport in the b axis direction. Fig. 5c–f demonstrates that the Ti sublayer (10 nm) effectively restrains the diffusion of the Ni (∼50 nm thick) into the LiFePO4 layer (∼200 nm), and as a result prevents the Ni sublayer from oxidation during charging and minimizes the capacity loss.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire after annealing at 500 °C for 2 h. (b) the high-resolution TEM image of the LiFePO4 crystal. The red triangle marked in part b is Li-ion diffusion channel (b axis direction). (c–f) The EDS mapping profiles in the red mapping rectangle were marked in part a for Ni (c), Ti (d), Fe (e), and P (f). (g) TEM image of LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire after 450 cycles at a 1 C rate. TEM image of C/LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire (h) before charge/discharge cycle and (i) and enlarged view of part h and (j) image after 450 charge/discharge cycles at a 1 C rate.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The electrochemical performances of the different cathodes were evaluated and compared by charge–discharge tests in Fig. 6. Fig. 6a shows the charge and discharge profiles of different samples at a 0.1 C charge/discharge current. The reversible electrochemical reaction plateaus around 3.4 V, which is the characteristic phase transition between FePO4 and LiFePO4. In comparison with the 2D LiFePO4/Ti thin film cathode, two 3D LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanoforest cathodes with and without a carbon coating show higher discharge capacity. The carbon coating cathode (3D C/LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanoforest) delivered the best discharge capacity of 165 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C. Fig. 6b shows the cycling stability and Coulombic efficiency of the different cathodes. The 3D C/LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanoforest cathode also delivered the best cycling stability and highest Coulombic efficiency, only decaying 0.014% per cycle during cycling at 1 C for 450 cycles, while the corresponding Coulombic efficiency quickly rises to ∼100% after the first 5 cycles. Obviously, the flat potential plateau of the carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanoforest cathode is due to the strong Li–polaron coupling that leads the Li+ and electrons to migrate together in an olivine lattice.73 The enhancement of the electronic conductivity by carbon coating increases the Li+ mobility while reducing the diffusion overpotential during phase change. Fig. 5g–j also indicates that the carbon coating helps to stabilize the surface morphology of the LiFePO4 layer.
 Fig. 6  (a) Potential profiles of C/LiFePO4/Ti/Ni, LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire forest cathodes, and LiFePO4/Ti thin film cathode at 0.1 C charge/discharge current. (b) Cycling stability and Coulombic efficiency of LiFePO4 cathodes at 1 C.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2. Spiral hierarchical LiFePO4 synthesized by naturally-shaped spirulina. 
Spirulina is a microscopic blue-green alga in the shape of a spiral coil with a high amount of protein, in which carbon (C) and phosphorus (P) are the main elements. Therefore, spirulina with its specific biological structure is both a very promising biotemplate and a renewable carbon source for preparing LiFePO4/C composites. Xia et al.74 performed biotemplating using native spirulina to synthesize hierarchical LiFePO4/C microstructures. Fig. 7a illustrates a schematic drawing of the main preparation process, which is via a facile and easy-to-obtain synthesis method. Fig. 7b shows that the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of samples before and after heat treatment are well matched to the diffraction peaks of pure LiFePO4 phase. Fig. 7c is a typical optical microscope image of native spirulina ca. 20 μm in width and ca. 200 μm in length, exhibiting a spiral structure consisting of large numbers of single cells. The spiral hierarchical structure of the heat-treated sample comprised of numerous nano-grains is shown in Fig. 7d, indicating that it keeps its original spiral morphology during the heat treatment. The grain size is 50 to 400 nm, and these grains are attached to each other, forming a porous hierarchical structure.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the hierarchically spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C. (b) XRD patterns of spirulina-templated LiFePO4 samples: as prepared (bottom) and after being heat-treated at 650 °C (top). (c) An optical microscope image of native spirulina. (d) SEM image of a heat-treated sample. (e) HRTEM image taken from the edge of two different LiFePO4 nanoparticles. The inset in (e) is the corresponding FFT image.74 Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The BET specific surface area of the LiFePO4/C composite is ca. 22.03 m2 g−1, and the average pore diameter is ca. 25 nm. Fig. 7e shows the high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image and the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) image of the LiFePO4 particle. The d-spacing values of the adjacent lattice planes are 0.4327 nm (marked in Fig. 7e), corresponding to the (101) planes of orthorhombic LiFePO4. A carbon layer with thickness of 3–5 nm can be clearly seen on the surface of LiFePO4 grains.
The electrochemical performances of the spirulina-templated samples were evaluated by charge–discharge tests, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic voltammogram (CV) methods in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) and (b) exhibit the rate and cycling performances of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C electrodes at various current rates of 0.1–5 C. The discharge capacity is 141 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.1 C. The discharge profile at 1 C has a flat discharge voltage plateau (Fig. 8a). Even at the 5 C rate, the discharge voltage plateau is still higher than 3 V, indicating a lower polarization. Furthermore, Fig. 8b shows that the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C composite cathode also displays excellent cycling stability at different discharge rates. Fig. 8c shows CV curves for the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C sample. The reduction and oxidation peaks appear at 3.31 and 3.56 V, respectively. After 10 cycles, the CV curves of the first and tenth cycles still overlap well, suggesting good structural stability of the electrode material. The Nyquist plots of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C electrode show a semicircle followed by a sloping line with increasing frequency (see Fig. 8d). The Rct of the LiFePO4/C electrode is 87.1 Ω at the first cycle and 80.3 Ω after 10 cycles. This obvious reduction in the Rct with cycling may be attributed to the porous structure, allowing better electrolyte penetration, thus achieving a higher surface area and reducing the charge transfer resistance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Discharge profiles of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C sample in the voltage from 2.5–4.2 V at various current rates. (b) The rate and cycling performances of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C sample. (c) Cyclic voltammograms for the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C sample at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (d) Impedance spectra of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C electrodes at the first and tenth cycle with the frequency range of 10−1–10−6 Hz. The inset is an equivalent circuit of impedance spectra.74 Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3. Biomass of phytic acid as a novel and eco-friendly phosphorus source. 
Known as inositol hexakisphosphate, phytic acid (PA) is a common natural compound with the chemical formula of C6H6 (H2PO4)6. The biomass is the main storage form of phosphorus in many plant tissues, with the ability to chelate many mineral ions such as Fe2+, Fe3+, Ca2+, Mg2+ and Zn2+ due to its high negative charges on the surface.75 In view of the high phosphorus content, extensive sources and strong interaction, Su et al.76 used PA as both a template and a phosphorus source for fabricating self-assembled LiFePO4/C nano/microspheres that exhibited good morphology and electrochemistry performance. The experiment was performed via a hydrothermal method, and the obtained LiFePO4 microspheres were formed by the aggregation of smaller units of nanocrystals (Fig. 9a shows the formation mechanism), while the nanosized building blocks of LiFePO4 can shorten the Li+ migration length and improve LiFePO4 kinetics.77,78Fig. 9b displays a typical SEM image of the as-synthesized LiFePO4 products, and shows that the sample is mainly composed of microspheres with diameters from 0.5 to 2 μm. The inset in Fig. 9b shows a high-magnification SEM image of a single LiFePO4 microsphere, which is made from many ordered nanoparticles with grain size less than 100 nm. In addition, the HRTEM image (Fig. 9c) reveals that there is an amorphous carbon coating layer with a thickness of 4–6 nm uniformly covering the surface of the LiFePO4 grains, which will enhance the electrical conductivity of the LiFePO4 particles. Fig. 10 presents the electrochemical characterizations of the LiFePO4/C nano/microspheres, exhibiting a high reversible specific capacity of 155 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C, as well as excellent rate capability and cycling performance.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly of LiFePO4 nano/microspheres templated by biomass PA. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the as-synthesized LiFePO4 nano/microspheres.76 Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 10  Electrochemical characterizations of the biomass PA synthesized LiFePO4/C nano/microspheres in the voltage range of 2.2–4.2 V (vs. Li+/Li). (a) Glavanostatic charge/discharge voltage profiles at 0.1 C at different cycle numbers. (b) Discharge voltage profiles at various discharge rates. (c) Rate performance. (d) Cycling performance at 1 C.76 Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


3.1.4. Fabricating biocarbon-coated LiFePO4 nucleus nanoparticles using Baker's yeast cells. 
Zhang et al.79 synthesized biocarbon-coated LiFePO4 nucleus nanoparticles (BC-LFP-NN) via a simple green biomimetic method, using yeast cells as both a structural template and a biocarbon source. According to their report, hydrophilic anion groups in biomacromolecules on a cell wall surface can improve the mineralization ability of yeast cells, as well as regulate crystal nucleation and growth.80Fig. 11 illustrates the synthesis process and formation mechanism of the sample BC-LFP-NN. During the cultivation of yeast cells, the macromolecule metabolites with hydrophilic anion groups and negative charges, including extracellular polysaccharides and proteins, are produced on the cell surface.81Fig. 11a–c exhibits the adsorption, deposition and self-assembly mechanism of FePO4 nanoparticles in yeast cells. In situ precipitation of FePO4 occurs on the yeast cell wall and inside the cell by means of genetic engineering and natural bioassemblies. The self-assembly of the FePO4 nanoparticles with biomacromolecules in yeast cell form biomolecules-coated FePO4 nucleus nanoparticles. The further assembly of the biomolecules-coated FePO4 nucleus nanoparticles form FePO4–yeast cell microspheres. By mixing the FePO4–yeast cell microspheres with LiOH and calcining in a reducing atmosphere, BC-LFP-NN was synthesized that possessed outstanding morphology: nano-sized, nuclei–shell, mesoporous and spherical in shape (as illustrated in Fig. 11d), which definitely results in good electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 11  (a–c) Illustrations of the synthesis procedure and formation mechanism of FePO4–yeast cell microspheres. (d) Schematic structure drawing of BC-LFP-NN derived from yeast cells.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 12a–g shows the SEM, TEM and HRTEM images of the BC-LFP-NN sample. The BC-LFP-NN sample have a spherical or elliptical morphology similar to yeast cells and a size distribution from 2–8 μm. The BC-LFP-NN microsphere is composed of densely aggregated LiFePO4 nanoparticle coated by a biocarbon cage and pores between particles. Particularly, the HRTEM images (Fig. 12e–g) feature the nanocomposite structure and the biocarbon network structure of the sample, the spherical nuclei–shell structure of a LiFePO4 nanoparticle coated by a biocarbon cage and has a primary particle size of 3–5 nm with distorted lattice fringes. The distorted crystal structure of the LiFePO4/C composite is illustrated in Fig. 12i. Compared with pure LiFePO4 crystal structure (Fig. 12h, V = 0.290 nm3), the unit cell volume (Fig. 12i, V = 0.291 nm3) of the LiFePO4/C composite slightly increases, expanding the 1D Li diffusion channels along the b-axis inside the LiFePO4 nuclei. Fig. 12j displays the characteristic charge/discharge curve of the LiFePO4/C composite at a current rate of 0.2 C, the initial discharge capacity is 163 mA h g−1, and after 100 cycles it has only 0.9% capacity loss from the initial value. Encapsulation of a LiFePO4 nanoparticle in a protein cage molecule is a promising way to improve its electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 12  The morphology characterizations of the BC-LFP-NN sample. (a) and (b) SEM images of different magnified regions. (c) TEM image. (d–g) The magnified HRTEM images of the partial area in (c). (h) Representation of the crystal structure and possible lithium paths of LiFePO4 olivine.82 (i) The distorted crystal structure of the LiFePO4 spherical nuclei completely coated by the mesoporous biocarbon cage, and possible lithium and electron pathways. (j) The charge and discharge curves of the BC-LFP-NN cathode of different numbers of cycles at rate of 0.2 C. (k) The inset shows representation of possible lithium paths in LiFePO4 nuclei–carbon nanocage structure.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.5. Fabricating high-energy quantum dots in ultra-thin nanosheets of LiFePO4 with the high-energy biomolecule ATP. 
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a high-energy biomolecule and its critical part is the phosphorus part–the triphosphate. There are high-energy phosphorus bonds in the triphosphate, which can be used as a phosphorus source and a nucleating agent for active iron phosphate growth during the synthesis of LiFePO4. During incubation, the high-energy phosphorus bonds of ATP exhibit increased interactions with Fe cations and form HEQDs in LiFePO4 nanoparticles during pyrolytic degradation. ATP-enhanced electrochemical performances of the nanostructured LiFePO4 were first demonstrated by Zhang et al.83 In this work, a new technique was developed for fabricating high-energy quantum dots (HEQDs) in ultra-thin LiFePO4 nanosheets and synthesizing the mesoporous biocarbon nanowire coating LiFePO4 with HEQDs (MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs) using ATP as a phosphorus source, a nucleating agent, a structural template and a biocarbon source. Fig. 13 is an illustration of the synthesis mechanism and process, with characteristics of the biomolecule ATP and a structural model of MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs. Malik et al.84 demonstrated that most channels in small-enough nanoparticles are unblocked, making all sites accessible by very rapid migration of Li+ through the channels. The quantum confinement effect and tuning of the electrochemical performances generate a breakthrough theoretical capacity of LiFePO4.
 Fig. 13  A biological method: self-assembly and multiple functions of ATP high-energy biomolecules. (a) A schematic presentation of the multifunctional ATP biomolecule. (b) A schematic diagram of self-assembly of the multifunctional ATP biomolecules with iron phosphate. (c) Structural model of MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs. (d) A schematic drawing of a battery using MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs as cathodes. (e) Schematic illustration of Li+ diffusion in the two-dimensional channel of MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs. Black curves represent the two dimensional diffusion pathways for Li ions in the lattice.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 14a and b show HRTEM images of the LiFePO4 nanosheet with HEQDs and a normal crystalline LiFePO4 nanoparticle (ULFPNP) without HEQDs, respectively. It is clear that Fig. 14a shows a brighter background (the β Li-rich phase) than that shown in Fig. 14b, implying that the particle shown in Fig. 14a is thinner. Fig. 14a shows that the HEQDs with an average size of about 3 nm are mosaiced in an ultra-thin LiFePO4 nanosheet. The existence of HEQDs in the LiFePO4 structure was also verified by the AFM image (Fig. 14c) and the fluorescent micrograph (Fig. 14e) of the MBCNW-LFP-HEQD sample. The quantum dots act as fast pathways for Li+ ions and provide ultra-active sites for Li+ ions in LiFePO4, altering the LiFePO4 phase transition pathways during the electrochemical process. To demonstrate this effect, the first discharge and charge profiles of the MBCNW-LFP-HEQD cathode (A) and the ULFPNP cathode (B) at the 0.1 C rate are compared (Fig. 14f), with the MBCNW-LFP-HEQD cathode able to break through the theoretical capacity of LiFePO4 and deliver the higher first discharge capacity of 197 mA h g−1 (116% of the theoretical value). Worthy of the name, ATP really is a high-energy molecule.
 Fig. 14  Characterizations of HEQDs. (a) HRTEM image of HEQDs (area containing the red ring) embedded in an ultra-thin LiFePO4 nanosheet in the MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs sample. (b) HRTEM image of a ULFPNP, only showing lattice fringes, LiαFePO4 (α-Li-poor phases), LiβFePO4 (β-Li-rich phases) and binary phase distribution (M-metastable miscibility gap). (c) AFM image shows the size and height distributions of HEQDs embedded in an ultra-thin LiFePO4 nanosheet. (d) Li ion pathway diagrams in ULFPNP (B) and MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs (A). (e) Fluorescent micrograph of the MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs sample, which exhibits green fluorescence at the excitation wavelengths of 480 nm. (f) The first discharge and charge profiles of the MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs cathode (A) and the ULFPNP cathode (B) at 0.1 C rate using CR 2032 coin cells.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
By manipulating two genes, Belcher et al.6 equipped viruses with peptide groups with an affinity for single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) on one end. The results show that peptides capable of nucleating amorphous iron phosphate (a-FePO4) fused to the viral major coat protein. The virus clone with the greatest affinity toward SWNTs enabled power performance of a-FePO4 comparable to that of crystalline lithium iron phosphate (c-LiFePO4) and showed excellent capacity retention upon cycling at 1 C.
More interestingly, by using the different kinds of biotemplates, including virus, spirulina, PA, yeast cells and ATP, high-performance LiFePO4/C nanocomposites can be synthesized and used to enhance the electrochemical performances of LIBs. The synthesis mechanism studies have demonstrated that the biomolecules as multifunctional biotemplates are able to control the formation of LiFePO4 nanoparticles. The mesoporous biocarbon network structure formed by biotemplates ensures not only intimate contact between the liquid electrolyte and the active LiFePO4 nanoparticles, but also high electronic conductivity for both facile mass transfer and facile charge transfer. Through biomimetic material design, the LiFePO4 cathode material can display superior electrochemical performance and behavior.

3.2. Li3V2 (PO4)3/C microspheres
Among the cathode materials, it has been suggested that monoclinic Li3V2 (PO4)3 offers an optimal combination of high operating voltage, high lithium capacity, good ion mobility and excellent thermal stability. The monoclinic Li3V2 (PO4)3 exhibits four redox plateaus around 3.62, 3.68, 4.08 and 4.55 V,85–88 the theoretical capacity of which is the highest of all phosphates mentioned above.9 However, Li3V2 (PO4)3 also has a low electronic conductivity of about 2.3 × 10−8 S cm−1 at 27 °C,89 which presents a major drawback for practical implementation of the materials. Barker et al. first introduced a carbothermal reduction method to synthesize Li3V2 (PO4)3/C using carbon black as the carbon source, and the electronic conductivity of the materials was greatly improved by the residual carbon.90 Recently, Wang et al. reported a Li3V2 (PO4)3/C thin film synthesized via a electrostatic spray deposition using glucose as the carbon precursor.91 The results exhibited superior rate characteristics, as well as excellent cycle characteristics at different rates. Very recently, we have established an approach by which we are able to prepare Li3V2 (PO4)3 (LVP) nanoparticles covered with amorphous carbon, which simultaneously constitute mesoporous microspheres through the biomineralization assembly process.92 In this work, the Li3V2 (PO4)3 nanoparticles covered with carbon are denominated as LVP-C, and are a kind of nanocomposite, whereas the mesoporous microspheres composed of those nanoparticles are abbreviated as LVP-C microspheres. A crucial step of this approach is to use low-cost microbe yeast cells as templates. During the biomimetic mineralization process, Li3V2 (PO4)3 replicates the hierarchical nanostructures of a Baker's yeast cell (Fig. 15a–d). These microspheres are composed of densely aggregated nanoparticles (20–40 nm) as well as interconnected nanopores (2–15 nm), and hence they are of mesoporous nature. The nanoparticles can be easily brought into contact with the electrolyte and the open mesoporous structure allows lithium ions to easily penetrate into the microspheres. Fig. 15e shows that the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the synthesized samples with different addition amount of dry yeast are well matched to diffraction peaks of pure Li3V2 (PO4)3 phase. The carbon network (16.4 wt%) on the surface of the Li3V2 (PO4)3 nanoparticles facilitates electron diffusion. The mesoporous LVP-C microspheres have a high discharge capacity (about 126.7 mA h g−1), only 2% capacity loss of the initial value at the 50th cycle at the current density of 0.2 C, and a high rate capacity of 100.5 mA h g−1 at 5 C in the region of 3.0–4.3 V (Fig. 15f and g). The apparent Li+ diffusion coefficient is found to be 6.76 × 10−10 cm2 s−1. The microspheres could be an ideal cathode-active material that fulfills the requirements of rechargeable lithium batteries for high-power applications.
 Fig. 15  Formation mechanism of mesoporous nanocomposite of Li3V2 (PO4)3 with amorphous carbon (LVP-C). (a) Schematic drawing of the structure templating mechanism of the biomimetic mineralization process of LVP-C. (b) TEM image of living yeast cells. (c) TEM image of yeast cell after adding Li+, VO2+, PO43− into the bioemulsion. (d) TEM image of LVP-C. (e) XRD patterns for the synthesized samples with different addition amounts of dry yeast; (A) LVP (without yeast), (B) LVP-C-1 (20 g L−1 yeast), (C) LVP-C-2 (40 g L−1 yeast), (D) LVP-C-3 (60 g L−1 yeast). (f) The initial charge–discharge curves and (g) cycling performance of the LVP and LVP-C-2 samples between 3.0 and 4.3 V at different rates (1 C = 133 mA h g−1).92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3. LMO microtube nanocomposites
Spinel LiMn2O4 (LMO) is a low-cost, environmentally friendly, and highly abundant material for Li-ion battery cathodes, which has a theoretical charge storage capacity of 148 mA h g−1.93–96 Nanostructure electrode materials have been proven to enhance power performance due to the large specific surface area, which allows for sufficient contact between the electrode and the electrolyte.97–102 Microbial transformations possessing a primary pathway for the formation of Mn oxides in nature provide potential for material-oriented researchers to fabricate hierarchical LMO materials. By manipulating the solution chemistry and using the Mn-oxidizing fungus Paraconiothyrium sp. WL-2 as a bio-oxidizer as well as a biotemplate, Yu et al.103 synthesized lithium manganese oxide microtubes (LMO-MTs). Their delithiated products (HMO-MTs) have almost the same structure of microtubes assembling by nanoscale particles, indicating a strong structural stability through the lithiation/delithiation process. Biogenic birnessite (BB) is used as a Mn source to synthesize LMOs because of its ubiquity in the natural environment. Fig. 16(a) shows the schematic illustration of the synthesis of LMO-MTs and the delithiated products (HMO-MTs). The detailed nanostructures of LMO-MTs (Fig. 16b and c) and HMO-MTs (Fig. 16d and e), are characterized in the SEM and TEM images. The SEM image (Fig. 16b and d) shows microtubes with a wall thickness of ca. 200 nm, and a length of 10–15 μm. The TEM image (Fig. 16c and e) shows that these hierarchical microtubes are composed of nano-sized octahedral crystals with a grain size of 20–50 nm. The inner-diameter of the LMO-MTs is ca. 1 μm, which is similar to the size of hyphae of the fungus Paraconiothyrium sp. WL-2. The HMO-MTs were obtained after acid-washing of LMO-MTs with 0.1 mol L−1 HCl for 12 h, and the microtube morphology was mostly preserved, demonstrating the strong structural stability maintained through the process of lithiation/delithiation. Furthermore, considering that the hollow structure can facilitate ionic motion and alleviate the volume expansion during lithiation/delithiation, the microtube LMO nanocomposites are proposed to have diverse applications, such as in lithium-ion batteries or devices.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of LMO-MTs and HMO-MTs. (b, d) SEM images and (c, e) TEM images of (b, c) LMO-MTs after calcinating at 500 °C for 4 h and (d, e) HMO-MTs after acid- washing of LMO-MTs with 0.1 mol L−1 HCl for 12 h.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier. 
4. Biotemplate synthesis of anode materials
In conventional LIBs, non-renewable graphite materials are exclusively used as anodes. The graphite anodes have a limited specific theoretical capacity of 372 mA h g−1. Additionally, carbon materials suffer from capacity degradation due to irreversible side reactions that occur at the electrode/electrolyte interface between lithium ions, the solvent, and the anode surface during charge–discharge cycles, which is a common failing of anode materials.104 Nowadays, the graphite materials cannot meet the ever-growing performance demands of next-generation LIBs because of increasingly serious issues in natural resource depletion and mining-induced environmental pollution.105–107 Therefore, how to provide low-cost, environmentally friendly, high-power and renewable anode materials is a great challenge. To circumvent these issues and exploit superior anode materials, one effective approach is to introduce a second component to constitute hybrid nanostructure anodes. Recently, a number of renewable biotemplate-based materials have been fabricated and used in anode materials of LIBs.
4.1. Transition metal oxides
Tao et al.8 successfully synthesized hierarchically porous NiO/C microspheres via a facile biotemplating method using natural porous lotus pollen grains as both the carbon source and the template. Fig. 17 illustrates the synthesis mechanism. The resultant NiO nanoparticles are in the shape of nanowalls growing directly on the surface of the carbonized pollen, forming good adhesion and better electrical contact between NiO and the porous biocarbon, which enhances the kinetics of NiO during cycling under multiple current rates. The specific capacities of the porous NiO/C nanocomposites after every 10 cycles at 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 3 A g−1 are about 698, 608, 454 and 352 mA h g−1 (Fig. 18a and b). Belcher et al.17 also used M13 viruses to assemble nanowires of Co3O4 at room temperature and formed hybrid gold–cobalt oxide wires by incorporating gold-binding peptides into the filament coat. Combining virus-templated synthesis at the peptide level and methods for controlling two-dimensional assembly of viruses on polyelectrolyte multilayers provides a systematic platform for integrating these nanomaterials to form thin, flexible lithium ion batteries. Thereafter, Shim et al.108 synthesized hollow-rod-type porous Co3O4 nanostructures by using Gram-positive bacteria, Bacillus subtilis, as the soft templates. The cell wall of this extensively studied bacterium is composed of a thick, multilayered peptidoglycan sheath outside of the plasma membrane. The phosphate groups in the form of phosphodiesters of teichoic and lipoteichoic acids that were linked to and embedded in the peptidoglycan contributed to the highly negative surface charge.108,109 Wall teichoic acid chains and carbonyl groups of peptidoglycan bound the positive Co2+ ions through an electrostatic interaction. The resultant Co3O4 nanoclusters were successfully grown on the surface of bacteria by the genetic biomineralization process. The mean crystallite size was estimated to be 6.6 nm from the calculation of the halfwidth of the XRD peak of the Co3O4 (311) plane using Scherrer's equation. These Co3O4 nanostructures exhibited an enhanced Coulombic efficiency as well as an excellent reversible specific capacity of 1000, 936, and 903 mA h g−1 after 1, 10, and 20 cycles, respectively. The porous nanostructures of the hollow Co3O4 can effectively accommodate the mechanical strain, thereby enhancing the cycle stability. Miot et al.109 reported a method based on bacterial iron biomineralization for the synthesis of α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles and their subsequent use as a conversion-based electrode material for Li+ batteries. γ-FeOOH was synthesized at room temperature via the use of an anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizing bacterium Acidovorax sp. strain BoFeN1. After a short heat treatment under air, the BoFeN1/γ-FeOOH assemblies transformed into an alveolar bacteria-free α-Fe2O3 material. These minerals exhibited a controlled texture, consisting of micrometric (1–2 × 0.2 μm) 40 nm thick shells, formed by an assembly of nanometer-scale particles. This alveolar texture accounts for the enhancement of capacity retention and rate capability (70% of the initial capacity recovered at 10 C), favorably comparing with the best performances achieved so far with 3D-Fe3O4 conversion electrodes.110 Zhang et al.7 fabricated hollow porous MnO/C microspheres by using microalgae as the biotemplate. In this structure, MnO nanoparticles were tightly embedded into a porous amorphous carbon matrix and form a penetrative shell. The porous carbon matrix not only improves the electrical connectivity between MnO nanoparticles but also buffers the stress of volume expansion and keeps the structural integrity of the MnO/C microspheres. Due to the unique structure, the hollow porous MnO/C nanocomposite microspheres exhibited a high reversible specific capacity of 700 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and enhanced rate performance of 230 mA h g−1 at 3 A g−1.
 Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the hierarchically porous NiO/carbon nanocomposites microspheres produced by templating of lotus pollen grains.8 Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 18  (a) Charge–discharge profiles of the pollen-templated NiO/C electrodes at various current rates. (b) The rate and cycling performances of the pollen-templated NiO/C electrodes.8 Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2. Silicon

4.2.1. Rice husks—a sustainable source of nanostructured silicon—fabricate high-performance nano-Si anodes. 
The efficient utilization of materials from earth-abundant substances is of strategic significance for industrial processes. Despite Si being the secondary abundant element in the Earth's crust, processes for forming Si nanomaterials are usually complicated, costly and energy-intensive. Due to the large theoretical specific capacity of 4200 mA h g−1, nano-Si has attracted considerable attention as a promising anode material in next generation Li-ion batteries for electric vehicles and portable electronics.111,112 However, during Li insertion and extraction, the structures of Si anode experiences problems with fracturing and pulverization that lead to volume changes. Recent studies have exhibited that reducing the size of silicon to the nanoscale, at least in one dimension, can alleviate the strain and prevent fracture.113–116 Liu et al.117 reported that rice husks (RHs) as an abundant agricultural byproduct, produced at a rate of 1.23108 tons per year, can be converted directly into pure Si nanoparticles (SiNPs). Fig. 19 illustrates the biosynthetic process and a comparison with conventional synthesis method of producing nano-Si.118 Compared with the conventional methods, this biosynthesis of nano-Si has several advantages: (1) The recovered silicon inherits the intrinsic and unique bionanostructure in RHs, which allows for excellent electrochemical property by mitigating pulverization; (2) RHs are a kind of abundant and sustainable materials source; (3) the overall method is facile, energy-saving, and easy-yielding; and (4) it avoids the use of expensive Si precursors or reagents in the synthesis process.
 Fig. 19  A possible low-cost, energy-efficient, green, and large scale production of nano-Si from RHs. (a) Comparison between existing methods118 and the RHs-derived method (highlighted in red) for producing nano-Si. Si(OR)4 denotes silicon alkoxide. (b) A panicle of ripe rice at a rice farm in China (photographed by K. Huo). (c) Flow chart of the process for recovering SiNPs from RHs. R.T. denotes room temperature. (d–g) Optical images of the intermediate substances. The inset of (f) shows an optical microscopy image (0.9 mm × 30.6 mm) of one piece of heat treated RH.115 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The morphology and nanostructures of the RHs converted nano-Si are shown in Fig. 20a–d. Heating HCl-leached RHs at 700 °C in air produces loosely interconnected amorphous SiO2 nanoparticles with diameters distributed around 80 nm (Fig. 20a and e). After magnesiothermic reduction at 650 °C and then etching away of MgO impurities with HCl, Si nanoparticles (Si-RH-5) are obtained with diameters of around 22 nm (Fig. 20e). Here, Si-RH-5 denotes that the heating rate of magnesiothermic reduction is 5 °C min−1, the latter Si-RH-40 mentioned in Fig. 20f denoting the heating rate of 40 °C min−1. The porous nanostructure of Si-RH-5 is exhibited in the SEM and TEM images (Fig. 20b–d). Fig. 20d shows one spherical SiNP and the (111) lattice spacing of crystalline Si is clearly visible. The porous structure of the nanoparticles is also proved by N2 adsorption–desorption test and pore size distribution analysis, with the results shown in Fig. 20f. With the high internal porosity enabling the volume expansion of Si without rupturing the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) at the outer surface, the RHs converted nano-Si has better electrochemical behavior than the commercial metallurgical-grade Si particles (Fig. 20g). The discharge capacity reaches 2790 mA h g−1 for the first cycle at C/50; and after 98 cycles at C/5, the RH derived nano-Si still delivers 2200 mA h g−1, while the capacity of the metallurgical-grade Si drops below 500 mA h g−1 after only 20 cycles. The uniquely small size, high porosity and interconnectedness of the nano-Si converted from RHs are the key to achieving such high performance.
 Fig. 20  (a) SEM images of SiO2 obtained by leached RHs at 700 °C. (b) SEM images of nano-Si obtained by magnesiothermic reduction of nano-SiO2 with ramp rates of 5 °C min−1. (c) and (d) TEM images of Si-RH-5 at different magnifications. The high-resolution TEM image (d) shows one spherical SiNP and the (111) lattice spacing of crystalline Si is clearly visible (the red line indicates the boundary of the SiNP). (e) Statistical analysis of particle sizes of nano-SiO2 shown in (a) and nano-Si (Si-RH-5) reduced from it. (f) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of nano-SiO2 and the Si samples reduced from it. Inset: pore size distribution. (g) Galvanostatic cycling of nano-Si recovered from RHs and commercial metallurgical-grade Si particles. Both electrodes were cycled at C/50 for the first cycle, C/20 for the second cycle, and C/5 for the later cycles. The nano-Si electrodes were tested between 1 V and 0.01 V versus Li/Li+ with PVDF binder.117 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited. 


4.2.2. Crab shells as sustainable natural templates for nanostructured anodes. 
Rational nanostructure design without expensive starting materials and elaborate processing has been a promising route to address critical materials issues for enabling next-generation high capacity lithium ion batteries. Crab shells are a sustainable natural resource, since 1.5 million tons of crabs are consumed yearly, engendering about 0.5 million tons of crab shells as waste.119 Crab exoskeletons are genetically programmed by nature with unique structures, consisting of highly mineralized chitin–protein nanofibers with an average diameter of 60 nm arranged in a twisted plywood or Bouligand pattern with bioceramic CaCO3.120–123 Inspired by the distinct structure, using crab shells as biotemplates, Yao et al.119 fabricated hollow carbon nanofibers encapsulating sulfur and silicon to form cathodes and anodes for Li-ion batteries. Here, we draw attention to the fabrication of the silicon encapsulated in crab shell-templated carbon for anodes.
As illustrated in Fig. 21a, the hollow nanochannels after removing the organic nanofibers are arranged parallel to each other, forming horizontal planes accumulated in a helicoid fashion, creating a twisted plywood structure. The nanochannel array structures are of universal presence in crab shells of various common varieties (shown in Fig. 21b–e). Fig. 22 demonstrates the characteristic nanostructure of the stone crab shell template and a schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for electrode materials. The nanoscale channels in the CaCO3 templates obtained from the stone crab shells possess high packing density and uniform pore sizes, as featured in Fig. 22a–c. The diameter distribution of these nanoscale channels (Fig. 22d) shows the medial diameter of 70 nm. The procedure for fabricating nanostructured C/Si anodes from these templates is illustrated in Fig. 22e. The hollow carbon nanofiber has an inner diameter of about 65 nm and a length up to tens of micrometers. The active material of Si is effectively confined in these high aspect-ratio hollow carbon nanofibers, which is important for reducing deleterious interactions of the active material with the electrolyte.122,123 The hollow nanostructures are also essential for providing sufficient space for the volume expansion of Si during the discharge/charge processes. Furthermore, the thin walls of the hollow carbon, allowing rapid lithium ion transport from the electrolyte to the active materials of Si through the one-dimensional structure, enable fast electron transfer from the current collector to the active materials. The good electrochemical performance of the C/Si anode confirmed these effects. As shown in Fig. 23a, the reversible specific capacity of the crab shell templated C/Si composite anodes can be maintained at around 2010 mA h g−1 and 1690 mA h g−1 without any capacity decay after 200 cycles at C/2 and 1C, respectively. These specific capacities at different current rates are comparable to or even better than that of silicon anodes produced from anodized aluminum oxide templates and electrospun nanofiber templates.124,125 The Coulombic efficiencies are ∼98.6% at C/2 and ∼98.9% at 1C over 200 cycles. The good rate capability exhibited in Fig. 23b indicates the excellent stability of crab shell-templated C/Si anode materials.
 Fig. 21  Structural model and SEM images of crab shell templates. (a) Structural model of twisted plywood nanochannel arrays in crab shell templates showing the hollow channels created by removing organic nanofibers in crab shells. The hollow channels are arranged parallel to each other to form horizontal planes stacked in a helicoid fashion, creating a twisted plywood structure. (b–e) SEM images of the biotemplates from a Chinese hairy crab shell, a blue crab, a stone crab, and a Dungeness crab, respectively, demonstrating the universal nature of the nanochannel arrays in crab shell templates.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 22  Nanostructure of stone crab shell template and schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for electrode materials. (a–c) SEM images of the cross section of a stone crab shell, a stone crab shell template, and the powder of the stone crab shell template, respectively. The inset in a shows that the length of the stone crab shell is 10.8 cm, and the inset in c shows that about 8 g of powder was produced from one piece of stone crab shell. (d) Diameter distribution statistics for the nanoscale channels in stone crab shell biotemplates. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for hollow carbon nanofiber arrays encapsulating sulfur or silicon electrode materials based on stone crab shell templates.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 23  Electrochemical performance of silicon encapsulated in crab shell-templated carbon for Li-ion battery electrodes. (a) Reversible capacity and Coulombic efficiency at C/2 and 1 C versus cycle number. The cells were activated with a slower rate on the first cycle (C/10). (b) Rate capabilities of the electrode.117 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Compared with previous nanostructure designing of electrodes for advanced lithium ion batteries,125–128 the crab shell nanotemplates have the following interesting features:119 (1) The high surface area of the inner surface benefits the depositing of active materials to retain the high activity of the electrode. (2) The hollow structure of the nanochannel arrays can bear the volume change of the active materials during the charge/discharge processes. (3) One-dimensional hollow structures are important for reducing deleterious interactions of the active material with the electrolyte. (4) Nanowire-like materials templated from nanochannel arrays contribute to rapid Li+ diffusion through the side wall between the active material and the electrolyte to achieve good rate performances through charge/discharge. (5) The crab shell template's only component is CaCO3 and can be easily etched using dilute HCl solution, a relatively environmentally benign route as compared to the HF acid etching of silica templates.124,128,129 This biotemplating concept will inspire new techniques for producing nanostructured electrode materials by making full use of low-cost sustainable sources.
Recent studies, as reviewed above, have demonstrated that biotemplates exhibit various capabilities in designing nanostructural anode materials to address the existing issues such as cycling stability, rate capability, and pronounced volume expansion during charge–discharge cycles. Distinguished from conventional methods, because of the good structural stability and the conductive pathway provided by the well-controlled nanostructures, the anodes synthesized by biotemplate methods exhibit outstanding lithium storage performance with high reversible specific capacity, fast rate capability, and superior capacity retention during cycling. Consequently, the biotemplate method makes itself an attractive technique for the development of high-performance anodes of LIBs.

5. Conclusions and outlooks
In summary, recent studies have demonstrated that bionanotechnology is a facile but versatile technique to use renewable biomass energy to develop high-performance lithium batteries. It is very important to seek a simple and efficient method for the synthesis of electrode materials with uniform carbon coatings. The biotemplate method is an effective method to solve this problem. The mesoporous bionanoarchitecture ensures not only intimate contact between the liquid electrolyte and the active material nanoparticles, but also high electronic conductivity for both facile mass transfer and facile charge transfer. Through biomimetic materials design, the optimizing of carbon structure and significant improvements over conventional lithium-ion battery materials have been achieved. More importantly, many bionanotechnologies have simple processes, low production costs, abundant sources and easy realization of industrialization. As an emerging area, the employment of bionanotechnology in LIBs deserves more extensive investigation in future studies and is of broad general interest to the chemistry, materials science, energy resources and biology communities.
Although many composite cathodes and anodes have been successfully synthesized by using bionanotechnologies and the contributions of biotemplates in improving electrochemical performance have been discussed, the studies in this field are at an early stage. A number of challenges still exist in optimizing materials before real industrial applications become possible, and further developments are required. First of all, the large-scale production of nanocomposites with excellent large current discharge properties and cyclic stability is still challenging, and there is a lot work to do. Especially, a high tap density of the nanocomposite is considered to be an important factor for practical applications. The introduction of carbon decreases the energy density of the material significantly, especially for the volumetric energy density. An effective route to improve the material's tap density is to design novel nanostructures by using bionanotechnologies, including quantum dots, nanocrystal superlattices, aggregated and especially microspheral structures composed of tightly compacted nanocrystallites. Besides, some fundamental questions still remain and need to be investigated in detail. An in-depth study of the surface chemistry of these nanocomposites will direct the optimization of the nature of the nanocomposites. Also, a wide diversity of electrode materials with various compositions and morphologies might be designed by the exploration of critical biomaterials. Thus, bionanotechnologies are expected to be developed as competitive technologies for fabricating high performance lithium-ion batteries and other electrochemical storage devices with a view to addressing various energy-related issues. The future in this area should be enthralling.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51172132, 51272144 and 51472127) for the financial support. They also thank the Projects Supported by the State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology (no. M2013-20).
Notes and references
W. Z. Wu, X. N. Wen and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2013, 340, 952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nassif and J. Livage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 849 RSC .
C. S. Chan, G. D. Stasio, S. A. Welch, M. Girasole, B. H. Frazer, M. V. Nesterova, S. Fakra and J. F. Banfield, Science, 2004, 303, 1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jensen, R. Keding, T. Hoche and Y. Z. Yue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kovalenko, B. Zdyrko and G. Yushin, Science, 2011, 334, 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W.-J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2009, 324, 1051 CAS .
Y. Xia, Z. Xiao, X. Dou, H. Huang, X. H. Lu, R. J. Yan, Y. P. Gan, W. J. Zhu, J. P. Tu, W. K. Zhang and X. Y. Tao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, W. K. Zhang, Z. Xiao, H. Huang, H. J. Zeng, X. R. Chen, F. Chen, Y. P. Gan and X. Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9209 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Y. Fu and B. L. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4634 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Zhang, Z. H. Liu, Q. S. Kong, C. J. Zhang, S. P. Pang, L. P. Yue, X. J. Wang, J. H. Yao and G. L. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 128 CAS .
E. J. Shin, A. Lauve, M. Carey, E. Bukovsky, J. F. Ranville, R. J. Evans and A. M. Herring, Biomass Bioenergy, 2008, 32, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Chu, X. Zhou, K. L. Ren, B. Neese, M. R. Lin, Q. Wang, F. Bauer and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2006, 313, 334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Neese, B. J. Chu, S. G. Lu, Y. Wang, E. Furman and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2008, 321, 821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, B. M. Sanchez, P. J. Dobson and P. S. Grant, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 839 RSC .
K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, P. He and H. S. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 805 CAS .
K. T. Nam, D. W. Kim, P. J. Yoo, C. Y. Chiang, N. Meethong, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2006, 312, 885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, P. Liu, W. G. Jiang, H. H. Pan, X. R. Xu and R. K. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, B. Ankamwar, A. Singh, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kisailus, J. H. Choi, J. C. Weaver, W. Yang and D. E. Morse, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 314 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Bi, X. D. Zhang, W. He, D. D. Min and W. S. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 19744 RSC .
X. D. Zhang, X. G. Zhang and W. He, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 103, 114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Wong, T. Douglas, S. Gider, D. D. Awschalom and S. Mann, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 279 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Chen, Materials, 2013, 6, 156 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Wang and X. L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5163 CAS .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu and D. F. Xue, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Han, S. S. Zhou and Z. B. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, L. Li, Y. Hu and S. T. Lee, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Haque, J. Li, H. C. Wu, X. J. Liang and P. Guo, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2302 CAS .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280 CAS .
C. Z. Yuan, B. Gao, L. F. Shen, S. D. Yang, L. Hao, X. J. Lu, F. Zhang, L. J. Zhang and X. G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 529 RSC .
B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Wu, S. H. Yu, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wickson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mann, Nature, 1993, 365, 499 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Fan and D. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Shim, A. H. Lim, K. M. Min and D. W. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6747 RSC .
S. R. Hall, V. M. Swinerd, F. N. Newby, A. M. Collins and S. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 598 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Huang, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, W. K. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. P. Gan, Z. Xiao, L. C. Qian and X. Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6498 RSC .
Z. Schnepp, W. Yang, M. Antonietti and C. Giordano, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Zhi, G. C. Liang, L. Wang, X. Q. Ou, J. P. Zhang and J. Y. Cui, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Y. Hu, R. O. Hayre and Z. P. Shao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7151 RSC .
S. Y. Chung, J. G. Kim, Y. M. Kim and Y. B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liu, D. W. Liu, Q. F. Zhang, D. M. Yu, J. Liu and G. Z. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5300 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gibot, M. Casas-Cabanas, L. Laffont, S. Levasseur, P. Carlach, S. Hamelet, J. M. Tarascon and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Hu, F. Y. Wu, C. T. Lin, A. N. Khlobystov and L. J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1687 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, Y. R. Wang, E. Hosono, K. X. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Morgan, A. Van der Ven and G. Ceder, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Lee, W. H. Kan and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Yuan, Z. H. Wang, W. X. Zhang, X. L. Hu, J. T. Chen, Y. H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 269 CAS .
M. S. Islam, D. J. Driscoll, C. A. J. Fisher and P. R. Slater, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5085 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maxisch, F. Zhou and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2006, 73, 104301 CrossRef .
O. K. Park, Y. Cho, S. Lee, H. C. Yoo, H. K. Song and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1621 CAS .
S. Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y. M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chung and Y. M. Chiang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jin, X. D. Zhang, W. He, Y. Wang, H. M. Li, Z. Wang and Z. Y. Bi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 15332 RSC .
P. S. Herle, B. Ellis, N. Coombs and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ravet, Y. Chouinard, J. F. Magnan, S. Besner, M. Gauthier and M. Armand, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97, 503 CrossRef .
M. Gaberscek, R. Dominko and J. Jamnik, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Liu, H. Zhong, R. S. Wang and N. C. Seeman, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 278 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Luo and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 293 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hong, C. Wang, N. J. Dudney and M. J. Lance, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tang, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, W. K. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, Z. Xiao, L. Qian and X. Y. Tao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6498 RSC .
L. Cao, W. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Diana, A. Yakupitiyage, Z. Luo and D. Li, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2007, 40, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, X. L. Wu, C. P. Yang, J. S. Lee, J. Kim and Y. G. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5019 CAS .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621 CAS .
Y. G. Guo, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2878 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zhang, X. D. Zhang, W. He, Y. Z. Yue, H. Liu and J. Y. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10093 RSC .
D. Brady and J. R. Duncan, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1994, 41, 149 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. T. Barriga, D. G. Cooper, E. S. Idziak and D. R. Cameron, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1999, 25, 96 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tang, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 501 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Zhang, Z. Y. Bi, W. He, G. Yang, H. Liu and Y. Z. Yue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2285 CAS .
R. Malik, D. Burch, M. Bazant and G. Ceder, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Wang, Z. C. Li, H. J. Xu and K. L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 308 CAS .
P. Fu, Y. M. Zhao, Y. Z. Dong, X. N. An and G. P. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Saidi, J. Barker, H. Huang, J. L. Swoyer and G. Adamson, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 266 CrossRef .
M. Y. Saidi, J. Barker, H. Huang, J. L. Swoyer and G. Adamson, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Yin, P. S. Strobel, H. Grondey and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1456 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barker, M. Y. Saidi and J. L. Swoyer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, L. C. Zhang, I. Lieberwirth, H. W. Xu and C. H. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Du, W. He, X. D. Zhang, Y. Z. Yue, H. Liu, X. G. Zhang, D. D. Min, X. X. Ge and Y. Du, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5960 RSC .
M. M. Thackeray, P. J. Johnson, L. A. Depicciotto, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1984, 19, 179 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray and A. De Kock, J. Solid State Chem., 1988, 74, 414 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Kim, P. Muralidharan, H. W. Lee, R. Ruffo, Y. Yang, C. K. Chan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, L. Fu, X. Zhan, D. Samuelis, J. Maier, L. Li and Y. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3985 CAS .
K. M. Shaju, F. Jiao, A. Debart and P. G. Bruce, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1837 RSC .
N. Li, C. J. Patrissi, G. Che and C. R. Martin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2787 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Tan and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2008, 1, 265 CrossRef PubMed .
H. K. Song, K. T. Lee, M. G. Kim, L. F. Nazar and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3818 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and T. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 5, 366 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yu, K. Sasaki and T. Hirajima, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 262, 3 Search PubMed .
X. B. Meng, X. Q. Yang and X. L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis, P. Knauth and T. Djenizian, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, S. Li, D. Wu, F. Zhang, H. Liang, P. Gao, C. Cheng and X. Feng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Shim, Y. H. Jin, S. D. Seo, S. H. Lee and D. W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 443 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Miot, N. Recham, D. Larcher, F. Guyot, J. Brest and J.-M. Tarascon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 451 CAS .
L. Taberna, S. Mitra, P. Poizot, P. Simon and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 567 CrossRef PubMed .
T. D. Hatchard and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Obrovac and L. J. Krause, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. Mcllwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 3, 31 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Evanoff, J. Khan, A. A. Balandin, A. Magasinski, W. J. Ready, T. F. Fuller and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, K. Huo, M. T. McDowell, J. Zhao and Y. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1919 Search PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, G. Zheng, W. Li, M. T. McDowell, Z. Seh, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bouligand, Tissue Cell, 1972, 4, 189 CrossRef CAS .
R. Roerand and R. Dillaman, Am. Zool., 1984, 24, 893 Search PubMed .
M. M. Giraud-Guille, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1998, 3, 221 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Chen, J. McKittrick and M. A. Meyers, Acta Biomater., 2008, 4, 587 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zheng, Y. Yang, J. J. Cha, S. S. Hong and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Szczech and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 56 CAS .
M. H. Park, M. G. Kim, J. Joo, K. Kim, J. Kim, S. Ahn, Y. Cui and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liang, N. J. Dudney and J. Y. Howe, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4724 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Xudong Zhang	Xudong Zhang is currently a full professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Qilu University of Technology. He received his PhD degree from Shandong University in 2004. His research interests focus on materials chemistry, technology for nanometer material synthesis, lithium batteries and electrode materials.
Yukun Hou	Yukun Hou graduated from Qilu University of Technology in 2012. Then, in the same year, he moved to the Institute of Materials Science and Engineering at Qilu University of Technology as a postgraduate student and majored in materials science and engineering.
Wen He	Wen He is currently a full professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Qilu University of Technology. She received her PhD degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in South China University of Technology in 2009. Her research interests focus on material chemistry and, technology for lithium batteries.
Guihua Yang	Guihua Yang is currently a full professor in the Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Science and Technology of the Ministry of Education at Qilu University of Technology. She received her PhD degree from South China University of Technology in 2009. Her research interests focus on biotechnology and resource utilization of biomass.

 	Fig. 1  (a) DNA gene regulation. (b) Biomineralization of bones and teeth. (c) Organization of biomolecules, M: metal ion. (d) Nucleation to the spatial orientation. (e) Supramolecular self assembly and crystal growth.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Electron-transfer pathway for LiFePO4 particles partially coated with carbon. (b) Designed ideal structure for LiFePO4 particles with typical nano-size and a complete carbon coating.55 Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Four strategies to enhance rate performance of LiFePO4.62 Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic description of TMV-templated near-vertical assembly of a LiFePO4 nanoforest on a current collector with multilayered nanohierarchical arrangement of active materials and electron conducting pathway.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire after annealing at 500 °C for 2 h. (b) the high-resolution TEM image of the LiFePO4 crystal. The red triangle marked in part b is Li-ion diffusion channel (b axis direction). (c–f) The EDS mapping profiles in the red mapping rectangle were marked in part a for Ni (c), Ti (d), Fe (e), and P (f). (g) TEM image of LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire after 450 cycles at a 1 C rate. TEM image of C/LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire (h) before charge/discharge cycle and (i) and enlarged view of part h and (j) image after 450 charge/discharge cycles at a 1 C rate.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Potential profiles of C/LiFePO4/Ti/Ni, LiFePO4/Ti/Ni nanowire forest cathodes, and LiFePO4/Ti thin film cathode at 0.1 C charge/discharge current. (b) Cycling stability and Coulombic efficiency of LiFePO4 cathodes at 1 C.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the hierarchically spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C. (b) XRD patterns of spirulina-templated LiFePO4 samples: as prepared (bottom) and after being heat-treated at 650 °C (top). (c) An optical microscope image of native spirulina. (d) SEM image of a heat-treated sample. (e) HRTEM image taken from the edge of two different LiFePO4 nanoparticles. The inset in (e) is the corresponding FFT image.74 Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Discharge profiles of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C sample in the voltage from 2.5–4.2 V at various current rates. (b) The rate and cycling performances of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C sample. (c) Cyclic voltammograms for the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C sample at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (d) Impedance spectra of the spirulina-templated LiFePO4/C electrodes at the first and tenth cycle with the frequency range of 10−1–10−6 Hz. The inset is an equivalent circuit of impedance spectra.74 Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly of LiFePO4 nano/microspheres templated by biomass PA. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the as-synthesized LiFePO4 nano/microspheres.76 Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Electrochemical characterizations of the biomass PA synthesized LiFePO4/C nano/microspheres in the voltage range of 2.2–4.2 V (vs. Li+/Li). (a) Glavanostatic charge/discharge voltage profiles at 0.1 C at different cycle numbers. (b) Discharge voltage profiles at various discharge rates. (c) Rate performance. (d) Cycling performance at 1 C.76 Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–c) Illustrations of the synthesis procedure and formation mechanism of FePO4–yeast cell microspheres. (d) Schematic structure drawing of BC-LFP-NN derived from yeast cells.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  The morphology characterizations of the BC-LFP-NN sample. (a) and (b) SEM images of different magnified regions. (c) TEM image. (d–g) The magnified HRTEM images of the partial area in (c). (h) Representation of the crystal structure and possible lithium paths of LiFePO4 olivine.82 (i) The distorted crystal structure of the LiFePO4 spherical nuclei completely coated by the mesoporous biocarbon cage, and possible lithium and electron pathways. (j) The charge and discharge curves of the BC-LFP-NN cathode of different numbers of cycles at rate of 0.2 C. (k) The inset shows representation of possible lithium paths in LiFePO4 nuclei–carbon nanocage structure.79 Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  A biological method: self-assembly and multiple functions of ATP high-energy biomolecules. (a) A schematic presentation of the multifunctional ATP biomolecule. (b) A schematic diagram of self-assembly of the multifunctional ATP biomolecules with iron phosphate. (c) Structural model of MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs. (d) A schematic drawing of a battery using MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs as cathodes. (e) Schematic illustration of Li+ diffusion in the two-dimensional channel of MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs. Black curves represent the two dimensional diffusion pathways for Li ions in the lattice.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Characterizations of HEQDs. (a) HRTEM image of HEQDs (area containing the red ring) embedded in an ultra-thin LiFePO4 nanosheet in the MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs sample. (b) HRTEM image of a ULFPNP, only showing lattice fringes, LiαFePO4 (α-Li-poor phases), LiβFePO4 (β-Li-rich phases) and binary phase distribution (M-metastable miscibility gap). (c) AFM image shows the size and height distributions of HEQDs embedded in an ultra-thin LiFePO4 nanosheet. (d) Li ion pathway diagrams in ULFPNP (B) and MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs (A). (e) Fluorescent micrograph of the MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs sample, which exhibits green fluorescence at the excitation wavelengths of 480 nm. (f) The first discharge and charge profiles of the MBCNW-LFP-HEQDs cathode (A) and the ULFPNP cathode (B) at 0.1 C rate using CR 2032 coin cells.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Formation mechanism of mesoporous nanocomposite of Li3V2 (PO4)3 with amorphous carbon (LVP-C). (a) Schematic drawing of the structure templating mechanism of the biomimetic mineralization process of LVP-C. (b) TEM image of living yeast cells. (c) TEM image of yeast cell after adding Li+, VO2+, PO43− into the bioemulsion. (d) TEM image of LVP-C. (e) XRD patterns for the synthesized samples with different addition amounts of dry yeast; (A) LVP (without yeast), (B) LVP-C-1 (20 g L−1 yeast), (C) LVP-C-2 (40 g L−1 yeast), (D) LVP-C-3 (60 g L−1 yeast). (f) The initial charge–discharge curves and (g) cycling performance of the LVP and LVP-C-2 samples between 3.0 and 4.3 V at different rates (1 C = 133 mA h g−1).92 Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of LMO-MTs and HMO-MTs. (b, d) SEM images and (c, e) TEM images of (b, c) LMO-MTs after calcinating at 500 °C for 4 h and (d, e) HMO-MTs after acid- washing of LMO-MTs with 0.1 mol L−1 HCl for 12 h.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the hierarchically porous NiO/carbon nanocomposites microspheres produced by templating of lotus pollen grains.8 Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Charge–discharge profiles of the pollen-templated NiO/C electrodes at various current rates. (b) The rate and cycling performances of the pollen-templated NiO/C electrodes.8 Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  A possible low-cost, energy-efficient, green, and large scale production of nano-Si from RHs. (a) Comparison between existing methods118 and the RHs-derived method (highlighted in red) for producing nano-Si. Si(OR)4 denotes silicon alkoxide. (b) A panicle of ripe rice at a rice farm in China (photographed by K. Huo). (c) Flow chart of the process for recovering SiNPs from RHs. R.T. denotes room temperature. (d–g) Optical images of the intermediate substances. The inset of (f) shows an optical microscopy image (0.9 mm × 30.6 mm) of one piece of heat treated RH.115 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) SEM images of SiO2 obtained by leached RHs at 700 °C. (b) SEM images of nano-Si obtained by magnesiothermic reduction of nano-SiO2 with ramp rates of 5 °C min−1. (c) and (d) TEM images of Si-RH-5 at different magnifications. The high-resolution TEM image (d) shows one spherical SiNP and the (111) lattice spacing of crystalline Si is clearly visible (the red line indicates the boundary of the SiNP). (e) Statistical analysis of particle sizes of nano-SiO2 shown in (a) and nano-Si (Si-RH-5) reduced from it. (f) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of nano-SiO2 and the Si samples reduced from it. Inset: pore size distribution. (g) Galvanostatic cycling of nano-Si recovered from RHs and commercial metallurgical-grade Si particles. Both electrodes were cycled at C/50 for the first cycle, C/20 for the second cycle, and C/5 for the later cycles. The nano-Si electrodes were tested between 1 V and 0.01 V versus Li/Li+ with PVDF binder.117 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 21  Structural model and SEM images of crab shell templates. (a) Structural model of twisted plywood nanochannel arrays in crab shell templates showing the hollow channels created by removing organic nanofibers in crab shells. The hollow channels are arranged parallel to each other to form horizontal planes stacked in a helicoid fashion, creating a twisted plywood structure. (b–e) SEM images of the biotemplates from a Chinese hairy crab shell, a blue crab, a stone crab, and a Dungeness crab, respectively, demonstrating the universal nature of the nanochannel arrays in crab shell templates.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Nanostructure of stone crab shell template and schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for electrode materials. (a–c) SEM images of the cross section of a stone crab shell, a stone crab shell template, and the powder of the stone crab shell template, respectively. The inset in a shows that the length of the stone crab shell is 10.8 cm, and the inset in c shows that about 8 g of powder was produced from one piece of stone crab shell. (d) Diameter distribution statistics for the nanoscale channels in stone crab shell biotemplates. (e) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for hollow carbon nanofiber arrays encapsulating sulfur or silicon electrode materials based on stone crab shell templates.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Electrochemical performance of silicon encapsulated in crab shell-templated carbon for Li-ion battery electrodes. (a) Reversible capacity and Coulombic efficiency at C/2 and 1 C versus cycle number. The cells were activated with a slower rate on the first cycle (C/10). (b) Rate capabilities of the electrode.117 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
