Anion-exchange membrane water electrolyzers and fuel cells   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00038E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00038E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 9620-9693Anion-exchange membrane water electrolyzers and fuel cells†

        
          
            Yaxiong 
            Yang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Li‡
*bg, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobo 
            Zheng
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wenping 
            Sun
          
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Shi Xue 
            Dou
          
          
        
      fg, 
      
        
          
            Tianyi 
            Ma
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Hongge 
            Pan
          
          
        
      *ad
aInstitute of Science and Technology for New Energy, Xi’an Technological University, Xi’an, 710021, P. R. China
bSchool of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, 3000, Australia. E-mail: peng.li@rmit.edu.au; tianyi.ma@rmit.edu.au
cDepartment of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China. E-mail: honggepan@zju.edu.cn
eState Key Laboratory of Clean Energy Utilization, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China
fInstitute of Energy Material Science, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, China
gInstitute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials, Australian Institute for Innovative Materials, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia
Received 
      5th July 2022
    First published on 8th November 2022AbstractAnion-exchange membrane (AEM) water electrolyzers (AEMWEs) and fuel cells (AEMFCs) are technologies that, respectively, achieve transformation and utilization of renewable resources in the form of green hydrogen (H2) energy. The significantly reduced cost of their key components (membranes, electrocatalysts, bipolar plates, etc.), quick reaction kinetics, and fewer corrosion problems endow AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells with overwhelming superiority over their conventional counterparts (e.g., proton-exchange membrane water electrolyzer/fuel cells and alkaline water electrolyzer/fuel cells). Limitations in our fundamental understanding of AEM devices, however, specifically in key components, working management, and operation monitoring, restrict the improvement of cell performance, and they further impede the deployment of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. Therefore, a panoramic view to outline the fundamentals, technological progress, and future perspectives on AEMWEs and AEMFCs is presented. The objective of this review is to (1) present a timely overview of the market development status of green hydrogen technology that is closely associated with AEMWEs (hydrogen production) and AEMFCs (hydrogen utilization); (2) provide an in-depth and comprehensive analysis of AEMWEs and AEMFCs from the viewpoint of all key components (e.g., membranes, ionomers, catalysts, gas diffusion layers, bipolar plates, and membrane electrode assembly (MEA)); (3) summarize the state-of-the-art technologies for working management of AEMWEs and AEMFCs, including electrolyte engineering (electrolyte selection and feeding), water management, gas and heat management, etc.; (4) outline the advances in monitoring the operations of AEMWEs and AEMFCs, which include microscopic and spectroscopic techniques and beyond; and (5) present key aspects that need to be further studied from the perspective of science and engineering to accelerate the deployment of AEMWEs and AEMFCs.
Peng Li
Peng Li received his PhD degree under the supervision of Distinguished Prof. Shi Xue Dou from the Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials at the University of Wollongong in 2021. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher for a joint project “Low-cost electrolysis of seawater and CO2 for co-production of renewable fuel and hypochlorite” between RMIT and CSIRO Energy under the mentorship of ARC Future Fellow Prof. Tianyi Ma. His current research focuses on the rational development of efficient materials, and the fundamental understanding of the electrochemical processes for electrocatalysis and fuel cells.
Wenping Sun
Wenping Sun is a professor at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University. He received his B.S. degree in 2008 and PhD degree in 2013 in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). He is a recipient of the ARC DECRA (2016) and CAS Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Award (2015). His research expertise includes electrocatalysis, fuel cells, and batteries, especially the design of novel materials and structures, and fundamental understanding of the related electrochemical processes. He has authored/co-authored over 130 peer-reviewed papers, which have attracted a total citation of >12000 with an h-index of 59 (Google Scholar). He serves as an Associate Editor for Frontiers in Chemistry and Materials for Renewable and Sustainable Energy.
Shi Xue Dou
Shi Xue Dou is a Distinguished Professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, University of Wollongong (UOW) Research Ambassador Asia and the founding director of Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials at UOW. He received his PhD at Dalhousie University, Canada in 1984, DSc at the University of New South Wales in 1998 and was elected as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering in 1994. He was awarded the Australian Government's Centenary Medal in 2003 and Australian Order of Member in 2019 for his contribution to materials science and engineering, multiple Australian Professorial Fellowships from 1993 to 2011, the Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award in 2008, Outstanding Partnership Award in 2012, the ASTS Lifetime Achievement Award in 2018, Lifetime Achiever by Australian Research Magazine in 2020 and the ICMC Lifetime Achievement Award in 2021. He is named a highly cited researcher in materials science by Thomson Reuters since 2018 with citations of 90000 and an h-index of 145. He has supervised and co-supervised over 100 PhD students, and more than 60 postdoctoral and visiting fellows. He is a program leader for Auto CRC 2020 on electrification program and the on-going ARENA 2016–2021 on smart sodium storage system program.
Tianyi Ma
Tianyi Ma is a Professor and the Leader of Carbon Neutrality Group at RMIT University. He received his PhD in physical chemistry in 2013 from Nankai University, China. He was awarded an ARC DECRA in 2015. He has published more than 230 papers which attracted more than 22000 citations with an h-index of 69. He is a world-leading scientist in renewable energy field, with pioneering work done in the areas of functional photocatalytic, electrocatalytic, thermocatalytic, and piezocatalytic materials for renewable solar, mechanical, and thermal energy harvesting storage and utilization, carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS), as well as next-generation high-performance battery and supercapacitor energy storage devices. He is an ARC Future Fellow, Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry, and Clarivate's Global Highly Cited Researcher.
Hongge Pan
Hongge Pan received his PhD in materials science and engineering from Zhejiang University in 1996 under a joint program between Zhejiang University and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Science. Later that year he joined Zhejiang University and became a professor in 1999. He is a recipient of the Changjiang Distinguished Professorship by the Ministry of Education (2014) and National Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Award (2000). His research is focused on energy materials for solid-state hydrogen storage, lithium-ion batteries, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis. He has authored/co-authored over 380 peer-reviewed papers, which have attracted a total citation of more than 11000 times with an h-index of 55. Now he serves as a co-editor-in-chief of Journal of Alloys and Compounds.
1. Introduction
1.1. Global carbon neutrality and H2 energy
Worldwide industrial activities have created diverse products and services for humans but have also generated a huge amount of CO2 emissions due to the consumption of fossil fuels.1 Intensive CO2 emission sources are everywhere, ranging from agriculture and animal husbandry to transportation and various industrial sectors (e.g., refineries, the petrochemical industry, the iron and steel industry, cement and fertilizer production, etc.), causing rapid growth of our atmospheric CO2 concentration year by year.2,3 It has been reported that the CO2 level in the atmosphere is approaching 420 ppm, which is nearly 50% higher than the level before the Industrial Revolution.4 What is worse, global warming, floods, drought, and other extreme weather problems induced by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are huge threats to all humans. Towards this end, stopping CO2 emissions and circumventing climate change are essential ways to build a sustainable society in pursuit of harmony between humanity and nature. In 2016, 196 parties negotiated the Paris Agreement to limit global warming to well below 2 °C by 2050 via undertaking specific emission targets.5 After that, announcements of CO2 emission reduction have been pledged by many countries (e.g., Australia, Germany, Canada, China, the United States, Japan, etc.). Australia has committed itself to a strong and responsible target to reduce its GHG emissions to 26–28% below the 2005 level by 2030 and deliver net zero emissions by 2050.6 Germany's newly amended national climate law proposed a 65% emission reduction by 2030, 85–90% by 2040, and net zero emissions by 2045.7 China has promised to peak its CO2 emissions before 2030 and hit carbon neutrality by 2060.8 President Biden announced that for the United States a 50–52% of GHG emissions based on 2005 levels will be cut by 2030.9 The need to eliminate CO2 emissions to achieve net zero carbon emissions has increasingly been admitted by many countries, which is also a great necessity for attaining the goals of the Paris Agreement as well as sustainable development. It has to be noted that global CO2 emissions associated with energy combustion and industrial processes rebounded in 2021 to reach their highest ever annual level of 36.3 gigatons (Gts) according to the International Energy Agency (IEA).10,11 This implies that it is imperative to find new energy sources that are clean and abundant to satisfy our human demands and attain global carbon neutrality, which is challenging but promising.
Solar energy, wind energy, hydro power, etc. are excellent renewable resources that are adequate to meet our increasing energy demands.12–14 Considering the fluctuating and intermittent nature of these renewable sources of energy, one efficient approach is to store the energy or convert it into chemical fuels.14–16 Hydrogen (H2) is an ideal chemical for such storage with an ultrahigh energy density (120–140 MJ kg−1), the most abundant element resources, the greatest sustainability, and zero emissions.17–19 Furthermore, the use of hydrogen could reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and help the decarbonization of various industries and energy sectors, both of which are imperative pathways to attain global carbon neutrality.18,20 As reported by the International Energy Agency (IEA), hydrogen energy has long been considered an ideal energy alternative to fossil fuels and will experience explosive development in transportation, heavy industry, power generation, etc. To be specific, the huge amount of carbon emission removal (∼1.9 Gts) by 2050 will primarily rely on the initiation of hydrogen energy and the deployment of the carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) technology.3,21 Currently, hydrogen is mainly produced by the steam reforming reaction, coal gasification, water electrolysis, etc.22 The former two methods unavoidably generate great amounts of GHG emissions, while water electrolysis via renewable resources has almost zero emissions, which is considered green hydrogen technology.23–26 The higher water splitting energy efficiency and the increasing deployment of renewables (e.g., solar photovoltaic and wind energy) in recent years are further driving the implementation of water electrolyzers with MW-scale capacity. By virtue of green H2 production technology, hydrogen would substitute for the current fossil fuels in industry, transportation, the electricity sector, etc. Moreover, H2 fuel cells could be widely mounted in light/medium/heavy-duty vehicles and power any portable devices that use batteries. A green hydrogen cycle associated with H2 production and H2 utilization is expected to be established, as shown in Fig. 1. Water electrolyzers (WEs) and H2–O2 fuel cells (FCs) are the most critical devices to achieve H2 production from renewables and H2 utilization in the form of electricity, respectively. Therefore, developing low-cost, high-efficiency, and durable WEs and FCs is of paramount importance in the pursuit of green hydrogen technology as well as attaining carbon neutrality, which is also challenging but promising.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the green hydrogen (H2) cycle as a clean energy solution mediated by anion-exchange water electrolyzer and fuel cell technologies. GDL gas diffusion layer; CT: computed tomography. 
1.2. AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
Water electrolysis can be dated back to the 18th century when the electrolysis phenomenon was discovered and water electrolysis experiments were conducted.27 After the development of electrode catalysts and the search for a suitable electrolyte, alkaline water electrolyzers (AWEs) have become a mature technology since 1920.28 AWEs convert water into hydrogen and oxygen with the input of electricity while alkaline fuel cells (AFCs) utilize the chemical energy of hydrogen and oxygen and generate water and electrical energy.29 Both AWEs and the AFCs feature mature stack components, low capital cost, and decent durability, which have enabled them to be major water electrolysis and fuel cell devices for a long period.26,30,31 So far, a large amount of H2 produced by electrolysis relies on traditional alkaline water electrolyzers, owing to their strong cost competitiveness. Meanwhile, their pollution-free nature and fast reaction kinetics have made alkaline fuel cells increasingly important to build a more sustainable society. The corrosive nature of the KOH electrolyte (20–30% KOH solution), however, and high sensitivity to CO2 usually cause severe carbonate deposition and reduce the overall cell performance.32,33 Furthermore, their relatively low current density, limited operating pressure, and inconvenient device are restricting their fast and large-scale deployment. Based on this, researchers later proposed polymer electrolyte membrane and solid oxide water electrolysis/fuel cell technology – an attempt to achieve breakthroughs in the performance of cells in such aspects as portability, efficiency, current density, etc. Solid oxide water electrolyzers (SOWEs) and fuel cells (SOFCs) are alternative technologies that operate at high temperatures (700–1000 °C) and feature many fascinating advantages such as highly accelerated reaction kinetics and almost 100% device efficiency.34,35 Their high-temperature working environment requires a significant amount of heating energy to be supplied, which greatly limits the practical conditions of SOWEs and SOFCs (coupled with a thermal source). On the other hand, the high temperature also intensifies cell component degradation and usually leads to unsatisfactory durability.36,37 The search for superior ceramic membranes with high ionic conductivity, to some degree, remains unresolved. The above-mentioned problems still keep the SOWEs and SOFCs in the investigation stage and make the capital cost of SOWEs very much more expensive than that of AWEs and polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolysis.33,38 Polymer electrolyte membranes can be classified into proton exchange membranes (PEMs) and anion exchange membranes (AEMs) according to the chemical structure that is fabricated to shuttle cations or anions. For instance, the use of PEM creates strongly acidic conditions inside the cells, while alkaline conditions are formed when using AEMs. Compared with the alkaline water electrolyzer/fuel cell, proton exchange membrane (PEM) technologies feature a higher H2 output rate, extended power density, and improved cell efficiency, so they have achieved scaled applications.14 It has to be noted that the acidic working conditions of PEM cells reduce the choice of catalysts to only the platinum group metals (PGMs), and many other components (membranes and bipolar plates) possess relatively high production costs which make PEM technology quite costly. Furthermore, the strongly acidic conditions also significantly reduce the lifespan of cell devices. In sharp contrast, the highly favorable oxygen reaction/evolution kinetics and improved power density in the alkaline system make the use of AEMs more desirable.39–41 At the same time, the electrode catalysts are no longer dependent on PGMs, thus significantly reducing the overall production cost compared with PEM technology.42,43 Moreover, the corrosion problem in alkaline media is significantly mitigated, which increases the catalyst durability as well as prolongs the lifespan of cell devices. Apart from the aforementioned aspects, a variety of fuels can be used in AEMFCs owing to their higher electro-oxidation kinetics.41 Objectively, these technologies (AWE/AFC, PEMWE/PEMFC, SOWE/SOFC, and AEMWE/AEMFC) have respective advantages/disadvantages owing to their component compositions (e.g., membranes and catalysts) and the membrane electrode assembly (MEA) fabrication approaches involved in them. Meanwhile, the progress of these technologies is also affected by upstream renewable electricity and downstream H2 transportation/utilization, where many factors, such as raw materials, the H2 output rate, delivery pressure, scalability, etc., will exert significant influences on their further development and deployment. It is foreseen that these technologies will play commanding roles in the field of clean hydrogen production and utilization but in different markets, and what we should do is to sweep away the fundamental and technological barriers to ensure that each of them could leverage their strength.
2. H2 for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
2.1. H2 production involving AEM water electrolyzers
The current technologies employed to produce H2 normally focus on several approaches, such as thermochemical, electrochemical, biochemical, photochemical, etc.45–47 The thermochemical avenue is based on converting fossil fuels (e.g., natural gas and coal) into hydrogen, including steam reforming, methane pyrolysis, and coal gasification.46 Biochemical or photochemical approaches are promising methods for transforming biomass waste or solar energy into hydrogen, but their very low efficiency and unaffordable process are still keeping them in the early investigation stage.48,49 The electrochemical method (known as water electrolysis or water-splitting) is a relatively mature technology and has been considered an ideal solution to build a more sustainable society.15,36 This is because water electrolysis is easily integrated with intermittent electricity from renewable resources. Furthermore, the electrochemical technology has nearly zero emissions in H2 production, and the only emissions in the whole process are in power generating facilities upstream. Therefore, H2 produced via water electrolysis powered by renewable electricity is considered green hydrogen (H2 made by the biochemical or photochemical methods is also regarded as green H2).50,51 Hydrogen production via the thermochemical pathway causes millions of tons of emitted CO2 due to the use of fossil fuels. It is estimated that by producing 1 ton of H2, the process will generate almost 10, 12, or 19 tons of CO2 by using natural gas, oil, or coal, respectively.52 Steam methane reforming (SMR) is an efficient and low-cost way to produce H2, but it also generates carbon emissions. Consequently, H2 produced by the combustion of fossil fuels, generating CO2 emissions, is called grey hydrogen (or brown/black hydrogen). At the same time, huge CO2 emissions are stimulating the deployment of carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) technology, which aims to reduce up to 90% of carbon emissions by implementing additional systems used for CO2 recovery, transportation, and storage/utilization.53,54 H2 made from fossil fuels but coupled with the CCUS technology is considered blue hydrogen.50Fig. 2a gives us an overview of globally produced H2 (grey, blue, and green) from different sources and their respective features. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), global H2 production reached ∼90 million tons (Mt) by 2020, where approximately 72 Mt of H2 were produced from dedicated plants while the remainder (18 Mt) was generated as a by-product.44 In the dedicated H2 amount (72 Mt), the primary source used to make hydrogen is natural gas (∼73%); coal comes with the second biggest feedstock (∼24%), and oil takes the least share (∼0.75%). Collectively, nearly 98% of globally dedicated H2 (∼70.5 Mt) was produced as grey hydrogen, and a significant consequence is that the CO2 emissions have reached over 830 Mt.52 Meanwhile, the blue hydrogen amount merely attained 0.7 Mt and accounted for around 0.9% of global production. In sharp contrast, H2 produced via water electrolysis (green hydrogen) only hit ∼0.03% (∼30 kilotons (kt)) of globally dedicated H2, indicating that the current green hydrogen amount is far from being able to satisfy our energy demands as a clean energy solution. H2 produced from fossil fuels currently represents the most economical option, while water electrolysis is rather a costly approach. The levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH) production made using different sources is shown in Fig. 2b. For H2 produced from natural gas, the LCOH ranges from 0.5 to 1.7 US dollars (USD) per kg without the CCUS technology, while it increases to ∼1.0 to 2.0 USD per kg coupled with the CCUS technology in 2020. When it comes to H2 made via renewables, the state-of-the-art LCOH fluctuates from 3.0 to 8.2 USD per kg, which is around 2 to 4 times higher than that produced by fossil fuels. Moreover, the projected LCOH in 2030 and 2050 made by fossil fuels and renewables is also presented. The LCOH made via renewables is estimated to decrease to 1 to 3.1 USD per kg, implying very strong price competitiveness compared with H2 produced by fossil fuels with or without CCUS.44,52 The increased H2 production cost made by fossil fuels is in great part due to pricing CO2 emissions (e.g., through carbon prices).44,55 The decreased LCOH of using renewables prompts us to further discuss the possible factors related to water electrolysis, which is beneficial for the development of low-cost green hydrogen. Simply speaking, renewable electricity and the electrolyzer stack are the top two cost factors for green hydrogen production. Increasing the electrolyzer stack and photovoltaic modules are two efficient ways to reduce LCOH, which is why large-scale water electrolyzers and numerous PV systems are preferably adopted in the construction phase. Fig. 2c shows the planned global electrolyzer capacity installation for the next 10 years. In terms of the capital cost of AEM water electrolyzers, it is rather challenging to give very specific data due to the limited research and different comparison methods. The truth is that the major components of the capital cost of AEM water electrolyzers are almost identical with those of PEM water electrolyzers, which include electrolyzer stacks, balance of systems, electricity, installation, contingency factors, site preparation, operation, maintenance, etc.56,57 After a careful review of the literature on the cost analysis of these factors, the four decisive factors are listed in Fig. 2d. Due to the complex and expensive PV solar energy and wind energy upstream, the electricity is the dominant cost for green H2 production. Next to it is the balance of plant (BOP), which denotes subsystems to provide auxiliary functions for the electrolyzer. This includes the power supply system, the water circulation system, hydrogen processing and separation, cooling, etc. The electrolyzer-stack cost includes the balance of stack, bipolar plate, framework, porous transport layer, and catalyst-coated membrane. The stack cost analysis of the three different types of water electrolysis technologies (e.g., AWE, PEMWE, and AEMWE) is depicted in Table 1. One can see that the AWE still possesses higher cost competitiveness over the other two types of technologies, which is why we should keep studying to further reduce the stack cost of these technologies. The fourth part is the operation cost, which is highly dependent on the operation time. The other influential factors, including contingency, maintenance, etc., take up very little shares. One should note that the stack cost and BOP are highly correlated with the scale of the electrolyzer system. The BOP cost of a 5 MW-scale AEM water electrolyzer (∼$ 291) is approximately half the cost of a 1 MW-scale one (∼$ 542).58 The H2 production cost as a function of operating hours and investment is depicted in Fig. 2e and f. Given that the investment in an AEM water electrolyzer is estimated to be US$ 770 per kW, approximately 8760 hours of working time is required.38,59 The lower the electrolyzer investment cost, the higher the cost competitiveness of green H2 production than blue H2 will be for an identical working time, and this is true for the renewable electricity price. Therefore, deploying a large-scale water electrolyzer system, strengthening the renewable energy industry, and prolonging the electrolyzer operation time are the three dominant avenues to attain cost-competitive green hydrogen.
 Fig. 2  (a) Global production amounts of grey-, blue-, and green-H2 in 2020. (b) Levelized cost of H2 production via five different technologies in 2020 and in the Net Zero Emission Scenario for 2030 and 2050. (c) Globally planned installed capacity of water electrolyzers from 2021 to 2030. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2021 IEA. (d) Approximate capital cost analysis for the 1 MW-scale AEM water electrolyzer system (electricity > balance of plant (BOP) > stack cost > operation > others). (e and f) H2 production cost as functions of investment, electricity price, and operation hours. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2021 IRENA. 
Table 1 Stack cost analysis of the three water electrolyzer technologies, alkaline, PEM, and AEM water electrolyzers




Cell components
Alkaline water electrolyzer
PEM water electrolyzer
AEM water electrolyzer




PTL = porous transport layer; PSU = polysulfone; PTFE = polytetrafluoroethylene; PPS-40GF: poly phenylene sulfide (40% glass fiber filled); ETFE = ethylene tetrafluoroethylene.




Anode
OER catalyst material
Ni-based (e.g., Ni2CoO4) or Co3O4
75% IrO2 (typical)
NiMo alloy


Catalyst loading (g m−2)
50
20
20


Catalyst price (US$ m−2)
21
1238
100


Ionomer loading (US$ m−2)
—
2.73
2.73


PTL materials
Ni mesh (not always present)
Ti 30% porosity/Pt
Ni foam/Ni wool


Cathode
HER catalyst material
Ni-based (e.g., nickel foam/Ni-stainless steel)
50% Pt/C (typical)
NiCrMo alloy


Catalyst loading (g m−2)
50
5
20


Catalyst price (US$ m−2)
21
195
100


Ionomer loading (US$ m−2)
—
10
10


Separators
Diaphragm (e.g., asbestos, Zirfon (a composite material of zirconia and Polysulfone))
PFSA (e.g., Nafion TM)
Aemion+TM


GDL material
—
Carbon cloth
Carbon cloth


Sealing and frame
PPS-40GF, PTFE
PPS-40GF, PTFE, ETFE
PPS-40GF, PTFE, silicon


BP material
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel


Bipolar coating
Ni
Pt
Ni


Stack cost estimation (minimum 1 MW)
∼200–270 US$ Kw−1
∼300–400 US$ Kw−1
Unknown




2.2. H2 utilization involving AEM fuel cells

Fig. 3a gives a comparison of the value of trade in energy commodities in 2020 and 2050.1 As two of the most important sectors in the green H2 supply chain, the estimated market value for water electrolyzers is likely to reach US$ 50–60 billion, while fuel cells approach US$ 21–25 billion by the middle of the century.1 It has been ascertained that H2 energy will be more competitive than oil and gas with a further reduction of green H2 production costs. H2 also represents one of the most typical energy combustion types, together with bioenergy and electricity, by 2050, compared to oil, gas, and coal in 2020. Also, the global H2 demand is likely to increase from ∼90 million tons (Mt) in 2020 to more than 200 Mt in 2030, and further jump to roughly 530 Mt by 2050, based on the announced pledges of carbon neutrality.3,60 By 2050, green hydrogen produced via water electrolysis is assumed to account for 60% of the global amount (∼318 Mt), and blue hydrogen made from natural gas coupled with CCUS will take up almost 40%.3 This implies that the global electrolyzer capacity will increase to 3,600 GW by 2050, of which there is approximately 0.3 GW today, again manifesting the high necessity of developing green H2 production technology due to its huge demand potential.3 The estimated H2 demand can be broadly grouped into onsite production within industrial facilities and merchant H2, which is usually for national/international trade (Fig. 3b). As shown in Fig. 3c, the produced H2 will be mainly utilized in heavy industry, the transportation sector, and households in accordance with the degree of H2 maturity to decarbonization as well as utilization efficiency. Generally, around 50% of H2 demand will be directly used in the heavy industry and transport sectors. This includes ammonia production for fertilizers, oil refineries, and methanol production for use as vehicle fuel. In addition, 30% of H2 will be converted into H2-based fuels, including ammonia for shipping, synthetic kerosene for aviation, and synthetic methane for blended gas networks.61 The maturity of H2 as the solution to decarbonization follows an increasing trend from household usage to industrial applications, owing to their rather centralized features. Consequently, governments and countries are adopting a range of policies and actions to accelerate the deployment of H2 technology in industry, transportation, and households. Currently, fuel cell electrical vehicles (FCEVs) are undergoing the most obvious development, and a large number of countries have invested huge amounts in the supply chain of FCEVs, including refueling systems, storage, transportation, etc. Meanwhile, FCEVs offer many principal advantages compared to internal-combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs) and battery electrical vehicles (BEVs). First, the fuel cell system is environmentally friendly, since no carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and/or other materials will be produced compared with the ICE system. Second, the energy efficiency of the fuel cell system is approximately 30% higher than for the ICE, which means that FCEVs with 1 kg of hydrogen could achieve around double the kilometers in comparison to ICEVs with 1 US gallon of gasoline. Third, the refueling time for a FCEV is minutes compared with at least several hours of battery recharging for BEVs, enabling highly improved travel efficiency. Fourth, the FCEVs can be more rapidly warmed up than BEVs in cold weather and hence can produce full power in a short period. Specifically, BEVs are suited to smaller and lighter vehicles traveling short distances, while FCEVs present strong advantages for heavier vehicles as well as those used for much longer traveling distances, including heavy-duty vehicles, trucks, buses, etc.61,62 The deployment of FCEVs has largely been restricted in view of the lack of widespread refueling infrastructure, the short working life of the fuel cell stack, low volumetric energy density, and relatively high cost. To fill these gaps, governments across the world are initiating refueling infrastructure, purchase incentives, and tax deductions to boost the fast progress of FCEVs, while the scientific community is dedicated to further improving the overall performance of fuel cell stacks. Fig. 3d shows that the global number of hydrogen refueling stations (HRS) has reached 540, which are located in Korea (9%), the United States (12%), China (16%), Japan (25%), Germany (17%), and the rest of the world (RoW) (21%). Meanwhile, the number of FCEVs has reached 34,800 with most of them being distributed in Korea (29%), the United States (27%), China (24%), Japan (12%), and Germany (3%).63 Of the almost 35000 FCEVs, around 75% are passenger light-duty vehicles (PLDVs), and they are mainly deployed in Korea, the United States, and Japan. Buses and trucks take up 15% and 10%, respectively, of the total amount of FCEVs, which are all nearly exclusively in China. Fig. 3e gives the announced automotive fuel cell production capacity from 2020 to 2030. Global fuel cell manufacturing capacity has apparently reached 200,000 systems by 2021 and will grow rapidly to reach a capacity of more than 1.2 million by 2030. It can be ascertained that the great momentum in the H2 supply chain initiated by governments and parties will accelerate the fast progress and practical utilization of green H2.
 Fig. 3  (a) Shift in the value of trade in energy commodities from 2020 to 2050. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1 Copyright 2022 IRENA. (b) The estimated utilization of global H2 and H2-based fuel in the Net-Zero Emission scenario from 2020 to 2050. (c) Maturity of H2 as a clean energy solution to decarbonize household/transportation/industry applications. (d) The global number of fuel cell electric vehicles and refueling stations by 2020. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2021 IEA. (e) The announced annual automotive fuel cell manufacturing capacity from 2020 to 2030. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2021 IEA. 
3. Overview of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
3.1. Fundamental principles of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
The AEM water electrolysis and AEM H2–O2 fuel cell configurations are illustrated in Fig. 4a and b. Renewable energy can be stored or converted by water electrolysis, and then be utilized through fuel cells in the form of electricity. The detailed electrode reaction equations (eqn (3.1), (3.2), (3.3), (3.4), (3.5) and (3.6)) in AEMWEs and AEMFCs are presented here, with the standard potential, E0.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the major components and working principles of anion-exchange membrane (AEM) (a) water electrolyzers and (b) fuel cells. 
AEMWEs: Anode: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−, E0 = 0.40 V(3.1) Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−, E0 = −0.83 V(3.2) Overall reaction: 2H2O → O2 + 2H2, E0 = −1.23 V(3.3)In the AEMFCs: Anode: H2 + 2OH− → 2H+ + 2e−, E0 = −0.83 V(3.4) Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−, E0 = 0.40 V(3.5) Overall reaction: O2 + 2H2 → 2H2O, E0 = 1.23 V(3.6)Both the AEMWEs and the AEMFCs are composed of bipolar plates, gas-diffusion layers (GDLs), catalyst layers (CLs), and a polymer anion-exchange membrane (AEM). The membrane electrode assembly (MEA) is normally fabricated by pressing the GDL, CL, and AEM together at a high temperature and pressure. A single cell is formed by placing two bipolar plates to cover the MEAs. The polymer AEM substitutes for the liquid alkaline electrolyte and provides hydroxide-conducting channels. In the AEMWEs, water is circulated from the anode to the cathode side while the hydroxide ions proceed in the opposite direction. At the cathode, water is reduced by the addition of two electrons from the external power supply and generates H2 and hydroxides. The hydroxides, moving to the anode area, are oxidized to form water and oxygen by losing electrons. In contrast, the electrochemical process in the AEMFCs is the reverse of what happens in the AEMWEs. Oxygen molecules (O2) are reduced in the cathode area with the formation of hydroxides that are then transported across the AEM to the anode side. Meanwhile, the H2 molecules are oxidized at the anode and combined with the hydroxides to generate water molecules. The electrons generated from the redox reactions that occur in the two electrodes flow into the external circuit and power the needed devices. Theoretically, the thermodynamic water splitting voltage is 1.23 V at 298 K, but additional potential (overpotential) is required to overcome the sluggish electrode kinetics and the ohmic resistance of the electrolyte and other components. Correspondingly, the output voltage of the AEM H2–O2 fuel cell is much lower than 1.23 V due to the sluggish electrode kinetics as well as internal resistance. To achieve efficient production and utilization of green hydrogen energy, common requirements on the AEMFCs and AEMWEs are reduced cost, improved durability, and high efficiency.
3.2. Practical working conditions of water electrolyzers and fuel cells

3.2.1. AEMWEs. 
A simplified system overview of AEMWEs coupling from the upstream renewable electricity generation to H2 separation is shown in Fig. 5a. The renewable electricity from upstream directly powers the electrolyzer stack after the processes in the transformer and rectifier. The electrolyte is supplied to the anode via a gas–liquid separator system and passes through a circulation pump, heat exchanger, and ion exchanger to complete the cycle.36,64 The O2 that is formed comes with the circulated water and enters the gas–liquid separator system for further separation and use. On the cathode side, the generated H2 diffuses into the water and arrives to the gas–liquid separator system (cathode side). Subsequently, H2 can be distributed for further use after processing in the deoxidizer and dryer. A practical electrolyzer stack is shown in Fig. 5b, and the basic composition of a single cell is shown in Fig. 5c. The bipolar plate, porous transport layer (PTL), quaternary ammonium polysulfone (QAPS) membrane, catalyst coated membrane (CCM), O-ring, and end plate collectively constitute a single cell. The cell voltage–current (I–V) relationship as a function of three key factors (temperature, fed electrolyte, and membrane) (Fig. 5d–f) could best characterize the electrochemical behavior of a single cell. Fig. 5d gives the I–V curves at 25 and 80 °C. Specifically, the cell overpotential can be divided into the activation overpotential (Vact), ohmic overpotential (Vohm), and concentration overpotential (Vcon), corresponding to the energy barrier for the reaction kinetics, the sum of ohmic voltage losses, and the concentration voltage loss associated with the insufficient mass transfer at a high current density. Thermodynamically, the reversible voltage Urev (also the water splitting voltage in Section 3.1) reflects the minimum voltage required to dissociate water molecules under standard temperature and pressure (298.15 K and 1 atm), which is calculated according to eqn (3.7). (3.7)Here, the change in the Gibbs free energy ΔG0 is 237.21 kJ mol−1, n is the number of transferred electrons (2), and F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1).31 The derived value of Urev is 1.23 V. Given that the Gibbs free energy varies with temperature, the empirical polynomial equation for the reversible voltage Urev as a function of temperature is shown in eqn (3.8).65 (3.8)Consequently, the increase in temperature decreases the reversible voltage Urev, and Urev is calculated to be 1.167 V at 100 °C. This is why the reversible voltage for water-splitting at 80 °C (Fig. 5d) is lower than that at 25 °C. Meanwhile, high temperature favors ion transportation in the solution and electrode reaction kinetics; hence, it decreases both the ohmic and the activation overpotentials.66,67 Conversely, higher temperature accelerates the degradation of membranes and results in decreased overall cell performance. Therefore, based on the consideration of energy efficiency and cell durability, the practical working temperature for AEM water electrolyzers is designed to be 40 to 70 °C. The second factor affecting the performance relates to the feeding types and concentrations. Research on the feed electrolyte in an AEMWE is focused on diluted KOH (1 M), Na2CO3 (1 M), NaHCO3 solution (1 M), and pure water. As mentioned before, a good electrolyte could ensure sufficient shuttling of ions between the anode and the cathode while delivering the least ohmic loss and the best membrane compatibility. By comparing the cell polarization curves with different feeding electrolytes, it was found that the cell performance follows the order of KOH (1 M) > 1% K2CO3 > 1% K2CO3 + HKCO3 > HKCO3 > Deionized (DI) water (Fig. 5e). This is attributed to the decreased electrode and cell resistances stemming from the enhanced concentration of hydroxide ions when using 1 M KOH rather than the other electrolytes.68,69 Any further increase in the concentration of KOH electrolyte will cause CO2 contamination and easily degrade the membranes, let alone the higher cost. In contrast, the use of K2CO3 and HKCO3 solutions could favor enhanced stability for AEM and cell materials, although at the price of lower reaction kinetics and greatly reduced ionic conductivity.70–73 In the case of DI water, its availability and lowest cost might make it the most ideal feeding electrolyte, but the reduced hydroxide conductivity and the choice of ideal bipolar plates need to be further optimized. Fig. 5f shows how the anion exchange membrane affects the cell performance of water electrolyzers. Specifically, Sustanion® (Dioxide Materials, FL, USA), A-201 (Tokuyama, Japan), and AEMION™ (Ionomr, Canada) were employed to fabricate MEA for the evaluation of water electrolysis performance under identical testing conditions. A-201 delivered a relatively higher current density in the low current range (<∼0.8 A cm−2) while Sustanion® exhibited the best cell performance at a higher current density (>∼0.8 A cm−2). The results indicate that the physicochemical properties of membranes (e.g., ionic conductivity, water uptake, thickness) are intrinsic factors that affect the cell performance of water electrolyzers.74 The underlying determining factors are briefly illustrated, and these challenges will be further discussed in the following section.
 Fig. 5  (a) Overview of the basic components of AEM water electrolyzers at the system level. (b and c) Images of a normal water electrolyzer stack and the components inside. Working polarization curves of AEM water electrolyzers impacted by (d) temperature. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.) (e) Different electrolytes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 Copyright 2017 Elsevier.) (f) Different membranes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.) 


3.2.2. AEMFCs. 
As a typical H2 utilization device, a system overview of the AEM fuel cell stack, encompassing gas/water/heat management systems, is illustrated in Fig. 6a. The fuel cell stack is usually composed of a large number of single cells to achieve the required power and/or energy density. Inlet gases including H2 and air are manipulated to a certain pressure, temperature, and humidity through the H2 and air management system before entering the fuel cell stack. Due to the complexity of the water movement in AEMFCs, an additional water management system is usually coupled with the gas management system to jointly tune the water content in the cell stack.76,77 Furthermore, a thermal management system is required to alleviate the stack overheating problems.78 For an electrical vehicle powered by fuel cells, the major components include, but are not limited to, the fuel cell stack, electric motor, hydrogen tank, etc., in which a rather complex fuel cell management system is needed to achieve a smooth power output. Owing to the strong cost competitiveness of AEM fuel cells over their PEM counterparts, it is expected that AEMFCs will dominate the market for fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs), although currently PEMFCs are mounted in commercial FCEVs (e.g., the Toyota Mirai).79 For an AEMFC, the effects of a range of operation conditions on the cell performance, including the inlet gas and electrolyte ions are illustrated in Fig. 6c and d. The open circuit voltage (OCV) in AEM fuel cells can be expressed viaeqn (3.9).80 (3.9)where R = 8.3145 J mol−1·K−1 is the gas constant. Given that the operating temperature for AEMFCs normally ranges from 50 to 90 °C, the higher working temperature than standard conditions and partial H2 crossover during the startup mean that the initial OCV is usually lower than the reversible cell potential (1.23 V), as shown in Fig. 6c. Meanwhile, the activation, ohmic, and concentration potential losses stemming from the respective sluggish reaction kinetics, cell resistance, and mass transfer resistance make the cell potential gradually decrease. In addition, another common influential factor in cell performance is the CO2 concentration in the inlet gas stream, where accelerated degradation of cell voltage profile in the presence of 300 ppm CO2 (Fig. 6c) has been reported.82 The adverse effects of CO2 for AEMFCs have been widely documented,83 and the bicarbonate/carbonate ions that are formed possess remarkably lower mobility than OH− (∼1/5 and 1/3 of the mobility of OH−),84,85 thus leading to the loss of membrane conductivity. Moreover, the bicarbonate/carbonate ions tend to accumulate on the anode side, resulting in a pH gradient across the membrane, as depicted in Fig. 6d. This pH gradient would cause concentration overvoltage and indirectly decrease the catalyst reaction kinetics.86 Consequently, many interesting studies on reducing the effects of CO2via gas stream management, the development of a CO2-resistant catalyst, and beyond are highly desirable and will be discussed in the following section. Fig. 6e presents the polarization curve and peak power density profile of an AEMFC (50 °C, H2/O2 as fed gas) with the use of PGM as a hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) catalyst (0.5 mgPt cm−2) and Fe–Nx–C as an oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalyst (3 mgnon-PGM cm−2).81 Obviously, the power density of 155 mW cm−2 (current density, j = 240 mA cm−2 and E = 0.65 V) for this AEMFC is far lower than that for a PEMFC (∼440 mW cm−2) employing non-PGM/PGM based ORR/HOR catalysts, let alone the state-of-the-art PEMFCs (∼1000 mW cm−2) using PGM-based catalysts.87,88 On the other hand, the US Department of Energy (DOE) has set a 2025 target for PGM catalyst in PEMFCs to further increase its activity and durability while reducing the cost. On account of these incentives, it is highly imperative to develop non-PGM-based AEMFCs to compete with or even replace their PEM counterparts, so that the extremely high production cost of PEMFCs can be fundamentally overcome. To this end, an in-depth understanding of the key challenges in AEM fuel cells will be carefully discussed in the following section in an attempt to find plausible solutions for low-cost high-performance AEMFCs.
 Fig. 6  (a) Overview of the basic components of AEM fuel cells at the system level. (b) Illustration of the key components for an electric vehicle powered by an H2–O2 fuel cell and the cell stack architecture. (c) Polarization curves of AEM fuel cells impacted by CO2 concentrations in the feeding gas. (d) The effects of (bi)carbonate ions on the AEM during operation. (e) Performance of the Fe–Nx–C type cathode catalyst-based AEMFCs with a loading amount of 3 mg non-PGM cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 

3.3. Key performance indicators (KPIs) for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
Based on the challenges for and key technological breakthroughs in water electrolyzers in the past 200 years of development, the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) has roughly classified this period into five generations of electrolyzers.38 Specifically, for the current 5th generation (post-2020) water electrolyzers, the key challenge lies in how to translate the water electrolyzer from the niche to the GW scale to attain its expected role in green H2 production. Meanwhile, the detailed target for 5th generation water electrolyzers is a trade-off between cost (<US$ 200 per kW), durability (50000 h), and efficiency (∼80% lower heating value (LHV)).38Table 2 gives a comparison of key parameters of AEM water electrolyzer technology in 2020 and outlines the projected targets for 2050. It is foreseen that great improvements in durability and capital cost are highly needed for AEM water electrolyzers to achieve the 2050 target. Moreover, the 2050 target can be used to provide guidelines for industry and academic researchers for the rational design and development of key components, working management, and operation monitoring to accelerate the practical deployment of AEMWE technology before 2050. Apart from AEM water electrolyzer technology, AEM fuel cells also achieved fast progress, so KPIs of AEMFC key components and evaluation parameters are very much needed. To this end, the KPIs of AEMFCs in 2020 and the targets in 2030 are illustrated in Table 3. Considering that the currently reported AEMFCs have mostly employed PGM-based materials as catalysts, the specific targets for PGM-based and PGM-free catalysts are both provided. Generally speaking, the ultimate goal of AEMFCs is to achieve a comparable power density to PEMFCs with the use of PGM-free catalysts.43,89,90 Therefore, researchers are encouraged to refer to Tables 2 and 3 to have a better understanding of the targets for AEM technologies, which will guide and accelerate the design and advancement of key components and the whole devices.
Table 2 Key performance indicators (KPI) for an AEM water electrolyzer in 2020 and 2050




KPI for AEMWE
2020
2050




Anode catalyst
IrO2, Ni–Fe oxides, Co3O4, etc.
Non-noble metals, metal oxides, and metal-free compounds.


Cathode catalyst
Pt black, Ni–Mo oxides, CeO2–La2O3, etc.
Non-noble metals, metal oxides, and metal-free compounds.


Anion exchange membrane
Quaternary ammonia polysulfone (QAPS), A-201 (Tokuyama), etc.
Unknown


Ionomer
QAPS
Unknown


Nominal current density (A cm−2)
0.2–2
>2


Voltage range (V)
1.4–2.0
<2.0


Operating temperature (°C)
40–60
80


Cell pressure (bar)
<35
>70


Load range
5%–100%
5%–200%


H2 purity
99.9–99.999%
>99.9999%


Voltage efficiency (LHV)
52–67%
>75%


Electrical efficiency (stack)
51.5–66 kW h kg−1 H2
<42 kW h kg−1 H2


Electrical efficiency (system)
57–69 kW h kg−1 H2
<45 kW h kg−1 H2


Lifetime (stack) (hours)
>5000
100000–120000


Stack unit size
2.5 kW
2 MW


Electrode area (cm2)
<300
1000


Cold start (to nominal load) (min)
<20
<5


Capital costs (stack-only) minimum 1 MW (USD per kW)
Unknown
<US$ 100


Capital costs (estimate for the entire system) minimum 10 MW (USD per kW)
Unknown
<US$ 200




Table 3 Key performance indicators (KPI) for an AEM fuel cell in 2020 and 2030




KPI for AEMFC
2020
2030




Anode catalyst
PtRu/C, Pt/C, NiMo/C, Cr–NiOx, etc.
Fully PGM-free MEAs are recommended.


Ni-based alloys and/or Ni-based compound.


Cathode catalyst
Pd/C, Ag/C, Co3O4/C, Fe–N–C, etc.
Fully PGM-free MEAs are recommended.


Fe–N–C and/or Fe–N–C/metal oxide-based metal compounds.


Anion exchange membrane
Quaternary ammonia polysulfone (QAPS), AS4 (Tokuyama), etc.
Unknown


Ionomer
QAPS
Unknown


Peak power density (mW cm−2)
<100 for non-PGM cell, 100–500 for PGM-free anode cell, 100–1500 for PGM-free cathode cell, and >1500 for PGM based cell.
≥600 under H2/air (maximum pressure of 1.5 atm) in PGM-free MEA


Ultimate goal is to achieve 1 W cm−2 at rated power (∼0.65 V at 95 °C), PGM-free MEA, T ≥ 80 °C, P ≤ 250 kPa


Operating temperature (°C)
40–60
80


Lifetime (stack) (hours)
>5000
100000


Durability milestone
<10% voltage degradation over a 2000 h hold at 0.6 A cm−2 with an initial voltage greater than 0.6 V
—


Voltage efficiency (LHV)
52–67%
>75%


H2 crossover
Unknown
<5 mA cm−2


Cost for the membrane that can be practically integrated into a device
Unknown
≤20 US$ 20 m−2




3.4. Efficiency of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
To make a reliable and accurate comparison, the efficiencies in describing AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells including system electrical efficiency and/or cell stack efficiency need to be critically reviewed and presented.

System electrical efficiency. 
Before we discuss the efficiency of AEM devices, the heat of combustion will be introduced. Here, LHV, denoted as the lower heating value, is a term known in industry to measure the released thermal energy in the combustion of a fuel based on the forming of water vapor. The HHV (higher heating value) is a higher value for describing the thermal energy of a fuel combusted based on forming liquid water. For AEM fuel cells, the electrical efficiency is usually determined by dividing the produced electricity by the HHV or LHV of the fuel used.91 The HHV and LHV of H2 are 39.4 kW h kg−1 (141.7 MJ kg−1) and 33.3 kW h kg−1 (120 MJ kg−1), respectively.20,92 Consequently, the system electrical efficiency of AEM fuel cells can be described viaeqn (3.10). For AEM water electrolyzers that are the reverse of the fuel cells, the system electrical efficiency can be inverted as shown in eqn (3.11). (3.10) (3.11)One should note that the system electrical efficiency is widely known in industry and applied to describe the cell systems that include a range of individual components (e.g., power conditioners, controls, cell stacks, humidifiers, fuel processors, etc.). It is suggested to indicate whether it is calculated based on the HHV or the LHV when quoting electrical efficiency.


Voltage efficiency for a single cell or cell stacks. 
In contrast, the voltage efficiency for a single cell and/or cell stacks is more suitable for fundamental researchers to assess the efficiency of the two devices. Here, the voltage efficiency of a single cell and/or cell stacks is expressed viaeqn (3.12). (3.12)The thermodynamic voltage can be calculated viaeqn (3.9). As mentioned before, the thermodynamic voltage of water electrolyzers/H2–O2 fuel cells operating at standard temperature and pressure is 1.23 V. For fuel cells, the operating voltage is lower than the thermodynamic voltage due to the overpotential coming from reaction kinetics, ohmic resistance, etc.; hence, the voltage efficiency for AEM fuel cells is less than 100%. For AEM water electrolyzers, the voltage efficiency is higher than 100% because under standard temperature and pressure, splitting one mole of liquid water to produce one mole of H2 requires 285.8 kJ of energy that includes 237.2 kJ as electricity and 48.6 kJ as heat.65,91 Calculating the voltage efficiency of water electrolyzers viaeqn (3.12) does not consider the required heat and hence causes a value higher than 100%. Consequently, the water splitting energy (285.8 kJ mol−1) is rather reasonable to be employed to calculate the thermoneutral voltage considering H2 and O2 are produced with 100% thermal efficiency without any waste heat. The thermoneutral voltage (E) is calculated to be 1.481 V and a rather reasonable voltage efficiency for AEM water electrolyzer single cell and/or cell stacks can be determined viaeqn (3.13). (3.13)

3.5. Challenges of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells

3.5.1. Scientific challenges. 
A view of the architecture of the membrane electrode assembly (MEA) for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells is presented in Fig. 7a, which is known to play a dominant role in the durability and performance of water electrolyzers and fuel cells. As illustrated in Fig. 7a, the membrane electrode assembly is composed of an anion exchange membrane, two catalyst layers, and two gas diffusion layers, respectively, which form the well-known 5-layer MEA. The gas-diffusion layer, intended to supply high gas permeability and electronic conductivity while preventing water flooding, is composed of a substrate and a microporous layer (MPL) that are normally prepared from Teflon-treated carbon cloth and Teflon-modified carbon powder, respectively. To reach a balance between mechanical strength, chemical stability, and mass transfer efficiency, the thickness of the GDL usually ranges from 200 to 400 μm. Apart from the GDL, electrocatalysts and ionomers are usually dispersed in isopropyl alcohol (IPA), which is then coated onto the anion exchange membrane to form a catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) to maximize the reaction kinetics and narrow the electron/hydroxide transportation pathways.93,94 In addition to the CCM, catalyst ink (prepared from catalysts and ionomers) can be also deposited in the gas diffusion layer to form a gas diffusion electrode (GDE), which is also known as a catalyst coated substrate (CCS).94–96 The central part of an MEA is the membrane, which not only needs to have fast conduction of ions and water molecules, but also needs to withstand harsh working conditions such as higher pressure, voltage, and working temperature.38 A single cell of an AEM water electrolyzer or fuel cell is at least composed of an anion-exchange membrane, anode and cathode catalyst layers, two gas-diffusion layers, and two bipolar plates, respectively. In a practical cell assembly, gaskets and sealing materials are often added to increase the airtightness and decrease gas crossover, since both are important to improve cell safety and efficiency. The fundamental challenges and technological obstacles for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells are illustrated in Fig. 7b and c, where the fundamental issues normally relate to the problems of each component in AEM devices, which need to be individually addressed, while technological obstacles usually have to do with the challenges faced at the system level from MEAs to single cells or even MW-scale cell stacks. According to the KPIs of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells reported by the IEA, state-of-the-art water electrolyzers face challenges from the niche to the mainstream level, from the MW to the GW scale, and from potential to reality. Furthermore, the levelized cost, durability, and working efficiency of future water electrolyzers are projected to be lower than 200 US$ kW−1, higher than 50000 hours, and approach 80%, respectively.38,97 For AEM fuel cells, the currently employed PGM-based electrocatalyst is expected to be fully replaced with PGM-free catalysts, and the peak power density will be maintained at no lower than 600 mW cm−2, in addition to a stable operation time of more than 100000 h.90,98 The overall requirements on AEMWEs and AEMFCs also lead to specific demands on cell components, and the challenges and benefit analysis for each component are depicted in Fig. 7b. The most challenging as well as the most profitable aspect for AEM technology comes at the membrane and triple-phase boundary (TPB) level, which includes membrane durability, chemical binding, and mechanical stability of the ionomer/catalyst, as well as the optimal ionomer for building the TPB. Next to it, the moderately challenging part on the one hand relates to electrocatalyst kinetics and durability. On the other hand, it is necessary to decrease the membrane resistance and gas permeability. These two moderate challenges are expected to bring identically high profits. Third, developing a low-cost GDL, reducing the interface resistance from catalyst to GDL, and controlling the oxidized state of the catalyst on the electrode are considered three moderate challenges but will bring medium benefits.
 Fig. 7  (a) Overview of the architecture of the membrane electrode assembly with three key components, namely, the membrane, the catalyst layer, and the gas-diffusion layer. (b) The degree of difficulty and profit analysis for the development of fundamental components in AEMWEs and AEMFCs. (c) Key problems and technological obstacles for the development of AEMWEs and AEMFCs at three different levels, the 3-layer MEA level, the single cell level, and the cell stack system level. 


3.5.2. Technological barriers. 
The technological obstacles from moderate to high for AEM devices are presented in Fig. 7c. The electrochemical performance of AEMWEs and AEMFCs is heavily dependent on the MEA, and hence, the fabrication method for the MEA will play a decisive role in AEM devices. Consequently, finding optimal fabrication methods (CCM or CCS) to build a robust and high-performance MEA is most important for the 3-layer MEA, which is a relatively moderate obstacle. For a single cell, bipolar plates and gas diffusion layers are two key components of the cell. The moderate fundamental challenge of developing a low-cost GDL has been discussed before; how to set a balance between different key components to achieving cell performance and durability is critical. The thickness of each component is roughly described in Fig. 7a, but the geometrical size of each layer is a compromise between the reaction kinetics and transport properties on the one hand and the production cost on the other, which is highly dependent on the raw materials. For instance, higher OH− conductivity can be accessed by narrowing the thickness of the membrane and enhancing its water uptake; unfortunately, this will, in turn, weaken its mechanical strength and chemical durability. Meanwhile, a thinner membrane usually implies a higher gas crossover, which also causes potential safety problems and decreases cell efficiency. In addition to a delicate balance between every cell component, the cell assembly needs to maintain high quality and avoid any safety problems to ensure the cell's efficiency and lifespan. These two aspects compose the most crucial technological obstacles for a single cell, which is remarkably higher than for the 3-layer MEA. Last but not least, overwhelming obstacles come at the level of the cell stack system. For water electrolyzers, a suitable electrolyte is necessary to ensure high cell activity and durability. For fuel cells, water management is extremely complicated due to the unbalanced water production and consumption at the anode and cathode areas. In addition, the cell system is required to mount gas management, heat management, and balance of plant systems to reduce the problems of gas crossover and overheating, which is expected to improve the system's efficiency and safety.

4. Key components of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
4.1. Membranes for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells

4.1.1. Chemistry of the anion-exchange membrane. 
The anion-exchange membrane (AEM) of AEMWEs and AEMFCs is a thin-layered polymer matrix that permits the shuttling of anions (e.g., OH−, CO32−, Cl−, etc.) and water molecules but blocks the electrons and gases. In the fabrication of cell stacks, the membrane is in direct contact with the catalyst layer that will be further assembled with gas-diffusion layers and bipolar plates. During operation, the redox reactions occur at the catalyst/ionomer/membrane interface and form a triple-phase boundary (TPB). The critical demands on mass transfer, electron transfer, anion shuttling, water flow, durability, robustness, etc. for building excellent water electrolyzers and fuel cells make the anion-exchange membrane the most critical part. This requires a membrane with excellent chemical, mechanical, and thermal stability, in addition to good ionic conductivity. Based on the above-mentioned requirements (Fig. 8a), AEM is usually made of a polymer matrix that is composed of polymer backbones as the main chains and cationic groups as the side chains. Meanwhile, organic linkers are usually needed to connect the cationic groups and the polymer main chain. The cationic groups provide the anchoring sites for anion transportation, and the investigated cationic groups include quaternary ammonium (QA) ions, phosphonium, ligand–metal complexes, sulphonium, tertiary diamines, etc. On the other hand, the polymer backbones include polyphenylene oxide (PPO), polyphenylene, poly(styrene), ethylene tetrafluoroethylene (ETFE), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), etc. We next discuss the fundamental physicochemical properties of the membrane (Fig. 8b) and the interplay of these features in building membranes with desirable OH− conductivity, chemical stability, mechanical stability, and gas permeability.
 Fig. 8  (a) Composition-structure analysis of an anion-exchange membrane (AEM), including the polymer backbones and cationic groups. (b) Fundamental properties of the AEM and (c) performance targets of the AEM through trade-off of the fundamental features. (d) A comparison of key features of commercially available membranes and academically reported membranes. BTMA: benzyl trimethylammonium. 
Ion exchange capacity (IEC). 
Ion exchange capacity (IEC) is generally identified as the moles of fixed cationic groups per gram of dry polymer. It is usually determined by aqueous or non-aqueous titration or nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).99,100 For hydroxide or chloride exchange membranes, IEC can be measured by back-titration in HCl (∼0.1 M) or KCl (0.1 M) solution, respectively. Specifically, the hydroxide exchange membrane, together with a control sample without a membrane can be immersed in HCl (∼0.1 M) solution to achieve a complete exchange of the hydroxide ions. The HCl solutions are then respectively titrated with standard KOH solutions, in which the difference in the consumed volume of the standard KOH solution (ΔV) in titrating the HCl solution can be used to calculate the number of hydroxide ions.99 The membrane is dried in a vacuum oven to obtain its dry weight (Wdry) after titration.99 The IEC (mmol g−1) is calculated according to eqn (4.1). Here, ΔVNaOH and CNaOH are the volume and the concentration of the titrant solution, respectively. (4.1)
Water uptake (WU), hydration number (λ), and swelling ratio (SR). 
Anion-exchange membranes possess a strong affinity for water. Water uptake (WU) is the relative weight ratio of the adsorbed water with respect to the dry membrane.100 The WU of a membrane is essentially determined by the polymer backbone, and the testing conditions (e.g., hydrothermal treatment and drying temperature) would affect the tested value. To be specific, the weights and surface areas of the wet membrane (equilibrated in deionized water at a series of temperatures) and the dry membrane (dried in an oven (60–80 °C)) are suggested by measuring three times with no more than ± 5% deviation. The obtained values are used to calculate the water uptake, hydration number (λ), and swelling ratio of the membrane according to the following equations (eqn (4.2), (4.3) and (4.4)). (4.2) (4.3) (4.4)
Tensile/strain strength (TS) and elongation at break (EB %). 
Tensile/strain strength is the ability of the membrane to withstand maximum tensile stress while being stretched without failing or breaking.101 The tensile/strain strength of a membrane can be obtained from a stress–strain curve that is usually recorded using a tensile tester.102 Further increasing the tensile stress would result in membrane deformation. Elongation at break (EB) is the ratio between the changed length at breakage (Lbreak) and the initial length (Linitial) of the membrane. The tensile/strain strength and elongation at break of a membrane are expressed by the following equations. Fmax is the maximum stress at the membrane breaking point, and S is the cross-sectional area of the membrane along the direction of the applied stress (eqn (4.5) and (4.6)). (4.5) (4.6)
Ion conductivity (σ), chemical and mechanical stability, and gas permeability. 
Ion conductivity (σ) is one of the most significant parameters of the membrane, which is essentially determined by the physicochemical properties of the membrane. The ion conductivity of a membrane can be calculated according to eqn (4.7).103 Here, d, S, and R are the thickness, surface area, and resistance of the membrane, respectively. Degradation of ionic conductivity of the membrane can be measured by the chemical stability, which can be obtained by testing the σ before and after a certain amount of operation time. The mechanical stability of the membrane is intrinsically determined by the polymer backbone, while the water content also plays a significant role. In general, an excess amount of water uptake usually makes the membrane fragile, thus reducing the mechanical and chemical stability of the membrane. Moreover, the tensile/strain strength, elongation at break, Young's modulus, etc. have been widely employed as standard parameters to evaluate the mechanical stability of a membrane. Last but not least, the gas permeability of a membrane, the ability of the membrane to allow gases to pass through it, is theoretically determined by the polymer matrix.104 First, different types of gas molecules possess varied solubility and diffusivity in the polymer, and hence, they exhibit different permeation in a membrane.105 Second, the structure, polarity, orientation, fillers, humidity, etc. of the membrane also have a huge influence on gas permeability. For AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells, ideal membranes should also block the H2/O2 permeation to maximize the efficiency of the device. The gas permeability is usually quoted in units of Barrer (1 Barrer = 3.35 × 10−16 mol (m s Pa)−1).106 (4.7)We carefully reviewed the state-of-the-art performance of AEMs from the literature with reference to proton-exchange membrane performances in PEMWEs and PEMFCs, and the desired parameters of an excellent AEM can be projected as shown in Fig. 8c. The membrane parameters here are given as a reference for the research community for fast, reliable, and accurate AEM screening and developing. Specifically, an AEM should possess excellent OH− conductivity (>100 mS cm−1), outstanding chemical stability (with OH− conductivity retention of over 80% after 50000 h operation and thermal stability > 100 °C), strong mechanical stability (50000–100000 h), and lower gas permeability (<10 × 10−17 mol (cm s Pa)−1). It is challenging to satisfy the above-mentioned requirements simultaneously, and the trade-off of the fundamental properties of the membrane must be carefully designed. In Fig. 8d, the physicochemical properties of commercial AEMs vs. academically reported AEMs are summarized. The poly(fluorenyl aryl piperidinium) (PFAP)-based membrane has been reported with higher OH− conductivity and excellent mechanical stability compared to commercial membranes,103,107 but the durability might not compete with some of the commercial membranes (e.g., Sustainion® X37-5). Consequently, the durability of the reported membranes and the membrane production costs need to be further improved for practical electrolyzers and fuel cells.


4.1.2. Transportation dynamics of anion-exchange membrane. 
Understanding the transportation mechanism and degradation pathway of the anions in AEMs is a prerequisite to developing low-cost high-performance AEMs. Initially, the proton transportation mechanism in the PEM was well studied, and currently, the dominant proton shuttling theory includes the Grotthuss mechanism, diffusion, migration, and convection.108,109 In addition, the experimentally measured proton conductivity is also highly dependent on specific conditions, such as temperature, relative humidity (RH), and pressure.99,110 Interestingly, pioneering researchers found that the conductivity of hydroxide ions in AEMs is influenced similarly by these factors, with the consequence that the shuttle mechanism of hydroxide ions in AEMs is thought to be equally dominated by the Grotthuss mechanism, diffusion, migration, and convection, as shown in Fig. 9a.110,111 For the transportation of protons (H+) in PEM, the Grotthuss mechanism is based on the formation and concomitant cleavage of covalent bonds with neighboring molecules. In the AEM context, research has revealed that OH− exhibits Grotthuss behavior as H+ does in an aqueous solution, so that the movement of OH− is identically associated with hydrogen bond formation and cleavage along a chain of water molecules.112,113 In addition, diffusion and migration in the transport of OH−, following the concentration and/or electrical gradient in aqueous solution, also occur. Convective transport implies that the diffusion of water molecules through the membrane is imposed by the hydraulic pressure gradient, stemming from the unbalanced water concentrations on both sides of the membrane, induced by the dragging of water molecules by OH−. Currently, the Grotthuss mechanism, diffusion and migration, and convection are considered as the most possible mechanisms for OH− transport in AEMs.103,110,114,115 Apart from experimental verification, exploring the ion shuttling dynamics from the viewpoint of theoretical chemistry is another important way to find the truth. In view of this, Voth and co-authors proposed a multiscale reactive molecular dynamics (MS-RMD) model to investigate the solvation structure and ion transport dynamics of hydroxide ions in AEMs.116 The proposed MS-RMD model enables the capture of the bonding configuration of the studied element following the changes in the environment, which is based on the multistate empirical valence bond algorithm with higher efficiency117 and overcomes the problem of modeling Grotthuss shuttling, which has not been resolved by conventional classical molecular dynamics. In this work, poly(vinyl benzyltrimethylammonium) (PVBTMA), bearing hydration of 14, was adopted to study the water dynamics in the fully hydrated state. By building and comparing the hydroxide models of MS-RMD-OH (bulk water system) and MS-RMD-PVBTMA (PVBTMA membrane system), the solvation structure and hydroxide mechanism in the PVBTMA can be reasonably deduced. In Fig. 9b, the QA+ group at the end of a side chain is shown to attach to the polymer backbone. The distance between QA+ groups from two adjacent side chains was determined to be 6.5 Å, while the first peak in the radial distribution function (RDFs) for the N–O* configuration ranges from 3.5 to 6.1 Å, suggesting that part of their first coordination shells is well overlapped, as shown in the dark blue area in Fig. 9b. Meanwhile, the overlapped regions and the first coordination shells of N–O* for the QA+ groups form a continuous surface channel, where the hydroxide ions have a higher preference to stay, freely migrate, and be transported. Moreover, a significant higher “continuous” mean square displacement (MSD) component in comparison with a “discrete” MSD component was demonstrated for the PVBTMA system, indicating that the dominant contribution was from a vehicular mechanism (related to the “continuous” component) as compared to the Grotthuss hopping pathway (related to the “discrete” component). Finally, the activation energy (ΔEa) of hydroxide diffusion in an AEM is verified to be larger than the ΔEa for proton diffusion in a PEM, manifesting that elevated temperature could promote the transport kinetics of OH− in AEMs considerably more than for H+ in PEMs. One should note that the mechanism proposed by Voth was derived from the study of a block copolymer with fully hydrated hydrophilic domains, which might not be suitable to describe the water dynamics in the nonblocky polymers with a relatively low degree of functionalization. In light of this, Bedrov's group selected poly(p-phenylene oxide) (PPO)-based AEMs and discussed the OH− transport mechanism in AEMs made of nonblocky polymers.118 Here, the reactive ReaxFF and nonreactive Atomistic Polarizable Potential for Liquids, Electrolytes, and Polymers (APPLE&P) force fields were employed in a joint molecular dynamics (MD) study to gain in-depth insight into the water transport behaviour.119–121 As shown in Fig. 9c, the shuttling of hydroxide ions along the sub-nanometer wide water channels is provided, where the mobility of OH− is highly alleviated by the narrow bottlenecks. The transport of OH− through the narrow bottlenecks requires balancing the vehicular and Grotthuss hopping mechanisms. This is because the vehicular mechanism requires the partial dehydration of OH−, which is thermodynamically unfavourable and consequently leads to higher activation energy. On the other hand, Grotthuss hopping works very efficiently, so that OH− moves from one side of the bottleneck to the other with negligible loss of the hydration structure and minimized activation energy. This work highlights the importance of the trade-off between the vehicular and Grotthuss hopping mechanisms in the membranes that are made of nonblocky polymers. It is interesting to note that the water and OH− transport behaviour is heavily dependent on the water content inside the membrane, which is also highly associated with the molecular architecture of membrane ion-conducting channels.122–124 Deciphering the water and OH− dynamics in relation to membrane hydration is another scientific issue that remains to be addressed. Based on this, Lyonnard and co-authors proposed the employment of quasi-elastic neutron scattering (QENS) to thoroughly investigate the polymer–water interaction and OH− transport mechanism over a range of temperatures, hydration levels, and timescales.125 In this work, a commercial anion-conducting membrane (Fumasep, FAD-55) was studied. As described in Fig. 9d–g, elastic scattering intensities were analysed using elastic fixed window scans (EFWS) of FAD-55 membranes that had been chemically and isotopically substituted. The profile of EFWS as a function of temperature can be classified into four regions. In region 1 (T < 200 K), a regular loss in the EFWS intensity for λ = 4 can be assigned to the fast rotation of –CH3 groups attached to the polymer. In region 2 (200 K < T < 250 K), a rapid decrease in EFWS intensity accompanied by a sharp increase in m.s.d is observed for all samples (λ = 4 and λ = 13), which can be ascribed to the activation of first polymer side-chain dynamics that takes place within a few picoseconds. Regarding region 3 (250 K < T < ∼270 K), a continuously sudden drop of EFWS intensity starting from 250 K appears across the slower to fast timescale measurements (Fig. 9d–g), which can be attributed to the rotational–translational water dynamics activated within hydrated AEM samples. With regard to region 4 (T > ∼270 K), another regular decrease in EFWS intensity associated with increase in m.s.d. is observed for λ = 4 and λ = 13, implying the activation of a further dynamics process occurring on a much slower timescale. Based on the TGA analysis, this can be assigned to the ion hopping process that is accelerated by the remaining water molecules bridging two OH− groups. The EFWS intensity is translated into water and OH− dynamics and mechanisms, as illustrated in Fig. 9h and i. The water distribution within the cell is uneven between the anode and cathode, and the hydroxide transport mechanism is highly dependent on the water uptake. Under fully hydrated conditions (λ = 13), the OH− shuttling process is mainly occupied by vehicular transport, so the self-diffusion coefficient of translationally mobile species is comparable to the total diffusion coefficient of the membrane. The simulations suggest a long-range component that is comparable to the previously reported value, implying
that the Grotthuss mechanism contributes to ∼15% of the total process. For a membrane bearing a moderate hydration (λ = 8) level, the self-diffusion coefficient is 50% lower than that under fully hydrated conditions. In the case of lower hydration conditions (λ ≤ 8) (Fig. 9i), the water-mediated OH− hopping dominates the hydroxide transport mechanism, while the contribution arising from the vehicular mechanism takes only a limited share. This work provides a systematic investigation of the water and hydroxide dynamics within a fast timescale at different temperature ranges, and for the first time, reveals the OH− shuttling mechanism under different water hydration conditions, which will provide constructive guidance for the design of functional anion-exchange membranes.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of hydroxide ion transfer dynamics in an AEM. (a) A combination of the Grotthuss mechanism, diffusion and migration, and convection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing. (b) Understanding hydroxide solvation and transport in the AEM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Grotthuss transition of hydroxide ions in an AEM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d–g) Elastic and inelastic scattering intensity (EFWS) and mean square atomic displacement (m.s.d.) values of the FAD-55 membrane. (h and i) Water dynamic mechanism and diffusion coefficients of anionic species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. 


4.1.3. Degradation of anion-exchange membrane. 
Given that the anion-exchange membrane is composed of polymer backbones, cationic groups, and polymer-cationic-group linkages, all of them are prone to suffering from degradation under practical operation, leading to reduced ion conductivity, and weakened mechanical and chemical stability. The degradation mechanism of each unit varies according to the specific polymer composition. In the case of a commercially available AEM (benzyl trimethylammonium (BTMA)), the cationic groups (alkyl ammoniums) are supposed to be attacked by hydroxide ions, leading to the formation of alcohol and trimethylamine (Fig. 10a).40,126 The nucleophile substitution (SN2 substitution) mechanism has been well studied and is considered the prominent degradation mechanism in the QA head groups.126,127 Besides SN2 substitution, ylide formation and Hofmann elimination were also reported as possible degradation pathways for quaternary ammonium cationic groups mainly dependent on the presence or absence of β-hydrogen atoms.128–132 In addition to QA groups, pyridinium and imidazolium are typical representatives of N-based cyclic cationic groups that have been widely investigated. In Fig. 10a, pyridinium is very likely to undergo nucleophilic addition and displacement at the 2- and 4-positions, as well as further oxidation with the formation of amide by-products.128 In the meantime, diazabicyclooctane (DABCO)-based cations were also studied. Their cyclic structure in the vicinity of cationic nitrogen impedes the nucleophilic attack of hydroxide ions while making the degradation of DABCO follow the nucleophilic displacement reaction.130 In contrast to QA, the stability of phosphonium and sulfonium cationic groups is less stable and tends to suffer from faster degradation.127,133,134 The OH− attacking the cationic S sites results in a Stevens rearrangement of benzyldimethylsulfonium, as shown in Fig. 10a. Considering the increasing amount of cationic groups in the membrane studies, a precise understanding of the degradation mechanism for each group is challenging. It has to be noted that the degradation pathway for most of the reported membranes (e.g., QA, imidazolium, guanidinium, pyridinium, tertiary sulfonium, phosphonium, etc.) is usually initiated by nucleophile (OH−) attack, followed by substitution, rearrangement, etc. On the other hand, stability issues of polymer backbones associated with the OH− attack also cause the degradation of AEM, which needs to be investigated to obtain highly durable AEMs. Following the concept of wisely choosing cationic groups, the studied polymer backbones range from polysulfones and fluorinated polymers to polyolefins, polyaromatics, etc.135–138 Polysulfones and fluorinated polymers are susceptible to suffering from the ether and quaternary carbon hydrolysis and dehydrofluorination, respectively, stemming from hydroxide attack.139,140 Notably, in Fig. 10b, the carbon skeleton of partially fluorinated polyolefins tends to be attacked by OH−, triggering the generation of CC double bonds and further chain scission.140,141 Meanwhile, the aryl ether linkages (C–O–C bonds) existing in polysulfones and/or quaternary-ammonium-tethered poly(arylene ether)s are easily attacked by OH−. It was reported that the electron-withdrawing groups and certain types of side chains both increase the accessibility of OH− and intensify the degradation, accelerating the aryl ether cleavage, as shown in Fig. 10b.126,142 Kim and co-authors employed DFT calculations to further demonstrate that the energy barrier (85.8 kJ mol−1) of aryl-ether cleavage is significantly reduced than that of the aryl–aryl cleavage (223.8–246.0 kJ mol−1), again indicating the excellent stability of aromatic polymer backbones made only of carbon–carbon bonds.143 In contrast, the alkaline stability of non-fluorinated polyolefins and fully fluorinated polyolefins is remarkably better, in which negligible backbones can be detected after several hundred hours of operation.137,144 Polybenzimidazoles have also been commonly used as polymer backbones in addition to working as tethered cationic groups.
 Fig. 10  Degradation pathways and mechanisms for specific compositions of an AEM. (a) Cationic groups, (b) polymer backbones, and (c) membrane linkages. 
Although the polybenzimidazole backbone has been recognized as quite stable, the degradation triggered by nucleophilic attack at the benzimidazole C2 position is hardly unavoidable (Fig. 10b), where the chain is broken with the formation of free amino and carboxylate residues.145 Apart from polymer backbones and cationic groups, the polymer-cationic-group linkages or linkers (Fig. 10c) also face degradation problems arising from hydroxide ion attack.


4.1.4. Design and fabrication of anion exchange membranes. 
An understanding of the ion dynamics and degradation mechanisms of AEMs offers guidelines for the design and optimization of anion-exchange membranes with high performance. In Fig. 11a–c, the membrane fabrication methods and the modulation strategies are displayed. Specifically, the fabrication avenues for the anion-exchange membranes can be grouped into direct polymerization and post-polymerization functionalization, depending on whether the cationic groups have been installed on the polymer backbones. A comprehensive introduction to a variety of synthetic strategies for AEMs has recently been reported.146,147 Several polymerization methods, including copolymerization, sol–gel, grafting, plasma polymerization, etc., are presented in Fig. 11b. Furthermore, the membrane modulation strategies according to our understanding of membrane degradation mechanism are presented in Fig. 11c, and we will give detailed examples on how an AEM is rationally designed and optimized from the viewpoint of the polymer matrix, steric hindrance, and electron-donating groups in the next chapter.
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthetic approaches and (b) specific methods for anion-exchange membranes. (c) The commonly employed AEM design and tuning strategies. 


4.1.5. Advances on anion exchange membranes. 
Developing functional membranes with high anion conductivity, chemical durability, mechanical robustness, and low gas permeability is the target for membrane scientists. To this end, the state-of-the-art progress of AEMs guided by the mentioned design and tuning strategies will be discussed in this section. Finding superior polymer matrices for membrane backbones and positive groups, as well as understanding the underlying rationale, are the first and foremost considerations. Inspired by this, Choe and Bae did a systematic alkaline stability study on a variety of different polymer backbones.148 Specifically, four different types of polymer structures, including Udel polysulfone (PSU), poly(phenylene oxide) (PPO), poly(biphenylalkylene) (PB), polystyrene-b-poly(ethylene-co-butylene)-b-polystyrene (SEBS), and their counterparts modified by electron-withdrawing groups (PSU-CH2Cl/F, PPO-CH2Br, bromoalkyl-tethered PB (PBA), and SEBS-CH2Cl) were processed under different alkaline conditions (KOH and NaOCH3 solutions). Meanwhile, gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and 1H NMR spectroscopy were employed to conduct a quantitative analysis of the degradation of the polymer chains. As shown in Fig. 12a, by comparing the average molecular weight (Mn) of the four polymer structures and their counterparts, the degradation behaviour of the four types of polymer structures was obtained. The four polymer structures exhibited higher anti-degradation capability than their counterparts, and SEBS showed the best performance, while PSU-CH2Cl delivered the poorest chemical stability toward base media. The small molecule model and experiments confirmed that the presence of aryl ether bonds in a polymer matrix showed reduced chemical stability under alkaline treatment. Furthermore, the electron-withdrawing groups such as sulfone and benzyl trimethylammonium (BTMA) could accelerate the chemical degradation by decreasing the energy barrier of aryl ether bond cleavage. Consequently, a consensus was increasingly reached that higher alkaline stability when using all-carbon backbones to fabricate AEMs can be obtained compared with those heteroatom-containing backbones.146,149 The earlier investigated positive groups have been discussed in several excellent articles.126,150,151 In terms of commercial BTMA, the susceptibility to degradation via nucleophilic substitution and ylid elimination restricts the long-term operation of BTMA in AEMs, although it features easy fabrication and decent hydroxide ion conductivity.152 Hence, an increasing number of researchers aimed to propose a universal protocol to make a quantitative assessment and comparison of a variety of cationic groups across the membrane research community.152–155 Coates et al. carefully considered all the possible parameters affecting the evaluation of membrane degradation, such as type of solvent, base and cation concentration, the hydrogen/deuterium exchange process, and the reaction vessel, and proposed the protocol illustrated in Fig. 12b.156 Based on this unified protocol, the remaining cation percentages after a 30 day alkaline treatment for 20 organic cationic model compounds were obtained as a general cation stability trend for cation design and development. Piperidinium and tetraalkylammonium were the most stable cations, while the chemical stability of simple imidazolium, pyridinium, and guanidinium remains to be improved.157,158 Apart from the commonly studied types of the polymer matrix, the discovery of unique functional polymers is ongoing. Lee and co-authors proposed poly(fluorene-co-terphenyl N,N′-dimethylpiperidinium) (PFTP-x, where x gives the molar ratio of the fluorenyl piperidinium segment in the copolymer) as an AEM in view of its excellent hydroxide conductivity and rigidity.107 The molecular structure of PFTP is shown in Fig. 12c, and an optical image of the thin membrane film (7–20 μm) together with its cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) image is also attached. By tuning the water uptake and the swelling ratio of PFTP through changes in the ratio of fluorenyl piperidinium in the membrane, the ideal ionic conductivity can be derived. Consequently, PFTP-13, bearing the lowest swelling ratio, exhibited an OH− conductivity of 208 mS cm−1 at 98 °C. By using PFTP-13 as the membrane, Pt-Ru/C as the anode catalyst, and a 75%/100% anode/cathode RH, the peak power density (PPD) of the AEMFC reached 1.67 W cm−2 (0/0 bar back pressure and fed with H2–O2) and 2.34 W cm−2 (1.3/1.3 bar back pressure and fed with H2–O2) at 80 °C. The OH− conductivity of PFTP-13 and the PPD when using the PFTP-13 membrane indicate strong competitiveness over conventional membranes (BTMA-based) and AEMFCs (Fig. 12d). The ∼20% ionic conductivity degradation after testing in 5 M NaOH (2000 h and 80 °C) for PFTP-13 membrane further demonstrated its strong durability and superiority in practical applications (Fig. 12e). Furthermore, the research on many other functional polymers to fabricate AEMs with superior performances has been reported in some very recent articles.159–163 In addition to the judicious choice of cationic groups and polymer backbones, conferring steric hindrance shielding on cationic groups and linkers is also an effective approach to regulating the AEM. Based on this, Zhang et al. proposed to incorporate an alkyl extender to strengthen the chemical stability and improve the hydroxide conductivity of AEMs.164 As shown in Fig. 13a and b, the introduction of different types of spacers and extenders into the polymer backbone is presented, and their performances in water uptake, swelling ratio, and conductivity as functions of the spacers and extenders are comparatively studied. Dual quaternary ammonium attached to the main chain via a spacer was denoted as SDQ. Alkoxyl-extender-containing dual quaternary ammonium attached to the main chain with a spacer (SDQEO), and alkyl-extender-containing dual quaternary ammonium attached to the main chain via a spacer (SDQEC) were introduced into identical polymer backbones (poly(phenylene oxide)) to obtain AEMs. As a proof-of-concept demonstration, the ionic conductivity for the AEM bearing a spacer and a hydrophilic extender in the side chain (SDQEO) increased remarkably because the introduced alkoxyl extender helped to improve the hydrophilicity and the formation of hydrophilic domains. Therefore, the hydroxide conductivity for AEMs with hydrophilic spacers is far higher than for those that do not have hydrophobic spacers, as shown in Fig. 13b. In addition, the chemical stability of SDQEO was remarkably higher, since the steric hindrance arising from the alkoxyl extender can provide additional protection for cationic groups in the membranes. Continuing this concept, a much similar work has been done to improve the membrane properties through modulation of steric hindrance in polymer backbones and cationic sites.165,166 To determine the comprehensive effects of cationic groups and steric hindrance on membrane performance, He et al. did a systematic study aided by DFT calculations and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.167 In this work, polysulfone (PSF) was selected as the membrane backbone, and trimethylammonium (QA), quaternary phosphonium (QP), and 1-methylimidazolium (Im) were employed as cationic groups. As presented in Fig. 13c and d, it was found that the water sorption of the membrane is mainly correlated with three key factors, i.e., the degree of hydration of the ions, the strength of the interchain interaction, and the location of the cationic groups. Initially, the interchain interactions of the membrane were determined to be of three different types, which are hydrophilic–hydrophilic interactions among QA groups, hydrophilic–hydrophobic interactions between QA and the sulfone groups on the PSF backbone, and hydrophobic–hydrophobic interactions between the sulfone groups. Apart from the two aforementioned strategies, introducing electron donating groups (EDGs) has also recently been employed to optimize the anti-oxidation stability of the membrane. Toward this end, He and co-authors did lots of excellent studies on incorporating electron donating groups into membrane backbones to improve the overall properties ((Fig. 14a).168,169 Specifically, He et al. selected a typical membrane backbone (poly(arylene ether ketone)s, PEAK) and proposed to transform electron-withdrawing CO groups into the electron-donating C-NH2 links to alleviate the aryl-ether cleavage.169 Hence, the CO group in the PEAK is substituted by a C-NH2 to
form poly(aryl ether amine) (PEAM). Meanwhile, tethered QA groups were grafted on the para position of the benzylic carbon. In Fig. 14b, the electrostatic potential (ESP) of the as-prepared AEMs (QA-PEAM and QA-PEAK) is provided, where the lower value of ether-aryl phenyl-C for QA-PEAM in comparison with QA-PAEK validates the less likelihood of nucleophilic attack by OH−. Furthermore, the lower Mulliken charge of the linker C for QA-PEAM compared with QA-PAEK again demonstrates the weakened interaction between linker C and OH−, proving the strong hindrance effects coming from the para position of QA groups. Consequently, the lower ESP and Mulliken charge arising from the grafting of the C-NH2 linkage protects the QA groups from nucleophilic attack, which is evidenced by the higher energy barrier of aryl-ether cleavage for QA-PEAM as compared with QA-PAEK (Fig. 14c and d) regardless of whether the degradation followed either the SNAr or the SN2 mechanism. This is very likely the reason for the enhanced alkaline stability of QA-PEAM tested in a 1 M KOH alkaline solution at 80 °C for 192 h. Following this concept, He's group achieved a decent progress in the optimization of AEM through the incorporation of the electron-donating groups on the polymer backbones or groups.168,171 Lee's group presented a detailed study on the alkaline stability of 24 NHA groups under three hydration conditions (λ = 4.8, 7, and 10) to elucidate how the electronic effects of the substituents determine the degradation mechanism of the membrane.170 Taking BTMA and trimethylammonium (TMA) as benchmarks, it is found that the alkaline stability of NHAs bearing electron-withdrawing substituents (e.g., phenyls and heteroatoms) delivered a much reduced alkaline stability. In contrast, the NHAs with electron-donating substituents (–CH2–, –CH3, benzyl, or aliphatic chains) exhibited higher stability than that of the benchmark. Notably, the degradation mechanism of NHAs tethered with two different types of groups was demonstrated by DFT calculations as well as 1H NMR analysis. Specifically, the SN2 reaction rather than the ring-opening E2 reaction dominates the degradation mechanism of most NHA groups under three hydration conditions according to the 1H NMR analysis. As illustrated in Fig. 14e and f, the degradation pathways of N,N-dimethyl piperidinium (DMP), diphenyl-substituted DMP (DP-DMP), 6-azonia-spiro[5.5]undecane (ASU), and diphenyl-substituted ASU (DP-ASU) are found to be dominated by SN2, which can be evidenced by their lower Gibbs free energy values in comparison with E2. In particular, DP-DMP displayed rather lower free energy in the three mentioned types of degradation pathways compared with DMP, indicating that the introduction of electron-withdrawing substituents in the γ-position of NHA decreases the degradation energy barrier to promote the degradation of NHA rings. ASU and DP-ASU show higher Gibbs free energy for the SN2 pathway but lower free energy for E2, suggesting that ASU exhibits a higher alkaline stability than the DMP series.
 Fig. 12  (a) Molecular weights of four studied polymers before and after treatment with 10 equiv. of NaOCH3 solution, and the molecular structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Overview of the proposed protocol for the reliable assessment of the alkaline stability of a membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) The chemical structure, and optical and SEM images of PFTP membrane. (d) Comparison of the peak power density with regard to OH− conductivity for AEMFCs with the use of PFTP membrane and ionomer. (e) Durability analysis by testing the remaining cations for PFTP membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 13  (a) AEM functionalized with side chains bearing different types of extenders and water contact wettability. (b) OH− conductivity of PPO-based AEMs as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Illustration of microscopic intermolecular interactions. (d) Locations of cationic groups in the hydrophilic phase of the membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 14  (a) The concept of membrane regulation strategy via introducing electron-donating groups. (b) Electrostatic potential (ESP) and Mulliken charge model of QA-PEAM and QA-PAEK. The calculated free energy profiles of (c) the SNAr reaction and (d) SN2 reaction in model compounds of QA-PEAM and QA-PAEK. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 and 169 Copyright 2021 and 2020 American Chemical Society. Degradation pathways of (e) DMP and DP-DMP and (f) ASU and DP-ASU calculated by DFT calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170 Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. 

4.2. Ionomer for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells

4.2.1. Chemistry of ionomer and the design criteria. 
An ionomer is essentially a type of polymer matrix featuring a similar structure to anion-exchange membranes but playing a distinct role.172,173 In cell configuration, an ionomer works as an ion-conductive binder to form a mechanically stable catalyst layer (catalyst/ionomer) that is sandwiched between the anion-exchange membrane and the gas-diffusion layer (GDL). Many previous studies usually employed identical polymers to fabricate the ionomer and the anion-exchange membrane – an increasing consensus is that these studies in great part overlooked the different roles of the ionomer and AEM in the two devices. For instance, the high gas diffusion capability of the ionomer conflicts with the low gas permeability required for an AEM; hence, the direct employment of the same polymers for the AEM and the ionomer not necessarily leads to satisfactory results. Toward this end, the explicit role of the ionomer in AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells is discussed from the following three aspects (Fig. 15a and b). First, the ionomer is required to possess high ionic conductivity, fast water diffusion capability, and quick gas permeability, because the ionomer is dedicated to building a triple-phase boundary (TPB) where the catalytic reactions (HER/HOR and OER/ORR) occur. More critically, the transport of gases, ions, and water should be balanced to avoid technical problems such as water flooding, drying out, etc. as well as ensure efficient power output. Second, the overall stability, including anti-oxidation stability, thermal stability, durability, and mechanical stability, is highly desirable to build robust ionomers for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. Last but not least, the ionomer is required to possess excellent binding capability toward the catalyst and feature superior dispersion in the solvent. The strong adhesion capability with catalysts as well as the strong binding capacity between the GDL and the AEM is also one of the crucial properties of ionomers that differentiate it from the AEMs. The three aspects are general requirements for the ionomer for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells, which can be used as guidance for the ionomer design and preparation. Considering that the ionomer shares analogous polymer compositions with the AEM, the properties of the ionomer are essentially determined by the chemical features of the polymers, as discussed in Fig. 8b (hydration number, water uptake, tensile/strain strength, etc.), in which a trade-off between these fundamental features is required to achieve high-performance ionomers for AEM devices. Please note that the coated catalyst and the specific reaction that occurs at the TPB also exert huge influences on the ionomers, which, in turn, determine the overall performance of water electrolyzers and fuel cells. Based on this, the development of ionomers associated with catalyst systems and reaction types will be discussed to illustrate the ionomer screening rationale for water electrolyzers and fuel cells. As shown in Fig. 15c, Kim's group studied the influences of different ionomer backbones on the performance of AEMFCs combined with an experimental analysis and DFT calculations.174 Specifically, poly(biphenyl alkylene) with 45% quaternization (BPN45), BPN100, para-poly(terphenyl alkylene) with 100% quaternization (p-TPN), and meta-poly(terphenylene) (m-TPN) poly(fluorene) with 55% quaternization (FLN55) were selected as polymer backbones to study the interaction between catalyst metal surfaces and aromatic components of the ionomer. The peak power density of the membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs) employing five different ionomers decreases in the sequence of FLN55 > BPN45, BPN100 > m-TPN, p-TPN, indicating that the performance of MEAs is highly related to the ionomer backbone structure. Meanwhile, the use of PtRu/C as an anode catalyst in MEA outperformed an MEA with Pt/C as the anode catalyst, again manifesting that the AEM performance is affected by the ionomer–catalyst interactions. On the other hand, the adsorption energy of different aromatic fragments on the Pt surface is calculated to be in the order of p-terphenyl ≥ m-terphenyl > biphenyl > diphenyl ether > benzene ≥ o-terphenyl > 9,9-dimethyl fluorene. This adsorption trend is in close agreement with the MEA performance sequence employing different ionomer backbones, demonstrating that the interaction between the polyaromatic backbone and the electrocatalyst could be a prominent reason for the difference in MEA performance. As a typical ionomer fragment, benzene is verified to form strong hybridization of the π-orbital with metal orbitals of the electrocatalyst; therefore, finding alternative ionomers without aromatic backbones and developing catalysts featuring weakened phenyl adsorption (PtRu/C in this work) might be effective strategies. In the meantime, Kim and many other researchers further confirmed the highly adverse effects of the adsorption of phenyl groups on the HOR kinetics in AEM fuel cells.175–177 In terms of the ORR side of the AEMFCs, the sluggish cathode reaction kinetics, rapid cathode ionomer dry-out, and complex mass transport issues usually lead to enhanced challenges that need to be addressed. Based on this, Dekel et al. employed computational methodology to elucidate the role of the ionomer on the cathode side for AEMFCs.178 To make a reliable comparison, the cell configurations and specific operational parameters, including temperature (60 °C), working current density (0.6 A cm−2), catalyst loading (0.5 mgPt cm−2), catalyst layer thickness (10 μm), membrane thickness (15 μm), etc., were considered. In this case, the cell was modeled under the above conditions, and the voltage loss as a function of the x position in the membrane electrode assembly is presented in Fig. 15d. The voltage loss can be mainly classified into three parts, namely, anode overpotential from point A to B, membrane overpotential (ohmic loss) from B to C, and cathode overpotential from C to D, respectively. The cathode overpotential dominates the overall potential loss for the cell with a cathode ionomer ion conductivity of 25 mS cm−1. Also, it was found that increasing the ionomer conductivity from 25 mS cm−1 to 180 mS cm−1 (25, 50, 100, and 180 mS cm−1) not only leads to a much higher limiting current density (from ∼1.2 to ∼2.3 A cm−2), but also results in a five-fold increase in durability (from 500 h to 2500 h). The overpotential distribution profile along different cell components was further calculated and is illustrated in Fig. 15e. It was found that, with the cathode ionomer conductivity of 180 mS cm−1, the overpotential loss arising from the anode kinetics and the anode ionomer is negligible, while the overpotential from the cathode ionomer gradually increases and becomes significant as the operation time reaches 3000 h. This study demonstrates that the high ionic conductivity of the cathode ionomer benefits the catalyst utilization and reduces the internal resistance, thereby contributing to a higher cell limiting current density and overall durability. In addition to fuel cells, investigations of ionomers in AEM water electrolyzers for the design rationale have also been reported.179–184 One should note that the overpotential loss associated with oxygen electrocatalysis dominates the overall overpotential of the cell, as has been increasingly demonstrated in AEMWEs and AEMFCs.178,184–186 To attain superior cell performance and durability, simultaneously studying and/or modeling the anode and cathode ionomers from the viewpoint of the whole cell need more research. To this end, an optimal ionomer design concept for high-performance AEMFCs and AEMWEs is discussed in Fig. 15f. First, ionomers should be designed with varied ionic conductivity at the anode and cathode, not only because the ORR/OER contributes considerably to the overpotential range, but also because of different mass transfer requirements. Second, with regard to anti-oxidation capability, ionomers tend to be oxidized in certain types of reactions (e.g., the HOR and OER) that are very likely to intensify the degradation. Kim and co-authors confirmed the oxidation of phenyl groups in a practical AEM water electrolyzer test when using biphenylene as an ionomer.180 The formation of phenol induced by phenyl oxidation is likely to occur at the catalyst–ionomer interface, where the phenol would stick on the interface, decrease the local pH, slow the reaction kinetics, and adversely impact the whole electrolyzer performance. Third, targeting the complicated and varied water requirements on the anode and cathode for AEMFCs, the ionomers for AEMFCs should be designed with different water-withstanding capabilities to avoid dry-off and water flooding. Fourth, delicate experimental designs and computational simulations are needed to provide a comprehensive analysis on specific parameters of ionomer (e.g., ion conductivity, weight ratio to
catalyst, etc.) for attaining a trade-off between high performance and long durability for AEMWEs and AEMFCs.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the role of the ionomer in building a triple-phase boundary (TPB). (b) Detailed description of the role of the ionomer in the TPB. (c) The linear correlation between AEMFC performance (peak power density) and the calculated phenyl adsorption energy on the ionomer backbone structure employed on the anode side. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) The simulated cell overpotential profile across the membrane electrode assembly as a function of the position. (e) The modeled overpotential distribution versus cell operation time and a schematic illustration of the overpotential loss across the cell components. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (f) Proposed ionomer design concept for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. 


4.2.2. Advances on ionomers for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. 
We next discuss the recent studies on ionomers and the catalyst–ionomer interaction under the premise of the employment of non-PGM-based electrocatalysts for applications in AEMFCs and AEMWEs. As we mentioned earlier, one of the critical advantages of using AEM devices is their compatibility with non-PGM catalysts; hence, developing ionomers targeting non-PGM catalyst environments for AEMFCs and AEMWEs is of great significance. Mamlouk et al. employed NiCo2O4 as a cathode electrocatalyst and concluded that a robust catalyst–ionomer interface, a suitable catalyst loading amount, and strong binding properties are key factors for developing a high-performance AEM water electrolyzer.187 Later, Kim and co-authors reviewed the previous ionomer design criteria for AEM water electrolyzers and proposed an ionomer fabrication strategy.188 In Fig. 16a, trimethyl ammonium functionalized polystyrene ionomers (TMA-x, where x denotes the molar percentage of quaternized benzyl ammonium) were synthesized. From the ionomer structure, it was found that the phenyl groups and long non-ionic alkyl chains were not included in the polymer backbone, which would minimize the risk of phenyl adsorption and maintain suitable polymer hydrophilicity. Meanwhile, the phenyl groups in the polymer side chains were replaced with ammonium and/or amine groups to further reduce phenyl adsorption and maintain high pH conditions. As shown in Fig. 16b, the performances of assembled MEAs with TMA ionomers, IrO2 as anode catalyst, and PtRu/C as cathode catalyst are displayed. For the PGM-based catalysts, the most suitable ionomer content is found to be 9 wt%. In the meantime, a higher current density for an MEA is obtained with increasing amounts of quaternized benzyl ammonium in the TMA ionomer. Notably, an MEA employing TMA-70 as an ionomer exhibited a current density of 1,360 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.8 V, which is 1.7-fold higher than that of the TMA-53-bonded MEA. In Fig. 16c, the polarization curves of the non-PGM-bonded MEAs are presented. Changing the cathode catalyst from NiMo alloy to PtRu alloy for NiFe anode-catalysed MEAs results in an improved current density (twofold) and so do changes in the feeding electrolyte from pure water to 0.1 M and again to 1 M NaOH solution. Particularly for NiFe anode-catalysed MEAs fed with 1 M NaOH solution, the current density at 1.5 V potential (in the kinetics region) is more than two times greater compared with PEM MEA with IrO2/Pt as the anode/cathode catalyst fed with pure water. Moreover, the authors demonstrated that the MEA employing TMA-53 as the ionomer exhibited remarkably enhanced durability at 60 °C in comparison with TMA-70 because the reduced binding strength of TMA-70 cannot sustain a stable catalyst–ionomer interface for a long period of operation. This work proves that very competent performance of non-PGM catalysed AEM water electrolyzer vs. PEM water electrolyzer can be attained through careful architecture of the ionomer structure, ionomer content, feeding electrolyte, and catalyst–ionomer interaction. In addition to this, Faid and co-authors employed Ni–MoO2 as the cathode catalyst in AEMWEs and emphasized how the cationic ions (species and concentration) from the electrolyte and/or ionomer affect the catalytic performance.189 Specifically, the authors found that increasing the K+ concentration usually leads to a negatively shifted potential of zero free charge (pzfc) value, thereby reducing the interfacial electrical field, softening the double-layer, and consequently resulting in faster OH− transport kinetics as well as enhanced HER activity. Moreover, the use of benzyltrimethylammonium hydroxide (BTMAOH) in comparison to tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH) causes a rather strong electrode interaction between the electrode surface and the benzyl groups, where the mobile QA+ would form a compact double layer at the interface, blocking the shuttling of OH− and inhibiting the HER kinetics. This work highlights the importance of rational selection of ionomer cationic groups in affecting the performance of AEMWEs. Apart from the catalyst–ionomer interaction, the architecture of the anode and/or cathode layer of AEM devices also faces many challenges associated with the conventional fabrication route, such as (1) inhomogeneous catalyst ionomer distribution and low catalyst utilization; (2) inefficient electron transfer networks arising from low ionomer–catalyst adhesion; and (3) sluggish mass transfer due to the dense and thick catalyst layer, particularly for the anode layer, which has consequently inspired studies of unified and/or integrated electrodes in AEM devices.190–192 As shown in Fig. 16d, an illustration of an integrated electrode (IE) for AEMWEs proposed by Wang et al. is presented, in which an ultrasonic spray of ammonia poly(N-methyl-piperidine-co-p-terphenyl) (QAPPT) ionomer into a self-supported FeNi layered double hydroxide (LDH) anode was employed.192 Benefiting from the accelerated OH− and electron transfer kinetics, improved AEMWE performance is shown in Fig. 16e. Specifically, the pure water-fed AEMWEs with the use of 20 wt% ionomer delivered the highest current density (1900 mA cm−2) at a voltage of 1.9 V, which was 2 times that of the IrO2-catalysed AEM (950 mA cm−2), again manifesting the high necessity of rational design of the ionomer content for achieving balanced mass/charge transfer capability, surface wettability, aerophobicity, etc. More importantly, the IE and the ultrathin ionomer avoid the need for an interface between the catalyst layer and the liquid/gas diffusion layer, thereby improving the transfer of electrons, hydroxide ions, and gas/liquid, thus contributing to optimal performance of the AEMWEs. The ion exchange capacity (IEC) of the membrane and ionomer before and after 170 h of operation is presented in Fig. 16e, in which a ∼37% IEC loss is observed for the ionomer compared with a negligible loss for the membrane. The ex situ IEC test for the ionomer and membrane clarifies the origin of the degradation of AEMWE performance, which will guide the rational design of high-performance ionomers, electrodes, and AEMWEs. In the case of AEMFCs, the carefully designed architecture of the electrode structure, including ionomer content, catalyst–ionomer interaction, etc. is also of importance for the activity and durability of the cell performance.176,193–195 In particular, by simultaneously tuning the ionomer and electrode, an exceptional high-performance AEMFC was achieved by Mustain et al.196 Based on previous studies, Mustain's group proposed to synthesize three tetrablock poly(norbornene) ionomers (GT32, GT64, and GT78) with tuneable IEC, molecular weight, dispersity, and water uptake, followed by coupling with symmetric and asymmetric ionomers in the electrode to screen the optimal ionomer properties and suitable electrode configuration. The IECs and molecular weights of GT32, GT64, and GT78 were 1.88 meq g−1/114.9 kg mol−1, 3.37 meq g−1/50.96 kg mol−1, and 3.78 meq g−1/103.6 kg mol−1, respectively, through control of the amount of quaternary ammonium groups. Similarly, the water uptake (WU) of GT32, GT64, and GT78 was measured to be 63%, 90%, and 163%, respectively. By incorporating each of the ionomers with the anode and cathode (symmetric configuration) in the AEMFC, the authors found that the GT32- and GT78-based AEMFCs generally exhibited better peak power density, while the GT64-based AEMFC showed very fast decay, which was highly related to its lowest hydroxide mobility. Therefore, the requirements of the anode and cathode on the ionomer are very likely different, so GT32 and GT78 were further assembled asymmetrically in AEMFCs and tested as shown in Fig. 16g and i. Obviously, in Fig. 16g, the cell with GT78 as an anode ionomer and GT32 as a cathode ionomer delivered better PPD, while the other cell configuration (GT32 as anode ionomer and GT78 as cathode ionomer) suffered from ohmic losses and mass transport losses, indicating that the higher water uptake and IEC of GT78 could benefit the cell performance via promoting water back diffusion to the membrane and to the anode gas. As shown in Fig. 16h, changing the cathode ionomer from GT32 to GT78 led to reduced cell performance at a higher current density (>4 A cm−2), which can be attributed to the insufficient water as the reactant at the cathode due to too fast water distribution for the GT78 ionomer. Consequently, adding back pressure could allow additional water content to be maintained for the reaction by suppressing convection evaporation, contributing to a remarkable PPD of 2.7 W cm−2. In addition to the electrode configuration, the back pressure and types of gas diffusion electrodes were further studied
to elucidate their influences on the cell performance. As a result, it was found that the cathode prefers a more hydrophobic status than the AEM to hold enough water at the membrane/catalyst layer interface as well as avoiding too much water throughout the catalyst layer, which might lead to flooding. With this optimal configuration (GT78 as the anode and GT32 as the cathode), the cell delivered a 2000 h durability at 600 mA cm−2 with very minor degradation (15.36 μV h−1) (Fig. 16i). These studies demonstrate that AEM devices with high performance in their activity and durability can be achieved through carefully designing the ionomer, catalyst–ionomer interaction, electrode configuration, back pressure, etc., which will shed light on the rational design of ionomers and beyond.
 Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structure and ion exchange capacity of the TMA ionomer. (b) Polarization curves of MEAs employing various TMAs as ionomers. (c) Polarization curves of an AEM electrolyzer employed with different catalysts under corresponding operating conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of an integrated electrode (IE). (e) Polarization curves of pure-water-fed AEMWEs containing IEs with different ionomer contents. (f) IEC tests of 20 wt% IE before and after durability test, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192 Copyright 2022 John Wiley and Sons. (g) Polarization curves and peak power density profiles of AEMFCs employing GT32 and GT78 as ionomers. (h) Polarization curves and peak power density profiles of AEMFCs employing GT32 and GT78 as ionomers without and with 200 kPa backpressure (BP). (i) Cell durability test with GT32 and GT78 as ionomers under corresponding conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 

4.3. Electrocatalysts for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells

4.3.1. Earth-abundant hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalysts. 
As illustrated in Fig. 17a, two types of fundamental reactions are involved in AEMWEs (HER and OER) and AEMFCs (HOR and ORR), respectively. Currently, there are many reports on AEMWECs/AEMFCs employing noble metals/noble metal oxides (e.g., Pt, Pd, Ir, IrO2) as hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalysts to achieve comparable a power density to that in PEMWEs/PEMFCs.197,198 They to some degree overlooked that one of the biggest benefits of using AEMWEs and AEMFCs is their capability to utilize non-noble-metal-based catalysts; therefore, the study of non-noble based electrocatalysts is rather significant and represents a great advance toward the practical deployment of these devices. Meanwhile, the costly noble metals and unsteady metal exports and supply would inevitably impede their long-term application.199,200 In principle, the development of advanced catalysts is highly dependent on the mechanical understanding of hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalysis chemistry.201–203 Unfortunately, an accurate understanding of the reaction kinetics of the HER/HOR and OER/ORR, together with the specific role of cations and ions in these reactions, poses a great challenge for researchers.204–208 To this end, we follow three steps to present a practical catalyst development concept, including a clear understanding of the electrochemical processes of the HER/HOR and OER/ORR, the establishment of a universal activity descriptor, and the construction of catalyst discovery scheme, as depicted in Fig. 17b. Given that the HER and HOR are reversible processes in hydrogen electrocatalysis, the HER and HOR will be discussed together to give a clear understanding of the chemistry of hydrogen electrocatalysis as well as the activity descriptor in the HER/HOR. Meanwhile, an outline of oxygen electrocatalysis chemistry and the activity descriptor for the OER/ORR will also be given. In terms of the scaling relationship, Sabatier's principle suggests that an optimal catalyst should possess moderate, neither too strong nor too weak, binding energy toward reaction intermediates (e.g., atoms, molecules, etc.), and this correlation is normally plotted as a function of the Gibbs free energy that is usually obtained by means of theoretical calculations (Fig. 17c).209,210 To make it quantitative and effective to guide the catalyst design on the experimental scale, the scaling relationship can be further replotted as a function of bulk physiochemical features such as the degree of 3d filling, eg electrons, electronegativity, etc.211 Although the bulk feature cannot provide very precise relations with intermediates as the surface properties do during adsorption/desorption, it offers a chance to explore the underlying mechanisms, which can be examined by theoretical simulations. In this regard, finding the scientific principles of hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalysis, understanding the chemical reaction descriptor, and the screening of efficient catalysts are of pivotal importance. For the HER/HOR and OER/ORR, we focus more attention on non-noble-metal-based electrocatalysts composed of earth-abundant elements to summarize their theoretical and experimental advances, accompanied by many fascinating strategies, including defect engineering, single-atom confinement, heterostructure building, etc. (Fig. 17d).
 Fig. 17  (a) Polarization curves and potential range for hydrogen (HER/HOR) and oxygen (OER/ORR) electrocatalyses. (b) The development scheme for low-cost and high-performance electrocatalysts. (c) Scaling relationship translation for hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalytic reactions, from a linear relation to a volcano relation. (d) Electrocatalyst engineering strategies. 


4.3.2. Chemistry of hydrogen electrocatalysis and HER/HOR activity descriptor. 
HER/HOR processes are two-electron-coupled electrode reactions involved in water electrolysis and H2–O2 fuel cells. The alkaline HER/HOR mechanism is a combination of three elementary steps: the Volmer step, the Heyrovsky step, and/or the Tafel step (eqn (4.8), (4.9) and (4.10)). Volmer step: H2O + e−  H* + OH−(4.8) Heyrovsky step: H2O + e− + H*  H2 + OH−(4.9) Tafel step: H* + H*  H2,(4.10)where H* represents an adsorbed H atom (Had) on the surface active site, and the alkaline HER proceeds via the Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel step, while the HOR follows the Tafel–Volmer or Heyrovsky–Volmer mechanism. The catalyst design approaches as well as the discovery of optimal catalysts are highly dependent on having an in-depth understanding of the fundamental HER/HOR process. Deciphering the scientific issues for the pH-dependent HER/HOR kinetics as well as finding a universal catalytic activity descriptor, therefore, is significant for the further development of high-performance electrocatalysts. Fig. 18 gives a clear overview of the key stages during the development of the HER/HOR activity descriptor. The pioneering studies simply concentrated on the HER branch, and the researchers extracted a linear relationship between the HER exchange current density on monometallic surfaces and the metal–hydrogen binding energy, thereby generating a volcano plot (Fig. 18a).212,213 The volcano plot suggests that the ideal HER catalysts should possess balanced hydrogen binding energies for the Had adsorption and desorption, which fits well with the Sabatier principle.214 Later, with the assistance of DFT calculations, Nørskov et al. obtained a similar volcano curve of the hydrogen chemisorption energies on metal surfaces and experimental exchange currents, which demonstrated the correlation between the hydrogen binding energy and the HER exchange current.215 Since then, the metal–hydrogen binding energy (HBE) is widely accepted as an HER activity descriptor for a variety of metals and alloys.215–217 When the electrolyte changed from acidic to alkaline, slower HER kinetics by 2–3 orders of magnitude was observed for a wide range of electrocatalysts (PGMs) irrespective of their HBEs, implying that the alkaline HER kinetics might be impacted by other parameters.218,219 In view of this, Yan et al. ascribed the decreased HER/HOR kinetics to the stronger hydrogen binding energy in an alkaline electrolyte, which is associated with the sluggish Volmer step in the HER/HOR.220–222 Notably, the HBE here proposed by Yan et al. is an experimental value, which correlates with the peak potential of the oxidation of underpotential-deposited hydrogen (HUPD) (Fig. 18b). The pH-dependent kinetics of Pt, Ir, and Pd electrodes are all linearly related to the position of the HUPD desorption peak, directly proving the correctness of the HBE concept. From the derived equation (eqn (4.11)): HBE or Emetal-H = –Epeak × F,(4.11)where F is the Faraday constant and Epeak is the peak potential of the oxidation of HUPD. The energy difference could vary by 12.5–13.5 kJ mol−1 from pH = 0 to pH = 13, and the acid/alkaline reaction rate ratio (γacid/γalkaline) is in the range of 120 to 200, which is in agreement with the experimentally observed reaction difference.223 Later, Yan et al. proposed a refined HBE theory and claimed that it is the apparent Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption, ΔGH,app, rather than hydrogen adsorption ΔGH, that is correlated with the HUPD desorption peak.219 According to Yan et al. (Fig. 18c), ΔGH,app can be calculated using the equation ΔGH,app = ΔGH − ΔGH2O, where ΔGH and ΔGH2O are the intrinsic Gibbs free energy and the Gibbs free energy of water adsorption, respectively. In the refined HBE concept, changing the electrolyte (in going from acids to bases) simply weakens ΔGH2O, while ΔGH remains constant. Consequently, ΔGH,app increases with increasing electrolyte pH and matches the shifted HUPD desorption peak. On the other hand, recent molecular dynamics modeling on Pt(100) that was based on quantum mechanics also demonstrated the weakened water adsorption under high pH conditions, in agreement with the refined HBE.224 The inconsistency in the HBE or the refined HBE concept, however, is that the pH-dependent HBE trend is not observed for the Pt(111) electrode.225 In addition, the good HER activity but unsatisfactory HOR activity observed for MoS2 contradicts the idea that the HBE should control the HER and HOR in a similar way.228,229 These results manifest that the HBE or refined HBE might not be a universal descriptor. Later, it was found that the HOR/HER activity can be enhanced by decorating Pt(111) with oxophilic metals (e.g., Ni, Co, Ru, etc.).226,230,231 Accordingly, Markovic's group proposed that both Had and OHad species are reactant intermediates, which is also known as bifunctional theory (Fig. 18d). In terms of the HER, the incorporation of oxophilic species promotes water dissociation with the generation of Had, which accelerates the Volmer step and contributes to the enhanced overall reaction. With regards to the HOR, the oxophilic species promote the adsorption of reactive OHad, which is vital for the Heyrovsky or Volmer step. In general, the overall HER/HOR kinetics is rationalized by the balance between water dissociation, Had, and OHad adsorption. Considering that the multiple adsorption intermediates are greatly impacted by the catalyst composition and surface structure, the researchers constructed single-crystal electrodes with controlled Had binding strength and fine-tuned OHad binding strength, and further found that the HER activity is correlated with the hydrogen and hydroxide binding strength.232 Apart from the bifunctional theory, the potential of the zero (free) charge (pzfc) theory, the 2B (bifunctional and hard acid soft base (HASB)) concept, etc. have emerged as an HER/HOR activity descriptor (Fig. 18e).225,227,233–239 So far, the aforementioned assumptions do describe the HER/HOR activity somehow, but the underlying science and inconsistencies remain to be addressed in further investigations. More direct observations and dynamical monitoring of the multiple reactant species (e.g., OHad, H2O, AM+, etc.) during the reaction, and the determination of the explicit role of additives might benefit the construction of a universal descriptor in the future.
 Fig. 18  Overview of the development of hydrogen electrocatalysis descriptors. (a) Hydrogen binding energy theory proposed by Nørskov et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215 Copyright 2005 IOP Publishing. (b) Hydrogen binding energy theory derived from experimental results and proposed by Yan et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220 Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) The refined hydrogen binding energy proposed by Yan et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219 Copyright 2018 IOP Publishing. (d) The bifunctional theory proposed by Markovic et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (e) The newly developed pzfc and 2B proposals by Jia et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


4.3.3. Chemistry of oxygen electrocatalysis and OER/ORR activity descriptor. 
The oxygen evolution and oxidation are two reversible reactions coupled with the four-proton-electron transfer processes that take place at the anode and cathode of AEMWEs and AEMFCs, respectively. The overall reaction equation of the OER/ORR under alkaline media can be written as (eqn (4.12)): OER/ORR: 4OH− ↔ 4e− + 2H2O + O2,(4.12)where the overall equation can be classified into four elementary steps (eqn (4.13), (4.14), (4.15) and (4.16)): OH− ↔ OH* + e−(4.13) OH* + OH− ↔ H2O + O* + e−(4.14) O* + OH− ↔ OOH* + e−(4.15) OOH* + OH− ↔ H2O + O2 + e−.(4.16)Here, the OH*, O*, and OOH* are reactant intermediates and * represents a surface-active site. From the viewpoint of transition state theory (Fig. 19a), the reaction starts from the initial state and then goes to the transition state before ending with a final state.240 During the transition state, electrochemical free energy is required to drive the reaction to pass through each reaction pathway. Here, the presence of a catalyst can significantly reduce the reaction energy barrier through the interaction between the reaction intermediates and the catalyst active sites. Unlike the HER/HOR reaction with only one intermediate (H*), the three intermediates (Fig. 19b) in the OER/ORR are strongly correlated, which makes it rather challenging to construct scaling relations. Furthermore, the very complicated surface compositions and chemical states of each category of electrocatalyst intensify the difficulty in building a universal OER/ORR activity descriptor. Benefiting from our comprehension of oxygen electrocatalysis chemistry and advanced characterization techniques, the OER/ORR activity scaling relations on metals, metal single atoms (graphene-based support), metal oxides, perovskite oxides, etc. have almost been established, which will be discussed in detail. For metals and metal alloys, Nørskov and co-authors employed DFT-based calculations and calculated the Gibbs free energy of two key intermediates (O and OH) on the surface of Pt(111).241,242 Furthermore, this model was further extended to calculate the binding energies of O*, OH*, and OOH* for a range of other metals, where a volcano correlation between the calculated binding energy of O* and the ORR reactivity was obtained (Fig. 19c). Moreover, the relationship between ΔGOOH* and ΔGOH* was depicted as ΔGOOH* = ΔGOH* + 3.2 ± 0.2 eV (Fig. 19d), which can be found to apply universally to both close-packed (111) and open-packed (100) facets of metals and their alloys. Metal single atoms have achieved significant success in the past several years in the OER/ORR field, owing to their high catalytic activity and economic viability for practical applications.243–245 Similar to single-atom catalysts (SACs) in the HER/HOR, the tremendous research on SACs for the OER/ORR has also stimulated researchers to explore the underlying structure–activity relationships. Based on this, Zeng's group summarized the behavior of many transition metal single atoms on graphene and derived a scaling relation of adsorption free energies ΔGOH*, as shown in Fig. 19e–f.246 After a critical analysis of the adsorption energy, the authors employed more realistic concepts (valence electrons in the occupied d orbital of the metal element (θd) and electronegativity (E)) to predict, screen, and guide the rational design of new catalysts.246
 Fig. 19  (a) Transition state theory for illustrating the distinctive role of a catalyst in decreasing reaction barriers for a catalytic reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright 2015 RSC Publishing. (b) Gibbs free energy diagram for the oxygen evolution and reduction reactions. (c) ORR volcano plot for metals. (d) ORR theoretical limiting potential plot for face-centred cubic (fcc) (111) and (100) facets of metals and alloys. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242 Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Scatter plot of the adsorption free energy of OH versus the descriptor φ for all single transition metal (TM) atoms supported on macrocyclic molecules. (f) Scatter plot of adsorption free energy of H versus the descriptor φ for all single TM atoms supported on macrocyclic molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. 


4.3.4. Recent progress on the earth-abundant hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalysts. 
Although the alkaline HER/HOR activity descriptor is debatable, a consensus has been reached that the interfacial water molecules and Had/OHad play an unavoidable role in the HER/HOR processes.225,227,229,239,247–249 Also, this is true for studying the OER/ORR activity descriptors. To this end, a series of typical metals, metal single atoms, metal compounds (e.g., oxides, dichalcogenides, phosphides, etc.), metal alloys, metal-based heterostructures, etc. will be thoroughly covered and compared. On the one hand, the explicit role of small molecules, ions, and species (e.g., Had, OHad) in the HER/HOR and OER/ORR, as well as a better understanding of the related innovative mechanisms will be elucidated. On the other hand, some excellent catalyst design strategies and a range of easily scaled catalyst manufacturing methods for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells will be discussed.
4.3.4.1. Single-atom catalysts (SACs) for HER/HOR and OER/ORR. 
Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have achieved significant progress in heterogeneous catalysis, such as CO oxidation, the water–gas shift reaction, electrocatalytic reactions, etc., owing to their efficiency in full atom utilization and excellent activity.243,250–253 As shown in Fig. 20a, the three important compositions in the SACs are the metal central ions, the surrounding ligands, and the host materials.250,254,255 By changing the central metal atoms, the coordination environmental, and/or the host materials, the catalyst properties (e.g., activity, selectivity, and stability) can be modulated accordingly. A typical example is that researchers mainly concentrated on oxide hosts for the earlier SACs (e.g., FeOx, CeO2, or TiO2) because of their strong chemical stability in thermal catalytic reactions (e.g., CO oxidation).256,257 Later, carbon-based materials were widely selected as hosts, stemming from their high electronic conductivity, good resistance to acids/bases, and abundant coordination environment.258–260 Since then, carbon-based SACs have been widely reported with excellent activities for HER, HOR, OER, ORR, etc.250,261Fig. 20b gives some good examples of SACs for HER from the C3–Ni bonding to Ni–C6 configuration,262,263 and then to Ni–N3–O2 coordination,264,265 following the tuning concept of coordination chemistry. On the other hand, non-carbon based supports (e.g., metal carbides, metal oxides, metal hydroxides, etc.) also emerged to build SACs to boost electrochemical performances.266–277 The metal atoms in these compounds might induce structural distortions and charge redistributions, which are expected to bring vacancies, phase transformations, or strains that trigger a considerable improvement in catalytic properties. Ru-doped Ni5P4 (Ni5P4–Ru) was verified with the formation of Ru–P/Ru–Ni bonds (Fig. 20b), and electrons were transferred from Ni/P to Ru, leading to enhanced HER activity because water adsorption is more favorable on Ni5P4–Ru (Ru top sites) than on bare Ni5P4 (Ni top sites).268 Introducing Co and Ni atoms into MoSe2 would substitute them for Mo atoms in the basal plane and give rise to the formation of Co–MoSe2 and Ni–MoSe2.278 Interestingly, compared with Ni–MoSe2, Co–MoSe2 possesses similar adsorption energy towards H2O and Had due to the minor difference in ΔGH2O and ΔGH, but much reduced HER kinetics, in turn demonstrating that OHad adsorption and OH− desorption are enhanced on Ni–MoSe2 and are critical to the alkaline HER process. Modulations of the local atomic configuration, defect engineering, support effects, etc. are commonly employed approaches that have been demonstrated to be effective.279–281 It is worth noting that these typical SACs reported with decent HER activity have not been actively studied in the HOR, and/or their HOR activity is unsatisfactory, even though HER/HOR is a reversible reaction, which poses a question that the activity descriptor of the HER/HOR for SACs has not been identified. To this end, Li's group employed atomic Ni to manipulate the electronic structure of Ru nanocrystals and discussed its influence on HOR activity.274 In RuNi1 nanocrystals (NCs), the Ru–Ni bonding in RuNi1 suggests that the electronic structure of Ru is well-tuned with the incorporation of atomically dispersed Ni. As expected, the HOR mass activity of RuNi1 (2.7 A mg−1) at 50 mV overpotential is much higher than those of the Ru–Ni bimetallic alloy (0.427 A mg−1) and Pt/C (0.426 A mg−1) (Fig. 20c). In Fig. 20d, DFT-based calculations demonstrate that the incorporation of atomic Ni could significantly reduce the hydrogen adsorption energy, particularly when compared with the pure Ru catalyst. Moreover, the energy barrier of the Volmer rate-determining step (rds) was decreased from 1.067 to 0.966 eV, which also boosted the fast HOR kinetics. These studies suggest the inevitable role of Had and OHad in the alkaline HER/HOR, although typical single atom configurations with HER and HOR that can be both carefully and comparatively investigated to examine the intermediates are very few. Pacchioni and co-authors proposed a new model to explain the activity descriptor in the HER.282 Based on the assumption that SACs can be considered as surface analogues of organometallic complexes, Nørskov's theory here is not well suited to the intermediate model of SACs, where the dihydrogen and/or dihydride complexes are easily formed. In contrast, the adsorptions of both the first H atom (ΔG0H(1)) and the second H atom (ΔG0H(2)) need to be considered because HMH dihydride complexes (M is a metal) are usually formed and observed on a series of single atoms including Pt atoms on N–Gr (where a carbon atom of the graphene (Gr) lattice is replaced by a N atom), MoS2, defect-rich graphene, etc.283 Consequently, the HER kinetics of SACs is highly associated with ΔG0H(1) and ΔG0H(2), implying that moderate adsorption energies towards H1 and H2 need to be satisfied simultaneously to attain an ideal HER activity, as shown in Fig. 20e. The exchange current as a function of ΔG0H(1) and ΔG0H(2) gives rise to the formation of a three–dimensional volcano plot in Fig. 20f. Taking metal single atoms anchored on N-doped graphene (M@N-Gr) as an example, their HER kinetics predicted by MH intermediate theory (Nørskov's theory, Fig. 20g, I) and the two-intermediate model (Fig. 20g, II) is illustrated. Here, i0/imax is defined as the descriptor, where i0 denotes the exchange current and imax is the maximum exchange current. Apparently, according to the two-intermediate model, V, Cr, Co, Ni, Cu, and Pd do not exhibit good HER activity as they did in the MH intermediate theory. In conclusion, this work reconsiders the rationale of Nørskov's theory in the determination of the HER activity. The pH-dependent kinetics of SACs and the rationality of this concept in the prediction of HER/HOR activity remain to be answered in future studies. SACs have also achieved tremendous progress in oxygen electrocatalysis owing to their many fascinating features, among which, Fe–N4 has been demonstrated to be the most promising PGM-free catalyst to substitute for Pt or Pt-based alloys, given its relatively high activity and four-electron selectivity towards the ORR.284–287 The current reported ORR activity of Fe/N/C catalysts (0.02 A cm−2@0.9 ViR-free), however, is far behind the 2025 target (0.44 A cm−2@0.9 ViR-free) for fuel cell technologies set by U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) to achieve the economic viability of fuel cells in light-duty vehicles.286 Based on the previous studies, the critical challenges for SACs in the ORR lie in their low electrochemical site density (ECSD) and inferior durability, which result in unsatisfactory power/energy density and very limited lifespan.288–290 Given that the dynamical reaction process and very complicated electron-transfer steps involve oxygen-related species, improving our mechanical understanding of oxygen electrocatalytic chemistry and designing high-performance ORR catalysts are still major tasks in the next stage. As mentioned in Fig. 20a, the ORR activity of SACs is mainly determined by the metal center, host, and ligand. Aside from the judicious choice of metal centers, ligand manipulations of SACs were widely reported. Most of the earlier reported metal–N4 single atom configuration relates to metal atoms that are bonded by four pyridinic N atoms,259,291,292 while Wu et al. demonstrated that
pyrrolic-type Fe–N4 coordination can also boost the ORR activity and achieve good fuel cell performance.293 Following this concept, Chen and co-authors designed nitrogen and phosphorus dual-coordinated iron active sites (Fe–N3P) and confirmed that more efficient O2 molecule adsorption and *O2 dissociation to *OOH can be achieved in contrast to the normal Fe–N4 model (Fig. 21a), thus significantly improving their catalytic performance in zinc-air batteries compared to the Pt/C benchmark.294 Meanwhile, Ma's group employed the concept of “Janus materials” and synthesized a dual single atomic site composed of Ni–N4 and Fe–N4 on the inner and outer walls of graphene hollow nanospheres (GHSs).295 Wang and co-workers reported single-site Ru cation coordination to manipulate the local ligand environments and the electronic structure via fabricating an Ru/LiCoO2 SAC with atomically dispersed Ru–Co pair sites (Fig. 21a).296 Many other interesting works in terms of metal center tuning and ligand tuning in SACs have been published.284,297–301 In this regard, an atomic-level understanding of the catalytic mechanism of the ORR might provide some new thoughts. As described in Fig. 21b, Liu and co-authors studied the mechanism of Fe–N4 from the viewpoint of electron spin.302 Specifically, the authors synthesized Fe single atom catalysts and identified that the Fe–N4 moieties can be classified into Fe–N4C12 (D1), Fe–N4C10 (D2), and N–Fe–N4C10 (D3), respectively, by using 57Fe Mössbauer spectra. Based on the values of the isomer shift (IS) and quadrupole splitting (QS), the spin state of Fe2+ in D1, D2, and D3 were assigned to low, intermediate, and high spin, respectively. The high correlation between the ORR mass activities of single-Fe-atom catalysts and the D3 moiety content strongly suggests that N–Fe–N4C10 is the critical component for high ORR activity. In the initial stage (polarized at 0.9 V), the operando57Fe Mössbauer spectra and Raman spectra confirmed that the D3 content was decreased with an increase in the relative D1 content, indicating O2 adsorption on D3 sites and the generation of O2−–FeN5 intermediate. During this process, the spin state of Fe2+ in D3 evolves from high spin to low spin, accompanied by a decreased isomer shift (IS) from 0.77 to 0.39 mm s−1. When polarized at 0.7 V, the D3 content was increased with a reduction in the relative D1 content, manifesting O2 adsorption on D1 sites and the formation of O2−–FeIIN4 intermediate. Meanwhile, both QS and IS showed an increase from 0.80 to 2.46 mm s−1 and 0.37 to 0.77 mm s−1, respectively, suggesting that the Fe2+ spin state in D1 changed from low spin to high spin, with Fe2+ moving out of the N4 square plane. Polarization at a higher bias (0.5 V) resulted in a continuously increasing content of O2−–FeIIN4 intermediate, again proving the dynamic ORR activity of D1 at higher biasing. It has to be noted that the preferential adsorption of O2 molecules on D3 near the onset potential demonstrates that N–Fe–N4C10 is a more active site towards the ORR in alkaline media. A fully dynamic ORR cycle on N–Fe–N4C10 moieties is presented in Fig. 21b. The O2 molecule adsorption on N–Fe–N4C10 sites stimulates the movement of the central Fe atom partially and completely to the N4-plane with the formation of OH− and *O2 intermediates, respectively. The interaction between the Fe 3d orbital (dxz) and side-on coordinated O2 π* orbital promotes the d-orbital splitting and results in the conversion of high spin Fe2+ to low spin Fe2+. The DFT results further confirmed that the energy barrier of orbital interaction between D3 and O2 is remarkably lower than that in the case of D1 and D2. On the other hand, Yu and co-authors, for the first time, depicted the relationship between the single atomic inter-site distance (dsite) of Fe–N4 and its ORR activity.303 By carefully controlling the metal loading content, Fe SAs with inter-site distances ranging from ∼7.8 to ∼0.5 nm were generated. Fig. 21c gives four typical EXAFS spectra of Fe–N4 samples, and the dsite of each sample estimated from STEM images is presented. Given that surface interrogation scanning electrochemical microscopy (SI-SECM) has been proved to offer insight into the first O2 adsorption kinetics on transition metal sites, the rate constant (k′) for oxygen binding on Fe(II)–N4 as a function of dsite was calculated via SI-SECM and is shown in Fig. 21d. A sudden jump appeared at the dsite values between 1.2 and 0.7 nm in the plot, which indicates a remarkable improvement of the oxygen activation activity, which is also in agreement with the TOF values. Furthermore, the authors deepened the study and employed 57Fe Mössbauer spectra and found that the catalytic activity of Fe–N4 was correlated with FeN4C12 (D1) and FeN4C10 (D2). The ORR activity difference of dsite can be ascribed to the difference in the ratio of D1 to D2, originating from the Fe spin states. As the two Fe atoms become closer, the energy level of the Fe dz2 orbital is downshifted, resulting in a higher degree of filling of the partially occupied d orbitals and eventually leading to weakened bonding strength of the over-strongly adsorbed hydroxyl intermediates. The dsite-dependent ΔG*OH plot in Fig. 21e acquired from DFT calculations demonstrates this interpretation. Also, the derived volcano plot of ORR overpotentials against ΔG*OH provides a new avenue to design and prepare single atom catalysts with reasonable metal loading. In contrast to SACs in the ORR, the fundamental challenges of SACs in the OER mainly originate from the unstable structural stability and inferior activity induced by ultrahigh overpotential. Even though carbonaceous materials possess many competitive features in electrocatalysis, their susceptibility to corrosion in the OER potential range in alkaline media would intensify catalyst dissolution,304,305 which calls for the development of other support materials such as metal oxides, hydroxides, etc., to improve the overall structural stability of SACs. To this end, Thomas et al. employed transition metal carbides (TMCs) as supports to design SACs because of their very robust hardness, thermal stability, chemical corrosion resistance, and high electrical conductivity. Fig. 22a presents a schematic image of the WCx-FeNi catalyst with the Fe and Ni atoms immobilized on the WCx support. The HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding intensity profile along the (−12−1) plane (Fig. 22b and c) further validate the existence of Ni and Fe single atoms, which was demonstrated by the weak bonding (Ni–W and Fe–W). As expected, WCx-FeNi exhibited 237 mV overpotential towards the OER at 10 mA cm−2, and this value further decreased to 211 mV when the atomic loading content increased from 0.38 to 1.14 mg cm−2. The reaction pathways are illustrated in Fig. 22d, where the adsorption free energy values toward OH* and O* on WCx-FeNi and WCx-FeNi–OH (surface oxidized) are reduced. Apart from the support engineering, Lu and co-authors synthesized a Co1/TaS2 catalyst where Co SAs were confined in the TaS2 monolayer, and they discussed the OER activity from the viewpoint of electron spin-density.306 The intercalated Co SAs were found to occupy the high-spin (HS) sites (bonding at the hollow site, CoHS) and Ta sites (Co replacing Ta atoms, CoTa), although the CoHS sites were calculated to have smaller formation energy. The CoHS and CoTa sites correspond to the Co2+ and Co3+ species, and the Co1/TaS2 catalyst with tunable CoHS and CoTa sites was obtained by controlling the content of Co SAs. DFT calculations revealed that the CoHS sites have much reduced energy barrier than CoTa sites and the pristine TaS2 surface, so they serve as the real OER active centers. In Fig. 22e, the adjacent CoTa sites were validated to favor the formation of O*, while the neighboring CoHS sites result in a larger energy barrier from OOH* to O2. Furthermore, the CoHS–CoTa sites were calculated to have a medium magnetic moment (2.100 μB) for the CoHS atom, which consequently benefits the formation of CoHS–O single bonding and leads to optimal O* adsorption/desorption as well as excellent OER activity and durability. As shown in Fig. 22f, the correlation between the OER activity and the Co spin density value of the Co1/TaS2 catalyst as a function of the doped Co content is established. These studies of SACs anchored on non-carbon-based supports for the alkaline OER,307–309 open an avenue to diversify the single-atom catalyst design strategy and strengthen the activity and durability of such catalysts toward the alkaline OER via support engineering, electron spin state, etc., which also provides insights, knowledge, and principles for the followed catalyst design.310,311 Based on the aforementioned studies, Li et al. employed a series of metal single atoms (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Ag, and Mo) that immobilized on the carbon support and aimed to propose a universal thought in the determination of HER/HOR activity. It was found that changing the metal centers would result in a different water adsorption behavior as well as OH binding energy. Hence, the authors concluded that the hybridization between M 3d and O 2p orbitals might be a dominant reason for the varied species adsorption and HER/HOR activities. For Mn–N–C, Mn t52ge0g, with an unoccupied eg state, it is easier to possess strong overlaps with O 2p orbitals and hence higher adsorption capability. For Cu–N–C, Cu t62ge4g, the full eg orbitals of Cu lead to negligible H2O/OH adsorption (Fig. 22g). This thought is based on the analysis of crystal field theory and square pyramidal geometry for the configurations (Pt–O–M–N4) in this study.249,312–314 For other metal atomic configurations, crystal field theory with different geometries and molecular orbital theory may be employed to clarify the hybridization between eg orbitals of metal centers and O2p orbitals, and beyond. For oxygen electrocatalysis, readers are suggested to access several excellent review articles to have a detailed study of the activity descriptors in MN4 metal complexes for the ORR.246,315,316 The metal single atoms immobilized on non-carbon-based supports and the activity descriptors for the OER need to be further studied.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of three key compositions (ligand, host, and metal) and catalysis descriptors (activity, selectivity, and stability) for single-atom catalysts (SACs), and their applications in water electrolyzers and fuel cells. (b) A range of metal single-atom configurations for hydrogen electrocatalysis (C3–Ni, Ni–N3–O2, Ni5P4–Ru, and Ni–MoSe2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 262, 264, 268 and 278 Copyright 2015, 2019, and 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (c) HOR polarization curves of RuNi1 and other catalysts, and (d) the calculated hydrogen adsorption energies and atomic configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 274 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (e) Three-dimensional volcano plot for HER reaction assuming the formation of MH and HMH intermediates. (f) DFT calculated volcano plot for the case of HER on 55 SACs assuming the formation of MH and HMH intermediates. Red: high activity; blue: low activity. When log(i0) < −10 (extremely low activity), the color is black. (g) Predicted efficiency for the HER reaction for 22 models of SACs based on the configuration of M@NGr (M atoms incorporated on N–Gr). (I) Classical model based on a single MH intermediate; (II) model based on both MH and HMH intermediates (two-hydrogen complex). Reproduced with permission from ref. 282 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 21  (a) Typical atomic configurations of SACs (Fe–N3P, Janus Ni–N4/Fe–N4, and Ru–Co pair site of Ru–Co/LiCoO2) for oxygen electrocatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 294–296 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society, and Copyright 2020 and 2022 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Dynamics of N–Fe–N4C10 moieties in the ORR pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 302 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) EXAFS spectra for four typical Fe–N4 catalysts with different dsite distances. (d) SI-SECM titration of the reaction rate constant (k′O2) on Fe(III)–N4 sites as a function of dsite. (e) The calculated dsite-dependent ΔG*OH plot. Reproduced with permission from ref. 303 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the WCx-FeNi catalyst. (b) HAADF-STEM image of WCx-FeNi, and (c) the corresponding intensity profiles along the (−12−1) plane over the dimmer atomic columns. (d) The OER reaction pathways with calculated energy barriers for different samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 317 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (e) The calculated free energy diagram for CoTa and CoHS sites in the OER process. (f) Magnetic moments of an individual Co atom in Co1/TaS2-2, Co1/TaS2-3, and Co1/TaS2-4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 306 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (g) Illustration of electron occupation of metal 3d orbitals for M-N4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) based on crystal field theory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. 
4.3.4.2. Transition metal-based heterostructures for the HER/HOR and OER/ORR. 
Heterostructure materials have attracted increasing research attention because of their fascinating physicochemical properties based on the hybridization of two or more components.25,318–323 By incorporating distinct compositions, the heterostructures can be altered to achieve balanced adsorption of reactant intermediates, as well as acquiring decent HOR/HER and OER/ORR activity.321,323 Specifically, the combination of two or more components normally generates an interface accompanied by a local electrostatic potential perturbation, where the strength of the interaction between components is closely associated with the type of perturbation. The generated heteroatom bonds, the induced strain effects, and the derived electronic interactions across the interface are the prominent aspects for optimization of the electronic structures of heterostructure materials as well as their enhanced adsorption capability toward reaction intermediates, leading to improved electrocatalytic reaction rates. Therefore, in this section, we concentrate on the recent progress on a variety of metal-based heterostructures encompassing carbon-based, non-carbon-based, and metal-based components that are active towards alkaline hydrogen and oxygen electrolyses, with a particular emphasis on the electronic modulation approaches as well as interpretations of the mechanism. As mentioned earlier, carbonaceous materials usually serve as catalyst supports owing to their large specific surface area, high electronic conductivity, strong stability in acidic/alkaline media, ready availability, etc.324–326 Immobilizing metals, metal oxides, metal sulfides, etc. on carbon-based supports is a widely employed strategy, because the stability is enhanced and the spatial distribution can be controlled.327 Meanwhile, the high electronic conductivity of carbon promotes the charge transfer kinetics in the heterostructure materials. Moreover, the generated interface would give rise to interesting metal-support interactions, which might exert profound effects on the electronic structure of the catalysts as well as the adsorption of the reactant intermediates.328,329 One important study that illustrates how the Ni–carbon heterointerface contributes to the enhanced HOR activity compared to pure Ni metal was reported by Yan's group in 2016.330 In this work, the Ni particles (∼20 nm) were immobilized on N-doped carbon nanotubes (Ni/N-CNT) with a loading content of around 70 wt%. Ni particles supported on CNTs (Ni/CNT) and pure Ni particles were also synthesized for comparison. The N-CNT support exerts geometrical effects that tend to decrease the strong hydrogen binding energy sites with Ni, while, on the other hand, the electronic interaction between the edge N atoms and Ni causes a further upshift of the d-band center of Ni and activates their adjacent sites for the HOR, which contribute synergistically to the improved HOR activity. Following this concept, a large number of unique metal–carbon heterointerfaces were tailored and generated by strain engineering, geometrical engineering, and incorporation of heteroatoms in the carbon skeleton (e.g., B, P, S, etc.), which contribute to improved hydrogen electrocatalysis.331–348 The success in modulating metal–carbon heterointerfaces also inspired researchers to explore the support effects coming from non-carbon-based substrates, with transition metal dichalcogenides,349–352 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),353–356 MXenes,357–359 cerium(IV) oxide (CeO2),360–363 and titanium(IV) oxide (TiO2),364–366 as classical representatives. Lu and co-authors synthesized a unique LixNiO/Ni heterostructure via a Li metal-mediated redox reaction, shown in Fig. 23a.367 In the O 1s XPS spectra (Fig. 23b), a dramatic ∼2.0 eV positive shift is observed for LixNiO/Ni as compared with NiO or annealed NiO/Ni, implying that the incorporation of Li+ contributes to totally different O compositions. Likewise, the Ni 2p XPS spectra also exhibit a positive shift (∼2.0 eV), and the binding energy of Ni2+ changes to 855.9 eV, which is closely associated with the Ni defects and the unique O compositions. Moreover, the O 1s XANES spectra of LixNiO/Ni compared with NiO or NiO/Ni present a pronounced adsorption peak located at 534 eV, which can be ascribed to the strong Brønsted basic oxygen. Meanwhile, a dramatic pH change (from 6.60 to 8.67) is observed on dispersing 10 mg LixNiO/Ni into 3.0 mL water, in contrast to dispersing NiO/G and Ni/G, where G stands for graphene, demonstrating that the presence of the strong Brønsted basic oxygen species could promote the dissociation of H–OH bonds. As shown in Fig. 23c, LixNiO/Ni exhibits enhanced HER activity in alkaline media (pH = 13.8) compared with that in a neutral electrolyte (pH = 7.0) because of the significantly accelerated water dissociation step due to the presence of strong Brønsted basic oxygen species. Meanwhile, the HOR performance of LixNiO/Ni in 1 M KOH is also better than for most of the reported electrocatalysts, again demonstrating the capability of the unique LixNiO/Ni interface in boosting hydrogen electrocatalysis. Apart from the LixNiO/Ni interface, CeO2 was also employed to build Ni/CeO2 heterostructures by Yang and co-workers.368 In this work, a CeO2-decorated Ni hybrid with different Ni ratios was immobilized on carbon (XC-72) to obtain CeO2(r)–Ni/C. When used as an HOR catalyst, the CeO2(r)–Ni/C-1 (52.3% Ni content) exhibited the highest kinetic current density (12.28 mA mgNi−1) at 50 mV as well as the highest ECSA normalized exchange current density (0.038 mA cmNi−2). The role of abundant oxygen vacancies in the CeO2 support in the HOR was illustrated by XPS, Raman spectroscopy, and DFT-based calculations. In Fig. 23d, the decreased hydrogen adsorption energy for CeO2(r)–Ni (−0.065 eV) as compared with pristine Ni (−0.302 eV) validates the tremendous hydrogen adsorption on CeO2(r)–Ni sites after optimization. Moreover, an increased OH* adsorption was also obtained for CeO2(r)–Ni, as its adsorption energy for OH* is –0.924 eV, in contrast to –0.163 eV for pristine Ni. The electronic interaction between CeO2(r) and Ni modulates the electronic structure of Ni, endowing CeO2(r)–Ni with improved H* and OH* adsorption capability as well as enhanced HOR performance. Very recently, Stamenkovic et al. studied the HOR performance of Pt–RuO2 heterojunctions from the viewpoint of RDE and membrane electrode assembly (MEA) investigations.369 The Pt–RuO2 heterostructures were synthesized by annealing carbon-supported PtRu8 nanodendrites, and the scaled-up synthesis (1 g per batch) was successful. The HAADF-STEM and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) images proved that the Pt clusters and atoms were uniformly distributed in RuO2. The HOR performance of the Pt–RuO2 heterostructures was evaluated in NaOH solution and benzyl trimethylammonium hydroxide (BTMAOH). When the electrolyte changed from 0.1 M NaOH to 0.1 M BTMAOH, there was a reduced HOR current on the Pt/C Tanaka Kikinzoku Kogyo (TKK) catalyst, while only a negligible difference in the kinetics could be found for Pt–RuO2. This demonstrates that Pt–RuO2 heterostructures are less likely to be poisoned by the phenyl groups in the BTMAOH solution compared with Pt/C, suggesting its strong practical feasibility in MEAs that contain phenyl groups. Notably, the Pt mass loading in Pt–RuO2 is only 3.5 wt% as opposed to 19.4% wt% for commercial Pt/C, signifying the excellent HOR performance of Pt–RuO2 heterostructures. Furthermore, the HOR performance tested under MEA conditions is compared in Fig. 23e. The peak power density of the MEAs when using the Pt–RuO2 anode catalyst reached 0.77 W cm−2, far beyond 0.28 and 0.55 W cm−2 for Pt/C and PtRu/C, respectively. Furthermore, the peak power density as a function of catalyst cost is illustrated in Fig. 23f, showing that the Pt–RuO2 heterostructure is a promising approach to meet the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) fuel cell cost and performance target. Some other interesting studies
on the elucidation of heterointerface effects in hydrogen electrocatalysis, including for Ni/Ni3N, Ru@RuO2/TiO2, Pt/Ni3N–Mo2C, etc., have been presented in detail, and the remarkable role of heterointerfaces in improving bonding configuration and species adsorption is demonstrated.370–372 In addition to hydrogen electrocatalysis, heterostructure engineering also plays an unavoidable role in oxygen electrocatalysis.202,354,373–381 Given the multiple reaction steps and sluggish reaction kinetics for oxygen electrocatalysis compared with hydrogen electrocatalysis, a classical catalyst design concept is to immobilize noble metals on support materials, which not only induces improved catalyst activity through strong electronic interaction, tensile or compressive strain, and confinement effects, but also results in enhanced structural stability. Based on this, Sun's group investigated the electronic effects of employing nitrogen-doped carbon, Ni(OH)2, LiCoO2, h-BN, and g-C3N4 as supports to immobilize a range of noble metals (e.g., Pt, Ir, Ru, etc.) and how the electronic effects affect oxygen evolution and reduction activity.320,354,382–384 It is interesting to find that, although Pt is not considered to exhibit oxygen evolution activity, Pt could promote the reduction of Co ions as well as the formation of O vacancies and under-coordinated Co centers, which results in weakened adsorption toward OH*/OOH* and contributes to higher oxygen evolution.320 On the other hand, h-BN and g-C3N4 both exhibit exceptional co-catalytic activity for Pd and Ir in the oxygen reduction and evolution reactions, respectively.354,382 h-BN not only increases the hydrophobicity of h-BN/Pd owing to its super hydrophobicity, which promotes gas transfer kinetics, but also induces downshifting of the d-band center of Pd due to strong compressive strain effects, thereby leading to weakened adsorption of O* as well as enhanced reaction kinetics. In-depth studies of h-BN and g-C3N4 as catalyst supports in building heterostructures have revealed their unique role in providing B, N, and C coordination environments, supplying surface wettability, and offering overall structural stability, which will yield a solid foundation for the design and construction of other heterointerfaces with wider applications. Unlike the role of h-BN in confining Pd, Dong and co-worker designed Pd/Mo2C interfaces by depositing β-Mo2C nanoparticles (NPs) into atomic layers of Pd (AL-Pd/Mo2C).385 As illustrated in Fig. 24a, the positively shifted Pd 3d peak manifests the strong interaction between Pd and Mo2C. Furthermore, the projected density of states (PDOS) of bulk Pd and AL-Pd/Mo2C shows a downshifted d-band center away from the Fermi level for AL-Pd/Mo2C. The strong electronic interaction of the Pd/Mo2C interface would result in weakened adsorption toward oxygen intermediates and faster ORR activity. Consequently, as shown in Fig. 24b and c, the half-wave potential of AL-Pd/Mo2C is 0.935 V, far better than that of most of the reported ORR electrocatalysts as well as commercial 20% Pt/C. In addition, disk and ring currents were measured, and the electron transfer number is calculated to be 3.9, suggesting that AL-Pd/Mo2C follows the four-electron reaction pathway to reduce O2 and that the H2O2 yield is negligible. Inspired by considerable work that employed noble metal species as active components in heterostructures, an increasing number of research studies are aimed at exploring the unique interface structures arising from non-noble metal species for oxygen electrocatalysis.386–388 To this end, Park et al. reported heterostructures comprising La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ and MoSe2 that induced a local phase transition from 2H MoSe2 to the 1T phase, thereby achieving exceptional stability of over 1000 h of operation at a current density of 100 mA cm−2.389 As shown in Fig. 24d, the electron transfer from Co to Mo is found to alter the electron configuration of Mo from the occupied 4dz2 level to the incompletely filled dxz, dyz, and dyx, to induce the phase transition as well as improve the electronic conductivity. Furthermore, the charge transfer also upshifts the d-band center of Co resulting in enhanced adsorption toward OH− as well as faster oxygen evolution kinetics (Fig. 24e). DFT calculations further confirm the electron transfer across the interface and the 0.1 eV upshift in the d-band center for Co in La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ. The exceptional durability of the La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2 heterostructure can be verified by the chronopotentiometric profiles in Fig. 24f, where negligible degradation in current density can be observed, even when captured at 100 mA cm−2 with an operation time of 1000 h. On the other hand, investigations of heterostructures comprising non-metal-based components in oxygen electrocatalysis have been paid particular attention to.390–392 In particular, Chen's group proposed employing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and thienothiophene–pyrene covalent organic frameworks (COFs) to construct one-dimensional van der Waals heterostructures (1D vdWHs).392 As shown in Fig. 24g, a solution-based in situ wrapping was applied to assemble coaxial CNT/COF heterostructures, where the COF shell thickness could be controlled by changing the precursor mass ratio of COF to CNTs.
 Fig. 23  (a) High-resolution transmission electron microscope image of the LixNiO/Ni heterostructure and its reverse FFT. (b) The O 1s and Ni 2p XPS spectra of LixNiO/Ni before and after molten Li treatment. (c) HER and HOR polarization curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 367 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of the HOR mechanism on a CeO2/Ni interface and the calculated adsorption energy of H* and OH*. Reproduced with permission from ref. 368 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (e) AEMFC performance comparison with the use of Pt–Ru/C, Pt–RuO2/C, and TKK-Pt/C as catalysts. (f) AEMFC peak power density comparison as a function of anode catalyst cost. Reproduced with permission from ref. 369 Copyright 2020 RSC Publishing. 
 Fig. 24  (a) XPS spectra of Pd 3d peaks for AL-Pd/Mo2C heterostructures and Pd NPs, and PDOS plots for Pd sites in AL-Pd/Mo2C and bulk Pd. (b) Mass and specific activities of AL-Pd/Mo2C towards the ORR at 0.9 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)). (c) Rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) polarization curves of AL-Pd/Mo2C and comparison between the disk current density (solid line) and the ring current density (dashed line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.(d and e) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer along the La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2 interface and the accelerated water splitting kinetics. (f) Chronopotentiometric stability profiles of La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2 measured at 100 mA cm−2 for 1000 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 389. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (g) The fabrication process for the one-dimensional van der Waals heterostructures 2D-COFs/CNTs. (h) The calculated oxygen intermediate adsorption geometries. (i) Polarization curves towards the ORR and OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 392. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
The S-pentacyclic domains in the thienothiophene–pyrene COF and the strong π–π interactions in the heterointerface were found to play a critical role in oxygen electrocatalysis. On the one hand, the band gap of COF/CNT vdWHs was found to decrease with the reduction of COF shell thickness, promoting the charge transfer. On the other hand, the C-S moieties were calculated to be the solely catalytic active sites for initial O2 adsorption as well as OOH* adsorption. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 24h, the O2 activation at a C atom in the vicinity of an S atom, the OOH* adsorption at an S atom, and the O* adsorption at an S atom, etc. can be illustrated with the corresponding vibration peaks of S-, as evidenced by operando FTIR. In contrast, the pristine thienothiophene–pyrene COF was characterized with a band gap of 2.08 eV and no obvious change in the vibration bands, further indicating that the efficient band-gap reduction and optimal oxygen intermediate adsorption originate from the heterointerface between the thienothiophene–pyrene COF and the CNTs. Consequently, as shown in Fig. 24i, the half-wave potential of COF/CNT vdWHs (CC-3) is 0.828 V, and the transferred electrons of CC-3 were calculated to be ∼3.86, proving its excellent ORR activity. In addition, CC-3 also delivered the lowest overpotential of 389 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, much better than that of the bare TAPTt-COF (prepared by self-assemblies of thienothiophene–pyrene without CNTs) and CNTs. The development of non-noble-metal-based heterostructures not only promotes the findings of unique interface effects in oxygen electrocatalysis but also advances AEM technologies.
4.3.4.3. Transition metal alloys for HER/HOR. 
Alloy engineering normally involves modifications of the electronic structure of the parent metal through ligand effects or strain effects by incorporation of a second or even more metal phases.393 The varied electronic structures of the parent metal would give rise to a shift of the d-band center in relation to the Fermi level, inducing a changed interaction between the metal and the adsorbed molecules according to the d-band center theory.393,394 Many catalysts with enhanced HER/HOR activity and durability can be obtained by changing the electronic structure through alloy strategies.395–404 On account of the question whether oxophilic effects play different roles in alkaline HER and HOR processes, Sun's group synthesized Pt3Ni/C and acid–Pt3Ni/C to rationally compare their Had and OHad affinities, which were reflected by their CO stripping test results and cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves.405 Specifically, the Pt–OHad binding energies follow the sequence of Pt/C < acid–Pt3Ni/C < Pt3Ni/C, while the Pt–Had binding energies decrease in the order of Pt3Ni/C ≈ acid–Pt3Ni/C < Pt/C. Interestingly, the acid–Pt3Ni/C exhibits medium HER activity but delivers the best HOR activity among these three samples. The current densities at the overpotential of 50 mV (without the influence of H2 mass transfer) for Pt/C, acid–Pt3Ni/C, and Pt3Ni/C are 1.3, 6.2, and 8.3 mA cm−2, respectively, suggesting that the surface Ni species could boost the HER performance via adsorbed OHad. On the other hand, the HOR current densities (at 50 mV) for Pt/C, acid–Pt3Ni/C, and Pt3Ni/C are 1.5, 4.3, and 4.7 mA cm−2, respectively, and no apparent enhancement in the exchange current density can be observed for Pt3Ni/C as compared with acid–Pt3Ni/C, in turn demonstrating the slight effects of adsorbed OHad on the HOR. Analysis of the charge transfer kinetics based on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) plots further confirms that the reaction mechanisms of the HER and HOR are different, which is reflected by their inequivalent transfer coefficients. For the HER process, the Ni species are used to cleave water molecules as well as to reduce the Pt–Had binding energy. With regards to the HOR, the role of Ni is to weaken the Pt–Had binding energies. The DFT calculations give hydrogen adsorption profiles as a function of the reactant intermediates in the HER/HOR process. The HER activity descriptor is reflected by the sum energy of H–OH cleaving and Had adsorption, which follows the order of Pt(111) (0.99 eV) < Pt3Ni(111)@Pt skin (0.96 eV) < Pt3Ni(111) (0.78 eV). The HOR process is merely determined by Had adsorption, where the sequence is Pt(111) (0.76 eV) < Pt3Ni(111) (0.64 eV) < Pt3Ni(111)@Pt skin (0.32 eV). This work illustrates how the oxophilic effects play different roles in the HER and HOR processes, and deepens our understanding of the HER/HOR steps although more direct evidence of the OHad behavior as a reactant intermediate is missing. In the meantime, Li's group employed in situ electrochemical surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) to clarify the role of hydroxyl species (OHad) in the HOR process, which might provide evidence of the dynamical reaction kinetics.406 In order to increase the surface detection sensitivity, Au metal was employed to build Au as cores with Pt or PtNi serving as shells (Au@Pt NPs vs. Au@PtNi NPs) as the main object of study. The in situ SERS spectra as a function of voltage for Au@Pt and Au@PtNi in alkaline KOH/KOD (deuterium isotopic experiment) are presented in Fig. 25a. During the HOR reaction, no Raman signals can be observed for Au@Pt, which is very likely due to the weak adsorption of OH− on the Pt surface. With regards to Au@PtNi, the peak at 778 cm−1 emerged at the potential of 65 mV and increased to a maximum intensity at 165 mV before decreasing. In terms of Au@PtNi in KOD, the peak at 778 cm−1 shifted to ∼668 cm−1, indicating that the adsorbed species are most likely to be OHad, based on analysis of the mass conversion formula.407 Moreover, DFT-based calculations were adopted to find the adsorption energy of OHad on different sites.
 Fig. 25  (a) In situ SERS spectra of Au@Pt and Au@PtNi surfaces in 0.1 M KOH, and Au@PtNi surface in 0.1 M DOH during the HOR process. (b) Illustration of the Volmer steps on pure Pt and Pt3Ni(110) surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. (c) HER/HOR polarization curves and (d) PDOS profile for alloyed samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 408. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (e) The HOR polarization curves of Ru/C, Ni/C, Pt/C, PtRu/C, and Ru7Ni3/C, and (f) their fuel cell performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 409. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (g) UPS spectra of MoNi4, WNi4, and Ni. (h) Schematic illustration of Had and OHad adsorption on Mo(W)Ni4 alloys and a comparison of kinetics currents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 410. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 
Of them, the adsorption of OHad on surface Ni–Ni bridge sites was calculated to feature the lowest adsorption energy. Furthermore, the co-adsorbed configuration of OHad was simulated to give the O–H rocking mode at a frequency of 774 cm−1, which matches well with the experimentally observed peak at 778 cm−1, suggesting that OHad might be another HOR intermediate species. The Gibbs free energies of Had and OHad species were also obtained by DFT calculations to clarify the HOR process. As described in Fig. 25b, for the pure Pt surface, the HOR process is energetically unfavorable due to the unavailability of sites for OHad. For the PtNi surface, however, the oxophilic Ni facilitates the adsorption of OHad and enhances the reaction rate. Moreover, the authors also inferred from electrochemical SERS that the Pt–H binding energy is identical for Au@Pt and Au@PtNi, in turn confirming the definite role of OHad in the HOR process. This is the first report that elucidates the dynamical electrochemical process for the HOR by using in–situ techniques, although the explicit role of OHad in the alkaline HER process remains to be determined. Wang and co-authors discussed the alloying effects of Ru with different metals (Co, Ni, and Fe) and demonstrated their activity enhancement mechanisms for the HER/HOR and the OER/ORR.408 With regards to hydrogen electrolysis, the specific activities and mass activities of Ru0.95Co0.05/C, Ru0.95Fe0.05/C, and Ru0.95Ni0.05/C are much higher in contrast to Ru/C and Pt/C, with Ru0.95Co0.05/C being the best (Fig. 25c). As illustrated in Fig. 25d, the d-band center of RuCo decreases with the increasing ratio of Co in the alloy, leading to weakened Had adsorption as well as enhanced HER/HOR activity.411 The recent investigations of metal-based alloys have further promoted the development of high-performance electrocatalysts in AEMWEs and AEMFCs.409,410,412 Zhuang and co-authors fabricated the RuNi alloy, and the mass activity of Ru7Ni3/C was 21 times that of Pt/C.409 Remarkably, Ru7Ni3/C exhibited a high peak power density of 2.03 W cm−2 in an H2/O2 hydroxide exchange membrane fuel cell at 95 °C, outperforming the PtRu/C anode catalyst (Fig. 25e and f). According to the refined HBE theory, the authors ascribed the highly enhanced HOR activity to the optimized hydrogen binding energy and increased water adsorption. The Ru–H binding is weakened after the addition of Ni, which was reflected by the negatively-shifted electrochemical in situ attenuated total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (ATR–SEIRAS).413 Furthermore, the O–H stretching vibration peak derived from ATR–SEIRAS within the HOR potential range (−0.15 to 0.2 V) validates the improved water adsorption ability on Ru7Ni3/C, which is closely associated with the surface oxidized Ni species.414 Very recently, Yu's group fabricated Ni-based alloys and discussed the role of hydrogen and hydroxyl species in activity enhancement.410 As determined by extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis, heteroatom bonds (Mo–Ni) are generated within the MoNi4 alloy. The incorporation of Mo modulates the electronic band structure of the MoNi4 alloy, which is reflected in the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra (Fig. 25g). Compared with pristine Ni metal, the d-band center of WNi4 and MoNi4 is downshifted away from the Fermi level, implying that the metal–H antibonding state above the Fermi level is increased, resulting in weakened Had adsorption.415 Apart from the electronic effects induced by the metal alloy, the oxophilic effects are also discussed, based on the CO stripping test. The CO stripping peaks of WNi4 and MoNi4 are negatively shifted in contrast to pristine Ni metal and Pt/C, manifesting the strengthened OHad binding energy. In Fig. 25h, DFT calculations also illustrate the remarkably enhanced hydroxyl adsorption and the greatly decreased hydrogen adsorption on MoNi4, which both contributed to the boosted HOR activity. Importantly, MoNi4 exhibited a geometrical current density j0 of 3.41 mA cm−2 and an ECSA normalized j0 of 0.065 mA cm−2, which is far beyond the performance of reported non-PGM based catalysts.
4.3.4.4. Transition metal-based oxides/(oxy)hydroxides for the OER/ORR. 
Metal oxides/(oxy)hydroxides have been considered promising electrocatalysts for the OER because of their robust structural stability, strong corrosion resistance, and decent intrinsic activity. The most promising category, NiFe oxides (i.e., NiFeOxHy), has long been employed as a family of benchmark OER catalysts given their exceptional activity and economic competitiveness, especially in contrast to noble metal oxides (e.g., RuO2, IrO2, etc.).416 Although the activity of NiFe oxides is well established, the nature of active sites and their working principles remain debatable. Meanwhile, the recent catalyst design approaches involving metal oxides for the alkaline OER concentrate on foreign-metal doping and binary or ternary metal oxide/(oxy)hydroxide construction, and numerous classical catalysts have been reported with very high activity.417–419 To this end, the major objective for researchers is to elucidate the fundamental mechanism behind the OER process on metal oxides/(oxy)hydroxides, find out the catalyst design principle, and further improve the catalysts’ performance toward the alkaline OER. It has to be noted that the OER is a dynamical process with applied potential and that complex compositions, morphological changes, surface reconstruction, etc. intensify the difficulty in probing the authentic active sites. Inspired by this, Chueh and co-authors employed operando scanning probe and X-ray microscopy techniques to establish the structure–activity correlation in the oxygen evolution reaction by selecting a single-crystalline β-Co(OH)2 platelet.420 Based on combining an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) with electrochemical atomic force microscopy (EC-AFM), the height and mass difference of a single β-Co(OH)2 platelet could be determined as a function of applied potentials  and are displayed in Fig. 26a. The particle height increased approximately 10% between the two applied potentials ( and ) and contracted back to its initial dimensions at . Meanwhile, the mass of the single β-Co(OH)2 platelet gradually decreased with  and . According to the EQCM measurements, the structural changes associated with applied potential are shown in Fig. 26b, where the first redox transition (0.9 to 1.36 V) corresponds to hydroxide intercalation (from Co(OH)2 to α-CoO2H1.6·0.5H2O) and the second redox reaction at  implies the removal of interlayer water and protons, and the formation of β-CoOOH. Furthermore, the author employed operando scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) to probe the Co oxidation state in the potential range of the OER (Fig. 26c), and the X-ray absorbance spectrum (XAS) with the corresponding Co oxidation state fitting is shown in Fig. 26d. The number of electrons transferred in the redox reaction was derived to be ∼0.54 ± 0.04 e− at  (∼1.14 V) and ∼0.46 ± 0.04 e− at  (∼1.58 V), respectively, in agreement with the redox peaks (Fig. 26c) and EC-AFM and EQCM results (Fig. 26a). Hence, the average oxidation states of Co were determined to be Co2.54+ at  and Co3+ at . Based on the analysis of operando STXM data and microkinetic modeling,422 the Co3+ (β-CoOOH) sites are very likely to be the active sites of the rate-determining step for the OER. This work provides a fundamental viewpoint to establish the relationship between the OER rate-determining step (RDS) and the electronic structure of a single crystal by using advanced techniques (EC-AFM and EQCM). In addition to this work, Markovic et al. aimed to provide a catalyst design scheme from the viewpoint of activity–stability and address the metal dissolution issues over the OER potential range.421 By systematically comparing the OER activity between MOxHy (M = Fe, Co, Ni) and Fe-containing MOxHy clusters (Fe–MOxHy), the activity trend toward alkaline OER (Fe–NiOxHy > Fe–CoOxHy > FeOxHy) was derived, where the OER activity was found to correlate with the surface Fe average adsorption free energy on MOxHy sites (ΔGFe–M), and the stronger interaction of MOxHy with Fe usually leads to sufficient active sites as well as enhanced stability. The OER activity enhancement for Fe incorporated 3d transition-metal hydr(oxy)oxides is shown in Fig. 26e, in which Co, Ni, and Cu could significantly improve the Fe adsorption energy owing to weakened M–O bonding. Furthermore, doping on the Ni hydr(oxy)oxide with other 3d transition metals (Co, Ni, and Cu) was confirmed to improve the Fe adsorption energy and Fe coverage, consequently leading to better OER activity (Fig. 26e). This trend was further demonstrated by the linear relationship between OER activity and Fe surface coverage on NiM (Cu, Co, Mn) and Ni hydr(oxy)oxides. At the same time, the synergistic effects between Fe and Ni species for Fe-doped NiOOH ((NixFey)OOH) in the oxygen evolution reaction have been elucidated due to their exceptional catalytic activity. Goddard and co-authors adopted quantum mechanics (QM) methods (hybrid DFT and grand canonical-QM) to find that the surface high spin d4 Fe(IV) site contributes to the formation of active O radical species; meanwhile, the surface closed-shell d6 Ni(IV) sites serve as active centers for O–O coupling. These two synergistic steps result in a highly improved alkaline OER rate for (NixFey)OOH, which is in agreement with the experimental results.423 Following this concept, the author screened the OER activity of Fe-doped NiOOH ((NixFey)OOH) by replacing Fe with 17 other transition metals and predicted Co-, Rh-, and Ir-doped NiOOH to be efficient OER electrocatalysts because they promote the formation of the key intermediate (O radical species).424 Aside from theoretical investigations, Cao's group developed a universal strategy through ligand-induced conversion on 3d-transition-metal (hydro)oxides and successfully synthesized a series of metal oxides and metal LDHs with highly improved OER performances (e.g., NiCo LDH-terephthalic acid (TPA), 267 mV overpotential).425 Given the strong bonding between *OOH species and 3d block metals, this strategy was intended to weaken the intermediate bonding by shifting the d-band center of 3d block metals, which was achieved by organic ligand transformation (e.g., replacing a certain amount of OH− by terephthalic acid). Accordingly, the downshifted d orbitals of Co and the decreased Co 3d–O 2p orbital energy gap were validated by DOS calculations and consequently led to optimized *OOH bonding and improved OER activity. On the other hand, Liu's group developed a ball milling method to introduce tensile strength into the NiFe hydroxide lattice to tune the anti-bonding orbital filling and oxygenated intermediate adsorption, as well as OER activity.426 Apart from the fabrication of transition metal hydr(oxy)oxides at the laboratory scale, Yu et al. for the first time proposed a scalable method to synthesize amorphous ternary metal oxides and studied their catalytic properties towards the OER.417 Based on the facile supersaturated co-precipitation method, the authors employed metal-containing precursors and synthesized a range of ternary metal oxides up to 515 grams with high quality (e.g., CoFeMo, MnFeMo, and CuFeMo oxides). As demonstrated, the amorphous catalysts underwent a self-reconstruction process to generate metal oxy(hydroxides) with O-vacancies during the OER, in which the O-vacancies were confirmed to lower the adsorption energy toward *OOH, consequently leading to excellent OER activity. Recently reported excellent studies particularly focused on 3d block transition metal hydr(oxy)oxides, as
can be seen from the following excellent reviews.207,427–429 Please note that surface reconstruction for metal hydr(oxy)oxides and many other metal compounds was found to heavily affect the catalyst structure and the authentic catalytic active sites especially for the OER. The studies on the surface reconstruction during the OER and the coping strategies have been systematically outlined by several review papers.207,430–432 Notably, Gao et al. emphasized the fundamental understanding of the mechanism of the surface reconstruction and summarized the strategies to tailor the reconstruction (e.g., doping, morphology tuning, vacancy, etc.) and characterization techniques for transition metal-based OER catalysts.430
 Fig. 26  (a) The tested heights (top) and the EC-AFM current and isothermal (T = 25 °C) mass change (measured by EQCM) for a β-Co(OH)2 particle. (b) Illustration of the expansion and contraction of individual CoO2 layers with increasing voltage. (c) Voltage-dependent particle-averaged Co LIII-edge STXM-XAS spectra. (d) The Co oxidation state as a function of voltage. (e) Cyclic voltammogram (in 0.1 M KOH) of β-Co(OH)2 in an STXM electrochemical flow cell at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a flow rate of 30 μl min−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 420. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (f) OER activity enhancement trend for 3d transition-metal hydr(oxy)oxides incorporated with Fe. (g) OER activity of Ni (left) and NiCu (right) hydr(oxy)oxides in pure KOH and KOH containing 0.1 ppm Fe. (h) Linear correlation between the absolute OER activity of NiM (Cu, Co, Mn) and Ni hydr(oxy)oxides and average Fe coverage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 421. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 

4.4. Gas diffusion layers and bipolar plates for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
Gas diffusion layers (GDLs) and bipolar plates (BPs) are another two critical components to build low-cost high-performance AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. As illustrated in Fig. 7a, the GDL is usually composed of a microporous layer (MPL) and a substrate, and is in direct contact with the inner catalyst layer and the outer BP. Meanwhile, the membrane, catalyst layer, and GDL are sandwiched by BPs, and the BPs act as a shield and provide strong mechanical support to the single cell. In addition, BPs serve as protective layers to allow the chemical reaction to take place smoothly while transporting water, gas, heat, electricity, etc. A schematic illustration of a commercially available bipolar plate and the zoomed GDL structure is presented in Fig. 27a. It is believed that the properties of GDL and BP in AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells lead to very similar requirements to those of their PEM counterparts.433–436 Herein, the primary requirement on BPs in AEM devices is also to offer higher electrical and thermal conductivity to reduce the potential loss and internal heating, high mechanical strength to withstand the pressure in the cell stack, robust anti-corrosion capability to prolong the working lifetime, lower gas permeability to minimize the gas crossover, etc.433,437 In addition to this, the material density and the cost are another two factors that influence the overall function of the AEM devices. For instance, the density of the material for PEM BPs is suggested to be lower than 5 g cm−3, and the materials plus fabrication cost is believed to be lower than $0.0045 cm−2 to improve their portability and economic competitiveness.438,439 One major difference for the BPs in AEM and PEM water electrolyzers is that the BPs in AEM usually face fewer corrosion issues due to the working electrolyte; hence, the materials of the BPs and the coating layer in AEM device have a wider choice and lower production cost. For GDLs, their main function is to allow the reactants (e.g., water, gas, etc.) to pass through to the catalyst layer and, equally, let the products flow away efficiently. On top of this, higher electrical conductivity, mechanical strength, and anti-corrosion capability are desirable to improve the cell potential loss, structural stability of the membrane electrode assembly, and cell durability. The properties of the BP and GDL for AEM devices are displayed in Fig. 27b, and we next discuss how to make rational material designs for BPs and GDLs based on the requirements mentioned. There have been increasing research reports on BPs for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells,440,441 but there has been very little in-depth exploration on how the employment of various materials and/or flow channel designs determine the cell performance. In the case of the BPs in PEM fuel cells, the selection of different raw materials, ranging from graphite and metals (e.g., Al, Ti, Ni, etc.) to composites (e.g., stainless steel, carbon composites) has been comparatively studied.439 Furthermore, a variety of modification strategies, including changing the filler content and incorporation of protective coating layers to improve the conductivity and anti-corrosion capability of the BPs, have been widely adopted,433,442–444 which in turn indicates that relevant studies on the AEM devices are urgently needed. Moreover, the different operation conditions between AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells also call for comprehensive studies on the BPs to respectively develop ideal ones for the two devices. A typical example is that the BPs of AEM water electrolyzer anodes tend to suffer from severe corrosion in comparison to their counterparts in AEM fuel cells because the potential experienced at the anode can be often higher than 2.0 V. As shown in Fig. 27c, three respective flow channel designs, i.e., 1-channel serpentine, 5-channel serpentine, and parallel, are depicted. The flow channel transition from 1-channel serpentine to multipath serpentine reduces the flow resistivity and favors a high flow rate (Fig. 27c).445 Continuing this concept, parallel channels and modifications were accordingly proposed to reduce the hydraulic resistivity.446,447 A schematic illustration of a flow field channel from a PEM BP is shown in Fig. 27d to provide fundamental insight on how to achieve efficient BPs in AEM devices through the rational design of channel parameters. Therefore, from the viewpoint of experimental design and computational modeling, finding optimal channel parameters such as channel depth, flank angle, pitch distance, etc. for AEM devices is urgently needed. In addition to the basic channel parameters, a common problem of BPs is the increased interfacial contact resistance (ICR), which originates from the generated metal oxidation layer at the surface of BPs after a certain period of operation. In particular, the anodic film formation is rather severe because the potential is usually higher than +1.5 V vs. RHE. Targeting this problem, Proch et al. studied a series of coating materials used in the BPs for AEM fuel cells and explored how the coating layer helps to reduce interfacial contact resistance.448 The ICR was calculated through an established setup, and the BP surface compositions were detected by glow-discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GD-OES), the results of which are presented in Fig. 27e. Optical images of the surfaces of BPs and the ICR were found to show no difference before and after exposure to aqueous sodium hydroxide with pH 11 and pH 14.5. Furthermore, the GD-OES profile tested under the conditions of pH 11 showed that C and O signals were mostly dominant, which is almost the same as with the pristine one. When the pH of the electrolyte was changed to 14.5, the GD-OES profile exhibited an increased O signal, indicating obvious carbon oxidation. Interestingly, the ICR remained almost unchanged, even with severe carbon oxidation, suggesting that the carbon coating could well inhibit the generation of metal oxides. This work paves the way for the future design and development of robust BPs for AEM fuel cells and water electrolyzers. Next, we consider three classical experimental factors (i.e., pore structure, hydrophobic/hydrophilic conditions, and thickness) for which a GDL will be evaluated to study its performance in AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells, respectively. For a macroporous layer (MPL), Razmjooei and co-authors proposed to use a Ni-based MPL to further improve the performance of AEM water electrolyzers.450 Specifically, the Ni-based MPLs were synthesized by using the air-plasma spraying (APS) technique, in which a very porous Ni-based alloy layer with the thickness of ∼80 μm was deposited on a metallic porous transport layer (PTL), thus forming a Ni-based MPL. As shown in Fig. 28a, the total pore volume of the NiMPL-PTL was 11.29 mm3 g−1, and the pore size ranged from 0.1 to 90 μm, which are far better than those of an uncoated PTL (total volume of 0.85 mm3 g−1 with pore size ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 nm). The highly improved porous structure of NiMPL-PTL promoted gas and water transportation, leading to enhanced cell performance (Fig. 28b). The AEM water electrolyzer with NiMPL-PTL precious metal catalysts (Ir and Pt/C) delivered the lowest voltage (1.9 V) at a current density of 500 mA cm−2, which is much lower than that of the cell (2.19 V) employing a normal PTL and identical catalysts as well as of the cell using a commercial Ni mesh as the PTL. On the other hand, NiMPL-PTL also enables the reduction of interfacial contact resistance (ICR), which is another reason for the improved cell performance. Nyquist plots of cells with PTL/PTL and NiMPL-PTL/NiMPL-PTL, captured at the current density of 500 mA cm−2, are presented in Fig. 28b. The internal and mass transfer resistances of the NiMPL-PTL/NiMPL-PTL cell are both far lower than for the PTL/PTL cell, again manifesting that NiMPL-PTL could efficiently reduce the ICR and promote gas removal. In addition, the complicated water management for AEM fuel cells in comparison with their PEM counterparts makes the tuning of the hydrophobic conditions of the GDL rather significant and challenging. For this purpose, Yang et al. investigated the effects of the hydrophobic conditions of the gas diffusion layer on the AEM fuel cell performance through modulation of the amount of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) within the GDL.451 In this work, two gas-diffusion substrates (GDSs: carbon paper functionalized with/without PTFE) and three gas-diffusion layers (GDLs, GDSs further coated with a MPL) were prepared and characterized accordingly. The pore size distributions (PSD) of the five samples are given in Fig. 28c, where GDS-0 shows a maximum distribution of the pore diameters at 33 μm when compared with GDS-30 and GDL-30. In addition, the intensity of the maximum distribution for GDL-30
decreases in comparison with GDS-30, indicating that the incorporation of MPL has occupied the pores on GDS and hence leads to reduced maximum distribution intensity. Furthermore, the porosity (%), air permeability, through-plane resistance, and mean pore diameter for GDS-0, GDS-30, GDL-0, GDL-10, and GDL-30 were calculated. The air permeability of GDL-0, GDL-10, and GDL-30 gradually increases while the through-plane resistance of the former two remains nearly identical (5.45 vs. 5.43 mΩ cm−2), and the latter is increased to 11.9 mΩ cm−2, suggesting that a thicker PTFE layer in the GDS results in better gas transfer capability but also causes higher resistance. The polarization curves and power density profiles of the cells assembled with different GDLs are presented in Fig. 28d. Specifically, the cell voltage and power density profiles of the cells show the trend of GDL-0/GDL-0 < GDL-40/GDL-40 < GDL-10/GDL-10 < GDL-30/GDL-30. This indicates that too high a PTFE content in the GDL does not necessarily lead to higher cell performance and that 30% PTFE functionalization on the GDL benefits water transport more than 10% PTFE does, which contributes significantly to cell performance. In addition to the two strategies, tuning the thickness of the GDL is another method to improve cell performance, because the thickness of the GDL would greatly affect the electrical conduction, the passage of reactants/products, and the framework of the cell. As illustrated in Fig. 28e, Zhang and co-authors employed a novel liquid/gas diffusion layer (LGDL) with much-reduced thickness and tunable pore morphologies.452 Compared with the conventional titanium foam GDL (e.g., mesh, foam, felts, etc.) with a thickness of ∼260 μm, the bare thin/tunable liquid/gas diffusion layers (TTLGDLs) feature a thickness of approximately 50 μm. Meanwhile, a ∼80 nm-thick gold layer was electroplated on the surface of TTLGDL (surface-coated TTLGDL (SC-TTLGDL)). The average pore size of TTLGDL was found to be 300 μm, which is far better than the commercial Ti foam GDL (∼30 μm). Consequently, an AEM water electrolyzer with the SC-TTLGDL delivered much enhanced current density compared with an SC-Ti foam-based cell at the same overpotential, whether operated under 0.1 M KOH electrolyte or deionized water (Fig. 28f), suggesting that the highly porous and thinner LGDL promotes mass diffusion and interfacial contact. Moreover, the decreased thickness of LGDL also helps to build a cell stack with reduced weight, product cost, and volume. On this basis, more in-depth studies on the GDL from the perspectives of pore size, hydrophobic conditions, and thickness are still needed to find the ideal elements for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells.
 Fig. 27  (a) Architectural view and images of the bipolar plate (BP) and gas-diffusion layer (GDL). (b) Key properties of the BP and GDL, and the normal tuning strategies from a variety of aspects. (c) Illustration of different types of flow channels in the BPs in PEMFCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 449. (d) Cross-sectional view of the flow channel and the critical geometrical parameters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 439. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) Optical images of stainless-steel grade 304L BPs of AEMFCs exposed to three electrolyte conditions and the GD-OES profiles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 448. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 28  (a) 3D structure of NiMPL-PTL and its pore size distribution profile. (b) Polarization curves of AEMWEs with the use of different cell configurations and impedance spectroscopy curves, with the equivalent circuit in the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 450. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Pore size distributions of different gas-diffusion substrates (GDSs). (d) Polarization curves and power density of AEMFCs containing different GDSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 451. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the design concept of a novel TTLGDL with reduced thickness. (f) Performance comparison of water-fed AEMWEs employing SC-TTLGDL and commercial SC-Ti foam GDL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 452. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
4.5. Membrane electrode assembly (MEA)
The membrane, ionomer, electrocatalyst, gas diffusion layer, and bipolar plate have been carefully summarized, and now we move on to the assembly of these key fragments to understand the fabrication process for a single cell and cell stacks. A key step is the construction of the membrane electrode assembly (MEA), which is usually manufactured by two different pathways: catalyst-coated substrate (CCS) and catalyst-coated membrane (CCM).94,453 In the catalyst-coated substrate (CCS) the catalyst ink needs to be dispersed on the gas-diffusion layer to form a gas-diffusion electrode (GDE).454 MEA is then generated by hot-pressing a single layer of AEM sandwiched between two GDEs.455 In sharp contrast, the catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) is fabricated by hot-pressing a single layer of AEM sandwiched between two catalyst layers (CLs).94 Generally, the CCM-based MEA possesses a higher catalyst utilization efficiency and electrochemical reaction rate than the CCS-based MEA because the reaction that occurs on the carbon paper for the CCS-based MEA is a more lengthy process.93,456 Meanwhile, the studies of CCM-based MEAs in PEM fuel cells demonstrated that this type of MEA could efficiently minimize noble metal loading, improve cell power density, and increase overall performance.93,456,457 The employment of CCM-based MEAs would also benefit the catalyst loading and cell performance, which has also been validated in several studies on AEM fuel cells.457,458 On the other hand, the process of fabricating CCM is rather complicated, and obtaining high-quality MEAs is quite challenging because of the partial dissolution of the membrane with the catalyst ink solvent, especially for membrane thickness lower than 20 μm. In addition, membrane creep behavior was found to be present in CCM and reduce the durability of the membrane.459 Critically, the comparisons between CCS-based MEAs and CCM-based MEAs under the premise of employing non-noble-metal-based electrocatalysts still need to be studied to further clarify the most suitable MEA fabrication methods and the compatible non-noble-metal-based catalysts. Here, the manufacturing approach for the single cell and cell stacks based on the CCM-based MEA is presented in Fig. 29. After the fabrication of the CCM and the gas-diffusion layer (GDL), a 5-layer MEA is formed by hot-pressing CCM sandwiched between two layers of GDL. Gaskets and seals are usually assembled with the 5-layer MEA to avoid any gas and/or liquid leakage. Finally, a 7-layer MEA is generated for further assembly with the bipolar plate and end plate before obtaining a single cell as well as cell stacks.
 Fig. 29  Manufacturing flow process for membrane electrode assembly and cell stacks for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. (a) Catalyst coated membrane, (b) gas-diffusion layer, (c) a single cell, and (d) cell stacks for AEMWEs and AEMFCs. 
4.6. Electrochemical evaluation and state-of-the-art performance of AEM devices

4.6.1. Electrochemical evaluation. 
Electrochemical evaluation is the first and foremost step to determine if the cell components have been properly assembled and how well the cell is operated. In the past few decades, tremendous studies have concentrated on catalyst development and optimization, and most of the performance has been assessed in the three-electrode configuration (TEC) (Fig. 30a). The TEC can give a quick and unified measurement of the as-prepared catalysts, but it cannot reflect the precise working conditions in the MEA system (e.g., interfacial structure, reactant concentration, local and bulk pH, etc.).460,461 What is worse is that some electrocatalysts reported with superior performance in TEC do not necessarily deliver equivalent performance when assessed in MEA-based cells,462 further implying that a realistic measurement method to simulate the true working environment is a great necessity. In view of this, Kim et al. employed a microelectrode (ME) set-up to study the HOR and ORR reaction kinetics at the Pt/ionomer interface, and found that cell preconditioning benefits the HOR reaction kinetics of Pt in tetramethyl guanidinium (TMG) and benzyl trimethyl ammonium hydroxide (BTMAOH).463 Weber et al. proposed the pros and cons when using ME to investigate the solid-state electrolyte.464,465 Although a ME has competitive advantages when studying lots of variables (e.g., humidity, temperature, gas flow, etc.) in solid electrolyte membranes than TEC, it is rather complicated to screen cell components than MEA does. For the MEA system, the electrocatalyst and membrane have both achieved outstanding progress, and the current challenge is how to translate the developed high-performance catalysts from liquid electrolytes to the membrane-electrode assembly (MEA).81,466 Therefore, the catalyst evaluation method from TEC to MEA and to a practical water electrolysis cell/H2–O2 fuel cell can be a necessary transition, which could boost the optimization of a range of cell components and operational conditions.453 On this basis, the electrochemical evaluation based on a single cell and the testing advantages as well as the protocols are illustrated in Fig. 30b–d. Fig. 30b shows a MEA-based water electrolysis cell with a working electrode area of 1 cm2. Therefore, the as-prepared catalyst, membrane, ionomer, etc. can be evaluated under these MEA conditions. Currently, this type of single cell can be built at a laboratory and/or directly purchased.467 The electrocatalysts (e.g., 20% Pt/C, IrO2, etc.) as well as membranes (e.g., FAA-3-10 and X37-5) with reproducibility and reliability are commercially available.103 These premises make the establishment of a unified testing protocol for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells a high possibility.441,467 For instance, it is suggested that, for each test, it is better to select the other cell components except for the object of research (catalyst or membrane) from commercial benchmarks, in which a relatively reliable and reproducible polarization curve of a specific research object can be obtained for accurate evaluation. In Fig. 30c, the use of the MEA mimics the practical working environment (water electrolyzer stacks) for every component, which establishes a reliable and unified method to screen cell components and working parameters.462,468
 Fig. 30  Translation of electrochemical evaluation methodology. (a) Three-electrode configuration (TEC), (b) Components and structure of a single cell with working electrode 1 cm2 in size. (c) Advantages and necessity of a single cell configuration evaluation in comparison with TEC. (d) Proposed single cell test protocol. 
Based on the analysis of the literature, the testing protocol for an MEA-based single cell is illustrated in Fig. 30d.


4.6.2. State-of-the-art AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. 
AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells have gained solid progress very recently, owing to the technological advances on electrocatalysts, membranes, ionomers, etc. On the other hand, the efforts toward the optimization of operational conditions and the cell configuration also contribute significantly to the high performance of AEM devices. Herein, AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells with state-of-the-art performances and a variety of cell tunings from the aspects of the operational conditions and engineering setup are presented. First, some typical durability curves of AEMWEs and their corresponding testing protocols are illustrated in Fig. 31a and b. For an AEMWE tested under a constant current density, the polarization voltage curve usually expresses the following different behaviors: type 1 to type 4, which correspond to a gradual increase in voltage, gradual decrease in voltage, stepwise increase in voltage, and spike type of voltage. The gradual increase in voltage is the most common type of degradation that appears in an AEMWE, which might be caused by the increase in cell resistance arising from the loss of cationic functional groups of the AEM. The opposite type 2 degradation is speculated to be due to AEM thinning, leading to hydrogen crossover, although the voltage profile does not reflect the true degradation process. The stepwise increase in voltage is associated with the loss of fast catalyst activity or a local pH change that result in rapid performance decay. Lastly, spike type 4 represents a recoverable degradation within a certain amount of working time, which is thought to be due to changes in the liquid electrolyte concentration or water transport issues. For the detailed durability curves and the possible assumptions, readers are suggested to refer Li's work.469 Compared with the intensive studies on the degradation of PEM devices and the durability tests,470,471 investigations of the AEM water electrolyzers are still in an early stage. As shown in Fig. 31b, Lim's group studied the effects of two different durability testing protocols (short periodic and long periodic modes) on the stability of AEM water electrolyzers.472 For protocol A, the cell is subjected to a bias of 1.95 V for 2–10 hours and rested for 12 hours at open circuit without solution feeding. As a comparison, the 1.95 V voltage bias was prolonged to ∼100 h after every 12 hour rest for protocol B. The AEM water electrolysis cells are operated under the two protocols for 1000 h; meanwhile, the impedance spectra of the cell at a bias of 1.8 V are obtained. Based on the analysis of the ohmic and non-ohmic resistances of the cell, it was found that the frequently rest processes led to an increase in the ohmic resistance. Furthermore, more rest times also led to a lower humidity level inside the cell and degraded the membrane. These findings might provide useful tips on the operation of practical AEM water electrolyzers, in that it is a necessity to feed the electrolyzer to protect the membrane from deterioration, even under regular rest. Sung and co-authors carefully investigated the possible factors influencing the performance of AEM water electrolyzers (Fig. 31c and d).473 The authors found that the CCM-based cells delivered a higher current density than the CCS-based cells with and without hot-pressing. In addition, the resistance analysis made it clear that the CCM-based cell showed minimum ohmic, charge transfer, and mass transfer resistance. In contrast, the CCS-based cell with hot-pressing showed similar ohmic resistance (∼0.2 Ω) but with higher charge transfer resistance, indicating that the CCM fabrication method could promote the electrochemical reaction kinetics. Furthermore, the CCS-based cell without hot pressing exhibited a much higher ohmic resistance (∼0.7 Ω) and rather higher charge transfer as well as mass transfer resistance. The evidence confirms that CCM is more suitable for use in the fabrication of MEAs. As shown in Fig. 31d, the cell fed with the 1 M KOH electrolyte at both the anode and cathode showed the best performance, while the cell fed with the 1 M KOH electrolyte at the anode and pure water at the cathode delivered much reduced current density at the same overpotential. The use of pure water as a reactant at the anode and at both electrodes led to unstable cell performance, manifesting that the supply of KOH at the anode and cathode results in improved performance. Following this concept, a range of careful tunings on the catalysts, membranes, MEA fabrication method, operation conditions, etc. can be accessed from lots of interesting works.476–479 In addition to the operation conditions and electrocatalyst, the durability of AEM water electrolyzers and the test protocol warrant further investigations.472,480–482Fig. 31e and f give two typical examples showing that record-high current density and durability have been achieved for AEM water electrolysis cells.474,475 In light of the consensus that the critical challenge for membranes is durability and mechanical stability, Meroueh selected Sustainion® X37-50 as the membrane and experimentally reinforced the membrane by the sol–gel method to validate its long-term durability.474 The cell using PTFE reinforced Sustainion® (Grade-T) membrane exhibited a record-high durability (Fig. 31e) with only ∼8 mV degradation within 12000 h of operation. The exceptional durability this reinforced membrane achieved demonstrates that an industrial-level lifespan for an AEMWE can be achieved through a rational membrane reinforcement strategy. According to the different requirements on ionomers in anodes/cathodes, Lee and co-authors employed poly(fluorenyl-co-biphenyl piperidinium) (PFBP) with a high IEC (3.43 mmol g−1) and high water uptake (∼350%) as cathode ionomer and adopted poly(fluorenyl-co-terphenyl piperidinium) (PFTP) bearing a high IEC (2.80 mmol g−1) and low water uptake (∼80%) as the anode ionomer, in which the water molecules from the AEM can be efficiently captured at the cathode.475 In addition, poly(fluorenyl-co-terphenyl piperidinium) (PFTP) was selected as the anion-exchange membrane.475 In particular, ionomers and membranes with a range of fluorenyl ratios were tested in the AEMWEs, from which the ideal fluorenyl ratios for electrode ionomer and membrane were acquired. As shown in Fig. 31f, a record-high current density of 7.68 A cm−2 at 2.0 V for an AEMWE was achieved by feeding 1 M KOH as the electrolyte, surpassing that of the state-of-the-art PEMWE (6 A cm−2 at 2.0 V). The current density of AEMWEs with the use of PGM-free electrocatalysts still reached a high level (1.62 A cm−2 at 2.0 V), suggesting the strong competitiveness and practicability of AEMWEs compared to the PEMWE.
 Fig. 31  (a) Typical voltage degradation curves as a function of operation time for AEMWEs. (b) The proposed long-term durability test protocols for AEMWEs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 472. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) AEMWE performance comparison as a function of the MEA fabrication method (CCM vs. CCS) and the resistance analysis. (d) AEMWE performance comparison as a function of the working electrolyte and the feeding flow rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 473. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (e) Record-high long-term durability of AEMWEs with a range of AEMs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 474. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (f) Polarization curves of AEMWEs with specific cell configurations to achieve record-high current density, and the comparison of current density and durability between PFAP membrane and those reported membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 475. Copyright 2021 RSC Publishing. 
State-of-the-art performances of AEMFCs with the employment of typical anode/cathode catalysts are depicted in Fig. 32. For AEMFCs, long-term cell durability (>1000 h) has rarely been reported; hence, understanding the cell degradation mechanism and whether or not the performance losses can be recovered by cell optimization is rather significant. To this end, Mustain et al. continued their previous study and investigated the cell durability mechanism and performance loss reversibility.196,483 As claimed in the previous work, the authors employed benchmark electrocatalysts (PtRu/C for anode and Pt/C for cathode), ionomers, and GDEs, and achieved a stable operation of 2000 h.196 Within this period of 2000 h, the cell average degradation rate nearly maintains at 15 μV h−1 (Fig. 32a). However, an apparent rise in high-frequency resistance (HFR) from 6 to 9 mΩ was observed in the time frame of 1050 h to 2000 h (∼3 μΩ h−1). The rising rate of HFR can be translated to a voltage degradation rate of 9.5 μV h−1, implying that the increased HFR took a majority of the voltage loss within this period. Between 2000 and 2800 h, the voltage degradation rate sharply increased to 118 μV h−1 accompanied by the rise of HFR (4.6 μΩ h−1). Notably, the HFR-induced voltage loss simply accounts for 13.8 μV h−1, suggesting that many other factors are involved in the degradation of cell performance. The authors hence ascribed the performance losses to two types of degradation. The first one is reversible degradation that is very likely induced by the cathode dry-off and water imbalance. This means that the reversible degradation can be recovered by cell optimization such as changing the electrode Dew point. Another part is an irreversible loss that is mainly caused by cell component degradation (e.g., catalysts, ionomer, membrane, etc.). To verify this assumption, the authors increased the Dew point of the cathode to improve the water conditions. At around 2630 h, the Dew point at the anode and cathode both increased obviously, the cell voltage slightly recovered, and the degradation rate reduced (Fig. 32a and b). The authors concluded that nearly half of the lost cell performance can be recovered in the period from 2000 to 2600 h by resolving the water balance issue. The cell with the optimized cell parameters also exhibited better PPD than those without operation optimization (Fig. 32c). This work demonstrates that attaining a longer and better cell durability is very promising by frequently cell optimization, which also opens an avenue to develop durable and robust AEM fuel cells in the future. Fig. 32d–i give the polarization curves and PPD for several AEM fuel cells with the employment of anode, cathode, and membrane. In Fig. 32d–f, three representative cathode electrocatalysts, i.e., Fe–N–C, Mn–Co spinel oxides, and Co@C/C, have been assembled with benchmark anode catalyst (PtRu/C) to test the cell performance.43,107,484 The AEM fuel cell with the use of Fe–N–C as the cathode electrocatalyst exhibited an excellent PPD of 1.44 W cm−2 and a remarkable mass transport limited current density of 4.3 A cm−2. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest PPD of the reported AEM fuel cells with the employment of a non-precious metal cathode. Zhuang and co-authors prepared [Mn0.3Co0.7][Mn0.6Co0.4]2O4 (MCO) as the cathode and the assembled AEM fuel cell delivered a PPD of 1.1 W cm−2 and a higher mass transport limited current density of 3.5 A cm−2.484 In Fig. 32f, Chen focused on the development of poly(fluorene-co-biphenyl N,N′-dimethylpiperidinium) (PFBP) as ionomer and poly(fluorene-co-terphenyl N,N′-dimethylpiperidinium) (PFTP) as the membrane. The PFTP-based fuel cell with the use of cobalt catalyst (0.6 mg cm−2 Co@C/C, 40 wt% Co) delivered a PPD of 0.891 W cm−2.107 On the other hand, some typical precious metal-free anodes and the fuel cell performances are presented in Fig. 32g–i. Atanassov et al. synthesized Ni95Cu5 nanoalloy that immobilized on Ketjenblack as the anode material for an AEMFC.485 With the use of Pd/XC-72 as the cathode, the AEM fuel cell exhibited a PPD of ∼0.35 W cm−2 at 80 °C. Zhuang prepared Ni-based nanoparticles enwrapped by a 2 nm nitrogen-doped carbon shell (Ni@CNx) as the anode and employed Pt/C as the cathode (Fig. 32h). Specifically, the assembled AEM fuel cell exhibited a PPD of 0.48 W cm−2 at 80 °C. Meanwhile, the fuel cell presented quite stable durability for 20 h at a current density of 600 mA cm−2. Notably, changing the cathode catalyst from commercial Pt/C to [Mn0.3Co0.7][Mn0.6Co0.4]2O4 (MCO), the AEM fuel cell achieved a record high PPD of 0.21 W cm−2 (Fig. 32i). One should note, these works have slightly different catalyst loading amounts although most the electrode catalysts have selected benchmark materials, manifesting a unified comparison with identical cell components and working conditions is rather important and critical. The recent AEM water electrolysis and fuel cell performances are displayed in Tables 4 and 5.
 Fig. 32  (a and b) Variation of the specific AEM fuel cell parameters (cell voltage, cell potential, and electrode Dew point) over time. (c) Polarization curves and PPD of the cell with three working conditions. Green circles represent the optimized working conditions at a temperature of 80 °C, reacting gas flow rates of 1.0 L min−1 with anode/cathode dew points that optimize power density (71/73 °C) with no back pressurization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 483. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Cell performances with the use of benchmark anode catalysts and typical cathode catalysts from Fe–N–C to MnCo spinel catalyst (MCS), and then to Co@C/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, 107 and 484. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society, 2019 and 2021 Springer Nature. (g–i) Cell performances with the use of different cathode catalysts and typical anode catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 485 and 489. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing and 2022 National Academy of Sciences. 
Table 4 Comparison of AEM water electrolyzers in terms of key components and performances




Work
Membrane
Ionomer
AC, (mg cm−2)
CC, (mg cm−2)
GDL/BP

T
cell (°C)
Electrolyte
Current density (A cm−2@V)
Durability (h)




AC is short for anode catalyst; CC is short for cathode catalyst; Tcell means the working temperature of the cell.




Wang et al.192
QAPPT
QAPPT
FeNi-LDH on Ni foam. Integrated electrode.
Pt/C
—
60
Pure water
1.9@1.9 V
500 mA cm−2 for 175 h. 242.4 μV h−1.


Choi et al.478
X37-50 grade T
—
CuCoO (30)
NiCoO–NiCo/C (1.5)
—
50
1 M KOH
0.504@1.85 V
440 mA cm−2 for 150 h. 2.0 mV h−1. (5 cell stack)


Choi et al.477
X37-50 Grade T
PTFE
NiFeV layered double hydroxide supported on Ni foam.
Pt/C loaded on carbon cloth.
Ni foam as GDL
50
1 M KOH
2.10@1.8 V
500 mA cm−2 for 100 h and the voltage lower than 1.80 V.


Lee et al.475
PFTP-13
No
Ni–Fe electrodeposited electrode (20)
Ni–Fe electrodeposited electrode (20)
No
60
Pure water
1.2@∼2.0 V
500 mA cm−2 for 240 h and the voltage lower than ∼2.2 V.


Yan et al.486
PAP-TP-85, 150 mS cm−1 at RT, 20 μm
PAP-TP-85,
FexNiyOOH-20F, (4.8)
47% Pt/C, 0.94 mgPt cm−2
—
80
Pure water
0.81@1.8 V
200 mA cm−2 for 160 h. 0.56 mV h−1.


Boettcher et al.480
PeperION, >135 mS cm−1 at 70 °C, 50 μm
Aemion ionomer
IrO2 nanoparticles, (2.3 and 2.8)
Pt black, (2.3 and 2.8)
Toray 090 carbon paper
55
Pure water
1.0@∼1.9 V
500 mA cm−2 for 180 h. 0.67 mV h−1.


Meroueh et al.474
PTFE-Sustainion®, >50 μm
—
NiFe2O4, (1.8)
RANEY® Ni, (14.5)
—
60
1 M KOH
0.84@1.8 V
1 A cm−2 for 12000 h. 0.7 μV h−1.


Li et al.487
PTP-90, 129 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, ∼40–50 μm
A-Radel ionomer
IrO2 powder
Pt black
—
55
1 M NaOH
0.91@2.2 V
400 mA cm−2 for 120 h. 1.61 mV h−1.




Table 5 Comparison of AEM fuel cells in terms of key components and performances




Work
Membrane
Ionomer
AC and loading (mg cm−2)
CC and loading (mg cm−2)
GDL/BL

T
cell (°C)
Gas stream
PWD (W cm−2)
Mass transport limited current density (A cm−2)
Durability (h)




Poly(terphenyl piperidinium-co-trifluoroacetophenone) (PAP-TP-85); poly(fluorenyl-co-biphenyl piperidinium) (PFBP); quaternary ammonia poly(N-methyl-piperidine-co-p-terphenyl) (QAPPT); branched poly(terphenyl piperidine) (b-PTPA-2.5) polymers, where 2.5 is the molar ratio (in percent) of 1,3,5-triphenylbenzene (TPB) to the aryl monomers; and vinylbenzyl-terminated bi-cationic quaternary ammoniumpoly(2,6-dimethylphenylene oxide)-PPO (VBBQPPO).




Mustain et al.488
LDPE-BTMA 2.87 mmol−1
ETFE-BTMA powder
PtRu/C (0.70)
N–C–CoOx (2.4)
—
65
H2/CO2-free air
0.66
2.5
600 mA cm−2 for 100 h. 15% voltage loss.


Zhuang et al.489
QAPPT
QAPPT
Ni@CNx (15 mgNi cm−2)
60% Pt/C (0.4)
—
80
H2/O2, 100% and 100% RH
0.48
∼0.8
600 mA cm−2 for 20 h. No obvious voltage loss within 20 h.


Serov et al.490
Tokuyama A201
Tokuyama AS4
NiMo/KB (4)
Pd/C (0.2 mgPd cm−2)
—
70
H2/O2, 70% and 100% RH
0.12
∼0.25
The current density decays from 55 to ∼40 mA cm−2 after 100 h at 0.7 V.


Hu et al.163
b-PTP-2.5, >145 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, 20 μm
PFBP
PtRu/C (0.6)
Pt/C (0.4)
Graphite BP
80
H2/CO2-free air, 75%/100% RH
1.3
∼3.2
H2/O2, 200 mA cm−2@60 °C. V decreased from 0.68 V to 0.51 V at 110 h and stabilized at 0.51 V for 50 h.


Yan et al.162
PAP-TP-85, 60–80 mS cm−1 at 20 °C, 25 μm
PAP-BP-100 ionomer
low-Pt anode (<0.15)
Ag-based cathode (1)
—
95
H2/CO2-free air,
0.92
∼1.8
500 mA cm−2 for 300 h. ∼11.5% voltage loss at 250 h.


Ozoemena et al.363
HDPE-based RG-AEM


Pd–CeO2/OLC (onion-like carbon)
40 wt% Pt/C (0.4 mgPt cm−2)
Teflon-treated Toray paper GDL
80
H2/O2
1.0
—
Stable operation at 900 mW cm−2 for 1 h.


Xu et al.491
VBBQPPO-based, 2.87 mmol g−1, 20 μm
VBBQPPO-based
PtRu/C (0.5 mgmetal cm−2)
Pt/C (0.5 mgmetal cm−2)
Graphite BP
70
H2/O2, 100%/100% RH
1.5
∼3.0
600 mA cm−2 for 120 h. No obvious voltage loss within 70 h.





5. Working management for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
5.1. Feeding electrolyte
Three different types of commonly employed feeding electrolytes for AEMWEs and their polarization curves have been briefly introduced in Fig. 5e. Simply speaking, the use of different types of electrolytes and electrolyte pre-feeding methods need careful tuning to achieve an optimal balance between cell performance and long-term durability.70,72,73,492–495 First, Park's group confirmed that adequate membrane wetness to ensure sufficient OH− doping in the membrane is required to decrease the membrane ohmic resistance and complete the membrane activation, which is significant for the initial operation of AEMWEs.492,493 Hence, they suggested that pre-feeding 0.5 M aqueous KOH into an AEM water electrolysis cell could maximize the cell performance. Razmjooei et al. found that an improved cell performance is achieved by changing the electrolyte solution from 0.1 M KOH to 0.3 M, although this performance increase is rather limited when the electrolyte solution further changes from 0.3 M KOH to 1.0 M KOH.496 This is because a minor increase in electrolyte concentration contributes to accelerated HER and OER kinetics, reduced ohmic resistance of the membrane, and fast ion mobility. Further increasing the electrolyte concentration (above 0.3 M KOH) leads to increased solution viscosity and blockage of catalytic active sites due to the formation of gas bubbles on the surface. As shown in Fig. 33a, Mustain and co-authors studied the cell performance and durability through tuning a series of KOH solutions with different concentrations. They found that diluted KOH solution benefits cell performance but very likely leads to reduced long-term durability compared with the use of DI water.495 The exceptionally low cell degradation for over 500 h (93.5 μV h−1) when feeding with DI water vs. higher cell performance when feeding with diluted KOH solutions (Fig. 33a) manifests that the delicate balance between durability and cell performance needs careful studies. On the other hand, Weber and co-authors elucidated the fundamental role of metal alkali solution in AEMWEs through experiments and mathematical models.494 As shown in Fig. 33b, the voltage loss of the AEM water electrolysis cells with three different electrolytes can be grouped into anode kinetics-intrinsic, anode kinetics-pH, anode kinetics-bubble, cathode kinetics, high-frequency resistance (HFR), catalyst layer ohmic resistance, and ion-exchange resistance by using a mathematic model. For the cell fed with DI water, the most dominant factors contributing to the voltage loss are anode kinetics-intrinsic, catalyst layer ohmic resistance, anode kinetics-pH, and HFR resistance. In terms of the cell using a 0.01 M KOH solution, these four factors still dominate the voltage loss but all with reduced proportions. By contrast, for the cell fed with 1 M KOH solution, anode kinetics-intrinsic was also regarded the most influential factor of the voltage loss while the others took up minor shares. This is a pioneering study where a mathematic model analysis method was employed to quantitatively compare all possible factors involved in cell voltage loss. Therefore, a more precise improvement strategy can be proposed to address the challenges such as increasing the intrinsic activity of the anode catalyst, facilitating membrane and ionomer transportation, and reducing the HFR. Besides, Weber's group also proposed to thoroughly investigate the effects of the ion type (cationic and anion), the cation/OH− ratio, and the presence of carbonates on the cell voltage and durability.497,498 As depicted in Fig. 33c–e, three important aspects, i.e., cationic ion type, anion ion type, and different cation/OH− ratios in determining the cell voltage and durability are presented. The employment of 1 M KOH, 1 M NaOH, and 1 M LiOH as electrolytes aimed to validate whether the AEM water electrolysis cell performance followed the trend of KOH > NaOH > LiOH as observed from the RDE configuration (half-cell). In this work, the hydration-free enthalpy and exchange time of a water molecule in a hydration shell for cations were determined, where Li+ appears to have a higher hydration-free enthalpy and water exchange time than those of Na+ and K+. Consequently, the author speculated that LiOH is very likely to precipitate close to the anode layer of the membrane and hence block the water supply. This is why the polarization curves (kinetics region (0 to 50 mA cm−2)) of the AEM electrolysis cells fed with 1 M KOH deliver improved voltage profiles compared to cells fed with 1 M LiOH, 1.45 M LiOH (equivalent conductivity with 1 M KOH), and 1.23 M NaOH (equivalent conductivity with 1 M KOH). For current density above 2000 mA cm−2, the precipitate further inhibits the catalytic active sites and causes an increased voltage. In terms of the better performance for the cell fed with LiOH in comparison to KOH in the ohmic region (250 to 1600 mA cm−2), it is assumed that the higher defect density and ionic mobility for the Li+-interfacial double layer (IDL) accelerate the mobility of OH− and result in lower overpotential. Following a similar mechanism, the cationic effect on the cell performance is concluded to exist in the order K+ > Na+ > Li+, in which an identical trend was observed in the RDE configuration. In addition, the authors employed electrolytes with identical pH values and conductivities (0.5 M KOH (13.65, 189 mS cm−1), 0.82 M K2CO3 (11.35, 189 mS cm−1), and 18 mM KOH (11.22, 7.4 mS cm−1)) to critically compare the cell performances (Fig. 33d). Notably, the cell voltage with the three electrolytes delivered the trend of 0.5 M KOH > 18 mM KOH > 0.82 M K2CO3 in the kinetics current region, while the voltage trend changed to 0.5 M KOH > 0.82 M K2CO3 > 18 mM KOH in the current density range of 700 to 2000 mA cm−2, indicating that the cell performance is not solely related to the conductivity or electrolyte pH. The authors ascribe these findings to the cation/OH− ratio, which is further discussed in Fig. 33e. In general, the increased cation/OH− ratio leads to increased overpotential. The weaker performance of the 0.82 M K2CO3-fed cell than the 18 mM KOH-fed cell was due to the higher cation/OH− ratio. These mentioned works give a detailed elucidation of the fundamental insights on the effects of using different types of electrolytes, electrolyte concentrations, ion species, etc. on the cell performance. Care needs to be taken to attain a balance between cell performance and durability, for which systematic work on the AEMWE cells to find the optimal feeding electrolyte and compatible cell components (e.g., non-noble-metal-based electrocatalyst, ionomer, GDL, etc.) is further required.
 Fig. 33  (a) Voltage degradation profiles for AEMWEs operating under three different electrolyte feeding conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 495 Copyright 2022 IOP Publishing. (b) Voltage breakdown analysis for AEMWE cells feeding with three respective electrolytes: DI water, 0.01 M KOH, and 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2021 IOP Publishing. Polarization curves of AEMWEs influenced by the types of (c) cations, (d) anions, and (e) cation/OH ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 497. Copyright 2021 IOP Publishing. 
5.2. Water and gas management
As shown in Fig. 34a, water is solely generated in the cathode area (occurs via the ORR reaction) for PEM fuel cells. For AEM fuel cells, water serves as both the reactant and the product at the cathode and anode, respectively, implying that water shuttling between electrodes in AEMFCs is rather complicated than for their PEM counterparts.499,500 For every 4 moles of electrons that pass through the circuit, two moles of water molecules are consumed at the cathode, while 4 moles of water molecules are generated. In addition, accompanied by the movement of hydroxide ions from the cathode to the anode, a certain amount of water molecules is dragged by the OH− and transported through the membrane to the anode, which is also referred to as the electroosmotic drag. On the other hand, back diffusion, in which water molecules come across the membrane driven by the water concentration gradient between the electrodes also occurs. Importantly, Fig. 34b illustrates the significance of water balance within the AEM fuel cells from two critical aspects: the membrane and the catalyst layer. Too high a water content usually causes water flooding, and conversely, too low a water content leads to dry-off, both exerting badly hazardous effects on the cell components. Taking the membrane as a typical example, a higher amount of water usually increases the water uptake of the membrane, which would reduce its mechanical stability and durability. Too low a water content makes the membrane brittle and deactivates the ion transportation within the membrane. In terms of the catalyst, water flooding very likely blocks the catalytic active sites and is the main reason for the loss of catalytic activity. Furthermore, water flooding also causes improper transport of gas/water/heat within the MEA, which would lead to fast degradation and cell failure. The effects of imbalance of water management on the cell components would dictate the cell performance and durability. Consequently, suggestions from the viewpoint of cell components and operation conditions on how to make rational modulations to further improve water management in AEMFCs have been presented (Fig. 34b). As shown in Fig. 34c, Mustain's group has coupled neutron imaging and operando electrochemical measurements to give a clear summary of the water distribution within the cell components.501 It was found that with increasing operation temperature, a higher amount of liquid water accumulates in both the anode catalyst layer and the GDL, while almost no water content variation can be observed at the cathode CL and GDL. Furthermore, a linear increase in the thickness of the liquid water at the anodic GDL is observed as the working temperature changes from the dew point to the optimum +2 °C (Fig. 34d). Notably, an increase in liquid water content is accompanied by a reduction in the cell voltage, certifying that an increase in relative humidity (RH) contributes to increased cell voltage. It has to be noted that the authors employed two membranes (radiation-grafted ETFE-BTMA vs. perfluorinated AEM) with different water uptake capabilities to validate this concept. Without any doubt, both membrane-based cells exhibited almost an identical water accumulation trend in the anodic catalyst layer and GDL, further indicating the universality of this finding. Based on these findings, the authors proposed to improve the water capacity of the anode to optimize cell performance through manipulation of the anode catalyst content ratio between the ionomer, carbon, and Pt. As a result, with an increased carbon ratio in the anode catalyst layer and in the overall thickness, the capability of the anode to withstand water improved significantly, which can be evidenced by the greatly enhanced mass transport limiting current (5 A cm−2) and peak current density (1.9 W cm−2). Following this concept, Mustain further employed operando neutron imaging and X-ray computed tomography (CT) to illustrate the liquid water distribution under various operating conditions.502 For an AEM fuel cell operated at full humidity, the neutron image manifests that a large number of water molecules have accumulated in the membrane and electrode. In contrast, the accumulation of water content is significantly alleviated with a decrease in the dew point of reactant gases. In particular, the cell water distribution dependence on the operating current density and dew point is further illustrated in Fig. 34e. The AEM cell with a higher working current density is found to have a higher amount of liquid water in every part of the cell (anode/cathode GDL, anode/cathode CL, and membrane) compared with the cell operated at a low current density. This proves that, at a higher current density, water is very likely to be dragged from the anode to the cathode via back diffusion, indicating that the current density serves as a main driver for cell water accumulation. Based on this observation, the authors proposed to redesign the electrode with the employment of an optimal amount of hydrophobic PTFE to balance the water production rate while maintaining high RH of the gases. These works contributed by Mustain's group give us fundamental insight into the importance of the water balance in AEM fuel cells and how the cell architecture should be rationally designed to properly cope with this challenge. Apart from above-discussed works, many studies from the aspects of the membrane, ionomer, GDL, catalyst, etc. on making careful modulation of the water content in AEMFCs have been presented.503–508 The electrode parameters (e.g., GDL, ionomer content, catalyst loading amount, and the ratio of active material to carbon) and cell operation conditions (e.g., flow rate and gas dew point) are found to heavily affect the membrane hydration and electrode flooding/drying out, for which a delicate balance between all the parameters is needed to develop robust AEMFCs.499,504,507
 Fig. 34  (a) Comparison of the water distribution in PEMFCs and in AEMFCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 499. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) The common problems of water management in AEMFCs from the viewpoint of membranes and catalysts, and the tuning strategies for water management from the standpoint of cell components and operating conditions. (c) Operando in-plane neutron radiographic images of water in an ETFE-BTMA AEM-based AEMFC (anode/cathode: 50 °C/50 °C) vs. perfluorinated AEM (PFAEM)-based AEMFC (anode/cathode: 54 °C/51 °C). (d) Water distribution plots from the data in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 501. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing. (e) Operando in-plane high-resolution neutron radiographic images of water distribution in ETFE-BTMA-based AEMFCs operated under four conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 502. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 
As shown in Fig. 35a, Jang et al. employed the solvent-assisted molding (SAM) technique to functionalize membranes with dual-sided patterns to improve the capability in water management.507 Here, a commercial membrane FAA-3–50 (FuMA-Tech) was selected, in which a dual patterned hydrocarbon-based AEM was fabricated. As depicted in Fig. 35b, the modified membrane exhibits enhanced ionic conductivity and improved mass transfer of O2 and H2 gas, which contribute to higher AEMFC performance. In addition to the membrane, Yoo and co-workers proposed to manipulate water management from the standpoint of the catalyst material by improving its capability in water transfer via incorporating a thermo-responsive polymer.505 Specifically, poly-(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM), showing the characteristic of hydrophobicity at the operating temperature, was employed to functionalize the electrocatalyst to enhance water management. The normal carbon black was modified with PNIPAM (with the product denoted as CTRP), and was then used as a support to load Pt to obtain Pt/CTRP. In Fig. 35c, the water distribution within the anode and cathode for four different catalysts (Pt/C, Pt/CTRP, Pt/C + C, and Pt/CTRP + C) is presented, where a balanced water content at the anode and cathode appears for the Pt/CTRP + C electrode, implying that PNIPAM does benefit the water back diffusion from the anode to the cathode. In addition, the enhanced hydrophobicity arising from the employment of PNIPAM is reflected by the increased water contact angle, as described in Fig. 35c. Consequently, Pt/CTRP could efficiently drive the water to move from the anode to the cathode, which cannot be achieved for a normal Pt/C electrode (Fig. 35d), even with a supply of humidified air at the cathode. The AEM fuel cells with the use of the Pt/CTRP + C electrode also exhibited higher PPD and max powder density (Fig. 35e and f). This work proposes a new avenue to manipulate water balance from the aspect of the catalyst, which is interesting and needs to be further studied. On account of the relative maturity of PEM technology over its AEM counterparts, hydrogen crossover has been mostly reported in PEM fuel cells and water electrolyzers.509–511 It usually refers to the permeation of two gases (H2 and O2 for H2–O2 fuel cells and/or water electrolyzers) across the polymer membrane during operation, in which the phenomenon is exacerbated with an increasing operating pressure.512,513 The concern of hydrogen crossover also appears for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells, although the H2 pressure for the state-of-the-art AEMWEs (∼30 bar) may not be larger than for PEMWEs (30 ∼ 80 bar).33,36 This is because the H2 crossover rate is heavily dependent on a variety of factors, including membrane thickness, membrane permeability, current density, working temperature, hydrogen supersaturation, etc. Meanwhile, the distinct features of the AEM in comparison with the PEM (e.g., thickness and permeability) and different operation parameters dictate that H2 crossover in AEM devices might not follow the identical pathways as that of their PEM counterparts. For water electrolyzers, the gas crossover would decrease the purity of H2, pose safety issues, and cause a decrease in cell efficiency.511 In fuel cells, the H2 crossover also raises hazardous safety problems and generates additional heat, peroxides, and water molecules, eventually leading to reduced cell efficiency, accelerated thermal and chemical degradation, and reduced overall performance.509,510 The intrinsic factors that cause the H2 crossover of AEM devices are presented in Fig. 36a. First, the porous feature of the ion-conducting membrane implies that gas shuttling across the membrane is unavoidable. The H2 permeation caused by this factor takes up only a tiny minority. Second, the post-engineering processes including the fabrication of the CCM and MEA, the cell stacks installation, etc. usually incorporate a certain number of cracks and flaws into the membrane, which makes the hydrogen crossover easier. Third, the membrane degradation during operation makes it thinner and induces pinhole formation in the membrane, which intensifies the H2 crossover significantly. The three factors influencing H2 crossover in PEM devices have been widely documented, and the latter two are found to play a dominant role. For AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells, the above-mentioned reasons are thought to account for the H2 crossover, and an in-depth understanding of each category needs to be further provided. The H2 crossover, in turn, causes degradation of the catalyst, the membrane, and the whole cell (Fig. 36b). The gases that have crossed will combust and release an amount of heat that will induce local hot spots in the membrane and membrane thermal degradation. Meanwhile, the radicals associated with gas crossover usually attack carbon or nitrogen branch points of the membrane and hence intensify the chemical degradation. In the case of the catalyst, the generated heat and radicals also cause the sintering and agglomeration of catalyst particles as well as loss of catalytic activity. For a detailed discussion of the origin of gas crossover, the consequences, and corresponding mitigation strategies, the reader is encouraged to refer to Ming's work.514 Based on the analysis of the factors determining hydrogen crossover in AEMs, it is reasonable to conclude that there are two aspects to mitigating the crossover. Increasing the membrane thickness, reducing the defects during the fabrication processes, and alleviating the membrane degradation during practical operation are widely employed. Guiver and co-authors developed microporous quaternized ammonium modified polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIM) (QPIM-1) AEM bearing high hydroxide conductivity, and studied how the hydration state affects the crossover.515,516 As shown in Fig. 36c, QPIM-1 membranes with three respective thicknesses (34, 53, and 74 μm) were employed to fabricate MEAs, and the hydrogen crossover current densities at 50 °C at various relative humidity (RH) values were evaluated. There was an obvious rapid increase in the current density of H2 crossover up to 0.15 V, and a following gradual increase was observed for three QPIM-1 membranes. For the three membranes, decreasing the RH from 100% to 60% resulted in a negligible change in the H2 crossover current density, but a further decrease to 40% led to a rapid increase in the H2 crossover current density, indicating that the 60% hydration state might be a threshold for water to block the microporous structures in the QPIM-1 membrane. The water sorption analysis illustrates that the microporous structure can be occupied by water molecules; hence, changing the hydration status might be an effective approach to prohibit H2 crossover in AEMFCs (Fig. 36d).
 Fig. 35  (a) The fabrication process for a dual-sided patterned membrane by the solvent-assisted molding (SAM) technique. (b) Illustration of the promotion effects in water management of the membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 507. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Change in the water content of the cell electrode, based on the improvement in water management using Pt/C, Pt/CTRP, Pt/C + C, and Pt/CTRP + C electrodes. (d) Water contact angle results for Pt/C and Pt/CTRP electrodes at 60 °C. (e) Cell polarization curves of MEAs with Pt/C, Pt/CTRP, Pt/C + C, and Pt/CTRP + C as anodes for AEMFCs. (f) The values of the current density and maximum power density at 0.6 V for MEAs with the different anodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 505. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 36  (a) Three respective factors that illustrate the hydrogen crossover in the AEM. (b) The consequences of H2 crossover from the aspects of the membrane, catalyst, and whole cell. (c) LSV curves of QPIM-1 AEMs measured at 100% RH and 50 °C. (d) Schematic illustration of hydrogen crossover dependence on the humidity of hydrogen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 516 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. 
5.3. Thermal management
For water electrolyzers and fuel cells, the additional heat mainly comes from two aspects. For one, ohmic heating mainly comes from the key components arising from the current passage through. For another, electrochemical heat (entropic heat) mainly derives from partial electrochemical energy conversion. The accumulated heat will cause a temperature gradient in the cell components and consequently, lead to fast cell degradation and failure.78,517 Therefore, a variety of cooling techniques including coolant fluid, cooling channels, heat pipes, and the employment of BPs with ultrahigh thermal conductivity are employed to mitigate the overheating problems. Due to the relatively fewer studies of heating management for AEM devices, readers are suggested to read some excellent reviews on thermal management for electrochemical devices, where several effective strategies that have been demonstrated for PEM counterparts might provide novel ideas for AEM devices.78,518,519 Therefore, the fast development of AEM technologies also urges the research community that thermal management studies in the field of AEMWEs and AEMFCs need to be focused on to help address practical technical problems.
6. Operation monitoring for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells
With the fast development of key components and operational management for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells, advanced techniques used to monitor the dynamic operation of cell devices and the key components are in high demand. Herein, a series of real-time observation technologies, including electron microscopy, spectroscopy, and X-ray spectroscopy techniques will be discussed. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), particularly synchrotron XAS, has played a significant role in the electrocatalyst community owing to its sensitivity and strength in deciphering atomic configurations and elemental coordination environments. The fundamentals and recent progress on XAS in electrocatalysis have been extensively documented, and readers are suggested to refer to the works reported by Duan, Feng, and Li.254,310,520 Apart from the electrocatalyst, challenges arising from many other key components and related operational problems remain to receive much attention, in which a variety of in situ and/or ex situ techniques will play a decisive role. These include in situ fluorescence spectroscopy,521operando neutron radiography,522–524 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),139 infrared spectroscopy,525etc. In this section, the unique techniques with important roles in visualizing the behavior of key components in operation, deciphering membrane/ionomer/MEA degradation pathway, and revealing working principles and management mechanisms will be discussed.
6.1 X-Ray computed tomography
X-Ray computed tomography (CT) is a nondestructive technique used to visualize the microstructure and internal composition of a test sample and present its three-dimensional distribution viewed from many directions.526,527 An illustration of a laboratory X-ray CT is presented in Fig. 37a, where a series of X-ray transmission images of the sample are obtained by the detector. Owing to its prevailing advantages, X-ray CT has been widely applied in water electrolyzer and fuel cell technology, including membranes,528 catalysts,529 GDLs,524 water management, etc. In particular, X-ray CT has also become rather significant in detecting and analyzing surface and interface structures such as triple-phase boundaries, in view of its high sensitivity and spatial resolution. In this section, we will particularly select some interesting works which have used X-ray CT for the characterization of membranes, catalysts, and/or GDLs in AEM water electrolyzers and/or fuel cells in an attempt to promote the fast advancement of operation monitoring techniques in AEM technology. Xu and co-workers targeted the membrane-electrode interfacial compatibility and proposed to fabricate a tightly bounded interface between the AEM and the electrode.491 The VBBQPPO-based MEA was in situ converted into crosslink-immobilized by a gradual thermal treatment under N2 atmosphere. Consequently, a dense 3D-zipped interface layer (3D-ZIL) and a tight chemical contact were formed for the MEA (denoted as ZIL-MEA) compared with normal MEA without thermal treatment. Micro-X-ray tomography was employed to investigate the interface structure of the ZIL-MEA. In Fig. 37b–d, the crevices and cracks can be observed at the interface for normal MEAs, while no cracks can be detected for 3D-ZIL, demonstrating the tight interface connection. In addition, X-ray CT was also used to detect the catalyst layer and examine water diffusion and the catalyst failure mechanism.530 Based on the advantages of employing non-noble-metal-based materials as electrocatalysts for AEMFCs, Zenyuk's group fabricated Fe–N–C as an electrocatalyst and employed ex situ nano-CT and operando micro-CT to visualize water distribution within the catalyst layer. As shown in Fig. 37e–h, a micro-X-ray CT, together with two nano X-ray CTs of the cathode catalyst layer at 50% and 100% RH, respectively, is presented. Apart from the MEA and the catalyst layer, X-ray CT can be also used to justify the water transport conditions by detecting the water conditions in the gas-diffusion layer. To this end, Zenyuk et al. selected four types of commercially available gas diffusion electrodes, namely, the Freudenberg, Toray, SGL 10BA, and SGL 24BA, and employed X-ray CT to study their water transport behavior.531 One should note that previous reports normally interpreted the external contact angles (CAs) of GDLs as their internal wettability due to the lack of an efficient method to accurately test the internal properties. In this work, the authors adopted an algorithm method and computed the local CAs from the pore space images that were captured with the use of X-ray CT.531,532
 Fig. 37  (a) Illustration of a laboratory X-ray CT instrument that is composed an of X-ray source, sample stage, and detector. Reproduced with permission from ref. 526. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. X-ray CT images of (b) ZIL-MEA, (c) M-MEA-B, and (d) M-MEA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 491. Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. (e) Cross-sectional micro-X-ray CT image of a catalyst layer (CL) and (f) the zoomed images at 50% RH and 100% RH. (g–h) Three-dimensional representations of the CL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 530. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (i and j) 3D maps of contact angles (CAs) and local roughness of four different types of GDLs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 531 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
The 3D maps of the CAs and the local roughness of the four GDLs (from left to right SGL 10BA, SGL 24BA, Toray H-060, and Freudenberg H23C2) are shown in Fig. 37i and j. In addition, the probability distributions of the CAs for the four GDLs were simulated, where a mixed wettability can be observed for all GDLs. The mean internal contact angle values for the GDLs were calculated following the sequence: Freudenberg (96°) < Toray (98°) < SGL 10BA (102°) < SGL 24BA (112°). All the contact angle values were further used to calculate the wettability percentage of the GDLs, and it was found that SGL 24BA was the most hydrophobic, while Freudenberg was the most hydrophilic, in accordance with the mean internal CA values. It was concluded that the hydrophilicity is attributable to the surface metal oxide groups, while the hydrophobicity can be correlated with the PTFE content and roughness to trap air. This work also highlights the importance of using X-ray CT in deciphering water transport in GDLs, which will lay a solid foundation for the investigation of other components and operational issues by using X-ray CT.524,533
6.2. 
          In situ spectroscopy and electron microscopy testing
Aside from X-ray CT, in situ spectroscopy and electron microscopy techniques, including Raman spectroscopy, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), have been widely reported in articles on membrane technologies and beyond.525 Vibrational spectroscopy techniques such as Raman spectroscopy plays an increasingly important role in characterizing O–H vibration bands and the interfacial water structure at catalyst/electrolyte interfaces, which has provided valuable insight for deciphering ion/species adsorption and the catalyst design rationale.406,534,535 TEM and scanning TEM (STEM) enable the observation of the dependence of sample morphology and atomic structure evolution on the applied potential. The fundamental principles of these techniques have been presented in several excellent review articles;536,537 hence, we focus on the employment of these techniques in the field of AEM technology to summarize how the techniques benefit the development of catalysts, membranes, ionomers, etc. The studies on the employment of various operando spectroscopic techniques in AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells have been discussed previously.205,406
 Fig. 38  Pathways toward practical deployment of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells from fundamentals to technologies. 
7. Conclusions and perspective
Water electrolyzers and H2 fuel cells are regarded as ideal clean energy solutions, which could efficiently utilize renewable resources and secure a sustainable society. To fulfill this vision, developing low-cost high-performance key components, including anion-exchange membranes, ionomers, electrocatalysts, bipolar plates, gas-diffusion layers, etc., determining the optimal operation conditions, including the electrolyte, working temperature, water/heat management, etc., and employing advanced operando techniques (e.g., XAS, X-ray CT, Raman spectroscopy, etc.) to provide feedback for the device design are critical and unavoidable (Fig. 38). The fast advancement of catalysts and anion-exchange membranes, to some degree, have propelled the development of AEM technologies, although state-of-the-art advances in some key aspects, namely, membrane durability, working management, and operation monitoring are far from adequate. A fundamental understanding of the membrane failure mechanism, water transfer dynamics, and catalyst activity descriptors remain to be provided with new insights, not even mentioning more comprehensive and challenging aspects, such as MEA fabrication, water management, etc. Therefore, we present following the perspective on what needs to be further studied from a range of aspects to accelerate AEM technology development and translation into applications:
(1) From the viewpoint of key components, a low-cost high-performance membrane featuring long durability is the key target for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. This is because membranes essentially determine the viability and practicability of these two devices. Critically speaking, current studies on the AEM focus on ionic conductivity and mechanical stability; however, the durability, especially the long-term durability under practical working conditions (10000 h or longer), is rarely reported. It has to be noted that the obtained membrane durability tested under either ex situ conditions or in mere KOH solutions cannot accurately reflect the authentic working environment in AEM water electrolyzers and/or fuel cells. Consequently, membrane electrode assembly (MEA) based cells and/or cell stacks are suggested to be used for the assessment. Furthermore, standard testing protocols (Fig. 30d) are required to give reliable and repeatable evaluation and screening for membrane materials. In addition, the catalyst layers, comprising the electrode electrocatalysts and ionomers, are the second biggest challenge to overcome. This is because the triple-phase boundary is an exceptionally critical environment that requires efficient transport of gas, liquid, and electrons, while it is easily influenced by many conditions, including the water content, temperature, layer thickness, ionomer/catalyst ratio, gas stream flow, etc. Moreover, the slightly different requirements between anode and cathode imply that the catalyst layer design for the anode and the cathode should be different, suggesting a viewpoint from the whole device (water electrolyzer and/or fuel cell) to carefully evaluate and regulate their respective anode and cathode layer parameters is a high necessity. Given that the catalysts and ionomers are used together to fabricate the catalyst layer, a strong binding property of ionomer/catalyst is another important aspect that needs to be further developed to improve the overall durability. Apart from the aforementioned aspects, improvements in the gas diffusion layer and bipolar plate to increase the mass transfer capability, cell efficiency, and cost-effectiveness, are necessary. The use of MEA-based cells to evaluate and screen catalysts and materials is very important, as the requirements on a single component might be incompatible.
(2) From the viewpoint of operational management, optimal operation conditions to attain cell activity and durability need to be comprehensively studied and modeled. In terms of AEM water electrolyzers, the key operational conditions, including temperature, working electrolyte, and feeding flow rate, need to be balanced to achieve long-term operation. The cell performance is easily affected by the parameters of these operational conditions; hence, the operation conditions should also be optimized from a standpoint of a single cell or more cells, which would provide reliable and realistic data for practical operation. In the case of AEM fuel cells, CO2 concentration and water management are two critical parameters that affect the cell performance, in addition to the temperature, gas stream flow rate, etc. Developing membranes with high withstand capability to CO2 is one approach, which means that the use of ammonium-based membranes might not suitable because they tend to be attacked in the presence of CO2. A fundamental understanding of the membrane failure mechanism induced by CO2 is desirable, which would help in designing membranes that are less likely to be affected by CO2. Another plausible solution is gas stream management. A CO2 filter can be considered to mitigate the CO2 pollution problem from its source, even with the sacrifice of cost. Self-purging and developing CO2-resistant membranes and catalysts need to be further studied though they will also bring some other issues.538 Cell stack overheating and gas crossover are problems that commonly appear in AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. Gas crossover not only reduces the cell efficiency but also increases the safety problems because of the potential for explosion with the increasing concentrations of hydrogen and oxygen. Overheating also causes a decline in cell efficiency and intensifies cell stack degradation, leading to a significantly reduced lifespan. Consequently, cooling fans and water are normally employed to ease the overheating of the cell system. It is reasonable to conclude that the success of low-cost, high-performance cell stacks of AEMWEs and AEMFCs is impossible without careful operational management, mainly including the electrolyte, water, heating, gas, etc.
(3) Third, advanced and operando characterization techniques would provide valuable feedback for the materials design and architecture engineering in AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. Considering the multiple solvated ions or species involved in the HER/HOR, advanced characterizations, particularly the surface-sensitive spectroscopy methods, are suggested to probe the changes in the surface and interface structure during the electrochemical reactions. Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) has been adopted to validate the role of OHad species in the alkaline HOR/HER.406 Likewise, surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRAS) has been employed to study the adsorption of cations or hydrogen on the Pt surface.223,539,540 Apart from the aforementioned advanced characterizations, the in situ techniques should also be coupled with them to monitor the real-time changes in catalyst surfaces and solid-electrolyte interfaces during the HER/HOR reactions. As for the catalysts themselves, in situ XAS is a representative tool that can provide precise information on the electronic structure and configurations for certain metals in catalysts. These techniques have already been employed to study the coordination evolution of Pt single atoms in the HER.541 Jia and co-workers employed in situ XAS to study the HER/HOR kinetics of Pt after the addition of transition metals.239,542 Following this concept, other in situ techniques such as in situ Raman spectroscopy and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy might also be helpful to determine the dynamical changes.
(4) Last but not least, theoretical simulations or calculations are highly necessary. DFT-based calculations could provide more theory-led design concepts to guide material design strategies in the future.210 On the other hand, the theoretical calculations are also helpful for understanding the complex reaction mechanisms where multiple species are involved, which would play a unique role in deciphering the membrane failure mechanisms and catalyst dissolution dynamics. We hope that a clear understanding of every key component will lay a very solid foundation for the construction of AEMWEs and AEMFCs. In addition, by coupling the advances on operational management and operation monitoring techniques, low-cost high-performance AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells are expected to show fast progress and deployment in the near future.
List of abbreviations

GHGGreenhouse gas
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HORHydrogen oxidation reaction
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
LSVLinear sweep voltammetry
ECSAElectrochemically active surface area
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XASX-ray absorption spectroscopy
XANESX-ray absorption near edge structure
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
HAADF-STEMHigh-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy
RDERotating disk electrode
FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
DFTDensity functional theory

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through a Future Fellowship (FT210100298), Discovery Project (DP220100603 and DP200100365), Linkage Project (LP210200504, LP210100467, and LP160100273), Industrial Transformation Training Centre (IC180100005) schemes, CSIRO Energy Centre and Kick-Start Project, and the Victorian Government's support through the provision of a grant from veski – Study Melbourne Research Partnerships (SMRP) project. The authors thank Dr. Tania Silver for critical discussion.
References

Geopolitics of the Energy Transformation: The Hydrogen Factor, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, 2022.
M. van der Spek, C. Banet, C. Bauer, P. Gabrielli, W. Goldthorpe, M. Mazzotti, S. T. Munkejord, N. A. Røkke, N. Shah, N. Sunny, D. Sutter, J. M. Trusler and M. Gazzani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1034–1077 RSC .

          S. Bouckaert, A. Fernandez Pales, C. McGlade, U. Remme, B. Wanner, L. Varro, D. D’Ambrosio and T. Spencer, Net Zero by 2050-A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector, International Energy Agency, 2021.

          H. Shaftel, GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE Vital Signs of the Planet, https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/carbon-dioxide/.
R. J. Detz and B. van der Zwaan, Energy Policy, 2019, 133, 110938 CrossRef CAS .
C. o. Australia, Australia's emissions projections 2021, https://www.industry.gov.au/data-and-publications/australias-emissions-projections-2021.

          B. Teilen, Climate Change Act 2021 Intergenerational contract for the climate, https://www.bundesregierung.de/breg-de/themen/klimaschutz/climate-change-act-2021-1936846.
S. Mallapaty, Nature, 2020, 586, 482–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
THE LONG-TERM STRATEGY OF THE UNITED STATES Pathways to Net-Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 2050, T. U. S. D. O. State, Washington DC, 2021.
J. Rissman, C. Bataille, E. Masanet, N. Aden, W. R. Morrow, N. Zhou, N. Elliott, R. Dell, N. Heeren, B. Huckestein, J. Cresko, S. A. Miller, J. Roy, P. Fennell, B. Cremmins, T. Koch Blank, D. Hone, E. D. Williams, S. de la Rue du Can, B. Sisson, M. Williams, J. Katzenberger, D. Burtraw, G. Sethi, H. Ping, D. Danielson, H. Lu, T. Lorber, J. Dinkel and J. Helseth, Appl. Energy, 2020, 266, 114848 CrossRef CAS .

Global Energy Review: CO

2

Emissions in 2021 Global emissions rebound sharply to highest ever level, International Energy Agency, 2021.
C. Rae and F. Bradley, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 6497–6506 CrossRef .
E. Kabir, P. Kumar, S. Kumar, A. A. Adelodun and K.-H. Kim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 894–900 CrossRef .
M. Götz, J. Lefebvre, F. Mörs, A. McDaniel Koch, F. Graf, S. Bajohr, R. Reimert and T. Kolb, Renewable Energy, 2016, 85, 1371–1390 CrossRef .
A. Ursua, L. M. Gandia and P. Sanchis, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 410–426 CAS .
S. P. S. Badwal, S. S. Giddey, C. Munnings, A. I. Bhatt and A. F. Hollenkamp, Front. Chem., 2014, 2, 79 Search PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Abe, A. P. I. Popoola, E. Ajenifuja and O. M. Popoola, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 15072–15086 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chi and H. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 390–394 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Fan, E. Ochu, S. Braverman, Y. Lou, G. Smith, A. Bhardwaj, J. Brouwer, C. McCormick and J. Friedmann, Green hydrogen in a circular carbon economy: Opportunities and limits,  2021 Search PubMed .

          V. Srinivasan, M. Temminghoff, S. Charnock, A. Moisi, D. Palfreyman, J. Patel, C. Hornung and A. Hortle, CO2 Utilisation Roadmap, CSIRO,  2021 Search PubMed .
S. Z. Baykara, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 10605–10614 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724–761 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, K. Rui, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803291 CrossRef .
Z. F. Pan, L. An, T. S. Zhao and Z. K. Tang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2018, 66, 141–175 CrossRef .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. H. Chan, H. K. Ho, S.-C. Tan, M. Li, G. Li, J. Li and Z. Feng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 6866–6919 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Cruden, in Comprehensive Renewable Energy, ed. A. Sayigh, Elsevier, Oxford,  2012, pp. 1–27 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-08-087872-0.00401-7 .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470–30492 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hren, M. Božič, D. Fakin, K. S. Kleinschek and S. Gorgieva, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 604–637 RSC .
I. Vincent and D. Bessarabov, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1690–1704 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch, R. Küngas, P. Blennow, A. B. Hansen, J. B. Hansen, B. V. Mathiesen and M. B. Mogensen, Science, 2020, 370, eaba6118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. M. Damo, M. L. Ferrari, A. Turan and A. F. Massardo, Energy, 2019, 168, 235–246 CrossRef .
S. A. Grigoriev, V. N. Fateev, D. G. Bessarabov and P. Millet, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 26036–26058 CrossRef CAS .
A. Choudhury, H. Chandra and A. Arora, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 20, 430–442 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Taibi, H. Blanco, R. Miranda and M. Carmo, Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction: Scaling up Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5 °C Climate Goal, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  2020 Search PubMed .
G. A. Lindquist, Q. Xu, S. Z. Oener and S. W. Boettcher, Joule, 2020, 4, 2549–2561 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. L. Hagesteijn, S. Jiang and B. P. Ladewig, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 11131–11150 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Arges, V. K. Ramani and P. N. Pintauro, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2010, 19, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tong, M. Forster, F. Dionigi, S. Dresp, R. Sadeghi Erami, P. Strasser, A. J. Cowan and P. Farràs, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 367–377 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Firouzjaie and W. E. Mustain, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 225–234 CrossRef CAS .

Global Hydrogen Review 2021, I. E. Agency, International Energy Agency, IEA Publications, 2021.
N. Sánchez-Bastardo, R. Schlögl and H. Ruland, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 11855–11881 CrossRef .
F. Safari and I. Dincer, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 205, 112182 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Megía, A. J. Vizcaíno, J. A. Calles and A. Carrero, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 16403–16415 CrossRef .
S. Yadav, D. Singh, P. Mohanty and P. K. Sarangi, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2021, 44, 1–14 CrossRef .
H. Song, S. Luo, H. Huang, B. Deng and J. Ye, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 1043–1065 CrossRef CAS .
M. Noussan, P. P. Raimondi, R. Scita and M. Hafner, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 298 CrossRef CAS .
M. Newborough and G. Cooley, Fuel Cells Bull., 2020, 16–22 Search PubMed .

          F. Birol, Report prepared by the IEA for the G20, 82–83, Japan, 2019.
M. H. Ali Khan, R. Daiyan, P. Neal, N. Haque, I. MacGill and R. Amal, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 22685–22706 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, K. Wang and H. Vredenburg, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 21261–21273 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hagmann, E. H. Ho and G. Loewenstein, Nat. Clim. Change, 2019, 9, 484–489 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .

          A. T. Mayyas, M. F. Ruth, B. S. Pivovar, G. Bender and K. B. Wipke, Manufacturing cost analysis for proton exchange membrane water electrolyzers, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United States),  2019 Search PubMed .

          I. I. Inc, Hydrogen Production Cost by AEM Water Electrolysis,  2020 Search PubMed .

          E. Bianco and H. Blanco, Green hydrogen: a guide to policy making,  2020 Search PubMed .

          H. Council, Hydrogen scaling up: A sustainable pathway for the global energy transition,  2017 Search PubMed .

          E. Taibi, R. Miranda, W. Vanhoudt, T. Winkel, J.-C. Lanoix and F. Barth, Hydrogen from renewable power: Technology outlook for the energy transition,  2018 Search PubMed .
D. A. Cullen, K. C. Neyerlin, R. K. Ahluwalia, R. Mukundan, K. L. More, R. L. Borup, A. Z. Weber, D. J. Myers and A. Kusoglu, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 462–474 CrossRef CAS .

          IEA, Global EV Outlook 2021, 2021.

          T. Smolinka, E. T. Ojong and J. Garche, Electrochemical energy storage for renewable sources and grid balancing, Elsevier,  2015, pp. 103–128 Search PubMed .
C. Lamy and P. Millet, J. Power Sources, 2020, 447, 227350 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Diéguez, A. Ursúa, P. Sanchis, C. Sopena, E. Guelbenzu and L. M. Gandía, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 7338–7354 CrossRef .
M. H. Miles, G. Kissel, P. W. T. Lu and S. Srinivasan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 332–336 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vincent, A. Kruger and D. Bessarabov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 10752–10761 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hnát, M. Plevová, J. Žitka, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 248, 547–555 CrossRef .
H. Ito, N. Kawaguchi, S. Someya, T. Munakata, N. Miyazaki, M. Ishida and A. Nakano, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 17030–17039 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Pavel, F. Cecconi, C. Emiliani, S. Santiccioli, A. Scaffidi, S. Catanorchi and M. Comotti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1378–1381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Faraj, M. Boccia, H. Miller, F. Martini, S. Borsacchi, M. Geppi and A. Pucci, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 14992–15002 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hnát, M. Paidar, J. Schauer and K. Bouzek, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 4779–4787 CrossRef .
I. V. Pushkareva, A. S. Pushkarev, S. A. Grigoriev, P. Modisha and D. G. Bessarabov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 26070–26079 CrossRef CAS .
E. Amores, J. Rodríguez, J. Oviedo and A. De Lucas-Consuegra, Open Eng., 2017, 7, 141–152 CAS .
S. Huo, H. Deng, Y. Chang and K. Jiao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 18389–18402 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Ohashi, T. Tamaki and T. Yamaguchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7650–7657 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rashidi, N. Karimi, B. Sunden, K. C. Kim, A. G. Olabi and O. Mahian, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2022, 88, 100966 CrossRef .
A. Serov, I. V. Zenyuk, C. G. Arges and M. Chatenet, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 149–157 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Wu and J. Zhang, Fuel Cell Open Circuit Voltage, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2013, ch. 7 Search PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy and S. Mukerjee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11945–11979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Grew, X. Ren and D. Chu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, B127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Watanabe, K. Fukuta and H. Yanagi, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 1837 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inaba, Y. Matsui, M. Saito, A. Tasaka, K. Fukuta, S. Watanabe and H. Yanagi, Electrochemistry, 2011, 79, 322–325 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kimura and Y. Yamazaki, Electrochemistry, 2011, 79, 94–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Vega, S. Smith and W. E. Mustain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B349 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand and M. F. Mathias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1127–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiao, J. Xuan, Q. Du, Z. Bao, B. Xie, B. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Fan, H. Wang, Z. Hou, S. Huo, N. P. Brandon, Y. Yin and M. D. Guiver, Nature, 2021, 595, 361–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Osmieri, L. Pezzolato and S. Specchia, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 9, 240–256 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Thompson, D. Peterson, D. Ho and D. Papageorgopoulos, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 084514 CrossRef CAS .

          K. W. Harrison, R. Remick, A. Hoskin and G. Martin, Hydrogen production: fundamentals and case study summaries, National Renewable Energy Lab. (NREL), Golden, CO (United States),  2010 Search PubMed .
Biomass Energy Data Book, Lower and Higher Heating Values of Gas, Liquid and Solid Fuels,  2011 Search PubMed.
H. Tang, S. Wang, S. P. Jiang and M. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 140–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Lim, E. H. Majlan, A. Tajuddin, T. Husaini, W. R. Wan Daud, N. A. Mohd Radzuan and M. A. Haque, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2021, 33, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Han, H.-J. Kim, Y.-G. Shul and E. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2016, 323, 142–146 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Krishnan, D. Joseph, N. M. H. Duong, A. Konovalova, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim, S. W. Nam and D. Henkensmeier, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 544, 416–424 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Kannah, S. Kavitha, O. P. Karthikeyan, G. Kumar, N. V. Dai-Viet and J. R. Banu, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 319, 124175 CrossRef PubMed .
T. B. Ferriday and P. H. Middleton, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 18489–18510 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hibbs, M. A. Hickner, T. M. Alam, S. K. McIntyre, C. H. Fujimoto and C. J. Cornelius, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2566–2573 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kim and K.-S. Lee, Polym. Rev., 2015, 55, 330–370 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Fontananova, in Encyclopedia of Membranes, ed. E. Drioli and L. Giorno, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2016, pp. 1884–1886 DOI:10.1007/978-3-662-44324-8_1801 .
Y. Kawano, Y. Wang, R. A. Palmer and S. R. Aubuchon, Polímeros, 2002, 12, 96–101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Henkensmeier, M. Najibah, C. Harms, J. Žitka, J. Hnát and K. Bouzek, J. Electrochem. Energy Convers. Storage, 2020, 18, 024001 CrossRef .

          A. F. Ismail, K. C. Khulbe and T. Matsuura, Gas Separation Membranes, Springer,  2015, pp. 11–35 Search PubMed .
B. D. Freeman, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Stern, J. Polym. Sci., Part A-2, 1968, 6, 1933–1934 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, H. H. Wang, S. P. Kim, H. M. Kim, W. H. Lee, C. Hu, J. Y. Bae, E. S. Sim, Y.-C. Chung, J.-H. Jang, S. J. Yoo, Y. Zhuang and Y. M. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Thampan, S. Malhotra, H. Tang and R. Datta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 3242 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marx, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1848–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Grew and W. K. S. Chiu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B327 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Barbir, PEM fuel cells: theory and practice, Academic Press,  2013 Search PubMed .
N. Agmon, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 319, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Tuckerman, D. Marx and M. Parrinello, Nature, 2002, 417, 925–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Merle, M. Wessling and K. Nijmeijer, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 377, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
T. Luo, S. Abdu and M. Wessling, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 555, 429–454 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y.-L. S. Tse, G. E. Lindberg, C. Knight and G. A. Voth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 991–1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, H. Chen, F. Wang, F. Paesani and G. A. Voth, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 467–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dong, W. Zhang, A. C. T. van Duin and D. Bedrov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 825–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. T. van Duin, S. Dasgupta, F. Lorant and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 9396–9409 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Senftle, S. Hong, M. M. Islam, S. B. Kylasa, Y. Zheng, Y. K. Shin, C. Junkermeier, R. Engel-Herbert, M. J. Janik, H. M. Aktulga, T. Verstraelen, A. Grama and A. C. T. van Duin, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 15011 CrossRef CAS .
O. Borodin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 11463–11478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zelovich, L. Vogt-Maranto, M. A. Hickner, S. J. Paddison, C. Bae, D. R. Dekel and M. E. Tuckerman, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5778–5787 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, D. Dong, D. Bedrov and A. C. T. van Duin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5442–5452 RSC .
V. Dubey, A. Maiti and S. Daschakraborty, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 755, 137802 CrossRef CAS .
F. Foglia, Q. Berrod, A. J. Clancy, K. Smith, G. Gebel, V. G. Sakai, M. Appel, J.-M. Zanotti, M. Tyagi, N. Mahmoudi, T. S. Miller, J. R. Varcoe, A. P. Periasamy, D. J. L. Brett, P. R. Shearing, S. Lyonnard and P. F. McMillan, Nat. Mater., 2022, 21, 555–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Ran, B. Wu, L. Wu and T. Xu, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2016, 12, 22–30 CrossRef .

          D. Shin, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, The Chemistry of Membranes Used in Fuel Cells: Degradation and Stabilization,  2018, pp. 195–228 Search PubMed.
J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. Kucernak, W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer, K. Scott, T. Xu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3135–3191 RSC .
S. Chempath, B. R. Einsla, L. R. Pratt, C. S. Macomber, J. M. Boncella, J. A. Rau and B. S. Pivovar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3179–3182 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Mohanty and C. Bae, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17314–17320 RSC .
S. Chempath, J. M. Boncella, L. R. Pratt, N. Henson and B. S. Pivovar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11977–11983 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ghigo, S. Cagnina, A. Maranzana and G. Tonachini, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 3608–3617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Meek and Y. A. Elabd, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7071–7084 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Ye and Y. A. Elabd, Polymers for Energy Storage and Delivery: Polyelectrolytes for Batteries and Fuel Cells, American Chemical Society,  2012, ch. 14, vol. 1096, pp. 233–251 Search PubMed .
G. Couture, A. Alaaeddine, F. Boschet and B. Ameduri, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1521–1557 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, K. Jankova, Q. Li, N. J. Bjerrum and J. O. Jensen, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 492, 422–429 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, L. An, M. D. Guiver and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12284–12296 RSC .
S. Miyanishi and T. Yamaguchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12009–12023 RSC .
C. G. Arges and V. Ramani, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 2490–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ameduri, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6632–6686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taguet, L. Sauguet, B. Ameduri and B. Boutevin, J. Fluorine Chem., 2007, 128, 619–630 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hickner, A. M. Herring and E. B. Coughlin, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 1727–1735 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Choe, C. Fujimoto, K.-S. Lee, L. T. Dalton, K. Ayers, N. J. Henson and Y. S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5675–5682 CrossRef CAS .
E. Abouzari-Lotf, M. V. Jacob, H. Ghassemi, M. Zakeri, M. M. Nasef, Y. Abdolahi, A. Abbasi and A. Ahmad, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 3764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aili, M. K. Hansen, R. F. Renzaho, Q. Li, E. Christensen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 447, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .
W. You, K. J. T. Noonan and G. W. Coates, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 100, 101177 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen and Y. M. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2021, 113, 101345 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Mohanty, S. E. Tignor, J. A. Krause, Y.-K. Choe and C. Bae, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 3361–3372 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Park and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15456–15477 RSC .
Z. Sun, B. Lin and F. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 58–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu and P. A. Kohl, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2018, 56, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Sturgeon, C. S. Macomber, C. Engtrakul, H. Long and B. S. Pivovar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F366 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Hugar, H. A. Kostalik and G. W. Coates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8730–8737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dekel, M. Amar, S. Willdorf, M. Kosa, S. Dhara and C. E. Diesendruck, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4425–4431 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Womble, J. Kang, K. M. Hugar, G. W. Coates, S. Bernhard and K. J. T. Noonan, Organometallics, 2017, 36, 4038–4046 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Hugar, W. You and G. W. Coates, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1681–1686 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Marino and K. D. Kreuer, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 513–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Pham, J. S. Olsson and P. Jannasch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2888–2891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. R. Kraglund, A. K. Reumert, X. Ren, D. Aili and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17914–17922 RSC .
H. Li, N. Yu, F. Gellrich, A. K. Reumert, M. R. Kraglund, J. Dong, D. Aili and J. Yang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 633, 119418 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumari, J. C. Douglin and D. R. Dekel, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 626, 119167 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Zhao, B. P. Setzler, S. Rojas-Carbonell, C. Ben Yehuda, A. Amel, M. Page, L. Wang, K. Hu, L. Shi, S. Gottesfeld, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 392–398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, N. Chen, H.-A. Klok, Y. M. Lee and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114892 CAS .
L. Li, J. Wang, M. Hussain, L. Ma, N. A. Qaisrani, S. Ma, L. Bai, X. Yan, X. Deng, G. He and F. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 624, 119088 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, F. Yang, W. Sheng, Y. Zhou, X. Zhou, Y. Lu, F. Nie, N. Li, L. Pan and Y. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 641, 119938 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, H. Zhang, M. Li and Z. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 22129–22136 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, X. Wu, T. Li, X. Yan, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, F. Zhang, S. Zhang and G. He, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 244, 116791 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, T. Li, W. Chen, X. Wu, X. Yan, W. Xiao, Y. Zhang, X. Wang and G. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10490–10499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Li, W. Chen, X. Yan, X. Wu, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang, X. Wang and G. He, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 10988–10997 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, Y. Jin, H. Liu, C. Hu, B. Wu, S. Xu, H. Li, J. Fan and Y. M. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19272–19280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Li, W. Chen, X. Wu, X. Yan, W. Xiao, Y. Zhang, X. Wang and G. He, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 624, 119052 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adhikari, M. K. Pagels, J. Y. Jeon and C. Bae, Polymer, 2020, 211, 123080 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ahlfield, G. Huang, L. Liu, Y. Kaburagi, Y. Kim and P. A. Kohl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F1648–F1653 CrossRef CAS .
I. Matanovic, S. Maurya, E. J. Park, J. Y. Jeon, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4195–4204 CrossRef CAS .
I. Matanovic, H. T. Chung and Y. S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4918–4924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maurya, S. Noh, I. Matanovic, E. J. Park, C. Narvaez Villarrubia, U. Martinez, J. Han, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3283–3291 RSC .
S. Maurya, A. S. Lee, D. Li, E. J. Park, D. P. Leonard, S. Noh, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 436, 226866 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yassin, I. G. Rasin, S. Brandon and D. R. Dekel, J. Power Sources, 2022, 524, 231083 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Faid, L. Xie, A. O. Barnett, F. Seland, D. Kirk and S. Sunde, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 28272–28284 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, I. Matanovic, A. S. Lee, E. J. Park, C. Fujimoto, H. T. Chung and Y. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9696–9701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, M. Mandal, N. U. Hassan, K. Groenhout, A. Dobbs, W. E. Mustain and P. A. Kohl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 164514 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, M. Mandal, N. U. Hassan, K. Groenhout, A. Dobbs, W. E. Mustain and P. A. Kohl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 024503 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Buggy, I. Wu, Y. Du, R. Ghosh, M.-C. Kuo, M. S. Ezell, J. M. Crawford, S. Seifert, M. A. Carreon, E. B. Coughlin and A. M. Herring, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 412, 140124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu and A. Z. Weber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 054506 CrossRef .
D. R. Dekel, I. G. Rasin and S. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2019, 420, 118–123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yassin, I. G. Rasin, S. Brandon and D. R. Dekel, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 608, 118206 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gupta, K. Scott and M. Mamlouk, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 387–396 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, E. J. Park, W. Zhu, Q. Shi, Y. Zhou, H. Tian, Y. Lin, A. Serov, B. Zulevi, E. D. Baca, C. Fujimoto, H. T. Chung and Y. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Faid, A. O. Barnett, F. Seland and S. Sunde, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3327–3340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zeng, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Jia, S. Miao, W. Song, Y. Xiao, H. Yu, Z. Shao and B. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6521–6533 RSC .
J. E. Park, S. Park, M.-J. Kim, H. Shin, S. Y. Kang, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 135–145 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wan, J. Liu, Z. Xu, Q. Xu, M. Pang, P. Wang and B. Wang, Small, 2022, 18, e2200380 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Park, S. Maurya, A. S. Lee, D. P. Leonard, D. Li, J. Y. Jeon, C. Bae and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25040–25046 RSC .
D. P. Leonard, S. Maurya, E. J. Park, L. Delfin Manriquez, S. Noh, X. Wang, C. Bae, E. D. Baca, C. Fujimoto and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14135–14144 RSC .
H. Cao, J. Pan, H. Zhu, Z. Sun, B. Wang, J. Zhao and F. Yan, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2101744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ul Hassan, M. Mandal, G. Huang, H. A. Firouzjaie, P. A. Kohl and W. E. Mustain, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001986 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F1504–F1539 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Davydova, S. Mukerjee, F. Jaouen and D. R. Dekel, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6665–6690 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ercolano, S. Cavaliere, J. Rozière and D. J. Jones, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 9, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dinh, Z. Dobo and H. Kovacs, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Zhao, S. Liu, S. Zha, D. Cheng, F. Studt, G. Henkelman and J. Gong, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 792–804 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, M. Luo, W. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. Chen and S. Guo, Chem, 2018, 4, 2054–2083 CAS .
J. Masa, C. Andronescu and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15298–15312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Weber, M. Janssen and M. Oezaslan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F66–F73 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rebollar, S. Intikhab, N. J. Oliveira, Y. Yan, B. Xu, I. T. McCrum, J. D. Snyder and M. H. Tang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 14747–14762 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, P. Zhao and W. Sheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808066 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Krivina, Y. Ou, Q. Xu, L. P. Twight, T. N. Stovall and S. W. Boettcher, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 548–558 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, E. Budiyanto and H. Tüysüz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 61, e202103824 Search PubMed .
M. Che, Catal. Today, 2013, 218, 162–171 CrossRef .
A. H. Motagamwala and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Rev., 2020, 121, 1049–1076 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Voss, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
B. Conway and J. O. M. Bockris, J. Chem. Phys., 1957, 26, 532–541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1971, 33, 351–378 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sabatier, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1911, 44, 1984–2001 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. J. K. Nørskov, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23 CrossRef .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, J. K. Nørskov, L. A. Kibler, A. M. El-Aziz and D. M. Kolb, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1032–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, J. Nash, B. Xu and Y. Yan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, H27–H29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501602 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, M. Gao, J. Zheng, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sheng, M. Myint, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1509–1512 RSC .
J. Durst, A. Siebel, C. Simon, F. Hasché, J. Herranz and H. A. Gasteiger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2255–2260 RSC .
T. Cheng, L. Wang, B. V. Merinov and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7787–7790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ledezma-Yanez, W. D. Z. Wallace, P. Sebastián-Pascual, V. Climent, J. M. Feliu and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17031 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K.-C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Liu, J. Li, L. Jiao, H. T. T. Doan, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Huang, K. M. Abraham, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3232–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Dubouis and A. Grimaud, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 9165–9181 RSC .
D. Strmcnik, M. Uchimura, C. Wang, R. Subbaraman, N. Danilovic, D. Van Der Vliet, A. P. Paulikas, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 300–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. T. McCrum and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 891–899 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. T. C. van der Niet, N. Garcia-Araez, J. Hernández, J. M. Feliu and M. T. M. Koper, Catal. Today, 2013, 202, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Shen, B. A. Lu, Y. Y. Li, J. Liu, Z. C. Huang-fu, H. Peng, J. Y. Ye, X. M. Qu, J. M. Zhang, G. Li, W. B. Cai, Y. X. Jiang and S. G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22397–22402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Xu, M. Jaroniec, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4876 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ryu and Y. Surendranath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15524–15531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh and S. Hammes-Schiffer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiao and X. Song, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 141, 134104 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Liu, L. Jiao, J. Li, T. Stracensky, Q. Sun, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3064–3074 RSC .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Qi, M. Chhowalla and D. Voiry, Mater. Today, 2020, 40, 173–192 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Liu, X. Ren, J. Gao, Y. Huang and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb6833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Tian, X. Duan, H. Sun, S. Liu and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, G. Zhao, P. Cui, N. Cheng, M. Lao, X. Xu, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105850 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lao, G. Zhao, P. Li, T. Ma, Y. Jiang, H. Pan, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100698 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, G. Zhao, N. Cheng, L. Xia, X. Li, Y. Chen, M. Lao, Z. Cheng, Y. Zhao, X. Xu, Y. Jiang, H. Pan, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Chin. J. Catal., 2022, 43, 1351–1359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Zhou, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 683–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, e2103900 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, M. Escudero-Escribano and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 5670–5672 RSC .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
S. K. Kaiser, Z. Chen, D. Faust Akl, S. Mitchell and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11703–11809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 0, 1902031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Small Methods, 2019, 0, 1800443 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. He, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1619–1633 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Qiu, Y. Ito, W. Cong, Y. Tan, P. Liu, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14031–14035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
M. D. Hossain, Z. Liu, M. Zhuang, X. Yan, G.-L. Xu, C. A. Gadre, A. Tyagi, I. H. Abidi, C.-J. Sun, H. Wong, A. Guda, Y. Hao, X. Pan, K. Amine and Z. Luo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803689 CrossRef .
W. Zang, T. Sun, T. Yang, S. Xi, M. Waqar, Z. Kou, Z. Lyu, Y. P. Feng, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, R. Zhao, H. Xiang, J. Wu, W. Zhong, W. Li, Q. Zhang, N. Yang and X. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002260 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Kwon, I. H. Kwak, S. Ju, S. Kang, S. Han, Y. C. Park, J. Park and J. Park, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12184–12194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, D. Tian, H. Jiang, D. Cao, S. Wei, D. Liu, P. Song, Y. Lin and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Yang, D. Cheng and D. Cao, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Wang, T. Xie, Q. Zhu, D. Zeng, R. Li, X. Zhang and S. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 485, 506–512 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Q. Li, C. Han, Z. Xing and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mosconi, P. Till, L. Calvillo, T. Kosmala, D. Garoli, D. Debellis, A. Martucci, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, Surfaces, 2019, 2, 531–545 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, C.-T. He, J. Pei, Y. Liu, J. Li, W. Chen, D. He, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3442–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ramalingam, P. Varadhan, H.-C. Fu, H. Kim, D. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Song, D. Ma, Y. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and J.-H. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 0, 1903841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Y. Ouyang, H. Zhang, M. Xiao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, D. Tang, X. Cao, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2120 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
B. Mao, P. Sun, Y. Jiang, T. Meng, D. Guo, J. Qin and M. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15232–15237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Kun Jiang, Chem, 2018, 4, 194–195 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Sokolowski, X. Song, Y. He, Y. Mei and G. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1902844 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, Y. Luo, S. Li, L. Liao, Y. Li, H. Chen and J. Ye, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 970–986 RSC .
G. Di Liberto, L. A. Cipriano and G. Pacchioni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 20431–20441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Samantaray, V. D’Elia, E. Pump, L. Falivene, M. Harb, S. Ould Chikh, L. Cavallo and J.-M. Basset, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 734–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lu, Q. Liu and S. Chen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7584–7618 CrossRef CAS .
T. Asset and P. Atanassov, Joule, 2019, 4, 33–44 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee and S. Chen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10126–10141 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, L. Gao, S. Lei, S. Liang, J. Zhang, C. D. Sewell, W. Xue, Q. Liu, Z. Lin and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009197 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kozhushner, N. Zion and L. Elbaz, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2021, 25, 100620 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Wagner, H. A. Gasteiger and S. I. Yan, Fuel Cell Activities, DOE Workshop on Non-Platinum Electrocatalysts, General Motors, New Orleans, LA,  2003 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, J.-P. Dodelet, G. Wu and P. Zelenay, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807615 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Chen, L. Yu, X. Wu, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Yang, H. Tian, Y. Hu, P. Du, R. Si, J. Wang, X. Cui, H. Li, J. Xiao, T. Xu, J. Deng, F. Yang, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, J. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Li, X. Pan and X. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500462 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Jiang, L. Gu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, L.-J. Zhang, J.-Q. Wang, J.-S. Hu, Z. Wei and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3570–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, T. Zhou, M. Chen, H. Feng, R. Yuan, C. A. Zhong, W. Yan, Y. Tian, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 111–118 RSC .
K. Yuan, D. F. Lützenkirchen-Hecht, L. Li, L. Shuai, Y. Li, R. Cao, M. Qiu, X. Zhuang, Y. Chen and M. K. Leung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Li, C. Fan, Q. Meng, Y. Tang, X. Qiu, G. Fu and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, J. Yang, Z. Xu, Q. Wang, J. Wu, E. Zhang, S. Dou, W. Sun, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202205946 CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, C.-J. Chen, R.-S. Liu, C. Wang, K. Yan, Y. Li and G. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20118–20126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hai, X. Zhao, N. Guo, C. Yao, C. Chen, W. Liu, Y. Du, H. Yan, J. Li and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5862–5870 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, Y. Jia, F. Wei, L. Zhuang, D. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang, S. Lin, P. Yuan and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6122–6127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Z. Li, C. Wang, W. Tao, M. Huang, M. Zuo, Y. Yang, K. Yang, L. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Xu and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Luo, A. Roy, L. Silvioli, D. A. Cullen, A. Zitolo, M. T. Sougrati, I. C. Oguz, T. Mineva, D. Teschner, S. Wagner, J. Wen, F. Dionigi, U. I. Kramm, J. Rossmeisl, F. Jaouen and P. Strasser, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1215–1223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C.-S. Cao, S.-F. Hung, Y.-R. Lu, W. Cai, A. I. Rykov, S. Miao, S. Xi, H. Yang, Z. Hu, J. Wang, J. Zhao, E. E. Alp, W. Xu, T.-S. Chan, H. Chen, Q. Xiong, H. Xiao, Y. Huang, J. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Chem, 2020, 6, 3440–3454 CAS .
Z. Jin, P. Li, Y. Meng, Z. Fang, D. Xiao and G. Yu, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 615–622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pérez-Rodríguez, D. Sebastián, M. J. Lázaro and E. Pastor, J. Catal., 2017, 355, 156–166 CrossRef .
S. Möller, S. Barwe, J. Masa, D. Wintrich, S. Seisel, H. Baltruschat and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1585–1589 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. Wang, S. Xi, X. Zhao, T. Sun, J. Li, W. Yu, H. Xu, T. S. Herng, X. Hai, P. Lyu, M. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook, J. Ding, H. Xiao and J. Lu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7105–7113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Huang, Z. L. Zhao, M. Wang, B. Xiang, J. Li, Z. Feng, H. Xu and M. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, L. Kong, Y. Ji, J. White, Y. Li, J. Zhang, P. An, S. Liu, S.-T. Lee and T. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2149 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hwang, S. H. Noh and B. Han, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 471, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, P. Li, S. Dou, W. Sun, H. Pan, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2809–2858 RSC .
X. Li, Z. Cheng and X. Wang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2021, 4, 136–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schlapp and W. G. Penney, Phys. Rev., 1932, 42, 666–686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Van Vleck, Phys. Rev., 1932, 41, 208 CrossRef CAS .
J. Van Vleck, J. Chem. Phys., 1935, 3, 807–813 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510–14521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. R. Axet, J. Durand, M. Gouygou and P. Serp, in Advances in Organometallic Chemistry, ed. P. J. Pérez, Academic Press,  2019, vol. 71, pp. 53–174 Search PubMed .
S. Li, B. Chen, Y. Wang, M.-Y. Ye, P. A. van Aken, C. Cheng and A. Thomas, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1240–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yu, Y. Luo, A. Mahmood, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 373–394 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ling, W. Kang, H. Jing, W. Zeng, Y. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Qi, L. Fang and M. Zhou, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 20 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, P. Cui, Y. Qian, G. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Xu, Z. Cheng, Y. Liu, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14533–14540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, Y. Jiang, S.-X. Dou, W. Sun and H. Pan, Sci. Bull., 2020, 66, 85–96 CrossRef .
H. Xu, H. Shang, C. Wang and Y. Du, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 418, 213374 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, B. Xu, T. Liao, J. Guo, Y. Wu and Z. Sun, Small, 2021, 17, 2002240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Xiao, H. Wang and M. Shao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7855–7865 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804672 CrossRef PubMed .
I. C. Gerber and P. Serp, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 1250–1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. van Deelen, C. Hernández Mejía and K. P. de Jong, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 955–970 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pacchioni and H.-J. Freund, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8474–8502 RSC .
W. Zhu, Z. Wu, G. S. Foo, X. Gao, M. Zhou, B. Liu, G. M. Veith, P. Wu, K. L. Browning and H. N. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhuang, S. A. Giles, J. Zheng, G. R. Jenness, S. Caratzoulas, D. G. Vlachos and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ni, T. Wang, P. A. Schouwink, Y. C. Chuang, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10797–10801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang and Y. Qin, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Bao, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10936–10941 RSC .
S. A. Giles, Y. Yan and D. G. Vlachos, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1129–1139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohyama, T. Sato and A. Satsuma, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 311–315 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohyama, T. Sato, Y. Yamamoto, S. Arai and A. Satsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8016–8021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Abbott, Y. Sun, J. Sun, Y. Du, X. Han, G. Wu and P. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Wang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11751–11757 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ming, Y. Zhang, C. He, L. Zhao, S. Niu, G. Fan and J. S. Hu, Small, 2019, 15, 1903057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, H. Peng, W. Liu, J. Yin, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Small, 2018, 14, 1704073 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Zhao, D. Xu, Y. Li, J. Bao and Z. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2731–2734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nong, W. Dong, J. Yin, B. Dong, Y. Lu, X. Yuan, X. Wang, K. Bu, M. Chen, S. Jiang, L.-M. Liu, M. Sui and F. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5719–5727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, T. Liu, J. Li, B. Li, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, D. Xiong, I. Amorim, W. Li and L. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1819–1827 RSC .
L.-N. Zhang, Z.-L. Lang, Y.-H. Wang, H.-Q. Tan, H.-Y. Zang, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2569–2580 RSC .
X. Zhang, R. Sa, S. Yang, F. Zhou, Z. Jiang and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104981 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Hamo, R. K. Singh, J. C. Douglin, S. Chen, M. B. Hassine, E. Carbo-Argibay, S. Lu, H. Wang, P. J. Ferreira, B. A. Rosen and D. R. Dekel, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 932–947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, S. Tao, Q. He, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Xie, W. Ding and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10168–10174 RSC .
W. Xu, Y. Ke, Z. Wang, W. Zhang and A. T. S. Wee, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2021, 76, 100542 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bar-Ziv, P. Ranjan, A. Lavie, A. Jain, S. Garai, A. Bar Hen, R. Popovitz-Biro, R. Tenne, R. Arenal, A. Ramasubramaniam, L. Lajaunie and M. Bar-Sadan, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6043–6050 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, S. Liang, X. Wang, M. Zhang, S.-M. Hao, X. Cui, Z. Li and Z. Lin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2110036118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, Y. Wang, H. Li, Q. Li, N. Ta, L. Zhuang, Q. Fu and X. Bao, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5728–5734 RSC .
Y. Chen, J. Cai, P. Li, G. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Jiang, J. Chen, S. X. Dou, H. Pan and W. Sun, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6807–6814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guha, T. Veettil Vineesh, A. Sekar, S. Narayanaru, M. Sahoo, S. Nayak, S. Chakraborty and T. N. Narayanan, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6636–6644 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, L. Gao and Q. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 9608–9619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
A. Liu, X. Liang, X. Ren, W. Guan, M. Gao, Y. Yang, Q. Yang, L. Gao, Y. Li and T. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003437 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hao, Y. Wu, Y. An, B. Cui, J. Lin, X. Li, D. Wang, M. Jiang, Z. Cheng and S. Hu, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 453–462 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, Y. Pi, Q. Shao, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6245–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fan, X. Wu, M. Li, X. Wang, Y. Zhu, G. Fu, T. Ma and Y. Tang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133829 CrossRef CAS .
D. Taherinia, S. H. Moravvej, M. Moazzeni and E. Akbarzadeh, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 2994–3000 RSC .
J. J. Ogada, A. K. Ipadeola, P. V. Mwonga, A. B. Haruna, F. Nichols, S. Chen, H. A. Miller, M. V. Pagliaro, F. Vizza, J. R. Varcoe, D. M. Meira, D. M. Wamwangi and K. I. Ozoemena, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 7014–7029 CrossRef CAS .
R. Muntean, D. T. Pascal, U. Rost, L. Holtkotte, J. Näther, F. Köster, M. Underberg, T. Hülser and M. Brodmann, Top. Catal., 2019, 62, 429–438 CrossRef CAS .
E.-J. Kim, J. Shin, J. Bak, S. J. Lee, K. H. Kim, D. Song, J. Roh, Y. Lee, H. Kim, K.-S. Lee and E. Cho, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 280, 119433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Z. Xie, J. Jiang, J. Wang, X. Song, Q. He, W. Ding and Z. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 454–462 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lu, Y. Liu, F. Lin, I. A. Cordova, S. Gao, B. Li, B. Peng, H. Xu, J. Kaelin, D. Coliz, C. Wang, Y. Shao and Y. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12613–12619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Bao, P. Li, X. Wang, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14179–14183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, D. Li, S. Maurya, Y. S. Kim, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, D. Strmcnik, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 316–324 RSC .
L. Su, D. Gong, N. Yao, Y. Li, Z. Li and W. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2106156 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, L.-Y. Li, L.-N. Chen, T. Sheng, L. Chen, Y.-C. Wang, P. Zhang, Y.-H. Hong, J. Ye, W.-F. Lin, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, G. Fu, N. Tian, S.-G. Sun and Z.-Y. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 9292–9301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Q. Dai, L. Shi, Y. Liu, T. T. Isimjan and X. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 2107–2116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, F. Li, W. Chen, Y. Ma, Y. Wu, X. Gu, Y. Qin, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang, H. Zhu, T. Deng and J. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2357–2365 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rui, G. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, Q. Zhou, J. Chen, J. Zhu, W. Sun, W. Huang and S. X. Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801554 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2013–2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500564 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 146–159 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 7409–7413 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Liu, T. Ma, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102540 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, P. Cui, G. Zhao, K. Rui, M. Lao, Y. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Jiang, H. Pan, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12540–12544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, P. Li, N. Cheng, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2000872 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Zheng, J. Cai, G. Zhao, B. Zhang, Z. Luo, G. Wang, H. Pan and W. Sun, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 7406–7414 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, X. Zheng, G. Gao, H. Zhang, K. Rong, J. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, W. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Wang and S. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 6933–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, X.-T. Wang, J.-H. Zhong, J. Liu, G. I. N. Waterhouse and Z.-Q. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 22043–22050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, J. Chen, P. Ning, X. Chen, J. Liang, X. Yao, D. Chen, L. Qin, Y. Huang and Z. Wen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12418–12428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dai, X. Zhang, M. Sun, B. Huang, N. Zhang, P. Da, R. Yang, Z. He, W. Wang, P. Xi and C.-H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Oh, C. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yin, J. Wang, T. Li, J. P. Hill, A. Rowan, Y. Sugahara and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 13240–13248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Liu, H. Li, J. Chen, J. Fei, Z. Yu, Z. Yuan, C. Wang, H. Zheng, Z. Liu, M. Xu, G. Henkelman, L. Wei and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3309–3319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Chen, C. A. Menning and M. B. Zellner, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 201–254 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Advances in Catalysis, Academic Press,  2000, vol. 45, pp. 71–129 Search PubMed .
T. Kenjo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 383–386 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jenseit, A. Khalil and H. Wendt, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1990, 20, 893–900 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fan, D. L. Piron and M. Rojas, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1994, 19, 29–33 CrossRef CAS .
S. John, R. W. Atkinson, R. R. Unocic, T. A. Zawodzinski and A. B. Papandrew, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13481–13487 CrossRef .
W. Sheng, A. P. Bivens, M. Myint, Z. Zhuang, R. V. Forest, Q. Fang, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1719–1724 RSC .
Y. Wang, G. Wang, G. Li, B. Huang, J. Pan, Q. Liu, J. Han, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 177–181 RSC .
M. E. Scofield, Y. Zhou, S. Yue, L. Wang, D. Su, X. Tong, M. B. Vukmirovic, R. R. Adzic and S. S. Wong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3895–3908 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu and Z. Zhuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5156–5163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, L. Zhang, G.-L. Xu, S. Zhu, Q. Wang, M. Gu, X. Zhang, C. Sun, P. B. Balbuena, K. Amine and M. Shao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9614–9621 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohyama, D. Kumada and A. Satsuma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15980–15985 RSC .
L.-F. Shen, B.-A. Lu, X.-m Qu, J.-Y. Ye, J.-M. Zhang, S.-H. Yin, Q.-H. Wu, R.-X. Wang, S.-Y. Shen, T. Sheng, Y.-X. Jiang and S.-G. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Wang, X.-T. Wang, H. Ze, X.-G. Zhang, P. M. Radjenovic, Y.-J. Zhang, J.-C. Dong, Z.-Q. Tian and J.-F. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5708–5711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Dong, X.-G. Zhang, V. Briega-Martos, X. Jin, J. Yang, S. Chen, Z.-L. Yang, D.-Y. Wu, J. M. Feliu, C. T. Williams, Z.-Q. Tian and J.-F. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4608–4616 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, L. Shi, X. Liu, J. Fang, X. Wang, B. P. Setzler, W. Zhu, Y. Yan and Z. Zhuang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Duan, Z.-Y. Yu, L. Yang, L.-R. Zheng, C.-T. Zhang, X.-T. Yang, F.-Y. Gao, X.-L. Zhang, X. Yu, R. Liu, H.-H. Ding, C. Gu, X.-S. Zheng, L. Shi, J. Jiang, J.-F. Zhu, M.-R. Gao and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt and T. Bligaard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 937–943 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, H. Yang, J. Shi, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, S. Di, X. Zhao, J. Zhong, T. Cheng, W. Zhou and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5771–5777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kunimatsu, T. Senzaki, M. Tsushima and M. Osawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 401, 451–454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osawa, M. Tsushima, H. Mogami, G. Samjeské and A. Yamakata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4248–4256 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Song, J. Cai, X. Zheng, D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu and J. Zhu, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 5170–5174 CrossRef .
S. Lee, K. Banjac, M. Lingenfelder and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 10401–10405 CrossRef .
Y. Duan, Z. Y. Yu, S. J. Hu, X. S. Zheng, C. T. Zhang, H. H. Ding, B. C. Hu, Q. Q. Fu, Z. L. Yu and X. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15772–15777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, P. Schlexer Lamoureux, A. Kulkarni and M. Bajdich, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 3423–3431 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bo, R. K. Hocking, S. Zhou, Y. Li, X. Chen, J. Zhuang, Y. Du and C. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4225–4237 RSC .
J. T. Mefford, A. R. Akbashev, M. Kang, C. L. Bentley, W. E. Gent, H. D. Deng, D. H. Alsem, Y.-S. Yu, N. J. Salmon, D. A. Shapiro, P. R. Unwin and W. C. Chueh, Nature, 2021, 593, 67–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Chung, P. P. Lopes, P. F. B. D. Martins, H. He, T. Kawaguchi, P. Zapol, H. You, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik and Y. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 222–230 CrossRef .
J. T. Mefford, Z. Zhao, M. Bajdich and W. C. Chueh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 622–634 RSC .
H. Xiao, H. Shin and W. A. Goddard 3rd, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 5872–5877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shin, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard 3rd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6745–6748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, D. Zheng, T. Deng, Q. Chen, C. Zhu, C. Pei, H. Li, F. Wu, W. Shi, S.-W. Yang, Y. Zhu and X. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10614–10619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, S. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Xiong, H. Yang, S. Liu, J. Tang, J. Zhang, D. Liu and L. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 736–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Li, B. Yang, M. Ling, X. Gao, J. Lu, Q. Shi, L. Lei, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105162 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, M. B. Faheem, J. Fu, Y. Xiao, C. Li and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4019–4047 CrossRef CAS .
F.-Y. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu, Z. Adler and H. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 1704–1731 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, X. Cui, C. D. Sewell, J. Li and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8428–8469 RSC .
F. Polo-Garzon, Z. Bao, X. Zhang, W. Huang and Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5692–5707 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sivanantham, P. Ganesan, A. Vinu and S. Shanmugam, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 463–493 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hermann, T. Chaudhuri and P. Spagnol, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 1297–1302 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, H. Oh, T. Ha, Y. I. Lee and K. Min, Appl. Energy, 2015, 155, 866–880 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mo, Z. Kang, G. Yang, S. T. Retterer, D. A. Cullen, T. J. Toops, J. B. Green and F.-Y. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 177, 817–822 CrossRef CAS .
H. Teuku, I. Alshami, J. Goh, M. S. Masdar and K. S. Loh, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 20583–20600 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mehta and J. S. Cooper, J. Power Sources, 2003, 114, 32–53 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, X. Lai, D. A. Liu, P. Hu and J. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. Porstmann, T. Wannemacher and W. G. Drossel, J. Manuf. Process., 2020, 60, 366–383 CrossRef .
L. Xiao, S. Zhang, J. Pan, C. Yang, M. He, L. Zhuang and J. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7869–7871 RSC .
J. Hnát, R. Kodým, K. Denk, M. Paidar, J. Žitka and K. Bouzek, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2019, 91, 821–832 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, D. F. Ruiz Diaz, K. S. Chen, Z. Wang and X. C. Adroher, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 178–203 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adloo, M. Sadeghi, M. Masoomi and H. N. Pazhooh, Renewable Energy, 2016, 99, 867–874 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Asri, T. Husaini, A. B. Sulong, E. H. Majlan and W. R. W. Daud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 9135–9148 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Suresh, S. Jayanti, A. P. Deshpande and P. Haridoss, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 6067–6072 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, F. J. Pinar, E. Mena and D. Úbeda, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5510–5520 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ouellette, A. Ozden, M. Ercelik, C. O. Colpan, H. Ganjehsarabi, X. Li and F. Hamdullahpur, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 1152–1170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Proch, M. Stenström, L. Eriksson, J. Andersson, G. Sjöblom, A. Jansson and J. Westlinder, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1313–1324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sauermoser, N. Kizilova, B. G. Pollet and S. Kjelstrup, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8, 13 CrossRef .
F. Razmjooei, T. Morawietz, E. Taghizadeh, E. Hadjixenophontos, L. Mues, M. Gerle, B. D. Wood, C. Harms, A. S. Gago, S. A. Ansar and K. A. Friedrich, Joule, 2021, 5, 1776–1799 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Wang, M. Yang and H. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 301–310 CrossRef .
K. Li, S. Yu, D. Li, L. Ding, W. Wang, Z. Xie, E. J. Park, C. Fujimoto, D. A. Cullen, Y. S. Kim and F.-Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 50957–50964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Miller, K. Bouzek, J. Hnat, S. Loos, C. I. Bernäcker, T. Weißgärber, L. Röntzsch and J. Meier-Haack, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2114–2133 RSC .
Y.-G. Chun, C.-S. Kim, D.-H. Peck and D.-R. Shin, J. Power Sources, 1998, 71, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shahgaldi, I. Alaefour and X. Li, Appl. Energy, 2018, 225, 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, S. Sui, X. Zhu, Q. Yu, G. Cao, X. Hong and H. Tu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1010–1018 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hnát, M. Plevova, R. A. Tufa, J. Zitka, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 17493–17504 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, W. Zhu, T. Huang, C. Zheng, Y. Pei, G. Shen, Z. Nie, D. Xiao, Y. Yin and M. D. Guiver, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sadeghi Alavijeh, R. M. H. Khorasany, A. Habisch, G. G. Wang and E. Kjeang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 16–28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guétaz, S. Escribano and O. Sicardy, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 169–178 CrossRef .
S. Martens, L. Asen, G. Ercolano, F. Dionigi, C. Zalitis, A. Hawkins, A. Martinez Bonastre, L. Seidl, A. C. Knoll, J. Sharman, P. Strasser, D. Jones and O. Schneider, J. Power Sources, 2018, 392, 274–284 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, M. B. Stevens, M. R. Cosby, S. Z. Oener, A. M. Smith, L. J. Enman, K. E. Ayers, C. B. Capuano, J. N. Renner and N. Danilovic, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 7–15 CrossRef .
S.-D. Yim, H. T. Chung, J. Chlistunoff, D.-S. Kim, C. Fujimoto, T.-H. Yang and Y. S. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F499–F506 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Petrovick, G. C. Anderson, D. I. Kushner, N. Danilovic and A. Z. Weber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 056517 CrossRef CAS .
D. Novitski, A. Kosakian, T. Weissbach, M. Secanell and S. Holdcroft, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15465–15472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2019, 120, 851–918 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Sassin, Y. Garsany, B. D. Gould and K. E. Swider-Lyons, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 511–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106162 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, A. R. Motz, C. Bae, C. Fujimoto, G. Yang, F.-Y. Zhang, K. E. Ayers and Y. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3393–3419 RSC .
P. Aßmann, A. S. Gago, P. Gazdzicki, K. A. Friedrich and M. Wark, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2020, 21, 225–233 CrossRef .
G. Papakonstantinou, G. Algara-Siller, D. Teschner, T. Vidaković-Koch, R. Schlögl and K. Sundmacher, Appl. Energy, 2020, 280, 115911 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Niaz, A. Akhtar, J.-Y. Park and H.-T. Lim, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 229093 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, S. Y. Kang, S.-H. Oh, J. K. Kim, M. S. Lim, C.-Y. Ahn, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
B. Motealleh, Z. Liu, R. I. Masel, J. P. Sculley, Z. Richard Ni and L. Meroueh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 3379–3386 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, S. Y. Paek, J. Y. Lee, J. H. Park, S. Y. Lee and Y. M. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6338–6348 RSC .
P. Fortin, T. Khoza, X. Cao, S. Y. Martinsen, A. Oyarce Barnett and S. Holdcroft, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227814 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Jung, Y. S. Park, S. Woo, J. Yang, M. J. Jang, J. Jeong, N. Kwon, B. Lim, J. W. Han and S. M. Choi, Small, 2021, 17, 2100639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Park, J. Jeong, Y. Noh, M. J. Jang, J. Lee, K. H. Lee, D. C. Lim, M. H. Seo, W. B. Kim, J. Yang and S. M. Choi, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292, 120170 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Kim, J. Kim, J. C. Park, S. H. Ahn and D.-W. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 130491 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Lindquist, S. Z. Oener, R. Krivina, A. R. Motz, A. Keane, C. Capuano, K. E. Ayers and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 51917–51924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Niaz, J.-Y. Park and H.-T. Lim, Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy, 2021, 46, 31550–31562 CrossRef CAS .
S. Campagna Zignani, M. L. Faro, A. Carbone, C. Italiano, S. Trocino, G. Monforte and A. S. Aricò, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 413, 140078 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ul Hassan, M. J. Zachman, M. Mandal, H. Adabi Firouzjaie, P. A. Kohl, D. A. Cullen and W. E. Mustain, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 8116–8126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Jia, X. Wang, K. Lyu, Y. Peng, H. Zheng, X. Wei, H. Ren, L. Xiao, J. Wang, D. A. Muller, H. D. Abruña, B. J. Hwang, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1506 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Roy, M. R. Talarposhti, S. J. Normile, I. V. Zenyuk, V. De Andrade, K. Artyushkova, A. Serov and P. Atanassov, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2268–2275 RSC .
J. Xiao, A. M. Oliveira, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, T. Wang, J. Wang, B. P. Setzler and Y. Yan, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Y. Huang, L. Liu, Q. Ju, X. Zhou, X. Qiao, Z. Zheng and N. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 621, 118964 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, T. J. Omasta, E. Magliocca, L. Wang, J. R. Varcoe and W. E. Mustain, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1046–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Y. Yang, R. Schimmenti, E. Murray, H. Peng, Y. Wang, C. Ge, W. Jiang, G. Wang, F. J. DiSalvo, D. A. Muller, M. Mavrikakis, L. Xiao, H. D. Abruña and L. Zhuang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2022, 119, e2119883119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kabir, K. Lemire, K. Artyushkova, A. Roy, M. Odgaard, D. Schlueter, A. Oshchepkov, A. Bonnefont, E. Savinova, D. C. Sabarirajan, P. Mandal, E. J. Crumlin, I. V. Zenyuk, P. Atanassov and A. Serov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24433–24443 RSC .
X. Liang, X. Ge, Y. He, M. Xu, M. A. Shehzad, F. Sheng, R. Bance-Soualhi, J. Zhang, W. Yu, Z. Ge, C. Wei, W. Song, J. Peng, J. R. Varcoe, L. Wu and T. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2102637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lim, H.-j Kim, D. Henkensmeier, S. Jong Yoo, J. Young Kim, S. Young Lee, Y.-E. Sung, J. H. Jang and H. S. Park, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 76, 410–418 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Cho, H.-Y. Park, H. J. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Lim, D. Henkensmeier, S. J. Yoo, J. Y. Kim, S. Y. Lee, H. S. Park and J. H. Jang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Kang, D. Li, M. Pak, S. M. Alia, C. Fujimoto, G. Bender, Y. S. Kim and A. Z. Weber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 054522 CrossRef CAS .
N. U. Hassan, Y. Zheng, P. A. Kohl and W. E. Mustain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 044526 CrossRef .
F. Razmjooei, A. Farooqui, R. Reissner, A. S. Gago, S. A. Ansar and K. A. Friedrich, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3951–3960 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiessling, J. C. Fornaciari, G. Anderson, X. Peng, A. Gerstmayr, M. R. Gerhardt, S. McKinney, A. Serov, Y. S. Kim, B. Zulevi, A. Z. Weber and N. Danilovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 084512 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiessling, J. C. Fornaciari, G. Anderson, X. Peng, A. Gerstmayr, M. Gerhardt, S. McKinney, A. Serov, A. Z. Weber, Y. S. Kim, B. Zulevi and N. Danilovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 024510 CrossRef .
T. J. Omasta, L. Wang, X. Peng, C. A. Lewis, J. R. Varcoe and W. E. Mustain, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gutru, Z. Turtayeva, F. Xu, G. Maranzana, B. Vigolo and A. Desforges, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 19642–19663 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Omasta, A. M. Park, J. M. LaManna, Y. Zhang, X. Peng, L. Wang, D. L. Jacobson, J. R. Varcoe, D. S. Hussey, B. S. Pivovar and W. E. Mustain, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 551–558 RSC .
X. Peng, D. Kulkarni, Y. Huang, T. J. Omasta, B. Ng, Y. Zheng, L. Wang, J. M. LaManna, D. S. Hussey, J. R. Varcoe, I. V. Zenyuk and W. E. Mustain, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Otsuji, Y. Shirase, T. Asakawa, N. Yokota, K. Nagase, W. Xu, P. Song, S. Wang, D. A. Tryk, K. Kakinuma, J. Inukai, K. Miyatake and M. Uchida, J. Power Sources, 2022, 522, 230997 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, M. Her, Y. Kim, C.-Y. Ahn, S. Park, Y.-H. Cho and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 400, 139439 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi, J.-H. Jang, D. W. Lee, Y. S. Kang, H. Jin, K.-Y. Lee and S. J. Yoo, J. Power Sources, 2021, 494, 229738 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saebea, C. Chaiburi and S. Authayanun, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 721–729 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, M. Her, S. Kim, J.-H. Jang, J. E. Chae, J. Choi, M. Choi, S. M. Kim, H.-J. Kim, Y.-H. Cho, Y.-E. Sung and S. J. Yoo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34805–34811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Eriksson, H. Grimler, A. Carlson, H. Ekström, R. Wreland Lindström, G. Lindbergh and C. Lagergren, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 4930–4939 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inaba, T. Kinumoto, M. Kiriake, R. Umebayashi, A. Tasaka and Z. Ogumi, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5746–5753 CrossRef CAS .
C. Francia, V. S. Ijeri, S. Specchia and P. Spinelli, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schalenbach and D. Stolten, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 321–327 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schalenbach, M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14921–14933 CrossRef CAS .
R. Omrani and B. Shabani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 31041–31055 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, B. Li, D. Yang, P. Ming, C. Zhang and Y. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 22040–22061 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Pei, X. Liu, J. Xue, H. Jiang, X. Qiu, Y. Yin, H. Wu, Z. Jiang and M. D. Guiver, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 418, 129311 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, X. Qiu, J. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Pei, H. Jiang, R. Yue, Y. Yin, Z. Jiang, X. Zhang and M. D. Guiver, J. Power Sources, 2022, 527, 231143 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bock, H. Karoliussen, F. Seland, B. G. Pollet, M. S. Thomassen, S. Holdcroft and O. S. Burheim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1236–1254 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Islam, B. Shabani, G. Rosengarten and J. Andrews, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 48, 523–539 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, D. Chaudhary, P. Varshney, U. Varshney, S. M. Yahya and Y. Rafat, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 32, 102003 CrossRef .
M. Wang, L. Árnadóttir, Z. J. Xu and Z. Feng, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Parrondo, S. Sankarasubramanian and V. Ramani, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3056–3062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kulkarni, J. I. S. Cho, L. Rasha, R. E. Owen, Y. Wu, R. Ziesche, J. Hack, T. Neville, M. Whiteley, N. Kardjilov, H. Markötter, I. Manke, P. R. Shearing and D. J. L. Brett, J. Power Sources, 2019, 439, 227074 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kimura, T. Kawamoto, M. Aoki, T. Mizusawa, N. L. Yamada, K. Miyatake and J. Inukai, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 4955–4963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Maier, J. Dodwell, R. Ziesche, C. Tan, T. Heenan, J. Majasan, N. Kardjilov, H. Markötter, I. Manke, L. Castanheira, G. Hinds, P. R. Shearing and D. J. L. Brett, J. Power Sources, 2020, 455, 227968 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rudolph, T. Virtanen, M. Ferrando, C. Güell, F. Lipnizki and M. Kallioinen, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 588, 117221 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Withers, C. Bouman, S. Carmignato, V. Cnudde, D. Grimaldi, C. K. Hagen, E. Maire, M. Manley, A. Du Plessis and S. R. Stock, Nat. Rev. Methods Primers, 2021, 1, 18 CrossRef CAS .
S.-G. Kim and S.-J. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2013, 230, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vobecká, M. Svoboda, J. Beneš, T. Belloň and Z. Slouka, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 559, 127–137 CrossRef .
J. P. Braaten, S. Ogawa, V. Yarlagadda, A. Kongkanand and S. Litster, J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 229049 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Normile, D. C. Sabarirajan, O. Calzada, V. De Andrade, X. Xiao, P. Mandal, D. Y. Parkinson, A. Serov, P. Atanassov and I. V. Zenyuk, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 187–197 CrossRef .
C. P. Liu, P. Saha, Y. Huang, S. Shimpalee, P. Satjaritanun and I. V. Zenyuk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 20002–20013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. AlRatrout, A. Q. Raeini, B. Bijeljic and M. J. Blunt, Adv. Water Resour., 2017, 109, 158–169 CrossRef .
E. Leonard, A. D. Shum, N. Danilovic, C. Capuano, K. E. Ayers, L. M. Pant, A. Z. Weber, X. Xiao, D. Y. Parkinson and I. V. Zenyuk, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 921–931 RSC .
C.-Y. Li, J.-B. Le, Y.-H. Wang, S. Chen, Z.-L. Yang, J.-F. Li, J. Cheng and Z.-Q. Tian, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 697–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Liang, W. Guo and R. Zou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 436, 213824 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Xiong, R. Zeng, X. Lu, M. Krumov, X. Huang, W. Xu, H. Wang, F. J. DiSalvo, J. D. Brock, D. A. Muller and H. D. Abruña, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1136–1178 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3748–3779 RSC .
N. Ziv, W. E. Mustain and D. R. Dekel, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1136–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yamakata and M. Osawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, X. Qin, Y. Yao and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8748–8754 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fang, X. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Gu, W. Liu, D. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Lin, J. Lu and S. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jiao, E. Liu, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11099–11109 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cs00038e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Peng Li
	Peng Li received his PhD degree under the supervision of Distinguished Prof. Shi Xue Dou from the Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials at the University of Wollongong in 2021. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher for a joint project “Low-cost electrolysis of seawater and CO2 for co-production of renewable fuel and hypochlorite” between RMIT and CSIRO Energy under the mentorship of ARC Future Fellow Prof. Tianyi Ma. His current research focuses on the rational development of efficient materials, and the fundamental understanding of the electrochemical processes for electrocatalysis and fuel cells.

Wenping Sun
	Wenping Sun is a professor at School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University. He received his B.S. degree in 2008 and PhD degree in 2013 in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). He is a recipient of the ARC DECRA (2016) and CAS Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Award (2015). His research expertise includes electrocatalysis, fuel cells, and batteries, especially the design of novel materials and structures, and fundamental understanding of the related electrochemical processes. He has authored/co-authored over 130 peer-reviewed papers, which have attracted a total citation of >12000 with an h-index of 59 (Google Scholar). He serves as an Associate Editor for Frontiers in Chemistry and Materials for Renewable and Sustainable Energy.

Shi Xue Dou
	Shi Xue Dou is a Distinguished Professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, University of Wollongong (UOW) Research Ambassador Asia and the founding director of Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials at UOW. He received his PhD at Dalhousie University, Canada in 1984, DSc at the University of New South Wales in 1998 and was elected as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering in 1994. He was awarded the Australian Government's Centenary Medal in 2003 and Australian Order of Member in 2019 for his contribution to materials science and engineering, multiple Australian Professorial Fellowships from 1993 to 2011, the Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award in 2008, Outstanding Partnership Award in 2012, the ASTS Lifetime Achievement Award in 2018, Lifetime Achiever by Australian Research Magazine in 2020 and the ICMC Lifetime Achievement Award in 2021. He is named a highly cited researcher in materials science by Thomson Reuters since 2018 with citations of 90000 and an h-index of 145. He has supervised and co-supervised over 100 PhD students, and more than 60 postdoctoral and visiting fellows. He is a program leader for Auto CRC 2020 on electrification program and the on-going ARENA 2016–2021 on smart sodium storage system program.

Tianyi Ma
	Tianyi Ma is a Professor and the Leader of Carbon Neutrality Group at RMIT University. He received his PhD in physical chemistry in 2013 from Nankai University, China. He was awarded an ARC DECRA in 2015. He has published more than 230 papers which attracted more than 22000 citations with an h-index of 69. He is a world-leading scientist in renewable energy field, with pioneering work done in the areas of functional photocatalytic, electrocatalytic, thermocatalytic, and piezocatalytic materials for renewable solar, mechanical, and thermal energy harvesting storage and utilization, carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS), as well as next-generation high-performance battery and supercapacitor energy storage devices. He is an ARC Future Fellow, Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry, and Clarivate's Global Highly Cited Researcher.

Hongge Pan
	Hongge Pan received his PhD in materials science and engineering from Zhejiang University in 1996 under a joint program between Zhejiang University and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Science. Later that year he joined Zhejiang University and became a professor in 1999. He is a recipient of the Changjiang Distinguished Professorship by the Ministry of Education (2014) and National Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Award (2000). His research is focused on energy materials for solid-state hydrogen storage, lithium-ion batteries, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis. He has authored/co-authored over 380 peer-reviewed papers, which have attracted a total citation of more than 11000 times with an h-index of 55. Now he serves as a co-editor-in-chief of Journal of Alloys and Compounds.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the green hydrogen (H2) cycle as a clean energy solution mediated by anion-exchange water electrolyzer and fuel cell technologies. GDL gas diffusion layer; CT: computed tomography.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Global production amounts of grey-, blue-, and green-H2 in 2020. (b) Levelized cost of H2 production via five different technologies in 2020 and in the Net Zero Emission Scenario for 2030 and 2050. (c) Globally planned installed capacity of water electrolyzers from 2021 to 2030. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2021 IEA. (d) Approximate capital cost analysis for the 1 MW-scale AEM water electrolyzer system (electricity > balance of plant (BOP) > stack cost > operation > others). (e and f) H2 production cost as functions of investment, electricity price, and operation hours. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2021 IRENA.	 


Anode	OER catalyst material	Ni-based (e.g., Ni2CoO4) or Co3O4	75% IrO2 (typical)	NiMo alloy
Catalyst loading (g m−2)	50	20	20
Catalyst price (US$ m−2)	21	1238	100
Ionomer loading (US$ m−2)	—	2.73	2.73
PTL materials	Ni mesh (not always present)	Ti 30% porosity/Pt	Ni foam/Ni wool
Cathode	HER catalyst material	Ni-based (e.g., nickel foam/Ni-stainless steel)	50% Pt/C (typical)	NiCrMo alloy
Catalyst loading (g m−2)	50	5	20
Catalyst price (US$ m−2)	21	195	100
Ionomer loading (US$ m−2)	—	10	10
Separators	Diaphragm (e.g., asbestos, Zirfon (a composite material of zirconia and Polysulfone))	PFSA (e.g., Nafion TM)	Aemion+TM
GDL material	—	Carbon cloth	Carbon cloth
Sealing and frame	PPS-40GF, PTFE	PPS-40GF, PTFE, ETFE	PPS-40GF, PTFE, silicon
BP material	Stainless steel	Stainless steel	Stainless steel
Bipolar coating	Ni	Pt	Ni
Stack cost estimation (minimum 1 MW)	∼200–270 US$ Kw−1	∼300–400 US$ Kw−1	Unknown

 	Fig. 3  (a) Shift in the value of trade in energy commodities from 2020 to 2050. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1 Copyright 2022 IRENA. (b) The estimated utilization of global H2 and H2-based fuel in the Net-Zero Emission scenario from 2020 to 2050. (c) Maturity of H2 as a clean energy solution to decarbonize household/transportation/industry applications. (d) The global number of fuel cell electric vehicles and refueling stations by 2020. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2021 IEA. (e) The announced annual automotive fuel cell manufacturing capacity from 2020 to 2030. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2021 IEA.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the major components and working principles of anion-exchange membrane (AEM) (a) water electrolyzers and (b) fuel cells.	 
Anode: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−, E0 = 0.40 V	(3.1)
Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−, E0 = −0.83 V	(3.2)
Overall reaction: 2H2O → O2 + 2H2, E0 = −1.23 V	(3.3)
Anode: H2 + 2OH− → 2H+ + 2e−, E0 = −0.83 V	(3.4)
Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−, E0 = 0.40 V	(3.5)
Overall reaction: O2 + 2H2 → 2H2O, E0 = 1.23 V	(3.6)
	(3.7)
	(3.8)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Overview of the basic components of AEM water electrolyzers at the system level. (b and c) Images of a normal water electrolyzer stack and the components inside. Working polarization curves of AEM water electrolyzers impacted by (d) temperature. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.) (e) Different electrolytes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 68 Copyright 2017 Elsevier.) (f) Different membranes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.)	 
	(3.9)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Overview of the basic components of AEM fuel cells at the system level. (b) Illustration of the key components for an electric vehicle powered by an H2–O2 fuel cell and the cell stack architecture. (c) Polarization curves of AEM fuel cells impacted by CO2 concentrations in the feeding gas. (d) The effects of (bi)carbonate ions on the AEM during operation. (e) Performance of the Fe–Nx–C type cathode catalyst-based AEMFCs with a loading amount of 3 mg non-PGM cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

Anode catalyst	IrO2, Ni–Fe oxides, Co3O4, etc.	Non-noble metals, metal oxides, and metal-free compounds.
Cathode catalyst	Pt black, Ni–Mo oxides, CeO2–La2O3, etc.	Non-noble metals, metal oxides, and metal-free compounds.
Anion exchange membrane	Quaternary ammonia polysulfone (QAPS), A-201 (Tokuyama), etc.	Unknown
Ionomer	QAPS	Unknown
Nominal current density (A cm−2)	0.2–2	>2
Voltage range (V)	1.4–2.0	<2.0
Operating temperature (°C)	40–60	80
Cell pressure (bar)	<35	>70
Load range	5%–100%	5%–200%
H2 purity	99.9–99.999%	>99.9999%
Voltage efficiency (LHV)	52–67%	>75%
Electrical efficiency (stack)	51.5–66 kW h kg−1 H2	<42 kW h kg−1 H2
Electrical efficiency (system)	57–69 kW h kg−1 H2	<45 kW h kg−1 H2
Lifetime (stack) (hours)	>5000	100000–120000
Stack unit size	2.5 kW	2 MW
Electrode area (cm2)	<300	1000
Cold start (to nominal load) (min)	<20	<5
Capital costs (stack-only) minimum 1 MW (USD per kW)	Unknown	<US$ 100
Capital costs (estimate for the entire system) minimum 10 MW (USD per kW)	Unknown	<US$ 200

Anode catalyst	PtRu/C, Pt/C, NiMo/C, Cr–NiOx, etc.	Fully PGM-free MEAs are recommended.
Ni-based alloys and/or Ni-based compound.
Cathode catalyst	Pd/C, Ag/C, Co3O4/C, Fe–N–C, etc.	Fully PGM-free MEAs are recommended.
Fe–N–C and/or Fe–N–C/metal oxide-based metal compounds.
Anion exchange membrane	Quaternary ammonia polysulfone (QAPS), AS4 (Tokuyama), etc.	Unknown
Ionomer	QAPS	Unknown
Peak power density (mW cm−2)	<100 for non-PGM cell, 100–500 for PGM-free anode cell, 100–1500 for PGM-free cathode cell, and >1500 for PGM based cell.	≥600 under H2/air (maximum pressure of 1.5 atm) in PGM-free MEA
Ultimate goal is to achieve 1 W cm−2 at rated power (∼0.65 V at 95 °C), PGM-free MEA, T ≥ 80 °C, P ≤ 250 kPa
Operating temperature (°C)	40–60	80
Lifetime (stack) (hours)	>5000	100000
Durability milestone	<10% voltage degradation over a 2000 h hold at 0.6 A cm−2 with an initial voltage greater than 0.6 V	—
Voltage efficiency (LHV)	52–67%	>75%
H2 crossover	Unknown	<5 mA cm−2
Cost for the membrane that can be practically integrated into a device	Unknown	≤20 US$ 20 m−2
	(3.10)
	(3.11)
	(3.12)
	(3.13)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Overview of the architecture of the membrane electrode assembly with three key components, namely, the membrane, the catalyst layer, and the gas-diffusion layer. (b) The degree of difficulty and profit analysis for the development of fundamental components in AEMWEs and AEMFCs. (c) Key problems and technological obstacles for the development of AEMWEs and AEMFCs at three different levels, the 3-layer MEA level, the single cell level, and the cell stack system level.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Composition-structure analysis of an anion-exchange membrane (AEM), including the polymer backbones and cationic groups. (b) Fundamental properties of the AEM and (c) performance targets of the AEM through trade-off of the fundamental features. (d) A comparison of key features of commercially available membranes and academically reported membranes. BTMA: benzyl trimethylammonium.	 
	(4.1)
	(4.2)
	(4.3)
	(4.4)
	(4.5)
	(4.6)
	(4.7)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of hydroxide ion transfer dynamics in an AEM. (a) A combination of the Grotthuss mechanism, diffusion and migration, and convection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing. (b) Understanding hydroxide solvation and transport in the AEM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Grotthuss transition of hydroxide ions in an AEM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d–g) Elastic and inelastic scattering intensity (EFWS) and mean square atomic displacement (m.s.d.) values of the FAD-55 membrane. (h and i) Water dynamic mechanism and diffusion coefficients of anionic species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  Degradation pathways and mechanisms for specific compositions of an AEM. (a) Cationic groups, (b) polymer backbones, and (c) membrane linkages.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthetic approaches and (b) specific methods for anion-exchange membranes. (c) The commonly employed AEM design and tuning strategies.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Molecular weights of four studied polymers before and after treatment with 10 equiv. of NaOCH3 solution, and the molecular structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Overview of the proposed protocol for the reliable assessment of the alkaline stability of a membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) The chemical structure, and optical and SEM images of PFTP membrane. (d) Comparison of the peak power density with regard to OH− conductivity for AEMFCs with the use of PFTP membrane and ionomer. (e) Durability analysis by testing the remaining cations for PFTP membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) AEM functionalized with side chains bearing different types of extenders and water contact wettability. (b) OH− conductivity of PPO-based AEMs as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164 Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Illustration of microscopic intermolecular interactions. (d) Locations of cationic groups in the hydrophilic phase of the membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The concept of membrane regulation strategy via introducing electron-donating groups. (b) Electrostatic potential (ESP) and Mulliken charge model of QA-PEAM and QA-PAEK. The calculated free energy profiles of (c) the SNAr reaction and (d) SN2 reaction in model compounds of QA-PEAM and QA-PAEK. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168 and 169 Copyright 2021 and 2020 American Chemical Society. Degradation pathways of (e) DMP and DP-DMP and (f) ASU and DP-ASU calculated by DFT calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170 Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the role of the ionomer in building a triple-phase boundary (TPB). (b) Detailed description of the role of the ionomer in the TPB. (c) The linear correlation between AEMFC performance (peak power density) and the calculated phenyl adsorption energy on the ionomer backbone structure employed on the anode side. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) The simulated cell overpotential profile across the membrane electrode assembly as a function of the position. (e) The modeled overpotential distribution versus cell operation time and a schematic illustration of the overpotential loss across the cell components. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178 Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (f) Proposed ionomer design concept for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structure and ion exchange capacity of the TMA ionomer. (b) Polarization curves of MEAs employing various TMAs as ionomers. (c) Polarization curves of an AEM electrolyzer employed with different catalysts under corresponding operating conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of an integrated electrode (IE). (e) Polarization curves of pure-water-fed AEMWEs containing IEs with different ionomer contents. (f) IEC tests of 20 wt% IE before and after durability test, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192 Copyright 2022 John Wiley and Sons. (g) Polarization curves and peak power density profiles of AEMFCs employing GT32 and GT78 as ionomers. (h) Polarization curves and peak power density profiles of AEMFCs employing GT32 and GT78 as ionomers without and with 200 kPa backpressure (BP). (i) Cell durability test with GT32 and GT78 as ionomers under corresponding conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Polarization curves and potential range for hydrogen (HER/HOR) and oxygen (OER/ORR) electrocatalyses. (b) The development scheme for low-cost and high-performance electrocatalysts. (c) Scaling relationship translation for hydrogen and oxygen electrocatalytic reactions, from a linear relation to a volcano relation. (d) Electrocatalyst engineering strategies.	 
Volmer step: H2O + e−  H* + OH−	(4.8)
Heyrovsky step: H2O + e− + H*  H2 + OH−	(4.9)
Tafel step: H* + H*  H2,	(4.10)
HBE or Emetal-H = –Epeak × F,	(4.11)

 	Fig. 18  Overview of the development of hydrogen electrocatalysis descriptors. (a) Hydrogen binding energy theory proposed by Nørskov et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215 Copyright 2005 IOP Publishing. (b) Hydrogen binding energy theory derived from experimental results and proposed by Yan et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220 Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) The refined hydrogen binding energy proposed by Yan et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219 Copyright 2018 IOP Publishing. (d) The bifunctional theory proposed by Markovic et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (e) The newly developed pzfc and 2B proposals by Jia et al. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 
OER/ORR: 4OH− ↔ 4e− + 2H2O + O2,	(4.12)
OH− ↔ OH* + e−	(4.13)
OH* + OH− ↔ H2O + O* + e−	(4.14)
O* + OH− ↔ OOH* + e−	(4.15)
OOH* + OH− ↔ H2O + O2 + e−.	(4.16)

 	Fig. 19  (a) Transition state theory for illustrating the distinctive role of a catalyst in decreasing reaction barriers for a catalytic reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright 2015 RSC Publishing. (b) Gibbs free energy diagram for the oxygen evolution and reduction reactions. (c) ORR volcano plot for metals. (d) ORR theoretical limiting potential plot for face-centred cubic (fcc) (111) and (100) facets of metals and alloys. Reproduced with permission from ref. 242 Copyright 2017 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Scatter plot of the adsorption free energy of OH versus the descriptor φ for all single transition metal (TM) atoms supported on macrocyclic molecules. (f) Scatter plot of adsorption free energy of H versus the descriptor φ for all single TM atoms supported on macrocyclic molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of three key compositions (ligand, host, and metal) and catalysis descriptors (activity, selectivity, and stability) for single-atom catalysts (SACs), and their applications in water electrolyzers and fuel cells. (b) A range of metal single-atom configurations for hydrogen electrocatalysis (C3–Ni, Ni–N3–O2, Ni5P4–Ru, and Ni–MoSe2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 262, 264, 268 and 278 Copyright 2015, 2019, and 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (c) HOR polarization curves of RuNi1 and other catalysts, and (d) the calculated hydrogen adsorption energies and atomic configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 274 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (e) Three-dimensional volcano plot for HER reaction assuming the formation of MH and HMH intermediates. (f) DFT calculated volcano plot for the case of HER on 55 SACs assuming the formation of MH and HMH intermediates. Red: high activity; blue: low activity. When log(i0) < −10 (extremely low activity), the color is black. (g) Predicted efficiency for the HER reaction for 22 models of SACs based on the configuration of M@NGr (M atoms incorporated on N–Gr). (I) Classical model based on a single MH intermediate; (II) model based on both MH and HMH intermediates (two-hydrogen complex). Reproduced with permission from ref. 282 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Typical atomic configurations of SACs (Fe–N3P, Janus Ni–N4/Fe–N4, and Ru–Co pair site of Ru–Co/LiCoO2) for oxygen electrocatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 294–296 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society, and Copyright 2020 and 2022 John Wiley and Sons. (b) Dynamics of N–Fe–N4C10 moieties in the ORR pathway. Reproduced with permission from ref. 302 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) EXAFS spectra for four typical Fe–N4 catalysts with different dsite distances. (d) SI-SECM titration of the reaction rate constant (k′O2) on Fe(III)–N4 sites as a function of dsite. (e) The calculated dsite-dependent ΔG*OH plot. Reproduced with permission from ref. 303 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the WCx-FeNi catalyst. (b) HAADF-STEM image of WCx-FeNi, and (c) the corresponding intensity profiles along the (−12−1) plane over the dimmer atomic columns. (d) The OER reaction pathways with calculated energy barriers for different samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 317 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (e) The calculated free energy diagram for CoTa and CoHS sites in the OER process. (f) Magnetic moments of an individual Co atom in Co1/TaS2-2, Co1/TaS2-3, and Co1/TaS2-4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 306 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (g) Illustration of electron occupation of metal 3d orbitals for M-N4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) based on crystal field theory. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249 Copyright 2022 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) High-resolution transmission electron microscope image of the LixNiO/Ni heterostructure and its reverse FFT. (b) The O 1s and Ni 2p XPS spectra of LixNiO/Ni before and after molten Li treatment. (c) HER and HOR polarization curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 367 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of the HOR mechanism on a CeO2/Ni interface and the calculated adsorption energy of H* and OH*. Reproduced with permission from ref. 368 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (e) AEMFC performance comparison with the use of Pt–Ru/C, Pt–RuO2/C, and TKK-Pt/C as catalysts. (f) AEMFC peak power density comparison as a function of anode catalyst cost. Reproduced with permission from ref. 369 Copyright 2020 RSC Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) XPS spectra of Pd 3d peaks for AL-Pd/Mo2C heterostructures and Pd NPs, and PDOS plots for Pd sites in AL-Pd/Mo2C and bulk Pd. (b) Mass and specific activities of AL-Pd/Mo2C towards the ORR at 0.9 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)). (c) Rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) polarization curves of AL-Pd/Mo2C and comparison between the disk current density (solid line) and the ring current density (dashed line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.(d and e) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer along the La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2 interface and the accelerated water splitting kinetics. (f) Chronopotentiometric stability profiles of La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/MoSe2 measured at 100 mA cm−2 for 1000 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 389. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (g) The fabrication process for the one-dimensional van der Waals heterostructures 2D-COFs/CNTs. (h) The calculated oxygen intermediate adsorption geometries. (i) Polarization curves towards the ORR and OER. Reproduced with permission from ref. 392. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) In situ SERS spectra of Au@Pt and Au@PtNi surfaces in 0.1 M KOH, and Au@PtNi surface in 0.1 M DOH during the HOR process. (b) Illustration of the Volmer steps on pure Pt and Pt3Ni(110) surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 406. Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. (c) HER/HOR polarization curves and (d) PDOS profile for alloyed samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 408. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (e) The HOR polarization curves of Ru/C, Ni/C, Pt/C, PtRu/C, and Ru7Ni3/C, and (f) their fuel cell performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 409. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (g) UPS spectra of MoNi4, WNi4, and Ni. (h) Schematic illustration of Had and OHad adsorption on Mo(W)Ni4 alloys and a comparison of kinetics currents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 410. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) The tested heights (top) and the EC-AFM current and isothermal (T = 25 °C) mass change (measured by EQCM) for a β-Co(OH)2 particle. (b) Illustration of the expansion and contraction of individual CoO2 layers with increasing voltage. (c) Voltage-dependent particle-averaged Co LIII-edge STXM-XAS spectra. (d) The Co oxidation state as a function of voltage. (e) Cyclic voltammogram (in 0.1 M KOH) of β-Co(OH)2 in an STXM electrochemical flow cell at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a flow rate of 30 μl min−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 420. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (f) OER activity enhancement trend for 3d transition-metal hydr(oxy)oxides incorporated with Fe. (g) OER activity of Ni (left) and NiCu (right) hydr(oxy)oxides in pure KOH and KOH containing 0.1 ppm Fe. (h) Linear correlation between the absolute OER activity of NiM (Cu, Co, Mn) and Ni hydr(oxy)oxides and average Fe coverage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 421. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Architectural view and images of the bipolar plate (BP) and gas-diffusion layer (GDL). (b) Key properties of the BP and GDL, and the normal tuning strategies from a variety of aspects. (c) Illustration of different types of flow channels in the BPs in PEMFCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 449. (d) Cross-sectional view of the flow channel and the critical geometrical parameters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 439. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) Optical images of stainless-steel grade 304L BPs of AEMFCs exposed to three electrolyte conditions and the GD-OES profiles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 448. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) 3D structure of NiMPL-PTL and its pore size distribution profile. (b) Polarization curves of AEMWEs with the use of different cell configurations and impedance spectroscopy curves, with the equivalent circuit in the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 450. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) Pore size distributions of different gas-diffusion substrates (GDSs). (d) Polarization curves and power density of AEMFCs containing different GDSs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 451. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the design concept of a novel TTLGDL with reduced thickness. (f) Performance comparison of water-fed AEMWEs employing SC-TTLGDL and commercial SC-Ti foam GDL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 452. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Manufacturing flow process for membrane electrode assembly and cell stacks for AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells. (a) Catalyst coated membrane, (b) gas-diffusion layer, (c) a single cell, and (d) cell stacks for AEMWEs and AEMFCs.	 

 	Fig. 30  Translation of electrochemical evaluation methodology. (a) Three-electrode configuration (TEC), (b) Components and structure of a single cell with working electrode 1 cm2 in size. (c) Advantages and necessity of a single cell configuration evaluation in comparison with TEC. (d) Proposed single cell test protocol.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Typical voltage degradation curves as a function of operation time for AEMWEs. (b) The proposed long-term durability test protocols for AEMWEs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 472. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) AEMWE performance comparison as a function of the MEA fabrication method (CCM vs. CCS) and the resistance analysis. (d) AEMWE performance comparison as a function of the working electrolyte and the feeding flow rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 473. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (e) Record-high long-term durability of AEMWEs with a range of AEMs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 474. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (f) Polarization curves of AEMWEs with specific cell configurations to achieve record-high current density, and the comparison of current density and durability between PFAP membrane and those reported membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 475. Copyright 2021 RSC Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a and b) Variation of the specific AEM fuel cell parameters (cell voltage, cell potential, and electrode Dew point) over time. (c) Polarization curves and PPD of the cell with three working conditions. Green circles represent the optimized working conditions at a temperature of 80 °C, reacting gas flow rates of 1.0 L min−1 with anode/cathode dew points that optimize power density (71/73 °C) with no back pressurization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 483. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Cell performances with the use of benchmark anode catalysts and typical cathode catalysts from Fe–N–C to MnCo spinel catalyst (MCS), and then to Co@C/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, 107 and 484. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society, 2019 and 2021 Springer Nature. (g–i) Cell performances with the use of different cathode catalysts and typical anode catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 485 and 489. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing and 2022 National Academy of Sciences.	 


Wang et al.192	QAPPT	QAPPT	FeNi-LDH on Ni foam. Integrated electrode.	Pt/C	—	60	Pure water	1.9@1.9 V	500 mA cm−2 for 175 h. 242.4 μV h−1.
Choi et al.478	X37-50 grade T	—	CuCoO (30)	NiCoO–NiCo/C (1.5)	—	50	1 M KOH	0.504@1.85 V	440 mA cm−2 for 150 h. 2.0 mV h−1. (5 cell stack)
Choi et al.477	X37-50 Grade T	PTFE	NiFeV layered double hydroxide supported on Ni foam.	Pt/C loaded on carbon cloth.	Ni foam as GDL	50	1 M KOH	2.10@1.8 V	500 mA cm−2 for 100 h and the voltage lower than 1.80 V.
Lee et al.475	PFTP-13	No	Ni–Fe electrodeposited electrode (20)	Ni–Fe electrodeposited electrode (20)	No	60	Pure water	1.2@∼2.0 V	500 mA cm−2 for 240 h and the voltage lower than ∼2.2 V.
Yan et al.486	PAP-TP-85, 150 mS cm−1 at RT, 20 μm	PAP-TP-85,	FexNiyOOH-20F, (4.8)	47% Pt/C, 0.94 mgPt cm−2	—	80	Pure water	0.81@1.8 V	200 mA cm−2 for 160 h. 0.56 mV h−1.
Boettcher et al.480	PeperION, >135 mS cm−1 at 70 °C, 50 μm	Aemion ionomer	IrO2 nanoparticles, (2.3 and 2.8)	Pt black, (2.3 and 2.8)	Toray 090 carbon paper	55	Pure water	1.0@∼1.9 V	500 mA cm−2 for 180 h. 0.67 mV h−1.
Meroueh et al.474	PTFE-Sustainion®, >50 μm	—	NiFe2O4, (1.8)	RANEY® Ni, (14.5)	—	60	1 M KOH	0.84@1.8 V	1 A cm−2 for 12000 h. 0.7 μV h−1.
Li et al.487	PTP-90, 129 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, ∼40–50 μm	A-Radel ionomer	IrO2 powder	Pt black	—	55	1 M NaOH	0.91@2.2 V	400 mA cm−2 for 120 h. 1.61 mV h−1.


Mustain et al.488	LDPE-BTMA 2.87 mmol−1	ETFE-BTMA powder	PtRu/C (0.70)	N–C–CoOx (2.4)	—	65	H2/CO2-free air	0.66	2.5	600 mA cm−2 for 100 h. 15% voltage loss.
Zhuang et al.489	QAPPT	QAPPT	Ni@CNx (15 mgNi cm−2)	60% Pt/C (0.4)	—	80	H2/O2, 100% and 100% RH	0.48	∼0.8	600 mA cm−2 for 20 h. No obvious voltage loss within 20 h.
Serov et al.490	Tokuyama A201	Tokuyama AS4	NiMo/KB (4)	Pd/C (0.2 mgPd cm−2)	—	70	H2/O2, 70% and 100% RH	0.12	∼0.25	The current density decays from 55 to ∼40 mA cm−2 after 100 h at 0.7 V.
Hu et al.163	b-PTP-2.5, >145 mS cm−1 at 80 °C, 20 μm	PFBP	PtRu/C (0.6)	Pt/C (0.4)	Graphite BP	80	H2/CO2-free air, 75%/100% RH	1.3	∼3.2	H2/O2, 200 mA cm−2@60 °C. V decreased from 0.68 V to 0.51 V at 110 h and stabilized at 0.51 V for 50 h.
Yan et al.162	PAP-TP-85, 60–80 mS cm−1 at 20 °C, 25 μm	PAP-BP-100 ionomer	low-Pt anode (<0.15)	Ag-based cathode (1)	—	95	H2/CO2-free air,	0.92	∼1.8	500 mA cm−2 for 300 h. ∼11.5% voltage loss at 250 h.
Ozoemena et al.363	HDPE-based RG-AEM	
	Pd–CeO2/OLC (onion-like carbon)	40 wt% Pt/C (0.4 mgPt cm−2)	Teflon-treated Toray paper GDL	80	H2/O2	1.0	—	Stable operation at 900 mW cm−2 for 1 h.
Xu et al.491	VBBQPPO-based, 2.87 mmol g−1, 20 μm	VBBQPPO-based	PtRu/C (0.5 mgmetal cm−2)	Pt/C (0.5 mgmetal cm−2)	Graphite BP	70	H2/O2, 100%/100% RH	1.5	∼3.0	600 mA cm−2 for 120 h. No obvious voltage loss within 70 h.

 	Fig. 33  (a) Voltage degradation profiles for AEMWEs operating under three different electrolyte feeding conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 495 Copyright 2022 IOP Publishing. (b) Voltage breakdown analysis for AEMWE cells feeding with three respective electrolytes: DI water, 0.01 M KOH, and 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2021 IOP Publishing. Polarization curves of AEMWEs influenced by the types of (c) cations, (d) anions, and (e) cation/OH ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 497. Copyright 2021 IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Comparison of the water distribution in PEMFCs and in AEMFCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 499. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) The common problems of water management in AEMFCs from the viewpoint of membranes and catalysts, and the tuning strategies for water management from the standpoint of cell components and operating conditions. (c) Operando in-plane neutron radiographic images of water in an ETFE-BTMA AEM-based AEMFC (anode/cathode: 50 °C/50 °C) vs. perfluorinated AEM (PFAEM)-based AEMFC (anode/cathode: 54 °C/51 °C). (d) Water distribution plots from the data in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 501. Copyright 2018 RSC Publishing. (e) Operando in-plane high-resolution neutron radiographic images of water distribution in ETFE-BTMA-based AEMFCs operated under four conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 502. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) The fabrication process for a dual-sided patterned membrane by the solvent-assisted molding (SAM) technique. (b) Illustration of the promotion effects in water management of the membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 507. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Change in the water content of the cell electrode, based on the improvement in water management using Pt/C, Pt/CTRP, Pt/C + C, and Pt/CTRP + C electrodes. (d) Water contact angle results for Pt/C and Pt/CTRP electrodes at 60 °C. (e) Cell polarization curves of MEAs with Pt/C, Pt/CTRP, Pt/C + C, and Pt/CTRP + C as anodes for AEMFCs. (f) The values of the current density and maximum power density at 0.6 V for MEAs with the different anodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 505. Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Three respective factors that illustrate the hydrogen crossover in the AEM. (b) The consequences of H2 crossover from the aspects of the membrane, catalyst, and whole cell. (c) LSV curves of QPIM-1 AEMs measured at 100% RH and 50 °C. (d) Schematic illustration of hydrogen crossover dependence on the humidity of hydrogen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 516 Copyright 2022 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Illustration of a laboratory X-ray CT instrument that is composed an of X-ray source, sample stage, and detector. Reproduced with permission from ref. 526. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. X-ray CT images of (b) ZIL-MEA, (c) M-MEA-B, and (d) M-MEA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 491. Copyright 2021 John Wiley and Sons. (e) Cross-sectional micro-X-ray CT image of a catalyst layer (CL) and (f) the zoomed images at 50% RH and 100% RH. (g–h) Three-dimensional representations of the CL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 530. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (i and j) 3D maps of contact angles (CAs) and local roughness of four different types of GDLs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 531 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  Pathways toward practical deployment of AEM water electrolyzers and fuel cells from fundamentals to technologies.	 
GHG	Greenhouse gas
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HOR	Hydrogen oxidation reaction
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
LSV	Linear sweep voltammetry
ECSA	Electrochemically active surface area
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
HAADF-STEM	High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy
RDE	Rotating disk electrode
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
DFT	Density functional theory
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cs00038e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
