Electrocoagulation for industrial wastewater treatment: an updated review  - Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EW00158B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EW00158B
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2021, 7, 1177-1196Electrocoagulation for industrial wastewater treatment: an updated review

        
          
            Gaogui 
            Jing
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shuai 
            Ren
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Stephen 
            Pooley
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Sun
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Przemyslaw B. 
            Kowalczuk
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            Zhiyong 
            Gao
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Minerals Processing and Bioengineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: zhiyong.gao@csu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Hunan Province for Clean and Efficient Utilization of Strategic Calcium-Containing Mineral Resources, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China
cDepartment of Geoscience and Petroleum, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway. E-mail: przemyslaw.kowalczuk@ntnu.no
dFaculty of Chemistry, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Wroclaw, Poland
Received 
      2nd March 2021
    , Accepted 7th June 2021First published on 7th June 2021AbstractElectrocoagulation (EC) is a promising method that has been effectively employed in the treatment of various types of industrial effluent. Its distinct advantages such as good effluent quality, compact installation, simple operation and reduced sludge generation make it effective to treat numerous recalcitrant pollutants. To provide an overview of the current state and future potential of EC technology in industrial wastewater treatment, this paper presents a review of the most relevant recent publications. Aspects such as the characteristics, mechanism, and applicability of EC and factors affecting the EC efficiency are thoroughly reviewed. Additionally, the management of EC sludge as well as the development of emerging hybrid technologies are discussed systematically. This review highlights the applicability of EC in the treatment of real industrial wastewaters. In the long term, the EC treatment process will likely be recognized as one of the core methods for the treatment of various industrial effluents.

Water impact
The application of electrocoagulation for wastewater remediation is of increasing interest. This review article summarizes recent improvements of electrocoagulation for real industrial wastewater treatment from the perspectives of applicability, mechanism, controlling factors, sludge management and hybrid technologies in order to broaden its range of industrial applications.

1. Introduction
Over recent decades, large-scale industrialization has resulted in an increase in the complexity and volume of industrial wastewater. Wastewater from various industries like dyeing, pharmaceuticals, mining, chemicals, etc. has become a major source of pollutants.1 The indiscriminate release of industrial wastewater has adversely affected water bodies, soil quality and the entire ecosystem.2 In addition to common pollutants such as total suspended solids (TSS), fluoride, heavy metals and non-biodegradable organic carbon, industrial wastewater may also contain a variety of toxic compounds (chlorinated compounds, phenols, aromatics, surfactants, etc.). To combat the increasing burden on the environment, many countries have implemented stricter regulations on wastewater discharge. Thus, the treatment of industrial effluents is one of the biggest concerns nowadays.
In the past, various commonly used technologies – including physical, chemical, and biological processes – have been proposed for the remediation of industrial wastewater. Nevertheless, traditional physical processes such as sedimentation, flotation and filtration do not cause a significant improvement in the biological and chemical characteristics of the wastewater.3 Chemical processes such as coagulation/flocculation, chlorination and ion exchange usually require the addition of large quantities of chemical reagents which limits their application.4 Biological processes such as aerated lagoons, activated sludge and trickling filters require large process reactors, long treatment time, and are very sensitive to the presence of microorganisms, and are not always suitable.5 Therefore, there is an imperative to provide effective treatments for different types of industrial effluent.
The electrocoagulation (EC) process, as an emerging electrochemical technology, has gained much more attention in recent years. Some attractive advantages make EC unique from other commonly used technologies,6,7 including: (1) EC equipment is compact and has simple operation without moving parts, so complete automation is possible, (2) EC has high processing efficiency and less sludge generation, (3) EC process doesn't require the addition of extra chemicals, avoiding secondary pollution, (4) EC process exhibits some pH buffering capacity, which is vital for practical application, (5) EC is an efficient alternative to remove a wide range of contaminants (organic pollutants, heavy metals, etc.) from industrial effluents. As a result, the EC process has become a well-known wastewater treatment technology in many countries and regions.8 It seems that the industrial application of EC will increase significantly. However, there are only few reviews of the EC application in real industrial effluents.
The purpose of this review is to summarize, analyze and discuss the state-of-the-art of EC technology for real industrial wastewater treatment. It is demonstrated that the EC treatment process can be recognized as one of the core methods in the sustainable wastewater treatment.
2. Electrocoagulation process
As an electrochemical technology, the EC process is based on the in situ generation of coagulant species from a sacrificial anode usually made of Al and/or Fe.9 The physical and chemical processes involved in the EC system are shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The schematic representation of the EC process. 
When a Fe anode is used, the main reaction occurring in the system is: Fe(s) → Fe2+ + 2e−(1)In an acidic solution, Fe2+ is slowly oxidized into Fe3+ in the presence of dissolved oxygen: Fe2+ + O2 + 2H2O → Fe3+ + 4OH−(2)In either a neutral or an alkaline solution, Fe2+ is immediately oxidized to Fe(OH)3(s) in the presence of dissolved oxygen:10 4Fe2+ + 8OH− + O2 + 2H2O → 4Fe(OH)3(s)(3)The Fe2+ and Fe3+ generated in eqn (1) and (2) can be hydrolyzed to various monomeric and polymeric species such as: Fe(OH)4−, Fe(OH)2+, Fe(OH)2+, Fe(OH)24+, Fe(H2O)4(OH)2+, Fe2(H2O)6(OH)44+, Fe(H2O)8(OH)24+, Fe(OH)2 and Fe(OH)3. These species play a role of coagulant/flocculant for pollutants in wastewater.
When an Al anode is used, the reaction is: Al(s) → Al3+ + 3e−(4)The Al3+ generated may be hydrolyzed to Al(OH)4−, Al(OH)2+, Al(H2O)63+, Al(H2O)5 (OH)2+, Al6(OH)153+, Al7(OH)173+, Al8(OH)204+, Al13(OH)344+ and Al(OH)3, which have large surface areas and the ability to trap pollutants by either electrostatic attraction or surface complexation.11
At the cathode, hydrogen gas and hydroxide ions are generated: 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2(g)(5)When the required potential is applied to the EC cell, the generation of metal cations follows the Faraday's law: (6)where m is the mass of the released coagulant (g), I is the current (A), t is the electrolysis time (s), M is the molecular mass (g mol−1), F is the Faraday's constant (96485 C mol−1), and Z is the number of electrons involved in the anode reaction.
The electrical energy consumption during the EC process can be calculated using the following equation: (7)where, WEC is the energy consumption (kW h m−3), U is the applied voltage (V), I is the applied current (A), t is the reaction time (h), and V is the volume of wastewater (m3).
In fact, the metal cations dissolved from the sacrificial anode undergo a number of equilibrium reactions in solution, including acid/base, precipitation, complexation, and redox reactions. The EC technology combines the advantages of chemical coagulation, electrochemical and flotation treatments.12 The prevailing mechanism in an EC system depends on the nature of the contaminants and the possible mechanisms involved including:
(1) Reduction–oxidation reaction: the EC process follows the basic principles of an electrochemical system, with electro-oxidation and electro-reduction occurring on the surface of anode and cathode, respectively.13
(2) The mechanism of double layer compression, charge neutralization, sweep coagulation and interparticle bridging: the metal cations produced at the anode compress the electric double layer and reduce the repulsive forces. This can lead to the agglomeration of pollutant particles, which is called the double layer compression mechanism. The charged particles can be attracted to the metal hydroxide with the opposite charge by sorption, and this is called the mechanism of adsorption and charge neutralization. The sweep coagulation mechanism occurs when insoluble metal hydroxide flocs are generated in the solution. Pollutants are entrapped by the flocs during precipitation, and hence the agglomeration is achieved. The interparticle bridging mechanism occurs when coagulants/flocculants are polymerized because the polymers form bridges between particles.
(3) Direct adsorption on the electrodes: the pollutants may be attracted to the electrodes by electric forces. This is especially common for fluoride anions.14
These different mechanisms synergistically function during the EC process, although the dominant removal mechanism will vary with the pollutant type.
3. Factors affecting EC efficiency
3.1. Electrode

(1) Electrode type. 
Anode material is the prime consideration in the design of an EC system.15 Several metal materials such as Fe, Al, Mg, Zn and Cu can be used for the anode production.16–18 Among them, Al and Fe electrodes are the most widely used for the EC process because of their reliability, availability and nontoxicity.19 The metal hydroxides generated using different anode materials are different in size, structure, and contaminant adsorption capability.20 It was observed that the Al electrode produced a higher decoloration efficiency, however the elimination of the chemical oxygen demand (COD) was more rapid using the Fe anode.21,22


(2) Electrode arrangement. 
Electrode arrangement can be classified as bipolar and monopolar as illustrated in Fig. 2. In the bipolar-serial (BP-S) system, there is no connection between the inner electrodes, and the power supply is directly connected to the two outer electrodes. In the monopolar parallel (MP-P) configuration, the anodes and cathodes are connected in parallel. The MP-P mode has exhibited low energy consumption and high efficiency in the removal of oil grease, COD and chloride from carwash wastewater.23 In the monopolar-serial (MP-S) configuration, the internal anode and cathode are connected in series. The inner electrodes effectively reduce the surface passivation and consumption of electrodes. Additionally, the EC system with the electrodes in the bipolar-serial mode facilitates the formation of Al13 species which is the most effective species for coagulation, while EC with the monopolar mode tends to generate either more Al(OH)(s) or larger polymers.24
 Fig. 2  Different modes of electrode configuration (1) bipolar-serial (2) monopolar parallel (3) monopolar-serial. 


(3) Electrode distance. 
IR drop is positively correlated with the electrode distance, as described by the following equation: ηIR = dIρ(8)where, ηIR denotes the IR drop, d denotes the electrode distance, I is the current density, and ρ is the electrolyte resistivity.
As the electrode distance is increased, the IR drop increases, resulting in an increase in energy consumption. However, using a very short distance between the electrodes is not recommended because the strong electrostatic attraction may cause a high degree of collision among the flocs, leading to the degradation of their quality.25 With regard both pollutant removal efficiency and energy consumption, the electrode distance is usually chosen to be in the range of 0.5–3.0 cm.

3.2. Current density
Current density determines the size and generation rate of both H2 bubbles and metal hydroxide flocs in the EC system.26 A certain level of current density must be reached to make sure that a sufficient amount of metal hydroxide precipitation is available for the efficient pollutant removal. Nevertheless, if the applied current density is too high, the resulting electrode passivation may lead to higher energy consumption, and even to the decrease in the current efficiency. Therefore, for different industrial effluents, it is critical to experimentally determine the optimal value of current density.
3.3. Electrolysis time
The effects of electrolysis time on the EC efficiency are similar to those of current density: as the electrolysis time increases, there is an increase in the amount of generated coagulants, and therefore the removal efficiency. When the electrolysis time increases above the optimum value, the removal efficiency of pollutant will remain unchanged because a sufficient amount of metal hydroxide is available for the pollutant removal.
3.4. Supporting electrolytes
Supporting electrolytes play a crucial role in the reduction of cell voltage in the EC system. When treating wastewater with low electrical conductivity, more energy is needed to overcome the resistance, resulting in high energy consumption.27 Thus, the addition of electrolytes such as Na2SO4, NaCl, NaNO3, NaH2PO4 has been recommended to increase the electrical conductivity of wastewater.
It has been found that the corrosion of the electrodes is catalyzed in the presence of either Na2SO4 or NaCl, while the corrosion is inhibited in the presence of NaH2PO4.28 Compared with Na2SO4, the presence of NaCl in wastewater is more favorable because chloride can act as a disinfectant, which can reduce the electrode passivation. The following equations occur in the presence of chloride: 2Cl− → Cl2 + 2e−(9) Cl2 + H2O → HOCl + H+Cl−(10) HOCl → H+ + OCl−(11)Cl− is oxidized at the anode, and then hypochlorous acid and hypochlorite are generated in the solution. The high concentration of chloride in wastewater may cause the formation of carcinogenic compounds like chloroform.29
3.5. pH
The EC process has a buffering effect on the solution and Al electrodes exhibit a particularly strong buffering effect due to the presence of aluminate ions in alkaline solutions. The effects of pH on the EC efficiency can be explained by the predominance zone diagrams of the corresponding species. Fig. 3 shows the existing species of Al and Fe in the aqueous solution at different pH values.
 Fig. 3  Predominant species of Al(III), Fe(II) and Fe(III) in aqueous solution (invisible colors indicate the negligible quantity).31 
In the Al-EC system, insoluble aluminum hydroxide gradually increases as the pH increases from around pH 3.5 and predominates from pH 4.5 to 11.0. Then, as the pH value rises above 11.0, the amount of Al hydroxide decreases. Soluble Al(OH)4− is the predominant species present in the strongly alkaline solution, and this may lead to the decrease in the pollutant removal efficiency.30 Different from the Al electrode, Fe electrodes can dissolve as either ferrous (eqn (1)) or ferric (eqn (2)) cations. The insoluble ferrous hydroxide and ferric hydroxide start being generated from around pH 7.0 and pH 2.0, respectively. High pH is favorable to the EC efficiency because both hydroxides of iron predominate in the strongly alkaline solution.
3.6. Type of power supply
Direct current (DC) is commonly used in EC system. However, using DC may lead to deterioration of the anode and the formation of an impermeable oxide layer on the cathode, preventing current transport.32 To minimize these limitations, alternating current (AC) or alternating pulsed current (APC) has been adopted.33 Additionally, compared with DC, AC can achieve lower operational costs and lower sludge generation.
In APC-EC system, the pulse current parameters have a significant effect on the efficiency. Yang34 investigated the passivation/dissolution behavior of the electrodes in EC using APC. They found that APC significantly influenced the extent of passivation. A longer pulse period of 590 s led to depassivation due to the generation of nonprotective film. However, a shorter pulse period time of 10 s produced a protective passive film.
4. Empirical models of EC thermodynamics and kinetics
Modeling of EC is important to quantitatively evaluate the EC process. To date, many types of models including phenomenological, adsorption, variable-order kinetic, flocculation models, and others have been proposed to model the EC process. Among them, the adsorption kinetics and adsorption isotherm models are widely used to further understand the mechanisms of EC. In this chapter, we focus mainly on the recent development of these two models.
4.1. Adsorption kinetics
Kinetic models are used to investigate the adsorption kinetics and possible rate-limiting steps in the EC treatment. The pseudo first-order Lagergren and second-order kinetic models, which have been applied by many authors to model the EC processes, are expressed as:35
Lagergren pseudo first-order model: (12)Second-order kinetic model: (13)where qe (mg g−1) and q (mg g−1) are the amounts of contaminants adsorbed at equilibrium and time t (min), respectively; k1 is the first-order adsorption rate constant (min−1), k2 is the second-order adsorption rate constant (mg L−1 min−1). The linearized form of eqn (12) and (13) are: (14) (15)A kinetic study on the removal of TOC (total organic carbon) from real textile wastewater showed a high linear correlation for both kinetic models.36 However, the second-order kinetics model gave a better fit than the pseudo first-order kinetics model due to its higher regression coefficient.
4.2. Adsorption isotherms
Adsorption isotherms are used to investigate the equilibrium relationships of the adsorbate and the adsorption capacity of the flocs produced during the EC process. For a given time, the amount of flocs produced can be calculated using eqn (6), and then the contaminant removal can be estimated from the adsorption phenomenon.37 Previous studies have demonstrated the applicability of Langmuir, Freundlich and Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherms in EC modeling. The linearized forms of the isotherm equations are shown below:38,39
Freundlich isotherm: (16)Langmuir isotherm: (17)Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherm: lnqe = lnqs − 2bRTln[1 + 1/Ce](18)where, kf is the Freundlich constant ((mg g−1) (L mg−1)1/n), 1/n is the adsorption intensity, Ce is the equilibrium concentration of the adsorbate (mg L−1), q0 is the Langmuir constant, which represents the adsorption capacity (mg g−1), b is the adsorption constant representing the adsorption energy (mol2 kJ−2), qs is the Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherm constant (mg g−1), T is the temperature (K), and R is the ideal gas constant (J mol−1 K−1).
The Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms are the most widely used models to investigate EC mechanisms.37 However, the Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherm is usually used to predict the equilibrium state and the mean free adsorption energy. Chou et al. used these three adsorption isotherm models to identify the adsorption mechanism of EC process.40 The results indicated that the Freundlich isotherm gave a better fit in terms of higher R2 (0.99) than the Langmuir (0.97) and Dubinin–Radushkevich (0.87) isotherms. The n value in the Freundlich isotherm was calculated as 0.664 at 298 K, which means that physical rather than chemical adsorption is dominant when adsorbing COD.
5. Hazardous contaminant removal by EC from real industrial wastewater
5.1. Suspended solids
A content of suspended solids (SS) is one of the primary indices to judge the degree of water pollution. A high SS content may block the light from reaching the aquatic vegetation, which is a serious threat to aquatic life and the health of the waterway's ecosystem.41 Moreover, industrial use of SS-containing effluents may block pipes and equipment.42
In recent years, many studies have focused on SS reduction by EC processes. Izadi43 studied the treatment of paper recycling wastewater by EC using Fe and Al electrodes. At the optimum operating parameters of an initial pH of 7.0, an applied voltage of 10 V and a treatment time of 60 min, ca. 83% of TSS was removed. The treatment of textile dyeing effluent was conducted using a pilot-scale EC reactor.44 Adding coagulant to the posttreatment effluent was found to enhance the removal efficiency significantly. The highest TSS removal rate (92%) was observed during a 20 min treatment time with a coagulant dosage of 30 mg L−1. These results indicate that the EC process is as an effective alternative to eliminate SS from different types of industrial effluents. However, SS usually co-exists with other pollutants such as heavy metals and organic matters.45 There are few cases where SS is the only contaminant removed by the EC process.
5.2. Organic pollutants
Reducing substances such as complex organic pollutants in industrial wastewater can lead to the high biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and COD value. Using EC to remove organic pollutants from real industrial wastewater has been reported by various researchers. Table 1 summarizes the results from representative EC studies of organic pollutant removal from industrial wastewater.
Table 1 Representative EC studies for organic pollutants removal




Source of wastewater
Pollutants
Anode/cathode
Current density
Time (min)
Initial pH
Optimum removal rate (%)
Ref.




Drilling site
O&G
Al/Al
80 A m−2
20
3.6
70.86

53



Textile dyeing factory
Dye
Al/Al
15 mA cm−2
23
5.5
97 (color)

58



Textile industry
Dye
Steel/Al
8 mA cm−2
10
7.1
86 (color)

57



82 (turbidity)


59 (COD)


Hospital
Ciprofloxacin
Al/Al
12.5 mA cm−2
20
7.78
88.75

59



Olive debittering wastewater
Polyphenolic compounds
Al/Al
15 mA cm−2
60
4.0
78.51(COD)

60



Machinery industry
Spent coolant
Al/Al
20 mA cm−2
30
10.5
70.90 (COD)

61



92.10 (BOD)


94.80 (O&G)





Oil & grease. 
Oil–water emulsions discharged from various industrial processes including oil drilling, oil explorations, refineries, olive oil production and oil transportation are serious environmental hazards.46 Events like crude oil spills have significant impacts on the entire marine ecosystem. Thus, it is vital to identify efficient technologies for the treatment of oil-in-water emulsions.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the EC technology has a higher oil separation efficiency than many other available technologies.47 To date, the EC process has been successfully employed to remove oil and grease (O&G) from a number of real industrial wastewaters including petroleum refinery wastewater,48 chicken processing plant wastewater,49 oil field wastewater50 and slaughterhouse wastewater51etc. EC was shown to be superior to the coagulation/flocculation and anaerobic–aerobic process for the treatment of some industrial effluents.52 Changmai53 explored the O&G separation behavior of raw drilling wastewater using the EC process. The initial O&G concentration of 35.0 mg L−1 was reduced to 10.2 mg L−1 in 20 min. Large amounts of hydroxide flocs were generated during EC, and microfiltration was subsequently employed to separate the flocs from wastewater.
Dyes. 
The textile industry produces large volumes of liquid waste and is the main source of industrial water pollution. It has been reported that over 3600 different types of dyes are used in the textile industry.54 Dyeing wastewater usually contains complex residual dye molecules which are characterized by high water solubility, intense color and high stability.55 In recent years, EC processes have shown promise for the removal of dyes from industrial wastewater.56
Khorram56 investigated the degradation of dyes from textile dyeing factory effluent by the EC process using the Al electrode. A short sludge settling time of 30 min was adopted after the EC process. Under the optimum conditions, i.e., pH 5.5, 15 mA cm−2 current density, and 23 min electrolysis time, the decolorization efficiency increased up to 97%. Furthermore, it was found that separation of the sludge by settling using the Al electrodes was ineffective, while either filtration or changing the electrode material may be more effective. A study by Núñez57 utilized the EC process to remove pollutants from textile wastewater and reuse the treated water for the dyeing process. For the wastewater from dyed linen, the EC process resulted in the maximum removal of 24%, 65%, and 80% for COD, turbidity and color, respectively. For wastewater from the residual effluent pool, the corresponding removal efficiencies were 59%, 82% and 86% respectively. More importantly, the reuse of the treated water in the dyeing process had no negative effect on either color or quality of the fabric.
Pharmaceuticals. 
Pharmaceutical drugs, including anti-inflammatories, antibiotics and others, are emerging pollutants of concern.62 The release of pharmaceuticals into water bodies may cause potential health and environmental risks. Pharmaceutical wastewater, which is characterized by large volume and hazardous nature, usually contains very high solid, COD and BOD content.63 For this type of wastewater, the biological processes, which have been traditionally used for wastewater treatment, have a little effect because the metabolic processes of the microorganisms are often impeded by the pharmaceuticals.64 Therefore, many researchers focus on the non-biological treatment.
The EC process has been proved to be a more effective method for the elimination of stubborn pharmaceutically active contaminants.65 Relevant results have been published by Ahmadzadeh59 who optimized the EC process for the treatment of hospital wastewater. Under optimal conditions, the EC process effectively reduced the level of ciprofloxacin from 154 ± 6 μg L−1 to almost zero. Liu66 considered the effect of a cationic surfactant (cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, CTAB) on the EC efficiency by exploring the removal of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) from hospital wastewater. They found that the addition of CTAB significantly improved the degradation of NSAIDs. It can be explained by the fact that surfactants reduce the surface tension of the aqueous solution, which makes the associated hydrogen bubbles more stable. Additionally, the surfactants can also act as collectors so that the pollutants are adsorbed more easily by the bubbles. These studies confirm that EC is an effective technology for the removal of pharmaceutical drugs from industrial wastewaters.
Phenolic compounds. 
Phenolic compounds such as phenol, nitrophenol and chlorophenol are widely used in petrochemical, coking, pesticide and paint industries.67 Phenolic-containing wastewater is one of the typical refractory and toxic industrial wastewaters.68 In recent decades, EC has also attracted attention as an effective and environmentally friendly process for the phenolic compound removal.
An interesting study by Fajardo69 focused on the treatment of real olive mill wastewater by the EC process using a Zn anode. To determine the optimal operating parameters, experiments were first conducted under different operating conditions with synthetic phenolic-containing wastewater. Then, those optimal parameters (stainless steel cathode, initial pH 3.2, electrode distance 1.0 cm and current density 250 A m−2) were used in the depuration of real industrial wastewater. The results showed that ca. 72% of total phenolic compounds and ca. 21% of COD were removed from the filtered effluent. This study has established the potential of EC using the Zn anode as a pretreatment process for real olive mill wastewater. Naje70 investigated the treatment of textile wastewater using a novel rotating anode reactor with Al impellers acting as the anode, and found that the phenol concentration could be significantly reduced from 335.0 to 0.0065 mg L−1. This new EC reactor design was shown to have a higher pollutant removal efficiency than previous models. In summary, the EC process can be considered as a promising alternative for the treatment of phenolic-containing wastewater.
Other organic pollutants. 
In addition to the main organic pollutants mentioned above, the EC process has also been shown to be effective in the removal of many other persistent organic pollutants.71 For example, the treatability of sugar industry wastewater using EC and the effects of different system parameters on the EC efficiency were investigated by Yilmaz.72 The maximum observed COD removal rate (ca. 97%) was achieved using the Al electrode, at current density of 2.143 mA cm−2, initial pH of 6.0, stirring speed of 150 rpm and electrolysis time of 180 min. In a recent study by Barhoumi73 for the cellulose and paper industry wastewater treatment, the total removal rate of humic acid of ca. 93% was obtained under the following conditions: current density of 1.388 mA cm−2, initial pH of 4, EC time of 10 min and Na2SO4 concentration of 150 mg L−1.
It can be concluded that EC has been proved to be a promising method for the removal of various organic pollutants from real industrial wastewater. However, the removal mechanisms for different types of organic matter are not yet entirely clear. Additionally, there have been no authoritative studies about the feasibility of removing specific organic matter using EC. Thus, further study is necessary to reveal the difference in the EC efficiency for different organic matters.

5.3. Heavy metals

Metallic elements. 
Many heavy metals, which are highly toxic, have caused severe ecological and environmental damage. Unlike organic pollutants, most of the heavy metals show low biodegradability and tend to accumulate in living organisms. In addition, their high solvency in aqueous solutions makes them difficult to separate by conventional separation technologies.74 Hitherto, EC has been shown to be a promising process for the removal of some heavy metals, namely, Pb2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Ni2+ and Cr3+, and the representative studies are summarized in Table 2.75,76
Table 2 Representative EC studies for heavy metals removal




Source of wastewater
Pollutants
Anode/cathode
Current density
Time (min)
Initial pH
Optimum removal rate (%)
Ref.




Metal industry
Cr
Stainless steel/stainless steel
25 mA cm−2
30
6.0
97

80



Electroplating facility
Cr(VI)
Fe/Fe
20 mA cm−2
60
2.4
∼100

93



Industrial mining wastewater
Zn(II), Cd(II)
Al/Al
2 A
20 L h−1
7.0
93, 99

77



Metal plating plant
Cu, Cr, Ni
Fe/Al
10 mA cm−2
20
3.0
∼100 (all)

94



Metal plating wastewater
Cu2+, Cr3+, Ni2+, Zn2+
Carbon steel/carbon steel
4 mA cm−2
45
9.6
>97 (all)

95





Brahmi77 recently applied a ballasted electroflocculation system in the removal of Zn and Cd from mining wastewater. Simultaneous high removal efficiencies of Zn(II) (93%) and Cd(II) (99%) were achieved at a low cost of 0.04 € per m3. The results indicate that EC is an effective and cheap method for the treatment of some industrial mining wastewaters. The influence of hydrocarbonate (HCO3−) on the removal of Zn2+ and Fe2+ by EC was investigated by Doggaz.78 It was shown that a larger amount of dissolved Al3+ and a longer electrolysis time were required in the presence of the HCO3− ion. The removal of Fe2+ and Zn2+ from HCO3−-containing wastewater was found to be mainly due to simple adsorption onto Al(OH)3 flocs, and Fe2+ could be further oxidized to Fe(OH)3 after adsorption. Wulan79 studied the ability of simultaneous removal of four heavy metals (Zn, Cr, Fe, Cu) in electroplating wastewater by EC. Under the optimum parameters (voltage: 30 V, electrolysis time: 30 min), the removal efficiencies, measured by optical density (a function of turbidity, which is correlated with the heavy metal concentration), were ca. 60% in laboratory-scale experiments, and more than 79% in pilot-scale experiments. The treated water reached Indonesian government standards except for the Cu ions, which had a much higher initial concentration.
Shine80 found that EC was an effective method to remove the residual Cr from metal industry wastewater. The maximum removal rate of 97% was achieved under the optimum operating conditions, i.e., an initial pH of 6, an electrode spacing of 4 cm, a current density of 25 mA cm−2, and an electrolysis time of 30 min. Oden81 investigated the EC removal efficiencies of Ni, Zn and Cr from metal plating effluent, and the response surface methodology was applied for the process optimization. They found that the models predicted within a 95% confidence level, and the measured removal rates were 96.3%, 99.8% and 98.9% for Ni, Zn and Cr, respectively, under optimum conditions. The results indicated that heavy metals could be effectively removed by EC, and that the response surface methodology is a reliable technique for parameter optimization.
Metalloid element: arsenic. 
Arsenic (As) is one of the most toxic chemical elements and is regarded as a high priority pollutant by the World Health Organization.82 It is present in wastewater both in inorganic and organic species. Arsenite, with high genotoxicity, cytotoxicity and solubility, is the most harmful inorganic arsenic species, followed by arsenate. The EC process, after years of development, has been shown to be an efficient and promising technology for arsenic removal from industrial effluent.83
Fe is more widely used than Al as an anode material for arsenic decontamination because of its higher efficiency, cost efficiency and availability. A novel EC system powered by a thermoelectric generator was developed and used for As removal from mine drainage.84 A removal efficiency of up to 99.7% was achieved and the removal rate obeyed a pseudo-second-order model. This electrochemical treatment system using existing thermocouple technology could be used for effluents with high arsenic concentrations and high temperatures.
The mechanism of arsenic removal from wastewater has been analyzed by several authors.85,86 Arsenic exists in various species, and the two major existing forms are arsenates (H3AsO4, AsO43−, HAsO42− and H2AsO−) and arsenite (H3AsO3, AsO33−, HAsO32− and H2AsO3−). The negatively charged species can be removed by the charge neutralization and adsorption effects of the insoluble aluminium or iron hydroxides. Even at high pH, when similarly charged arsenate, arsenite, aluminium, ferrous, and ferric predominant species are presented, satisfactory arsenic removal rates were able to be achieved. This is mainly because of sweep floc coagulation by the stable metal hydroxides.
Another mechanism, which has been described by several researchers, is called the “bonding mechanism”.87,88 This mechanism explains that FeO(OH) (lepidocrocite, goethite) is formed by the dehydration of Fe(OH)3, and arsenite is oxidized to more stable arsenate during the EC process. Then, an insoluble surface complex is formed by the reaction of FeO(OH) with arsenic species.89 The relevant reactions are: Fe(OH)3(s) → FeO(OH)(s) + H2O(19) 2FeO(OH)(s) + H2AsO4− → (FeO)2HAsO4(s)− + H2O + OH−(20) 3Fe(OH)(s) + HAsO42− → (FeO)3AsO4(s)− + H2O + 2OH−(21)

5.4. Inorganic anionic pollutants
EC has also been shown to be effective in dealing with anionic pollutants such as F−, PO4−, NO3−, AsO43−, Cl−, SeO42−, SO42− andCN−.90Table 3 summarizes the representative studies dealing with the removal of inorganic anionic pollutants from real industrial effluents in recent years.
Table 3 Representative EC studies for inorganic anionic pollutants removal




Source of wastewater
Pollutants
Anode/cathode
Current density
Time (min)
Initial pH
Optimum removal rate (%)
Ref.




Flue gas desulfurization wastewater
F−
Fe/C/Al
5.00 mA cm−2
25
4.0
86

97



Manganese–phosphate coating wastewater
PO32−
Al/Al
20 A m−2
30
3.12
99.96

112



Mineral processing wastewater
SO42−
Al/stainless steel
90.91 mA cm−2
60
6.5
93.14

111



Phenol treatment plant
Selenium
Fe/Fe
153 A m−2
360
5.0
90

113



Tannery wastewater
Nitrate
Al/Al
75 A m−2
45
7.15
>90

114






Fluoride. 
Fluoride (F−) is an essential micronutrient for humans. The presence of fluoride below 1 mg L−1 in drinking water is beneficial for calcification in the body, while excessive fluoride levels lead to adverse effects like skeletal fluorosis, dental fluorosis and spinal ligament calcification.91 Industrial effluents from the semiconductor, solar cell, smelting and electroplating industries usually contain excessive fluoride concentrations of up to 1500 mg L−1.92
EC has been widely used for the de-fluoridation of industrial effluent and shown to be feasible and efficient.96 Most often, Al anodes were employed for the fluoride removal from wastewater. The aluminum species generated by the anode show better removal ability on F− than the species introduced by aluminum salts. The recent report by Liu97 described the removal of F− from flue gas desulfurization wastewater by the EC process. At pH 4, electrode distance 5 mm, and current density 5.00 mA cm−2, the removal rate of 86% was attained within 25 min. The simultaneous removal of concomitant pollutants like Ni(II), SS and COD was also achieved with excellent efficiency. Khatibikamal98 carried out EC experiments on the de-fluoridation of steel industrial wastewater, and a satisfactory removal rate of ca. 93% was achieved within only 5 min. A kinetic analysis indicates that the adsorption of fluoride followed the second-order dynamical model.
Two different mechanisms of fluoride removal have been proposed so far:99,100
Adsorption on aluminium hydroxide flocs: mF− + Aln(OH)3n(s) → AlnFm(OH)(3n−m)(s) + m(OH)−(22)Co-precipitation: mF− + nAl3+ + (3n − m)OH− → AlnFm(OH)(3n−m)(s)(23)Then, AlnFm(OH)(3n−m)(s) formed by either adsorption or coprecipitation is separated from wastewater to complete the fluoride removal.
Phosphate. 
Phosphorus (P), as a major nutrient in water, performs a significant role in the growth of aquatic organisms. Phosphorus compounds present in the water are mainly orthophosphates, with small amounts of organic phosphate. Excessive concentrations of phosphorus in water bodies can cause eutrophication, which brings oxygen depletion and aquatic life kill.101 Therefore, in recent years, a significant amount of studies has been performed to remove phosphorus from industrial effluents.102,103
EC is an economic and feasible technique for phosphate removal from industrial wastewater, and has attached considerable attention.25 Long-term EC experiments of phosphorus removal in small-scale wastewater treatment plants were carried out, and the effect of different operating conditions were analyzed.104 An excellent phosphorus removal efficiency was obtained over long periods of time by adjusting the quantity of iron generated. The results showed that EC is a promising process to reduce environmental load while limiting power consumption to an acceptable level. Additionally, the EC process was suitable for phosphate recovery from sludge anaerobic supernatant. Aeration during the EC process could improve the recovery of phosphate.25 To summarize, the EC process has been shown to achieve both environmental regulation and phosphate resource recovery.105
Numerous studies have described that phosphate ions undergo inner surface complexation via OH ligand exchange with metal hydroxide.106,107 The mechanism of PO43− removal can be classified into two major mechanisms:108 (I) Adsorption of PO43− on the Fe(III) and Al hydrolysis species. (II) Formation of Fe/Al-hydroxo-phosphate complexes. The reactions involved in the removal of phosphate in the EC system are as follows: 3Fe2+ + 2PO43− → Fe3(PO4)2(s)(24) Fe3+ + PO43− → FePO4(s)(25) xFe3+ + PO43− + (3x − 3)OH− → FexPO4(OH)3x−3(s)(26) Al3+ + PO43− → AlPO4(s)(27) xAl3+ + PO43− + (3x − 3)OH− → AlxPO4(OH)3x−3(s)(28)
Sulfate. 
High concentrations of sulfate in wastewater can cause many environmental issues such as high aggressiveness to concrete and water pipeline corrosion.109 It may also cause intestinal disorders and diarrhea when sufficient levels of sulfate are ingested by humans.110 However, the removal of sulfate from the solution is quite difficult due to its stability and high solubility.
Recently, the EC system has been successfully employed to treat mineral processing wastewater containing sulfate ions.111 More importantly, the treated water after EC could be recycled for grinding with no negative impact on subsequent mineral concentrating processes, revealing that the EC method is a potential contender amongst traditional mineral processing wastewater treatment processes. Jo115 conducted a series of EC experiments to remove nitrate and sulfate from wet scrubber wastewater. A removal efficiency of ca. 40% (for both nitrate and sulfate) was achieved after 180 min. The results indicate that EC is a promising method for the sulfate anion removal from industrial wastewater.
Nitrite, nitrate and ammonia nitrogen. 
Excessive nitrate in wastewater can also lead to the eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems.116 Moreover, nitrate may be reduced and converted to nitrite, which is highly toxic and carcinogenic to living organisms. Nitrate pollution is mainly caused by agricultural fertilizers; while various industrial processes, like oil refining, fuel, food industry, etc. also produce large amounts of nitrate-containing wastewater.117 Ammonia is another highly toxic contaminant in wastewater.118 Similarly to nitrate, it may lead to eutrophication and may be converted to nitrite. Thus, it is particularly critical to remove nitrite, nitrate and ammonia from industrial effluents. In this section, recent EC applications for the removal of these pollutants from real industrial wastewater are briefly reviewed.
Nitrates can be reduced to ammonia at the cathode during EC processes. Using Ti/Pt cathodes can effectively eliminate ammonia formation when compared with other cathode materials.119 Tian120 utilized a novel EC reactor with an air-breathing cathode for removing nutrients from both synthetic wastewater and raw wastewater collected from a wastewater treatment plant. Compared with the traditional EC technology, the system using the air-breathing cathode was found to be a more promising method for nutrient removal, when both removal efficiency and energy consumption were considered. The EC process was evaluated as a post-treatment method for molasses wastewater by Tsioptsias121 who adopted a response surface method to optimize the removal of total nitrogen, COD and color. Preliminary experiments demonstrated that sample dilution and aeration significantly influenced the kinetics of the EC process. The treated effluent had NO3–N and NH4–N concentrations of 2.0 and 52.0 mg L−1, down from 44.7 and 820.0 mg L−1, respectively, revealing that the EC technology exhibits superior performance for the removal of nitrite, nitrate and ammonia nitrogen from industrial effluents.
Boron and selenium. 
Boron compounds, especially boric acid and borates, are mostly used in detergents, nuclear and glass industries as well as fire extinguishers.122 Chronic exposure to boron has caused decreased life expectancy, gastrointestinal dysfunction, and testicular atrophy in animals. The EC process using the Al anode was used to remove boron from the hydraulic fracturing effluent.123 The boron removal efficiency increased with the amount of aluminum dissolved, and over 90% of the removal rate could be obtained at the Al/B ratio above 70. The investigation into the mechanism shows that the chemical adsorption of aluminium hydroxide flocs plays the dominant role in the boron removal.124
Selenium at low concentrations is a plant nutrient and essential for humans and animals.125 However, slightly higher concentrations of selenium are toxic and can cause gastrointestinal disturbances, skin disease and nervous system injury. Additionally, it can generate highly toxic persistent complexes with heavy metals like Pb, Ni, Cd and Cu. Hansen113 investigated the removal of selenium from petroleum refinery wastewater using a batch airlift EC reactor. They found that a selenium removal rate of 90% was achieved in 6 hours. It is worth mentioning that the configuration of EC reactor, which can significantly affect the mass transport and energy consumption, has been empirically optimized over the last several years. Design the EC reactor reasonably to the maximum EC efficiency is important for the practical application.126 Hitherto, the design of EC reactors mostly rely on experience rather than the scientific understanding of the relevant mechanism, which may limit the further improvement of EC equipment. Hence, further research is recommended to focus on the fundamental mechanisms for optimized engineering design, providing a predictive guide for the design of EC reactors.
In fact, the compositions of real industrial effluents are very complicated and usually contain a number of different types of contaminants. Compared with other commonly used technologies, EC possesses distinct superiority that can remove multiple pollutants from complicated effluents.127 Most importantly, EC is an efficient and flexible technology to remove some refractory pollutants, which are hardly degraded. Currently, EC is playing an irreplaceable role in depth defluorination and treatment of toxic wastewater. Nevertheless, the widespread application of EC remains great challenge. As known, the industrial application of any effluent treatment process should be comprehensively evaluated in terms of treatment performance and operation cost. For the EC technology, the energy consumption is an important criterion in evaluating the feasibility of commercialization. Particularly, the electrical consumption is extremely high for wastewater with low conductivity. Additionally, the anode passivation and sludge generation may also hamper its further application.6,7 With these considerations, many studies have focused on the hybrid treatment methods, which can take full advantages of two or more technologies.

6. Hybrid processes have attracted increasing attention
As more stringent environmental requirements for industrial wastewater discharge have emerged, studies have found that, in many cases, EC by itself cannot achieve the required pollutant removal efficiency.128 To tackle this issue, researchers have developed hybrid treatment methods for the degradation of contaminants in wastewater. These hybrid technologies can utilize the advantages of two or more treatment processes, resulting in a highly efficient and sustainable treatment for industrial wastewater. This is especially true for the case where the wastewater has a complex composition. In that case, the processing efficiency and energy consumption advantages of hybrid processes are readily seen. Hitherto, the integration of EC and other treatment techniques such aselectrooxidation,129 ozonation,130 sorption process,131 and membrane process,132 photocatalytic oxidation133 and biological process137 have been shown to be highly feasible for the industrial wastewater treatment, and the schematic design of some representative hybrid processes are shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Schematic design of some hybrid processes. (a) The EC/electrooxidation–electroflotation process,136 (b) the EC + O3 process135 and (c) the EC membrane process.134 Reproduced with permission from ref. 134–136. Copyright 2011, Elsevier, 2019, Elsevier and 2006, Elsevier. 
6.1. EC coupled with physical processes
Combination of EC and adsorption can effectively remove sulphate from mine wastewater.138 With the addition of 0.1 g L−1 of activated carbon, the sulphate removal efficiency significantly improved from ca. 24% (for a single EC process) to ca. 52% after 10 min of treatment. Linares-Hernández139 developed a hybrid system involving EC and the biosorption process for the treatment of mixed industrial wastewater containing organic pollutants. Using the hybrid treatment, the removal rates of color, turbidity, COD, BOD5 and fecal coliforms were ca. 97, 98, 84, 78 and 99%, respectively. Compared with the single EC system, the organic pollutant removal efficiency was observably improved by the hybrid system. UV-vis spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry results confirmed the further degradation of organic pollutants and the improvement in water quality.
The hybrid system using EC and forward osmosis (FO) has been developed for the treatment of hydraulic fracturing wastewater.140 Using EC with the Al electrode prior to the FO process effectively eliminated the suspended solids and organic pollutants, and thus prevented the membrane fouling. Over 24 h, an increase of ca. 21% in the amount of water recovered was achieved due to the suppression of the membrane fouling. Consequently, the pretreatment of wastewater containing high levels of TSS and TOC by EC prior to FO has significant advantages.
6.2. EC coupled with chemical processes
As mentioned earlier, the EC process has striking advantages when compared to chemical coagulation. Several authors have shown that the addition of chemical coagulation to EC systems significantly enhances the pollutant removal efficiency. Additionally, adding PAC performs better on the COD removal efficiency compared with alum.141
The coupling of EC and ozone (O3) treatment has been adopted to effectively remove dyes from textile wastewater.135 When EC was used as a single process, the color removal efficiency was low even after an extended electrolysis time, while using ozonation alone required a very long treatment time to achieve a satisfactory color removal. However, the coupling of EC and O3 processes, both as EC + O3 (run simultaneously as a one-step operation) and EC → O3 (run separately as a two-step operation) operations, gave the satisfactory color removal efficiency. The ozonation efficiency was remarkably improved when combined with EC, which could be explained by the production of ˙OH (hydroxyl radicals) due to dissolved ferrous ions in the EC process.142 The operating cost analysis indicated that EC → O3 was more cost-effective than EC + O3. At the same time, brine, which was produced by the EC → O3 process, was able to be successfully reused in the dyeing process. Therefore, the two-step treatment (EC → O3) was recommended as the effective treatment technology for the textile wastewater.
The coupling of EC with a UVC/VUV photoreactor for the degradation of real tannery effluent has been reported by Moradi.143 Here, EC was used as the pretreatment method prior UVC/VUV. The combined system effectively removed COD, sulfide and total Cr by 99.52%, 98.27% and 100.00%, respectively. Furthermore, experiments using only the UVC photoreactor were also carried out to separate the effect of UVC from that of VUV. The results indicate that VUV plays a major role in removing the pollutants from tannery wastewater. This combined system possesses superior degradation ability on organic pollutants with negligible sludge generation, what demonstrates that EC coupled with the UVC/VUV photoreactor has potential application in real industrial wastewater treatment.
Several hybrid electrochemical treatments have been developed for pollutant removal from different types of industrial effluents.144,145 Brillas146 systematically summarized combined electrochemical processes for dye removal, including EC, electrochemical oxidation (EO), electro-Fenton (EF) and photo-assisted electrochemical processes. Recently, an integrated EC–EO process was applied to remove persistent pollutants from industrial effluent.147 The results showed that EC was an effective process for colloidal and suspended particle removal but relatively ineffective in removing persistent organic pollutants. Conversely, EO exhibited the excellent performance in removing persistent organic pollutants, but required a very long time to achieve satisfactory results for colloidal and suspended particle removal. The investigation into the electrochemical mechanism indicated that the colloidal materials prevent the oxidation of the organic compounds at the electrode during the EO process. Considering the advantages and disadvantages of the two processes, the coupled EC–EO treatment was developed. During the EC process, the colloids were effectively removed and only dissolved organic pollutants were left. Thus, in the coupled process, the color, turbidity, coliforms, COD, and BOD5 were all effectively reduced.
6.3. EC coupled with biological processes
The enhancement effect of bio-electrocoagulation technology on nitrogen removal from industrial wastewater has been demonstrated.148 Laboratory experiments showed that the EC process could improve the enzyme activity and the amount of biomass and nitrogen-removing bacteria, resulting in the enhancement of the nitrification and denitrification of microorganisms. In pilot-scale tests, the relative abundance of cold-effective removal of NH4+–N, NO3−–N and COD was verified by the full-scale industrial bio-electrocoagulation system.
To summarize, EC and hybrid processes coupling EC and other treatments for the treatment of real industrial effluents have been investigated extensively. As discussed above, using the hybrid processes can exert the advantage of EC sufficiently in terms of economics and applicability.149 In order to treat the refractory wastewater efficiently and completely, more economical and effective hybrid technologies should be introduced and developed. This is one of the interesting directions for future research.
7. Sludge characterization and management
The separation of the metal hydroxide flocs from the solution is the final step of EC process. Thus, it is critical to characterize the sludge to gain a deep understanding of mechanisms of EC process, and develop appropriate disposal methods for the sludge.150
The density and size of the flocs determine the sludge settling velocity and significantly affect the performance of the solid–liquid separation. Many studies have shown that EC-produced flocs are relatively large and have higher effective density in comparison with flocs produced by chemical addition. Thus, EC-produced flocs are better suited for sedimentation and dehydration due to their high settling velocity. The sediment volume, also known as the sludge volume index (SVI), is a well-known indicator to assess sludge settling ability, which can be expressed as:151 (29)where H30 is the height of sludge in the settling column after 30 min (cm), H0 is the initial height of the treated water in the settling column, and SS is the sludge concentration of the treated water.
The electrode material has a significant effect on the sludge settling characteristics.152 Al hydroxides do not have a rapid settling velocity, likely due to their gel-like structure. Fe hydroxides are denser than Al hydroxides and their settling velocity is faster.
The structure of the EC-produced flocs is quite complex in nature and the microphotographs are presented in Fig. 5.153,154 Oxygen and carbon elements, which belong to organic pollutants, are found in the sludge, confirming that they are adsorbed on the hydroxide flocs.155
 Fig. 5  SEM analyses of sludge. (a) and (b) Al electrode, and (c) and (d) Fe electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 and 154 . Copyright 2008, Elsevier and 2018, Elsevier. 
On the other hand, toxic pollutants in the sludge may be leached back and lead to further pollution. Thus, the sludge management is of critical importance. The treatment of EC-produced sludge can be separated into two categories: reasonable disposal and resource utilization. Several methods, including stabilization, landfilling, heat-treatment etc., are usually used for the disposal of sludge.156 For example, the cement-based solidification method is widely used in the stabilization of sludge. The anaerobic digestion technique is another effective method to dispose of As containing sludge.
Recently, the utilization of sludge has attracted increasing attention. Conversion of sludge into viable product is both environmentally friendly and economically significant. Fortunately, sludges generated by EC processes have potential as raw materials for many different uses. The electrocoagulated Al hydroxide sludge produced during the removal of heavy metals has been shown to be a high-capacity potential adsorbent for reactive dyes.157 Moreover, the sludge containing heavy metals can be reused for the production of inorganic pigments, brick and geopolymers.158
8. Conclusions
The EC process, which typically has high processing efficiency, easy operation and low sludge generation, appears to be an efficient and promising technology for the treatment of industrial effluents. It can be applied to remove various kinds of pollutants including suspended solids, organic pollutants, heavy metals, and inorganic anionic pollutants. The efficiency of EC technology depends on several operating parameters: the electrodes, applied current density, electrolysis time, supporting electrolytes, pH value and type of power supply. The contaminant removal mechanism and modeling of EC processes have been systematically covered in this review, and the management of EC by-products has been explored. EC can also be combined with other treatments such as electrooxidation treatment, ozone treatment, membrane sorption processes, photocatalytic oxidation and biological processes. However, it should be noted that the EC technology still faces several challenges when used to treat real industrial effluents. Hitherto, very few papers laid out a systematic approach for the design and operation of an EC reactor. More importantly, the application of EC has been limited in many areas due to its high electricity consumption. These issues must be addressed in future research.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Key Program for International S & T Cooperation Projects of China (2021YFE0106800), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Key program U2067201), the Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of Hunan Province, China (2020JJ2044), the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program of Hunan province, China (2018RS3011), the National 111 Project, China (B14034) and the Research Innovation Program of Central South University (1053320190995).
References
K. Kim and S. Ihm, Heterogeneous catalytic wet air oxidation of refractory organic pollutants in industrial wastewaters: A review, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 186, 16–34 CrossRef CAS .
O. Fadali, E. Ebrahiem, A. El-Gamil and H. Altaher, Investigation of the electrocoagulation treatment technique for the separation of oil from wastewater, J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 9, 62–74 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Y. Tan, C. L. Ong, L. M. Chng, J. K. Lim, D. J. C. Chan and P. Y. Toh, in International Symposium Green and Sustainable Technology, ed. M. J. K. Bashir, T. K. Tat, H. Nisar, Y. Munusamy and W. C. Chong,  2019, vol. 2157 Search PubMed .
H. Gong, Z. Jin, H. Xu, Q. Wang, J. Zuo, J. Wu and K. Wang, Redesigning C and N mass flows for energy-neutral wastewater treatment by coagulation adsorption enhanced membrane (CAEM)-based pre-concentration process, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 342, 304–309 CrossRef CAS .
T. Alvarino, S. Suarez, J. Lema and F. Omil, Understanding the sorption and biotransformation of organic micropollutants in innovative biological wastewater treatment technologies, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 615, 297–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yavuz and U. B. Ogutveren, Treatment of industrial estate wastewater by the application of electrocoagulation process using iron electrodes, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 207, 151–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zaleschi, C. Teodosiu, I. Cretescu and M. A. Rodrigo, A comparative study of electrocoagulation and chemical coagulation processes applied for wastewater treatment, Environ. Eng. Manage. J., 2012, 11, 1517–1525 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Hashim, R. Al Khaddar, N. Jasim and A. Shaw, Electrocoagulation as a green technology for phosphate removal from river water, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 210, 135–144 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Ryan, P. J. McNamara and B. K. Mayer, Iron-electrocoagulation as a disinfection byproduct control strategy for drinking water treatment, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2020, 6, 1116–1124 RSC .
C. A. Martínez-Huitle and E. Brillas, Decontamination of wastewaters containing synthetic organic dyes by electrochemical methods: a general review, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 87, 105–145 CrossRef .
S. Raghu and C. A. Basha, Chemical or electrochemical techniques, followed by ion exchange, for recycle of textile dye wastewater, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 149, 324–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rämö, Recent Applications of Electrocoagulation in Treatment of Water and Wastewater—A Review, Green Sustainable Chem., 2013, 3, 89–121 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Simultaneous removal of lead(II) and nitrate from water at low voltage, J. Water Process. Eng., 2019, 32, 100904 CrossRef .
J. N. Hakizimana, B. Gourich, M. Chafi, Y. Stiriba, C. Vial, P. Drogui and J. Naja, Electrocoagulation process in water treatment: A review of electrocoagulation modeling approaches, Desalination, 2017, 404, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Devlin, M. S. Kowalski, E. Pagaduan, X. Zhang, V. Wei and J. A. Oleszkiewicz, Electrocoagulation of wastewater using aluminum, iron, and magnesium electrodes, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 368, 862–868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mohora, S. Roncevic, J. Agbaba, K. Zrnic, A. Tubic, M. Adzemovic and B. Dalmacija, Effects of combined Fe-Al electrodes and ground water temperature on arsenic removal by electrocoagulation, Environ. Prot. Eng., 2019, 5–18 Search PubMed .
A. S. Fajardo, C. M. Rui and R. M. Quinta-Ferreira, Treatment of a Synthetic Phenolic Mixture by Electrocoagulation Using Al, Cu, Fe, Pb, and Zn as Anode Materials, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 2014, 18339 CrossRef .
A. K. Prajapati, P. K. Chaudhari, D. Pal, A. Chandrakar and R. Choudhary, Electrocoagulation treatment of rice grain based distillery effluent using copper electrode, J. Water Process. Eng., 2016, 11, 1–7 CrossRef .
M. Elazzouzi, K. Haboubi and M. S. Elyoubi, Enhancement of electrocoagulation-flotation process for urban wastewater treatment using Al and Fe electrodes: techno-economic study, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 13, 549–555 CAS .
K. P. Papadopoulos, R. Argyriou, C. N. Economou, N. Charalampous, S. Dailianis, T. I. Tatoulis, A. G. Tekerlekopoulou and D. V. Vayenas, Treatment of printing ink wastewater using electrocoagulation, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 237, 442–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Adamovic, M. Prica, B. Dalmacija, S. Rapajic, D. Novakovic, Z. Pavlovic and S. Maletic, Feasibility of electrocoagulation/flotation treatment of waste offset printing developer based on the response surface analysis, Arabian J. Chem., 2016, 9, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Sadik, A Review of Promising Electrocoagulation Technology for the Treatment of Wastewater, Adv. Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 9, 109 CrossRef CAS .
Z. BerilGönder, G. Balcıoğlu, I. Vergili and Y. Kaya, An integrated electrocoagulation–nanofiltration process for carwash wastewater reuse, Chemosphere, 2020, 11, 292–299 Search PubMed .
C. Hu, S. Wang, J. Sun, H. Liu and J. Qu, An effective method for improving electrocoagulation process: Optimization of Al13 polymer formation, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 489, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, D. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Peng and F. Gao, Comparison investigation on phosphate recovery from sludge anaerobic supernatant using the electrocoagulation process and chemical precipitation, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 141, 429–438 CrossRef .
E. Lacasa, P. Canizares, C. Saez, F. J. Fernandez and M. A. Rodrigo, Removal of arsenic by iron and aluminium electrochemically assisted coagulation, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2011, 79, 15–19 CrossRef CAS .
R. Keyikoglu, O. T. Can, A. Aygun and A. Tek, Comparison of the effects of various supporting electrolytes on the treatment of a dye solution by electrocoagulation process, Colloid Interface Sci. Commun., 2019, 33, 1–8 Search PubMed .
K. Mansouri, K. Ibrik, N. Bensalah and A. Abdel-Wahab, Anodic Dissolution of Pure Aluminum during Electrocoagulation Process: Influence of Supporting Electrolyte, Initial pH, and Current Density, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 13362–13372 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Hem and H. Efraimsen, Assimilable organic carbon in molecular weight fractions of natural organic matter, Water Res., 2001, 35, 1106–1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Mansoorian, A. H. Mahvi and A. J. Jafari, Removal of lead and zinc from battery industry wastewater using electrocoagulation process: Influence of direct and alternating current by using iron and stainless steel rod electrodes, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 135, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jimenez, C. Saez, F. Martinez, P. Canizares and M. A. Rodrigo, Electrochemical dosing of iron and aluminum in continuous processes: A key step to explain electro-coagulation processes, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 98, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kamaraj, P. Ganesan, J. Lakshmi and S. Vasudevan, Removal of copper from water by electrocoagulation process-effect of alternating current (AC) and direct current (DC), Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 399–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Bian, Z. Ge, C. Albano, F. L. Lobo and Z. J. Ren, Oily bilge water treatment using DC/AC powered electrocoagulation, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2019, 5, 1654–1660 RSC .
Z. H. Yang, H. Y. Xu, G. M. Zeng, Y. L. Luo and P. P. Song, The behavior of dissolution/passivation and the transformation of passive films during electrocoagulation: Influences of initial pH, Cr(VI) concentration, and alternating pulsed current, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 149–158 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Moneer, M. M. El-Sadaawy, G. F. El-Said and F. A. M. Morsy, Modeling adsorption kinetic of crystal violet removal by electrocoagulation technique using bipolar iron electrodes, Water Sci. Technol., 2018, 77, 323–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bener, Ö. Bulca, B. Palas, G. Tekin, S. Atalay and G. Ersöz, Electrocoagulation process for the treatment of real textile wastewater: Effect of operative conditions on the organic carbon removal and kinetic study, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2019, 129, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
N. Balasubramanian, T. Kojima and C. Srinivasakannan, Arsenic removal through electrocoagulation: Kinetic and statistical modeling, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 155, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. W. Tan, B. H. Hameed and A. L. Ahmad, Equilibrium and kinetic studies on basic dye adsorption by oil palm fibre activated carbon, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 127, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, Z. H. Yang, G. M. Zeng, J. Huang, H. Y. Xu, Y. Y. Zhang, S. M. Wei and L. K. Wang, The adsorption behavior and mechanism investigation of Pb(II) removal by flocculation using microbial flocculant GA1, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 148, 414–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Chou, C.-T. Wang, W.-C. Chang and S.-Y. Chang, Adsorption treatment of oxide chemical mechanical polishing wastewater from a semiconductor manufacturing plant by electrocoagulation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 180, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sajjad, A. Aziz, T. Jun and K. S. Kim, Removal of phosphate and suspended solids by electrocoagulation coupled with woven fabric membrane at pilot plant, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 7502–7510 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Zinatizadeh, S. Ibrahim, N. Aghamohammadi, A. R. Mohamed, H. Zangeneh and P. Mohammadi, Polyacrylamide-induced coagulation process removing suspended solids from palm oil mill effluent, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2017, 52, 520–527 CrossRef CAS .
A. Izadi, M. Hosseini, G. N. Darzi, G. N. Bidhendi and F. P. Shariati, Treatment of paper-recycling wastewater by electrocoagulation using aluminum and iron electrodes, J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng., 2018, 16, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Kim, J.-B. Cho, Y.-J. Park and I.-H. Cho, Treatment and toxicity reduction of textile dyeing wastewater using the electrocoagulation-electroflotation process, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A: Toxic/Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng., 2016, 51, 661–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Castañeda, J. F. Rodríguez and J. L. Nava, Electrocoagulation as an affordable technology for decontamination of drinking water containing fluoride: A critical review, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 127529 Search PubMed .
J. Qin, H. Wang, C. Qin, H. Meng and H. Qian, The role of sodium carbonate in PAM coagulation-flocculation for oil acidized wastewater treatment, Water Sci. Technol., 2018, 77, wst2018224 Search PubMed .
S. Sharma, O. T. Can, M. Hammed, D. Nawarathna and H. Simsek, Organic pollutant removal from edible oil process wastewater using electrocoagulation, IOP. Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci., 2018, 142, 1–13 Search PubMed .
Y. Yavuz, A. S. Koparal and U. B. Ogutveren, Treatment of petroleum refinery wastewater by electrochemical methods, Desalination, 2010, 258, 201–205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomes, D. O. Atambo, K. K. Das, D. L. Cocke and K. P. Das, Electrochemical remediation of chicken processing plant wastewater, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6028–6036 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, Treatment of oilfield produced water with electrocoagulation: improving the process performance by using pulse current, J. Water Reuse Desalin., 2017, 7, 378–386 CrossRef .

          M. S. Yusoff, A. M. Azwan, M. F. M. A. Zamri and H. A. Aziz, in Proceedings of the International Conference of Global Network for Innovative Technology and Awam International Conference in Civil Engineering, ed. H. A. Aziz, B. H. AbuBakar, M. A. M. Johari, C. K. Keong, M. S. Yusoff, M. R. M. Hasan, M. H. Ramli and H. Halim,  2017, vol. 1892 Search PubMed .
E. Aboutaleb, G. Kamel and M. Hellal, Investigation of Effective Treatment Techniques for Olive Mill Wastewater, Egypt. J. Chem., 2018, 61, 415–422 Search PubMed .
M. Changmai, M. Pasawan and M. K. Purkait, Treatment of oily wastewater from drilling site using electrocoagulation followed by microfiltration, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 210, 463–472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wong, N. Ngadi, I. M. Inuwa and O. Hassan, Recent advances in applications of activated carbon from biowaste for wastewater treatment: A short review, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 175, 361–375 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jalife-Jacobo, R. Feria-Reyes, O. Serrano-Torres, S. Gutierrez-Granados and J. M. Peralta-Hernandez, Diazo dye Congo Red degradation using a Boron-doped diamond anode: An experimental study on the effect of supporting electrolytes, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 319, 78–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fikri, N. Sintawati and T. Ruhmawati, Economic Valuation and Effectiveness of Utilizing Electrocoagulation System in Reducing Chemical Oxygen Demand of Textile Industry Wastewater, Ecol. Eng., 2019, 20, 35–43 CrossRef .
J. Núñez, M. Yeber, N. Cisternas, R. Thibaut, P. Medina and C. Carrasco, Application of electrocoagulation for the efficient pollutants removal to reuse the treated wastewater in the dyeing process of the textile industry, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 371, 705–711 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Khorram and N. Fallah, Treatment of textile dyeing factory wastewater by electrocoagulation with low sludge settling time: Optimization of operating parameters by RSM, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 635–642 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmadzadeh, A. Asadipour, M. Pournamdari, B. Behnam, H. R. Rahimi and M. Dolatabadi, Removal of ciprofloxacin from hospital wastewater using electrocoagulation technique by aluminum electrode: Optimization and modelling through response surface methodology, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2017, 109, 538–547 CrossRef CAS .
R. Niazmand, M. Jahani and S. Kalantarian, Treatment of olive processing wastewater by electrocoagulation: An effectiveness and economic assessment, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 248, 8 Search PubMed .
W. Pantorlawn, T. Threrujirapapong, W. Khanitchaidecha, D. Channei and A. Nakaruk, Electrocoagulation for spent coolant from machinery industry, J. Water Reuse Desalin., 2018, 8, 497–506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Jiang, L. Ma, Y. Wang, M. Liang, Z. Zhang and L. Li, Iron foam combined ozonation for enhanced treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater, Environ. Res., 2020, 183, 109205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Changotra, H. Rajput and A. Dhir, Treatment of real pharmaceutical wastewater using combined approach of Fenton applications and aerobic biological treatment, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 376, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Borea, B. M. B. Ensano, S. W. Hasan, M. Balakrishnan, V. Belgiorno, M. D. G. De Luna, F. C. Ballesteros and V. Naddeo, Are pharmaceuticals removal and membrane fouling in electromembrane bioreactor affected by current density, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 692, 732–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoosefian, S. Ahmadzadeh, M. Aghasi and M. Dolatabadi, Optimization of electrocoagulation process for efficient removal of ciprofloxacin antibiotic using iron electrode; kinetic and isotherm studies of adsorption, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 225, 544–553 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Liu, S. Lo, Y. H. Liou and C. Hu, Removal of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) by electrocoagulation–flotation with a cationic surfactant, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 152, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. M. Tri, P. Q. Thang, L. V. Tan, P. T. Huong, J. Kim, N. M. Viet, N. M. Phuong and T. M. Al Tahtamouni, Removal of phenolic compounds from wastewaters by using synthesized Fe-nano zeolite, J. Water Process. Eng., 2020, 33, 7 Search PubMed .
H. Tian, X. Xu, J. Qu, H. Li, Y. Hu, L. Huang, W. He and B. Li, Biodegradation of phenolic compounds in high saline wastewater by biofilms adhering on aerated membranes, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 392, 122463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Fajardo, R. F. Rodrigues, R. C. Martins, L. M. Castro and R. M. Quinta-Ferreira, Phenolic wastewaters treatment by electrocoagulation process using Zn anode, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 275, 331–341 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Naje, S. Chelliapan, Z. Zakaria and S. A. Abbas, Electrocoagulation using a rotated anode: A novel reactor design for textile wastewater treatment, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 176, 34–44 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Maher, K. N. O'Malley, J. Heffron, J. W. Huo, Y. Wang, B. K. Mayer and P. J. McNamara, Removal of estrogenic compounds via iron electrocoagulation: impact of water quality and assessment of removal mechanisms, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2019, 5, 956–966 RSC .
M. Tolgayılmaz, S. Bayar and S. Özcan, Treatment of sugar industry wastewater by electrocoagulation using Fe and Al electrodes: A comparative study, Desalin. Water Treat., 2018, 131, 206–211 CrossRef .
A. Barhoumi, S. Ncib, A. Chibani, K. Brahmi, W. Bouguerra and E. Elaloui, High-rate humic acid removal from cellulose and paper industry wastewater by combining electrocoagulation process with adsorption onto granular activated carbon, Ind. Crops Prod., 2019, 140, 111715 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dermentzis, A. Christoforidis and E. Valsamidou, Removal of nickel, copper, zinc and chromium from synthetic and industrial wastewater by electrocoagulation, Int. J. Environ. Sci., 2011, 1, 697–710 CAS .
A. Shafaei, E. Pajootan, M. Nikazar and M. Arami, Removal of Co (II) from aqueous solution by electrocoagulation process using aluminum electrodes, Desalination, 2011, 279, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
E.-S. El-Ashtoukhy, T. Zewail and N. Amin, Removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution by electrocoagulation using a horizontal expanded Al anode, Desalin. Water Treat., 2010, 20, 72–79 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brahmi, W. Bouguerra, S. Harbi, E. Elaloui, M. Loungou and B. Hamrouni, Treatment of heavy metals-polluted industrial wastewater by ballasted electroflocculation the new water treatment process, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 15, 968–980 Search PubMed .
A. Doggaz, A. Attour, M. L. Mostefa, K. Come, M. Tlili and F. Lapicque, Removal of heavy metals by electrocoagulation from hydrogenocarbonate-containing waters: Compared cases of divalent iron and zinc cations, J. Water Process. Eng., 2019, 29, 7 Search PubMed .

          D. Widyarani, H. R. Hariyadi, D. R. Wulan and S. Cahyaningsih, in 1st International Symposium on Green Technology for Value Chains 2016, ed. M. Karina and M. Nasir,  2017, vol. 60 Search PubMed .
K. Thirugnanasambandham and K. Shine, Investigation on the Removal of Chromium from Wastewater using Electrocoagulation, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2018, 16, 1–10 CAS .
M. K. Oden and H. Sari-Erkan, Treatment of metal plating wastewater using iron electrode by electrocoagulation process: Optimization and process performance, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2018, 119, 207–217 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fu, D. D. Dionysiou and L. Hong, The use of zero-valent iron for groundwater remediation and wastewater treatment: A review, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 267C, 194–205 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Nidheesh and T. A. Singh, Arsenic removal by electrocoagulation process: recent trends and removal mechanism, Chemosphere, 2017, 181, 418–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Oh, S. Ji, Y. Cheong and G. Yim, Applicability of electrochemical wastewater treatment system powered by temperature difference energy, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 351, 108–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Z. Can, R. Boncukcuoğlu, A. E. Yılmaz and B. A. Fil, Arsenic and Boron Removal by Electrocoagulation with Aluminum Electrodes, Arabian J. Sci. Eng., 2015, 41, 2229–2237 CrossRef .
P. Song, Z. Yang, H. Xu, J. Huang, X. Yang and L. Wang, Investigation of Influencing Factors and Mechanism of Antimony and Arsenic Removal by Electrocoagulation Using Fe-Al Electrodes, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 12911–12919 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wan, T. J. Pepping, T. Banerji, S. Chaudhari and D. E. Giammar, Effects of water chemistry on arsenic removal from drinking water by electrocoagulation, Water Res., 2011, 45, 384–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, B. Zhang, H. Liu and J. Qu, Removal of arsenite by simultaneous electro-oxidation and electro-coagulation process, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 184, 472–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. G. Gomes, P. Daida, M. Kesmez, M. Weir, H. Moreno, J. R. Parga, G. Irwin, H. McWhinney, T. Grady, E. Peterson and D. L. Cocke, Arsenic removal by electrocoagulation using combined Al-Fe electrode system and characterization of products, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 139, 220–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Noubactep and A. Schoener, Metallic iron for environmental remediation: Learning from electrocoagulation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 175, 1075–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Grich, A. Attour, M. L. P. Mostefa, S. Guesmi, M. Tlili and F. Lapicque, Fluoride removal from water by electrocoagulation: Effect of the type of water and the experimental parameters, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 316, 257–265 CrossRef .
S. Aoudj, A. Khelifa, N. Drouiche and M. Hecini, Removal of fluoride and turbidity from semiconductor industry wastewater by combined coagulation and electroflotation, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 18398–18405 CrossRef CAS .
U. T. Un, S. E. Onpeker and E. Ozel, The treatment of chromium containing wastewater using electrocoagulation and the production of ceramic pigments from the resulting sludge, J. Environ. Manage., 2017, 200, 196–203 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Akbal and S. Camci, Copper, chromium and nickel removal from metal plating wastewater by electrocoagulation, Desalination, 2011, 269, 214–222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Al-Shannag, Z. Al-Qodah, K. Bani-Melhem, M. R. Qtaishat and M. Alkasrawi, Heavy metal ions removal from metal plating wastewater using electrocoagulation: Kinetic study and process performance, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 749–756 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ihos, M. Dragalina, I. Iordache and D. G. Neidoni, Fluoride removal from industrial effluents by combining precipitation and electrocoagulation processes, Rev. Chim., 2019, 70, 304–306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Ye, K. He, Y. Chen and Y. Hu, Simultaneous removal of Ni (II) and fluoride from a real flue gas desulfurization wastewater by electrocoagulation using Fe/C/Al electrode, J. Water Reuse Desalin., 2017, 7, 288–297 CrossRef .
V. Khatibikamal, A. Torabian, F. Janpoor and G. Hoshyaripour, Fluoride removal from industrial wastewater using electrocoagulation and its adsorption kinetics, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 179, 276–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aoudj, A. Khelifa, N. Drouiche, R. Belkada and D. Miroud, Simultaneous removal of chromium (VI) and fluoride by electrocoagulation–electroflotation: application of a hybrid Fe-Al anode, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 267, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
U. T. Un, A. S. Koparal and U. B. Ogutveren, Fluoride removal from water and wastewater with a bach cylindrical electrode using electrocoagulation, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 223, 110–115 CrossRef .
R. LI, J.-L. Cui, X. Li and X.-Y. Li, Phosphorus removal and recovery from wastewater using Fe-dosing bioreactor and co-fermentation: Investigation by X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 14119–14128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Noubli, D. Akretche, J. Crespo and S. Velizarov, Complementary membrane-based processes for recovery and preconcentration of phosphate from industrial wastewater, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 234, 116123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Li, S. Xia and J. Zhao, Simultaneous recovery of microalgae, ammonium and phosphate from simulated wastewater by MgO modified diatomite, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 362, 802–811 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mishima, M. Hama, Y. Tabata and J. Nakajima, Long-term investigation of phosphorus removal by iron electrocoagulation in small-scale wastewater treatment plants, Water Sci. Technol., 2018, 78, 1304–1311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sarierkan, Wastewater treatment from the biodiesel production using waste cooking oil by electrocoagulation: a multivariate approach, Water Sci. Technol., 2019, 79, 2366–2377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Karageorgiou, M. Paschalis and G. N. Anastassakis, Removal of phosphate species from solution by adsorption onto calcite used as natural adsorbent, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 139, 447–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Nguyen, H. H. Ngo, W. Guo, T. T. Nguyen, S. W. Chang, A. Jang and Y. S. Yoon, Can electrocoagulation process be an appropriate technology for phosphorus removal from municipal wastewater?, Sci. Total Environ., 2016, 563, 549–556 CrossRef PubMed .
P. I. Omwene and M. Kobya, Treatment of domestic wastewater phosphate by electrocoagulation using Fe and Al electrodes: A comparative study, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2018, 116, 34–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mamelkina, S. Cotillas, E. Lacasa, C. Saez, R. Tuunila, M. Sillanpaa, A. Hakkinen and M. A. Rodrigo, Removal of sulfate from mining waters by electrocoagulation, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 182, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Amaral, A. Azevedo, R. Etchepare and J. Rubio, Removal of sulfate ions by dissolved air flotation (DAF) following precipitation and flocculation, Int. J. Miner. Process., 2016, 149, 1–8 CrossRef .
M. Wu, Y. Hu, R. Liu, S. Lin, W. Sun and H. Lu, Electrocoagulation method for treatment and reuse of sulphide mineral processing wastewater: Characterization and kinetics, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 696, 134063 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ince, Treatment of Manganese-Phosphate Coating Wastewater by Electrocoagulation, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2012, 48, 515–522 CrossRef .
H. K. Hansen, S. F. Peña, C. Gutiérrez, A. Lazo, P. Lazo and L. M. Ottosen, Selenium removal from petroleum refinery wastewater using an electrocoagulation technique, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 364, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Benhadji, M. T. Ahmed and R. Maachi, Electrocoagulation and effect of cathode materials on the removal of pollutants from tannery wastewater of Rouiba, Desalination, 2011, 277, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
E.-Y. Jo, S.-M. Park, I.-S. Yeo, J.-D. Cha, J. Y. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, T.-K. Lee and C.-G. Park, A study on the removal of sulfate and nitrate from the wet scrubber wastewater using electrocoagulation, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 7833–7840 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kalaruban, P. Loganathan, G. S. Wang and J. Kandasamy, Mathematical Modelling of Nitrate Removal from Water Using a Submerged Membrane Adsorption Hybrid System with Four Adsorbents, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 194 CrossRef .
X. Rao, X. Shao, J. Xu, J. Yi, J. Qiao, Q. Li, H. Wang, M. Chien, C. Inoue, Y. Liu and J. Zhang, Efficient nitrate removal from water using selected cathodes and Ti/PbO2 anode: Experimental study and -mechanism verification, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 216, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, C. Cui, Y. Wu, H. Chen and J. Xia, Highly efficient removal of ammonia nitrogen from wastewater by dielectrophoresis-enhanced adsorption, PeerJ, 2018, 6, e5001 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Dia, P. Drogui, G. Buelna and R. Dube, Strategical approach to prevent ammonia formation during electrocoagulation of landfill leachate obtained from a biofiltration process, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 189, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, W. He, X. Zhu, W. Yang, N. Ren and B. E. Logan, Energy efficient electrocoagulation using an air-breathing cathode to remove nutrients from wastewater, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 292, 308–314 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsioptsias, D. Petridis, N. Athanasakis, I. Lemonidis, A. Deligiannis and P. Samaras, Post-treatment of molasses wastewater by electrocoagulation and process optimization through response surface analysis, J. Environ. Manage., 2015, 164, 104–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Heredia, M. M. de la Fuente García-Soto, A. N. Sierra, S. M. Mendoza and M. E. Crivello, Boron Removal from Aqueous Solutions by Synthetic MgAlFe Mixed Oxides, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 9931–9939 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Sari and S. Chellam, Mechanisms of boron removal from hydraulic fracturing wastewater by aluminum electrocoagulation, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 458, 103–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Yang, H. Y. Xu, G. M. Zeng, Y. L. Luo, X. Yang, J. Huang, L. K. Wang and P. P. Song, The behavior of dissolution/passivation and the transformation of passive films during electrocoagulation: Influences of initial pH, Cr(VI) concentration, and alternating pulsed current, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 149–158 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ozbey, D. Y. Koseoglu-Imer, B. Keskinler and I. Koyuncu, Boron removal from geothermal water by air gap membrane distillation, Desalination, 2018, 433, 141–150 CrossRef .
S. H. Ammar, N. N. Ismail, A. D. Ali and W. M. Abbas, Electrocoagulation technique for refinery wastewater treatment in an internal loop split-plate airlift reactor, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1–6 Search PubMed .
E. Bazrafshan, L. Mohammadi, A. Ansari-Moghaddam and A. H. Mahvi, Heavy metals removal from aqueous environments by electrocoagulation process – a systematic review, J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng., 2015, 13, 74 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sardari, J. Askegaard, Y.-H. Chiao, S. Darvishmanesh, M. Kamaz and S. R. Wickramasinghe, Electrocoagulation followed by ultrafiltration for treating poultry processing wastewater, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4937–4944 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zazou, H. Afanga, S. Akhouairi, H. Ouchtak, A. A. Addi, R. A. Akbour, A. Assabbane, J. Douch, A. Elmchaouri and J. Duplay, Treatment of textile industry wastewater by electrocoagulation coupled with electrochemical advanced oxidation process, J. Water Process. Eng., 2019, 28, 214–221 CrossRef .
J. Behin, N. Farhadian, M. Ahmadi and M. Parvizi, Ozone assisted electrocoagulation in a rectangular internal-loop airlift reactor: Application to decolorization of acid dye, J. Water Process. Eng., 2015, 8, 171–178 CrossRef .
G. G. Jing, S. Ren, Y. S. Gao, W. Sun and Z. Y. Gao, Electrocoagulation: A Promising Method to Treat and Reuse Mineral Processing Wastewater with High COD, Water, 2020, 12, 12 CrossRef .
K. V. Vinduja and N. Balasubramanian, Electrocoagulation-integrated hybrid membrane processes for the treatment of tannery wastewater, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 7441–7449 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Keramati and B. Ayati, Petroleum Wastewater Treatment Using a Combination of Electrocoagulation and Photocatalytic Process with Immobilized ZnO Nanoparticles on Concrete Surface, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2019, 126, 356–365 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mavrov, S. Stamenov, E. Todorova, H. Chmiel and T. Erwe, New hybrid electrocoagulation membrane process for removing selenium from industrial wastewater, Desalination, 2006, 201, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bilińska, K. Blus, M. Gmurek and S. Ledakowicz, Coupling of electrocoagulation and ozone treatment for textile wastewater reuse, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 992–1001 CrossRef .
A. H. Mahvi, S. J. A.-D. Ebrahimi, A. Mesdaghinia, H. Gharibi and M. H. Sowlat, Performance evaluation of a continuous bipolar electrocoagulation/electrooxidation-electroflotation (ECEO-EF)
reactor designed for simultaneous removal of ammonia and phosphate from wastewater effluent, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 192, 1267–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Pérez, O. M. Rodriguez, S. Reyna, J. L. Sánchez-Salas and E. R. Bandala, Oil refinery wastewater treatment using coupled electrocoagulation and fixed film biological processes, Phys. Chem. Earth, 2015, 91, 53–60 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, X. Yin, W. Chen, Z. Yi and H. Tian, Removal of sulphate from mine waters by electrocoagulation/rice straw activated carbon adsorption coupling in a batch system: optimization of process via response surface methodology, J. Water Reuse Desalin., 2019, 9, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
I. Linares-Hernández, C. Barrera-Díaz, G. Roa-Morales, B. Bilyeu and F. Ureña-Núñez, Combined electrocoagulation-sorption process applied to mixed industrial wastewater, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 144, 240–248 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sardari, P. Fyfe, D. Lincicome and S. R. Wickramasinghe, Aluminum electrocoagulation followed by forward osmosis for treating hydraulic fracturing produced waters, Desalination, 2015, 428, 172–181 CrossRef .
O. T. Can, M. Kobya, E. Demirbas and M. Bayramoglu, Treatment of the textile wastewater by combined electrocoagulation, Chemosphere, 2006, 62, 181–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hernandez-Ortega, T. Ponziak, C. Barrera-Diaz, M. A. Rodrigo, G. Roa-Morales and B. Bilyeu, Use of a combined electrocoagulation-ozone process as a pre-treatment for industrial wastewater, Desalination, 2010, 250, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moradi and G. Moussavi, Enhanced treatment of tannery wastewater using the electrocoagulation process combined with UVC/VUV photoreactor: Parametric and mechanistic evaluation, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 1038–1046 CrossRef CAS .
V. Orescanin, R. Kollar, K. Nad, I. L. Mikelic and S. F. Gustek, Treatment of winery wastewater by electrochemical methods and advanced oxidation processes, J. Environ. Sci. Health Part A-Toxic/Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng., 2013, 48, 1543–1547 CAS .
V. Orescanin, R. Kollar, K. Nad, I. L. Mikelic and S. F. Gustek, Treatment of winery wastewater by electrochemical methods and advanced oxidation processes, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A: Toxic/Hazard. Subst. Environ. Eng., 2013, 48, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Brillas and C. A. Martinez-Huitle, Decontamination of wastewaters containing synthetic organic dyes by electrochemical methods. An updated review, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 603–643 CrossRef .
I. Linares-Hernandez, C. Barrera-Diaz, B. Bilyeu, P. Juarez-GarciaRojas and E. Campos-Medina, A combined electrocoagulation-electrooxidation treatment for industrial wastewater, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 175, 688–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, G. Qian, L. Ye, X. Hu, X. Yu and W. Lyu, Research on the enhancement of biological nitrogen removal at low temperatures from ammonium-rich wastewater by the bio-electrocoagulation technology in lab-scale systems, pilot-scale systems and a full-scale industrial wastewater treatment plant, Water Res., 2018, 140, 77–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nidheesh, J. Scaria, D. S. Babu and M. S. Kumar, An overview on combined electrocoagulation/degradation processes for the effective treatment of water and wastewater, Chemosphere, 2020, 127907 Search PubMed .
M. Damaraju, D. Bhattacharyya, T. K. Panda and K. K. Kurilla, Marigold wastewater treatment in a lab-scale and a field-scale continuous bipolar-mode electrocoagulation system, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 245, 118693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Tsang, F. L. Hua, H. Chua, S. N. Sin and Y. J. Wang, Optimization of biological treatment of paper mill effluent in a sequencing batch reactor, Biochem. Eng. J., 2007, 34, 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zodi, O. Potier, J. P. Leclerc and F. Lapicque, Treatment of the textile wastewaters by electrocoagulation: Effect of operating parameters on the sludge settling characteristics, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 69, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
N. Drouiche, N. Ghaffour, H. Lounici, N. Mameri, A. Maallemi and H. Mahmoudi, Electrochemical treatment of chemical mechanical polishing wastewater: removal of fluoride — sludge characteristics — operating cost, Desalination, 2008, 223, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .
K. O. Muhammed and S.-E. Hanife, Treatment of metal plating wastewater using iron electrode by electrocoagulation process: Optimization and process performance, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2018, S0957582018302878 Search PubMed .
C. Barrera-Dıaz, F. Urena-Nunez, E. Campos, M. Palomar-Pardavé and M. Romero-Romo, A combined electrochemical-irradiation treatment of highly colored and polluted industrial wastewater, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2003, 67, 657–663 CrossRef .
P. V. Nidheesh and T. S. A. Singh, Arsenic removal by electrocoagulation process: Recent trends and removal mechanism, Chemosphere, 2017, 181, 418–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Golder, A. N. Samanta and S. Ray, Anionic reactive dye removal from aqueous solution using a new adsorbent: Sludge generated in removal of heavy metal by electrocoagulation, Chem. Eng. J., 2006, 122, 107–115 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Hassan, K. Fukushi, K. Turikuzzaman and S. M. Moniruzzaman, Effects of using arsenic-iron sludge wastes in brick making, Waste Manage., 2014, 34, 1072–1078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Water impact
The application of electrocoagulation for wastewater remediation is of increasing interest. This review article summarizes recent improvements of electrocoagulation for real industrial wastewater treatment from the perspectives of applicability, mechanism, controlling factors, sludge management and hybrid technologies in order to broaden its range of industrial applications.


 	Fig. 1  The schematic representation of the EC process.	 
Fe(s) → Fe2+ + 2e−	(1)
Fe2+ + O2 + 2H2O → Fe3+ + 4OH−	(2)
4Fe2+ + 8OH− + O2 + 2H2O → 4Fe(OH)3(s)	(3)
Al(s) → Al3+ + 3e−	(4)
2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2(g)	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  Different modes of electrode configuration (1) bipolar-serial (2) monopolar parallel (3) monopolar-serial.	 
ηIR = dIρ	(8)
2Cl− → Cl2 + 2e−	(9)
Cl2 + H2O → HOCl + H+Cl−	(10)
HOCl → H+ + OCl−	(11)

 	Fig. 3  Predominant species of Al(III), Fe(II) and Fe(III) in aqueous solution (invisible colors indicate the negligible quantity).31	 
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
lnqe = lnqs − 2bRTln[1 + 1/Ce]	(18)

Drilling site	O&G	Al/Al	80 A m−2	20	3.6	70.86	
53

Textile dyeing factory	Dye	Al/Al	15 mA cm−2	23	5.5	97 (color)	
58

Textile industry	Dye	Steel/Al	8 mA cm−2	10	7.1	86 (color)	
57

82 (turbidity)
59 (COD)
Hospital	Ciprofloxacin	Al/Al	12.5 mA cm−2	20	7.78	88.75	
59

Olive debittering wastewater	Polyphenolic compounds	Al/Al	15 mA cm−2	60	4.0	78.51(COD)	
60

Machinery industry	Spent coolant	Al/Al	20 mA cm−2	30	10.5	70.90 (COD)	
61

92.10 (BOD)
94.80 (O&G)

Metal industry	Cr	Stainless steel/stainless steel	25 mA cm−2	30	6.0	97	
80

Electroplating facility	Cr(VI)	Fe/Fe	20 mA cm−2	60	2.4	∼100	
93

Industrial mining wastewater	Zn(II), Cd(II)	Al/Al	2 A	20 L h−1	7.0	93, 99	
77

Metal plating plant	Cu, Cr, Ni	Fe/Al	10 mA cm−2	20	3.0	∼100 (all)	
94

Metal plating wastewater	Cu2+, Cr3+, Ni2+, Zn2+	Carbon steel/carbon steel	4 mA cm−2	45	9.6	>97 (all)	
95

Fe(OH)3(s) → FeO(OH)(s) + H2O	(19)
2FeO(OH)(s) + H2AsO4− → (FeO)2HAsO4(s)− + H2O + OH−	(20)
3Fe(OH)(s) + HAsO42− → (FeO)3AsO4(s)− + H2O + 2OH−	(21)

Flue gas desulfurization wastewater	F−	Fe/C/Al	5.00 mA cm−2	25	4.0	86	
97

Manganese–phosphate coating wastewater	PO32−	Al/Al	20 A m−2	30	3.12	99.96	
112

Mineral processing wastewater	SO42−	Al/stainless steel	90.91 mA cm−2	60	6.5	93.14	
111

Phenol treatment plant	Selenium	Fe/Fe	153 A m−2	360	5.0	90	
113

Tannery wastewater	Nitrate	Al/Al	75 A m−2	45	7.15	>90	
114

mF− + Aln(OH)3n(s) → AlnFm(OH)(3n−m)(s) + m(OH)−	(22)
mF− + nAl3+ + (3n − m)OH− → AlnFm(OH)(3n−m)(s)	(23)
3Fe2+ + 2PO43− → Fe3(PO4)2(s)	(24)
Fe3+ + PO43− → FePO4(s)	(25)
xFe3+ + PO43− + (3x − 3)OH− → FexPO4(OH)3x−3(s)	(26)
Al3+ + PO43− → AlPO4(s)	(27)
xAl3+ + PO43− + (3x − 3)OH− → AlxPO4(OH)3x−3(s)	(28)

 	Fig. 4  Schematic design of some hybrid processes. (a) The EC/electrooxidation–electroflotation process,136 (b) the EC + O3 process135 and (c) the EC membrane process.134 Reproduced with permission from ref. 134–136. Copyright 2011, Elsevier, 2019, Elsevier and 2006, Elsevier.	 
	(29)

 	Fig. 5  SEM analyses of sludge. (a) and (b) Al electrode, and (c) and (d) Fe electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153 and 154 . Copyright 2008, Elsevier and 2018, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
