Recent advances in titanium-based electrode materials for stationary sodium-ion batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE01807F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01807F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2978-3006Recent advances in titanium-based electrode materials for stationary sodium-ion batteries

        
          
            Shaohua 
            Guo†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Yi†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Haoshen 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *ab
aEnergy Technology Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. E-mail: sun-yang@aist.go.jp; hs.zhou@aist.go.jp
bCenter of Energy Storage Materials & Technology, College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. E-mail: hszhou@nju.edu.cn
Received 
      23rd June 2016
    , Accepted 17th August 2016First published on 17th August 2016AbstractRecently, the attention to sodium-ion batteries has been refocused on large-scale energy storage applications, due to sodium's low cost and infinite abundance. Sodium is one of the most abundant elements on earth and exhibits chemical properties similar to lithium. Owing to their superior sodium storage capability especially for excellent safety and stability, Ti-based compounds have been extensively investigated as both cathode and anode materials. Herein we outline the current cathodes and anodes, and emphasize the critical roles of titanium in developing advanced electrodes for sodium-ion batteries. The latest advances and progress in the exploration of Ti-based compounds with various different frameworks such as NASICON, tunnel, MXenes, spinel, and layered structures are systematically reviewed. The straightforward linking of the structure–function–property relationship for Ti-based compounds, especially for layered Na/Ti-containing oxides, is summarized and analyzed. The titanium element plays a critical role in both positive and negative electrodes, i.e., supplying the charge transfer and high safety for anodes and greatly enhancing the structural and cycling stability for cathodes. Based on the bi-functional roles of titanium, a new concept of symmetric Na-ion cells employing layered Na/Ti-containing oxides as bipolar electrodes is proposed and realized. Symmetric Na-ion cells already offered a high voltage and withstood long time charge–discharge processes, demonstrating the practicality beyond the proof of concept. The participation of titanium in sodium-based electrode materials will greatly promote the development of room-temperature sodium-ion batteries towards stationary energy storage.
Shaohua Guo
Shaohua Guo received his PhD in Engineering Mechanics and Energy in 2015 from the University of Tsukuba under the supervision of Prof. Haoshen Zhou and Prof. Masayoshi Ishida. He is currently working as a postdoctoral researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). His research interests focus on functional materials for Li/Na-ion batteries, Li/Na–air batteries, supercapacitors, and other energy storage devices.
Jin Yi
Jin Yi received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Fudan University in 2014. In the same year, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan, with Prof. Haoshen Zhou. His research interests include electrochemical functional materials and their application in Li (Na)-ion batteries, solid-state batteries, and metal–air batteries.
Yang Sun
Yang Sun received his MS degree in physics from Shandong University (Weihai) in 2009 and PhD degree in condensed matter physics from the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). His research interests center on the mechanistic study of Li–O2 and Li/Na-ion batteries, through combined computational and experimental techniques.
Haoshen Zhou
Prof. Haoshen Zhou obtained his bachelor’s degree from Nanjing University in 1985, and received his PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1994. He is a prime senior researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology and a joint professor in Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of energy-active materials and their applications in Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries, Li-redox flow batteries, metal–air batteries and new type batteries/cells.

Broader context
Large-scale energy storage systems are key to smoothly integrating the renewable resources such as wind and solar into the smart grid. Recently, taking into account sodium's superiority in cost and abundance, the development of electrode materials and electrolytes for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) has been intensively revisited towards their promising application in large-scale energy storage. Titanium-based compounds present low-strain and high-stability characteristics as electrode materials of SIBs, and potentially enable low-cost and long-life room-temperature SIBs to proceed towards large-scale energy storage. Herein, we review recent research progress on titanium-based electrode materials for SIBs with three parts including titanium-based anodes, titanium-containing cathodes, and titanium-based bipolar electrodes, provide a detailed and comprehensive understanding of the structure–function–property relationship of titanium-based compounds, and underline the advantages of titanium-based compounds for sodium storage. Additionally, the design strategies to achieve high-performance SIB electrode materials via titanium participation are proposed. The model of symmetric Na-ion cells based on layered Na/Ti-containing oxides will be a competitive and attractive battery system for next-generation energy storage devices.

1 Introduction
To smoothly integrate renewable energy into the smart grid, energy storage devices are key to modulating variable renewable resources for large-scale applications.1 There are various potential technologies, wherein electrical energy storage (EES) or stationary batteries can efficiently store and release electricity in chemicals according to demand, and thus are regarded as a smart choice.2,3 For large-scale energy storage, the low cost, long life, and high safety of stationary batteries are the critical factors, definitely differing from those of power batteries. Therefore, it is extremely important to search for abundant, nontoxic, and durable batteries to smooth out the intermittency of renewable energy production.
Although lithium-ion batteries have dominated portable electronic devices and are regarded as a possible solution to the electrical grid concerns,4 the increasing lithium demand in mobile electronic equipment, hybrid electrical vehicles (HEVs), and electrical vehicles (EV) will ultimately push up the price of lithium compounds, thereby leading to prohibitively expensive large-scale storage.5 It is well known that lithium is a non-abundant element, limited to only 0.065% in earth's crust (Fig. 1a), and unevenly distributed (mainly in South America). In contrast to lithium, sodium is one of the most abundant elements in earth's crust (Fig. 1a); meanwhile, infinite sodium resources are also available in the ocean. Additionally, sodium has a suitable redox potential (versus the standard hydrogen electrode; only 0.3 V above that of lithium). Therefore, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) with low cost and high efficiency are the ideal alternative to lithium in large-scale applications.6–13
 Fig. 1  (a) Elemental abundance in the earth's crust. (b) Schematic showing renewable energy generation such as wind, solar, tidal, and geothermal energy supplies in the smart grid through energy storage solutions. (c) The working principle of room-temperature sodium-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) were studied in the 1970s in parallel with lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).14–16 Since the commercial success of LIBs, the related research studies explosively grew whereas the investigation of SIBs was decreased.4,17 Recently, taking account of sodium's superiority in cost and abundance, the development of electrode materials and electrolytes for SIBs has been intensively revisited towards their promising application in large-scale energy storage (Fig. 1b). Room-temperature sodium-ion batteries have a ‘rocking-chair’ working principle, similar to that of LIBs, shown in Fig. 1c. It is distinctive in its low maintenance cost and high energy efficiency, in contrast to various commercialized high-temperature sodium-based technologies such as Na/S and Na/NiCl2 batteries.18 Besides, the feasible usage of Al current collectors in both the electrodes will save substantial cost and weight of the whole Na-ion cells (compared with the Cu current collector in the anode of LIBs). In a typical structure of Na-ion full-cells, two insertion materials, positive and negative electrodes, are electrochemically separated by the electrolyte (in general, electrolyte salts dissolved in aprotic polar solvents). Although many efforts have been made for the development of various electrode materials, a number of drawbacks defer the implementation of Na-ion batteries in large-scale applications, such as safety, stability, and lifetime concerns. Recent studies and reports indicate that titanium-based compounds exhibit excellent sodium storage performance and hence show promise as high-performance electrodes for practical SIBs.6,19
Titanium is one of the rock-forming elements, widely distributed in the earth's crust, and titanium-based compounds are stable, nontoxic, and inexpensive. More importantly, numerous titanium-based materials are known as electrochemically active host materials for Li-ion insertion.20 For instance, polytype titanium dioxides, titanium trisulfide, spinel-type Li4Ti5O12, MXenes, zig-zag titanates, and NASICON (short for Na Super Ionic CONductor) type lithium–titanium phosphate have been applied in LIBs.21–26 Nevertheless, only three Ti-based materials, TiS2, NaTiO2, and NASICON type NaTi2(PO4)3, were reported for SIB electrodes before 2010.15,27–29 Until recent years, an increasing number of Ti-containing SIB electrodes have been intensively studied,30–33 demonstrating a much broader role of titanium in SIBs than that in LIBs. For instance, it is difficult to find traces of the titanium element in layered lithium containing oxides, the dominant cathode materials for LIBs; in contrast, layered Na/Ti-containing oxides are synthetically facile and show promise for large-scale electric energy storage. Layered Na/Ti-containing oxides are extensively explored as high-performance electrodes under the following considerations: (1) with respect to anode materials, titanium redox can provide a suitable insertion potential and superior structural stability, ensuring the safety and long-term operation of SIBs. (2) Regarding the cathode side, titanium incorporated into layered structures plays a pivotal role in stabilizing the two-dimensional structure, adjusting the electrochemical potential, smoothening the voltage profiles, and extending the cyclic life. Besides layered Na/Ti-containing oxides, other titanium-based compounds also present low-strain and high-stability characteristics similar to the electrode materials of SIBs, and potentially enable low-cost and long-life room-temperature SIBs to proceed towards large-scale energy storage.
In this review, recent research progress on titanium-based electrode materials for SIBs is summarized, with the three parts including titanium-based anodes, titanium-containing cathodes, and titanium-based bipolar electrodes. We provide a detailed and comprehensive understanding of the structure–function–property relationship of titanium-based compounds, and underline the advantages of titanium-based compounds for sodium storage. Besides, the design strategies for novel electrode materials for SIBs are discussed. The model of symmetric Na-ion cells based on layered Na/Ti-containing oxides will be a competitive and attractive battery system for next-generation energy storage devices.
2 Overview of the current electrode materials for sodium-ion batteries
Before addressing Ti-based compounds, we first give an overview of sodium storage materials. In recent years, large volumes of materials with various structures have been explored for both positive and negative electrodes for SIBs. Given the abundant research experience in LIBs, many sodium analogues of LIB electrodes have been used as electrode materials for SIBs, e.g., sodium containing layered oxides,34–39 various polyanion compounds,40–45 and alloying compounds.46–50 Besides, many novel compounds that have never been used in LIBs, e.g., prussian blue analogues,51,52 have also been developed as promising electrode materials for SIBs. In this section, we provide a brief introduction to the crystal structures and electrochemical performances of several main SIB electrode materials.
2.1 Cathode materials

2.1.1 Layered oxides. 
Following the commercial success of layered cathodes for LIBs, layered Na-containing 3d-transition metal oxides have been widely studied as electrode materials for SIBs.6 In fact, Delmas and his colleagues investigated this kind of material even before the worldwide upsurge in LIB research,53 nevertheless the study of SIBs has not received much attention until very recently. The renewed interest in SIBs motivates people to revisit the series of Na-containing layered oxides, leading to a significant rise in related publications.6,54 A typical layered structure is characterized by parallel sheets consisting of edge-sharing TMO6 octahedra (TM = transition metal elements) stacked along the c axis, with Na-ions intercalated between the TM–O sheets. When these sheets are stacked in different ways, polytypes appear. Layered Na–TM oxides normally fall into four main groups using the classification proposed by Delmas et al., i.e., O3-type, P3-type, O2-type, and P2-type stackings (Fig. 2a–d),55 where the symbols O and P indicate that the sodium ions are accommodated at octahedral and trigonal prismatic interstitial sites, respectively. The number 2 or 3 corresponds to the minimum number of TM–O sheets required to describe the lattice structure, e.g., there are two or three non-equivalent TMO2 sheets (AB CA BC for O3, AB BC CA for P3, AB AC for O2, and AB BA for P2) in the phase structures, as illustrated in Fig. 2a–d. Traditionally, layered Na-containing oxides can be obtained by simple solid-state reactions, which can be easily extended to industrial application.54
 Fig. 2  The classification of layered Na-containing oxides (NaxTMO2) and the Na-diffusion paths in the O- and P-type frameworks. A schematic of the crystal structures for O3-type (a), P3-type (b), O2-type (c), and P2-type stackings (d). (e) The indirect Na-ion diffusion path with the intermediate tetrahedron site in O-type frameworks. (f) The direct Na-ion diffusion path without the intermediate site in P-type frameworks. The blue and yellow balls represent the transition-metal and oxygen ions in the O-type frameworks, respectively; the brown balls indicate the transition-metal ions, and the green and yellow balls stand for the NaI and NaII ions in the P-type frameworks, respectively. 
Schematic illustrations of in-plane Na-ion conduction in both O- and P-type phases are compared in Fig. 2e and f. Sodium ions in the O-phase migrate through interstitial tetrahedral sites, which are face-shared sites with other NaO6 or TMO6 octahedra (Fig. 2e), leading to the high activation energy of direct hopping from one to another adjacent octahedral site, analogous to the Li-ion diffusion path in layered LixTMO2. Notably, a computational study indicates that the diffusion barrier of Na-ions could be smaller than that of Li-ions in the O3-type layered framework structures,56 although it is widely believed that the larger size of Na-ions certainly leads to lower ionic diffusivity. As the sodium concentration changes upon charge–discharge, NaxTMO2 cathodes normally undergo a reversible host rearrangement between O-type and P-type stackings (O3 ↔ P3 or P2 ↔ O2).57,58 Compared with the O-type phase, P-type structures are expected to provide more facile Na-ion transport owing to the open diffusion paths in P-type stackings (Fig. 2f).59 In the open framework of the P-type structure, the Na-ion directly migrates from one to another adjacent prismatic site and therefore a more rapid ionic transport is anticipated. Indeed, a higher ionic conductivity of P-type layered materials than that of O-type ones has been observed for samples containing similar chemical compositions for sodium/vacancy.60 It should be noted that the local environment of Na ions at prismatic sites and the diffusion pathway in the P2 and P3 phases are also different, potentially resulting in different mobilities of Na ions. A detailed comparison between the P2- and P3-phases will be discussed in the following sections.
Owing to the large radius of Na ions and the resulting multiple stacking sequences, more transition metal redox are available in NaTMO2 (TM = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) than that in LiTMO2 (M = Co, Ni). Recently, it was reported that the Cu1+/Cu2+ redox couple can also be realized in NaTMO2.61,62 Although the large ionic size usually indicates sluggish transport kinetics, Na migration can be even more facile than Li migration in layered frameworks due to the open structure of P-type stacking (by contrast, almost all layered LiTMO2 cathodes adopt O3-type stacking). Besides, the large gap in ionic radius between Na and TM ions almost prevents the formation of a Na–TM antisite, a common harmful defect in layered LiTMO2 cathodes.63 All these properties render layered Na-based oxides more flexible to meet expectations for their applications.
Layered sodium single-transition-metal oxides are in the early stage of investigation.34–39 Reversible (de)intercalation of Na in NaFeO2 was first reported by Okada and co-workers.64 The unique Fe3+/Fe4+ redox was demonstrated, and an 80 mA h g−1 capacity can be achieved when charged to 3.4 V. When the potential is continuously increased, the material suffered from serious deterioration. The electrochemical properties of O′3-NaMnO2 with a monoclinic lattice were revisited in 2011.65 A large capacity of over 180 mA h g−1 and a wide sodium composition (Na1−xMnO2, x < 0.8) were obtained, however, the potential profiles exhibited pronounced stepwise processes, indicative of multi-phase transition and structural instability during cyclings. It is generally considered to be caused by the Na-vacancy ordering during (de)sodiation, which also occurred in large-capacity P2-NaxMnO2 and other layered oxides by Na (de)insertion. Komaba et al. recently reported a new P2 material P2-Na2/3Mn1/2Fe1/2O2,66 showing a 190 mA h g−1 capacity and high energy density comparable to LIB cathodes. The charge transfer process was detected by Mossbauer spectroscopy, and it suggested that the Fe3+/Fe4+ redox couple is accessible in this material. This is the first SIB cathode material that delivers comparable energy density to that of LIB cathodes.


2.1.2 Prussian-blue analogues. 
Na-based Prussian-blue analogues (PBAs) have the general chemical formula Na2−xM[M′(CN)6]1−y·zH2O (0 ≤ x ≤ 2, y ≤ 1; M and M′ represent the transition-metal ions), wherein low-spin M′C6 and high-spin MN6 octahedra are bridged by (CN)− anions, Na+ and H2O occupy the large space of the framework's interstitial sites (Fig. 3). The open framework of PBAs offers a stable host for alkali-ion reversible (de)insertion, and the ion channels connecting the interstitial A sites with a large size allows rapid ionic transport. These compounds could be synthesized at low temperature, exhibit a reversible sodium insertion electrochemistry, and offer many advantages for large-scale applications, such as low-cost and high stability.
 Fig. 3  Several classical prussian blue analogues. Schematic of crystal structures for KFeMn(CN)6 (a), hydrated monoclinic-Na2−δMnHCF (b), and dehydrated rhombohedral-Na2−δMnHCF (c). The C, N, and alkali-metal (Na or K) atoms are represented by brown, blue, and yellow spheres, respectively. Low-spin (Fe/Mn)3+C6 and high-spin Mn2+N6 octahedra are denoted by olivine and green surfaces, respectively. 
Early studies of prussian blue materials focused on the electrochemistry in an aqueous electrolyte,67–70 showing low potentials because of the limitation of aqueous systems. It is subsequently demonstrated that in an aprotic electrolyte with a Na metal counter electrode, potassium iron hexacyanoferrate (Fig. 3a) exhibited a reversible capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1.71 Guo's group reported that nickel ferricyanide exhibits stable cycling performance with negligible volume change during charge–discharge.72 For easy access to full cell applications, a high Na concentration in prussian blue frameworks is highly desired. Goodenough's group recently synthesized sodium manganese hexacyanoferrate (Na2−δMnHCF) with a small δ.73 The dehydrated samples (Fig. 3c) with a rhombohedral lattice showed better electrochemical behavior than the hydrated monoclinic ones (Fig. 3b). The hydrated samples with high reversibility exhibited a 150 mA h g−1 capacity at 3.5 V with a single plateau for voltage profiles. It seems to be inconsistent with the two redox of Mn2+/Mn3+ and Fe2+/Fe3+. One possibility is associated with lattice water, and the removal of lattice water brings the two redox of Mn2+/Mn3+ and Fe2+/Fe3+ close in potential. Currently, the in-depth mechanistic understanding of prussian blue materials is still lacking and further explorations are needed to achieve satisfactory electrochemical performance. And it should be noted that the dissolution and toxic concerns of Prussian-blue analogues especially in acidic aqueous solution need to be repeatedly demonstrated before practical applications.


2.1.3 Polyanion compounds. 
Polyanion compounds including phosphates, fluorophosphates, and sulfates have been investigated as intriguing cathode materials for SIBs. The open-framework of polyanion compounds is expected to offer facile paths for Na-ion migration, and the operation voltage of a specific redox can be tailored by the local environments of polyanions. Moreover, most of these materials have high thermal stability and oxidative stability at high charging voltage due to the strong covalent bonding of oxygen atoms in the polyanionic framework.
Olivine lithium iron phosphate LiFePO4 is the most widely studied polyanionic LIB electrode material.74 It shows impressive cycle performance and has been commercialized in practical applications.75 Naturally, its sodium counterpart NaFePO4 was investigated as a SIB electrode. However, NaFePO4 is inclined to crystallize in the more thermodynamically stable maricite structure (Fig. 4b) rather than the electrochemically active olivine structure,76 and the former is generally considered to have no free pathways for Na migration. Olivine NaFePO4 (Fig. 4a) can be synthesized via Li/Na exchange from LiFePO4,77 while it undergoes an intermediate phase of Na0.7FePO4 during electrochemical charge–discharge,78 which is responsible for the sluggish kinetics. A more promising polyanion compound is NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3 (Fig. 4d), which exhibits two voltage plateaus at 3.4 V (V3+/V4+) and 1.6 V (V2+/V3+).79 After carbon-coating treatment, this material with enhanced electronic conductivity demonstrates impressive rate and cycling performance. Another NASICON type SIB electrode Na3Ti2(PO4)3 delivers a flat voltage plateau of 2.1 V,80 an awkward value that is higher for anodes and lower for cathodes in aprotic electrolytes. While in aqueous electrolytes with neutral pH, it shows excellent cyclic performance with a small polarization.81 Pyrophosphate-based materials were also scrutinized and it was found that Na2FeP2O7 (Fig. 4c) makes a safe cathode for SIBs, although the energy density is relatively low.82 The NaMnFe2(PO4)3 alluaudite phase was examined as the positive electrode to show a significant polarization in sodium batteries.83 Recently, Yamada et al. discovered a sulfate with a new composition of Na2Fe2(SO4)3 (Fig. 4f), and it registered the highest ever Fe3+/Fe2+ redox potential at 3.8 V vs. Na+/Na with a capacity of 102 mA h g−1 and fast kinetics.84
 Fig. 4  Several classical polyanion frameworks. Schematic of crystal structures for olivine-NaFePO4 (a), maricite-NaFePO4 (b), NaFeP2O7 (c), Na3V2(PO4)3 (d), Na2FeMn2(PO4)3 (e), and Na2Fe2(SO4)3 (f). The TMO6 octahedra and PO4/SO4 tetrahedra are denoted by green and dark red surfaces, respectively. Na atoms are represented by yellow spheres. 


2.1.4 Tunnel oxides. 
The tunnel-type structure of Na4Mn4Ti5O18 is presented in Fig. 5f.85 The unit cell is made up of TMO5 square pyramids and TMO6 octahedra (TM = Ti, Mn), which are arranged to form two types of tunnels: large S-shaped tunnels and small pentagon tunnels. Three Na sites appear in this structure, i.e. Na(1) fully occupied in the small tunnels, Na(2) and Na(3) sites half occupied in the large S-shaped tunnels. Sodium ions in the large S-shaped tunnels are regarded to be mobile and potentially extracted while the Na ions in the small pentagon tunnels are fixed.
 Fig. 5  Typical Ti-based compounds for sodium storage. Schematic of crystal structures for (a) anatase-type TiO2, (b) TiO2-B, (c) spinel-type Li4Ti5O12, (d) zig-zag Na2Ti3O7, (e) zig-zag Na2Ti6O13, and (f) tunnel-type Na4Mn4Ti5O18. The TiO6 octahedra and MnO5/MnO6 polyhedra are denoted by blue and olivine surfaces, respectively. Li and Na atoms are represented by green and yellow spheres, respectively. 
The use of tunnel-typeNa0.44MnO2 as a cathode for lithium and sodium cells was described by M. Doeff and et al.,86 and then in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements gave the evidence for the presence of six biphasic transitions within 2–3.8 V, and the sodium composition in NaxMnO2 ranges from 0.25 < x < 0.65, corresponding to the capacity as high as 140 mA h g−1.87 Recently, Ti-substituted tunnel structures seem to be a resurgence of interest since Ti participation in the tunnel structure successfully removes the multi-plateaus of potential profiles and the related phase transitions.88–91 Details of tunnel Ti-containing oxides are given in Section 5.2.

2.2 Anode materials

2.2.1 Hard carbon. 
Graphite is the most common anode material used in current lithium batteries, but typical graphite cannot be reversibly inserted in terms of Na-ions. In contrast, lower-crystallinity and non-graphitic carbon compounds, such as hard carbon, show high electrochemistry activity in non-aqueous sodium cells.92 Hard-carbon has a disordered structure, which is generally considered to be composed of two domains, that is, graphene-like carbon layers and nanosized micropores between them. Accordingly, for the electrochemical reaction in hard-carbon and sodium metal, the initial reaction with a sloping voltage profile originated from Na intercalation into graphene interlayers, and the following low-voltage plateau region corresponded to the filling of pores in the carbons.
The electrochemical performance of hard carbon was first reported by Stevens and Dahn in 2000.93 The hard carbon, obtained from the carbonization of glucose at 300 °C, delivered a 300 mA h g−1 reversible capacity. Subsequently, Palacin et al. optimized electrolytes with different Na salts and solutions for hard carbon, and discovered that the best cyclic performance was achieved in the case of NaClO4 dissolved in cyclic carbonates.94 Fluorinated ethylene carbonate (FEC) as an additive is noticeably effective to achieve good reversibility of Na insertion in hard carbon electrodes.95
The specific structure, domain size, fraction of carbon layers and micropores tightly depend on the carbon precursors, carbonization conditions, and graphitization extents. The selection of appropriate carbon sources and the carbonization process are of vital importance to tailor the carbon microstructure for the improved performance of carbon negative electrodes.96


2.2.2 Transition-metal oxides. 
Most insertion-type transition-metal oxides for SIB anodes are based on the Ti3+/Ti4+ redox couple. These Ti-based oxides can be divided into three categories, including TiO2 polymorphs,97 Na2O·nTiO2,98 and layered Na/Ti containing oxides.99 Besides, the most widely studied spinel lithium titanate Li4Ti5O12 (Fig. 5c) also allows reversible sodium storage.100 Vanadium, niobium, and molybdenum based anodes, utilizing their low potential redox couples, are also developed.101–103
TiO2 normally consists of TiO6 octahedra with tetravalent titanium ions. Polymorphisms of TiO2 appear according to the difference in the linkage of TiO6 octahedra, and anatase TiO2 is one of the oldest host structures studied for Li insertion.104 TiO6 octahedra in anatase TiO2 share four edges with other octahedra, forming a three-dimensional framework structure with a distorted cubic close-packed (CCP) oxygen lattice (Fig. 5a). TiO2-B has a monoclinic C2/m structure comprising edge- and corner-sharing TiO6 octahedra with an open channel parallel to the b-axis that sits between axial oxygens, as illustrated in Fig. 5b.105 The electrochemical performance of TiO2 polymorphs in SIBs is discussed in Section 4.1.
Several compound forms of Na2O·nTiO2 (n = 3, 6) are shown in Fig. 5d and e. The crystal structures for the series of Na titanates were studied in the 1960s.106,107 The crystal structure of Na2Ti3O7 is shown in Fig. 5d. The basic unit consists of a two-dimensional sheet of composition (Ti3O7)2− with edge-sharing triple octahedral chains. Na-ions are accommodated between the sheets of (Ti3O7)2−. Na2Ti6O13 has a similar structure to Na2Ti3O7,107 except for that the chains of (Ti3O7)2− are isolated in Na2Ti3O7, forming a two-dimensional structure, while the unit (Ti3O7)2− is corner-shared with other (Ti3O7)2− units in Na2Ti6O13, forming a zig-zag structure. More details of Na2O·nTiO2 anodes can be found in Section 4.4.1.
Layered oxide NaxTiO2 has a low sodium storage potential, and is another important anode material for SIBs. By Ti-site doping, NaxTiyTM1−yO2 (TM = Li, Cr, Co, or Ni) compounds showed low and even zero lattice strain,99,108,109 which ensures the long-term operation over thousands of cycles. The crystal structures of layered Na-containing oxides are shown in Section 2.1.1, and more details will be discussed in Section 4.3.


2.2.3 Na-alloying compounds. 
Na-alloying electrodes have the particularity to be inserted with a large amount of Na, but they always show large volume expansion by sodiation due to the fact that the molar volume of Na is much larger than that of Li. Through theoretical calculations, Ceder et al. suggested that the Na occupied volume in a series of Na–Me alloying systems is essentially independent of Me (Me = Si, Ge, Sn and so on), and remains constant at 30.3 Å3 per Na atom.110 Consequently, the volumetric energy density for Na-based alloys is significantly lowered when compared to Li-based alloys. Moreover, the large lattice strain is likely to cause the destruction of the starting materials and a loss of electrical contact, thus resulting in serious capacity fading.
Electrochemical alloying/dealloying for the Na–Sn system occurs in a series of steps, Sn, Na0.6Sn, Na1.2Sn, Na5Sn, and Na15Sn4, where the last phase corresponds to the theoretical capacity of 847 mA h g−1.111 The huge volume change of 424% leads to the poor cyclic performance. The use of a polyacrylate (PAA) binder can remarkably improve the reversibility of the Na–Sn system.112 Cao et al. synthesized Sb/C nanofibers through a single-nozzle electrospinning technique, which delivered a large capacity of 631 mA h g−1 and improved rate capability.113 The good capacity retention of 90% over 400 cycles is rare in alloying systems. In situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) revealed the reaction process for the Na–Sb system, which undergoes crystalline Sb, amorphous NaxSb, and hexagonal Na3Sb during discharge, and then amorphous Sb during charge.114 The insertion of sodium into an amorphous phosphorus/carbon composite achieves a remarkable capacity of 1500 mA h g−1, and the capacity is retained above 1000 mA h g−1 over 80 cycles.49 Recently, a phosphorene–graphene hybrid material showed a specific capacity of 2440 mA h g−1, and an 83% capacity retention after 100 cycles between 0 and 1.5 V.115 In most of these studies with the Na–Me system, the FEC additive is the key to enhanced cycling retention.95
Overall, the alloying SIB anodes are analogous to those of silicon/alloying LIB anodes, but even tougher. Further optimization of alloy composites and structures will be an important subject for improving the electrochemical performance of alloy anodes.

3 Why titanium is important for developing advanced sodium storage materials
The new wave of rechargeable SIB research studies could be attributed to both the abundant sodium resources and its similar intercalation chemistry to that of lithium. There is no doubt that the latter provides a shortcut for the development of SIBs, as many research experiences and well-developed electrodes of LIBs can be directly transplanted to the Na-ion system. Given the same intercalation host, however, Na-ion electrodes will deliver lower energy density and slower ionic mobility relative to their Li-ion counterpart, as the Na-ion is heavier and larger than the Li-ion. Besides, the larger intercalation ions normally lead to a large volume change upon charge–discharge, which is hazardous to long-term cycle performance. Therefore, we can expect an inferior electrochemical performance (by almost all standards) if the same wisdom was directly transferred from LIBs to SIBs. To develop excellent SIB electrodes satisfying the practical application of large-scale energy storage, we should seek new design strategies rather than depend too much on the LIB electrode design experience, i.e., focusing on the differences between Li- and Na-ion intercalation chemistry. The existing research findings have revealed a lot of unique characteristics of Na-containing compounds, and among them the widespread use of the titanium element in SIBs relative to that in LIBs is remarkable. Here we will show that the Ti participation brings new opportunities for SIBs to supply long-term cycling and high safety.
The large ionic radius of Na renders layered Na–TM oxides well-ordered compared to layered Li–TM oxides. Layered NaTMO2 (TM = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe) can be facilely synthesized via traditional solid-state reaction, and these materials can be reversibly inserted and extracted by Na-ions. In contrast, LiTMO2 (TM = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe) either is difficult to be prepared by a conventional routine or cannot be cycled in Li cells, due to the similar ionic radius of 3d TM and lithium ions. This structural flexibility of layered Na–TM oxides greatly enriches the choice of appropriate SIB electrodes. For instance, the Ti element is almost absent in layered Li–TM oxides, although researchers did a lot of attempts to incorporate or dope titanium into TM planes and it has proven unsuccessful. Instead, Ti-ions can be readily introduced into layered Na–TM oxides over a substantial compositional range. Titanium participation brings many new features to Na-ion intercalation chemistry, accelerating the development of satisfactory SIB electrodes.
4 Titanium-based anodes
Sodium ions can hardly be accommodated in graphite, which is a typical anode material for commercial Li-ion batteries.116 Although hard-carbon has been mostly studied as anodes,47,93 however, with respect to safety concerns, the insertion voltage for the most capacity contribution is located at 0–0.1 V, which is too close to that of sodium plating. Other anode materials met with some problems during alloying and conversion reactions. Alloying anodes, e.g., P, Sn, and Sb deliver a higher specific capacity but suffer from huge volume change (420% for Sn).49,117,118 Organic molecules have also been used as anode materials for sodium storage,119,120 however they demonstrated poor electronic conductivity and were susceptible to dissolution in the electrolyte. Ti3+/Ti4+ redox has been widely exploited in Li-ion battery anodes and exhibits an insertion voltage of around 1.5 V relative to Li metal.20 In Na-ion batteries, the potential of Ti redox normally ranges from 0.5 to 1.0 V, avoiding dangerous sodium plating and thus ensuring high safety during large-scale operations. Furthermore, the low lattice strain of Ti-based compounds greatly benefits the long-term cycling of stationary batteries.
4.1 Titanium dioxides
Polymorph titanium dioxides such as anatase, rutile, and brookite-TiO2 as insertion materials have been previously investigated in Li-ion batteries.121–123 These TiO2 compounds are electrochemically characterized by a high-efficiency and long-lasting lithium storage performance, despite a moderate voltage plateau of ∼1.5–1.9 V, sacrificing some energy density of Li-ion batteries. When serving as anodes for Na-ion intercalation, TiO2 compounds can offer a lower potential than that in lithium batteries, but not too low to cause sodium plating, ensuring the safety of Na-ion batteries. To date, amorphous, anatase, and TiO2-B compounds have also been studied for reversible sodium insertion/extraction.32,97,124
Xiong et al. firstly reported that amorphous TiO2 nanotubes were directly grown on Ti foil to gain better electron diffusion.32 Additionally, the preparation of electrode plates was in the absence of binders and conductive additives. Amorphous TiO2 nanotubes with a diameter over 120 nm were found to increasingly store sodium ions through stepwise activation until 15 cycles. The reversible capacity reached a maximum value of 150 mA h g−1, and maintained in the following cycles with a small capacity loss. A pseudocapacitance mechanism was proposed based on the charge balancing of the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox couple, indicated by the X-ray absorption results. Moreover, Na-ion full-cells employing amorphous TiO2 and Na1Li0.2Ni0.25Mn0.75Oδ as negative and positive electrodes, respectively, are preliminarily assembled and tested at ambient temperature. It seems that amorphous TiO2 shows high voltage and an undesirable activation process relative to crystalline TiO2, which was later reported to be active in electrochemical sodium storage.
Crystalline titanium dioxide requires nanosizing and/or carbon-coating to improve the electrical conductivity. Kim et al. hydrothermally synthesized anatase TiO2 nanorods, wherein carbon coating was used to enhance the electrical conductivity without altering the crystal structures.97 The bare and coated materials attained capacities of 160 and 190 mA h g−1, respectively, in the voltage window of 0–3 V (Fig. 6b). Both of them had stable cycling performances, whereas the carbon-coated materials delivered higher capacity at high rates, e.g., 82 mA h g−1 at the 30C-rate, much greater than that of the bare material (Fig. 6a). Ex situ XRD characterization revealed that the crystal structure was well retained during uptake and release of sodium ions (Fig. 6c). X-ray absorption spectroscopy indicated that the Ti4+/Ti3+ redox couple was responsible for the charge compensation as shown in Fig. 6d. Sun's group also reported that a carbon-coated anatase TiO2 microsphere exhibited a specific capacity of ca. 150 mA h g−1, excellent cycle retention during 50 cycles (∼100%) and a superior rate capability up to a 30C rate at room temperature.125 The average voltage of anatase TiO2 is below 1.0 V vs. Na+/Na, considerably lower than that of amorphous TiO2. Moreover, no activation process was observed in crystalline TiO2.
 Fig. 6  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of anatase nanorod TiO2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles for 2.9 wt% carbon-coated anatase TiO2 with different charge rates of 0.5C-rate (165 mA g−1) to 100C-rate (33 A g−1) after the same discharge current density of 10 mA g−1 between 0–3 V. (b) Cycling and rate performance for different carbon-coating amounts. (c) Ex situ XRD patterns and (d) XANES k-edge spectra for 2.9 wt% carbon-coated anatase TiO2 at the first cycle, showing the uncharged structure and the Ti redox mechanism. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Passerini's group investigated the influence of various electrolytes on the electrochemical performance of TiO2 anatase, and decided to select the EC:PC binary solvents for the best comprehensive electrochemical performance (specific capacity, cycling stability, and Coulombic efficiency).126 Subsequently, employing in situ and ex situ XRD, ex situ XPS and Raman spectroscopy, in situ GC-MS, as well as electrochemical methods, they proposed a new mechanism of medium insertion in commercial anatase TiO2 nanoparticles.127 They held that an intermediately formed sodium titanate phase formed in the initial electrochemistry process, and then disproportionated into another sodium titanate phase in the form of Na0.25TiO2, metallic titanium, sodium superoxide, and later oxygen. Only the newly formed, amorphous sodium titanate phase was able to reversibly (de-)intercalate ca. 0.41 Na+ per TiO2, providing a reversible specific capacity of ca. 140 mA h g−1. This newly generated material, nanostructured with a highly electronically conductive metallic titanium and conductive carbon, appears to be a promising anode candidate for high-power Na-ion batteries.
Recently, Huang's group demonstrated that Na-ion intercalation pseudocapacitance in TiO2-B/graphene nanocomposites enabled high-rate capability and long cycle life.128 The nanocomposite obtained by a microwave-assisted reduction-hydrolysis route showed two titanium dioxide phases, a major monoclinic brookite phase and a minor tetragonal anatase phase. TiO2-B was previously reported to present a low reversible capacity versus sodium metal.124 The chemically bonded graphene–TiO2 hybrid delivered a large reversible capacity of 265 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1, superior rate capability exceeding 90 mA h g−1 at 12000 mA g−1 (∼36C) and an ultra-long cycle lifetime over 4300 cycles. Kinetic analysis reveals a Na-ion intercalation pseudocapacitive behavior in TiO2/graphene materials. Further sodiation dynamics analysis based on first-principles calculations shows that the hybridization of graphene and TiO2 nanocrystals provides a more feasible channel at the TiO2/graphene interface and a low energy barrier for sodium intercalation/deintercalation.
The above reports indicate that titanium dioxide anodes usually deliver a moderate specific capacity, but have the advantage of high power capability. In particular, the electrochemical performance of anatase TiO2 in Na-ion batteries is as good as, if not better than, that in Li-ion batteries.97,129 Considering the much larger ionic radius of Na+ than that of Li+, the superior sodium storage capability in anatase TiO2 is remarkable.
4.2 MXenes
Mxenes are a family of two-dimensional (2D) early transition metal carbides and carbonitrides developed by Barsoum's group.25,130 They can be produced by etching out of the A layers from Mn+1AXn (n = 1, 2, 3), where M is an early transition metal, A is mainly a group 13 or 14 element, X is C or N (Fig. 7a).131 In 2013, the same group integrated this new series of materials into LIBs and demonstrated the reversible electrochemical activity of Mxenes.132 Later, Yamada's group found a pseudocapacitance behavior in the MXene nanosheets of Ti2CTx with the reversible sodium uptake and release.133 By utilizing the pseudocapacitance as a negative electrode, the Ti2CTx nanosheets delivered a reversible capacity of ∼175 mA h g−1 with a capacitor-type slope between 0.1–3.0 V (Fig. 7b), and presented good cycle stability (Fig. 7c). The capacities varied from 156 to 63 mA h g−1 by increasing the current density from 200 to 5000 mA h g−1, associated with a superior rate capability (Fig. 7d). The interlayer spacing change was detected by the ex situ XRD experiments. They speculated that the intercalation and swelling of desolvated Na ions and solvent molecules should be responsible for the large expansion of the interlayer space in the initial cycle. The Na2Fe2(SO4)3/Ti2CTx prototype cell was also tested to deliver a high specific energy of 260 W h kg−1 at a high specific power of 1.4 kW kg−1 based on the weight of Ti2CTx (Fig. 7e). Then, their group revisited the MXenes and discussed their intercalation mechanism.134 The interlayer distance showed no change, which is independent of the electrochemical reaction, and accounted for high cycle stability and fast Na-ion diffusion in the following cycles.
 Fig. 7  Sodium storage performance of MXene nanosheets. (a) Schematic of the crystal structure for MXenes. The M (an early transition metal) and X (C or N) atoms are represented by red and grey spheres, respectively. (b) Charge–discharge curves and (c) cycle stability for Ti2CTx in nonaqueous electrolytes. The specific current is 20 mA g−1 with cut-off voltages in the range of 0.1–3.0 V versus Na/Na+. (d) Charge–discharge curves at various rates. (e) Rate capability for Ti2CTx, hard carbon, expanded graphite and P2-Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O2. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
Another MXene, Ti3C2X was also explored as a high-capacity anode material for Na-ion batteries135 and other alkali-metal-ion batteries.136 Wang et al. clarified the surface and intercalation chemistry of Ti3C2X at the atomic scale, using aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations.135 The STEM results showed that the functional groups (e.g., OH−, F−, O2−) and the intercalated Na ions preferred to stay on the top sites of the central-Ti atoms and the C atoms of the Ti3C2X monolayer. They simultaneously observed that the double Na-atomic layers existed within the Ti3C2X interlayer after the intercalation of extensive Na ions. On the basis of these observations, they thought that the previous monolayer surface model of Ti3C2X should be modified. Given the abundant species of Mn+1AXn, more kinds of MXenes are expected to show reversible sodium storage in future.
4.3 Layered titanium-based oxides
Differing from the pseudocapacitance behavior of titanium dioxides and MXenes in Na-ion cells, layered Na/Ti-containing oxides show the apparent plateau characteristic based on the electrochemical Na-ion (de-)intercalation mechanism. Another notable difference between layered Na/Ti-containing oxides and TiO2/MXenes is that the former is sodium-containing and therefore can match with the Na-deficient cathode. TiO6 or other TMO6 (TM = transition metal) octahedra connect with each other through edge-sharing, forming the host lattice wherein Na ions can be extracted and inserted during charge and discharge, respectively. NaTiO2 was first studied for reversible Na-ion (de-)intercalation in 1983, however, it was simultaneously found to be environmentally unstable.15 Partly substituting titanium with other metal ions is an effective approach to stabilizing the Ti redox in a layered structure, and many efforts have been dedicated to searching for layered Na/Ti-containing oxides with more vacancies and better sodium storage performance for Na-ion anodes. The doping of low-valence cations at Ti sites in NaTiO2 can elevate the titanium valence to tetravalence, reduce sodium content, and produce more Na-ion vacancies, thereby stabilizing the layered structure against Na-ion insertion/extraction. Given the presence of Na-ion vacancies, Nax[TMyTi1−y]O2 (x, y ≤ 1) usually adopts Na-deficient O3- or P2-stacking. The doping metal and titanium ions should have similar ionic radii, then locating at the edge-shared octahedral sites and forming [TMyTi1−yO2]δ− layers while Na ions are at oxygen coordinated prismatic or octahedral sites for O-type or P-type stacking, respectively.

4.3.1 NaTiO2. 
As early as 1983, Delmas et al. firstly reported the synthesis and electrochemical deintercalation of the NaxTiO2 system.15 They also indicated that the free energy of the reaction Na + TiO2 = NaTiO2 was small, thus the sealed atmosphere necessarily supplied sodium pressure for the intended shift of the equilibrium. Preliminary electrochemical tests demonstrated that only 0.3 Na ions per formula unit can be reversibly extracted and inserted in this O3-type material, corresponding to a capacity of ∼78 mA h g−1. Recently, Ceder's group reinvestigated the electrochemistry and structural evolution of O3-NaTiO2.137 It was found that approximately 0.5 Na could be reversibly (de-)intercalated in O3-NaTiO2 anode materials, corresponding to a reversible capacity of 152 mA h g−1 with a narrow voltage window of 0.6–1.6 V (Fig. 8a). The outstanding cycling performance is illustrated in Fig. 8b, wherein the electrode showed no capacity decay over 60 cycles. Moreover, in situ XRD was used to monitor the reaction mechanism during sodium insertion/extraction, the reversible O3–O′3 transition, and the unusual lattice parameter variations were observed simultaneously (Fig. 8c). O3-NaTiO2 composed of only earth-abundant elements and providing a moderate capacity with excellent cyclability is regarded as a promising intercalation anode material for sodium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 8  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of O3-NaTiO2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles with 0.1C-rate between 0.6–1.6 V. (b) Cycling performance with 0.1C-rate. (c) In situ XRD patterns during the first charge with a C/20-rate between 0.5–1.6 V, demonstrating the O3–O′3 phase transition. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.3.2 NaxLix/3Ti1−x/3O2. 
Li-Substituted titanium-based oxides have the general formula of NaxLix/3Ti1−x/3O2 (x ≤ 1), wherein Li and Ti both occupy the TM slabs. These two elements have the similar ionic radius of Li+ (∼0.76 Å) and Ti4+ (∼0.61 Å),138 enabling lithium doping in the NaxTiO2 layered structure. Hu's group first investigated the sodium storage performance of Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O2, which crystallizes in a P2-stacking layered structure.99 This material presented a reversible capacity of ∼120 mA h g−1 between 0.4–2.5 V (Fig. 9a), good rate capability (Fig. 9b) and outstanding cycling stability over 1200 cycles (Fig. 9c). In situ and ex situ XRD results (Fig. 9d and e) suggested Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O2 exhibited an unusual quasi-single-phase electrochemical storage behavior, with the c axis shrinking by 2.03% while the a(b) axis expanding by 1.43% after discharge to 0.4 V. The unit-cell volume change before and after sodium insertion is only ∼0.77%, thus this Li-doped sodium titanate is regarded as having ‘zero-strain’ characteristics. It should be noted that the low volume change is due to the opposite changes in a- and c-axes, rather than the zero-strain of all three crystallographic axes such as spinel-type Li4Ti5O12. DFT calculations indicated that the energy barrier for Li ions leaving the TM slabs is ∼1 eV, whereas the activation energy for Na-ion diffusion was only ∼0.4 eV, suggesting that the Li-ion migration could be ignored during the charge–discharge process. This would effectively ensure the structural stability of the electrode during cycling, leading to an excellent long cycle life as demonstrated by over 1200 cycles with a very small capacity decay of 0.02% per cycle.
 Fig. 9  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of P2-Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles with a 0.1C-rate between 0.4–2.5 V. (b) Rate capability with different rates from 0.1C to 2C. (c) Cycling performance with a 2C-rate. (d) In situ XRD patterns under a C/7-rate between 0.4 and 2.5 V. (e) Ex situ XRD patterns when the electrode is discharged to 0.4 V, indicating a quasi-single-phase electrochemical storage behavior. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 


4.3.3 NaxCox/2Ti1−x/2O2. 
Co-Substituted titanium-based oxides can be synthesized in the form of NaxCox/2Ti1−x/2O2 (x ≤ 1), wherein Co2+ ions are incorporated for structural stability. In 2014, we developed a novel Ti-based negative electrode material Na2/3Co1/3Ti2/3O2 for rechargeable sodium batteries.109 A reversible capacity of ∼90 mA h g−1 was obtained with a cut-off voltage of 0.15–2.5 V (Fig. 10a), and superior rate capability is shown in Fig. 10b (∼41% capacity retention at 10C-rate). Notably, it could withstand an ultralong lifetime for up to 3000 cycles with an outstanding cycle stability of ∼85% capacity retention (Fig. 10c). STEM is utilized to directly observe the atomic-scale crystal structure, demonstrating the simultaneous occupancy of Nae (edge-sharing with TMO6 octahedra) and Naf (face-sharing with TMO6 octahedra) positions by the Na ions in the local structure. XRD and its refinement (Fig. 10d) manifested that the first discharged sample showed an apparent expansion of 0.23% in the a(b) axis and a shrinkage of 0.17% in the c axis, which was confirmed experimentally to be from the initial activation and SEI film formation by the contrast test. In the following cycles, the volume change in P2-type Na2/3Co1/3Ti2/3O2 is extremely small, contributing to the outstanding cyclic performance.
 Fig. 10  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of P2-Na2/3Co1/3Ti2/3O2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles at 0.2C-rate with the different voltage regions. (b) Rate capability with the optimal voltage region of 0.15–2.5 V; the inset shows the corresponding charge–discharge profiles at different rates from 0.2C to 10C. (c) Cycling performance at 2C and 5C-rates; the inset shows the corresponding Coulombic efficiency at a 5C-rate. (d) Ex situ XRD patterns of the electrodes in different states, indicating the superior structural stability. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.3.4 NaxCrxTi1−xO2. 
Cr-Substituted layered titanium oxides have the general formula of NaxCrxTi1−xO2 (x ≤ 1), wherein Cr and Ti show trivalence and tetravalence, respectively. Besides the mostly studied P2-structure, NaxCrxTi1−xO2 can also crystallize in another P-type layered structure, i.e., the P3-structure. Although both belong to P-type stacking, where sodium ions occupy the prismatic sites, the NaO6 prisms of the P3-structure have significant differences compared with those of the P2-structure. There are two distinguishable trigonal prismatic Na sites in the P2-structure, one is face-sharing with two TMO6 octahedra whereas the other is edge-sharing with six TMO6 octahedra. By contrast, all Na sites in the P3-structure are crystallographically equivalent, i.e., edge-sharing with six TMO6 octahedra at one side and face-sharing with one TMO6 octahedron at another side. The crystallographical difference of NaO6 prisms between the P2- and P3-structures apparently results in separated barriers when sodium ions migrate in the two kinds of Na layers.
Recently, we reported a couple consisting of P2-Na0.62Ti0.37Cr0.63O2 and P3-Na0.63Ti0.37Cr0.63O2, and comparatively studied their sodium storage performance.108 The P2- and P3-structures are well characterized by XRD and STEM techniques (Fig. 11a–d). Electrochemical tests illustrated that the P2 electrode had a superior sodium storage capability relative to the P3 electrode (Fig. 11e and f). Notably, the excellent rate capability (66 mA h g−1 at 10C-rate), cycling performance (77.5% capacity retention after 1000 cycles) of the P2 electrode made it an ideal choice of negative electrode for large-scale energy storage devices. Furthermore, atomic-scale STEM-EELS revealed the charge balancing between Ti3+/Ti4+, and ex situ XRD validated the approximate single-phase mechanism, and all of those further assured the fair contrast between P2- and P3-stacking. Density functional theory calculations indicated that the P2 phase showed a lower Na diffusion barrier in the presence of multi-Na vacancies, consistent with the better rate capability of the P2 phase (Fig. 12). The experimental results of GITT and ex situ XRD refinement further confirmed the smoother diffusion and lower volume change in the P2-stacking electrode, accounting for the rate and cycling performance by electrochemical tests.
 Fig. 11  Atomic-scale characterization and sodium storage performance of P2-Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2 and P3-Na0.63Cr0.63Ti0.37O2. (a) SAED patterns of P2-Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2 viewed along the [010] zone axis. (b) ABF-STEM image of P2-Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2; the inset shows the crystal structure of P2-stacking. (c) SAED patterns of P3-Na0.63Cr0.63Ti0.37O2 viewed along the [010] zone axis. (d) ABF-STEM image of P3-Na0.63Cr0.63Ti0.37O2; the inset shows the crystal structure of P2-stacking. (e) Discharge–charge profiles of P2 and P3 structures between 0.15–2.5 V at 0.2C-rate. (f) Rate capability of P2 and P3 structures at different rates of 0.25C, 0.5C, 1C, 2.5C, 5C, and 10C. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 12  Calculated energy barriers and trajectories of Na-ion diffusion in P2- and P3-NaTiO2. (a) Schematic of the Na-ion diffusion path in layered P-type structures in the case of three Na vacancies. The NaIO6 and NaIIO6 prisms are represented by green and yellow colors, respectively. (b) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P2-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. (c) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P3-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. (d) Schematic of the Na-ion diffusion path in layered P-type structures in the case of four Na vacancies. (e) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P2-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. (f) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P3-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. Note that the results are in good agreement with the above when introducing Cr doping in Ti sites, suggesting that the Na diffusion kinetics is determined by the structural difference (P2 vs. P3) and independent of transition metal ions. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 


4.3.5 NaxNix/2Ti1−x/2O2. 
By introducing bivalent nickel ions, Fielden et al. synthesized a series of Ni-substituted Ti-based layered oxides with the formula NaxNix/2Ti1−x/2O2 (x ≤ 1), and investigated their sodium insertion performance.139 These materials reversibly intercalated sodium ions at an average potential of ∼0.7 V with low hysteresis and delivered good cyclability and rate capability. Among them, Na0.6Ni0.3Ti0.7O2 offered a reversible capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1 between 0.005 and 2 V. Also, it was cycled over 50 cycles with good capacity retention. In situ XRD analysis indicated remarkable structural stability discharging upon 0 V, confirming a Na-ion intercalation process in the interlayer of layered oxides. Such materials showed the alterable stacking of O3 and P2 with different values of x in NaxNix/2Ti1−x/2O2, also representing the structural flexibility of layered Ti-based oxides with other TM-ion substitution.

4.4 Sodium titanate

4.4.1 Na2TinO2n+1. 
Na2TinO2n+1 (2 ≤ n ≤ 9) as a class of sodium titanates exhibit high ionic exchange ability,106,140 and potentially have high Na-ion conductivity. In the crystal structure, TiO6 zig-zag octahedra share edges to form a chain while the sodium ions reside in the inter-layer positions between the TiO6 slabs. This configuration leaves vacant tunnels along the b axis, where sodium intercalation is expected to take place.
Na2Ti2O5 nanowire arrays modified by VS2 (NTO-VS2) have been explored as additive-free 3D sodium insertion materials,141 showing low voltage (∼0.5 V on average), high capacity (over 200 mA h g−1), good stability (100 cycles) and rate capability (20C-rate).
Na2Ti3O7 was previously tested to show electrochemical activity against lithium between 1–3 V versus lithium.142 Recently, Senguttuvan et al. applied Na2Ti3O7 to Na-ion half-cells,98 working at the lowest insertion voltage of 0.3 V among the reported insertion-type oxides. Simultaneously, it was cycled by reversible uptake and the release of two Na ions per formula unit, corresponding to ∼200 mA h g−1. Subsequently, Hu's group studied in-depth the sodium storage behavior of Na2Ti3O7.143 The set of a NaFSI/PC electrolyte and sodium alginate was selected to achieve the best comprehensive performance. First-principles calculations predicted a sodium insertion voltage of 0.35 V, almost coinciding with the experimental potential of ∼0.3 V. A quasi-3D energy favorable trajectory and the Na-ion diffusion between the TiO6 octahedron layers with a low activation energy of 0.186 eV are demonstrated.
Na2Ti6O13 was also electrochemically active in Li-ion cells.144 Recently, it was reversibly cycled less than half of a sodium ion per formula unit in a sodium cell, only delivering a 49.5 mA h g−1 capacity with a 1C-rate.145 Later, Rudola et al. improved the synthetic approach of Na2Ti6O13 by a soft-template method.146 It accommodated 0.85 mol of Na per formula unit and delivered a capacity of more than 65 mA h g−1 with a flat plateau of ∼0.8 V, as well as performing a stable cycling performance over 5000 cycles at 20C-rate.


4.4.2 Na4Ti5O12. 
Another kind of sodium titanate with the Na4Ti5O12 stoichiometry is classified by two structures, i.e., monoclinic and trigonal, respectively.147,148 Therein, monoclinic-Na4Ti5O12 has a quasi-2D layered structure with four partially occupied Na sites while trigonal-Na4Ti5O12 shows a tunnel-like three-dimensional framework with completely filled Na sites. Ling's group confirmed the presence of continuous 2D channels in monoclinic-Na4Ti5O12 through neutron diffraction.147 With a cut-off voltage of 0.1–2.5 V, it presented a reversible capacity of ca. 60 mA h g−1, higher than that of the microsized trigonal-Na4Ti5O12.147,148 The in situ synchrotron XRD suggested a 0.64% volume change for the monoclinic-Na4Ti5O12 electrode.

4.5 Spinel Li4Ti5O12
Although spinel-type Li4Ti5O12 as a sodium insertion material is directly ‘transferred’ from Li-ion batteries, the insertion mechanisms between Li and Na ions are clearly different. On the basis of the two-phase mechanism, spinel-type Li4Ti5O12 (space group: Fdm) is well known as a ‘zero-strain’ lithium insertion material.149,150 Hu's group for the first time reported the reversible Na insertion and extraction in spinel lithium titanate.151 Subsequently, they carried on a detailed investigation on the optimal conditions and thoroughly discussed the reaction mechanism.100 The optimized Li4Ti5O12 anode for Na-ion batteries exhibited a high discharge capacity of 170 mA h g−1 and an initial Coulombic efficiency of 81% (Fig. 13a and b).
 Fig. 13  Electrochemical performance and the three-phase storage mechanism of Li4Ti5O12 in sodium-ion batteries. (a) Charge–discharge profiles at 0.1C when the electrode was cycled in the NaFSI/EC:DEC electrolyte with different binders (PVdF, NaAlg and Na-CMC). (b) Cyclic performances with different binders (inset is the 1st, 10th, 50th discharge–charge profiles of the Na-CMC electrode). (c) Schematic illustration of the structure model adopted in structure optimization. Li16dO6 and Ti16dO6 octahedra are plotted in blue and yellow, respectively. (d) Calculated formation energy and Gibbs free energy of Li7−xNaxTi5O12, the positive (negative) value indicates thermodynamically driven Na–Li segregation (mixing) at 16c sites. (e) ABF image in the half electrochemically sodiated Li4Ti5O12 nano-particle, showing the three-phase coexistence of Li4Ti5O12, Li7Ti5O12, and Na6LiTi5O12. Scale bar, 2 nm. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
They predicted a new three-phase separation mechanism via DFT calculations (Fig. 13c and d), and then directly visualized the coexistence of three phases through atomic-scale STEM, further confirmed by in situ XRD observation (Fig. 13e). When inserted by lithium ions, spinel-type Li4Ti5O12 demonstrates an apparent two-phase reaction between Li4Ti5O12 and Li7Ti5O12. Upon discharging, Li ions are inserted into Li4Ti5O12 and Li ions at tetrahedral sites migrate into adjacent octahedral sites, forming Li7Ti5O12 with titanium reduction. Upon charging, the formed Li7Ti5O12 is oxidized back to Li4Ti5O12 again. The absence of volume change during the process is very beneficial for long-term cycling. By contrast, Na ions will occupy 16c sites exclusively to form the Na6Li phase during discharge, meanwhile, Li8a ions are pushed to the nearest neighbor-site Li4 phase forming the Li7 phase. In this manner, two new phases are created, i.e., Na6Li and Li7 and the process is reversible during charge. The proposed three-phase sodium storage mechanism is as followed: 2Li4Ti5O12 + 6Na+ + 6e− = Li7Ti5O12 + Na6LiTi5O12. The large Na-ion and the resultant volume expansion of the Na6Li phase, however, lead to sluggish electrochemical kinetics of the Li4Ti5O12 electrode in Na-ion batteries.
4.6 Titanium phosphates
As an important solid-state electrolyte, NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 was also studied as electrode materials for Na-ion batteries.152,153 Delmas et al. firstly reported the NASICON-type sodium titanium phosphates as intercalation-type electrode materials as early as 1987.27,154 In the NASICON framework, TiO6 octahedra was connected by corner-sharing PO4 tetrahedra, forming an open structure with partial vacant sites for sodium ions. Four Na ions reside in the pristine NASICON framework per unit cell, and two sodium ions are reversibly intercalated with the charge balancing of Ti3+/Ti4+.
A reversible capacity approaching 130 mA h g−1 was experimentally obtained in the NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3, approximately equal to the theoretical capacity.155 Induced by the effect of phosphate, the electrochemical potential for the Ti3+/Ti4+ redox couple was up to ∼2.1 V, much higher than those of other Ti-based oxides. The elevated potential restricts its further application in aprotic (non-aqueous) electrolyte based Na-ion batteries. However, it became a benefit in neutral aqueous solution; Ti4+ could be reversibly reduced to Ti3+ without the decomposition of water.156,157 Quite a small polarization between reduction/oxidation with excellent rate capacity was reported for NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 in aqueous electrolyte. Moreover, the cost of batteries could be reduced with the aqueous electrolyte even though the sacrifice of energy density is unavoidable.
A mixed Nax[TM,TM′](PO4)3 composition was investigated,158–160 and the results revealed that the position of a given transition-metal redox couple was mostly independent of the chemical nature of the other one, due to the absence of direct connectivity between two [TM,TM′]O6 octahedra. For instance, the Ti3+/Ti4+ couple was found to lie at the same value of ∼2.2 V versus Na+/Na in NaxTiNb(PO4)3 and NaxFeyTi1−y(PO4)3.158,161 These Ti-based polyanion compounds have been developed for sodium storage materials.
Finding a suitable anode material is still a challenge in developing practical SIBs. Besides various carbon materials such as hard carbon, Ti-based compounds with a moderate sodium insertion potential show promise to be SIB anode candidates. As listed in Table 1, although the specific capacity of Ti-based compounds is relatively low compared to that of hard carbon or alloying anodes, they usually exhibit much better cycling stability. For large-scale stationary energy storage, the battery life has higher priority than the energy density. The moderate voltage of the Ti3+/Ti4+ redox couple ensures safe operation of SIBs, especially at a high current density. The high safety and stability of Ti-based compounds will greatly ensure the long-term operation of stationary SIBs. Currently, more research efforts are needed to pursue better Ti-based SIB anodes and continue improving their electrochemical performances.
Table 1 Electrochemical properties of current anode materials




 
Anode materials
Redox couple(s)
Potential (V)
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Cyclic stability




Hard carbon
Carbonization of glucose93
—
0.1
300 (25 mA g−1, −0.02 to 2 V)
—


Carbonization of sucrose194
—
0.1
(25 mA g−1, 0–2 V)
92%, 100 cycles






Ti-based oxides
Anatase-TiO297
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.8
190 (0.5C, 0.01–3 V)
90.7%, 50 cycles


NaTiO2137
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.9
160 (0.1C, 0.6–1.6 V)
100%, 60 cycles


Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O299
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.75
116 (10.6 mA g−1, 0.4–2.5 V)
75%, 1200 cycles


Na2/3Co1/3Ti2/3O2109
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.75
90 (20 mA g−1, 0.15–2.5 V)
85%, 3000 cycles


Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2108
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.73
110 (20 mA g−1, 0.15–22.5 V)
78%, 1000 cycles


Na0.6Ni0.3Ti0.7O2139
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.7
100 (11 mA g−1, 0.005–2 V)
80%, 100 cycles






MXenes
Ti2CTx133
Ti3+/Ti4+
1.3
175 (20 mA g−1, 0.1–3 V)
88%, 50 cycles


Ti3C2X135
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.8
160 (25 mA g−1, 0.01–2.5 V)
85%, 1000 cycles






Other layered oxides
Na0.3MoO2103
Mo3+/Mo4+
0.7
149 (20 mA g−1, 0.05–2 V)
72%, 1000 cycles


Na0.5NbO2102
Nb3+/Nb4+
1.2
90 (30 mA g−1, 0–2.5 V)
93%, 1500 cycles


Na0.7VO2195
V3+/V4+
1.7
100 (C/20, 1.2–2.5 V)
100%, 12 cycles


Na2Ti3O798
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.3
200 (C/50, 0.01–2.5 V)
—


Na2Ti6O13146
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.8
42 (C/5, 0.5–2.5 V)
85%, 5000 cycles


Monoclinic-Na4Ti5O12147
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.8
60 (12.5 mA g−1, 0.1–2.5 V)
88%, 25 cycles


Li4Ti5O12100
Ti3+/Ti4+
0.91
170 (0.1C, 0.5–3.0 V)
91%, 50 cycles






Alloying compounds
Sn/C196
—
0.6
422 (200 mA g−1, 0–2 V)
76%, 400 cycles


P/C49
—
0.4
1764 (250 mA g−1, 0.01–2 V)
68%, 60 cycles


Sb/C113
—
0.7
631 (C/15, 0.01–2.5 V)
81%, 400 cycles




5 Titanium-containing cathodes
The potential of the Ti3+/Ti4+ redox couple is too low to be utilized in cathode materials for Li- or Na-ion batteries. Actually, since the pioneering report of layered TiS2 (average potential of ∼2.0 V vs. Li+/Li) at the earliest stage of research in Li-ion batteries,162 titanium was hardly seen in today's cathode materials for LIBs.163 By contrast, Ti ions are common in Na-ion battery cathodes, wherein the tetravalent Ti ions are inactive but indispensable for the mixed transition-metal oxides to deliver satisfactory electrochemical performance.164 This phenomenon again reminds us that the similar intercalation chemistry between Li- and Na-ions is by no means identical. Most Ti-containing cathodes for SIBs adopt a layered structure analogous to LiCoO2, the dominant cathode for LIBs. As aforementioned, layered Na-ion battery cathodes exhibit more complex stacking sequences of oxygen sublattice, rather than the predominant O3-stacking in LIBs. As a result, the design strategies could be different from the experiences gained from Li-ion battery research studies.
As the commercial cathode materials of Li-ion batteries, layered Li-containing oxides have been investigated and researched in depth.165 Typically, the transition metal species available in layered Li-containing oxides are Mn, Co, and Ni ions. As the ionic radius between lithium and transition metal ions are close, the cation mixing between Li and transition metal layers, which hinders the Li-ion transport in these compounds, is not uncommon in LIBs. That is not the case in SIBs. Due to the large size difference between sodium and transition metal ions, a lot of transition metal species rarely seen in layered Li-ion cathodes can be readily introduced into layered Na-containing oxides, including both the active V,166 Cr,167 Fe,168 Cu ions168 and the inactive Ti ions.164 Moreover, the undesirable interlayer alkali-/transition-metal mixing is almost avoided. Accordingly, the rich mix of transition metal species provides a broad stage for the inactive Ti ion in layered Na-containing cathodes.
Relative to the counterparts in LIBs, layered Na-containing cathodes usually exhibit many plateaus due to different Na/vacancy orderings depending on the Na concentration.65,169,170 These voltage plateaus suggest the existence of many first-order phase transformations, which lead to sluggish electrochemical kinetics upon charge–discharge. Ti-ion doping in TM slabs of layered Na-containing oxides has been proven to greatly smoothen the charge–discharge profiles,164 possibly due to the suppression of cation ordering in TM slabs.171 Ti doping can supply more flexibility for utilizing active transition metal redox, e.g., Ni2+/Ni3+ is enabled in the presence of Ti4+ ions. Besides, Ti doping may elevate the sodium storage potential. It was found by Yamada et al. that the potential of the Ni3+/Ni2+ redox couple in NaTi0.5Ni0.5O2 is higher than that of the Ni4+/Ni3+ redox couple in NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2 in an identical structural framework (Fig. 14).172 All these beneficial effects of Ti-ions in layered Na-containing oxide cathodes highlight the importance of the titanium element in developing advanced Na-ion batteries.
 Fig. 14  Charge–discharge profiles as a function of x in NaxNi0.5Ti0.5O2 and NaxFe0.5Ni0.5O2. The dQ/dV plots are also shown for comparison. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Besides layered Na/Ti-containing oxides, tunnel-type Na/Ti-containing oxides also attract a lot of interest.85 These compounds also deliver a smooth voltage profile, which seems to be a common feature of Ti-containing cathodes for SIBs, rather than multiple plateaus normally seen in other Na-ion battery cathodes. After Ti-doping in tunnel-type cathodes, the improvement in structural stability and the shortened electrochemistry reaction paths greatly support the requirement for long-term cycling and high energy efficiency, thereby enabling layered Ti-containing oxides towards large-scale applications.
5.1 Layered Na/Ti-containing oxides
Tetravalent titanium appears in layered oxides with a reasonable voltage range, analogous to manganese in LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2.173,174 The inactive component offers a more stable framework for enhanced cyclability. During the charge–discharge process, other TM ions such as Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni can be cycled by means of divalent-tervalence or tervalence-tetravalent, while titanium remains unchanged. With this design, many promising layered Na/Ti-containing oxide materials have been explored as cathode materials for Na-ion batteries, demonstrating competitive electrochemical performance.

5.1.1 Ni/Ti binary systems. 
In 2014, we firstly reported a solid solution between NaNiO2 and NaTiO2, i.e., O3-type NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 as a stable cathode withstanding long-term cycling.164 The pristine NaNiO2 presented multi-plateau voltage profiles, associated with a complex phase transition process of O3–O′3–P3–P′3 (Fig. 15a).175,176 The presence of less phase transitions (only O3–P3) greatly shortened the electrochemical reaction paths in NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2, thus the voltage profiles of NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 were significantly smoothened in the same cut-off voltage, and most of the capacity contribution was located above 2.8 V (Fig. 15b).164 This electrode also displayed 93% capacity retention at 0.2C-rate after 100 cycles, and 75% capacity retention at a 1C-rate over 300 cycles (Fig. 15c). Ti doping in layered NaxNiO2 contributes to the structural stability and the suppression of complex phase transition during the electrochemical process, greatly smoothening the voltage profiles and promoting the sodium storage performance.
 Fig. 15  Comparison of the charge–discharge profiles of NaNiO2vs. NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2, Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2vs. Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNiO2 at 0.1C-rate. (b) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 at 0.1C-rate. (c) Cycling performance of NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 at 1C-rate. (d) Charge–discharge profiles of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 at a rate of 12.1 mA g−1. (e) Charge–discharge profiles of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O2 at a rate of 12.1 mA g−1. (f) Cycling performance of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3−xTixO2 with x = 0, 1/6, 1/3 and 2/3. Reproduced with permission.9,164,175 Copyright 2014 Elsevier, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry, and Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.1.2 Ni/Mn/Ti ternary systems. 
Yoshida et al. made attempts to dope the titanium element into P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2, wherein Mn is replaced by Ti.9 In the previous study, P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 demonstrated rugged voltage curves and rapid capacity decay (Fig. 15d).58 After the Ti element was incorporated into the layered structure, the P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O2 material delivered a 127 mA h g−1 reversible capacity with a 3.7 V average voltage for discharge (Fig. 15e).9 More importantly, the multi-plateau phenomenon disappeared accompanied by relatively smooth charge–discharge curves, indicating less phase transition or charge/vacancy ordering during sodiation and desodiation. The cell of Na//Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O2 could be cycled 20 times with little capacity loss (Fig. 15f), and simultaneously presents good rate capability. In contrast to the multi-plateau type charge–discharge curves of P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2, Ti doping also stabilizes the main crystal structure and performs a sloping charge–discharge process. Ti substitution was also conducted in the P2-Na2/3Ni1/4Mn3/4O2 system, showing the sloping charge–discharge profiles and enhanced capacity retention.177


5.1.3 Ni/Fe/Mn/Ti, Ni/Co/Fe/Ti, and Ni/Co/Fe/Mn/Ti multi-nary systems. 
A Ti-containing O3-type layered cathode NaNi0.4Fe0.2Mn0.4−xTixO2 was successfully developed by a thermopolymerization method,178 which displayed better electrochemical properties than the reported O3-type NaFeO2–NaNi1/2Mn1/2O2 solid solution.179 It exhibited a considerably high reversible capacity approaching 150 mA h g−1 with an average voltage of 3.2 V versus sodium metal (Fig. 16a), and 84% capacity retention after 200 cycles at a deep charge–discharge rate of 0.1C (Fig. 16b). The excellent cycling stability proves the Ti-substitution superiority in insertion chemistry.
 Fig. 16  Sodium storage performances of various Ti-containing oxide cathodes. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNi0.4Co0.2Fe0.2Ti0.2O2 at 0.1C-rate. (b) Long-term cyclic performance of NaNi0.4Co0.2Fe0.2Ti0.2O2 at 0.1C-rate. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2 at 0.1C-rate. (d) Long-term cyclic performance of Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2 at 5C-rate. (e) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNi0.4Fe0.2Mn0.2Ti0.2O2 at 0.1C-rate. (f) Long-term cyclic performance of NaNi1/4Co1/4Fe1/4Mn1/8Ti1/8O2 at 4C-rate. Reproduced with permission.178,180,181 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry, and Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A new O3-type layer-structured transition metal oxide Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2 was also reported by Fu's group.180 It delivered a reversible capacity approaching 120 mA h g−1 at 0.1C-rate (Fig. 16c). At 5C-rate, 75.0% of the initial specific capacity was retained after 400 cycles with a capacity-decay rate of 0.07% per cycle (Fig. 16d), demonstrating a superior long-term cyclability at a high current density. X-ray diffraction and absorption characterization revealed reversible O3–P3 phase transformations and electronic structural changes during the Na+ deintercalation/intercalation process. Ni, Co, and Fe ions balanced the charge transfer during charge and discharge. Although Ti ions contributed to no charge transfer, they played a very important role in stabilizing the structure during charge and discharge by suppressing the Fe migration.
As a derivative of Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2, a quinary layered transition metal oxide, NaNi1/4Co1/4Fe1/4Mn1/8Ti1/8O2, is also reported by the same group.181 The synergistic effect of these five transition metals (Ni, Co, Fe, Mn and Ti) on the electronic and crystal structures was investigated by X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and ex situ XRD. For Mn and Ti, the energy position of the K-edges does not shift due to the preliminary quadrivalent Mn and Ti, while Ni, Co, and Fe undergo a reversible evolution of the electronic structure with the voltage region of 2–4.2 V. The always observed O3–P3 phase transformation is also detected by the ex situ XRD experiment. This material containing five transition metals presented a large capacity over 120 mA h g−1 (Fig. 16e), and good capacity retention over 300 cycles (Fig. 16f). Ti substitution can also smoothen the charge–discharge plateaus effectively, which provides a potential advantage for the commercialization of this material for room temperature sodium-ion batteries.

5.2 Tunnel titanium-containing oxides
Besides layered oxides, the characteristic of smoothening charge–discharge profiles is also observed in tunnel sodium-based oxides. Ti-Substituted NaxMnO2, i.e., Na4Mn4Ti5O18, was synthesized by Mumme in 1968,85 whereas its sodium storage performance has been lacking research for a long time. In 2014, we for the first time explored Ti-substituted tunnel-type Na0.61Ti0.48Mn0.52O2 as a cathode material for sodium-ion batteries.182 Ti potentially replaced Mn at all four MnO6 octahedra sites but not the MnO5 square pyramid site, based on a bonding environment argument in a previous study.85 A reversible capacity of 86 mA h g−1 was achieved at a 0.2C rate between 1.5–4 V. After 100 times sodium extraction and insertion, it displayed a capacity retention of 81%.
Subsequently, the Na0.44Mn1−xTixO2 system was extensively investigated in both non-aqueous and aqueous sodium-storage systems.183–185 Hu's group firstly employed advanced STEM technology and first-principles calculations, and revealed that Ti ions replaced Mn at Mn(3) and Mn(4) sites at a low substitution amount (when x is 0.17, 0.22), and further replaced Mn at the Mn(1) site as x increased to 0.34 and 0.39. When the nominal x = 0.56, Ti was found to mainly occupy Mn(1), Mn(3) and Mn(4) sites. The line scanning of STEM-electron energy loss spectrum and atomic-scale energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) further verified the above-mentioned Mn/Ti distribution in different sites (Fig. 17a). Compared with the pristine Na0.44MnO2 (Fig. 17b), the Ti-substituted Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 showed smooth charge–discharge profiles (Fig. 17c). In aqueous media between −0.6 to 0 V versus a saturated calomel electrode (SCE), a stable capacity of 37 mA h g−1 could be obtained for Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 charge–discharge at a 2C rate (Fig. 17d). It also demonstrated excellent cycling performance with no evident capacity fading after 400 cycles (Fig. 17e). Soon after, their group further investigated the Na-rich Na0.66Mn0.66Ti0.34O2 and Fe-substituted Na0.61Mn0.27Fe0.34Ti0.39O2 as cathode materials with the same tunnel-type structure.186,187
 Fig. 17  Structure characterization and sodium storage performance of Na0.44Mn1−xTixO2 electrodes in organic and aqueous solutions. (a) Atomic-scale EELS mapping of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2. (b) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.44MnO2 in organic solutions. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 in organic solutions. (d) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 in aqueous solutions. (e) Cycling performance of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 in aqueous solutions. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
In Table 2, we summarize the electrochemical sodium storage ability of various cathode materials. Different from the anode side, the inactive Ti4+ ion in the cathode material plays a facilitating role. Although the underlying mechanism has not been clarified, massive experiments have demonstrated that titanium doping in SIB cathodes usually leads to “smoothened” potential profiles, indicating that the Na-vacancy ordering at intermediate states of charge and the resulting multiple first order phase transitions are suppressed by the presence of Ti ions. Consequently, the Na-ion transport in Ti-incorporated SIB cathodes is greatly promoted, contributing to improved cycling ability and rate capability. Additionally, Ti introduction will potentially elevate the sodium storage voltage, which is another advantage of Ti-incorporated layered oxides for enhanced energy density. Given that the low-cost and high-electrochemical-activity of manganese and iron, searching for Ti–Mn–Fe ternary layered oxides combined with high-energy and high-stability is another approach for improved layered cathodes in future. Tunnel Mn-based and Ti-based oxides have proven to be suitable positive electrodes in aqueous solution, which are used to construct a very stable aqueous sodium storage system. The strong covalent bonding in polyanion compounds can be utilized to explore a high-voltage cathode for sodium insertion even exceeding the current high-voltage LIB cathodes such as LiNi0.5Mn1.5O2. Their synthetic consistency and low conductivity issue should be overcome via more experiments. What should be mentioned finally is that the introduction of inactive titanium in the layered structure inevitably causes the decreased specific capacity, that is, high cycling stability could be achieved by sacrificing the energy density. Clearly, the stability is the more important factor for large-scale energy storage considering the maintenance cost in the long term. The sodium storage capacity and potential remain to be improved via the adjustment of layered compositions and configurations in future.
Table 2 Electrochemical properties of current cathode materials




 
Cathode materials
Redox couple(s)
Potential (V)
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Cyclic stability




Layered oxides
NaMnO265
Mn3+/Mn4+
2.8
185 (24 mA g−1, −2.0 to 3.8 V)
80.5%, 10 cycles


Na0.7MnO2197
Mn3+/Mn4+
2.8
163 (20 mA g−1, 2.0–4.5 V)
77%, 50 cycles


Na3Mn5O8198
Mn3+/Mn4+
2.8
219 (20 mA g−1, 1.5–4.7 V)
70%, 20 cycles


NaFeO264
Fe3+/Fe4+
3.3
100 (12.1 mA g−1, 2.5–3.5 V)
50%, 30 cycles


NaNi1/2Mn1/2O257
Ni2+/Ni3+
2.9
140 (12 mA g−1, 2.2–3.8 V)
75%, 50 cycles


Na2/3Fe1/2Mn1/2O266
Fe3+/Fe4+
2.75
190 (12 mA g−1, 1.5–4.3 V)
82%, 30 cycles


Na0.66Li0.18Mn0.71Ni0.21Co0.08O260
—
3.2
200 (10 mA h g−1, 1.5–4.5 V)
84%, 50 cycles


NaNi1/2Ti1/2O2164
Ni2+/Ni3+
3.1
100 (20 mA g−1, 2.0–4.0 V)
93%, 100 cycles


Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O29
Ni2+/Ni3+, Fe3+/Fe4+
3.7
127 (12.1 mA g−1, 2.5–4.35 V)
80%, 20 cycles


NaNi0.4Fe0.2Mn0.2Ti0.2O2178
Ni2+/Ni3+, Fe3+/Fe4+
3.2
145 (0.1C, 2–4.2 V)
84%, 200 cycles


NaNi1/4Co1/4Fe1/4Fe1/4Mn1/8Ti1/8O2181
—
3.1
128 (13 mA g−1, 2.0–4.1 V)
91%, 300 cycles


Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2180
Ni2+/Ni3+, Fe3+/Fe4+
3.0
116 (12 mA g−1, 2.0–3.9 V)
75%, 400 cycles






Prussian-blue
KFeFHC71
Fe3+/Fe4+
2.9
100 (0.05C, 2.0–4.0 V)
99%, 30 cycles


Na2−δMnHCF73
Mn2+/Mn3+, Fe2+/Fe3+
3.5
150 (15 mA g−1, 2.0–4.0 V)
75%, 500 cycles


Na4Fe(CN)672
Fe2+/Fe3+
3.0
170 (25 mA g−1, 2.0–4.5 V)
100%, 100 cycles






Tunnel oxides
Na0.44MnO2199
Mn3+/Mn4+
2.8
130 (12 mA g−1, 2.0–4.0 V)
77%, 1000 cycles


Na0.61Ti0.48Mn0.52O288
Mn3+/Mn4+
2.9
86 (20 mA g−1, 1.5–4.0 V)
81%, 100 cycles


Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O289
Mn3+/Mn4+
2.7
110 (12.6 mA g−1, 1.5–3.9 V)
100%, 1200 cycles


Na0.66Mn0.66Ti0.34O2186
Mn3+/Mn4+
3.1
74 (11.8 mA g−1, 1.5–3.9 V)
80%, 400 cycles


Na0.61Mn0.27Fe0.34Ti0.39O2200
Mn3+/Mn4+, Fe3+/Fe4+
3.7
94 (0.1C, 2.6–4.2 V)
75%, 200 cycles






Polyanions
Olivine-NaFePO4201
Fe2+/Fe3+
2.9
125 (7.5 mA g−1, 2.2–4.3 V)
90%, 50 cycles


Na3V2(PO4)379
V3+/V4+
3.4
108 (0.1C, 2.7–3.7 V)
93%, 80 cycles


Na2Fe(SO4)384
Fe2+/Fe3+
3.8
102 (0.05C, 2.0–4.5 V)
—


Na3Ti2(PO4)3202
Ti3+/Ti4+
2.1
117 (0.5C, 1.5–3.0 V)
80%, 1000 cycles


Na1.5Fe0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3203
Ti3+/Ti4+
2.2
117 (0.5C, 1.5–3.0 V)
95%, 50 cycles




6 Titanium-based bipolar electrodes
Ti-based compounds enable long cyclic life for the cathode and high safety for the anode. In view of the aforementioned advantages of Ti-based anode and cathode materials, many titanium-based compounds have been applied in Na-ion full-cells to evaluate the practical utility.99,188 Herein, a conceptual cell system is highlighted, i.e., symmetric Na-ion cells, which employ the same electrode material not only as a cathode, but also as an anode. It is similar to the construction of symmetric electrochemical capacitors, however, having a distinct working mechanism. Some Ti/TM incorporated layered oxides could serve as electrodes for symmetric Na-ion cells, namely, bipolar electrodes. In these bipolar electrodes, Ti and another TM provide TiIII/TiIV and TMII/TMIII (or TMIII/TMIV) redox couples, respectively (Fig. 18). The 3d transition-metal ions such as Cr, Co, Ni, Mn, and Fe have electrochemical potentials far above that of Ti, and hence are ideal choices for bipolar electrodes. On the basis of Ti-based layered compounds, we firstly proposed and released symmetric Na-ion full-cells via the bi-functional roles of Ti ions.189 Besides, Ti-based phosphate containingsymmetric Na-ion cells are also mentioned. Developing bipolar electrodes for symmetric batteries is of great significance in both academia and industry. Compared with traditional cells comprised of different cathode and anode materials, symmetric batteries can potentially reduce manufacturing costs and simplify the fabrication process, and also supply more possibilities for searching for new battery systems.
 Fig. 18  Schematic of the symmetric Na-ion cells via the two redox couples of nickel and titanium in the layered material Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2. (a) A diagram of the proposed symmetric cell based on O3-Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2. (b) Schematic of energy vs. density of states plot, showing the relative positions of the Fermi energy level of Ni4+/Ni2+ (Ni4+/Ni3+ and Ni3+/Ni2+) and Ti4+/Ti3+ redox couples for O3-Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2. (c) CV curve of Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2/Na half cell in the whole voltage range of 0–4 V vs. Na+/Na. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.1 NASICON-NaTi2(PO4)3
The relatively high-potential associated with the Ti(IV)/Ti(III) redox couple has been extensively studied in NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3, as mentioned above. Recently, a low-potential sodium insertion utilizing the Ti(III)/Ti(II) redox couple was reported.155 First-principles calculations were utilized to understand the electrochemical behavior of two Ti redox couples. The first plateau around 2.1 V showed a ∼1.8 Na ions per formula unit for reversible release and uptake, and the second plateau around 0.7 V exhibited ∼1 Na ion (de)intercalation per formula unit. By the assembly of symmetric cells involving NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 as both positive and negative electrodes, the concept of full-titanium Na-ion cells operating at an average potential of 1.7 V was well validated.
6.2 Layered Na/Ti-containing oxides as bipolar electrodes

6.2.1 O3-Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2. 
We for the first time developed a layered oxide-based symmetric battery, i.e., Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2.189 This bipolar material showed a typical O3-type layered structure, containing two redox couples with electrochemically active transition metals of Ni and Ti, respectively (Fig. 18a and b). Ti and Ni not only stabilized each other, but also balanced the charge transfer at the reasonable voltage region of cathodes and anodes. From the cyclic voltammetry (CV) of full spectrum between 0–4 V in the half cell of Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2/Na (Fig. 18c), it is clear that two distinct oxidation peaks of around ∼3.5 V and ∼0.7 V are observed. On the basis of their voltage difference, the sodium storage potential of this symmetric cell using the bipolar active material Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2 was expected to be ∼2.8 V, consistent with the following experimental results. The electrochemical results for the symmetric Na-ion cells demonstrated a reversible capacity over 80 mA h g−1 (calculated from the anode mass loading) and good cycling performance over 150 cycles. Simultaneously, the electrochemical phase evolution of the Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2 electrode was revealed, i.e., the reversible O3–P3 phase transition in the cathode side and the O3 single-phase reaction in the anode side. These properties, together with the good rate capability, low active material cost, and the recycling convenience, make this unique battery system more attractive for grid-related applications.


6.2.2 P2-Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2. 
Hu's group presented a cation-disordered electrode material, P2-type Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2, via selecting Cr and Ti with the similar ionic radii to avoid the charge/vacancy ordering in the pristine structure.190 The electrochemical performance simultaneously serving as the cathode and anode was investigated in detail. The voltage plateau for the positive electrode was ∼3.5 V, higher than that of O3-type NaCrO2. The reversible capacity is 74 mA h g−1, corresponding to 0.26 Na (de)intercalation per formula unit. For the negative electrode side, the average sodium storage potential is ∼0.8 V, and the reversible capacity is 105 mA h g−1, corresponding to 0.4 sodium intercalation into the available vacancies of the Na layer. The reversible extraction/insertion process was achieved in both the cathode and anode sides, and there exists a wide solid-solution in the host NaxCr0.6Ti0.4O2 in the range of 0.33 < x < 1. Moreover, Cr3+/Cr4+ and Ti4+/Ti3+ charge compensation mechanisms were probed by electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS).
A sodium-ion full cell was demonstrated using P2-Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 as both negative and positive electrodes. It delivered a reversible capacity of 80 mA h g−1 with an average operating voltage plateau at ca. 2.53 V, and 75% capacity retention of that at 1C was achieved even at a fast charge and discharge rate of 12C (Fig. 19a). This battery system also exhibited a superior cycling stability as well as 82 W h kg−1 at a 1C rate over 100 cycles (Fig. 19b). Moreover, they collected NPD data for P2-Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 upon cooling down to 3 K (Fig. 19c), showing no evidence of Cr/Ti and Na+/vacancy ordering such as that found in Na0.7CoO2.191 Instead, the sodium nuclear density was found to gradually delocalize with the increased temperature. It was demonstrated that this cation-disordered material can function as both positive and negative electrodes with average operation voltages of 3.5 and 0.8 V, respectively. A symmetric sodium-ion battery using the same P2-Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 electrode material demonstrates charge–discharge curves free of voltage plateaus, outstanding rate performance, and long cycle life.
 Fig. 19  The symmetric-cell performance of P2-Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 as both positive and negative electrodes in the NaPF6-based electrolyte and its nuclear density distribution. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2/Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 sodium-ion full cell at various rates. (b) The capacity and Coulombic efficiency versus cycle number of the full cell at 1C rate. The capacity was calculated based on the mass of the negative electrode. (c) Section of nuclear density at z = 0.25 for Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 at 3 K (left), 300 K (middle) and 1073 K (right). Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 


6.2.3 P2-Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2. 
We recently reported an ultra-stable layered Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2 with P2-stacking synthesized by a simple solid-state reaction as bipolar electrodes. The refined XRD indicated a typical layered structure (Fig. 20a), and the SEM image showed the particle size ranging between 2–5 μm (Fig. 20b). The local structure was characterized at the atomic scale by advanced spherical aberration-corrected electron microscopy (Fig. 20c–f), indicative of typical ABBA stacking for the P2 structure. Serving as a cathode, it delivered a very high average voltage over 3.7 V free of multi-plateau, wherein no voltage decay was detected over 500 cycles. Used as an anode with a low voltage window, it also exhibited a large reversible discharge capacity of 105 mA h g−1 along with a clear step around 0.69 V.
 Fig. 20  Structural characterization of P2-Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2. (a) XRD and Rietveld plots with experimental data in black dots, calculated curves in red, and difference curve in blue, as well as standard Bragg reflections as pink vertical bars. (b) SEM images. (c and d) SAED patterns viewed along the [010] and [001] zone axis, respectively. (e) HADDF-STEM image. (f) ABF-STEM image. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Employing P2-Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2 as the cathode and anode, the symmetric cells displayed the highest operating voltage of 3.1 V of all reported symmetric cells with a usable capacity of 92 mA h g−1 (Fig. 21a). It also illustrated a superior rate capability (∼65 mA h g−1 at 2C-rate), as well as having an ultralong lifetime of 1000 cycles in sodium full cells (Fig. 21b and c). These results of a long life cycle, high safety, low cost, high efficiency, and high voltage sodium full cell will greatly contribute to stationary energy storage technology, and will provide new avenues for designing advanced room-temperature sodium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 21  Electrochemical performance of bipolar Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2-based symmetric Na-ion cells. (a) Charge–discharge profiles between 2–3.5 V at 0.2C-rate. (b) Discharge profiles at different rates of 0.2C, 0.5C, 1C, 2C, 5C, 10C, and 15C. (c) Capacity retention with Coulombic efficiency at a 5C-rate, demonstrating the outstanding cycling performance (75.9% capacity retention after 1000 cycles). Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To date, bipolar SIB electrodes have been rarely reported (Table 3), as they have much higher requirements for electrode materials. The high-symmetry configurations of such cells not only shorten the production flow chart, but also greatly buffer the volume change of the sodium shuttle in the same electrode material. The whole volume change is potentially decreased to zero due to the same insertion mechanism, an interesting feature that may be appropriate for some sophisticated industries such as aerospace, which have stringent demands for specialised applications. In this regard, a precise evaluation of the volume change of the whole symmetric Na-ion cell needs to be performed.
Table 3 Electrochemical properties of bipolar electrodes in symmetric sodium-ion batteries




 
Bipolar electrode materials
Redox couple(s)
Potential (V)
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Cyclic stability




Layered oxides
Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2189
(+) Ni2+/Ni3+
(−) Ti3+/Ti4+
2.8
80 (20 mA g−1, 0.6–3.8 V)
75%, 150 cycles


Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2190
(+) Cr3+/Cr4+
(−) Ti3+/Ti4+
2.5
80 (11.2 mA g−1, 1.5–3.0 V)
80%, 100 cycles


Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2193
(+) Ni(Co)2+/Ni(Co)3+
(−) Ti3+/Ti4+
3.1
92 (20 mA g−1, 1.5–3.0 V)
76%, 1000 cycles






Polyanions
Na3Ti2(PO4)3155
(+) Ti3+/Ti4+
(−) Ti2+/Ti3+
1.7
—
—


Na3V2(PO4)3204
(+) V3+/V4+
(−) V2+/V3+
1.7
101 (11.2 mA g−1, 1.5–3.0 V)
94%, 200 cycles





7 Perspectives and summary
Although rechargeable SIBs have gained more and more attention in the battery field, there is still a long way before a commercially competitive SIB system becomes a reality.192 The orientation of SIB research is clear, i.e., satisfying large-scale stationary energy storage such as smart grids. To achieve this goal, the advantages of sodium containing compounds should be fully exploited. Compared to Li-ions, on the one hand the “large and heavy” Na-ions will inevitably lead to slower ionic transport kinetics and lower energy density, but on the other hand different Na-ion intercalation chemistry also provides new opportunities that do not exist in LIBs. A significant advantage of SIB electrodes is the titanium element, which is widely utilized in both anode and cathode materials. Especially, Ti ions are rarely seen in layered LiTMO2 but are widespread in layered NaTMO2 compounds. The Ti3+/Ti4+ redox couple is active for reversible sodium storage in a large variety of structures, and its potential around 1.0 V makes it suitable for SIB anodes. Ti-based SIB anodes, especially those with a layered structure, have demonstrated superior cycling stability and rate capability. Regarding SIB cathode materials, the Ti-ion is inactive but dramatically modifies the structural properties of layered NaTMO2 to bear continuous sodium (de)insertion. Owing to the facilitating role of Ti-ions, the titanium substituted NaTMO2 cathode exhibits much better battery performance than the undoped one. Benefiting from titanium's bi-function, Ti-based SIB electrodes can potentially circumvent the safety issues for anodes, and the cycling limitation for cathodes, all of which are the main obstacles for promoting sodium-ion batteries for practical applications. The electrochemical performance of Ti-based compounds including reversible capacity, average operating voltage, and energy density as cathodes and anodes is summarized in Fig. 22.
 Fig. 22  Summary of electrochemical performance (reversible capacity and average operating voltage) for Ti-based compounds as both cathodes and anodes. The energy density was calculated on the basis of the voltage versus metallic sodium for simplicity. 
The exposition of titanium’s twofold roles provides a new insight into the search for a better electrode material, and the similar functions potentially existing in other elements such as V, Nb, and Mo need to be further explored in the future. Given the flexibility of layered Na-containing structures, cathode and anode materials could be further extended to a broader scope. Fig. 23 schematically shows bipolar electrodes consisting of a transition-metal (Ti, V, Nb, and Mo) with low potential redox, and another transition-metals (Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Ru) with high potential redox. When the TM-ions with low potential redox serve as the active components for anode materials, the TM-ions with high potential redox automatically are the structure stabilizing components and vice versa. In the model of polyanion compounds Nax[My,M′2−y](PO4)3, the redox couple of one transition-metal is nearly independent of another, which also allows the design strategy of bipolar electrodes. Therefore, this bimetallic model for bipolar electrodes could be extended to other materials, e.g., polyanion-type and prussian-blue-type compounds. The exploration of various bipolar electrodes between them would be a promising solution to realize the high-performance symmetric Na-ion batteries consisting of bipolar electrodes. On the basis of the preliminary results, symmetric Na-ion cells using Ti-based bipolar electrodes have been successfully fabricated, demonstrating competitive high voltage and stable cycling performance.
 Fig. 23  The design strategy of the layered-type bipolar electrodes. Note that this bimetallic model for bipolar electrodes could be extended to other materials, e.g., polyanion-type and prussian-blue-type compounds. TM is a transition-metal ion with high redox potential while TM′ is another one with low redox potential. What enlightens this model is the twofold roles of titanium. 
Although great progress has been made, the in-depth investigation of Ti-based compounds should receive sufficient consideration as well. First, although the stabilizing effect of Ti ions on the host structure of SIB cathodes has been confirmed experimentally, the detailed mechanism has not been well understood until very recently. In our opinion, that is strongly associated with the weakly correlated 3d electrons of the Ti element, in stark contrast with other frequently-used 3d transition metal elements, e.g., V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni. The delocalized nature of Ti electrons allows the disordered distribution of Na ions and vacancies, and thereby suppresses the multi-plateau voltage profile originating from Na-ion ordering. Theoretical calculations, which have been widely applied to Li-ion electrode materials, will facilitate further understanding of Ti functions in layered oxides. Second, for promoting rechargeable Na-ion cells to daily life for large-scale applications, innovations of Ti-based compounds with high energy density are still needed. A considerable study of suitable Ti-based compounds with high capacity and high operating voltages is also required to further increase the energy density of Na-ion batteries. Third, the distinction between Li and Na intercalation chemistry needs to be disclosed for further breakthroughs. Finally, besides various targeting material designs, the overall optimization of Na-ion batteries is also important, which needs a good compatibility between each component such as the anode, cathode, and electrolyte, as well as the interfaces between them. There are still many tough challenges to overcome before achieving large-scale energy storage systems utilizing sodium as a charge carrier in future, and it is certain that titanium-based compounds are worthy of further investigation in the pursuit of practical sodium-ion batteries.
References
J. Liu, J. G. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. P. Lemmon, C. Imhoff, G. L. Graff, L. Li, J. Hu, C. Wang and J. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 929–946 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, D. H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3431–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoshida, N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, I. Ikeuchi, A. Garsuch, M. Schulz-Dobrick and S. Komaba, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3677–3680 RSC .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-González and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
J. Xu, D. H. Lee and Y. S. Meng, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2013, 6, 1330001 CrossRef .
X. Xiang, K. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5343–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Braconnier, C. Delmas and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1982, 17, 993–1000 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maazaz, C. Delmas and P. Hagenmuller, J. Inclusion Phenom., 1983, 1, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fouassier, C. Delmas and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1975, 10, 443–449 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Hueso, M. Armand and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 734–749 CAS .
M. Dahbi, N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, K. Tokiwa and S. Komaba, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15007–15028 RSC .
G.-N. Zhu, Y.-G. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6652–6667 CAS .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A139–A143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, L. Kavan, I. Exnar and M. Grätzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L142–L144 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1891–1895 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zaghib, M. Simoneau, M. Armand and M. Gauthier, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 300–305 CrossRef .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, K. Huang, Y. Zeng, S. Yang and L. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3280–3285 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, F. Cherkaoui, A. Nadiri and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 631–639 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Newman and L. P. Klemann, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2097–2099 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zanini, J. Shaw and G. Tennenhouse, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1647–1650 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mei, Y. Huang and X. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12001–12013 CAS .
J. Wang, X. He, D. Zhou, F. Schappacher, X. Zhang, H. Liu, M. C. Stan, X. Cao, R. Kloepsch and M. S. Sofy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3431–3437 CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Guo, K. Guo, T. Zhai and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6229–6232 RSC .
K. Nakamoto, Y. Kano, A. Kitajou and S. Okada, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guignard, C. Didier, J. Darriet, P. Bordet, E. Elkaim and C. Delmas, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Didier, M. Guignard, C. Denage, O. Szajwaj, S. Ito, I. Saadoune, J. Darriet and C. Delmas, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A75–A78 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Ding, Y. N. Zhou, Q. Sun and Z. W. Fu, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Ma, H. L. Chen and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1307–A1312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, L. W. Zhao, N. Dimov, S. Okada and T. Nishida, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A3077–A3081 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vassilaras, X. H. Ma, X. Li and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A207–A211 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Jian, W. Z. Han, X. Lu, H. X. Yang, Y. S. Hu, J. Zhou, Z. B. Zhou, J. Q. Li, W. Chen, D. F. Chen and L. Q. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 156–160 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saravanan, C. W. Mason, A. Rudola, K. H. Wong and P. Balaya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-U. Park, D.-H. Seo, H.-S. Kwon, B. Kim, J. Kim, H. Kim, I. Kim, H.-I. Yoo and K. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13870–13878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Ha, S. H. Woo, D. Mok, N.-S. Choi, Y. Park, S. M. Oh, Y. Kim, J. Kim, J. Lee, L. F. Nazar and K. T. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 770–776 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Park, H. Kim, R. A. Shakoor, E. Yang, S. Y. Lim, R. Kahraman, Y. Jung and J. W. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2787–2792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Chen, Q. Hao, O. Zivkovic, G. Hautier, L. S. Du, Y. Z. Tang, Y. Y. Hu, X. H. Ma, C. P. Grey and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2777–2786 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, Y. Chen, L. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7070–7072 RSC .
L. Xiao, Y. Cao, J. Xiao, W. Wang, L. Kovarik, Z. Nie and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3321–3323 RSC .
Y. Kim, Y. Park, A. Choi, N. S. Choi, J. Kim, J. Lee, J. H. Ryu, S. M. Oh and K. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, X. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 4731–4734 CrossRef .
B. Farbod, K. Cui, W. P. Kalisvaart, M. Kupsta, B. Zahiri, A. Kohandehghan, E. M. Lotfabad, Z. Li, E. J. Luber and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4415–4429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lu, L. Wang, J. G. Cheng and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6544–6546 RSC .
J. F. Qian, M. Zhou, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 410–414 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, J.-J. Braconnier, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3, 165–169 CrossRef .
M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, G. Singh and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 81–102 CAS .
C. Delmas, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Physica B+C, 1980, 99, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, X. Ma, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15571–15578 RSC .
S. Komaba, N. Yabuuchi, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, T. Ishikawa and I. Nakai, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6211–6220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1225–A1229 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, S. H. Kang, M. Slater, S. Rood, J. T. Vaughey, N. Karan, M. Balasubramanian and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 333–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, P. Liu, H. Yu, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 5992–5997 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Z. Yang, S. Xu, L. Mu, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li and L. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500031 CrossRef .
L. Mu, S. Xu, Y. Li, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6928–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, A. Urban, X. Li, D. Su, G. Hautier and G. Ceder, Science, 2014, 343, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Okada, Y. Takahashi, T. Kiyabu, T. Doi, J.-I. Yamaki and T. Nishida, Meeting Abstracts, The Electrochemical Society,  2006, pp. 201–201 Search PubMed .
X. Ma, H. Chen and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1307–A1312 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, M. Kajiyama, J. Iwatate, H. Nishikawa, S. Hitomi, R. Okuyama, R. Usui, Y. Yamada and S. Komaba, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 512–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Widmann, H. Kahlert, I. Petrovic-Prelevic, H. Wulff, J. Yakhmi, N. Bagkar and F. Scholz, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 5706–5715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Wessells, S. V. Peddada, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5421–5425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pasta, C. D. Wessells, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1149 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Qian and H. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 31, 145–148 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, L. Wang, J. Cheng and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6544–6546 RSC .
Y. You, X.-L. Wu, Y.-X. Yin and Y.-G. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1643–1647 CAS .
J. Song, L. Wang, Y. Lu, J. Liu, B. Guo, P. Xiao, J.-J. Lee, X.-Q. Yang, G. Henkelman and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2658–2664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, E. Hosono, K. Wang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7461–7465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zaghib, M. Dontigny, A. Guerfi, P. Charest, I. Rodrigues, A. Mauger and C. Julien, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3949–3954 CrossRef CAS .
M. Avdeev, Z. Mohamed, C. D. Ling, J. Lu, M. Tamaru, A. Yamada and P. Barpanda, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 8685–8693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Oh, S.-T. Myung, J. Hassoun, B. Scrosati and Y.-K. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
P. Moreau, D. Guyomard, J. Gaubicher and F. Boucher, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4126–4128 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, L. Zhao, H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, W. Chen and L. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, F. Cherkaoui, A. Nadiri and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 631–639 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, D. B. Ravnsbæk, K. Xiang and Y.-M. Chiang, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 44, 12–15 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, G. Liu, C. D. Ling, M. Tamaru, M. Avdeev, S.-C. Chung, Y. Yamada and A. Yamada, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3480–3487 CrossRef CAS .
K. Trad, D. Carlier, L. Croguennec, A. Wattiaux, M. Ben Amara and C. Delmas, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5554–5562 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, G. Oyama, S.-i. Nishimura, S.-C. Chung and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4358 CAS .
W. Mumme, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1968, 24, 1114–1120 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, M. Y. Peng, Y. Ma and L. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L145–L147 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sauvage, L. Laffont, J.-M. Tarascon and E. Baudrin, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3289–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, H. Yu, D. Liu, W. Tian, X. Liu, N. Hanada, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7998–8001 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, B. Lee, R. Qiao, Z. Yang, S. Xu, X. Yu, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu and W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jayakumar, K. Hemalatha, K. Ramesha and A. Prakash, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 20733–20740 RSC .
X. Jiang, S. Liu, H. Xu, L. Chen, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8480–8483 RSC .
D. Stevens and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A803–A811 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stevens and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, A. Goñi and M. R. Palacín, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, W. Murata, A. Ito and Y. Ohsawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4165–4168 CAS .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Luo, W. Qiu, P. Liu and Y. Tong, Carbon, 2016, 98, 162–178 CrossRef CAS .
K.-T. Kim, G. Ali, K. Y. Chung, C. S. Yoon, H. Yashiro, Y.-K. Sun, J. Lu, K. Amine and S.-T. Myung, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 416–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Senguttuvan, G. Rousse, V. Seznec, J.-M. Tarascon and M. R. Palacin, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4109–4111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Yu, S. Xu, J. Bai, R. Xiao, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, X.-Q. Yang, L. Chen and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2365 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, L. Zhao, H. Pan, X. Lu, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand, Y. Ikuhara and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1870 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Didier, M. Guignard, C. Denage, O. Szajwaj, S. Ito, I. Saadoune, J. Darriet and C. Delmas, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A75–A78 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Shen, Y. Li, Q. Kong, S. Lee, Z. Wang, R. Yu, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2753–2759 CAS .
K. Zhu, S. Guo, J. Yi, S. Bai, Y. Wei, G. Chen and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22012–22016 CAS .
T. Ohzuku, Z. Takehara and S. Yoshizawa, Electrochim. Acta, 1979, 24, 219–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Dylla, G. Henkelman and K. J. Stevenson, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1104–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Andersson and A. Wadsley, Acta Crystallogr., 1961, 14, 1245–1249 CrossRef CAS .
S. Andersson and A. Wadsley, Acta Crystallogr., 1962, 15, 194–201 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, Y. Sun, J. Yi, K. Zhu, P. Liu, Y. Zhu, G.-z. Zhu, M. Chen, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Ren, D. Xiao, S. Guo, Y. Zhu, Y. Qian, L. Gu and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8963–8969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Chevrier and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1011–A1014 CrossRef CAS .
L. Baggetto, P. Ganesh, R. P. Meisner, R. R. Unocic, J.-C. Jumas, C. A. Bridges and G. M. Veith, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 48–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, Y. Matsuura, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, W. Murata and S. Kuze, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 21, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, X. Hu, J. Qian, F. Pei, F. Wu, R. Mao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 323–328 CAS .
A. Darwiche, C. Marino, M. T. Sougrati, B. Fraisse, L. Stievano and L. Monconduit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20805–20811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, H.-W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. Yuan, G. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tatsumi, N. Iwashita, H. Sakaebe, H. Shioyama, S. Higuchi, A. Mabuchi and H. Fujimoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 716–720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. Han, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Zheng, K. Xu, L. Hu and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6378–6386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 CAS .
Z. Song, Y. Qian, T. Zhang, M. Otani and H. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500124 CrossRef .
M. Wagemaker, A. Kentgens and F. Mulder, Nature, 2002, 418, 397–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Hu, L. Kienle, Y. G. Guo and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. García and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862–865 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, D. Yuan, H. Zhang, Y. Cao, G. Li, H. Yang and X. Gao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12593–12597 RSC .
S.-M. Oh, J.-Y. Hwang, C. Yoon, J. Lu, K. Amine, I. Belharouak and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11295–11301 CAS .
L. Wu, D. Buchholz, D. Bresser, L. G. Chagas and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, D. Bresser, D. Buchholz, G. A. Giffin, C. R. Castro, A. Ochel and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401142 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Wen, X. Hu, X. Ji, M. Yan, L. Mai, P. Hu, B. Shan and Y. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Guo, Y. S. Hu, W. Sigle and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2087–2091 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Kajiyama, H. Iinuma, E. Hosono, S. Oro, I. Moriguchi, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kajiyama, L. Szabova, K. Sodeyama, H. Iinuma, R. Morita, K. Gotoh, Y. Tateyama, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3334–3341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Shen, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, R. Yu and L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2715–2721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Er, J. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11173–11179 CAS .
D. Wu, X. Li, B. Xu, N. Twu, L. Liu and G. Ceder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 195–202 CAS .
R. t. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
R. Fielden and M. Obrovac, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1158–A1163 CrossRef CAS .
H. Izawa, S. Kikkawa and M. Koizumi, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 5023–5026 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Liao and A. Manthiram, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chiba, N. Kijima, Y. Takahashi, Y. Idemoto and J. Akimoto, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 178, 1725–1730 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, X. Lu, X. Yu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, X. Q. Yang and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1186–1194 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, E. Baudrin, P. Umek, D. Arčon, M. Gaberšček and J. Jamnik, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 673–677 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Trinh, O. Crosnier, S. B. Schougaard and T. Brousse, ECS Trans., 2011, 35, 91–98 CAS .
A. Rudola, K. Saravanan, S. Devaraj, H. Gong and P. Balaya, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7451–7453 RSC .
P. J. Naeyaert, M. Avdeev, N. Sharma, H. B. Yahia and C. D. Ling, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7067–7072 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Woo, Y. Park, W. Y. Choi, N.-S. Choi, S. Nam, B. Park and K. T. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A2016–A2023 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda and N. Yamamoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1431–1435 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ferg, R. Gummow, A. De Kock and M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L147–L150 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, P. Hui-Lin, H. Yong-Sheng, L. Hong and C. Li-Quan, Chin. Phys. B, 2012, 21, 028201 CrossRef .
N. Anantharamulu, K. K. Rao, G. Rambabu, B. V. Kumar, V. Radha and M. Vithal, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 2821–2837 CrossRef CAS .
J. Goodenough, H.-P. Hong and J. Kafalas, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 203–220 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, A. Nadiri and J. Soubeyroux, Solid State Ionics, 1988, 28, 419–423 CrossRef .
P. Senguttuvan, G. Rousse, M. Arroyo y de Dompablo, H. Vezin, J.-M. Tarascon and M. Palacin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3897–3903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, A. Mohamed and J. Whitacre, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A497–A504 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Park, I. Gocheva, S. Okada and J.-i. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1067–A1070 CrossRef CAS .
O. Tillement, J. Couturier, J. Angenault and M. Quarton, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 48, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
O. Tillement, J. Angenault, J. Couturier and M. Quarton, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53, 391–399 CrossRef .
O. Tillement, J. Angenault, J. Couturier and M. Quarton, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 44, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patoux, G. Rousse, J.-B. Leriche and C. Masquelier, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2084–2093 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 315–320 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, S. Guo, Y. Zhu, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 457–459 RSC .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guignard, C. Didier, J. Darriet, P. Bordet, E. Elkaïm and C. Delmas, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Komaba, C. Takei, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata and N. Yabuuchi, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 355–358 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, H. Yoshida and S. Komaba, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 716–719 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berthelot, D. Carlier and C. Delmas, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Ma, D. Su, L. Liu, R. Chisnell, S. P. Ong, H. Chen, A. Toumar, J.-C. Idrobo and Y. Lei, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 586–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aryanpour, L. Miara and Y.-G. Ryu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A511–A519 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nanba, T. Iwao, B. M. d. Boisse, W. Zhao, E. Hosono, D. Asakura, H. Niwa, H. Kiuchi, J. Miyawaki and Y. Harada, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1058–1065 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hwang, Y. Tsai, D. Carlier and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3676–3682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tsai, B. Hwang, G. Ceder, H. Sheu, D. Liu and J. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3191–3199 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, M. Casas-Cabanas and T. Rojo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 266–271 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vassilaras, X. Ma, X. Li and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A207–A211 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, A. Tanaka, K. Momosaki, S. Yamamoto, F. Zhang, Q. Guo and H. Noguchi, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 170, 171–181 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Jin, C.-Y. Zhang, J.-W. Wen, Y. Shao, Y. Zang and C.-H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17268–17271 CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, M. Yano, H. Yoshida, S. Kuze and S. Komaba, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A3131–A3137 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Yue, Y.-N. Zhou, X. Yu, S.-M. Bak, X.-Q. Yang and Z.-W. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23261–23267 CAS .
J.-L. Yue, W.-W. Yin, M.-H. Cao, S. Zulipiya, Y.-N. Zhou and Z.-W. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15712–15715 RSC .
S. Guo, H. Yu, D. Liu, W. Tian, X. Liu, N. Hanada, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7998–8001 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, B. Lee, R. Qiao, Z. Yang, S. Xu, X. Yu, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, W. Yang, K. Kang, H. Li, X.-Q. Yang, L. Chen and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, S. Liu, H. Xu, L. Chen, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8480–8483 RSC .
P. Zhan, K. Jiao, J. Wang, Z. Hu, R. Ma, H. Zhu and S. Jiao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2296–A2301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Mu, J. Liu, Z. Yang, X. Yu, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, X. Q. Yang and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501005 CrossRef .
S. Xu, Y. Wang, L. Ben, Y. Lyu, N. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Li, L. Mu, H.-T. Yang, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, Z.-H. Cheng, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501156 CrossRef .
K. Zhu, S. H. Guo, J. Yi, S. Y. Bai, Y. J. Wei, G. Chen and H. S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22012–22016 CAS .
S. Guo, H. Yu, P. Liu, Y. Ren, T. Zhang, M. Chen, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1237–1244 CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Xiao, Y.-S. Hu, M. Avdeev and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Medarde, M. Mena, J. Gavilano, E. Pomjakushina, J. Sugiyama, K. Kamazawa, V. Y. Pomjakushin, D. Sheptyakov, B. Batlogg and H. Ott, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 266401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef .
S. Guo, P. Liu, Y. Sun, K. Zhu, J. Yi, M. Chen, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11701–11705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Komaba, W. Murata, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, T. Ozeki, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, K. Gotoh and K. Fujiwara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3859–3867 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hamani, M. Ati, J.-M. Tarascon and P. Rozier, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 938–941 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Z. Jia, Y. Chen, N. Weadock, J. Wan, O. Vaaland, X. Han, T. Li and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3093–3100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Su, C. Wang, H. j. Ahn and G. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10884–10889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, H. Yu, Z. Jian, P. Liu, Y. Zhu, X. Guo, M. Chen, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2115–2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, L. Xiao, W. Wang, D. Choi, Z. Nie, J. Yu, L. V. Saraf, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3155–3160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Wang, L. Ben, Y. Lyu, N. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Li, L. Mu, H. T. Yang and L. Gu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5 Search PubMed .
I. Hasa, J. Hassoun, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 2152–2155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, K. Song, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2175–2180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Difi, I. Saadoune, M. T. Sougrati, R. Hakkou, K. Edstrom and P.-E. Lippens, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25220–25234 CAS .
S. Li, Y. Dong, L. Xu, X. Xu, L. He and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3545–3553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Shaohua Guo
	Shaohua Guo received his PhD in Engineering Mechanics and Energy in 2015 from the University of Tsukuba under the supervision of Prof. Haoshen Zhou and Prof. Masayoshi Ishida. He is currently working as a postdoctoral researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). His research interests focus on functional materials for Li/Na-ion batteries, Li/Na–air batteries, supercapacitors, and other energy storage devices.

Jin Yi
	Jin Yi received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from Fudan University in 2014. In the same year, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan, with Prof. Haoshen Zhou. His research interests include electrochemical functional materials and their application in Li (Na)-ion batteries, solid-state batteries, and metal–air batteries.

Yang Sun
	Yang Sun received his MS degree in physics from Shandong University (Weihai) in 2009 and PhD degree in condensed matter physics from the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). His research interests center on the mechanistic study of Li–O2 and Li/Na-ion batteries, through combined computational and experimental techniques.

Haoshen Zhou
	Prof. Haoshen Zhou obtained his bachelor’s degree from Nanjing University in 1985, and received his PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1994. He is a prime senior researcher in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology and a joint professor in Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of energy-active materials and their applications in Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries, Li-redox flow batteries, metal–air batteries and new type batteries/cells.

Broader context
Large-scale energy storage systems are key to smoothly integrating the renewable resources such as wind and solar into the smart grid. Recently, taking into account sodium's superiority in cost and abundance, the development of electrode materials and electrolytes for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) has been intensively revisited towards their promising application in large-scale energy storage. Titanium-based compounds present low-strain and high-stability characteristics as electrode materials of SIBs, and potentially enable low-cost and long-life room-temperature SIBs to proceed towards large-scale energy storage. Herein, we review recent research progress on titanium-based electrode materials for SIBs with three parts including titanium-based anodes, titanium-containing cathodes, and titanium-based bipolar electrodes, provide a detailed and comprehensive understanding of the structure–function–property relationship of titanium-based compounds, and underline the advantages of titanium-based compounds for sodium storage. Additionally, the design strategies to achieve high-performance SIB electrode materials via titanium participation are proposed. The model of symmetric Na-ion cells based on layered Na/Ti-containing oxides will be a competitive and attractive battery system for next-generation energy storage devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Elemental abundance in the earth's crust. (b) Schematic showing renewable energy generation such as wind, solar, tidal, and geothermal energy supplies in the smart grid through energy storage solutions. (c) The working principle of room-temperature sodium-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The classification of layered Na-containing oxides (NaxTMO2) and the Na-diffusion paths in the O- and P-type frameworks. A schematic of the crystal structures for O3-type (a), P3-type (b), O2-type (c), and P2-type stackings (d). (e) The indirect Na-ion diffusion path with the intermediate tetrahedron site in O-type frameworks. (f) The direct Na-ion diffusion path without the intermediate site in P-type frameworks. The blue and yellow balls represent the transition-metal and oxygen ions in the O-type frameworks, respectively; the brown balls indicate the transition-metal ions, and the green and yellow balls stand for the NaI and NaII ions in the P-type frameworks, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Several classical prussian blue analogues. Schematic of crystal structures for KFeMn(CN)6 (a), hydrated monoclinic-Na2−δMnHCF (b), and dehydrated rhombohedral-Na2−δMnHCF (c). The C, N, and alkali-metal (Na or K) atoms are represented by brown, blue, and yellow spheres, respectively. Low-spin (Fe/Mn)3+C6 and high-spin Mn2+N6 octahedra are denoted by olivine and green surfaces, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Several classical polyanion frameworks. Schematic of crystal structures for olivine-NaFePO4 (a), maricite-NaFePO4 (b), NaFeP2O7 (c), Na3V2(PO4)3 (d), Na2FeMn2(PO4)3 (e), and Na2Fe2(SO4)3 (f). The TMO6 octahedra and PO4/SO4 tetrahedra are denoted by green and dark red surfaces, respectively. Na atoms are represented by yellow spheres.	 

 	Fig. 5  Typical Ti-based compounds for sodium storage. Schematic of crystal structures for (a) anatase-type TiO2, (b) TiO2-B, (c) spinel-type Li4Ti5O12, (d) zig-zag Na2Ti3O7, (e) zig-zag Na2Ti6O13, and (f) tunnel-type Na4Mn4Ti5O18. The TiO6 octahedra and MnO5/MnO6 polyhedra are denoted by blue and olivine surfaces, respectively. Li and Na atoms are represented by green and yellow spheres, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of anatase nanorod TiO2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles for 2.9 wt% carbon-coated anatase TiO2 with different charge rates of 0.5C-rate (165 mA g−1) to 100C-rate (33 A g−1) after the same discharge current density of 10 mA g−1 between 0–3 V. (b) Cycling and rate performance for different carbon-coating amounts. (c) Ex situ XRD patterns and (d) XANES k-edge spectra for 2.9 wt% carbon-coated anatase TiO2 at the first cycle, showing the uncharged structure and the Ti redox mechanism. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Sodium storage performance of MXene nanosheets. (a) Schematic of the crystal structure for MXenes. The M (an early transition metal) and X (C or N) atoms are represented by red and grey spheres, respectively. (b) Charge–discharge curves and (c) cycle stability for Ti2CTx in nonaqueous electrolytes. The specific current is 20 mA g−1 with cut-off voltages in the range of 0.1–3.0 V versus Na/Na+. (d) Charge–discharge curves at various rates. (e) Rate capability for Ti2CTx, hard carbon, expanded graphite and P2-Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O2. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of O3-NaTiO2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles with 0.1C-rate between 0.6–1.6 V. (b) Cycling performance with 0.1C-rate. (c) In situ XRD patterns during the first charge with a C/20-rate between 0.5–1.6 V, demonstrating the O3–O′3 phase transition. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of P2-Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles with a 0.1C-rate between 0.4–2.5 V. (b) Rate capability with different rates from 0.1C to 2C. (c) Cycling performance with a 2C-rate. (d) In situ XRD patterns under a C/7-rate between 0.4 and 2.5 V. (e) Ex situ XRD patterns when the electrode is discharged to 0.4 V, indicating a quasi-single-phase electrochemical storage behavior. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  Sodium storage performance and structural evolution of P2-Na2/3Co1/3Ti2/3O2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles at 0.2C-rate with the different voltage regions. (b) Rate capability with the optimal voltage region of 0.15–2.5 V; the inset shows the corresponding charge–discharge profiles at different rates from 0.2C to 10C. (c) Cycling performance at 2C and 5C-rates; the inset shows the corresponding Coulombic efficiency at a 5C-rate. (d) Ex situ XRD patterns of the electrodes in different states, indicating the superior structural stability. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  Atomic-scale characterization and sodium storage performance of P2-Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2 and P3-Na0.63Cr0.63Ti0.37O2. (a) SAED patterns of P2-Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2 viewed along the [010] zone axis. (b) ABF-STEM image of P2-Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2; the inset shows the crystal structure of P2-stacking. (c) SAED patterns of P3-Na0.63Cr0.63Ti0.37O2 viewed along the [010] zone axis. (d) ABF-STEM image of P3-Na0.63Cr0.63Ti0.37O2; the inset shows the crystal structure of P2-stacking. (e) Discharge–charge profiles of P2 and P3 structures between 0.15–2.5 V at 0.2C-rate. (f) Rate capability of P2 and P3 structures at different rates of 0.25C, 0.5C, 1C, 2.5C, 5C, and 10C. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Calculated energy barriers and trajectories of Na-ion diffusion in P2- and P3-NaTiO2. (a) Schematic of the Na-ion diffusion path in layered P-type structures in the case of three Na vacancies. The NaIO6 and NaIIO6 prisms are represented by green and yellow colors, respectively. (b) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P2-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. (c) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P3-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. (d) Schematic of the Na-ion diffusion path in layered P-type structures in the case of four Na vacancies. (e) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P2-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. (f) Na-ion diffusion barrier of the P3-type phase under the condition of three Na vacancies. Note that the results are in good agreement with the above when introducing Cr doping in Ti sites, suggesting that the Na diffusion kinetics is determined by the structural difference (P2 vs. P3) and independent of transition metal ions. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Electrochemical performance and the three-phase storage mechanism of Li4Ti5O12 in sodium-ion batteries. (a) Charge–discharge profiles at 0.1C when the electrode was cycled in the NaFSI/EC:DEC electrolyte with different binders (PVdF, NaAlg and Na-CMC). (b) Cyclic performances with different binders (inset is the 1st, 10th, 50th discharge–charge profiles of the Na-CMC electrode). (c) Schematic illustration of the structure model adopted in structure optimization. Li16dO6 and Ti16dO6 octahedra are plotted in blue and yellow, respectively. (d) Calculated formation energy and Gibbs free energy of Li7−xNaxTi5O12, the positive (negative) value indicates thermodynamically driven Na–Li segregation (mixing) at 16c sites. (e) ABF image in the half electrochemically sodiated Li4Ti5O12 nano-particle, showing the three-phase coexistence of Li4Ti5O12, Li7Ti5O12, and Na6LiTi5O12. Scale bar, 2 nm. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

Hard carbon	Carbonization of glucose93	—	0.1	300 (25 mA g−1, −0.02 to 2 V)	—
Carbonization of sucrose194	—	0.1	(25 mA g−1, 0–2 V)	92%, 100 cycles


Ti-based oxides	Anatase-TiO297	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.8	190 (0.5C, 0.01–3 V)	90.7%, 50 cycles
NaTiO2137	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.9	160 (0.1C, 0.6–1.6 V)	100%, 60 cycles
Na0.66Li0.22Ti0.78O299	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.75	116 (10.6 mA g−1, 0.4–2.5 V)	75%, 1200 cycles
Na2/3Co1/3Ti2/3O2109	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.75	90 (20 mA g−1, 0.15–2.5 V)	85%, 3000 cycles
Na0.62Cr0.63Ti0.37O2108	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.73	110 (20 mA g−1, 0.15–22.5 V)	78%, 1000 cycles
Na0.6Ni0.3Ti0.7O2139	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.7	100 (11 mA g−1, 0.005–2 V)	80%, 100 cycles


MXenes	Ti2CTx133	Ti3+/Ti4+	1.3	175 (20 mA g−1, 0.1–3 V)	88%, 50 cycles
Ti3C2X135	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.8	160 (25 mA g−1, 0.01–2.5 V)	85%, 1000 cycles


Other layered oxides	Na0.3MoO2103	Mo3+/Mo4+	0.7	149 (20 mA g−1, 0.05–2 V)	72%, 1000 cycles
Na0.5NbO2102	Nb3+/Nb4+	1.2	90 (30 mA g−1, 0–2.5 V)	93%, 1500 cycles
Na0.7VO2195	V3+/V4+	1.7	100 (C/20, 1.2–2.5 V)	100%, 12 cycles
Na2Ti3O798	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.3	200 (C/50, 0.01–2.5 V)	—
Na2Ti6O13146	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.8	42 (C/5, 0.5–2.5 V)	85%, 5000 cycles
Monoclinic-Na4Ti5O12147	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.8	60 (12.5 mA g−1, 0.1–2.5 V)	88%, 25 cycles
Li4Ti5O12100	Ti3+/Ti4+	0.91	170 (0.1C, 0.5–3.0 V)	91%, 50 cycles


Alloying compounds	Sn/C196	—	0.6	422 (200 mA g−1, 0–2 V)	76%, 400 cycles
P/C49	—	0.4	1764 (250 mA g−1, 0.01–2 V)	68%, 60 cycles
Sb/C113	—	0.7	631 (C/15, 0.01–2.5 V)	81%, 400 cycles

 	Fig. 14  Charge–discharge profiles as a function of x in NaxNi0.5Ti0.5O2 and NaxFe0.5Ni0.5O2. The dQ/dV plots are also shown for comparison. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison of the charge–discharge profiles of NaNiO2vs. NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2, Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2vs. Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O2. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNiO2 at 0.1C-rate. (b) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 at 0.1C-rate. (c) Cycling performance of NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 at 1C-rate. (d) Charge–discharge profiles of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 at a rate of 12.1 mA g−1. (e) Charge–discharge profiles of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O2 at a rate of 12.1 mA g−1. (f) Cycling performance of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3−xTixO2 with x = 0, 1/6, 1/3 and 2/3. Reproduced with permission.9,164,175 Copyright 2014 Elsevier, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry, and Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Sodium storage performances of various Ti-containing oxide cathodes. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNi0.4Co0.2Fe0.2Ti0.2O2 at 0.1C-rate. (b) Long-term cyclic performance of NaNi0.4Co0.2Fe0.2Ti0.2O2 at 0.1C-rate. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2 at 0.1C-rate. (d) Long-term cyclic performance of Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2 at 5C-rate. (e) Charge–discharge profiles of NaNi0.4Fe0.2Mn0.2Ti0.2O2 at 0.1C-rate. (f) Long-term cyclic performance of NaNi1/4Co1/4Fe1/4Mn1/8Ti1/8O2 at 4C-rate. Reproduced with permission.178,180,181 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry, and Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structure characterization and sodium storage performance of Na0.44Mn1−xTixO2 electrodes in organic and aqueous solutions. (a) Atomic-scale EELS mapping of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2. (b) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.44MnO2 in organic solutions. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 in organic solutions. (d) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 in aqueous solutions. (e) Cycling performance of Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O2 in aqueous solutions. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

Layered oxides	NaMnO265	Mn3+/Mn4+	2.8	185 (24 mA g−1, −2.0 to 3.8 V)	80.5%, 10 cycles
Na0.7MnO2197	Mn3+/Mn4+	2.8	163 (20 mA g−1, 2.0–4.5 V)	77%, 50 cycles
Na3Mn5O8198	Mn3+/Mn4+	2.8	219 (20 mA g−1, 1.5–4.7 V)	70%, 20 cycles
NaFeO264	Fe3+/Fe4+	3.3	100 (12.1 mA g−1, 2.5–3.5 V)	50%, 30 cycles
NaNi1/2Mn1/2O257	Ni2+/Ni3+	2.9	140 (12 mA g−1, 2.2–3.8 V)	75%, 50 cycles
Na2/3Fe1/2Mn1/2O266	Fe3+/Fe4+	2.75	190 (12 mA g−1, 1.5–4.3 V)	82%, 30 cycles
Na0.66Li0.18Mn0.71Ni0.21Co0.08O260	—	3.2	200 (10 mA h g−1, 1.5–4.5 V)	84%, 50 cycles
NaNi1/2Ti1/2O2164	Ni2+/Ni3+	3.1	100 (20 mA g−1, 2.0–4.0 V)	93%, 100 cycles
Na2/3Ni1/3Mn1/2Ti1/6O29	Ni2+/Ni3+, Fe3+/Fe4+	3.7	127 (12.1 mA g−1, 2.5–4.35 V)	80%, 20 cycles
NaNi0.4Fe0.2Mn0.2Ti0.2O2178	Ni2+/Ni3+, Fe3+/Fe4+	3.2	145 (0.1C, 2–4.2 V)	84%, 200 cycles
NaNi1/4Co1/4Fe1/4Fe1/4Mn1/8Ti1/8O2181	—	3.1	128 (13 mA g−1, 2.0–4.1 V)	91%, 300 cycles
Na[NiCoFeTi]1/4O2180	Ni2+/Ni3+, Fe3+/Fe4+	3.0	116 (12 mA g−1, 2.0–3.9 V)	75%, 400 cycles


Prussian-blue	KFeFHC71	Fe3+/Fe4+	2.9	100 (0.05C, 2.0–4.0 V)	99%, 30 cycles
Na2−δMnHCF73	Mn2+/Mn3+, Fe2+/Fe3+	3.5	150 (15 mA g−1, 2.0–4.0 V)	75%, 500 cycles
Na4Fe(CN)672	Fe2+/Fe3+	3.0	170 (25 mA g−1, 2.0–4.5 V)	100%, 100 cycles


Tunnel oxides	Na0.44MnO2199	Mn3+/Mn4+	2.8	130 (12 mA g−1, 2.0–4.0 V)	77%, 1000 cycles
Na0.61Ti0.48Mn0.52O288	Mn3+/Mn4+	2.9	86 (20 mA g−1, 1.5–4.0 V)	81%, 100 cycles
Na0.44Mn0.44Ti0.56O289	Mn3+/Mn4+	2.7	110 (12.6 mA g−1, 1.5–3.9 V)	100%, 1200 cycles
Na0.66Mn0.66Ti0.34O2186	Mn3+/Mn4+	3.1	74 (11.8 mA g−1, 1.5–3.9 V)	80%, 400 cycles
Na0.61Mn0.27Fe0.34Ti0.39O2200	Mn3+/Mn4+, Fe3+/Fe4+	3.7	94 (0.1C, 2.6–4.2 V)	75%, 200 cycles


Polyanions	Olivine-NaFePO4201	Fe2+/Fe3+	2.9	125 (7.5 mA g−1, 2.2–4.3 V)	90%, 50 cycles
Na3V2(PO4)379	V3+/V4+	3.4	108 (0.1C, 2.7–3.7 V)	93%, 80 cycles
Na2Fe(SO4)384	Fe2+/Fe3+	3.8	102 (0.05C, 2.0–4.5 V)	—
Na3Ti2(PO4)3202	Ti3+/Ti4+	2.1	117 (0.5C, 1.5–3.0 V)	80%, 1000 cycles
Na1.5Fe0.5Ti1.5(PO4)3203	Ti3+/Ti4+	2.2	117 (0.5C, 1.5–3.0 V)	95%, 50 cycles

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of the symmetric Na-ion cells via the two redox couples of nickel and titanium in the layered material Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2. (a) A diagram of the proposed symmetric cell based on O3-Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2. (b) Schematic of energy vs. density of states plot, showing the relative positions of the Fermi energy level of Ni4+/Ni2+ (Ni4+/Ni3+ and Ni3+/Ni2+) and Ti4+/Ti3+ redox couples for O3-Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2. (c) CV curve of Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2/Na half cell in the whole voltage range of 0–4 V vs. Na+/Na. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  The symmetric-cell performance of P2-Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 as both positive and negative electrodes in the NaPF6-based electrolyte and its nuclear density distribution. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2/Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 sodium-ion full cell at various rates. (b) The capacity and Coulombic efficiency versus cycle number of the full cell at 1C rate. The capacity was calculated based on the mass of the negative electrode. (c) Section of nuclear density at z = 0.25 for Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2 at 3 K (left), 300 K (middle) and 1073 K (right). Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 20  Structural characterization of P2-Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2. (a) XRD and Rietveld plots with experimental data in black dots, calculated curves in red, and difference curve in blue, as well as standard Bragg reflections as pink vertical bars. (b) SEM images. (c and d) SAED patterns viewed along the [010] and [001] zone axis, respectively. (e) HADDF-STEM image. (f) ABF-STEM image. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 21  Electrochemical performance of bipolar Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2-based symmetric Na-ion cells. (a) Charge–discharge profiles between 2–3.5 V at 0.2C-rate. (b) Discharge profiles at different rates of 0.2C, 0.5C, 1C, 2C, 5C, 10C, and 15C. (c) Capacity retention with Coulombic efficiency at a 5C-rate, demonstrating the outstanding cycling performance (75.9% capacity retention after 1000 cycles). Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Layered oxides	Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2189	(+) Ni2+/Ni3+	(−) Ti3+/Ti4+	2.8	80 (20 mA g−1, 0.6–3.8 V)	75%, 150 cycles
Na0.6Cr0.6Ti0.4O2190	(+) Cr3+/Cr4+	(−) Ti3+/Ti4+	2.5	80 (11.2 mA g−1, 1.5–3.0 V)	80%, 100 cycles
Na0.66Ni0.17Co0.17Ti0.66O2193	(+) Ni(Co)2+/Ni(Co)3+	(−) Ti3+/Ti4+	3.1	92 (20 mA g−1, 1.5–3.0 V)	76%, 1000 cycles


Polyanions	Na3Ti2(PO4)3155	(+) Ti3+/Ti4+	(−) Ti2+/Ti3+	1.7	—	—
Na3V2(PO4)3204	(+) V3+/V4+	(−) V2+/V3+	1.7	101 (11.2 mA g−1, 1.5–3.0 V)	94%, 200 cycles

 	Fig. 22  Summary of electrochemical performance (reversible capacity and average operating voltage) for Ti-based compounds as both cathodes and anodes. The energy density was calculated on the basis of the voltage versus metallic sodium for simplicity.	 

 	Fig. 23  The design strategy of the layered-type bipolar electrodes. Note that this bimetallic model for bipolar electrodes could be extended to other materials, e.g., polyanion-type and prussian-blue-type compounds. TM is a transition-metal ion with high redox potential while TM′ is another one with low redox potential. What enlightens this model is the twofold roles of titanium.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
