Synchronized-pressing fabrication of cost-efficient crystalline perovskite solar cells via intermediate engineering   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR01717D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR01717D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9628-9633Synchronized-pressing fabrication of cost-efficient crystalline perovskite solar cells via intermediate engineering†

        
          
            Yongchao 
            Ma
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jihoon 
            Lee
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yanliang 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Pesi Mwitumwa 
            Hangoma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Woon Ik 
            Park
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Jae-Hong 
            Lim
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Yun Kyung 
            Jung
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jung Hyun 
            Jeong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sung Heum 
            Park
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Kwangho 
            Kim
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Physics, Pukyong National University, Busan, 608-737, South Korea. E-mail: spark@pknu.ac.kr
bHybrid Interface Materials Global Frontier Research Group, Pusan National University, Busan 608-737, South Korea. E-mail: kwhokim@pusan.ac.kr
cElectronic Convergence Materials Division, Korea Institute of Ceramic Engineering & Technology (KICET), 101 Soho-ro, Jinju 52851, South Korea
dElectrochemistry Department, Korea Institute of Materials Science, 797 Changwondaero, Changwon, Gyeongnam 51508, South Korea
eSchool of Biomedical Engineering, Inje University, Gimhae 50834, South Korea
Received 
      28th February 2018
    , Accepted 19th April 2018First published on 19th April 2018AbstractA cost-effective fabrication method that can produce a remarkable enhancement in the device efficiency along with a reduction in the fabrication cost is one of the crucial requirements for the commercialization of perovskite-based solar cells. Here, we report a low-cost, printable, and highly effective synchronized-pressing annealing (SPA) method for inverted planar perovskite solar cells. In this method, two films are combined face-to-face for annealing, and separated as in a roll-to-roll process. Consequently, the SPA method provides two homogeneous highly crystalline MAPbI3 films with monolithic millimeter-scale crystalline grains by intermediate-induced crystallization engineering. The grains present a tendency of oriented growth along the <110> direction, parallel to the substrate, which leads to efficient charge transport. The IPSCs fabricated by the SPA method demonstrate a high efficiency of ∼17% with significantly enhanced photocurrents and fill factors. Moreover, the characteristics of both top and bottom devices are very similar, with nearly identical J–V curves and photoresponse spectra. As the SPA method is compatible with the printing technology for mass production, and as it can produce twin devices of high quality via one fabrication process, it can provide a remarkable reduction in the fabrication cost.
Introduction
Inverted (p–i–n) planar perovskite solar cells (IPSCs) have attracted considerable attention because of their advantages of simple solution-based fabrication,1,2 low-temperature processing,3,4 and high flexibility,5 in addition to the traditional advantages of a perovskite such as high optical absorption coefficients,6 low binding energies of photo-excited charge carriers, and long electron–hole diffusion lengths.7 With these advantages, the device performance of IPSCs has improved remarkably, with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of around 20%.8–10 However, further enhancement in the device performance, along with a reduction in the cost of solar electricity, is required for commercialization.
It is well-established that the device performance relies critically on the quality of the perovskite films, which is related to the crystallinity, extent of coverage, and sizes of the grains in the layer.11–13 Many effective methods including solvent annealing,14 addition of additives,15–18 and ion doping19–22 have been applied to fabricate uniform perovskite films with grain sizes of up to several micrometers. However, in spite of their attractiveness in terms of efficiency enhancement, most of these methods inevitably require additional processes, materials or time resulting in an increase in the fabrication complexity and cost of the product. The development of a cost-effective fabrication method for producing high-quality perovskites and reducing the fabrication cost remains a bottleneck for the commercialization of IPSCs. Moreover, the fabrication method should be compatible with the printing technologies with efficient mass productivity, such as roll-to-roll and offset printing.
In this work, we report a low-cost, printable, and highly efficient fabrication method for obtaining a remarkable enhancement in the device efficiency while reducing the fabrication cost. By introducing an effective synchronized-pressing annealing (SPA) method for the fabrication of IPSCs, we can achieve a highly crystalline and controllable perovskite active layer, and thus, attain a significant improvement in the performances of the IPSC devices based on these films. When the proposed method was incorporated into the one-step fabrication of an IPSC, the fabricated device provided a high PCE of ∼17.15% with a significantly enhanced short-circuit current (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). Moreover, since the SPA process provides two products at the same time, the fabrication becomes much simpler, easier, and faster, leading to a remarkable reduction in the fabrication cost.
Experimental
Materials and sample preparation
Methylammonium iodide (MAI) was provided by the Functional Phosphor Bank at Pukyong National University. If not stated otherwise, all chemicals were purchased from Aldrich. A 1.2 M perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving equimolar PbI2 and MAI in a mixture of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.9%) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%) with the volume ratio as 1:9. The solution was stirred at 70 °C overnight and filtered using 0.45 μm nylon filters before use.
Fabrication of thin-film perovskite solar cells
The solar cells were fabricated using the configuration of glass/indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/MAPbI3/phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM)/Al. The glass/ITO substrates were cleaned with water, ethanol and acetone in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min in sequence, and subsequently treated in a UV-ozone cleaner for 15 min. A PEDOT:PSS (Baytron PVP Al 4083) layer of 50 nm thickness was fabricated by firstly spin coating PEDOT:PSS onto the substrates at 4500 rpm for 40 s and then annealing it at 150 °C for 20 min. Then, the substrates were transferred into a N2-filled glovebox. The perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto the ITO/PEDOT:PSS layer at 5000 rpm for 10 s. Antisolvent treatment was performed according to our reported study.23,24 Then, the two as-cast precursor films were placed together face to face, and then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min, meanwhile preheat balance weight for applied pressure was put on the top substrate. To apply different pressures, we simply used different balances with different weights on the top substrate. After growth completes, the substrates with perovskite films were physically separated for further use. For comparison, the as-cast precursor film was directly placed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min, which afforded the reference film. Finally, PC61BM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was deposited by spin coating at 1500 rpm for 30 s, forming an 80 nm transporting layer. Al electrodes with a thickness of 100 nm were finally evaporated under high vacuum (<2 × 10−6 Torr) through a shadow mask. The device area is defined as 0.04 cm2.
Characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were performed by using a Philips X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The surface morphologies of the perovskite films were obtained by SEM (S-2700, Hitachi, Japan). The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films were collected on a Varian 5E UV/vis/NIR spectrophotometer. Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves were obtained under AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2) with a solar simulator and a Keithley 2400 source meter. The light intensity was adjusted using a calibrated Si solar cell. External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured in direct current (dc) mode, where a xenon lamp was used as a light source for generating a monochromatic beam.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the SPA fabrication method developed in this work. In contrast to the conventional annealing (CA) method, two perovskite precursor films were combined face-to-face for annealing in the SPA method to form a complete perovskite phase. They were then separated into two films—the top and bottom films. Thus, the SPA method yields two complete perovskite films at the same time, and is compatible with the roll-to-roll fabrication process for IPSCs, which leads to a remarkable reduction in the product cost. In addition, each perovskite film serves as a shield for the other, to retain the residual solvent in the perovskite film. This provides sufficient time for it to self-assemble, and produces a highly crystalline perovskite film, as demonstrated in our earlier work.23,24 The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images shown in Fig. 1b–d reveal stark differences between the complete MAPbI3 perovskite films fabricated using the CA method and SPA method. Compared to the conventionally fabricated film (CA film) with unclear and differently sized small grains, both the top and bottom films fabricated by the SPA method present remarkably enhanced crystallinity and enlarged grains. Moreover, highly uniform perovskite grains with no grain boundaries in the longitudinal direction are observed in the cross-sectional SEM images of the films, which enables efficient charge transport via the straightforward transport channels.25,26 Because both the top and bottom films have similar morphological shapes, it is expected that the SPA method will provide twin perovskite films from one annealing process.
 Fig. 1  Synchronized-pressing annealing (SPA) strategy for MAPbI3 perovskite films. (a) Designed synchronized-pressing annealing (SPA) process that is compatible with the roll-to-roll fabrication process. (b–d) Top-view and the corresponding cross-section SEM images of the reference film, top film, and bottom film. For comparison, a reference film was fabricated by placing the as-cast film onto a hot plate directly, while the other conditions were the same as that of SPA. 
Considering the fact that the grain growth relies on the speed of solvent evaporation from the perovskite film, the grain sizes of the complete perovskite films can be controlled easily by adjusting the applied pressure in the SPA method. A lower pressure produces smaller grains, because of the increase in the evaporation speed of the solvent from the perovskite precursor, while a higher pressure leads to enlarged grains, because of the reduction in the evaporation speed of the solvent. Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of the top film (a–c) and bottom film (d–f) prepared by the SPA method with increased applied pressure. The average grain size increases from ∼460 nm to ∼1 μm when the pressure increases from 0 kPa to 3 kPa. It becomes larger, from ∼1 to ∼1.5 μm, on increasing the pressure from 3 kPa to 5 kPa, after enough annealing time owing to the retarded evaporation. Therefore, it is obvious that the grain size can be tailored by controlling the applied pressure in the SPA method, which is another advantage of this method.
 Fig. 2  Top-view SEM images of perovskite films under SPA annealing under different applied pressures of (a, d) 0 kPa, (b, e) 3 kPa, and (c, f) 5 kPa. 

Fig. 3a presents the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the top (red line) and bottom (blue line) perovskite films, together with those of a CA film (black line) as a reference. All the perovskite films show the characteristic diffraction peaks at 14.12°, 28.46°, and 31.85° in the XRD patterns, which can be assigned to the (110), (220), and (310) crystal planes, respectively, of the perovskite phase.27 The unit cell structure of the tetragonal perovskite is shown in Fig. 3b. As expected, the XRD patterns of the top and bottom SPA films show sharper and intensive peaks, when compared to those of the CA film, indicating the high crystallinity of the perovskite films.28,29 In addition, the SPA films have much higher ratios of diffraction peak intensity for the (110) and (310) planes, compared to the CA film. The ratios were calculated to be 15.7, 14.4, and 2.4 for the bottom film, top film, and CA film, respectively. It was reported that the peak ratio of (110) to (310) was related to the orientation of crystal growth.30 Therefore, a higher peak ratio of (110) to (310) for the SPA films indicated highly (110)-oriented tetragonal crystals with a corner-sharing PbI3− octahedral network in a long-range order (Fig. 3c and d) parallel to the substrate, which led to efficient charge transport.31–33
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the reference film, top film, and bottom film. Note: The ratio (R) represents the intensity ratio of the (110) to (310) planes. (b) Unit cell of MAPbI3 perovskite crystals. (c) Top view of the (110) plane of MAPbI3 crystals. (d) Schematic representation of the (110) orientation of a MAPbI3 perovskite crystal, consistent with the XRD data. 
To further understand the crystallization process of perovskite films in the SPA method, we monitored the growth kinetics of the perovskite grains for the bottom SPA perovskite film. A series of top-view and cross-sectional SEM images of the films annealed with various annealing times are shown in Fig. 4a–f. On increasing the annealing time, the grains of the films become coarser and larger, and exhibit nanorod-like intermediate aggregation. They become enlarged under prolonged annealing (Fig. 4b and c). After heat annealing for 180 s, the monolithic grains connecting the top and bottom surfaces begin to emerge (see the white arrow) in the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 4d). They become more prominent and clear after heat annealing for 300 s. Interestingly, Pb3I8 intermediates with shapes distinct from those of complete grains (see the white arrows in Fig. 4e) are observed at the grain boundaries in the top view of the SEM image. In particular, the vertical growth of the grain occurs slowly and terminates when the grain size reaches the film thickness (see the cross-sectional image of Fig. 4e). After sufficient heat annealing up to 600 s, the intermediates transform into well-defined perovskite crystal grains with larger sizes, as shown in Fig. 4f, and the grain boundaries of the perovskite migrate, sweeping out the adjacent Pb3I8 intermediates (see the cross-sectional image of Fig. 4f). The numerical value of the grain size for each film was estimated by using a linear-intercept method.34 In this method, three straight lines are drawn on the film image at the top, middle, and bottom, as depicted in Fig. 4g. Then, the number of grains on each line is counted, and finally, the average grain size is calculated using eqn (1) and (2) given below: di = L/Ni(1) (2)where di is the average grain size of the grains on line i, d is the mean grain size of the specimen, L is the length of each line, and Ni is the number of grains on line i.
 Fig. 4  Grain growth process of perovskite crystal films. Top-view and cross-section SEM images of the films prepared by the SPA process, as a function of annealing time: (a) 0 s, (b) 30 s, (c) 90 s, (d) 180 s, (e) 300 s, and (f) 600 s. (g) Schematic illustration for the measurement of mean grain size, where the grains adjacent to the free surface marked by black spheres are counted as 0.5. (h) Corresponding average grain size changes of the perovskite film with different annealing times under SPA and CA strategies. 
The average grain size is plotted as a function of the annealing time for the CA film and SPA film (bottom film) as shown in Fig. 4h. The SEM images for the CA film annealed with increasing annealing times are shown in Fig. S1.† In contrast to the CA film with a constant grain size, the grains become larger continuously in the SPA film, with increasing annealing time. However, the gradient of the grain size against the annealing time for the SPA film increases suddenly after an annealing time of 180 s. It is known that the grain growth in polycrystalline materials usually occurs to reduce the fraction of grain boundaries with high energy, in which the grain coarsens by the gradual growth of larger grains and elimination of smaller ones.35 In this case, the grain sizes are relatively uniform (i.e., isotropic grain growth), whereas, under certain circumstances, only a few grains grow rapidly by consuming the surrounding smaller grains, and consequently, nonuniform grains with different grain sizes are achieved (i.e., anisotropic grain growth). Based on this interpretation, we infer that the mechanism of grain growth changes in the SPA method from isotropic to anisotropic, with an increase in the annealing time.
The evolution of grain growth of the perovskite during the annealing process in the SPA method is depicted in Fig. 5a. After solidification of the precursor solution, both the metastable Pb3I8 intermediate and the MAPbI3 perovskite are mixed randomly and the MAPbI3 perovskite is mostly surrounded by the Pb3I8 intermediate.36,37 With thermal annealing, the DMSO solvent begins to evaporate and the metastable Pb3I8 intermediates begin to get converted to the MAPbI3 perovskite by reacting with the residual MAI, which results in a decreased amount of Pb3I8 intermediate. However, MAPbI3 is restored to Pb3I8 by a reaction with the residual DMSO inside the film, which is reversible. The schematic diagram of the chemical reaction is presented in Fig. 5b. In the SPA process, the DMSO solvent tends to evaporate in a direction parallel to the substrate, owing to the shielding effect of the top and bottom substrates and the existence of relatively more space for evaporation in the interface between the top and bottom films. Therefore, the neighboring grains in the vertical direction are merged first, and the Pb3I8 intermediate merges together in the grain boundaries (GBs) owing to the evaporation of DMSO in a parallel direction. Under prolonged annealing, the GBs rich in DMSO migrate by consuming the Pb3I8 intermediate existing in the movement direction of the GBs. Thus, the grain becomes larger, which is driven by the high surface energy of the Pb3I8 intermediate. Moreover, it is important to note that at this stage, DMSO within GBs induces the heterogeneity of the Pb3I8 intermediate distribution (see the white arrows in Fig. 4e). Consequently, the isotropic grain growth of the perovskite alters to anisotropic grain growth. When each grain occasionally starts to grow in an anisotropic manner, the perovskite zone is preferentially enlarged. The anisotropic grain growth terminates when the growing grains reach another grain, because of the loss of driving pressure. Thus, the anisotropic grain growth induced by the residual DMSO inside the film occurs continuously until the DMSO vapor evaporates completely, leading to large MAPbI3 crystals.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the grain growth process of the perovskite film. (a) Stage (i) is the isotropic grain growth process driven by annealing; stage (ii) is the DMSO-induced vertical growth of the Pb3I8 intermediate; stage (iii) shows the lateral grain growth. Some grains start anisotropic grain growth by consuming the surrounding Pb3I8 intermediate phase, and this continues until the growing grain comes in contact with a neighboring grain. In this process, the dominant driving pressure for grain boundary (GB) migration is the high surface energy of the Pb3I8 intermediate. (b) Schematic structural view of the crystal growth process of MAPbI3 under the SPA process. 
Using the SPA method, we fabricated two complete perovskite films, for top and bottom, and utilized them in an IPSC, as the active layer. Fig. 6a shows the device structures of the IPSCs fabricated by the CA and SPA methods. When light is incident on the device, free holes and electrons are generated in the perovskite active layer. The holes are collected at the ITO electrode via the PEDOT:PSS layer and the electrons are collected at the Al electrode via the PCBM layer. The corresponding energy level diagram of the components of PSCs is presented in Fig. 6b. Fig. 6c presents the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the IPSCs measured under standard AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm−2) irradiation conditions. As shown in Fig. 6c, the top and bottom devices (red and blue lines) fabricated by the SPA method exhibit remarkably enhanced device performances with higher short-circuit currents (Jsc) and higher FFs, compared to the conventionally fabricated device (black line). Detailed photovoltaic parameters of IPSCs are summarized in Table 1. The best device performance is achieved for the top SPA device with an efficiency of 17.15%. In addition, all devices present hysteresis-free device performances with a negligible change in Jsc for voltage sweeps in either direction. The solid line representing the forward scan and the dotted line representing the reverse scan overlap exactly in the J–V curves. Therefore, we conclude that the hysteresis in the J–V curve is not strongly affected by the grain formation of the perovskite active layer in the IPSCs. Fig. 6d presents the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the IPSCs. As expected, the top and bottom SPA devices exhibit much higher and similar IPCE intensities than the CA device, because of the enhanced crystallinity and their comparable light absorption abilities (Fig. S2†). In particular, both top and bottom films display almost identical J–V curves, shapes of the IPCE spectra and absorbances (Fig. S2†) over the entire wavelength. Therefore, it is obvious that the SPA method provides two homogeneous perovskite films from one annealing process, which is one of the outstanding advantages.
 Fig. 6  Device characteristics’ comparison. (a) Structural configuration of the MAPbI3 planar solar cells prepared using the SPA method. (b) The energy level diagram of the components. Comparison of (c) J–V characteristics and (d) IPCE spectra for the planar perovskite solar cells based on the reference MAPbI3 film (black line), top film (red line), and bottom film (blue line). 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters for perovskite solar cells based on different perovskite layers




Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE(max) (%)
PCE(average) (%)




Conventional film
15.29
0.92
0.71
10.06
9.38 ± 0.68


Bottom film
21.76
0.97
0.81
17.09
16.33 ± 0.76


Top film
21.79
0.96
0.82
17.15
16.36 ± 0.79




Conclusions
In summary, we developed a highly effective SPA fabrication method for perovskite solar cells, which could produce remarkable enhancement in the device efficiency along with a reduction in the fabrication cost. By combining the perovskite precursor film face-to-face with controlled pressure, the solvent evaporation could be modulated and highly crystalline perovskite films could be produced. When the method was incorporated into the one-step fabrication of an IPSC, the device yielded a high PCE of ∼17.15% with a significantly enhanced Jsc and FF, compared to conventional devices. In addition, both top and bottom films prepared by the SPA method exhibited analogous film morphologies with highly crystalline grains and their device performances were very similar, with nearly identical J–V curves and shapes of the IPCE spectra. Since the SPA method is well compatible with the roll-to-roll fabrication process for mass production and provides two perovskite films from one fabrication process, the fabrication process becomes much simpler, easier, and faster, leading to a reduction in the fabrication cost.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was mainly supported by the Global Frontier Program through the Global Frontier Hybrid Interface Materials (GFHIM) of the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2013M3A6 B1078874). This research was also supported by the NRF Grant funded by the Korean Government (NRF-2016R1A2B4011474).
Notes and references
X. Yin, P. Chen, M. Que, Y. Xing, W. Que, C. Niu and J. Shao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3630 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bisquert, Y. Qi, T. Ma and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 520 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, X. Li, M. Cai, F. Xie, Y. Wu, Z. Lan, X. Yang, Y. Qiang, A. Islam and L. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700763 CrossRef .
C. Bi, B. Chen, H. Wei, S. DeLuca and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605900 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, C. Bao, B. Lv, F. Li, Y. Yi, Y. Wang, J. Yang, X. Wang, T. Yu and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12535 Search PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15007 CrossRef .
J. Ciro, S. Mesa, J. I. Uribe, M. A. Mejia-Escobar, D. Ramirez, J. F. Montoya, R. Betancur, H.-S. Yoo, N.-G. Park and F. Jaramillo, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9440 RSC .
C.-H. Chiang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and C.-G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 808 Search PubMed .
S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Bao, W. Sun, Y. Li, F. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7504 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sharenko and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 463 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Tao, P. Qin, W. Ke and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970 Search PubMed .
S. Bag, J. R. Deneault and M. F. Durstock, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701151 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Ugur, A. D. Sheikh, R. Munir, J. I. Khan, D. Barrit, A. Amassian and F. Laquai, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1960 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, F. Xie, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Su, M. Cai, Z. Zhou, T. Noda and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701073 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, C. Bao, W. Zhu, B. Lv, W. Tu, T. Yu, J. Yang, X. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11372 Search PubMed .
G. Xu, R. Xue, W. Chen, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, H. Chen, C. Cui, H. Li, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703054 CrossRef .
J. T.-W. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Pathak, W. Zhang, D. W. deQuilettes, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, J. Huang, P. K. Nayak, J. B. Patel, H. A. Mohd Yusof, Y. Vaynzof, R. Zhu, I. Ramirez, J. Zhang, C. Ducati, C. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, D. S. Ginger, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2892 Search PubMed .
Y. Hu, F. Bai, X. Liu, Q. Ji, X. Miao, T. Qiu and S. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2219 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Talbert, H. F. Zarick, A. Boulesbaa, N. Soetan, A. A. Puretzky, D. B. Geohegan and R. Bardhan, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12005 RSC .
Y. Ma, Y. Liu, I. Shin, I.-W. Hwang, Y. K. Jung, J. H. Jeong, S. H. Park and K. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33925 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, I. Shin, I.-W. Hwang, S. Kim, J. Lee, M.-S. Yang, Y. K. Jung, J.-W. Jang, J. H. Jeong, S. H. Park and K. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12382 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 545 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Meng, Y. M. Yang, G. Xu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, J. You, G. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10214 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Y. Fang, Q. Wang and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2464 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, L. Kang, T. Yu, B. Lv, Y. Wang, X. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6104 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang and L. N. Quan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yin, D. Cortecchia, A. Krishna, S. Chen, N. Mathews, A. C. Grimsdale and C. Soci, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1396 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sutou, T. Omori, K. Yamauchi, N. Ono, R. Kainuma and K. Ishida, Acta Mater., 2005, 53, 4121 CrossRef .
T. Kusama, T. Omori, T. Saito, S. Kise, T. Tanaka, Y. Araki and R. Kainuma, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 354 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seol, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xiao, Y. Bai, X. Meng, T. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Hu, Y. Qu and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604944 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr01717dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Synchronized-pressing annealing (SPA) strategy for MAPbI3 perovskite films. (a) Designed synchronized-pressing annealing (SPA) process that is compatible with the roll-to-roll fabrication process. (b–d) Top-view and the corresponding cross-section SEM images of the reference film, top film, and bottom film. For comparison, a reference film was fabricated by placing the as-cast film onto a hot plate directly, while the other conditions were the same as that of SPA.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top-view SEM images of perovskite films under SPA annealing under different applied pressures of (a, d) 0 kPa, (b, e) 3 kPa, and (c, f) 5 kPa.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the reference film, top film, and bottom film. Note: The ratio (R) represents the intensity ratio of the (110) to (310) planes. (b) Unit cell of MAPbI3 perovskite crystals. (c) Top view of the (110) plane of MAPbI3 crystals. (d) Schematic representation of the (110) orientation of a MAPbI3 perovskite crystal, consistent with the XRD data.	 
di = L/Ni	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Grain growth process of perovskite crystal films. Top-view and cross-section SEM images of the films prepared by the SPA process, as a function of annealing time: (a) 0 s, (b) 30 s, (c) 90 s, (d) 180 s, (e) 300 s, and (f) 600 s. (g) Schematic illustration for the measurement of mean grain size, where the grains adjacent to the free surface marked by black spheres are counted as 0.5. (h) Corresponding average grain size changes of the perovskite film with different annealing times under SPA and CA strategies.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the grain growth process of the perovskite film. (a) Stage (i) is the isotropic grain growth process driven by annealing; stage (ii) is the DMSO-induced vertical growth of the Pb3I8 intermediate; stage (iii) shows the lateral grain growth. Some grains start anisotropic grain growth by consuming the surrounding Pb3I8 intermediate phase, and this continues until the growing grain comes in contact with a neighboring grain. In this process, the dominant driving pressure for grain boundary (GB) migration is the high surface energy of the Pb3I8 intermediate. (b) Schematic structural view of the crystal growth process of MAPbI3 under the SPA process.	 

 	Fig. 6  Device characteristics’ comparison. (a) Structural configuration of the MAPbI3 planar solar cells prepared using the SPA method. (b) The energy level diagram of the components. Comparison of (c) J–V characteristics and (d) IPCE spectra for the planar perovskite solar cells based on the reference MAPbI3 film (black line), top film (red line), and bottom film (blue line).	 

Conventional film	15.29	0.92	0.71	10.06	9.38 ± 0.68
Bottom film	21.76	0.97	0.81	17.09	16.33 ± 0.76
Top film	21.79	0.96	0.82	17.15	16.36 ± 0.79
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr01717d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
