Self-propelled micro/nanomotors for removal of insoluble water contaminants: microplastics and oil spills  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EN00663K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EN00663K
(Frontier)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2021, 8, 3440-3451Self-propelled micro/nanomotors for removal of insoluble water contaminants: microplastics and oil spills

        
          
            Lei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Katherine 
            Villa
          
          
        
      *b
aMIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: Leiwang_chem@hit.edu.cn
bInstitute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Av. Països Catalans, 16, Tarragona, 43007 Spain. E-mail: kvilla@iciq.es
Received 
      21st July 2021
    , Accepted 31st October 2021First published on 1st November 2021AbstractMicro/nanomotors (MNMs) provide a myriad of significant potential applications in the environmental field, due to their self-propulsion that enhances the mixing of liquid media at the micro/nanoscale. Currently, various soluble pollutants have been addressed using MNMs, including organic dyes, pharmaceutical drugs, and explosives. However the potential of MNMs to remove insoluble emerging pollutants, such as microplastics and oil spills, has been rarely explored. Bearing this in mind, herein, based on our experience in this field, as well as the potential problems, we take a different perspective by focusing exclusively on the core features of MNMs for removing insoluble pollutants. Such types of contaminants are more difficult to treat by the current wastewater treatments, entailing a huge risk to the environment. Following their developing tendency, we highlight the main types of MNMs, actuation modes, and removal mechanisms that have been developed so far in this research field. In this way, we provide guidance to fine tune the design of MNMs to become a key technology to address the uncontrollable contamination of insoluble pollutants in water, such as microplastics and oil spills.Lei WangLei Wang received his Ph.D. degree from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) in 2015, with one and a half year study at the University of Maryland, College Park (US) and the University of Leeds (UK), respectively. After working as a Marie Sklodowska-Curie Fellow in Prof. Samuel Sanchez's group at the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia in Barcelona, Spain (2017–2019), he was appointed as an Associate Professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of HIT. His current research interests focus on the application of biomaterial self-assembly in the fields of micro/nanomotors, biosensors and biomimetics.Katherine VillaKatherine Villa received her Ph.D. degree from the Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain, in 2013. After two research positions at the Catalonia Energy Research Institute and the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia, she joined the Center for Advanced Functional Nanorobots at the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague (Czech Republic), where she worked as a senior scientist for 3 years. Currently, she is a Junior Leader fellow at the Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ). Her research interests include photocatalysis, micro/nanomotors, nanomaterials, renewable energy, and environmental remediation.

Environmental significance
In view of the alarming increase of plastic pollution and oil contamination in the environment, this frontier review highlights the opportunities that self-propelled micro/nanomotors provide for removing such emerging pollutants in water bodies. These devices offer unique features in comparison to other approaches, including autonomous propulsion and ease of surface functionalization to autonomously target the contaminants. This article provides a review of the use of such micromachines in the environmental field for the collection and degradation of microplastics, single-use plastic products, and oil spills. The current advantages and remaining challenges that need to be overcome for these devices to become a key technology in water remediation are also discussed.

Introduction
Anthropogenic activities are considered a major threat to the environment with a huge impact on aquatic ecosystems.1 For instance, oil spillage resulting from the release of crude oil into water bodies and landfills, either accidentally or intentionally,2 can disperse very quickly, entailing acute toxicity to aquatic organisms and animals.3 Although oil spills have considerably decreased since the 1970s,4 such a type of pollution still represents a major threat to ecosystems, water bodies, and organisms.5 Besides oil activities, plastic manufacturing is also considered an important type of contamination derived from industrial processes. It is estimated that about 300 million tons of plastics are produced every year worldwide, half of which become waste in less than one year.6 The ubiquity of plastic contamination in water bodies and the environment has marked a new era, commonly known as the Plasticene or Anthropocene.7,8
The quest for efficient wastewater treatments to maintain water supply in balance with overconsumption is a priority nowadays, especially considering the limited availability of freshwater (∼0.3%). Moreover, water contamination is one of the major causes of infectious diseases worldwide.9 Although traditional wastewater plants can remove almost any types of contaminants,10,11 they exhibit certain limitations regarding the removal of persistent organic pollutants,12 emerging plastic-based contaminants, and oil spills13–15 already present in water bodies.16 Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop alternative water treatments for counteracting this type of water pollution, i.e., insoluble wastes.
MNMs that take energy from the surroundings and translate it into motion hold great promise in the environmental field.17,18 The uniqueness of these devices relies on their ability to overcome diffusion limitations by their active motion with concomitant interaction with their environment.19–21 Such MNM systems have demonstrated outstanding capabilities for the removal of a variety of aqueous toxic pollutants, such as dyes,22–24 explosives,25,26 radioactive waste,27 heavy metals,23 and pathogenic microorganisms.28–30 Owing to their versatile motion actuation, including catalytic,31–33 light-driven,34–36 magnetic37 or acoustic,38 and ease of surface functionalization, these devices can be adapted to diverse water environments for targeting the respective pollutants.19 Recent studies have documented the potential of MNMs for treating insoluble contaminants in wastewaters, e.g., microplastics or oil spills, which are of emerging concern due to their ubiquitous presence in the environment. Herein, we will discuss the main types of MNMs and their action mechanisms for removing such types of emerging pollutants. Moreover, we will highlight the main advantages and future perspectives on the scalable design of MNMs for capturing and degrading larger amounts of pollutants. We hope that this frontier review will serve as an inspiration to design efficient self-propelled devices that can become a key solution in addressing oil and plastic-based contamination in different water bodies.
Types of MNMs for removal of insoluble pollutants
Four main types of self-propelled MNMs have been used so far for the removal of plastic-based contaminants and oil spills, including catalytic, magnetic, and light-driven devices, and/or hybrid micro/nanomotors combining more than one type of actuation. Among them, catalytic MNMs containing noble metals, metal oxides, and/or enzymes are the most common type. Their motion mechanism is based on the catalytic decomposition of a chemical fuel that may or may not be available in the swimming environment. For instance, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is usually added as a fuel to the liquid media to trigger their self-propulsion whereas enzyme-coated micromotors can usually move in the presence of oily contaminants, such as triglycerides. It should be noted that although H2O2 is an environmentally friendly oxidizer,39 due to its fast decomposition into oxygen and water, it adds some extra costs to the water treatment. On the other hand, considering that most of the insoluble pollutants are present in open water bodies, the addition of such chemical compounds becomes more challenging, limiting the overall use of such types of MNMs under real conditions. In this sense, the motion actuation of such micro/nanodevices under fuel-free conditions is more appealing. For instance, the actuation of MNMs under external fields, such as magnetic fields or light, has gained considerable attention over the last few years. The latter approach offers the possibility of using direct solar-light irradiation to trigger their self-propulsion, representing a sustainable strategy for developing MNMs for environmental remediation.

Fig. 1 presents the main removal mechanisms of plastic-based pollutants and oil spills using MNMs. They include physical removal or in situ degradation of such insoluble contaminants. The chemistry behind each process is different in the case of microplastics or hydrocarbons. The capture of microplastics is based on phoretic interactions, triggered by light/magnetic activation of the micromotors. On the other hand, for the removal of oil, further surface modification of the MNMs is required to collect oil spills by hydrophobic interactions. For degradation approaches, two main types of MNMs have been developed so far. They involve photocatalytic and enzyme-coated MNMs. The photoactivation of photocatalytic micromotors induces their self-propulsion with simultaneous generation of reactive species, such as hydroxyl radicals, which can react with the polymeric surface by removing a proton from the structure, leading to the formation of a polymer radical. Further reaction with oxygen results in the formation of oxygenated intermediates.40 This leads to the appearance of holes on the plastic surface that enable further oxidation of the inner structure. On the other hand, enzyme-coated MNMs have been developed for degrading oil compounds. Lipase, which is a hydrolase enzyme, has been used for catalyzing the hydrolysis of triglycerides into fatty acids and glycerol. Although both types of pollutants mainly contain carbon and hydrogen atoms, plastic-based pollutants are more challenging to degrade due to their cross-linked structure and solid shapes. Nevertheless, both strategies based on enzymatic and photocatalytic reactions have the potential to be used for counteracting both types of pollutants.41,42 The main approaches involving MNMs that have been used so far for the removal of microplastics and oil spills are discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 1  Main removal mechanisms of microplastics and oil by physical collection or degradation, including physical removal and degradation. 
Main strategies for removing microplastics
Plastics are representative components of a wide range of products that we interact with daily. The most used polymeric compounds in Europe are polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC), polystyrene (PS), poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), and polyurethane (PU) (Fig. 2A).43 However, due to their high stability, single-use, and short-life applications, these polymeric materials have become an important cause of contamination in water bodies and landfills.44 An emerging environmental concern about plastics is the recent discovery of microplastics, which result from the decomposition of big pieces of plastics.7 Usually, sizes below 5 mm are considered microplastics. However, this category includes a diverse range of sizes below that number, where detection and identification are more challenging as the sizes decrease, due to experimental limitations. A recent study showed the influence of photochemical and mechanical weathering on the resulting sizes.45 For instance, the effect of turbulent water in comparison with stagnant conditions led to almost three times higher microplastic formation, including size ranges of 177–240 and 74–177 μm. Besides the variation in sizes, morphologies are also dependent on the source of microplastics, such as clothing, personal care products, and food packaging, among others.46 The main morphology types of microplastics include fibers, fiber bundles, fragments, spheres, films, and foams (Fig. 2B). Due to their tiny sizes, microplastics can access through most filters of wastewater treatments to the different water bodies and the food chain. It has been estimated that human beings may be ingesting about 39000 microplastic particles per year.47 Although there are already existing approaches to address plastic contamination, such as recycling or incineration, the removal yields are either too low or entail the generation of toxic pollutant gases.47,48 Thus, it is necessary to develop more environmentally friendly and efficient solutions, especially, for removing such tiny plastic pieces present in different water bodies. Owing to the active motion and advanced functionalities of self-propelled micro/nanomotors, these microdevices have great potential for capturing and degrading these complex pollutants.
 Fig. 2  Nature of microplastics. A) Main types and B) main morphologies of microplastics. 
Collection/capture of microplastics by MNMs
Currently, the main mechanism for the microplastics removal is based on physical adsorption by phoretic interactions, involving a further recovery by magnetic fields, i.e., to utilize the interaction between the motor surface and the microplastics for attachment and further collection of the resulting entities. In this manner, Wang et al. reported a pioneering study showing the application of Janus Au@Ni@TiO2 micromotors for the removal of microplastics.49 These micromotors showed self-propulsion under UV light in water and H2O2 solutions by self-electrophoretic mechanisms (Fig. 3A). Polystyrene microparticles and real microplastics extracted from toothpaste, washing powder, face cleansing cream, and the Baltic Sea were used as model microplastic pollutants. These light-driven micromotors were able to collect such microplastics at a low concentration of H2O2 (0.1 wt%) by phoretic interactions. As a further step, the researchers also explored the collection of microplastics under fuel-free conditions by actuating the micromotors by solely magnetic forces. Upon magnetic activation, the micromotors assemble into long chains and move directionally in combination with light irradiation (Fig. 3B). Thus, the microplastics were removed by a shoveling effect, showing removal efficiencies of up to 77% and 67% in H2O2 and water, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Micromotors for capturing microplastics. A) Photocatalytic motion mechanism of Au@Ni@TiO2 micromotors. B) SEM image of chain formation of Au@Ni@TiO2 micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. C) SEM images of treated SPGs (sunflower pollen grains) after acidolysis and breaking. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd. 
After this pioneering work, further studies have been mainly focused on reducing fabrication costs. For instance, Sun et al. developed nature-based micromotors by treating sunflower pollen grains (SPGs) via acidolysis, followed by Ni sputtering, to provide them with a magnetic response (Fig. 3B).50 This resulted in hollow spike micromotors with multiple nanopores on their surface. Unlike the previous work, these SPG-based micromotors showed three different motion modes under a rotating magnetic field, including rolling, spinning, and wobbling. Therefore, it was possible to control the capture, transport, and release of microplastics by changing the actuation mode, because of the generated fluid flow. As a step forward, the authors investigated the microplastic removal capacity of the micromotors in real contaminated water and seawater, obtaining removal efficiencies of 75% and 70%, respectively.
On the other hand, to avoid the use of robust equipment for depositing magnetic layers, Ye et al. recently presented Fe3O4–MnO2 core–shell micromotors fabricated by an easy scalable hydrothermal method.51 This type of micromotor showed a different mechanism for removing microplastics based on adsorptive bubble separation (ABS).52 The ABS mechanism is based on the trapping of microplastics on microbubbles, which are generated by the in situ decomposition of H2O2 by the micromotors. In this approach, the microplastics are suspended in solution and some of them settle at the bottom as well, however, due to the turbulence caused by the active motion and the generated bubbles, the contact between the microplastics and the micromotors is achieved. Then, the microplastics accumulate on the foam layer in the upper part of the solution, due to surface tension, facilitating their recovery. However, this approach requires a high fuel concentration of 5% and a surfactant. Moreover, it only reached a maximum of 10% removal after a 2 h treatment. Therefore, the use of external fields is more desirable to not only achieve higher removal rates but also to avoid further detrimental effects on the environment by the addition of chemical fuels.
Degradation of (micro)plastic-based pollutants by MNMs
Single-use and disposable plastic-based products that also entail a negative impact on the environment are an important source of microplastics. In this category, wet wipes have been recently identified as emerging plastic pollutants in different water bodies.53,54 These products have been widely commercialized for multiple cleaning uses, reaching a remarkable increase in their production over the last few years. As a result of their disposable character, these products end up in rivers and oceans, easily adsorbing other toxic pollutants on their surface and entering the food chain through aquatic organisms.55–57 Recently, the application of visible-light-driven micromotors, fully made of Bi2WO6, for the degradation of plastic-based pollutants was reported for the first time (Fig. 4A).58 Such micromotors exhibited a perovskite-like structure with hybrid orbitals that enhance the charge pair mobility and separation, resulting in promising and efficient photocatalytic-based microdevices for environmental applications. Taking advantage of the highly oxidative radicals generated through the photocatalytic activation of Bi2WO6, these micromotors were explored as self-propelled microdevices for targeting baby wet wipe pollution in an aqueous solution. These micromotors were able to move under fuel-free conditions or in the presence of low fuel concentration (0.025 wt% H2O2). However, keeping in mind a potential real-world application, their capability for degradation of such solid waste was only evaluated in water. Interestingly, it was found that these micromotors were able to move as collective entities under visible light irradiation, which has been attributed to osmotic and phoretic interactions resulting from the generated chemical gradient concentration. Such swarming behavior was beneficial to attach a higher number of motors onto the microfibers, covering to a large extent their surface (Fig. 4B). Such an intimate contact is a key factor for improving the overall photocatalytic oxidation. It should be noted that due to the high stability of such polymeric pollutants, the effects of the degradation process were only observed after long irradiation periods. Upon illumination, a series of changes associated with the photocatalytic reactions were evidenced. For instance, the intertwined network of the fibres collapsed, and the damage of their surface along with the formation of holes with a diameter of about 0.3–0.6 μm was confirmed by SEM imaging. Besides, the released organic pollutants and microfibers from the textile wipes were also attacked and degraded by the micromotors. This is due to the generation of reactive species, such as hydroxyl radicals, that are non-selective and migrate from the surface of the micromotors towards the bulk solution, degrading also the organic pollutants present in the liquid. Therefore, it is a promising approach for targeting disposable solid pollutants along with the released toxic organic pollutants in water. However, further studies dealing with the selectivity of the micromotors towards the removal of plastic-based pollutants in the presence of other insoluble contaminants, e.g., oil, should be investigated in the future. A summary of the most representative examples of micromotors for the removal of plastic-based pollutants is included in Table 1.
 Fig. 4  Micromotors for the removal of single-use plastic-based products. A) Photocatalytic motion mechanism of Bi2WO6, including a SEM image and B) swarming of Bi2WO6 onto the wet wipes and further degradation under sun-like light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Table 1 Representative micromotors for removing microplastics




Mechanisms
Plastic-based pollutants
Motor materials
Motor size
Functions
Ref.




Phoretic interactions and shoveling
Microplastics from personal care products, rivers, and seas
Au@Ni@TiO2
700 nm
Capture of microplastics and removal by an external magnetic field

49



Noncontact shoveling
Polystyrene microparticles
Sunflower pollen grains half coated with Ni
∼30 μm
Capture, transport, and release of microplastics

50



Adsorptive bubble separation
Microplastics from Nivea brand facial cleanser
Fe3O4–MnO2 core–shell
∼5 μm
Separation of microplastics from solution

51



Degradation
Wet wipes, microfibers, polymeric compounds
Bi2WO6
∼7 μm
Swarming, capture and degradation of natural/synthetic textile fibers

58





Main strategies for removing/degrading oil by MNMs
For the past decades, due to the fast development of various manufacturing industries all over the world, wastewaters containing oils have been abundantly produced and released, thus making oils become one of the major sources of ocean pollution and groundwater contamination. The removal of oils and organic solvents from contaminated water is of considerable significance to minimize the environmental impact of these pollutants. To solve this problem, substantial efforts have been devoted to exploring efficient approaches or effective tools for the remediation and cleanup of oil spills. Although mechanical separation is still the most applied approach for removing oils from wastewater plants, due to the urgent requirement for portability and convenience in daily life, many other chemical or physicochemical methods have been explored.59,60 However, these methods mostly lack the desired efficiency or cost-effectiveness or might even cause secondary pollution. Hence, novel, facile, efficient, and portable approaches are still greatly desirable and urgently necessary, where micro/nanomotors are potential candidates.
To date, the mechanisms for oil removal based on micro/nanomotors mainly include two types: (i) physical adsorption and (ii) chemical degradation (see Table 2 for examples). On the one hand, the physical adsorption process usually requires specific surface functionalization of micro/nanomotors, including hydrophobic coatings or hydrophobic polymers as the motor body; on the other hand, for the degradation process, compared with microplastics, oil spills are relatively easier to degrade, since they are not cross-linked or solidified. Therefore, in this case, specific enzymes are necessary, which would be the key point to tailor fit-for-duty micro/nanomotors. Both mechanisms have their own merits, thus providing different applications towards different removal targets. In this section, we are going to discuss the progress in the past ten years, highlighting the representative studies, to provide key insights into oil removal.
Table 2 Representative micro/nanomotors for oil spill removal




Mechanism
Oil models
Motor materials
Size
Functions
Ref.




Adsorption
Olive oil
Au/Ni/PEDOT/Pt
∼8 μm
Capture and transport of oil spills

61



Oil droplets
Mg/Ti/Ni/Au
∼30 μm
Capture and transport of oil spills

32



1-Octane
MnFe2O4/OA
∼25 μm
Capture and transport of oil spills

62



Soybean blend oil
Fe3O4@Ag/ETPTA
475 μm
Capture and transport of oil spills; degradation of organic dyes

64



Mineral oil
PCL and Fe3O4 NPs
∼14 μm
Capture and transport of oil spills; removal of heavy metal ions

65



Corn oil
Ni@sunflower pollen grains
∼30 μm
Capture and transport of oil spills; removal of nanoplastics

50



Degradation
Triglyceride
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles
431 nm
Oil degradation

67



Triglyceride
Yolk shell NPs
285 ± 30 nm
Oil degradation

71



Triglyceride
Lipase-modified dendritic silica/carbon@Pt (DMS/C@Pt) nanomotors
563 ± 10 to 410 ± 10 nm
Oil degradation

72





Physical removal of oil droplets via adsorption
Currently, one of the common methods for providing micro/nanomotors with the ability to adsorb oil spills is through the modification of their surface with long alkyl-chains, i.e., self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), which have strong hydrophobic interaction with oils, thus being able to capture oil spills. For this purpose, the micromotors are usually fabricated by electrochemical/electroless deposition techniques or film rolling-up techniques, followed by sequential deposition of different inert materials or active materials into the straight pores of sacrificial membranes, or onto sacrificial substrates followed by film rolling-up. In this way, the micromotors are provided with an inner layer of active materials to decompose chemical fuels to trigger the motion. Then, the micromotors are coated with alkyl-chains, to obtain the hydrophobic surface for the adsorption of oils. Wang et al. pioneered the first study on the design of a catalytic micro-submarine by electroplating a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)/Pt bilayer followed by e-beam deposition of Ni/Au and subsequent functionalization with a SAM.61 In this work, dodecanethiol was selected as the SAM, thus obtaining dodecanethiol-coated Au/Ni/PEDOT/Pt microsubmarines with H2O2 as a fuel, with the ability to capture and transport olive oil droplets in aqueous media (Fig. 5A). Importantly, the influence of the alkanethiol chain length upon the interaction between olive oil droplets and nanomotors, as well as the oil collection efficiency, was investigated by the authors. The optimal SAM was gained from dodecanethiol (C12), since an alkanethiol with this length can not only provide sufficient oil-adsorption capabilities (better than unmodified or hexanethiol, C0 or C6), but could also avoid hindering of the motion caused by blocking of the catalysis process of thicker SAMs (like C18, octadecanethiol). Subsequently, Gao et al. from the same group further improved this system by designing the micromotors based on adopting Mg particles as the motor body, with asymmetrically coated Ti, Ni, and Au layers to form Janus micromotors.32 The most fascinating result of this design is that it was not necessary to add extra fuel to trigger the motion, because these hybrid micromotors could display efficient and prolonged propulsion in seawater, on account of the combination mechanism of galvanic corrosion and chloride pitting corrosion processes (Fig. 5B). Based on this structure, octadecanethiol was coated on the surface to generate SAMs, thus providing the affinity to oil droplets. Due to the large drag force of oil droplets, although the speed decreased from 90 to 44 μm s−1, these micromotors still successfully demonstrated their possibility of capturing and transporting the oil droplets.
 Fig. 5  Representative MNMs for oil removal with the mechanism of adsorption. (A) Microtubes with hydrophobic coatings. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) Mg/Au Janus micro/nanorobots in seawater. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Pot-like MnFe2O4 micromotor with hydrophobic modification. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission. Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (D) MnFe2O4@OA/PS Janus micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) Hierarchical porous micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (F) Walnut-like micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
These studies representatively demonstrated the oil removal using micromotors based on the adsorption mechanism. However, the additional modification process using an alkanethiol chain often prolongs the fabrication process (sometimes overnight). To simplify the motor fabrication, Mou and Guan et al. developed an oleic acid-assisted synthesis of MnFe2O4 micromotors, leading to an intrinsic hydrophobic coating with oleic acid on the surface of the motors to facilitate the oil collection.62 For such pot-like MnFe2O4 micromotors, the motion was mainly triggered by the generated oxygen bubbles from the decomposition of H2O2, which could lead to a vital mixing in the solution, thus providing a highly efficient collection of oil spills (Fig. 5C). The speed of the micromotor initially was 112 μm s−1, decreasing linearly from 86 to 23 μm s−1 with increasing number of carried oil droplets from 1 to 3 (∼20 μm each droplet). Besides, the micromotor was also responsive to a magnetic field for wireless modulation and recycling. Considering the composition of practical pollutants, usually containing several types of contaminants, like oils and other organic molecules, the ability of MNMs to simultaneously remove multi-contaminants is highly desirable. Thereby, to further enhance the functions of micromotors towards real environmental remediation, the same group improved the above system by introducing a polystyrene (PS) component to MnFe2O4 nanoparticles with oleic acid (OA) coatings, i.e., MnFe2O4@OA/PS Janus particles (Fig. 5D).63 In this case, the mechanism is different from conventional physical adsorption, which formed Pickering emulsions based on the amphiphilic property of MnFe2O4@OA/PS Janus particles. Under a magnetic field, the emulsions could be removed within 2 min, realizing the “on-the-fly” collection. Of notice, the MnFe2O4@OA/PS Janus particles here not only served as the surfactant of the Pickering emulsion but could also degrade the organic dyes (10 mg L−1) in water for 10 h, due to the generation of hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) from the active Fenton reaction between the MnFe2O4 components and H2O2. This works represents a good example of multifunctional micromotors for environmental remediation.
Another type of multifunctional micromotor includes hierarchical structures with different functionalities and components. To this end, Chu et al. developed a facile and flexible strategy based on microfluidics for continuous one-step fabrication of micromotors with well-engineered hierarchical porous structures for water decontamination.64 In this case, due to the multiple compartments in the micromotor body, each of the compartments could be entitled to different functions, such as one for loading of Fe3O4@AgNPs for magnetic control and recycling, and the other for collection of oil pollutants (soybean oil containing benzyl benzoate). Therefore, multifunctional micromotors were successfully developed, not only for oil collection but also for the removal of toxic heavy metal ions (Fig. 5E). Notably, in this work, there is no special alkanethiol chain modified on the surface, because poly(ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate) in this case is hydrophobic enough to adsorb the oil spills. Finally, due to their magnetic properties, the motors could be recycled for at least four times. Overall, this work not only provides an example for the precise design of micromotors with multiple compartments, towards the fine orchestration of multifunctional micromotors, but also offers a platform for the biomimicry of artificial cells based on oil droplets, potentially for the investigation of self-sorting behaviors, communication, or self-degradation behaviors. Another recent example includes the development of micromotors for the removal of both oil spills and microplastics, as mentioned in the last section. Ni-coated sunflower pollen grains could attach to the surface, on account of their large free volumes, multitudinous nanopores, and numerous nanospikes. Significantly, the micromotors showed collective interactions and thus greatly improved the removal efficiency.50
Besides the multifunctionality, the multi-responsiveness of micromotors is of high interest. Towards the aim of fine design and facile preparation of multifunctional and multi-responsive micromotors for oil removal, Dong et al. reported walnut-like micromotors obtained by a one-step electrospinning approach.65 In this work, in order to adsorb oil droplets, the motor body is made of polycaprolactone (PCL); meanwhile, for multi-responsiveness, iron oxide nanoparticles (Fe3O4 NPs) and catalase were encapsulated together to achieve a combination of the catalytic activity of the enzyme and the photothermal effect and magnetic properties of Fe3O4 NPs (Fig. 5F). Such resulting asymmetric micromotors (caused by the phase separation process during electrospinning) not only exhibited autonomous motion in a solution containing H2O2 but also showed multi-responsiveness with a controlled motion speed and direction. Furthermore, there is a synergistic interaction between the enzyme and Fe3O4 NPs, i.e., the photothermal effect of Fe3O4 NPs can boost the catalytic activity of the enzyme, thus promoting the enhancement of their velocity. More importantly, owing to the hydrophobic nature and the porous structure of the micromotors, the walnut-like micromotors can be directly utilized to collect spilled oil droplets without the introduction of multilayered structures or additional surface modifications with hydrophobic materials, achieving efficient removal of oil spills (2.2 mg mL−1 oil) within 60 min.
These studies paved the fundamental way towards oil removal using micro/nanomotors; however, there is still much to do for the real applications. For example, in real polluted wastewaters, the quantity of oil is much higher, and thus, the large-scale synthesis of micro/nanomotors is a prerequisite; secondly, the current methods mainly rely on the use of magnetic fields for collecting the motors and oils, which may be difficult to perform in large-scale scenarios. Therefore, alternative portable and facile controllable systems should be also explored; thirdly, the speed decrease caused by the large drag force of the oil phase is a foreseen problem occurring in real wastewaters, thereby a strong triggering force to overcome the drag needs to be further investigated. Last but not least, the efficiency of oil collection and transport is of great significance, and thus it still needs to be improved.
Chemical removal of oil droplets: nature-inspired enzymatic degradation
The collection and transport of oil spills require a large triggering force and the introduction of an external field for motor control, as well as surface coatings or polymeric bodies, which limits their applicability. In nature, hundreds of species of naturally occurring bacteria and fungi have been discovered, which can degrade certain components of oil, especially the saturated component containing molecules with 12 to 20 carbon atoms.66 Some species could also degrade lower-molecular-weight aromatic compounds. Furthermore, hydrocarbon-degrading organisms are abundant in oil-rich areas, such as near seeps on land or in water. Many studies reported that some of the native microorganisms are already thriving under local climatic and soil conditions with the ability to degrade oil. The mechanism for the degradation of oil by these bacteria and fungi mainly depends on enzymes. Therefore, inspired by nature, alternative catalytic micromotors with similar size and motility behavior to natural bacteria and fungi have been developed. In this aspect, Wang and Sánchez et al. adopted, for the first time, a lipase from Candida rugosa to power silica nanoparticle-based nanomotors, with a size of around 400 nm, to degrade oil spills in solution (Fig. 6A).67 In this work, lipase (triacylglycerol ester hydrolases from Candida rugosa, EC 3.1.1.3) was chosen for the experiment, mainly because: i) up to 2017, lipases accounted for the third-biggest category based on total global sales, with prevalent applications in both industrial and biotechnology areas due to their low price; ii) lipase can act as a catalyst for the decomposition of triglyceride substrates, both dissolvable (e.g., triacetin with a solubility of 61 mg mL−1) and slightly dissolvable (e.g., tributyrin with a solubility of 0.133 mg mL−1) ones. Therefore, lipase offers two functionalities when constructing lipase-powered nanomotors: 1) it acts as the power engine of the motor by consuming triacetin as a fuel, and 2) it takes on the major role in the degradation of tributyrin droplets. Based on these advantages, the nanomotors were constructed using silica nanoparticles as the scaffold, subsequently immobilized by lipase on the surface to facilitate the catalytic reaction. More than 98% of tributyrin droplets (∼20 μm) could be removed within 50 min, which is over 30% more efficient than pure lipase. This work demonstrated the first example of oil removal by in situ degradation, to avoid the tedious capture and transport processes in the physical adsorption. In order to further improve the motility ability, the authors deeply investigated the conformation influence of lipase motors, by applying silica supports with different hydrophobicity as the body for the nanomotors.68 The results revealed that the hydrophobic support could better facilitate the catalysis process compared with hydrophilic supports, therefore providing deep insights into the construction of nanomotors towards efficient degradation of oil droplets.
 Fig. 6  Representative MNMs for oil degradation. (A) Lipase powered mesoporous silica nanomotors, with the ability to degrade triglyceride in situ. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Multi-stimuli propelled Janus lipase-modified dendritic silica/carbon@Pt (DMS/C@Pt) nanomotors for enhanced oil degradation. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020. 
Besides tuning the conformation of lipase, to increase the degradation efficiency of oil droplets by MNMs, their structure can also be adjusted. For example, Sun et al. prepared poly(glycidyl methacrylate)/polystyrene (PGMA/PS) particles with various distributions of holes on the surface, where lipase was immobilized.69 The influence on the motion behavior caused by the distribution of lipase on the motor body (asymmetrical and symmetrical enzyme distributions) was investigated in detail, revealing that the Janus distribution of lipase exhibits superior diffusional and enzymatic reaction kinetics over the symmetrical structure under the same circumstances. Moreover, the authors mentioned that the enzymatic conversion enhanced their diffusional behaviors, and in turn, the autonomous motion of micromotors significantly facilitated the enzymatic reaction as well. This work provided key factors to further understand the kinetics of oil degradation, which was also confirmed by Yu et al. using a concave structure for lipase immobilization and orientated assembly through a deflation–inflation asymmetric growth strategy.70
Towards enhancing the degradation efficiency, the use of external fields can contribute to achieving accurate control over the micromotors. Therefore, Xu and coauthors developed two types of materials to immobilize or encapsulate lipase with NIR light responsiveness.71,72 In the first case, lipase-modified C@SiO2/C nanomotors with a yolk@spiky–shell structure were prepared, and due to the NIR guided motion towards the oil droplets, the nanomotors showed much higher degradation efficiency (93.1%) in contrast with that (66.7%) without NIR light at 20 min,71 which is also more efficient than that of pure lipase-powered nanomotors.67 For further efficiency improvement, multi-stimuli responsiveness is also an interesting alternative to be implemented on Janus lipase modified nanomotors. Therefore, Janus dendritic silica/carbon@Pt nanomotors were fabricated, with inner engines for hybrid propulsions based on H2O2, light, and lipase, therefore obtaining more efficient nanomotors (Fig. 6B).72
Lipase, to the best of the authors' knowledge, is the only enzyme that has been used for designing nanomotors for oil degradation, although assisted with another propulsion mechanism in some cases. However, compared with the abundant availability of enzymes in nature, the current development of enzyme-based micro/nanomotors is less than the tip of the iceberg. Therefore, much more effort is necessary for exploring other enzymes towards oil degradation; besides improving the efficiency, the type of oil pollutant should be broadened as well. In the aspect of nanomotors, the body structure should be precisely orchestrated, to achieve well-tailored multifunctionality, such as ecofriendly degradability or recycling properties.
Conclusions and outlook
In this frontier review, we briefly summarized the main progress of micro/nanomotors applied for the removal/degradation of non-soluble pollutants. Based on the multifunctional properties of MNMs in combination with their autonomous motion, several MNM systems have been proposed for the efficient removal of microplastics and oil spills. The resulting efficiencies shown by MNMs are satisfactory for proof-of-concept applications. However, there are still serious challenges to be overcome for real-world applications, such as biocompatibility, safety, power stability, navigation, and removal efficiency, among others. Some main issues currently faced in this research area are listed below, wishing to provide fundamental guidance for the future development of more applicable micro/nanomotors:
First, regarding the fuels to activate MNMs, it would be desirable to use biocompatible fuels or no additional fuels at all. H2O2 is a common fuel that decomposes into water and oxygen and has been prevalently explored for motor actuation; meanwhile, other fuels, such as contaminants themselves, are still to be investigated to power the motion of the motors. Addressing this issue will be key to avoiding further costs as well as secondary pollution. Likewise, the use of external fields, particularly light, has great potential for activating the motion of MNMs towards environmental approaches, since the sun's energy can ideally be used for their photoactivation at free cost.
Second, the recycling and lifecycle of MNMs are critical issues that are not considered in reported studies.73 Most of the previous MNM systems either lacked degradability or their efficiency decreased over time, limiting further reuse over multiple cycles. Therefore, further research should involve not only several cycles of reuse but also the study of the stability and environmental impact of MNMs after use.
Third, the cost of materials and large-scale synthetic techniques (such as 3D printing) for motor fabrication should be considered when designing MNMs. Although the preparation of a large quantity of MNMs is a long-term issue for this field, alternative low-cost metal components and easily scalable wet chemical methods are more viable for scalable fabrication required to treat large volumes of contaminated water. However, the engineering of sophisticated MNMs or more advanced systems requires multistep fabrication. Therefore, a compromise between functionalities and scalability should be reached according to the foreseen application.
Fourth, the removal efficiency for microplastics or oil still needs improvement. In the case of microplastics, it is necessary to not only estimate the microplastic removal but also to consider the cleaning of the surface of the micromotors upon use. On the other hand, real wastewater contains a huge amount of different contaminant types. Therefore, their selectivity or versatility towards multiple plastic-based pollutants should also be evaluated. A possible strategy to induce some selectivity towards the removal of plastics in the presence of other contaminants would include the modification of the surface of the micromotors with hydrophobic compounds and/or approaches based on surface molecular imprinting that has been demonstrated to be an efficient way to improve the selectivity of, for instance, photocatalytic-based oxidation of specific pollutants.74 Moreover, in the case of light-driven micromotors, a deep assessment of the capabilities of MNMs for plastic degradation, including irradiation times until total disappearance of the plastics, the light source, and stability should be performed to gain an insight into the real potential of these devices for this type of contamination. Regarding oil removal, it would also be desirable to design MNMs for in situ degradation of multi-type oil spills, to avoid secondary separation with collateral costs.
Besides, towards the removal of microplastics or oil, nature provides a huge library of approaches, such as bioremediation,75,76 which involves the use of living microorganisms to degrade such pollutants and convert them into innocuous substances. Based on this idea, some novel micro/nanomotors could be orchestrated with enzyme catalysis and bacterial immigration abilities, achieving the desired mimicry of bioremediation.
Finally, considering the richness of the multipollutant composition of wastewater, such as microbiological contamination, the development of multifunctional MNMs that can simultaneously remove multiple contaminants should be a priority. Although all the described challenges cannot be resolved in a short time, we envision that this field will gradually grow by a multidisciplinary collaboration between different expertise aimed to improve the capabilities of MNMs in the environmental field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Note added after first publication
This article replaces the version published on 16th November 2021, which contained errors in Fig. 3.
Acknowledgements
L. W. appreciates the financial support from NSFC (52073071, 51703043), the special and general funding program of Chinese Postdoc Foundation (2020T130144 and 2016M600247), and NSF of Heilongjiang Province (F2018014). K. V. acknowledges the support from the “la Caixa” Foundation (ID 100010434) with the fellowship code LCF/BQ/PI21/11830017.
Notes and references
H. T. T. Hoang, T. T. Duong, K. T. Nguyen, Q. T. P. Le, M. T. N. Luu, D. A. Trinh, A. H. Le, C. T. Ho, K. D. Dang, J. Némery, D. Orange and J. Klein, Impact of anthropogenic activities on water quality and plankton communities in the Day River (Red River Delta, Vietnam), Environ. Monit. Assess., 2018, 190, 67 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. E. Ndimele, A. O. Saba, D. O. Ojo, C. C. Ndimele, M. A. Anetekhai and E. S. Erondu, in The Political Ecology of Oil and Gas Activities in the Nigerian Aquatic Ecosystem, ed. P. E. Ndimele, Academic Press,  2018, pp. 369–384 Search PubMed .

          B. Laffon, in Encyclopedia of Toxicology, ed. P. Wexler, Academic Press, Oxford, 3rd edn,  2014, pp. 667–670 Search PubMed .
D. I. Little, S. R. J. Sheppard and D. Hulme, A perspective on oil spills: What we should have learned about global warming, Ocean & Coastal Management, 2021, 202, 105509 Search PubMed .
A. Jernelöv, Ambio, 2010, 39, 353–366 CrossRef PubMed .

The plastic dilemma: 348 million tons of plastic produced per year worldwide, half of which becomes waste, https://www.statista.com/press/p/plastic_waste_dossierplus//, (accessed April 20,  2021) Search PubMed .
R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck and K. L. Law, Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700782 CrossRef .
C. Campanale, C. Massarelli, I. Savino, V. Locaputo and V. F. Uricchio, A detailed study on Potential effects of microplastics and additives of concern of human health, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2020, 17, 1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Drinking-water, World Health Organization,  2019, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/drinking-water, (accessed April 14, 2021) Search PubMed .
S. Fallah, H. R. Mamaghani, R. Yegani, N. Hajinajaf and B. Pourabbas, Use of graphene substrates for wastewater treatment of textile industries, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2020, 3, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Dong, Y. Wu, Y. Bao, H. Yan and J. Ma, Fabrication and investigation on Ag nanowires/TiO2 nanosheets/graphene hybrid nanocomposite and its water treatment performance, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2020, 3, 402–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Falås, A. Wick, S. Castronovo, J. Habermacher, T. A. Ternes and A. Joss, Tracing the limits of organic micropollutant removal in biological wastewater treatment, Water Res., 2016, 95, 240–249 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Bai, Y. Pan, J. Ma, S. Zhang and L. Shao, Ultra-robust superwetting hierarchical membranes constructed by coordination complex networks for oily water treatment, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 627, 119234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Yang, L. Yan, Y. Bai, S. Li, P. Sorokin and L. Shao, Biomimetic nanoparticle-engineered superwettable membranes for efficient oil/water separation, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 618, 118525 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Cheng, Y. Jiao, Z. Sun, X. Yang, Z. Cheng, Q. Bai, Y. Zhang, K. Wang and L. Shao, Constructing scalable superhydrophobic membranes for ultrafast water-oil separation, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3500–3508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Gupta, G. J. Dunderdale, M. W. England and A. Hozumi, Oil/water separation techniques: a review of recent progresses and future directions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16025–16058 RSC .
Y. Yang, K. Hu, P. Zhang, P. Zhou, X. Duan, H. Sun and S. Wang, Manganese-based micro/nanomotors: synthesis, motion, and applications, Small, 2021, 2100927 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zarei and M. Zarei, Self-propelled micro/nanomotors for sensing and environmental remediation, Small, 2018, 14, 1800912 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Parmar, D. Vilela, K. Villa, J. Wang and S. Sánchez, Micro- and nanomotors as active environmental microcleaners and sensors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9317–9331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Duan, S. Ahmed, A. Sen and T. E. Mallouk, From one to many: dynamic assembly and collective behavior of self-propelled colloidal motors, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1938–1946 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jurado-Sánchez and J. Wang, Micromotors for environmental applications: a review, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1530–1544 RSC .
Y. S. Kochergin, K. Villa, F. Novotný, J. Plutnar, M. J. Bojdys and M. Pumera, Multifunctional visible-light powered micromotors based on semiconducting sulfur- and nitrogen-containing donor-acceptor polymer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002701 CrossRef CAS .
K. Villa, J. Parmar, D. Vilela and S. Sánchez, Metal-oxide-based microjets for the simultaneous removal of organic pollutants and heavy metals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20478–20486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, Y. K. Bahk and J. Wang, Organic dye removal by MnO2 and Ag micromotors under various ambient conditions: the comparison between the two abatement mechanisms, Chemosphere, 2017, 184, 601–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Khezri, K. Villa, F. Novotný, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Smartdust 3D-printed graphene-based Al/Ga robots for photocatalytic degradation of explosives, Small, 2020, 16, 2002111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Pourrahimi, K. Villa, Y. Ying, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, ZnO/ZnO2/Pt janus micromotors propulsion mode changes with size and interface structure: enhanced nitroaromatic explosives degradation under visible light, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42688–42697 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ying, A. M. Pourrahimi, Z. Sofer, S. Matějková and M. Pumera, Radioactive uranium preconcentration via self-propelled autonomous microrobots based on metal-organic frameworks, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11477–11487 CrossRef CAS .
K. Villa, F. Novotný, J. Zelenka, M. P. Browne, T. Ruml and M. Pumera, Visible-light-driven single-component BiVO4 micromotors with the autonomous ability for capturing microorganisms, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8135–8145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, M. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Sun, H. Zhang and B. Dong, Dual-fuel-driven bactericidal micromotor, Nano-Micro Lett., 2016, 8, 157–164 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Vilela, M. M. Stanton, J. Parmar and S. Sánchez, Microbots decorated with silver nanoparticles kill bacteria in aqueous media, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22093–22100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Villa, J. Viktorova, J. Plutnar, T. Ruml, L. Hoang and M. Pumera, Chemical microrobots as self-propelled microbrushes against dental biofilm, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 100181 CrossRef .
W. Gao, X. Feng, A. Pei, Y. Gu, J. Li and J. Wang, Seawater-driven magnesium based Janus micromotors for environmental remediation, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4696–4700 RSC .
M. Safdar, S. U. Khan and J. Jänis, Progress toward catalytic micro- and nanomotors for biomedical and environmental applications, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703660 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Villa and M. Pumera, Fuel-free light-driven micro/nanomachines: artificial active matter mimicking nature, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4966–4978 RSC .
L. Xu, F. Mou, H. Gong, M. Luo and J. Guan, Light-driven micro/nanomotors: from fundamentals to applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6905–6926 RSC .
M. Safdar, J. Simmchen and J. Jänis, Light-driven micro- and nanomotors for environmental remediuation, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1602–1616 RSC .
X.-Z. Chen, M. Hoop, F. Mushtaq, E. Siringil, C. Hu, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Recent developments in magnetically driven micro- and nanorobots, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 37–48 CrossRef .
T. Xu, L.-P. Xu and X. Zhang, Ultrasound propulsion of micro-/nanomotors, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 493–503 CrossRef .
L. Bauzá, A. Aguilera, R. Echenique, D. Andrinolo and L. Giannuzzi, Application of hydrogen peroxide to the control of eutrophic lake systems in laboratory assays, Toxins, 2014, 6, 2657–2675 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ohtani, S. Adzuma, S. Nishimoto and T. Kagiya, Photocatalytic degradation of polyethylene film by incorporated extra-fine particles of titanium dioxide, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1992, 35, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Tetteh, S. Rathilal and D. B. Naidoo, Photocatalytic degradation of oily waste and phenol from a local south Africa oil refinery wastewater using response methodology, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohanan, Z. Montazer, P. K. Sharma and D. B. Levin, Microbial and enzymatic degradation of synthetic plastics, Front. Microbiol., 2020, 11, 580709 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Gewert, M. M. Plassmann and M. MacLeod, Pathways for degradation of plastic polymers floating in the marine environment, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2015, 17, 1513–1521 RSC .
M. Eriksen, L. C. M. Lebreton, H. S. Carson, M. Thiel, C. J. Moore, J. C. Borerro, F. Galgani, P. G. Ryan and J. Reisser, Plastic pollution in the world's oceans: more than 5 trillion plastic pieces weighing over 250000 tons afloat at sea, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e111913 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Hebner and M. A. Maurer-Jones, Characterizing microplastic size and morphology of photodegraded polymers placed in simulated moving water conditions, Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts, 2020, 22, 398–407 RSC .
C. M. Rochman, C. Brookson, J. Bikker, N. Djuric, A. Earn, K. Bucci, S. Athey, A. Huntington, H. McIlwraith, K. Munno, H. De Frond, A. Kolomijeca, L. Erdle, J. Grbic, M. Bayoumi, S. B. Borrelle, T. Wu, S. Santoro, L. M. Werbowski, X. Zhu, R. K. Giles, B. M. Hamilton, C. Thaysen, A. Kaura, N. Klasios, L. Ead, J. Kim, C. Sherlock, A. Ho and C. Hung, Rethinking microplastics as diverse contaminant suite, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2019, 38, 703–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Cox, G. A. Covernton, H. L. Davies, J. F. Dower, F. Juanes and S. E. Dudas, Human consumption of microplastics, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 7068–7074 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mølgaard, Environmental impacts by disposal of plastic from municipal solid waste, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 1995, 15, 51–63 CrossRef .
L. Wang, A. Kaeppler, D. Fischer and J. Simmchen, Photocatalytic TiO2 micromotors for removal of microplastics and suspended matter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32937–32944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, W. Chen, X. Fan, C. Tian, L. Sun and H. Xie, Cooperative recyclable magnetic microsubmarines for oil and microplastics removal from water, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100682 CrossRef .
H. Ye, Y. Wang, X. Liu, D. Xu, H. Yuan, H. Sun, S. Wang and X. Ma, Magnetically steerable iron oxides-manganese dioxide core-shell micromotors for organic and microplastic removals, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 588, 510–521 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Jenkins, J. Scherfig and D. W. Eckhoff, in Adsorptive Bubble Separation Techniques, ed. R. Lemlich, Academic Press,  1972, pp. 219–242 Search PubMed .
O. Ó. Briain, A. R. Marques Mendes, S. McCarron, M. G. Healy and L. Morrison, The role of wet wipes and sanitary towels as a source of white microplastic fibres in the marine environment, Water Res., 2020, 182, 116021 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Durukan and F. Karadagli, Physical characteristics, fiber compositions, and tensile properties of nonwoven wipes and toilet papers in relevance to what is flushable, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 697, 134135 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ostle, R. C. Thompson, D. Broughton, L. Gregory, M. Wootton and D. G. Johns, The rise in ocean plastics evidenced form a 60-year time series, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1622 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. McCoy, D. J. Hodgson, P. F. Clark and D. Morritt, The effects of wet wipe pollution on the Asian clam, Corbicula fluminea (Mollusca: Bilvavia) in the river Thames, London, Environ. Pollut., 2020, 264, 114577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Ladewig, S. Bao and A. T. Chow, Natural fibers: a missing link to chemical pollution disperion in aquatic environments, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 12609–12610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Villa, L. Děkanovský, J. Plutnar, J. Kosina and M. Pumera, Swarming of perovskite-like Bi2WO6 microrobots destroy textile fibers under visible light, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2007073 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Lawton and P. K. J. Robertson, Physico-chemical treatment methods for the removal of microcystins (cyanobacterial hepatotoxins) from potable water, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1999, 28, 217–224 RSC .
T. A. Kurniawan, G. Y. S. Chan, W.-H. Lo and S. Babel, Physico-chemical treatment techniques for wastewater laden with heavy metals, Chem. Eng. J., 2006, 118, 83–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guix, J. Orozco, M. García, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. Merkoçi, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, Superhydrophobic alkanethiol-coated microsubmarines for effective removal of oil, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4445–4451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mou, D. Pan, C. Chen, Y. Gao, L. Xu and J. Guan, Magnetically modulated pot-like MnFe2O4 micromotors: nanoparticle assembly fabrication and their capability for direct oil removal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6173–6181 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, F. Mou, X. Li, Z. Deng, J. Sun, L. Xu and J. Guan, Multifunctional magnetic oleic acid-coated MnFe2O4/polysterene Janus particles for water treatment, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11768–11774 RSC .
Y.-Y. Su, M.-J. Zhang, W. Wang, C.-F. Deng, J. Peng, Z. Liu, Y. Faraj, X.-J. Ju, R. Xie and L.-Y. Chu, Bubble-propelled hierarchical porous micromotors from evolved double emulsions, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 1590–1600 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, G. Zhao, C. Chen, H. Zhang, R. Duan, D. Zhang, M. Li and B. Dong, One-step fabrication of dual optically/magnetically modulated walnut-like micromotor, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 2801–2807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Fingas, in Oil Spill Science and Technology, ed. M. Fingas, Gulf Professional Publishing, Boston,  2011, pp. 429–433 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, A. C. Hortelão, X. Huang and S. Sánchez, Lipase-powered mesoporous silica
nanomotors for triglyceride degradation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7992–7996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Marciello, M. Estévez-Gay, P. E. D. S. Rodriguez, Y. L. Morato, J. Iglesias-Fernández, X. Huang, S. Osuna, M. Filice and S. Sánchez, Enzyme conformation influences the performance of Lipase-powered nanomotors, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 21080–21087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu and Y. Sun, Autonomous motion of immobilized enzyme of Janus particles significantly facilitates enzymatic reactions, Biochem. Eng. J., 2019, 149, 107242 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Kong, Z. Gu, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, W. Ban, H. Song and C. Yu, Shaping nanoparticles for interface catalysis: concave hollow spheres via deflation-inflation asymmetric growth, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xing, S. Tang, X. Du, T. Xu and X. Zhang, Near-infrared light-driven yolk@shell carbon@silica nanomotors for fuel-free triglyceride degradation, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 654–659 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, X. Du, T. Xu and X. Zhang, Janus dendritic silica/carbon@Pt nanomotors with multiengines for H2O2, near-infrared light and lipase powered propulsion, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 9553–9558 RSC .
R. Arvidsson and S. F. Hansen, Environmental and health risks of nanorobots: an early review, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7, 2875–2886 RSC .
V. R. A. Ferreira, M. A. Azenha, C. M. Pereira and A. F. Silva, Preparation of molecularly imprinted hollow TiO2 microspheres for selective photocatalysis, Chemical Engineering Journal Advances, 2021, 5, 100071 CrossRef .
R. M. Atlas, Bioremediation and petroleum pollutants, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 1995, 35, 317–327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Kumar, S. Sarsaiya, R. Sirohi, S. K. Awasthi, R. Sindhu, P. Binod, A. Pandey, N. S. Bolan, Z. Zhang, L. Singh, S. Kumar and M. K. Awasthi, Sci. Total Environ., 2022, 802, 149823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Lei Wang	Lei Wang received his Ph.D. degree from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) in 2015, with one and a half year study at the University of Maryland, College Park (US) and the University of Leeds (UK), respectively. After working as a Marie Sklodowska-Curie Fellow in Prof. Samuel Sanchez's group at the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia in Barcelona, Spain (2017–2019), he was appointed as an Associate Professor at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of HIT. His current research interests focus on the application of biomaterial self-assembly in the fields of micro/nanomotors, biosensors and biomimetics.
Katherine Villa	Katherine Villa received her Ph.D. degree from the Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain, in 2013. After two research positions at the Catalonia Energy Research Institute and the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia, she joined the Center for Advanced Functional Nanorobots at the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague (Czech Republic), where she worked as a senior scientist for 3 years. Currently, she is a Junior Leader fellow at the Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ). Her research interests include photocatalysis, micro/nanomotors, nanomaterials, renewable energy, and environmental remediation.

Environmental significance
In view of the alarming increase of plastic pollution and oil contamination in the environment, this frontier review highlights the opportunities that self-propelled micro/nanomotors provide for removing such emerging pollutants in water bodies. These devices offer unique features in comparison to other approaches, including autonomous propulsion and ease of surface functionalization to autonomously target the contaminants. This article provides a review of the use of such micromachines in the environmental field for the collection and degradation of microplastics, single-use plastic products, and oil spills. The current advantages and remaining challenges that need to be overcome for these devices to become a key technology in water remediation are also discussed.


 	Fig. 1  Main removal mechanisms of microplastics and oil by physical collection or degradation, including physical removal and degradation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Nature of microplastics. A) Main types and B) main morphologies of microplastics.	 

 	Fig. 3  Micromotors for capturing microplastics. A) Photocatalytic motion mechanism of Au@Ni@TiO2 micromotors. B) SEM image of chain formation of Au@Ni@TiO2 micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. C) SEM images of treated SPGs (sunflower pollen grains) after acidolysis and breaking. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  Micromotors for the removal of single-use plastic-based products. A) Photocatalytic motion mechanism of Bi2WO6, including a SEM image and B) swarming of Bi2WO6 onto the wet wipes and further degradation under sun-like light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

Phoretic interactions and shoveling	Microplastics from personal care products, rivers, and seas	Au@Ni@TiO2	700 nm	Capture of microplastics and removal by an external magnetic field	
49

Noncontact shoveling	Polystyrene microparticles	Sunflower pollen grains half coated with Ni	∼30 μm	Capture, transport, and release of microplastics	
50

Adsorptive bubble separation	Microplastics from Nivea brand facial cleanser	Fe3O4–MnO2 core–shell	∼5 μm	Separation of microplastics from solution	
51

Degradation	Wet wipes, microfibers, polymeric compounds	Bi2WO6	∼7 μm	Swarming, capture and degradation of natural/synthetic textile fibers	
58


Adsorption	Olive oil	Au/Ni/PEDOT/Pt	∼8 μm	Capture and transport of oil spills	
61

Oil droplets	Mg/Ti/Ni/Au	∼30 μm	Capture and transport of oil spills	
32

1-Octane	MnFe2O4/OA	∼25 μm	Capture and transport of oil spills	
62

Soybean blend oil	Fe3O4@Ag/ETPTA	475 μm	Capture and transport of oil spills; degradation of organic dyes	
64

Mineral oil	PCL and Fe3O4 NPs	∼14 μm	Capture and transport of oil spills; removal of heavy metal ions	
65

Corn oil	Ni@sunflower pollen grains	∼30 μm	Capture and transport of oil spills; removal of nanoplastics	
50

Degradation	Triglyceride	Mesoporous silica nanoparticles	431 nm	Oil degradation	
67

Triglyceride	Yolk shell NPs	285 ± 30 nm	Oil degradation	
71

Triglyceride	Lipase-modified dendritic silica/carbon@Pt (DMS/C@Pt) nanomotors	563 ± 10 to 410 ± 10 nm	Oil degradation	
72


 	Fig. 5  Representative MNMs for oil removal with the mechanism of adsorption. (A) Microtubes with hydrophobic coatings. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) Mg/Au Janus micro/nanorobots in seawater. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Pot-like MnFe2O4 micromotor with hydrophobic modification. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission. Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (D) MnFe2O4@OA/PS Janus micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) Hierarchical porous micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (F) Walnut-like micromotors. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representative MNMs for oil degradation. (A) Lipase powered mesoporous silica nanomotors, with the ability to degrade triglyceride in situ. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Multi-stimuli propelled Janus lipase-modified dendritic silica/carbon@Pt (DMS/C@Pt) nanomotors for enhanced oil degradation. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
