ZnO quantum dots anchored in multilayered and flexible amorphous carbon sheets for high performance and stable lithium ion batteries   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA12511B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA12511B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8460-8471ZnO quantum dots anchored in multilayered and flexible amorphous carbon sheets for high performance and stable lithium ion batteries†

        
          
            Joseph F. S. 
            Fernando
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Konstantin L. 
            Firestein
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jawahar Y. 
            Nerkar
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Dmitri V. 
            Golberg
          
        
      *ac
aSchool of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Queensland 4000, Australia. E-mail: jf.fernando@qut.edu.au; dmitry.golberg@qut.edu.au
bInstitute for Future Environments, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Queensland 4000, Australia
cInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 3050044, Japan
Received 
      29th December 2018
    , Accepted 7th March 2019First published on 8th March 2019AbstractOwing to their high reversible capacity, cycling stability, low cost and safety, ultrafine ZnO particles embedded in carbonaceous materials are promising as electrode materials for lithium ion batteries (LIBs). Although there are a number of recent studies on ZnO/C based materials, direct evidence on the role played by the carbonaceous component, which is essential for the rational design of these nanomaterials with optimal electrochemical performance, is still missing. Herein, we systematically investigate the LIB performance of a novel ZnO quantum dot (ZnO-QD)/carbon composite using conventional electrochemical methods as well as the in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) technique. A composite of ZnO-QDs anchored in amorphous carbon multilayered sheets (ZnO-QDs@CMS) was synthesized using a pre-prepared zinc glycolate complex as the precursor. After low temperature annealing in Ar, the glycolate moieties carbonized and directly formed homogeneously distributed ZnO QDs embedded in ultrathin amorphous carbon layers. The ZnO-QDs@CMS delivered a high reversible capacity of 1015 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles at a specific current of 50 mA g−1. Even at 1000 mA g−1, a reversible capacity of 565 mA h g−1 was maintained after 350 cycles, with a capacity fading of only 5.7% (with respect to the second cycle). Comparative in situ TEM (de)lithiation studies of ZnO-QDs@CMS and pristine ZnO uncovered the role played by the amorphous carbon network in LIB performance. In addition to mitigating the volume expansion, during lithiation the flexible and conductive amorphous carbon network of the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode suppressed the formation of adversely large Zn crystals and favoured the formation of a LiZn alloy, which contributed to the high reversible capacity and long-term stability.
Introduction
At present, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are used as power sources for many devices, including portable computers, telecommunication equipment and electric vehicles.1–3 As today's population is becoming more dependent on such electronic devices, there is an increasing demand for the rapid advancement of secondary battery technologies with long cycle life, low rates of self-discharge and low environmental pollution.2,4,5 More so, the decline of fossil fuels and related environmental complications have led to a huge interest in “greener” and sustainable energy sources, such as wind, solar and tidal.6 These energy sources are typically seasonal and require high energy and power density energy storage devices for their reliable utilization in the long run. Therefore, development of safe and cost-effective LIB electrode materials that meet today's requirements is a major challenge for researchers.6
Nanoscale transition metal oxides and chalcogenides (ZnO,7–10 CoS2,3,11 ZnS,12 SnO2,13,14 Co3O4,15 Fe2O3,16etc.) that show high theoretical specific capacities have been the focus of many current studies for replacing graphite-based commercial anodes which show low theoretical capacity (372 mA h g−1).17 Among them, ZnO-based materials have enormous potential owing to their relatively low cost, high reversible capacity, environmental friendliness and low (de)lithiation potential.8,18 ZnO is Li active and undergoes conversion and alloying/dealloying reactions with lithium to yield a high theoretical specific capacity (987 mA h g−1):8
Conversion reaction ZnO + 2Li+ + 2e− ↔ Zn + Li2O(1)
Alloying–dealloying reaction Zn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixZn (x ≤ 1)(2)Although ZnO anodes could deliver a high specific capacity in the first cycle, these anodes cannot maintain this capacity over an extended period over many cycles due to two major problems: (a) large volume expansion upon repeated (de)lithiation; and (b) poor intrinsic conductivity, leading to pulverization of the electrode and loss of electrical contact, which consequently results in poor rate capability and capacity fading.19 Scientists have put forward many strategies to tackle these problems; among them, the design of composite structures of ultra-fine ZnO particles and carbonaceous materials has been the most effective.20–22 Ultrafine particles, particularly quantum dots (QDs) could have several advantages over bulk materials, such as reducing the mechanical stress caused by the conversion reaction, shortening the diffusion path for ions and electrons, and a high surface area for fast reactions with lithium.3,8 On the other hand, a carbon matrix could enhance the electrochemical performance of ZnO anodes by significantly reducing the large volume expansions, increasing the electronic conductivity and reducing the aggregation of small particles during (de)lithiation cycles.3,23 Therefore, the design of ZnO/carbon composites is a sensible way to incorporate ZnO into LIB anodes. For instance, Yang et al. reported the synthesis of carbon coated ZnO QDs by pyrolysis of the metal–organic framework IRMOF-1 at elevated temperature, which delivered a high reversible capacity of 1150 mA h g−1 at a specific current of 75 mA g−1 after 50 cycles in LIBs.21 Moreover, organic compounds could also be used as carbon sources to prepare ZnO/carbon composites.24,25 For instance, Fan et al. employed polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) as a carbon source to prepare yolk–shell structured ZnO microspheres that exhibited a reversible capacity of 818 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 50 cycles.26 There are also recent reports on various other types of ZnO/carbon materials, such as amorphous ZnO QD/mesoporous carbon bubble composites,9 ZnO@ZnO QD/C core–shell nanorod arrays,27 ZnO nanosheet/squeezebox-like porous carbon,28 ZnO/carbon nanofibers29 and sandwiched porous C/ZnO/porous carbon nanosheets30 with enhanced LIB performance. Even though there are continuous advances in the research of ZnO-based anodes, there is still room for improvement. For instance, while ZnO QD/carbon composites have exhibited promising LIB performance, the number of reports is still limited. This is because there are great hurdles to overcome in the fabrication of these materials with good control over the QD size and carbon framework using economic synthesis processes, while still meeting the required electrochemical performance. In this regard, carbon derived from organic molecules and organometallic compounds could play an important role,8 and herein we employ a metal glycolate complex, prepared via a low temperature solvothermal route, to produce the desired ZnO/C composite structure.
In this work, we report an innovative approach to fabricate ZnO QDs/amorphous carbon composites by using a pre-prepared zinc glycolate complex as the starting material. The composite structure has a peculiar multilayer sheet-like morphology, where ZnO QDs are uniformly anchored in ultra-thin amorphous carbon layers. These layers are highly flexible and form a continuous conductive network interconnecting the QDs. ZnO QDs/amorphous carbon multilayered sheets (ZnO-QDs@CMS) showed high reversible capacity, high rate capability and excellent cycling stability when incorporated as anodes into lithium ion batteries. Importantly, by using state-of-the-art in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques,31,32 we performed systematic experiments to visualize the (de)lithiation process of ZnO-QDs@CMS in real time. We reveal pivotal information on the role played by the amorphous carbon network and report direct evidence as to why ZnO-QDs@CMS exhibits superior LIB performance. Although there are in situ TEM studies on ZnO nanowires33,34 and ZnO/graphene composites,35 to the best of our knowledge, a detailed investigation on ZnO/derived carbon composites is missing. Interestingly, we found that unlike ZnO/graphene composites studied previously and pristine ZnO studied herein, during lithiation, the ZnO-QDs@CMS material promoted the formation of a LiZn alloy, instead of forming large Zn crystals, which partly contributed to the high performance displayed.
Experimental
Chemicals
Zinc acetate dihydrate, ethylene glycol, oleylamine, poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), lithium hexafluorophosphate (1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate:diethyl carbonate, 1:1), granular lithium and lithium ribbons were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Absolute ethanol was purchased from Ajax Finechem. TIMCAL graphite and carbon super P were purchased from MTI. N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) was purchased from RCI Labscan.
Synthesis of ZnO-QDs@CMS sheets
Zinc acetate dihydrate (2.08 g) and ethylene glycol (44 mL) were put into a round bottom flask. Then the reaction mixture was heated under reflux and held at 70 °C until all zinc acetate dihydrate was dissolved. At this point, oleylamine (6 mL) was added to the flask. Afterwards, the reaction mixture was further heated to 160 °C and kept at this temperature for 4 h. Then the flask was allowed to cool, and the product was promptly separated by centrifugation (9000 RPM, 4 min), washed several times with absolute ethanol and transferred to a drying oven at 60 °C. Next, the dried powder was annealed at 350 °C in a 3-zone tube furnace (Nabertherm R 50/500/12) under a gentle (200 mL min−1) Ar flow (the heating rate was 250 °C h−1. The tube was held under vacuum until the temperature became 150 °C). The temperature was held at 350 °C for 30 min before allowing the furnace to cool down to room temperature. The obtained product was used for analysis and battery testing without further treatment.
Materials characterization
The crystal structure and phase composition of the materials were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a PANalytical XPert Pro multi-purpose diffractometer (Co Kα radiation, λ = 0.179095 nm). The chemical state of the materials was determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements using a Kratos AXIS Supra spectrometer. XPS spectra were analysed using CasaXPS software and were calibrated to C 1s (284.8 eV). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) were employed for morphology and structural analysis. SEM images were acquired using a JEOL 7001F microscope. HRTEM images, selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns, dark field scanning TEM (DF-STEM) images and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental maps of the materials were acquired using a JEOL 2100 microscope (200 kV) equipped with JEOL STEM detectors (BF/ADF) and an Oxford X-Max 80 mm2 silicon drift EDX detector (SDD). TEM samples were prepared by adding a drop of diluted colloidal solution (in ethanol) onto lacey formvar coated 300 mesh Cu grids. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) of the materials was carried out using a Bruker Alpha FTIR spectrometer. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using a NETZSCH STA 449 instrument in air from 25 °C to 800 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. Raman spectroscopy was conducted using a 532 nm Renishaw inVia Raman microscope.
Electrochemical characterization
Electrochemical measurements were conducted at room temperature using CR 2032 coin-type cells with a Li counter electrode. The working electrode slurry was prepared by mixing the active material, carbon super P and PVDF in NMP at a weight ratio of 7:2:1. The slurry was doctor-bladed onto a copper foil to a wet thickness of 250 μm and then dried at 70 °C in a vacuum oven for 12 h. The electrodes and the separators (Celgard 2400) were cut into 15 mm and 19 mm discs, respectively. The active material loading was 1.2–1.3 mg cm−2. The coin cells were assembled in a high purity Ar filled glove box (MBraun UniLab) using 1 M LiPF6 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate and diethyl carbonate (1:1 v/v) as the electrolyte. The galvanostatic charge/discharge tests were performed between 0.01 V and 3.0 V using a Lanhe CT2001 electrochemical station. The first cycle of all tests was run at a specific current of 25 mA g−1. A constant voltage charge (3 V until current ≤0.01 mA) was applied at the end of each galvanostatic charge to ensure that the battery is fully charged. The rate capability was examined from 50 mA g−1 to 4000 mA g−1. Cyclic voltammetry data were collected between 0 and 3 V using a Keithley 2450 EC sourcemeter at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of fresh and cycled (after 15 cycles) half cells was performed using a BioLogic VMP-300 multichannel potentiostat, in the frequency range of 1 MHz to 10 mHz, with a sinusoidal amplitude of 5 mV. All potentials reported here are referenced to the Li/Li+ electrode potential. To have a preliminary understanding about the full cell performance of the ZnO-QDs@CMS material, a full battery was fabricated using LiFePO4 (LFP) on Al foil as the cathode material. The anode to cathode capacity ratio was adjusted to ∼1.1 to efficiently utilize the cathode material. The active material loading on the positive electrode was 7 ± 0.2 mg cm−2. The electrochemical tests of full cells were conducted between 1.0 and 4.0 V with respect to the mass of the ZnO-QDs@CMS active material.
Setting up in situ TEM measurements

In situ TEM experiments were carried out on a JEOL 2100 TEM using a “Zues” scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM)-TEM in situ specimen holder (Zeptools, P.R China). Initially, a freshly cut gold wire was meticulously tapped (once) onto a piece of tracing paper coated with the active material (ZnO-QDs@CMS or pristine ZnO) and, then, placed on the stationary part of the STM holder. A tiny amount of Li was attached to a freshly cut tungsten probe by scratching a Li granule and, then placed on the piezo-driven movable part of the STM holder. The setup was promptly transferred into the TEM column with minimal (<5 s) exposure to ambient air. A thin layer of Li2O formed on the Li metal surface serves as the solid electrolyte for the nanoscale battery.
Results and discussion
Materials synthesis and characterization
ZnO-QDs@CMS was prepared using a straightforward two-step protocol. Fig. 1a shows the schematic of the synthesis process. In the first step, Zn ions are reacted with ethylene glycol at 160 °C for 4 h to form zinc glycolate (ZnGc) precursor sheets. Fig. S1† shows the XRD pattern obtained from the as-prepared ZnGc sheets: the sharp diffraction peak observed at ∼10° is characteristic of metal glycolate compounds.36,37 In addition, a number of low intensity diffraction peaks corresponding to the wurtzite hexagonal form of ZnO were also observed. SEM and TEM imaging revealed that the precursor product predominantly consists of layered ZnGc sheets with a mosaic-like surface; their widths range from 0.25–5 μm and lengths are up to 20 μm (Fig. S2†). There are also some porous ZnO particles sandwiched in between glycolate sheets, as revealed by XRD and HRTEM imaging (Fig. S1 and S2†). It should be noted here that under the reaction conditions used herein, addition of oleylamine to the reaction system promoted the formation of sheet-like metastable ZnGc structures, while porous ZnO nanospheres were formed when oleylamine was omitted from the reaction mixture (Fig. S3†). ZnGc sheets formed here can act as a secondary precursor and could be annealed in a controlled way to construct multilayered ZnO/carbon composite structures. For instance, ZnGc nanofibers have been employed as a template to prepare mesoporous carbon nanofibers for supercapacitor electrodes.36 In the second step, the as-prepared ZnGc precursor compound was annealed at 350 °C under an Ar atmosphere to yield ZnO/carbon composites. During the annealing process, Zn of ZnGc is decomposed to form ZnO QDs. At the same time, the glycolate moiety is carbonized to produce ZnO-QDs@CMS. Fig. 1b shows the XRD pattern obtained from the as-synthesized ZnO-QDs@CMS product. The diffraction pattern is well matched to the hexagonal wurtzite crystal structure of ZnO with no impurity phases (PDF 36-1451) and comparable to the XRD spectra of ZnO/carbon composite materials reported previously.21,26 The broad diffraction peaks observed herein are indicative of the nanoscale size of ZnO particles.38 Low magnification SEM images (Fig. 1c) show that the composites have uniform sheet-like morphology throughout the sample, with a width of 0.25–5 μm and lengths of up to 20 μm (similar to the ZnGc precursor compound). The high magnification SEM image in Fig. 1d clearly depicts the multilayered nature of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite and also the ZnO/C nanospheres sandwiched in between the ZnO-QDs@CMS layers.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic image of the ZnO-QDs@CMS synthesis process. (b) XRD pattern (c) low magnification SEM image and (d) high magnification SEM image of the as-obtained ZnO-QDs@CMS product. 
The fine structure and detailed morphology of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite material were studied using TEM imaging. The low magnification TEM image in Fig. 2a reveals that the material is composed of a number of ultrathin sheets, and the high magnification TEM image in Fig. 2b shows that each layer is decorated with very small numerous dark dots dispersed in a lighter contrast matrix. The inset of Fig. 2c shows the SAED ring pattern collected from the region in Fig. 2a. Diffraction rings corresponding to the (010), (002) and (110) planes of the wurtzite crystal structure of ZnO are clearly identified. The SAED pattern also confirms that ZnO QDs are crystalline and arranged in different crystal orientations. The diffraction contrast image (Fig. 2c) obtained from the (010) reflection in the SAED pattern clearly depicts the distribution of ZnO QDs in the lighter contrast carbon matrix. The typical size of a ZnO QD is <5 nm according to the HRTEM image (Fig. 2d). During the thermal treatment under Ar flow at 350 °C, initial carbonization of the glycolate moieties could have confined the available growth area for ZnO crystallites, leading to the formation of ZnO QDs.36 It is worth noting here that smaller scale ZnO particles should favour the diffusion of Li ions and electrons during electrochemical cycling.12 The magnified HRTEM image in Fig. 2e clearly identifies lattice fringes with spacings of 0.26 nm, 0.25 nm and 0.15 nm, which can be attributed to the (002), (011) and (013) planes of the hexagonal wurtzite ZnO structure. The false colour inverse fast Fourier transform (FFT) image in Fig. 2f (inset shows the corresponding FFT pattern which was obtained from the marked region in Fig. 2d) clearly shows that ZnO QDs are effectively wrapped by 2–3 nm thick disordered carbon layers. As seen in the image, these carbon layers are separated by sub-nanometer scale cavities, which could facilitate ion access and transport. Consequently, the carbon matrix could act as an effective cushion and, thereby, prevent the volume expansion of ZnO QDs during lithiation/delithiation cycles. Furthermore, carbon layers could make the composite structure more functional by forming continuous conductive channels between individual ZnO QDs for ion transport.26 The DF-STEM image and corresponding EDX maps in Fig. 2g further confirmed the uniform distribution of Zn, O and C elements in the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite.
 Fig. 2  (a) Low and (b) high magnification TEM images of ZnO-QDs@CMS. (c) Diffraction contrast dark field image obtained from the (010) reflection of ZnO, as marked in the SAED pattern (inset). (d) HRTEM image of a single ZnO-QDs@C sheet showing the monodispersity of ZnO QDs. (e) Magnified HRTEM image of the area marked in Fig. 2d (red square). (f) False colour inverse FFT image of the area marked in Fig. 2d (blue square). Inset of Fig. 2f shows the corresponding FFT pattern; the inverse FFT image was obtained by masking some of the ZnO FFT signals to highlight the disordered carbon layers wrapped around ZnO QDs. (g) DF-STEM image and the corresponding spatially resolved EDX maps for individual elements in the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite system. 
The compositional and structural transformations accompanying the annealing of the ZnGc precursor complex were also studied using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and FTIR spectroscopy. The TGA curve (Fig. S4†) recorded under air shows ∼12.9% weight loss at about 360 °C, which manifests the carbon content in the ZnO-QDs@CMS. The carbon content in this material is considerably low compared to that in the MOF derived ZnO QDs21 (32%) and amorphous ZnO QD/carbon composites9 (50%) reported recently. Fig. S5† shows the FTIR spectra collected before and after the annealing process of the ZnGc complex. It can be seen that the peaks at 2933 and 2873 cm−1, which are ascribed to –CH2 bonds, and the peaks at 1080 and 1032 cm−1, which are ascribed to C–O and C–C bonds of the glycolate moieties, have completely disappeared after annealing, which indicates the successful carbonization of the glycolate complex. Raman spectroscopy of the material was performed to further analyze the carbon component of the composite (Fig. S6†). The two peaks positioned at ∼1370 cm−1 and ∼1585 cm−1 are assigned to D and G bands, respectively, characteristic of amorphous carbon or disordered graphite.39 The G peak corresponds to the vibration modes of sp2 carbon atoms while the D peak indicates structural disorder.40 An XPS study was then performed to understand the valence state of Zn and C in the composite system. It should be noted here that the ultimate binding energy value is governed by positive and negative shifts imposed by a combination of factors including nanoparticle size and structural arrangement.41Fig. 3a shows the Zn 2p high resolution XPS spectrum obtained from the ZnGc complex. After deconvolution of the Zn 2p doublet, two pairs of binding energy peaks were identified and the two obvious peaks at 1021.5 (Zn 2p3/2) and 1044.4 (Zn 2p1/2) eV with an energy separation of 22.9 eV are attributed to Zn(II) of the zinc glycolate complex. After the annealing step in Ar, only a single pair of peaks positioned at 1021.9 (Zn 2p3/2) and 1045.0 (Zn 2p1/2) eV was identified (Fig. 3b). The energy separation of 23.1 eV is typical of ZnO and confirms the successful synthesis of ZnO QDs. Fig. 3c shows the high resolution C1s spectrum of the ZnGc complex, which can be clearly deconvoluted into three peaks. The dominant peak centered at 286.0 eV is attributed to the C–O chemical state of the glycolate moiety. The component at 284.8 eV is due to the C–C chemical state of the glycolate moiety. The peak at 289.5 eV (CO) is attributed to adventitious carbon contamination. After the annealing step, the component at 284.8 eV, which corresponds to the C–C chemical state, evidently became dominant (Fig. 3d); this indicates the effective carbonization of glycolate moieties. Findings from XPS analysis are in good agreement with XRD, TEM and EDX results, and all techniques in combination reaffirm the formation of ZnO-QDs@CMS, where each individual sheet is made of ZnO QDs dispersed in a continuous carbon matrix. The ZnO QDs are monodisperse and enclosed by flexible channels of conductive and porous amorphous carbon. This composite structure with interesting features is deemed to show high capacity and excellent rate capability as an anode material in LIBs. For benchmarking the lithium storage properties of the newly prepared ZnO-QDs@CMS material, electrochemical tests (including in situ TEM battery tests) were also performed on pristine ZnO nanospheres (Fig. S3†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Zn 2p XPS spectrum of the ZnGc complex and (b) Zn 2p XPS spectrum of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite. (c) C 1s XPS spectrum of the ZnGc complex. (d) C 1s XPS spectrum of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite. 
Characterization of electrochemical properties
The electrochemical properties of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite were examined using cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles. Fig. 4a shows the cyclic voltammetry curves of the composite material. In the first cathodic scan, the peak at ∼0.40 V is attributed to the reduction of ZnO to Zn0 and the formation of Li2O, the LiZn alloy and the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI).26 The high current near 0 V is ascribed to the Li+ insertion into amorphous carbon (in the composite) and also to conductive carbon (in the electrode).3,42 Subsequently, the cathodic peak splits into two minor peaks centered at 0.60 and 0.32 V (clearly visible from the 3rd scan onward), which can be attributed to the reduction of ZnO to Zn0 and alloying reactions of Li and Zn, respectively.19,26 In the anodic scans, there are three oxidation peaks between 0.4 and 0.8 V, which correspond to the multistep dealloying processes: LiZn → Li2Zn3 → LiZn2 → Li2Zn5 → Zn.42 Additionally, the broader peak at 1.4 V is in line with the reaction between Zn and Li2O to reform ZnO.42 It is important to highlight that careful examination of the CV curves revealed slight increases in the current response for the alloying and dealloying processes of LixZny upon cycling (refer to red arrows in Fig. 4a). Since LixZny alloy formation has a substantial contribution to the reversible capacity displayed by ZnO-based anodes, the observed current increases might be attributed to a progressive activation of the electrode upon cycling. Furthermore, there is a slight decrease in the current response at 1.4 V (anodic trace), which indicates that not all Zn atoms/particles are oxidized to ZnO, yet directly transformed into LixZny in subsequent cycles according to CV data. After the initial cycle, apart from the minor deviances noted above, CV curves essentially overlap indicating appreciable reversibility and stability of ZnO-QDs@CMS during (de)lithiation. In contrast, CV curves of pristine ZnO particles displayed poor reversibility and stability (Fig. S7†). Fig. 4b presents the first ten galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles for the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode. The initial cycle is in good agreement with CV data, where the first plateau corresponds to the formation of the SEI layer.27 The initial discharge and charge capacities were 1542 and 849 mA h g−1, respectively. As such, the reversible capacity of the first cycle is lower than the expected theoretical value of 890 mA h g−1 (theoretical capacity estimated based on the relative amounts of ZnO and amorphous carbon in the composite: 987 (ZnO)8x 0.84 + 470 (amorphous carbon)21x 0.13 = 890 mA h g−1). The capacity loss in the first cycle can be attributed to the formation of a SEI layer9 and partial irreversibility of ZnO conversion processes. Most importantly, the coulombic efficiency rises to 95% in the fifth cycle and then to 99% from the 10th cycle onwards. Furthermore, the charge/discharge profiles closely overlap from the 4th cycle onwards, confirming the good reversibility of the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode during cycling.
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical characterization of the ZnO-QDs@CMS material. (a) Cyclic voltammetry conducted in a potential range of 0.0 to 3.0 V for five cyclic sweeps (scan rate: 0.5 mV s−1). (b) The galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles for the first ten cycles at a specific current of 50 mA g−1 (first cycle was conducted at a specific current of 25 mA g−1). 

Fig. 5a shows that the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode can deliver a high reversible specific capacity of 1015 mA h g−1 with excellent stability at a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100% after 80 cycles at a current density of 50 mA g−1. In contrast the pristine ZnO electrode delivered only 205 mA h g−1 (Fig. 5a). It is interesting to note that the specific capacity initially decreased to a value of 748 mA h g−1 between the 1st and 10th cycles and then gradually increased to 1015 mA h g−1 by the 75th cycle before stabilization. As seen in Fig. 5b, the capacity increase was mainly observed at low voltages (0.6>) during the discharge trace and at high voltages (1.4 V<) during the charge trace of the cycle. This phenomenon is analogous to the results reported by Passerini et al.3 and Duan et al.43,44 for metal oxide and metal-sulphide-based anode materials. The gradual increase in specific capacity can be partially attributed to ‘quasi-reversible’ SEI formation.3,45 For instance, degradation of the electrolyte could form a gel-like polymeric layer on the electrode surface and thereby improve the mechanical cohesion of active materials leading to enhanced ion transfer kinetics.43,44,46 Moreover, this SEI layer can provide extra active sites for Li ion storage by a process known as “pseudocapacitance-type” behaviour, and increase the capacity in subsequent cycles.43,46 Additionally, the apparent capacity increase in porous transition metal oxide-based anode materials has also been attributed to microstructural reorganization during cycling.44Fig. 5c shows the outstanding rate capability of the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode material. The electrode delivered stable reversible specific capacities of 715, 730, 735, 667, 561, 424 and 216 mA h g−1 when subjected to variable current densities of 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 mA g−1 (the battery was cycled 10 times in each current step). Remarkably, the specific capacity in fact increased between current steps 50–200 mA g−1 (11th to 31st cycle), further corroborating the progressive capacity improvement discussed earlier and the excellent stability of the electrode even at 200 mA g−1. Although in the last high current step (4000 mA g−1), the reversible specific capacity dropped to a value of 216 mA h g−1, upon returning the current back to 100 mA g−1 the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode delivered a stable reversible capacity of 943 mA h g−1 at the end of the 132nd cycle (Fig. 5c). In fact, there is a gradual capacity increase when the current density returns to 100 mA g−1 and the possible reason is as follows: during the rate capability test, the current was switched from low to high every 10 cycles. As seen in Fig. 5a, when cycling the battery at low currents, after the initial capacity decrease, the gradual capacity increase can take up to 75 cycles. There is a high possibility that chemical and physical processes (noted above), that led to the capacity increase, occur at low currents and were not complete at the time of switching current in the rate capability test. When the current returns to a low value (100 mA g−1 in this case), the activation processes would complete, leading to a capacity increase. An identical behavior has very recently been observed for CoS2 nanoparticles embedded in carbon.3 This result displays the superior stability of the prepared anode material even after undergoing cycling at high current rates. Then, we tested the long-term cycling stability of the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode at high specific currents of 1000 and 5000 mA g−1 (Fig. 5d). At 1000 mA g−1, the electrode delivered a reversible specific capacity of 565 mA h g−1 after 350 cycles, with a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100%. Moreover, the capacity fading was only 5.7% after 350 cycles (with respect to the second cycle), showing the excellent cycling stability of the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode. Even at 5000 mA g−1, the electrode showed a reversible specific capacity of more than 180 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles with a capacity retention of 71% (with respect to the 5th cycle).
 Fig. 5  (a) Comparative cycling performance of ZnO-QDs@CMS and pristine ZnO electrodes at a current density of 50 mA g−1. (b) Selected galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of ZnO-QDs@CMS from the 10th to 70th cycle (current density: 50 mA g−1, a constant voltage charge (3 V until current ≤0.01 mA) was applied at the end of each galvanostatic charge to ensure that the battery is fully charged). (c) Rate capability of ZnO-QDs@CMS at current densities from 50 to 4000 mA g−1. (d) Long term cycling stability of ZnO-QDs@CMS at high current densities of 1000 and 5000 mA g−1 (from the second cycle onwards). 
Impedance experiments were performed to further ascertain the excellent electrochemical properties of ZnO-QDs@CMS. Fig. S8† shows the impedance spectra of the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode before and after 15 cycles. The semicircle at high–medium frequency and the sloping lines at low frequency represent the charge transfer resistance (Rct) and Warburg impedance (Zw), respectively.27 ZnO-QDs@CMS displays low Rct compared to pristine ZnO, which can be attributed to the good electrical contact between QDs, enabled by the continuous conductive carbon network. Interestingly, after 15 cycles the diameter of the semicircle becomes smaller, which indicates enhanced ion transfer kinetics upon cycling. This phenomenon has been previously observed for LIB anodes based on metal oxides as well as sulfides.12,46 Moreover, the EIS result agrees well with the gradual capacity increase observed when cycling the ZnO-QDs@CMS at low currents, which could be ascribed to the formation of the ‘quasi-reversible’ SEI layer and thereby enhancement of Li ion transfer kinetics. The structural stability of ZnO-QDs@CMS was investigated by acquiring SEM images of the material after cycling. Fig. S9† shows SEM images of the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode material after undergoing 100 charge/discharge cycles at a specific current of 50 mA g−1. Apart from minor deformation, the sheet-like morphology of the material remained mostly intact, showing good structural stability even after 100 cycles. Recently, there is a huge interest in the development of ZnO-based anodes for lithium ion batteries, albeit, studies based on ZnO QDs are quite limited.8 Table S1† summarizes a comparison of the performance of the ZnO-QDs@CMS electrode with other ZnO QDs/C based materials reported previously. This displays appreciable performance in terms of high capacity, cycling stability and high rate performance, not to mention the trouble-free, simple and cost-efficient route to prepare the material.
To have a deeper understanding of the surpassing stability and long-term high rate performance of ZnO-QDs@CMS compared to the pristine ZnO material, we performed in situ TEM measurements during lithiation/delithiation processes to detect morphology, volume, and structural changes of the materials in real time. Firstly, we investigated pristine (and porous) ZnO spheres. Fig. 6a displays the schematic of the in situ TEM experimental setup. Fig. 6b shows the TEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern of a pristine ZnO particle just before lithiation. When a potential of −3 V versus Li/Li+ was applied, the ZnO particle immediately expanded along all directions (Movie S1†). As seen in Fig. 6c, the diameter of the particle increased by 18 nm (203 to 221 nm). This particle growth corresponds to a volume expansion of ∼30%. When a potential of 3 V versus Li/Li+ was applied, the delithiation process occurred. During delithiation, the ZnO particle shrank to a diameter of 215 nm (Fig. 6d), which corresponds to an irreversible volume expansion of ∼19% in the first cycle. Such irreversible volume changes to an electrode material could lead to pulverization of the electrode, loss of electrical contact and subsequent capacity decay.47 The most significant structural changes to the ZnO particle were observed during the second lithiation (Movie S2†). As seen in the time-lapse TEM images in Fig. 6e and f, we clearly distinguished the formation of ∼25 nm dark nanograins on the surface (marked by red arrows). The SAED pattern of the lithiated ZnO particle provides detailed information on the phase changes that occur after reaction with Li. According to the SAED pattern (Fig. 6f), the dark grains are due to the formation of adversely large Zn crystals during lithiation of ZnO, consistent with the previous observations by Su et al.35 Growth of large Zn nanocrystals could hinder the formation of a LiZn alloy (the key component for the reversible capacity displayed by ZnO) and thus deteriorate the reversible capacity and the overall cycling stability of the ZnO electrode.35 Moreover, large Zn crystals could block the pathway of Li transport, and thereby exacerbate the capacity loss and poor cycling stability displayed by pristine ZnO electrodes.33 As mentioned above, in situ TEM findings (irreversible volume expansion and large Zn crystal formation) should certainly retard the performance of pristine ZnO electrodes. This is in line with the poor cycling stability observed for the pristine ZnO material (Fig. 5a).
 Fig. 6  (a) Photograph and schematic representation of the in situ TEM setup. (b) TEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern of a single ZnO particle at the initial stage. (c) TEM image of the ZnO particle after the first lithiation. (d) TEM image of the ZnO particle after the first delithiation. (e and f) Time-lapse TEM images captured during the 2nd lithiation of the ZnO particle and the corresponding SAED pattern. 
Next, we performed the control in situ TEM experiment to see if we could determine the favourable features of ZnO-QDs@CMS that influence the observed high capacity and cycling stability. Fig. 7a shows a free-standing ZnO-QDs@CMS sample set for the in situ (de)lithiation experiment. Fig. 7b illustrates a magnified part of ZnO-QDs@CMS (green square in Fig. 7a) which was observed and recorded under a TEM during the (de)lithiation experiment. Similar to the previous experiment for pristine ZnO, a potential of −3 V versus Li/Li+ was applied to drive the lithiation when ZnO-QDs@CMS comes into contact with Li/Li2O. During the first lithiation, there was a notable expansion, closely adjacent to the Li/Li2O counter electrode, which in fact demonstrates effective lithiation of the composite material (Movie S3†). As seen in Fig. 7b and c, the length along two selected points, adjacent to the counter electrode changed from initial 429 to 449 nm (marked in red). Remarkably, there was no obvious volume expansion of ZnO-QDs@CMS, a touch away from the counter electrode (Fig. 7c, marked in blue; Movie S3†). This implies that flexible channels of porous amorphous carbon surrounding the ZnO QDs acted as an effective cushion to buffer a large volume expansion. During the first delithiation, the length along the two points adjacent to the counter electrode shrank to 443 nm (Fig. 7d). The small irreversible expansion in the first cycle (∼3.26% elongation) was confined to the edge of the sheet, whereas the majority remained intact. Essentially, there were no notable volume changes in the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample in subsequent (de)lithiation cycles (Fig. 7e; Movie S3†). Most importantly, in stark contrast to the pristine ZnO particle, we did not observe the formation of dark grains (Zn crystals) in the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample, even after the 4th lithiation (Fig. 7e). This indicates that Zn atoms formed during the first redox reaction (ZnO + 2Li+ + 2e− ↔ Zn + Li2O) effectively take part in the alloying reaction (yZn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixZny), instead of forming stable Zn crystals, which is the key for reversible electrochemical performance of the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode.35 The suppression of Zn crystal formation could be attributed to superior Li ion transport in ZnO-QDs@CMS facilitated by the continuous network of conductive carbon in the composite. Furthermore, since ZnO QDs are separated by the amorphous carbon network, the QD surface is readily available for a fast reaction with lithium.21Fig. 7e also shows the SAED pattern of ZnO-QDs@CMS after the 4th lithiation. Diffraction rings corresponding to LiZn and Li2O were clearly identified, further confirming the successful lithiation of ZnO-QDs@CMS. There was also a diffraction ring that corresponds to a d-spacing of 0.244 nm, which could be due to some Zn formation visually not observed or residual ZnO (considering the multi-layered nature of the structure and the presence of porous ZnO spheres sandwiched in between layers, there might be some residual ZnO that is not lithiated during the in situ experiment). Fig. S10† shows high magnification TEM images of ZnO-QDs@CMS, acquired after the 4thin situ lithiation, revealing that structural integrity was maintained during de(lithiation), which is essential to achieve cycling stability for the anode. It is worth noting here that carbon encapsulated porous ZnO particles (C–ZnO), which are sandwiched in between ZnO-QDs@CMS, would also react with lithium and contribute to the overall capacity observed. Fig. S11† shows an isolated mesoporous C–ZnO particle, where the whole structure and each constituent small particles forming the porous structure are encapsulated in carbon. An additional in situ TEM experiment was performed to investigate the structural integrity of a C–ZnO particle during (de)lithiation. We found that amorphous carbon not only effectively buffers the volume expansion of C–ZnO but also suppresses the formation of unfavourable Zn grains (Movie S4 and Fig. S12†). Therefore, mesoporous C–ZnO particles, on and in between ZnO-QDs@CMS, contribute toward the overall capacity displayed by the material, and have no detrimental effects toward the overall structure of the electrode.
 Fig. 7  (a) Low magnification TEM image of the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample on the Au wire and the Li/Li2O layer on the W wire set for the in situ de(lithiation) experiment. (b) High magnification TEM image of the marked region in Fig. 7a, showing the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample in contact with Li/Li2O, just before lithiation. (c) Time-dependent TEM image of the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample captured at the 60 s point in the 1st lithiation. (d) Time-dependent TEM image captured at the 60 s point in the 1st delithiation. (e) Time-dependent TEM image captured at the 60 s point in the 4th lithiation and the corresponding SAED pattern (i.e. after 3 (de)lithiation cycles: refer to Movie S3†). 
Aforementioned in situ TEM (de)lithiation experiments provide direct and real time evidence as to why the reversible capacity and the cycling stability of the ZnO-QDs@CMS material surpass those of the pristine ZnO electrode. The pristine ZnO electrode suffered from large volume expansions and irreversible structural changes. For instance, the formation of large and stable Zn grains in the pristine ZnO anode not only suppresses the Li and Zn alloying reaction but also blocks ion transport. Therefore, due to possible pulverization of the electrode upon repeated cycling, the pristine ZnO electrode exhibited low reversible capacity and poor cycling stability. In contrast, the mesoporous amorphous carbon layers of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite acted as flexible cushions to effectively buffer the large volume expansion, and thereby helped to maintain the structural integrity of the electrode. Furthermore, the continuous carbon network surrounding each ZnO QD of the composite helped to enhance the electrical contact between QDs, overall conductivity and the Li+ transport across the electrode. Hence, the LiZn alloy can be readily formed, which is essential for the reversible electrochemical operation and rate capability of the battery. In addition, the high surface area of ZnO QDs, which are open to thin layers of amorphous carbon, could provide more active sites for the reaction with lithium, which, in turn, could also result in extra capacity.9,21 All such complementing features helped to maintain the structural integrity and prevent pulverization of the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode during (de)lithiation, resulting in high reversible capacity and cycling stability.
Finally, a preliminary study was conducted to evaluate the full cell performance of the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode. A full battery was fabricated using LiFePO4 (LFP) on Al foil as the cathode material (refer to the experimental part for details). The Li/LFP half-cell showed a reversible specific capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at a specific current of 50 mA g−1 (Fig. S13a†). The electrochemical tests of full cells were conducted between 1.0 and 4.0 V with respect to the mass of the ZnO-QDs@CMS active material. The cycling performance of the ZnO-QDs@CMS/LFP full cell is depicted in Fig. S13b.† After 50 cycles, the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode material delivered a reversible specific capacity of 236 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100%. Remarkably, there was an initial capacity decrease in the first 10 cycles followed by a gradual increase in capacity, akin to the electrochemical performance of the Li/ZnO-QDs@CMS half-cell. A discharge plateau of ∼2 V and a charge plateau of ∼2.6 V were observed during the full cell test (Fig. S13c†). When the current was increased to 500 mA g−1, the specific capacity dropped to a value of 79 mA h g−1. However, upon returning the current to 100 mA g−1, the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode could redeliver a specific capacity of 250 mA h g−1, showing relatively good rate capability. Therefore, ZnO-QDs@CMS/LFP is a promising lithium ion battery. Nonetheless, the performance of the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode in the full cell was lower compared to that in the half-cell, largely due to an irreversible lithium loss in the first cycle (Fig. S13d†). Although there is a lithium loss in the first cycle of the half-cell also, the lithium electrode can compensate for this loss.48 Full battery parameters, such as the type of electrolyte (including electrolyte additives), chemistry of cathodes, anode/cathode mass ratios, cutoff potentials and procedures (e.g. pre-electrochemical cycling of anodes) need to be further explored for full cell optimization.
Conclusions
In summary, we designed a simple, cost-effective and scalable approach to prepare electrochemically functional ZnO quantum dot/amorphous carbon multilayered sheets using a zinc glycolate complex as the precursor. After a low temperature annealing process in Ar, the glycolate moieties carbonized and directly formed homogeneously distributed ZnO QDs embedded in ultrathin amorphous carbon layers. This unique composite material showed high reversible capacity, excellent cycling stability and high rate capability when implemented as an anode in lithium ion batteries. For instance, ZnO-QDs@CMS exhibited high reversible capacities of 1015 and 943 mA h g−1 at specific currents of 50 and 100 mA g−1, respectively. Moreover, the ZnO-QDs@CMS anode displayed remarkable cycling stability delivering up to 565 mA h g−1 at a specific current of 1000 mA g−1 after 350 cycles (with 94.3% capacity retention with respect to the 2nd cycle) and excellent rate capability delivering a reversible capacity of 424 mA h g−1 at 2000 mA g−1. More importantly, systematic in situ TEM (de)lithiation studies on prototype ZnO-QDs@CMS and pristine ZnO nanobattery devices provided real-time evidence on how the flexible amorphous carbon network helps to bring about the excellent performance displayed by ZnO-QDs@CMS anodes. The results clearly show that mesoporous amorphous carbon layers of ZnO-QDs@CMS effectively buffer the volume expansion and maintain the structural integrity of the material during (de)lithiation. Furthermore, the conductive and continuous carbon network of ZnO-QDs@CMS suppressed the growth of adversely large, stable Zn grains and eased the formation of a LiZn alloy, which has a substantial contribution to the reversible capacity displayed by ZnO-based anodes. The findings of this study would help the rational design of metal oxide/chalcogenide-based electrode materials for high performance rechargeable batteries.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the facilities and the scientific and technical assistance of staff at the Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF) operated by the Institute for Future Environments (IFE), QUT. Access to the CARF was supported by generous funding from the Science and Engineering Faculty, QUT. D.G. particularly acknowledges the Australian Research Council (ARC) for granting an Australian Laureate Fellowship (FL160100089) and QUT Grants No. 322170-0355/51 and 322170-0348/07.
References
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. Ma, D. Bresser, Y. Ji, D. Geiger, U. Kaiser, C. Streb, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7220–7231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Zhao, M. A. Khan, W. Zou, J. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20564–20620 RSC .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2014, 7, 19 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bresser, F. Mueller, M. Fiedler, S. Krueger, R. Kloepsch, D. Baither, M. Winter, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4977–4985 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, G. Zhang, Q. Liu and H. Duan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1414–1435 RSC .
Z. Tu, G. Yang, H. Song and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 439–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, C. Zhou, M. Xie, H. Sun, T. Hu, F. Lu, S. M. Scott, S. M. George and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7319–7326 RSC .
Q. Wang, R. Zou, W. Xia, J. Ma, B. Qiu, A. Mahmood, R. Zhao, Y. Yang, D. Xia and Q. Xu, Small, 2015, 11, 2511–2517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fang, S. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8358–8365 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Cao, L. Bourgeois, H. Guan, S. Chen, Y. Zhong, D.-M. Tang, H. Li, T. Zhai, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2682–2690 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, D. Kong, W. Lv, D.-M. Tang, D. Han, C. Zhang, D. Liu, Z. Xiao, X. Zhang, J. Xiao, X. He, F.-C. Hsia, C. Zhang, Y. Tao, D. Golberg, F. Kang, L. Zhi and Q.-H. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 402 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2543 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Tian, D. Liu, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, B. Yan, D. Xiong, D. Li, S. Lawes and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502175 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, P. Gu, J. Xu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18578–18595 RSC .
M.-G. Park, G.-K. Sung, N.-E. Sung, J.-H. Kim and C.-M. Park, J. Power Sources, 2016, 328, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xie, X. Zhang, X. Wu, H. Wu, X. Liu, G. Yue, Y. Yang and D.-L. Peng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 659–665 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yang, S. Nam, T. Kim, J. H. Im, H. Jung, J. H. Kang, S. Wi, B. Park and C. R. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7394–7397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, D. Mu, S. Chen, B. Wu and F. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3118–3125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Yang, H. W. Song, H. Cui, Y. C. Liu and C. X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Zeng, Q. Su, G. Du and H. Duan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 186, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, Z. Wang, C. Chen, J. Wang, X. Fu, C. Fan and G. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, H. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. Guo, Z. Wang, H. Wang, X. Hao, N. Zhao, H. Geng, Z. Dai, Q. Yan and J. Xu, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 168–176 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, S. Hou, H. Zhang, W. Zeng, F. Yan, C. C. Li and H. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2400–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li, H. Song, Z. Bian, L. Shi, X. Chen and J. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5934–5942 RSC .
G.-H. An, D.-Y. Lee and H.-J. Ahn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12478–12485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, G. Huang, D. Wang, Y. Ma, Z. Fan, Z. Bao and Y. Mei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22870–22878 RSC .
C. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Liang, X. Liu, Q. Weng, J. Liu, Y. Yang, Z. Dai, K. Ding, Y. Bando, J. Tang and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2054–2060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. S. Fernando, C. Zhang, K. L. Firestein and D. Golberg, Small, 2017, 13, 1701564 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Li and K. Zhao, Mech. Mater., 2015, 91, 313–322 CrossRef .
A. Kushima, X. H. Liu, G. Zhu, Z. L. Wang, J. Y. Huang and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4535–4541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Su, Z. Dong, J. Zhang, G. Du and B. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 255705 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Dou, Z. Wu, H. Liu, X. Qian, D. Gu, Y. Xia, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 382–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Das, I. R. Evans and D. Khushalani, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 3508–3510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. S. Fernando, M. P. Shortell, K. C. Vernon, E. A. Jaatinen and E. R. Waclawik, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M.-M. Titirici, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Xu, B. Shan, Y. Wen, T. Jiang, J. Lu, S. Zhang, D. P. Wilkinson, J. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Storage Materials, 2015, 1, 103–111 CrossRef .
J. Radnik, C. Mohr and P. Claus, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 172–177 RSC .
Z. Zhou, K. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Peng and G. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 406–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhong, H. Zhang, J. Fu, H. Shi, L. Wang, W. Zeng, Q. Liu, G. Zhang and H. Duan, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1708–1716 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, S. Zhong, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Zhu, J. Duan, L. Li, Z. Chen, P. Liu, G. Zhang and H. Duan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 290, 312–321 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bresser, E. Paillard, R. Kloepsch, S. Krueger, M. Fiedler, R. Schmitz, D. Baither, M. Winter and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 513–523 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Huang, X. Li, Y. Pei, S. Li, X. Cao, R. C. Massé and G. Cao, Small, 2016, 12, 1945–1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-L. Xu, Y. Li, T. Ma, Y. Ren, H.-H. Wang, L. Wang, J. Wen, D. Miller, K. Amine and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 253–264 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12511bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
ZnO + 2Li+ + 2e− ↔ Zn + Li2O	(1)
Zn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixZn (x ≤ 1)	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic image of the ZnO-QDs@CMS synthesis process. (b) XRD pattern (c) low magnification SEM image and (d) high magnification SEM image of the as-obtained ZnO-QDs@CMS product.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Low and (b) high magnification TEM images of ZnO-QDs@CMS. (c) Diffraction contrast dark field image obtained from the (010) reflection of ZnO, as marked in the SAED pattern (inset). (d) HRTEM image of a single ZnO-QDs@C sheet showing the monodispersity of ZnO QDs. (e) Magnified HRTEM image of the area marked in Fig. 2d (red square). (f) False colour inverse FFT image of the area marked in Fig. 2d (blue square). Inset of Fig. 2f shows the corresponding FFT pattern; the inverse FFT image was obtained by masking some of the ZnO FFT signals to highlight the disordered carbon layers wrapped around ZnO QDs. (g) DF-STEM image and the corresponding spatially resolved EDX maps for individual elements in the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite system.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Zn 2p XPS spectrum of the ZnGc complex and (b) Zn 2p XPS spectrum of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite. (c) C 1s XPS spectrum of the ZnGc complex. (d) C 1s XPS spectrum of the ZnO-QDs@CMS composite.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical characterization of the ZnO-QDs@CMS material. (a) Cyclic voltammetry conducted in a potential range of 0.0 to 3.0 V for five cyclic sweeps (scan rate: 0.5 mV s−1). (b) The galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles for the first ten cycles at a specific current of 50 mA g−1 (first cycle was conducted at a specific current of 25 mA g−1).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Comparative cycling performance of ZnO-QDs@CMS and pristine ZnO electrodes at a current density of 50 mA g−1. (b) Selected galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of ZnO-QDs@CMS from the 10th to 70th cycle (current density: 50 mA g−1, a constant voltage charge (3 V until current ≤0.01 mA) was applied at the end of each galvanostatic charge to ensure that the battery is fully charged). (c) Rate capability of ZnO-QDs@CMS at current densities from 50 to 4000 mA g−1. (d) Long term cycling stability of ZnO-QDs@CMS at high current densities of 1000 and 5000 mA g−1 (from the second cycle onwards).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photograph and schematic representation of the in situ TEM setup. (b) TEM image and the corresponding SAED pattern of a single ZnO particle at the initial stage. (c) TEM image of the ZnO particle after the first lithiation. (d) TEM image of the ZnO particle after the first delithiation. (e and f) Time-lapse TEM images captured during the 2nd lithiation of the ZnO particle and the corresponding SAED pattern.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Low magnification TEM image of the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample on the Au wire and the Li/Li2O layer on the W wire set for the in situ de(lithiation) experiment. (b) High magnification TEM image of the marked region in Fig. 7a, showing the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample in contact with Li/Li2O, just before lithiation. (c) Time-dependent TEM image of the ZnO-QDs@CMS sample captured at the 60 s point in the 1st lithiation. (d) Time-dependent TEM image captured at the 60 s point in the 1st delithiation. (e) Time-dependent TEM image captured at the 60 s point in the 4th lithiation and the corresponding SAED pattern (i.e. after 3 (de)lithiation cycles: refer to Movie S3†).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12511b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
