An overview on Pd-based electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction  - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8QI00042E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8QI00042E
(Review Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2060-2080An overview on Pd-based electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction

        
          
            Shreya 
            Sarkar
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Sebastian C. 
            Peter
          
          
        
      *ab
aNew Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore, 560064, India. E-mail: sebastiancp@jncasr.ac.in;  Fax: +080-22082627;   Tel: +080-22082998
bSchool of Advanced Materials, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore 560064, India
Received 
      18th January 2018
    , Accepted 25th May 2018First published on 30th May 2018AbstractThe most essential prerequisite for the hydrogen economy is sustainable hydrogen production. The electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction is a well-studied electrochemical reaction which involves the reduction of protons for hydrogen production. It requires highly efficient and robust catalysts to lower the overpotential and energy consumption. Platinum (Pt) remains the first choice among electrocatalysts because of its excellent activity and high current density. Since Pt is limited by its high cost and scarcity, extensive research is devoted for the development of non-Pt-based cost-effective electrocatalysts. According to the volcano plot, palladium (Pd) can be used as a substitute for Pt towards the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Herein, we review various Pd-based electrocatalysts in the form of nanoparticles, alloys, bimetallics and intermetallics reported for the HER. In this review we have emphasized various synthesis techniques employed for these electrocatalysts and the strategies used for improving the catalytic performance. We conclude with a perspective on the future aspects of electrocatalysts based on Pd.Shreya SarkarMs Shreya Sarkar obtained her B.Sc. degree from the University of Calcutta (India) and M.Sc. degree from the University of Pune (India). After completing her master's degree in chemistry she joined as a PhD student in 2015 under Prof. Sebastian C. Peter at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore, India. Her research interest involves the development of nanomaterials and nanocomposites for fuel cell applications, water electrolysis and batteries.Sebastian C. PeterProf. Sebastian C. Peter obtained his M.Sc. degree from Calicut University (India) and M.Tech. degree from CUSAT (India). He received his PhD degree from the University of Münster, Germany in 2006 and was a postdoctoral researcher at Max Plank Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, Dresden, Germany and Northwestern University, USA. He is presently an associate professor at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore, India. His research interests include fuel cells and CO2 reduction. He has been selected as a young research investigator by ACS, RSC, IOP and MRSI. He is the founder and director of the start-up Breathe India Pvt. Ltd, which aims to convert CO2 into chemicals and fuels.
1. Introduction
There has been a recent emphasis on fossil fuels due to our increased energy demands. Thus, developing a clean, renewable alternative to fossil fuels is a matter of utmost urgency. Hydrogen has emerged as an ideal energy carrier by virtue of its highest energy density with zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Hence, the key elements of the hydrogen economy are effective storage and production of hydrogen.1–5 Apart from compressed gas or cryogenic liquid, hydrogen can also be stored in hydrogen storage materials like metal hydrides, nanostructured materials and chemical storage materials.6 Hydrogen does not exist naturally on the Earth's surface but we have to produce it before use. It mainly exists in compounds such as hydrocarbons and water. Presently, more than 500 billion cubic metres (or 44.5 million tons) of hydrogen are produced annually worldwide.7,8 Steam methane reforming, coal gasification and water electrolysis are the three major pathways for hydrogen production in the present scenario. Around 95% of the total hydrogen is produced by steam reforming and coal gasification while only 4% is produced from water electrolysis. Though the major hydrogen production is based on fossil fuels, i.e. non-renewable resources, its limitations lie with regard to CO2 emission and hence, pollution.6 Steam-methane reforming is an energy intensive process due to the high temperature reaction between a hydrocarbon and water, leading to the generation of CO2 and hydrogen (e.g. (i) CH4 + H2O → CO + 3H2 and (ii) CO + H2O → CO2 + H2; hence, for every mole of hydrogen generated, one mole of CO2 is generated through steam reforming). So this method of hydrogen production does not comply with the reduction of pollution and global warming and hence, is not so much an environmentally friendly process of hydrogen production. Water electrolysis (photocatalytic or electrocatalytic) presents the most sustainable way of hydrogen production because its staple source is water which is an abundant and renewable hydrogen source. Water splitting can be accomplished either through the electrolytic or photocatalytic pathway in which water molecules are dissociated into their constituent elements with sunlight either directly or indirectly.2–5 The use of hydrogen as a transportation fuel instead of petroleum-based ones is one of the major attractions today. Hydrogen powered vehicles may provide a performance similar to that of petroleum-based ones but with almost zero emission of CO2 and pollutants.6 Hence, industrial-scale hydrogen production in an eco-friendly way is a major need in the present scenario.
Since the most appropriate way of producing hydrogen to meet our requirements would be water electrolysis, constraints lie with respect to its high cost. Pt and Pt-based materials are the most widely studied materials for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), but Pt is limited by its high cost and scarcity in the Earth's crust. Hence, the development of cost-effective materials and technological improvements are highly desirable for reducing the overall cost of the whole process.
Here we present a review of heterogeneous HER electrocatalysts emphasizing on Pd and Pd-based compounds. Pd has attracted considerable attention since it is one of the Pt group metals with good HER activity because of its high energy density (discussed later in detail). A special focus has been given to Pd metal nanostructures and Pd-based compounds in the form of alloys, intermetallics and bimetallics. The review is constructed with a special attention to the designing of these materials in different structural forms using various synthetic methods. For each catalyst we summarize the major achievements and trends leading to improved activity towards the HER. We believe that we have discussed most of the Pd-based materials reported for the HER. Finally we present a perspective on future HER electrocatalysts. The aim of this review is to guide those who are working in this particular area.
2. Electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
The HER is the cathodic half-reaction of water splitting and is one of the most well-studied electrochemical reactions. The electrochemical HER is significant for a range of energy conversion devices like water electrolysers and artificial photosynthetic cells. The HER is a classic example of a two-electron transfer reaction having the potential to produce hydrogen. Electrochemical water splitting (water molecules dissociating into its respective elements water and oxygen when driven by an external source) via the HER is a straightforward and clean way of producing hydrogen. The oxygen produced is released into the atmosphere and the hydrogen is used as a fuel. Water splitting occurs in the following manner based on the medium in which the reaction is known to take place:
In acidic electrolyte:At the cathode: 2H(aq)+ + 2e− → H2(g)At the anode: H2O → 2H+ + ½O2 + 2e−
In basic electrolyte:At the cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2(g) + 2OH−At the anode: 2OH− → H2O + ½O2 + 2e−
The HER comprises the cathodic half-reaction of water-splitting which is critical to water electrolyzers and artificial photosynthetic cells. The HER proceeds via the reduction of protons or water molecules accompanied by hydrogen evolution. The standard reduction potential of the HER is defined as . Like other chemical reactions, electrochemical reactions are also required to overcome a certain activation energy barrier (called the overpotential in electrochemistry) for the reaction to occur (Fig. 1). Hence, there is a need for electrocatalysts for the reduction of this overpotential and to increase the overall reaction kinetics and efficacy. Sometimes, a sufficient cathodic potential greater than 1 V other than the reaction potential is applied for the initiation of the HER. Hence, the potential for the HER to occur can be denoted as follows:Ei = EHER + iR + ηwhere iR is the ohmic potential drop caused by the flow of ionic electrolytes and η is the reaction overpotential.9
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of HER energetics, (b) schematic HER polarization curves on two different electrocatalysts with their onset potentials indicated and (c) schematic Tafel plots on two different electrocatalysts with their Tafel plots and exchange current densities indicated. (Reproduced from ref. 9.) 
The performance of the electrocatalysts is usually evaluated by the following parameters:
(i) Overpotential: A good HER catalyst should be capable of lowering the overpotential. The lower the overpotential, the higher the activity of the catalyst. A desired HER catalyst should be able to catalyse the reaction within 100 mV or less.
(ii) Electrochemically active surface area (ECSA): It is defined as the active area of the electrode material that is accessible to the electrolyte for charge transfer. The electrode surface area can be improved by techniques like nanostructuring and total electrode activity which is determined by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV). To determine the exact catalytic activity of a material, the steady-state currents are measured at various applied voltages with a dwell time of five minutes.
(iii) Faradaic efficiency: It is the ratio of the experimentally detected H2 amount to the theoretical H2 amount that can be calculated from the current density based on 100% faradaic yield.
(iv) Turnover frequency: It is defined as the number of reactants that a catalyst can convert into a desired product per catalytic site per unit of time. Another issue associated with hydrogen evolution is the generation of bubbles on the electrode surface which leads to the loss of the active surface area and hence, an increase in the reaction overpotential.
The kinetics of the HER is dependent on the electrochemical potential and is governed by the well-known Butler–Volmer equation:10,11j = j0{e[αzFη/RT] − e[−αzFη/RT]}where j is the current density, j0 is the exchange current density, α is the charge transfer co-efficient, z is the number of electrons transferred, F is the Faraday constant, R is the universal gas constant and T is the temperature.
This equation describes the dependence of current on the electrode potential. The exchange current density for the state-of-the-art material Pt is generally found to be in the range of j0 = 10−4 to 10−2 mA cm−2.12
In the low overpotential region (i.e. η < 0.005 V), the Butler–Volmer equation simplifies to:η = (RT/zFηj0) × j
Hence, within a narrow potential range near the equilibrium potential, the overpotential has a linear correlation with the current density.
In the high overpotential region (i.e. η < 0.005 V), the Butler–Volmer equation simplifies to the Tafel equation:η = a + blogjwhere b = 2.3RT/αzF and is known as the Tafel slope.
The Tafel equation shows the logarithmic relation of the overpotential (η) to the current density (j). The value of b elucidates the reaction mechanism on the electrode surface, whereas the exchange current density jo (obtained when η is considered to be zero) determines the intrinsic catalytic activity under equilibrium conditions. Hence, an ideal HER catalyst is one which has a low overpotential, low Tafel slope and high exchange current density. But an efficient electrocatalyst will be the one which has a small overpotential at a targeted current density. Usually the potential to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 is used to determine the efficiency of the electrocatalyst,13 which is the current density expected for a 12.3% efficient water splitting device.
The HER mechanism strongly depends on the catalytic pathway. Sometimes, more than one pathway can be simultaneously effective due to the presence of different crystalline facets.14 The HER in acidic media comprises three steps whereas that in alkaline media still remains ambiguous. The first step (Volmer or discharge step) involves the coupling of a proton with an electron at the catalyst surface forming an adsorbed hydrogen atom as follows:15–17H(aq)+ + e− → Hads
Subsequent hydrogen desorption can take place via two pathways:
The Heyrovsky step (discharge reaction): the adsorbed hydrogen reacts with another proton from the solution along with an electron transfer forming a hydrogen molecule:15–17Hads + H(aq)+ + e− → H2(g)or, the Tafel step (recombination reaction): two adsorbed hydrogen atoms combine to form a hydrogen molecule:15–17Hads + Hads → H2(g)
The Tafel slope is often used to study the rate-determining step of the HER.16,17
The Tafel slope values as deduced from the Butler–Volmer reaction is 118 mV per decade, 39 mV per decade or 29.5 mV per decade for the Volmer, Heyrovsky or Tafel steps, respectively. For platinum, a Tafel slope of 30 mV per decade is reported at a low overpotential indicating that the Tafel step is the rate-determining step after the fast Volmer step, whereas with the increase in the overpotential, the Volmer step becomes the rate-determining one with a Tafel slope of 120 mV per decade.11
The hydrogen adsorption and desorption steps are the two consecutive reactions on the catalyst surface for the electrochemical HER. Hence, a catalyst with a very low hydrogen binding energy will not be able to adsorb hydrogen which is the preliminary step for the HER, whereas that with a high binding energy will be resistant to the desorption of hydrogen. So, according to the Sabatier principle an ideal HER catalyst should have optimum hydrogen adsorption and desorption energies.18,19 The maximum exchange current density is obtained when the hydrogen adsorption energy is close to zero.20 The hydrogen adsorption energy on different metal surfaces was calculated by Nørskov et al.18 A volcano plot which relates exchange current densities with hydrogen adsorption energies was obtained with the peak position close to that of platinum (Fig. 2). Hence, the hydrogen adsorption energy is an important parameter to be considered for designing an electrocatalyst for the HER. It also depends on factors like crystallinity (for example, the exposed high-energy 001 plane of Ni5P4 and Ni2P having different crystalline structures improved the HER performance21), conductivity (increased electron transfer increases the charge transfer kinetics leading to an enhanced HER performance22), roughness23 and various support materials as the metal–support interaction improves both the activity and stability by increasing the active surface area and electronic conductivity.24 The present research focuses on the nanoengineering and nanostructuring of electrocatalysts in various forms to promote site-specific activities and improve the electrochemical performance as compared to their bulk counterparts.
 Fig. 2  Volcano plot of exchange current density (j0) as a function of the DFT-calculated Gibb's free energy (ΔGH*) of the adsorbed atomic hydrogen on a pure metal. (Reproduced from ref. 9.) 
3. Hydrogen evolution on Pd
The large-scale production of hydrogen is mainly restricted by two problems: (a) expensive and less abundant Pt metal and (b) lack of stability of the electrode materials under strongly acidic conditions. Enormous efforts are being devoted for the development of non-Pt-based catalysts which can overcome limitations like low durability and less CO poisoning. As seen in Fig. 2, Pd has an adsorption energy close to that of Pt and hence, can be an excellent HER catalyst.18,25 Some of the most effective and cheaper catalysts known to substitute Pt are Pd-based materials with costs almost 5 times lower than that of Pt. Apart from that, Pd is known to have a high hydrogen adsorption energy immediately after Pt. It has the ability to absorb a large amount of hydrogen not only from the gas phase but also from electrolytes. At room temperature and under ambient pressure conditions, H+ ions occupy the octahedral voids present within the Pd lattice leading to PdHx formation. The unique properties like incredible tendency and selectivity for hydrogen adsorption, fast adsorption kinetics and reversible hydride formation empower Pd and Pd-based materials to produce hydrogen gas with a purity up to 99.9999%. Hydrogen adsorption in bulk Pd occurs in two distinct α- and β-phases. The α- and β-phases are known to occur at low hydrogen concentrations (the atomic ratio of H to Pd typically below 0.3–0.05 at room temperature) and at high concentrations of hydrides (the atomic ratio of H to Pd typically above 0.6), respectively (Fig. 3). At a critical temperature Tc = 570 K, the α- and β-phases are known to co-exist which is represented by the area under the inverted parabolic curve.26
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the phase diagram for bulk PdHx with superimposed isotherms (solid red lines). (Reproduced from ref. 26.) 
3.1. Pd nanoparticles for the HER
Nanoparticles with different morphologies can expose different planes, which leads to different atomic arrangements on the surface. The catalytic performance is hence modified based on the planes resulting in distinct electronic and geometric structures (for example, simple nanocubes, spheres and octahedra are solely enclosed by the (100) and (111) planes). It is well reported that special morphologies including nanoframes/nanocages, branched structures, concave/convex structures, ultrathin structures and multicomponent and multi-layered core–shell structures due to their promising structural features exhibit a better catalytic performance.27 For example, rhombic dodecahedral PtCu3 structures were successfully synthesized by Xie et al. by using ultrathin nanosheets with a thickness of 2 nm. Compared to the solid rhombic dodecahedral nanocrystals the active facet is the same but the utilization of Pt atoms was significantly improved due to the ultrathin features.28 Similarly, Pd with a preferential shape (specific morphology with a particular plane exposed) or thin layers finds a wide range of applications in chemical reactions.29–31 Nanostructures of various shapes can be synthesized in diverse ways like seed-mediated growth using surfactants, using halide additives or using various reducing agents having different reducing powers, etc. Because of the high surface area to volume ratio, nanoparticles (NPs) have high dispersion values in comparison with the bulk which has almost zero dispersion. It is known that Pt group metals adsorb hydrogen at positive overpotentials with respect to the onset of the HER (underpotential deposition of hydrogen, i.e. UPD H) and the species is called the underpotential deposited H (HUPD). Hydrogen adsorption at the negative potential is called the overpotential deposition of H (OPD H) and the species is called the overpotential deposited H (HOPD). For Pd nanoparticles hydrogen loading is higher than the bulk32–34 and under appropriate electrochemical conditions, the cyclic voltammetry features due to UPD H, H absorption and HER can be distinguished. Zalineeva et al.35 reported the synthesis of octahedral and cubic Pd NPs with an average size of 7.8 nm and 10 nm, respectively, with their application in temperature-dependent electrochemical research. Palladium NPs were synthesized by the chemical reduction of K2PdCl4 using polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as the surfactant and ascorbic and citric acid as the reducing and surface agents. It was found that the Pd NPs maintain the structural integrity after several potential cycles. Based on the temperature-dependent electrochemical measurements for H adsorption in Pd NPs, it can be concluded that octahedral Pd NPs adsorb more H than the cubic ones of similar size or larger size or bulk Pd due to the (111) surface orientation of atoms. Upon theoretical modelling it was observed that for octahedral Pd NPs the external shell becomes saturated with H and hence, only the core starts absorbing H. A distinct core–shell structure is developed upon H absorption (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Surface stress model for H absorption and Habs desorption from octahedral Pt NPs. (a) Visual representation of the cross-section of a single octahedral Pd NP loaded with H to XH = 0.90, HUPD beneath the first Pd layer, Habs in the shell region and Habs in the NP core and (b) comparison of the calculated H2(g) fugacity values (black line) with the experimentally determined data (red points) required to reach XH = 0.90. (Reproduced from ref. 35.) 
In another approach scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) has been employed to investigate the kinetics and mechanism of the HER catalysed by two-dimensional assemblies of 13 nm diameter Pd NPs on a mica support using methyl viologen (MV2+/˙+) as the redox probe.36 Atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies on electrostatic adsorption provided the information on the number density of nanoparticles as a function of adsorption time. The average exchange current density for a single Pd NP was quantified using the SECM approach in which the Fermi level of the NP is dependent on the concentration ratio of the redox probe which in turn is dependent on the substrate separation, HER kinetics, particle density and bulk concentration of MV2+. The SECM approach allows the intrinsic reactivity of NPs to be investigated for the electronic and structural effects from the electrode surface in comparison with the usual electrochemical approach.
Three-dimensional Pd NPs with a high surface area to volume ratio are well reported for organic synthesis, fuel cells, electrochemical detection and hydrogen storage/sensing37–40 but not extensively for the HER. Liu et al. reported the synthesis of novel porous Pd nanoparticle assemblies (NPAs) as bifunctional catalysts for both HER and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).41 The porous Pd NPAs exhibit an overpotential of 80 mV at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope value of 30 mV per decade which is quite close to that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst. Cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) plays a crucial role in the formation of the porous Pd NPAs as polyhedral Pd nanostructures were formed in the absence of CPC implying that quaternary ammonium compounds are beneficial for the formation of the porous structure, the optimal concentration being 0.8 mM to about 21 mM. The porous Pd NPAs increase the specific surface area and also tune the hydrogen adsorption energy to an optimal value which helps in the improvement of the catalytic performance. Pd NPs have also been synthesized using the hard template assisted method. Naga Mahesh et al. reported the synthesis of Pd NPs using SBA-15 which is the silica hard template material.42 It was found that Pd NPs exhibited a higher electrocatalytic activity than Pt/C and the slope of the current density against the overpotential was sharper for Pd NPs than that for Pt/C showing an improved HER kinetics.
3.2. Pd nanoparticles loaded on various supports for the HER
A significant way of improving the catalytic activity towards the HER is by the use of various support materials that can increase the electronic conductivity and also the surface area. The main requirements for a support material are high surface area, good electrical and thermal conductivity, suitable porosity and high stability in the reaction environment. Carbon black, carbon nanotubes, and graphene are some of the typical electronic carriers generally used. The kinetics of the HER was investigated with a Pd modified carbon fibre (CF) 12 K tow material by means of a physical vapour deposition (PVD) method.43 The PVD method improves the grain size distribution and mechanical durability in comparison with the chemical deposition methods. The comparison of a CF/Pd catalyst prepared by the PVD method with that prepared by the electrochemical method showed better activity of the PVD-produced CF/Pd. Andonoglou et al. presented a similar study in which a Pd modified CF substrate was produced through a sequence of ion-exchange reduction.44 Huang et al.45 examined the activity of Pd NPs electrochemically deposited on a carbon paper substrate. Such prepared HER catalyst with a Pd loading of 0.0106 mg cm−2 exhibited greater electrocatalytic activity than a commercial Pt black electrode. Pd NPs supported on Vulcan XC-72 were synthesized by Grigoriev et al.46 for the cathodic HER in proton exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolysers. An impregnation/reduction method with ethylene glycol and formaldehyde as the reductant was used to prepare the Pd NPs on Vulcan XC-72. Water electrolysis using 7 cm2 single cells demonstrated a good performance with a conversion efficiency of 88% at 1 A cm−2. Hence, it was concluded that the impregnation/reduction method is an efficient way for synthesizing Pd NPs for the HER in a PEM electrolyser. The same group later reported the synthesis of Pt and Pd NPs on graphitic nanofibers (GNFs) using the impregnation–reduction method.47 GNF supported electrocatalysts were found to be more efficient than the conventional Vulcan XC-72 ones. This is due to the low resistivity and presence of a micro-porous structure in the GNF aggregates which facilitates better diffusion of hydrogen through the pore structure. An elementary understanding of the active sites can be obtained by investigating the particle size effect. Zheng et al.48 reported a systematic investigation of the particle size for the HER in both acidic and alkaline media on carbon supported Pd NPs with sizes varying from 3 to 42 nm. It was observed that the exchange current density increases as the Pd particle size is increased while the mass exchange current density increases slightly initially followed by a decrease with an increase in the particle size in both acidic and alkaline media. This suggests that the HER activity on the Pd surface is structure sensitive—sites of low hydrogen binding energy (low-index facets) being more active. It was also found that the HER activity on Pd is 50 times more than that in the base because of the negative shift of HUPD from the base to the acid and a small activation energy barrier in the acid resulting in a lower Pd–H binding energy. Among carbon materials, graphene has been considered as an ideal support due its exceptional properties like large surface area and high electrical conductivity which increases the conductivity and dispersity of the active components.49,50 Palladium NPs (average size 40–80 nm) were deposited on graphene by a dip coating method. A very low amount of the metal is required for the electrode modification using this method. The Pd–graphene composite showed a higher exchange current density in comparison with graphene and Pd. The enhanced activity is due to the graphene nanosheets which increase the electrical conductivity and dispersity of the Pd NPs.51 Also, the chemical and electronic coupling between Pd NPs and graphene nanosheets improved the electrochemical performance. As seen in Fig. 5, EIS measurements were conducted in the range of 20 kHz to 10 mHz at an open circuit potential. The semi-circle in the plot is related to the faradaic process which arises from the electron-transfer limiting step and the diameter is equal to the charge-transfer resistance (RCT). The Pd–graphene nanocomposite has the smallest diameter indicating a fast charge transfer of PdII/Pd. The low RCT value is indicative of the high HER activity of the nanocomposite that can be ascribed to the π-conjugated structure of graphene and provides good electrical conductivity for the nanocomposite. Also, the high dispersibility of Pd on a graphene film can significantly improve the HER activity of the Pd–graphene nanocomposite. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), due to their high surface area, electrical conductivity and stability in acidic or alkaline media, are well established as support materials.52,53 A hybrid HER catalyst (f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2) based on the combination of functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes (f-MWCNTs) and Pd mutually integrated with the TiO2 shell. This kind of nanostructuring led to the development of a benchmark HER catalyst with activity on par with the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts. The prodigious HER activity can be ascribed to the specific roles of individual components integrated together. CNTs facilitate the electron transfer from the electrode to the titania shell so as to feed the active Pd species. The hydrophilicity of the amorphous TiO2 coating and the hydrophobicity of CNTs impede each other while favouring the adsorption/desorption and proton dislocation. The overall consequence is a high efficiency HER at neutral pH for f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2 having a zero overpotential with a turnover frequency of 9460 H2 per hour (Fig. 6).54
 Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of GCE, Pd/GCE, graphene/GCE and Pd–graphene/GCE at the open circuit potentials in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Inset: The equivalent circuit for graphene/GCE and Pd–graphene/GCE. (Reproduced from ref. 51.) 
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the synthetic protocols yielding the f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2 electrocatalysts, (b) STEM tomographic reconstruction of f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2 and (c) general scheme for the HER proposed mechanism by f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2 at neutral pH. Water absorption and dissociation occurs at the hydrophilic, porous, TiO2 outer layer (blue shell), promoting the formation of Had (grey) intermediates on the catalytic Pd sites (black). 
One of the major drawbacks of carbon-supported catalysts is the low durability due to their facile oxidation at cathodic potentials under strongly acidic conditions. Hence, Bhowmik et al.55 reported the synthesis of a Pd nanoparticle–carbon nitride composite (Pd–CNx) with superior activity and durability for the HER in acidic and alkaline media. Pd–CNx has a porous network structure due to the reduction of PdCl2 in the presence of CNx nanosheets with NaBH4 and ultrasound treatment. In acidic media the composites exhibited an onset potential of −12 mV, a Tafel slope value of 35 mV per decade and durability up to 10000 cycles. The porous morphology of the catalyst, strong metal–carbon bond, improved charge transport and synergetic effects between Pd and the CNx support is accountable for the superior HER activity (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  HER performance at various electrodes. (a) LSV polarization curves (negative direction) of Pd–CNx (red line), Pt/C (blue line), Pd/C (green line), and g-CNx (wine red line) in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) The corresponding HER Tafel plot of porous Pd–CNx, Pt/C, and Pd/C. (c) LSV curves on the Pd–CNx surface at the first cycle (red) and after 10000 cycles (black) (scan rate 10 mV s−1). (d) Chronoamperometric responses of Pd–CNx, Pd/C, and Pt/C at η = −60 mV in RHE for 48 h. Inset: Chronoamperometric response of Pd–CNx at η = −60 mV in RHE for 100 h. (e) LSV curves of Pd–CNx, Pt/C, and Pd/C in 0.5 M KOH solution. (f) Tafel plots of porous Pd–CNx, Pt/C, and Pd/C in 0.5 M KOH. All experiments were performed with a constant metal loading of 0.043 mg cm−2. All LSV curves are iR corrected. (Reproduced from ref. 55.) 
Precious metals supported on metal carbides are also a promising candidate for the HER. Pd supported on tungsten carbide (WC) and molybdenum carbide (Mo2C) synthesized by physical vapour deposition (PVD) was reported by Kelly et al.56 They found that the current density of the carbides doubled with only a submonolayer amount of Pd followed by a substantial increase with monolayer and multilayer Pd on carbides as compared to unmodified carbides. With the increase of Pd coverage, the overpotential at all current densities decreased. The difference in activity for Mo2C and WC is attributed to the slightly different lattice structure and electronic properties (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Log of the current density at an overpotential of 0.1 V vs. Pd coverage on WC and Mo2C. The solid black line represents the current density on Pd foil. (Reproduced from ref. 56.) 
3.3. Pd-based alloys and bimetallics towards the HER
The HER activity of Pd can be significantly improved by alloying with other metals like Au, Ag, Pt, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Mn, etc. as the electronic properties and crystal lattice parameters of Pd are changed.57 One of the most well-studied systems is Pd supported on a Au substrate. Due to weak H adsorption Au is inactive for the HER.58 Based on the thicknesses of the Pd overlayers deposited on Au(111), the following was the exchange current density trend: thicker than 2 ML > 1 ML > 2ML (ML stands for monolayer) (Fig. 9).59 The observed trend is consistent with the density functional theory (DFT) calculations showing the least HER activity on 2 ML of Pd because of the strongest adsorption energy of Had.60–62 The strong adsorption of Hads is detrimental to the HER kinetics because of its reduction to form H2 either via the Heyrovsky or Tafel reaction. Pluntke et al.63 reported the synthesis of Au/Pd (111) alloy films on a Ru(0001) substrate by electrochemical metal deposition and subsequent heating up to 700 °C. The amount of hydrogen absorbed into the bulk of the Au/Pd alloy is strongly dependent on the Pd bulk as alloys with less than 20% bulk Pd did not show hydrogen absorption. The maximum hydrogen evolution on the Au/Pd surface alloys was observed in the range of 0.1–0.3 Pd surface fraction ascribed to the highly populated Pd monomeric sites (Pd single atoms surrounded by Au atoms). The activity was found to be 20 times higher than that of the Pd(111) overlayer.64 The Au substrate modified Pd clusters showed a shift of the density of states (DOS) towards the Fermi level. At low Had coverage the preferred adsorption site for Had was at the edge of the cluster formed by two Pd atoms and one Au atom that has a low adsorption energy. Enhanced HER activity was reported due to the decrease in the activation barriers for the Tafel and Heyrovsky reactions (Fig. 10).65 An optimal adsorption energy of Had was found at the edges of Pd islands, Pd ensembles and a single Pd atom, whereas at the terrace of the different nanostructures, it was found to be either strong or weak.64 Monte-Carlo simulations predicted that the highest exchange current density is achieved at 60% Pd coverage with respect to the number of active sites and the reactivity of Pd nanostructures.65 The HER activity increased with extremely low Pd coverage as predicted by Schafer et al.66 Though the exact mechanism for the improved HER activity with low Pd coverage is still ambiguous, an equitable hydrogen binding energy at the mixed Au–Pd sites may be one of the probable reasons. It was also predicted that spillover and surface diffusion of hydrogen atoms to the Au(111) surface can also be a probable reason. The HER activity is also dependent on the Pd salts used and the morphology for the formation of Pd nanoislands by spontaneous deposition on the Au(111) surface. Smaller and thinner Pd islands were more active towards the HER in both acidic and alkaline media formed from PdCl2 in which the deposition rate was much slower compared to PdSO4.67,68
 Fig. 9  Exchange current density as a function of Pd coverage for hydrogen evolution on ultrathin Pd overlayers deposited onto Au(111). (Reproduced from ref. 59.) 
 Fig. 10  Specific current density for Pd on Au(111) vs. Pd coverage for the HER at different overpotentials. (Reproduced from ref. 65.) 
In order to enhance the HER activity, different strategies were employed for the synthesis of AuPd alloys. Au–Pd bimetallic nanoparticles with varying ratios of Au and Pd were synthesized by electrodeposition on a microwave irradiated carbon ceramic electrode (MWCCE). But the highest electrocatalytic HER activity was obtained for the AuPd alloy with a molar ratio of 25:75. Due to the synergistic effect from Au, the alloyed nanoparticles showed much better HER activity than the individual elements.69 Also, the electrodeposition technique was used for AuPd alloys deposited on carbon felt. The highest catalytic HER activity was observed for Pd50Au50 in a neutral phosphate buffer solution.70
Bimetallic PtPd catalysts have also been used for the electrocatalytic HER due to their high electrocatalytic activity as compared to pure Pd and Pt perhaps due to the synergistic effect between Pd and Pt. Xiao et al. reported the synthesis of Pt/Pd bimetallic nanoparticles decorated on a multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) (Pt/Pd-MWCNT-GCE).71 The Pt/Pd-MWCNT-GCE had a Tafel slope of 38 mV per decade which is better than Pt-MWCNT-GCE and Pd-MWCNT-GCE (considering the same mass loading of metals). Tungsten carbide is also used as an electrocatalyst for the HER but it is limited by its high overpotential (requires 200 to 300 mV higher potential than Pt).72,73 To develop efficient tungsten carbide based catalysts, Wu et al.74 reported Pd modified Pt on a tungsten carbide support (PtPd/WC/C) using an intermittent microwave heating method. It was seen that the PtPd/WC/C catalyst exhibited better HER than Pt/WC/C in terms of both onset potential and current density due to the specific property of Pd for hydrogen storage.
Improved HER activity from Ag–Pd alloys was observed in comparison with pure Ag and Pd. Ag/Pd bimetallic nanoparticle modified carbon ionic liquid electrodes (CILE) were studied for the HER by Safavi et al.75 The incorporation of Ag in Pd and the application of an ionic liquid as a binder are accountable for the enhanced activity. With the increase in Ag content, the HER activity was observed to increase up to 20%, after which the activity reduced with further increase of the Ag content. Ag incorporation up to a certain extent caused an increase in the lattice parameters which in turn increased the hydrogen solubility and diffusion rate. Hydrogen diffusion, however, was reduced with too many Ag atoms which further decreased the fraction of Pd active surfaces.76–78 With the Pd surface fraction at 0.1–0.3 for Ag–Pd films supported on Ru(1000), the highest activity towards the HER was achieved.79
Pd metal alloyed with other elements like Co, Mn, Bi, Mo, Ni, etc. has also been used as a catalyst towards the hydrogen evolution reaction. AuPd and FePd supported on rGO were tested as electrodes for the HER in alkaline media.80 rGO-Au48Pd52 was superior to rGO-Fe48Pd52 with an onset overpotential of 80 mV whereas Fe48Pd52 exhibited an onset overpotential of 140 mV (Fig. 11). The results are consistent with the Sabatier principle as both Pd and Fe are in the left side of the volcano plot and hence have a high hydrogen binding energy, whereas Au is located on the right side, having a low binding energy. Reduced GO (rGO) facilitates charge transfer and reduces ohmic losses. Štrbac et al. investigated the HER on bimetallic Rh/Pd (poly) electrodes in alkaline media obtained by the spontaneous deposition of Rh on Pd.81 Theoretically excellent HER catalysis was predicted for Rh layers on Pd(111) due to the strong affinity for H adsorption.82,83 Depending on the deposition time, the palladium substrate coverage was 50% with the deposited Rh nanoislands. Rh/Pd (poly) electrodes show enhanced catalytic HER activity attributed to the strong electronic effect of a Pd substrate on Rh nanoislands due to which the adsorption of the intermediate hydrogen species is energetically favourable on bimetallic electrodes.81 The enhanced catalytic activity of 50% Rh/Pd (poly) electrodes for the HER is comparable to that of bare Pt (poly) (considering the same mass loading of the metal) (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 11  Polarisation curves at (a) T = 25 °C and (b) T = 35 °C for the rGO-MPd electrocatalysts in 8 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. (Reproduced from ref. 80.) 
 Fig. 12  Comparison of the catalytic activity of Pd(poly), 50% Rh/Pd(poly) and Pt(poly) electrodes for the HER. Polarization curves were recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 M NaOH. Current densities are referred to the EASA. (Reproduced from ref. 81.) 
Co–Pd alloys synthesized by the co-reduction of [Co(NH3)6]3+ and [Pd(NH3)4]2+ complexes were investigated for the HER by Mech et al.84 The co-deposition takes place by a two-step reduction of hexamminecobalt(III) and one step of the reduction of tetramminepalladium(II) complexes.  [Pd(NH3)4]2+ + 2e− → Pd0 + 4NH3
A Tafel slope as low as 25.4 mV per decade was obtained for the alloy deposited at a temperature of 50 °C from an electrolyte containing 50 mM of [Co(NH3)6]3+ at E = −0.7 V. Cavallotti et al. investigated the electrocatalytic properties of Co–Pd alloys for the HER in 0.1 M NaOH obtained by the electrochemical deposition of Co and Pd. The Tafel slope obtained was 80 mV per decade.85 A novel strategy for a highly efficient structure-optimized Pd catalyst was reported by Zhang et al. A PdMnCo alloy supported on nitrogen doped carbon (NC) synthesized by heterogeneous nucleation and methanol-mediated growth approach showed a much lower overpotential than 30 wt% Pd/C and 40 wt% Pt/C for the HER in acidic media.86 The HER catalytic activity follows the sequence as pure Pd < PdMnCo < PdMnCo/C interface < PdMnCo/NPC interface (NPC represents one pyridinic nitrogen atom doped carbon) as per DFT calculations. For a current density of 90 mA cm−2, PdMnCo/NC requires an overpotential of 96 mV as compared to 163 mV and 119 mV for Pd/C and Pt/C, respectively. The PdMnCo/NPC interface weakens the hydrogen adsorption energy on the catalyst leading to an optimum Gibbs free energy of the intermediate state which accounts for the remarkable activity (Fig. 13). The kinetics of the HER on electrodes made from submicron size powders of Co, Pd, Ni and Co–Ni alloys synthesized by the polyol method as well as on the physical mixtures of Co–Pd has also been reported.87 The electrodes made from Co–Pd alloys were more porous and showed better activity than individual metal powders and alloys.
 Fig. 13  (a) Polarization curves of PdMnCo/NC-1, PdMnCo/NC-2, and PdMnCo/NC-3. (b) Polarization curves of PdMnCo/NC-2, graphene, substrate, Pd, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C for comparison. (c) Polarization curves of PdMnCo/NC-2, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C for comparison; the inset in (c) is the chronoamperometric test of PdMnCo/NC-2 at a constant applied potential of 55 mV (vs. RHE). (d) Tafel plots of PdMnCo/NC-2, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C. (e) Comparison of the mass specific activity of Pd, 30% Pd/C, PdMnCo/NC-2, and 40% Pt/C at an applied potential of 35 mV (vs. RHE). (f) Nyquist plots of the substrate, PdMnCo/NC-2, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C. (Reproduced from ref. 86.) 
The Pd–Ni alloy formed by electrodeposition is well explored for the electrocatalytic HER. The HER proceeds on a surface partially covered by an adsorbed H-intermediate. The limiting coverage is attained at η < −0.15 V (θH → 0.82).88 Not only the binary alloy but also ternary systems like the Pd–Ni–Mo films were prepared on a stainless steel substrate as a novel electrode material for hydrogen evolution reaction catalysis. The alloying effect and a larger real surface are responsible for the enhanced electrocatalytic activity.89
Heterometallic coordination compounds have gained attention recently in catalysis as the incorporation of different metal ions into one molecule leads to an intriguing cooperative effect. Hence, Kuwamura et al.90 developed a platinum(II)–palladium(II)–nickel(II) heterotrimetallic coordination polymer to study the cooperative effect on the catalytic HER. The Pt(II)2Pd(II)2Ni(II) coordination polymer, [{Ni(H2O)4}{Pd2Pt2(NH3)4(D-pen)4}]Cl2 (D-H2pen = D-penicillamine), showed excellent catalytic HER activity in comparison with trans-[Pt(NH3)2(D-pen)2]2− and [Pd2Pt2(NH3)4(D-pen)4] due to the incorporation of all the three Group 10 metal ions in one molecule. The coordination behaviour in [Pd2Pt2(NH3)4(D-pen)4] (Fig. 14) is due to the presence of two NH3 ligands bound to each Pt(II) centre that employs non-bonding steric and NH⋯S hydrogen bonding interactions. For the Pt(II)2Pd(II)2Ni(II) coordination polymer, [{Ni(H2O)4}{Pd2Pt2(NH3)4(D-pen)4}]Cl2, [Pd2Pt2(NH3)4(D-pen)4] acts as the O-donating metalloligand to NiII. The stepwise combination of Pd(II) and Ni(II) centres with trans-[Pt(NH3)2(D-pen)2]2− results in the enhancement of the electrocatalytic HER by heterogeneous activity which corroborates a significant cooperative effect due to metal ions belonging to the same group. Döner et al.91 explored the effect of Pd doping in a carbon supported CoSnZn (C/CoSnZn) catalyst. Pd was added to the C/CoSnZn catalyst that was etched in caustic to leach out Zn and produce a Raney-type porous electrocatalytic surface for hydrogen evolution. The improved catalytic activity of the C/CoSnZn-Pd catalyst is due to the increased active surface area and well-known intrinsic activity of Pd.
 Fig. 14  Linear sweep voltammograms at a scan rate of 0.01 V s−1. The inset shows the 1D chain heterotrimetallic structure of [Pd2Pt2(NH3)4(D-H2pen)4]4+ (D-H2pen = D-penicillamine). (Reproduced from ref. 90.) 
Monodisperse bimetallic PdxCu1−x NPs having an average size of 4.7 nm were reported to be highly efficient HER electrocatalysts. Electrochemical activity was highly dependent on the Pd/Cu ratios for the carbon coated PdxCu1−x NPs. The small size and synergy of Pd and Cu are accountable for the improved electrochemical activity exhibited by Pd71Cu29/C NPs (onset potential: 75 mV and Tafel slope: 48 mV per decade).92 The onset potential as low as 56 mV was obtained by spherical PdCu nanocrystals using a one-pot solvothermal strategy with oleylamine as the solvent and KBr as the capping agent which inclines the growth of reduced Pd atoms towards the (111) facets. The raspberry-like architecture (Fig. 15) improves the ECSA in addition to the downward shift of the d-band centre of Pd to the Fermi level due to alloying with Cu which enhances the activity.93 Chao et al. designed Cu–Pt dual sites alloyed with Pd nanorings (NR) containing 1.5 atom% Pt using atomically disperse Cu on ultrathin Pd NRs as seeds.94 An onset potential close to zero and an overpotential of 22.8 mV for a current density of 10 mA cm−2 were achieved. The hydrogen adsorption energy on the single Pt(111) is only −0.008 eV as predicted using DFT which is the active site for the HER. Strong Cu–Pt coordination peaks were elucidated from EXAFS and the Cu–Cu and Pt–Pt peaks were eliminated which confirms the formation of Cu–Pt dual sites on Pd NRs (Fig. 16). Hayden et al.95 have reported the synthesis of PdBi thin film alloys and studied their activity towards the electrochemical HER. For the un-annealed Pd–Bi alloy thin films, the highest HER activity was found when the composition of Bi was 70% in the presence of the α-PdBi2 phase.
 Fig. 15  HAADF-STEM (A) and HAADF-STEM-EDS mapping (B–D) images of raspberry-PdCu NCs. (Reproduced from ref. 93.) 
 Fig. 16  Characterization of Pd/Cu–Pt NRs. (a) TEM image, (b) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding STEM-EDX elemental mapping, (c) atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image, (d) HER polarization curves of the Pd nanosheets, Pd/Cu NRs, Pd/Cu–Pt NRs, and commercial Pt/C, acquired by linear sweep voltammetry with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at room temperature, (e) the corresponding Tafel plots obtained from the polarization curves of Pd nanosheets, Pd/Cu NRs, Pd/Cu–Pt NRs, and commercial Pt/C and (f) chronoamperometry measurement of the Pd/Cu–Pt NRs at a potential of −24 mV for 15 h. (Reproduced from ref. 94.), (g) free-energy diagram for hydrogen evolution at Pt(111), Pd(111), Cu(111), and the Pd/Cu–Pt NRs and (h–j) possible structures for the Pd/Cu–Pt NRs. 
In addition to conventional Pd alloys, novel nanostructures such as core–shell nanoparticles have also been developed in the recent past. Pt@Pd core–shell nanostructures have attracted great attention due to their improved selectivity and catalytic activity along with reduced adsorption energy. Various structure directing agents are used for the formation of the core–shell nanostructures. Lin et al.96 designed reduced graphene oxide supported core–shell Pt@Pd nanoflowers (NFs) (Pt@Pd NFs/rGO) using a single step, seedless wet-chemical approach method. 3-Aminopyrrolidine dihydrochloride (APDC) acts as the structure directing agent as a concentration of 25 mM led to the formation of irregular nanostructures as compared to Pt@Pd NFs/rGO for 50 mM concentration. Pt@Pd NFs/rGO catalysts exhibit an onset potential of 39 mV with a Tafel slope value of 39 mV per decade. The electronic coupling between the Pd shell and the Pt core plays a crucial role in improving the activity along with increasing the ECSA due to the distinct core–shell structure. Wang's group reported PtPd alloys embedded in nitrogen-rich graphene nanopores by a hydrothermal process.97 Various shapes, for example, nanodendrites (NDs), nanowires (NWs) etc. are widely used for catalysis because of their unique structural features, high surface area and good catalytic activity. Yang et al.98 synthesized bimetallic PtPd alloyed core–shell NDs supported on rGO (Pt77Pd23 ACSNDs/rGO) with colistin sulfate. An improved HER catalytic activity with a low onset potential of 34 mV and a Tafel slope of 31 mV per decade was obtained in comparison with APDC.
Metal–organic framework (MOF) derived electrocatalysts for the HER were first reported by Chen et al.99 A PdCo alloy wrapped in a nitrogen-doped carbon shell (PdCo@CN) showed exceptional durability of 10000 cycles with an onset potential of 80 mV and a Tafel slope of 31 mV per decade. The N-doped carbon shell not only enhanced the charge transfer but also increased the active sites which promoted the HER performance. The enhancement of the HER activity in alkaline media was attained using a multisite strategy that has additional water dissociation sites for improving the proton supply.100 This strategy increased the HER activity 19 times of that of pure Pd NPs at 40% coverage of FeOx(OH)2–2x on Pd NPs (Fig. 17). At 40% coverage the water dissociation rate and H recombination rate are balanced for maximum efficiency. Starting with Pd/Fe3O4 core–shell NPs, the coverage of FeOx(OH)2–2x was tuned using electrochemical cycling. Core–shell PdCu@Pd nanostructures showed enhanced HER activity (onset potential of 5 mV) in comparison with PdCu NPs, spherical PdCu NPs and pure Pd.101 The strain and ligand effects on the d-band structure of Pd induced by Cu enhance the HER activity. Also, during the anodization process, the origin of structural defects is expected due to the removal of Cu atoms which lowers the coordination number, which also accounts for the improved activity of PdCu@Pd nanostructures.102 Ni@Pd core–shell nanostructures showed high HER activity in acidic media.103 The pronounced electronic effect from the Ni core caused an increase in the catalytic activity with decreasing Pd thickness. The activity was further improved by dispersing core–shell NPs on rGO due to the increased electrical conductivity of Ni@Pd/rGO as rGO facilitates charge transfer with the reduction of ohmic loss.103
 Fig. 17  HER activity versus FeOx(OH)2−2x coverage. (Reproduced from ref. 100.) 
3.4. Pd intermetallics for the HER
Intermetallic compounds are an important and myriad family of inorganic solids that are of great interest due to fundamentally strong structures and properties and hence, their technological applications. Depending on the constituent elements, stoichiometries and crystal structures, they can exhibit a wide range of applications as electronic, magnetic, optical and catalytic materials. They have stoichiometric compositions and ordered lattice structures. The uniformity in their crystal structures accounts for their high stability and compatibility making them highly desirable catalysts for electrochemical applications. Many Pt-based intermetallic compounds have been reported for fuel cell reactions under acidic conditions suggesting the significantly high activity and stability relative to their disordered alloys.104,105 Pt2Si produced by magnetron sputtering showed activity towards the electrochemical HER.106 Intermetallic compounds are usually produced using methods like chemical vapour transport, chemical vapour deposition, ball milling, etc. Schaak's group synthesized intermetallic Pd2Si nanostructures having a high exposed surface area using a solution method. Preliminary screening of Pd2Si towards the electrochemical HER showed an overpotential of 192 mV for a current density of 10 mA cm2.107 Jiao et al. designed PdTe nanowires on 2D rGO nanosheets as active HER electrocatalysts both in acidic and alkaline media.108 An onset potential as low as 7 mV was achieved due to the synergy between PdTe and rGO. Also, rGO not only acts as a support but also as a stabilizer and a reductant that enhances the activity and stability.
Dealloying has been used to create nano-porous structures. The process involves the selective removal of the less noble element from an alloy or intermetallic by either an electrochemical or chemical method. The morphology is dependent on the competition between the dissolution rates of less noble metals and the surface diffusion of noble metals. Pt dealloying has been extensively reported for oxygen reduction reactions.109–111 Xia et al.112 reported that Cu-rich PtCu3 is formed upon potential electrochemical cycling and shows activity similar to that of Pt. Lv et al.113 reported the synthesis of core–shell NiAu/Au nanoparticles by the electrochemical etching of Ni from a NiAu alloy that acted as highly active and durable catalysts for the HER. The lowering of the Au coordination number upon dealloying enhances the HER activity to a large extent. Even though there have been no systematic studies on Pd-based systems, a similar trend is expected. The dealloying method plays an important role in determining the structure of Pd intermetallics. We have reported dealloyed PdCu3 intermetallic NPs, which were obtained by the selective dissolution of Cu.114 A dramatic enhancement in the HER activity of PdCu3 was observed after potential cycling from 0.391 to 0.941 V. The dissolution of Cu favoured the formation of a Pd-rich system with enhanced activity. Also, the first principles studies predicted that the enhancement in activity is due to the formation of active Pd sites with a low coordination number (Fig. 18). A recent report by us showed an enhancement in the HER activity of both α- and β-PdBi2 intermetallic nanoparticles by the electrochemical dissolution of Bi115 (Fig. 19). The low co-ordination number of Pd active sites formed by the dissolution of Bi alters the d-band centre and hence the optimal energy required for hydrogen adsorption leading to enhanced activity. Though the obtained composition after potential cycling is almost similar for the both the phases, it is seen that the α-phase shows higher activity as compared to the β-phase. Cyclic voltammetry of α-PdBi2 shows the formation of the Bi–O species after potential cycling. Electron transfer from the Bi–O species to the Pd centre enhances the charge-transfer kinetics of the HER and hence an increased catalytic activity of α-PdBi2 as compared to β-PdBi2. Hence, the in situ generated oxide species facilitates charge transfer, in turn enhancing the catalytic activity.115
 Fig. 18  (a) PdCu3(111) surfaces with n = 9–4 (I–VI, respectively). The vacant sites are denoted by the white circles with a black dotted boundary. Cu, Pd, and H atoms are represented by red, orange, and cyan colored balls, respectively. (b) Free energy diagram for the HER (U = 0 V) at Pd sites with varying coordination numbers (n = 9–4). The broken line corresponds to a pure Pt(111) surface. (c) LDOS on Pd atom with n = 9, 5, and 4. The Fermi energy (EF) is represented by a black vertical dashed line. The green thick bar represents the d-band center (Ed) on the Pd atoms of PdCu3(111) surfaces. (Reproduced from ref. 114.) 
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of electrochemical Bi dissolution. The (31) and (103) planes correspond to PdBi2_BA and PdBi2_AA, respectively. The LSV curve inside gives an overall picture of the increase in catalytic activity after Bi dissolution. (Reproduced from ref. 115.) 
Metal phosphides are another class of interesting compounds for the HER. According to DFT calculations it was predicted by Rodriguez's group that Ni2P can be the best HER electrocatalyst.116 Metal phosphides have similar physical properties and have relatively high mechanical strength, electrical conductivity and chemical stability. Phosphorus atoms have a radius of 0.109 nm and hence, their crystal structure is based on trigonal prisms. Metal phosphides tend to form a more isotropic crystal structure which increases the probability of having a greater number of coordinatively unsaturated surface atoms. Transition metal phosphides particularly based on Ni,117,118 Co119 and Fe120 have been extensively reported for the electrocatalytic HER. However, a limited number of studies has been conducted for palladium-based phosphides. Kucernak et al.121 incorporated Pd in phosphorus to produce PdP2/C and Pd5P2/C as electrocatalysts for the HER from commercial Pd/C (Fig. 20). Sampath et al.122 reported a novel phosphochalogenide PdPS for the HER. PdPS was found to be an indirect band gap semiconductor with a band gap of 1.45 eV. An onset potential of 0.15 V was obtained with PdPS but upon dispersing PdPS with rGO the onset potential achieved was 0.05 V.
 Fig. 20  Representative diagram of the formation of palladium phosphide nanoparticles from the interaction of trioctylphosphine (TOP) with a palladium particle. (Reproduced from ref. 121.) 
The chalcogenides of palladium are of great interest for the electrochemical HER and the synthesis of various sulphides and selenides has been reported.123 PdS and Pd4S are known to show good chemical stability and catalytic properties.124,125 PdS is a potential candidate for photocatalytic hydrogen generation due to its adequate band gap energy in the range of 1.6–2 eV.126 Barawi et al.126 reported the synthesis of PdS nanocorals as photoanodes for photoelectrochemical cells. Mass spectrometry was used to calculate the hydrogen generation rate upon illumination which reached up to 4.4 μmol H2 h−1 at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Palladium selenides of various compositions were synthesized by the thermolysis of palladium didecylselenium complexes.123 Highly conducting palladium selenide phases were obtained. The synthesized Pd17Se15, Pd7Se4 and Pd4Se displayed an onset potential of 8 mV, 7 mV and 3 mV and η10 of 94 mV, 162 mV and 182 mV, respectively. Hence, Pd4Se shows very good electrocatalytic activity which opens up another way of reducing the noble metal content.
3.5. Pd nanoparticles for the electro-photochemical HER
A largely unexplored property of Pd NPs is its surface plasmon resonance which leads to its applications in electrical hydrogen storage and photocatalysis. Pd modified MoS2 for the HER was reported for the first time by Li et al.127 The Pd–MoS2 obtained by the chemical deposition method was found to be a highly efficient catalyst for the HER. The enhanced HER activity was attributed to the fact that more active sites are generated by spontaneous Pd deposition leading to the displacement of HUPD into the subsurface state. Also, HER activity was enhanced with Xe light irradiation. Pd NPs help in the separation of electron–hole pairs and calcination increases the monolayer crystallinity of C–MoS2. The synergistic effect between calcination and Pd also has a significant effect in the enhancement of current density under illumination. The TiO2 surface modified by mono- and bimetallic (Ni, Pd, Pd–Ni) nanoparticles using radiolysis has been used for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution by Luna et al.128 Bimetallic NPs showed better activity due to the synergetic effect obtained with the presence of Pd NPs and Ni0–NiO clusters on TiO2. The surface modification of TiO2 with bimetallic NPs is a promising strategy to identify better promoters of surface reactions for hydrogen generation.
4. Conclusion
Hydrogen storage and transportation using hydrogen are the two main aspects of the future hydrogen economy. The hydrogen cycle comprise three main processes: harvesting wind and solar energy; splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen using renewable energy; and releasing usable energy by reacting oxygen and hydrogen. In this review we have focused on the development of electrocatalysts for hydrogen production from water splitting. As discussed Pt is the state-of-the-art electrocatalyst and hence, the major goal is to find an alternative to Pt by replacing it with cost-effective and Earth-abundant catalysts. Exploring new HER electrocatalysts will be one of the core research goals in the next few years. An ideal non-Pt HER electrocatalyst is one that has high efficiency similar to that of Pt, good durability, high chemical/catalytic stability over a wide pH range, even at all pH values, low cost to ensure inexpensive hydrogen production and scalability to ensure a wide range of commercial uses. However, to date, none of the known HER electrocatalysts possess all the above merits.
Pd is the next best choice in the search for the replacement of Pt because of comparable exchange current density, favourable hydrogen adsorption energy and high current density as seen from the volcano plot for the hydrogen evolution reaction (the Pd-based electrocatalysts discussed in the manuscript are tabulated in Table 1).129 Another important drawback of the state-of-the-art Pt catalyst is its durability. The catalytic activity of the Pt catalyst degrades substantially when operating continuously. Though there are many non-noble metal based catalysts130–132 reported in the literature which have considerably good activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction, their durability is extremely poor (drastically degrades after a few cycles) when considered as a hydrogen evolution catalyst for real-time application. But in the water electrolyzer these catalysts lose their efficiency towards the HER. Therefore, for real-time application, Pt can only be replaced with Pd owing to its exchange current density, favourable hydrogen adsorption energy and high current density. Therefore, presently, Pd is the next best catalyst to be considered for the electrochemical HER after Pt, though the development of highly efficient non-noble metal based catalysts with considerably good durability is certainly welcome.
Table 1 Comparison of HER activity for the Pd-based electrocatalysts discussed in the manuscript. References are taken from the manuscript




Catalysts
Loading (mg cm−2)

η
onset (mV vs. RHE)

η
10 (mV vs. RHE)
Tafel slope (mV per decade)
Ref.




Porous Pd NP assemblies
0.28
5
9
30

41



Pd NP synthesized using SBA-15
0.5
7
—
—

42



Carbon paper coated with Pd NPs
0.016
10
—
—

45



Pd NPs supported on Vulcan
0.7
10
20
—

46



Pd NPs on graphitic nanofibres
0.38
5
—
—

47



Pd NPs on Vulcan
0.02
60
—
148

48



Pd–graphene nanocomposite
0.02
30
—
46

51



f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2
0.16
<100
—
130

54



Pd NP on graphitic carbon nitride
0.043
12
55
35

55



PtPd bimetallic
0.12
24
—
38

71



PtPd on WC/C
0.05
5
—
21

74



AgPd alloys
—
270
—
156

75



rGO-Au48Pd52
0.1
80
130
149

80



rGO-Fe48Pd52


140
250
370




Rh/Pd
—
98
—
160

81



PdCo alloy
0.33
—
—
88.1

84



PdMnCo alloy
0.285
23
39
31

86



PdNiMo film
—
85
110
227

89



PtII2PdII2NiII complex
0.28
98
—
—

90



Pd–CoSnZn
—
10
30
70

91



PdxCu100−x/C
—
75
102
48

92



PdCu alloy
0.136
56
—
51

93



CuPtPd
—
1
28
25

94



Pt@Pd
0.281
39
56
39

96



Pt2Pd
—
14
58
31

97



PtPd bimetallic
—
34
57
36

98



PdCo alloy
0.285


80
31

99



Pd–FeOx(OH)2−2x


50


135

100



Pd nanocubes


37
51
62

101



PdCu–Pd
0.14
5
31
35

102



Ni@Pd
0.14
10
54
54

103



Pd2Si
1


243



107



PdTe


7
97
90

108



PdCu3
0.28
10
50
34

114



PdBi2
0.28
11
78
63

115



PdPS


50
100
46

122



Pd17Se15


80
182
57

123



Pd7Se4


70
162
56




Pd4Se


30
94
50




Pd/MoS2
—
<50
—
47

127





Here we have discussed the development of Pd-based electrocatalysts towards the HER. The activity of noble metal surfaces follows the same trend due to the high reversibility of the HER. Alloying, surface modification and nanocomposites are few of the strategies that are employed for the development of more active Pd-based electrocatalysts. Though the effect of substrates from Au, Pt and other metals still remains ambiguous, the surface coverage and size of Pd clusters play a crucial role in promoting the HER activity. As discussed earlier Pd modified Pt-WC/C exhibits an even better electrocatalytic HER performance as compared to Pt. An onset potential as low as 5 mV was achieved upon the addition of Pd nanocrystals into Pt-WC/C. As Pd absorbs hydrogen the adsorbed hydrogen atom penetrates through the Pd surface layer and moves into the internal bulk site (penetration reaction).74 Core–shell PdCu@Pd nanocrystals showed a similar activity as that of Pt for the hydrogen evolution reaction ascribed to the strain and ligand effects on the d-band structure of Pd induced by Cu which affect the HER kinetics that involves hydrogen adsorption as the reaction intermediate step.102 PdTe NWs/rGO hybrid showed an onset potential of 7 mV which is comparable to that of Pt. The existence of Te in PdTe NWs benefitted the catalysts with more active surface sites and better electron transport along the nanowire. Good mechanical adhesion and electrical connection between PdTe NWs and rGO further helped in improving the electrocatalytic activity.108 Pd alloys are known to show good activity for proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells (PEMFCs). Still there is difficulty in studying the reaction kinetics but more efforts are being devoted to the development of non-precious metal catalysts for the HER. However, there are still a few areas which need our attention like whether the steps, edges or defects are more active than the surface in Pd and its NPs for the HER, OHad is a reactant or a spectator during the HER, or the activity and durability of Pd-based catalysts are comparable to those of Pt during fuel cell operation. The HER activity of Pd is strongly dependent on the Pd(111) plane which is more active than other low index planes in acidic solutions. This activity trend is valid for Pd NPs which show higher activity than Pt/C. The most challenging issue with respect to Pd-based catalysts is durability. One of the most promising ways of enhancing durability is coating the Pd-based core with Pt or vice versa. More attention should be given towards nanostructuring and development of cost-effective and durable materials for practical applications.
Fuel cell technology is one of the most eco-friendly ways of producing energy in the current scenario. The fuel cell using H2 and O2 as the fuels will be the best choice amongst other fuel cells as it emits water as the combustion product. Electrocatalytic H2 evolution is one the cleanest way of producing H2 as the fuel for the fuel cells. Hence, interfacing water electrolysers to a fuel cell using H2 and O2 as the fuels will help use H2 as a renewable source of energy. Again, water electrolysis is either carried out in acidic media (through a proton exchange membrane) or alkaline media (using a diaphragm). But due to the sluggish kinetics of both hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions and prohibitive cost, large-scale H2 production is hindered. So, the advancement now is towards non-conventional water electrolysis which can tackle the following issues: (i) In conventional water electrolysis, hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions are coupled and that may result in explosive H2/O2 gas mixtures, the co-existence of which along with electrocatalysts can result in the degradation of the membrane and device failure. (ii) Oxygen evolution is a 4e process requiring more overpotential as compared to the HER; hence, the OER product is not highly valuable. (iii) Cost-effective H2 storage still remains a challenge. Innovative strategies like overall water splitting (water splitting in the same electrolyte for the HER and OER),133 decoupled water electrolysis (water splitting involving redox mediators that can temporarily and spatially separate the HER and OER, hence, preventing the mixing of gases and formation of reactive species),134 hybrid water electrolysis (the OER is replaced with thermodynamically more favourable organic oxidation reaction)135 or tandem water electrolysis (direct consumption of H2 produced through water electrolysis to generate value-added chemicals via biological catalysts like enzymes)136 can be used to overcome the challenges related to conventional water splitting.
Hydrogen atom extraction from oceans and its direct conversion into H2 fuel requires enormous technological advancement. Hence, the development of water splitting electrocatalysts that can sustain the seawater environment is crucial. The HER based on seawater electrolysis still remains a challenge as most of the electrocatalysts tend to be corroded and/or deactivated due to the impurities in seawater leading to low efficiency and stability.137 Also, the complex composition plays a pivotal role in real seawater on the HER activity of the catalysts. The development of not only highly active catalysts but also catalysts that can withstand all conditions, from mild to harsh, is crucial.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Sheikh Saqr Laboratory (SSL), and the Department of Science and Technology, India (DST), for financial support. S. S. thanks the JNCASR for the research fellowship and S. C. P. thanks the TRC for the financial support.
References
J. O. M. Bockris, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 731–740 CrossRef .
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
M. Balat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4013–4029 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Gong and Z. Guo, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 29, 573–588 CrossRef .
M. Zeng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942–14962 Search PubMed .

          A. Bard and L. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley, 2nd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .

          G. Eliezer, Physical Electrochemistry, John Wiley, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .

          D. T. Sawyer, A. Sobkowiak and J. L. Roberts, Electrochemistry for Chemists, John Wiley, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, C. W. Roske, C. G. Read, J. C. Crompton, J. M. McEnaney, J. F. Callejas, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5420–5425 Search PubMed .
J. R. McKone, E. L. Warren, M. J. Bierman, S. W. Boettcher, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3573–3583 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23–J26 CrossRef .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1053–1063 RSC .
H. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Cao, Y. Li, L. Li, Z. Xu, X. Wang, N. Xiong and K. Pan, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4899–4908 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Cummins, U. Martinez, A. Sherehiy, R. Kappera, A. Martinez-Garcia, R. K. Schulze, J. Jasinski, J. Zhang, R. K. Gupta, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, G. Sumanasekera, A. D. Mohite, M. K. Sunkara and G. Gupta, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11857 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Brown, M. Krumpelt, R. O. Loutfy and N. P. Yao, Electrochim. Acta, 1982, 27, 557–560 CrossRef .
S. J. Gutic, A. S. Dobrota, M. Leetmaa, N. V. Skorodumova, S. V. Mentus and I. A. Pasti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13281–13293 RSC .
M. M. Jaksic, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 559–578 CrossRef .
D. G. Narehood, S. Kishore, H. Goto, J. H. Adair, J. A. Nelson, H. R. Gutiérrez and P. C. Eklund, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 952–960 CrossRef .
H. L. Liu, F. Nosheen and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3056–3078 RSC .
Y. Y. Jia, Y. Q. Jiang, J. W. Zhang, L. Zhang, Q. L. Chen, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3748–3751 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bianchini and P. K. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 4183–4206 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Polshettiwar, C. Len and A. Fihri, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 2599–2626 CrossRef .
A. Baldi, T. C. Narayan, A. L. Koh and J. A. Dionne, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1143 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. V. G. Alefeld, Hydrogen in Metals I, Springer,  1978 Search PubMed .

          J. V. G. Alefeld, Hydrogen in Metals II, Springer,  1978 Search PubMed .
A. Zalineeva, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and G. Jerkiewicz, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1600542 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, I. Ciani, P. Bertoncello, P. R. Unwin, J. Zhao, C. R. Bradbury and D. J. Fermin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9686–9694 Search PubMed .
A. Chen and C. Ostrom, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11999–12044 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Chinchilla and C. Nájera, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1783–1826 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Tracey, D. Pham and K. Koide, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4769–4791 RSC .
H. Zhong, C. Liu, Y. Wang, R. Wang and M. Hong, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2188–2194 RSC .
S. Liu, X. Mu, H. Duan, C. Chen and H. Zhang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 2017, 535–539 CrossRef .
K. Naga Mahesh, R. Balaji and K. S. Dhathathreyan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 46–51 CrossRef .
B. Pierozynski, T. Mikolajczyk, M. Turemko, E. Czerwosz and M. Kozlowski, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 1795–1799 CrossRef .
P. P. Andonoglou and A. D. Jannakoudakis, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 1905–1913 CrossRef .
Y.-X. Huang, X.-W. Liu, X.-F. Sun, G.-P. Sheng, Y.-Y. Zhang, G.-M. Yan, S.-G. Wang, A.-W. Xu and H.-Q. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 2773–2776 CrossRef .
S. A. Grigoriev, P. Millet and V. N. Fateev, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 281–285 CrossRef .
S. A. Grigoriev, M. S. Mamat, K. A. Dzhus, G. S. Walker and P. Millet, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 4143–4147 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, S. Zhou, S. Gu, B. Xu and Y. Yan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F499–F506 CrossRef .
R. Ojani, R. Valiollahi and J.-B. Raoof, Energy, 2014, 74, 871–876 CrossRef .
L. Ma, X. Shen, H. Zhou, G. Zhu, Z. Ji and K. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5337–5343 Search PubMed .
S. Ghasemi, S. R. Hosseini, S. Nabipour and P. Asen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 16184–16191 CrossRef .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Métayé, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Valenti, A. Boni, M. Melchionna, M. Cargnello, L. Nasi, G. Bertoni, R. J. Gorte, M. Marcaccio, S. Rapino, M. Bonchio, P. Fornasiero, M. Prato and F. Paolucci, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13549 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Bhowmik, M. K. Kundu and S. Barman, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1929–1941 CrossRef .
T. G. Kelly, S. T. Hunt, D. V. Esposito and J. G. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 5638–5644 CrossRef .
M. Łukaszewski, T. Kędra and A. Czerwiński, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1150–1159 CrossRef .
M. Baldauf and D. M. Kolb, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 2145–2153 CrossRef .
L. A. Kibler, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6824–6828 CrossRef .
P. Quaino and E. Santos, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 858–867 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Roudgar and A. Groß, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 548, 121–130 CrossRef .
I. A. Pašti, N. M. Gavrilov and S. V. Mentus, Adv. Phys. Chem., 2011, 2011 Search PubMed  , 35634.
Y. Pluntke, L. A. Kibler and D. M. Kolb, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3684–3688 RSC .
P. Quaino, E. Santos, H. Wolfschmidt, M. A. Montero and U. Stimming, Catal. Today, 2011, 177, 55–63 CrossRef .
M. E. Björketun, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff, H. Wolfschmidt, U. Stimming and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 045407 CrossRef .
P. J. Schafer and L. A. Kibler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15225–15230 RSC .
M. Smiljanić, I. Srejić, B. Grgur, Z. Rakočević and S. Štrbac, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 589–596 CrossRef .
M. Smiljanić, I. Srejić, B. Grgur, Z. Rakočević and S. Štrbac, Electrocatalysis, 2012, 3, 369–375 CrossRef .
A. Abbaspour and F. Norouz-Sarvestani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1883–1891 CrossRef .
E. Chorbadzhiyska, M. Mitov, G. Hristov, N. Dimcheva, L. Nalbandian, A. Evdou and Y. Hubenova, Int. J. Electrochem., 2014, 2014, 6 Search PubMed .
M. Xiao, X. Liang, W. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Miao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H415–H418 CrossRef .
G. Li, C. A. Ma, Y. Zheng and W. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 85, 234–240 CrossRef .
L. Schlapbach and A. Züttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wu, P. K. Shen, Z. Wei, S. Song and M. Nie, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 310–316 CrossRef .
A. Safavi, S. H. Kazemi and H. Kazemi, Fuel, 2014, 118, 156–162 CrossRef .
L. Opara, B. Klein and H. Züchner, J. Alloys Compd., 1997, 253–254, 378–380 CrossRef .
O. M. Løvvik and R. A. Olsen, J. Alloys Compd., 2002, 330–332, 332–337 CrossRef .
N. Ozawa, N. B. Arboleda, H. Nakanishi and H. Kasai, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 859–863 CrossRef .
Y. Pluntke and L. A. Kibler, Electrocatalysis, 2011, 2, 192 CrossRef .
J. A. S. B. Cardoso, L. Amaral, Ö. Metin, D. S. P. Cardoso, M. Sevim, T. Sener, C. A. C. Sequeira and D. M. F. Santos, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 3916–3925 CrossRef .
S. Štrbac, M. Smiljanić and Z. Rakočević, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 755, 115–121 CrossRef .
E. Santos, P. Hindelang, P. Quaino, E. N. Schulz, G. Soldano and W. Schmickler, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2274–2279 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Soldano, E. N. Schulz, D. R. Salinas, E. Santos and W. Schmickler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16437–16443 RSC .
K. Mech, P. Żabiński, R. Kowalik, T. Tokarski and K. Fitzner, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 97–103 CrossRef .
B. Bozzini, G. Zangari and P. L. Cavallotti, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1787–1793 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, Z. Sun, R. Feng, Z. Lin, H. Liu, M. Li, Y. Yang, R. Shi, W. Zhang and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38419–38427 Search PubMed .
P. Elumalai, H. N. Vasan, N. Munichandraiah and S. A. Shivashankar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2002, 32, 1005–1010 CrossRef .
N. V. Krstajić, S. Burojević and L. M. Vračar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2000, 25, 635–641 CrossRef .
J. Tang, X. Zhao, Y. Zuo, P. Ju and Y. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 1041–1049 CrossRef .
N. Kuwamura, Y. Kurioka and T. Konno, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 846–849 RSC .
A. Döner, F. Tezcan and G. Kardaş, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3881–3888 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, D. Wu and D. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 572–579 CrossRef .
R. Wang, L.-Y. Jiang, J.-J. Feng, W.-D. Liu, J. Yuan and A.-J. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 6695–6704 CrossRef .
T. Chao, X. Luo, W. Chen, B. Jiang, J. Ge, Y. Lin, G. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16047–16051 CrossRef PubMed .
F. A. Al-Odail, A. Anastasopoulos and B. E. Hayden, Top. Catal., 2011, 54, 77–82 CrossRef .
X.-X. Lin, A.-J. Wang, K.-M. Fang, J. Yuan and J.-J. Feng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8675–8683 CrossRef .
X. Zhong, Y. Qin, X. Chen, W. Xu, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 114, 740–748 CrossRef .
Z.-Z. Yang, X.-X. Lin, X.-F. Zhang, A.-J. Wang, X.-Y. Zhu and J.-J. Feng, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 735, 2123–2132 CrossRef .
J. Chen, G. Xia, P. Jiang, Y. Yang, R. Li, R. Shi, J. Su and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13378–13383 Search PubMed .
H. Liao, C. Wei, J. Wang, A. Fisher, T. Sritharan, Z. Feng and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701129 CrossRef .
J. Li, P. Zhou, F. Li, J. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Huo, J. Jin and J. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 343–351 CrossRef .
J. Li, F. Li, S.-X. Guo, J. Zhang and J. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8151–8160 Search PubMed .
J. Li, P. Zhou, F. Li, R. Ren, Y. Liu, J. Niu, J. Ma, X. Zhang, M. Tian, J. Jin and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11261–11268 Search PubMed .
D. Wang, H. L. Xin, R. Hovden, H. Wang, Y. Yu, D. A. Muller, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, Nat. Mater., 2012, 12, 81 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Casado-Rivera, D. J. Volpe, L. Alden, C. Lind, C. Downie, T. Vázquez-Alvarez, A. C. D. Angelo, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4043–4049 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, M. Yuan, L. Deng, R. Ming, A. Zhang, M. Yang, B. Chai and Z. Ren, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 1553–1560 RSC .
J. M. McEnaney and R. E. Schaak, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 707–709 CrossRef PubMed .
L. X. Jiao, F. Li, X. Z. Li, R. Ren, J. Li, X. C. Zhou, J. Jin and R. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18441–18445 RSC .
J. Erlebacher, M. J. Aziz, A. Karma, N. Dimitrov and K. Sieradzki, Nature, 2001, 410, 450 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qi and J. Weissmüller, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5948–5954 CrossRef PubMed .
I. McCue, J. Snyder, X. Li, Q. Chen, K. Sieradzki and J. Erlebacher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 225503 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, H. B. Wu, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13934–13937 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lv, Z. Xi, Z. Chen, S. Guo, Y. Yu, W. Zhu, Q. Li, X. Zhang, M. Pan, G. Lu, S. Mu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5859–5862 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jana, A. Bhim, P. Bothra, S. K. Pati and S. C. Peter, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2922–2927 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sarkar, U. Subbarao and S. C. Peter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15950–15960 Search PubMed .
P. Liu and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14871–14878 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jin, P. Li, X. Huang, G. Zeng, Y. Jin, B. Zheng and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18593–18599 Search PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5427–5430 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tian, X. Yan and X. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5441–5448 CrossRef .
A. R. J. Kucernak, K. F. Fahy and V. N. N. Sundaram, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 48–56 CrossRef .
S. Sarkar and S. Sampath, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7359–7362 RSC .
S. Kukunuri, P. M. Austeria and S. Sampath, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 206–209 RSC .
L.-L. Long, A.-Y. Zhang, Y.-X. Huang, X. Zhang and H.-Q. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4301–4306 Search PubMed .
Q. Chen, C. Suo, S. Zhang and Y. Wang, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2013, 2013, 5 Search PubMed .
M. Barawi, I. J. Ferrer, J. R. Ares and C. Sánchez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20544–20549 Search PubMed .
B. B. Li, S. Z. Qiao, X. R. Zheng, X. J. Yang, Z. D. Cui, S. L. Zhu, Z. Y. Li and Y. Q. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 68–76 CrossRef .
A. L. Luna, D. Dragoe, K. Wang, P. Beaunier, E. Kowalska, B. Ohtani, D. Bahena Uribe, M. A. Valenzuela, H. Remita and C. Colbeau-Justin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14302–14311 Search PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. A. Stern and X. L. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
H. J. Liu, Q. He, H. L. Jiang, Y. X. Lin, Y. K. Zhang, M. Habib, S. M. Chen and L. Song, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11574–11583 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, Q. Fang, W. S. Chu, Y. Y. Wan, X. L. Li, W. Y. Xu, M. Habib, S. Tao, Y. Zhou, D. B. Liu, T. Xiang, A. Khalil, X. J. Wu, M. Chhowalla, P. M. Ajayan and L. Song, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4738–4744 CrossRef .
C. Q. Wu, Q. Fang, Q. Liu, D. B. Liu, C. D. Wang, T. Xiang, A. Khalil, S. M. Chen and L. Song, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 663–667 RSC .
J. S. Luo, D. A. Vermaas, D. Q. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, W. A. Smith and M. Gratzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600100 CrossRef .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Science, 2014, 345, 1326–1330 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. J. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9913–9917 CrossRef PubMed .
E. M. Nichols, J. J. Gallagher, C. Liu, Y. D. Su, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, Y. J. Sun, P. D. Yang, M. C. Y. Chang and C. J. Chang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 11461–11466 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Ma, C. X. Wu, X. J. Feng, H. Q. Tan, L. K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z. H. Kang, E. B. Wang and Y. G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 788–798 Search PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2018
Table Content:
Shreya Sarkar	Ms Shreya Sarkar obtained her B.Sc. degree from the University of Calcutta (India) and M.Sc. degree from the University of Pune (India). After completing her master's degree in chemistry she joined as a PhD student in 2015 under Prof. Sebastian C. Peter at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore, India. Her research interest involves the development of nanomaterials and nanocomposites for fuel cell applications, water electrolysis and batteries.
Sebastian C. Peter	Prof. Sebastian C. Peter obtained his M.Sc. degree from Calicut University (India) and M.Tech. degree from CUSAT (India). He received his PhD degree from the University of Münster, Germany in 2006 and was a postdoctoral researcher at Max Plank Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, Dresden, Germany and Northwestern University, USA. He is presently an associate professor at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore, India. His research interests include fuel cells and CO2 reduction. He has been selected as a young research investigator by ACS, RSC, IOP and MRSI. He is the founder and director of the start-up Breathe India Pvt. Ltd, which aims to convert CO2 into chemicals and fuels.
At the cathode: 2H(aq)+ + 2e− → H2(g)
At the anode: H2O → 2H+ + ½O2 + 2e−
At the cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2(g) + 2OH−
At the anode: 2OH− → H2O + ½O2 + 2e−
Ei = EHER + iR + η

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of HER energetics, (b) schematic HER polarization curves on two different electrocatalysts with their onset potentials indicated and (c) schematic Tafel plots on two different electrocatalysts with their Tafel plots and exchange current densities indicated. (Reproduced from ref. 9.)	 
j = j0{e[αzFη/RT] − e[−αzFη/RT]}
η = (RT/zFηj0) × j
η = a + blogj
H(aq)+ + e− → Hads
Hads + H(aq)+ + e− → H2(g)
Hads + Hads → H2(g)

 	Fig. 2  Volcano plot of exchange current density (j0) as a function of the DFT-calculated Gibb's free energy (ΔGH*) of the adsorbed atomic hydrogen on a pure metal. (Reproduced from ref. 9.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the phase diagram for bulk PdHx with superimposed isotherms (solid red lines). (Reproduced from ref. 26.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Surface stress model for H absorption and Habs desorption from octahedral Pt NPs. (a) Visual representation of the cross-section of a single octahedral Pd NP loaded with H to XH = 0.90, HUPD beneath the first Pd layer, Habs in the shell region and Habs in the NP core and (b) comparison of the calculated H2(g) fugacity values (black line) with the experimentally determined data (red points) required to reach XH = 0.90. (Reproduced from ref. 35.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of GCE, Pd/GCE, graphene/GCE and Pd–graphene/GCE at the open circuit potentials in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Inset: The equivalent circuit for graphene/GCE and Pd–graphene/GCE. (Reproduced from ref. 51.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the synthetic protocols yielding the f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2 electrocatalysts, (b) STEM tomographic reconstruction of f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2 and (c) general scheme for the HER proposed mechanism by f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2 at neutral pH. Water absorption and dissociation occurs at the hydrophilic, porous, TiO2 outer layer (blue shell), promoting the formation of Had (grey) intermediates on the catalytic Pd sites (black).	 

 	Fig. 7  HER performance at various electrodes. (a) LSV polarization curves (negative direction) of Pd–CNx (red line), Pt/C (blue line), Pd/C (green line), and g-CNx (wine red line) in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (b) The corresponding HER Tafel plot of porous Pd–CNx, Pt/C, and Pd/C. (c) LSV curves on the Pd–CNx surface at the first cycle (red) and after 10000 cycles (black) (scan rate 10 mV s−1). (d) Chronoamperometric responses of Pd–CNx, Pd/C, and Pt/C at η = −60 mV in RHE for 48 h. Inset: Chronoamperometric response of Pd–CNx at η = −60 mV in RHE for 100 h. (e) LSV curves of Pd–CNx, Pt/C, and Pd/C in 0.5 M KOH solution. (f) Tafel plots of porous Pd–CNx, Pt/C, and Pd/C in 0.5 M KOH. All experiments were performed with a constant metal loading of 0.043 mg cm−2. All LSV curves are iR corrected. (Reproduced from ref. 55.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Log of the current density at an overpotential of 0.1 V vs. Pd coverage on WC and Mo2C. The solid black line represents the current density on Pd foil. (Reproduced from ref. 56.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Exchange current density as a function of Pd coverage for hydrogen evolution on ultrathin Pd overlayers deposited onto Au(111). (Reproduced from ref. 59.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Specific current density for Pd on Au(111) vs. Pd coverage for the HER at different overpotentials. (Reproduced from ref. 65.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Polarisation curves at (a) T = 25 °C and (b) T = 35 °C for the rGO-MPd electrocatalysts in 8 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. (Reproduced from ref. 80.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison of the catalytic activity of Pd(poly), 50% Rh/Pd(poly) and Pt(poly) electrodes for the HER. Polarization curves were recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 M NaOH. Current densities are referred to the EASA. (Reproduced from ref. 81.)	 

 		 
[Pd(NH3)4]2+ + 2e− → Pd0 + 4NH3

 	Fig. 13  (a) Polarization curves of PdMnCo/NC-1, PdMnCo/NC-2, and PdMnCo/NC-3. (b) Polarization curves of PdMnCo/NC-2, graphene, substrate, Pd, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C for comparison. (c) Polarization curves of PdMnCo/NC-2, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C for comparison; the inset in (c) is the chronoamperometric test of PdMnCo/NC-2 at a constant applied potential of 55 mV (vs. RHE). (d) Tafel plots of PdMnCo/NC-2, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C. (e) Comparison of the mass specific activity of Pd, 30% Pd/C, PdMnCo/NC-2, and 40% Pt/C at an applied potential of 35 mV (vs. RHE). (f) Nyquist plots of the substrate, PdMnCo/NC-2, 30% Pd/C, and 40% Pt/C. (Reproduced from ref. 86.)	 

 	Fig. 14  Linear sweep voltammograms at a scan rate of 0.01 V s−1. The inset shows the 1D chain heterotrimetallic structure of [Pd2Pt2(NH3)4(D-H2pen)4]4+ (D-H2pen = D-penicillamine). (Reproduced from ref. 90.)	 

 	Fig. 15  HAADF-STEM (A) and HAADF-STEM-EDS mapping (B–D) images of raspberry-PdCu NCs. (Reproduced from ref. 93.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Characterization of Pd/Cu–Pt NRs. (a) TEM image, (b) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding STEM-EDX elemental mapping, (c) atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image, (d) HER polarization curves of the Pd nanosheets, Pd/Cu NRs, Pd/Cu–Pt NRs, and commercial Pt/C, acquired by linear sweep voltammetry with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution at room temperature, (e) the corresponding Tafel plots obtained from the polarization curves of Pd nanosheets, Pd/Cu NRs, Pd/Cu–Pt NRs, and commercial Pt/C and (f) chronoamperometry measurement of the Pd/Cu–Pt NRs at a potential of −24 mV for 15 h. (Reproduced from ref. 94.), (g) free-energy diagram for hydrogen evolution at Pt(111), Pd(111), Cu(111), and the Pd/Cu–Pt NRs and (h–j) possible structures for the Pd/Cu–Pt NRs.	 

 	Fig. 17  HER activity versus FeOx(OH)2−2x coverage. (Reproduced from ref. 100.)	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) PdCu3(111) surfaces with n = 9–4 (I–VI, respectively). The vacant sites are denoted by the white circles with a black dotted boundary. Cu, Pd, and H atoms are represented by red, orange, and cyan colored balls, respectively. (b) Free energy diagram for the HER (U = 0 V) at Pd sites with varying coordination numbers (n = 9–4). The broken line corresponds to a pure Pt(111) surface. (c) LDOS on Pd atom with n = 9, 5, and 4. The Fermi energy (EF) is represented by a black vertical dashed line. The green thick bar represents the d-band center (Ed) on the Pd atoms of PdCu3(111) surfaces. (Reproduced from ref. 114.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of electrochemical Bi dissolution. The (31) and (103) planes correspond to PdBi2_BA and PdBi2_AA, respectively. The LSV curve inside gives an overall picture of the increase in catalytic activity after Bi dissolution. (Reproduced from ref. 115.)	 

 	Fig. 20  Representative diagram of the formation of palladium phosphide nanoparticles from the interaction of trioctylphosphine (TOP) with a palladium particle. (Reproduced from ref. 121.)	 

Porous Pd NP assemblies	0.28	5	9	30	
41

Pd NP synthesized using SBA-15	0.5	7	—	—	
42

Carbon paper coated with Pd NPs	0.016	10	—	—	
45

Pd NPs supported on Vulcan	0.7	10	20	—	
46

Pd NPs on graphitic nanofibres	0.38	5	—	—	
47

Pd NPs on Vulcan	0.02	60	—	148	
48

Pd–graphene nanocomposite	0.02	30	—	46	
51

f-MWCNTs@Pd/TiO2	0.16	<100	—	130	
54

Pd NP on graphitic carbon nitride	0.043	12	55	35	
55

PtPd bimetallic	0.12	24	—	38	
71

PtPd on WC/C	0.05	5	—	21	
74

AgPd alloys	—	270	—	156	
75

rGO-Au48Pd52	0.1	80	130	149	
80

rGO-Fe48Pd52	
	140	250	370	

Rh/Pd	—	98	—	160	
81

PdCo alloy	0.33	—	—	88.1	
84

PdMnCo alloy	0.285	23	39	31	
86

PdNiMo film	—	85	110	227	
89

PtII2PdII2NiII complex	0.28	98	—	—	
90

Pd–CoSnZn	—	10	30	70	
91

PdxCu100−x/C	—	75	102	48	
92

PdCu alloy	0.136	56	—	51	
93

CuPtPd	—	1	28	25	
94

Pt@Pd	0.281	39	56	39	
96

Pt2Pd	—	14	58	31	
97

PtPd bimetallic	—	34	57	36	
98

PdCo alloy	0.285	
	80	31	
99

Pd–FeOx(OH)2−2x	
	50	
	135	
100

Pd nanocubes	
	37	51	62	
101

PdCu–Pd	0.14	5	31	35	
102

Ni@Pd	0.14	10	54	54	
103

Pd2Si	1	
	243	
	
107

PdTe	
	7	97	90	
108

PdCu3	0.28	10	50	34	
114

PdBi2	0.28	11	78	63	
115

PdPS	
	50	100	46	
122

Pd17Se15	
	80	182	57	
123

Pd7Se4	
	70	162	56	

Pd4Se	
	30	94	50	

Pd/MoS2	—	<50	—	47	
127


This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2018
