Enhanced long-term stability of perovskite solar cells using a double-layer hole transport material   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA03315J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA03315J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14881-14886Enhanced long-term stability of perovskite solar cells using a double-layer hole transport material†

        
          
            Qi 
            Li
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Yicheng 
            Zhao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Fu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenke 
            Zhou
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yao 
            Zhao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fang 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Song 
            Liu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Dapeng 
            Yu
          
        
      acd and 

        
          
            Qing 
            Zhao
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics and Electron Microscopy Laboratory, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: zhaoqing@pku.edu.cn
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100084, China
cUCLA-PKU Joint Research Institute in Science and Engineering, Beijing, 100871, China
dInstitute for Quantum Science and Technology and Department of Physics, South University of Science and Technology of China (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, China
Received 
      17th April 2017
    , Accepted 21st June 2017First published on 21st June 2017AbstractThe instability of hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells hinders their commercialization and further applications although they have reached high power conversion efficiency. Here we introduce a double-layer hole transport material into perovskite solar cells containing a CuSCN layer and spiro-OMeTAD layer simultaneously. Consequently, the long-term stability of the solar cells was significantly enhanced compared to those of single-layer devices and the devices can sustain about 90% of their initial power conversion efficiency after 10 hours of continuous working at the maximum power point. We ascribed the long-term stability enhancement to the suppression of methylamine migration by the CuSCN layer.
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials have the ABX3 structure in common, and are typically comprised of a monovalent cation A (methylammonium (MA), formamidinium (FA), Cs+, and Rb+ usually),1–3 a divalent cation B (Pb2+ and Sn2+ usually)4 and a halide anion X (I− and Br− usually).5 This class of materials have attracted enormous interest in recent years because of their remarkable properties, such as excellent light harvesting ability,3,6,7 long carrier diffusion lengths,8,9 low exciton binding energy,10 a tuneable band gap,11–13 easy preparation methods,14–16etc. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) boomed from 3.8% (ref. 6) to today's record of 22.1%.17 Although the PCE has reached such a high value, PSCs still face a serious instability problem. When it comes to long-term testing, most studies reported only a few hundred seconds of steady-state output under AM 1.5G illumination at the maximum power point (MPP) of the solar cells. A prolonged steady-state test would cause rapid PCE decrease.18 Recently, intensive research has been focused on the instability problem and great progress has been made.19–24 The spiro-OMeTAD layer has been reported as a factor causing instability of the devices.2,3,25 For example, Li et al. noticed that 4-TBP used as the dopant in the spiro-OMeTAD layer could corrode the perovskite.26 Hawash et al. found that many pin-holes exist even in the as-prepared spiro-OMeTAD layer which may allow ions to migrate into spiro-OMeTAD and result in device degradation.27
In terms of hole transporting materials (HTMs), besides organic HTMs like spiro-OMeTAD, some inorganic materials constitute another big family of inorganic HTMs. Compared to organic HTMs, inorganic HTMs have lower price and higher thermal and chemical stability, which makes them attract researchers' attention.28 Until now, many different inorganic materials have been demonstrated and can be used as inorganic HTMs in PSCs, such as Cu2ZnSnS4,29 CuInS2,30 PbS,31 CuS,32 CuI,33 Cu2O,34,35 CuO,35 CuOx,36,37 CuSCN,38–40 NiMgLiO,41 NiO,42 NiOx,43etc. Nickel, CuS and different oxides of copper based HTMs are reported in the inverted (p-i-n) configuration.32,34–37,41–43 Some inorganic HTMs have been proved to be usable in the conventional n-i-p configuration, although most of them have a rather difficult synthesis method;29–31 CuI and CuSCN can be used as received without further processing.33,38–40 CuSCN has been demonstrated to achieve much higher device performance.28,33,40 CuSCN is an intrinsic p-type (hole-transport) semiconductor and has a favourable valance band maximum energy with the perovskite, with higher thermal and chemical stability than organic HTMs. It has been demonstrated as an inorganic HTM in PSCs, in both conventional (n-i-p) and inverted (p-i-n) configurations. For example, Qin et al. fabricated conventional structure PSCs with CuSCN as the HTM by the doctor blade method and the reported device PCE is 12.4%.38 Ye et al. used CuSCN in inverted structure PSCs with a reported PCE of 16.6%.39 The CuSCN layer was formed on ITO by an electrodeposition method which is incompatible with conventional structure PSCs. Yang et al. reported a PCE of 17.1% by using a relatively complex spray deposition technique to fabricate the CuSCN layer.40 Although it is a simple method to deposit a thin CuSCN layer onto perovskite films, spin-coating was rarely used in experiments because it is difficult to obtain a uniform thickness of the CuSCN layer and to guarantee full coverage on the perovskite due to the poor solubility of CuSCN by the spin-coating method. Therefore, developing an effective way to prepare a uniform CuSCN layer is highly desirable. Although there have been several reports on employing CuSCN as the HTM in PSCs, a stability test longer than 1000 s of PSCs based on CuSCN under AM 1.5G illumination and MPP bias has never been reported to our knowledge.
In this study, we introduce a double-layer HTM configuration (CuSCN + Spiro-OMeTAD) into PSCs to improve the long-term stability of the solar cell devices. A new recipe of the CuSCN precursor was developed to increase the solubility of CuSCN powder and to form a full-coverage CuSCN film by the spin-coating method on perovskite films. The long-term stability of PSCs has been greatly improved and this is shown by the fact that around 90% of the initial PCE of the PSCs was sustained after 10 h of steady-state measurement under full solar illumination at the MPP bias, compared to a rapid decay when only a single layer HTM was used. XPS measurements suggested that the long-term stability improvement may be derived from the suppression of methylamine ion migration into the spiro-OMeTAD layer by the blocking effect of the CuSCN inorganic layer. Considering that spiro-OMeTAD was likely to have pin-holes which would allow ion migration out from the perovskite but CuSCN did not have these pin-holes, along with that SCN− loss with time might damage the electron blocking ability of CuSCN, the double-layer HTM solar cells can overcome these shortcomings. This work highlights the importance of impeding ion migration into organic HTMs and the significance of using double-layer HTM for enhancing the long-term stability of PSCs.
For perovskite preparation, we use lead acetate tri-hydrate (PbAc2·3H2O) and methylamine iodide (MAI) to prepare the perovskite precursor and the perovskite film was synthesized by a one-step coating method.44,45 The preparation details are available in the ESI.† The schematic of the double-layer HTM configuration PSC architecture is shown in Fig. 1a. On preparing the double-layer HTM devices, we first formed the CuSCN layer on top of the perovskite film under optimized conditions which will be mentioned later. Then, a spiro-OMeTAD layer was spin-coated onto the CuSCN layer following the usual procedure. Finally, a gold electrode was thermally evaporated onto spiro-OMeTAD. In the double-layer HTM configuration, a spiro-OMeTAD layer and a CuSCN layer were used simultaneously as the double-layer HTM, and the CuSCN was bottom HTM contacted with the perovskite film and the spiro-OMeTAD layer was top HTM contacted with the gold electrode. The top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the perovskite film is shown in Fig. 1b. From the image, it is clear that the TiO2 substrate was covered by the perovskite film thoroughly, and the average size of the perovskite grain exceeded 500 nm. The cross-sectional SEM image of the full device is shown in Fig. 1c. As can be seen, we obtained full coverage of the CuSCN layer on the perovskite film, which is essential to improve the device performance, just using a simple spin-coating method.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the double-layer HTM configuration. (b) Top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the perovskite film. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of a complete solar cell with the double-layer HTM architecture. Spiro-OMeTAD is denoted as “spiro” in (c). 
To prepare the full-coverage CuSCN layer and to improve its quality, different parameters were optimized during preparation of the CuSCN layer. First we carried out solvent study to increase the CuSCN solubility. It was found that by using CuSCN solution with a conventionally reported concentration (CuSCN in dipropyl sulfide (PS) with 5 mg mL−1),46,47 the resulting CuSCN film formed by the spin-coating method was too thin to guarantee full coverage on the perovskite film. Considering the weak polarity of the PS solvent, a strong polar component was added to create a mixed solvent with stronger polarity to resolve more CuSCN. Four chemicals, acetic acid, acetonitrile, aniline and benzonitrile, were tried and the solubility of CuSCN boosted from around 5 mg mL−1 to over 20 mg mL−1 when 20 μL of additives were dropped into 1 mL of PS. Meanwhile, no obvious damage of the perovskite film was observed when coating the surface of the perovskite film with the mixed solvent. Utilizing this method, we obtained a transparent, high concentration CuSCN precursor. A sufficiently thick CuSCN film (∼50 nm) was formed to achieve full-coverage on the perovskite layer (Fig. S1, ESI†) based on the precursor. From Fig. 2a, using a mixed solvent containing acetonitrile can result in the best PCE, so it is chosen as the additive in further work.
 Fig. 2  Relationship between the PCE of the PSCs with CuSCN as the HTM under different (a) chemicals added into the CuSCN solution, (b) annealing temperatures, and (c) annealing times. Each datum and error bar was calculated from 4 individual devices. 
Apart from the coverage and thickness, the CuSCN crystallization process also has to be optimized to obtain better device performance. There are mainly two parameters, annealing temperature and annealing time, that should be changed to achieve the best device performance. As for the annealing temperature, low temperature cannot totally evaporate the residual solvent after spin-coating, and high temperature will damage the perovskite film. As indicated in Fig. 2b, annealing under 80 °C can obtain the best device performance. In addition, a short annealing time will lead to incomplete residual solvent evaporation and a long annealing time will also cause perovskite damage. From our experiment, we pointed out that 5 min is the best condition for prepared the CuSCN layer, as shown in Fig. 2c.
Based on the optimized conditions, we prepared devices with a double-layer HTM, and compared them with devices using only spiro-OMeTAD or CuSCN as the HTM. Fig. 3a shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics measured under simulated AM 1.5G irradiation of these three types of devices in one batch. The devices with spiro-OMeTAD displayed a short circuit current density (JSC) of 20.964 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1092 mV and a fill factor (FF) of 0.67, leading to a PCE of 15.3%. For the CuSCN HTM, the devices showed a PCE of 12.2% with a JSC of 19.535 mA cm−2, an VOC of 973 mV and a FF of 0.64. The performance of the devices with CuSCN was not as good as that of devices with spiro-OMeTAD, which is in agreement with former reports.38–40 The lower PCE may derive from the inferior hole-collection ability of CuSCN compared with spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. S2, ESI†). The double-layer HTM devices had similar performance to devices based on the CuSCN HTM, with a JSC of 19.427 mA cm−2, an VOC of 975 mV and a FF of 0.66, which meant a PCE of 12.5%. And we studied the PCE distribution of double-layer HTM devices; the statistical result is shown in Fig. 3b. The average PCE achieved was 11%.
 Fig. 3  
J–V and steady-state measurement of the PSCs. (a) J–V characteristics of solar cells with spiro-OMeTAD (black), CuSCN (blue) or both (red) as the HTM. (b) Statistical performance of 30 double-layer HTM devices. (c and d) Long-term stability test within 1000 s (c) and over 10 h (d) of solar cells with spiro-OMeTAD (black), CuSCN (blue) or both (red) as the HTM. The long-term stability test was conducted under AM 1.5G illumination and the devices were set at the MPP bias. “Spiro” in all figures refers to spiro-OMeTAD. 
Then we studied the stability of the cells under working conditions. The measurement was conducted under AM 1.5G irradiation and the devices were continuously set at the MPP voltage bias. The variation of the normalized PCE versus time is exhibited in Fig. 3c. From the figure, it is obvious that devices with CuSCN have better performance in terms of long-term stability than the spiro-OMeTAD counterparts. And a significant improvement of the long-term stability was observed when the double-layer HTM was used. Fig. 3d shows that the steady-state PCE of devices with spiro-OMeTAD or CuSCN as the HTM decayed below 80% and 85% of the initial value within an hour, respectively. In strong contrast, the double-layer HTM devices maintained 90% of their initial PCE after 10 h of continuous working. The result shows that using a double-layer HTM can achieve long-term stability several times better than applying only spiro-OMeTAD or CuSCN as the HTM. And to our best knowledge, this is the longest long-term stability measurement for PSCs using CuSCN as the HTM under full solar illumination and MPP bias.39
We ascribed the long-term stability improvement of devices with CuSCN compared to devices with spiro-OMeTAD mainly to three reasons. The first reason is the morphology of the HTM layer. Researchers have reported that small pin-holes commonly exist in the spiro-OMeTAD layer, even in the as-prepared samples.27 These pin-holes can allow ions to migrate away from the perovskite into spiro-OMeTAD. In contrast, the CuSCN film had a full-coverage morphology, which can partly prevent this migration. The second reason is the heating effect under constant light illumination. When exposing devices to light for hours, the temperature of the devices will rise markedly. Under this condition, spiro-OMeTAD was more fragile due to its organic nature.3 The last reason may be chemical corrosion. The commonly used dopant 4-TBP in spiro-OMeTAD solution can corrode the perovskite26 and result in a whole device breakdown. Using CuSCN as the HTM can avoid this problem.
We also noticed that when testing the stability of devices with CuSCN, the steady PCE increased slightly for a few minutes and then underwent a long-term decay. One possible explanation for the initial increment may be that light, especially UV light, induced the doping effect in the CuSCN layer.46,48 And the subsequent PCE decrease might be caused by the decomposition of the perovskite and SCN− radical loss in CuSCN with time.46 The SCN− radical loss in CuSCN would damage the electron-blocking ability of CuSCN and lead to PCE decay. Using the double-layer configuration would solve this problem to some extent. After the electron-blocking ability of CuSCN was partly damaged, the spiro-OMeTAD layer would compensate for the electron-blocking ability. So the long-term stability of the double-layer devices is much better than that of devices with CuSCN only.
To further study the reason why the long-term stability was enhanced by the double-layer HTM configuration, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement along with argon ion etching to study the elemental distribution in three types of devices. The first type only had spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM and was transferred into a dark box immediately after preparation, which is denoted as the “fresh-spiro” device. The second type also only used spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM, but it worked under AM 1.5G illumination at the MPP bias for 10 h, which is denoted as the “worked-spiro” device. The last type used the double-layer HTM configuration and worked at the MPP bias for 10 h under AM 1.5G irradiation, which is denoted as the “worked-double” device.
Considering that spiro-OMeTAD contains a great amount of carbon, we regarded nitrogen as a target element to observe methylamine distribution in the device. Nitrogen in the perovskite and in spiro-OMeTAD has different chemical environments, hence different binding energies of the N 1s electron, so we can differentiate them by their peak position in the XPS spectra. To distinguish the nitrogen peak in the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD, XPS measurements of two samples (the bare perovskite film on the TiO2 substrate (denoted as “perovskite”), and the perovskite film with the spiro-OMeTAD film on top of it (denoted as “spiro”)) were performed, and the results of nitrogen peaks are shown in Fig. 4a. In Fig. 4a, the XPS measurement result of the “perovskite” sample is depicted as a red line and the result of the “spiro” sample as a black line. So the nitrogen peaks located at 401.6 eV and 398.6 eV can be attributed to the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD, respectively. It is clear that both the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD film showed well defined nitrogen peaks. For the perovskite film, the only component containing nitrogen is methylamine, so the peak at 401.6 eV can be attributed to methylamine.
 Fig. 4  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of the N 1s peak. (a) XPS spectra of the N 1s peak of the perovskite film (red) and spiro-OMeTAD film (black). (b–d) XPS spectra of the N 1s peak after argon ion etching at the interface between the perovskite layer and spiro-OMeTAD layer of the “fresh-spiro” sample (b) and “worked-spiro” sample (c) and at the interface between the spiro-OMeTAD layer and CuSCN layer of the“worked-double” sample (d). 
Then we applied argon ion etching and XPS measurements to the three types of devices to see if there is any ion migration in the spiro-OMeTAD layer. We focused on the area in the spiro-OMeTAD layer side at the interface between the spiro-OMeTAD layer and perovskite film (“fresh-spiro” and “worked-spiro” samples) or the CuSCN layer (“worked-double” sample), because methylamine would have gradient distribution in the spiro-OMeTAD layer in the vertical direction if it migrated into the spiro-OMeTAD layer and would have maximum content in this area. First, the “fresh-spiro” sample was studied to see whether there is any ion migration in the spiro-OMeTAD layer if the device is not working under light. We utilized 3 kV argon ion beam etching for each sample, and a XPS spectrum was swept after every 1 min etching. To detect the signal in the area we focused on, we stopped etching when a slight Pb element signal was detected (Fig. S3a, ESI†) because now etching reaches the area at the interface between the perovskite film and spiro-OMeTAD layer. And the slight Pb element signal means that after etching, the perovskite film comes out at a very small part of the surface but most of the surface was still covered by the thin spiro-OMeTAD layer, so the XPS spectrum measured here contained a negligible signal from the perovskite layer but consisted of a signal from the area we are interested in. The nitrogen XPS spectrum measured is shown in Fig. 4b. Broad peaks with the center position around 399.7 eV were observed. The peak position agreed with that of the spiro-OMeTAD film, so the peak should originate from nitrogen in spiro-OMeTAD. And the broadening of the peak could be explained by the etching process. During argon ion etching, spiro-OMeTAD molecules would be broken to many fragments under the bombardment of argon ions. And different fragments formed different chemical environments for nitrogen, resulting in different electron binding energies of nitrogen. So the peak broadens around the center energy. Then, the “worked-spiro” sample was studied. Also, a slight Pb element signal was used as a probe (Fig. S3b, ESI†) to find the area we focused on. As shown in Fig. 4c, a peak located around 399.3 eV was also observed, corresponding to the N signal in spiro-OMeTAD. The peak is broadened by the etching process as well. It is worth noting that a peak with a 401.7 eV center position appeared. As deduced before, the peak at 401.6 eV can be attributed to methylamine. To rule out the possibility that the methylamine peak we observed originated from the perovskite layer, we performed quantitative analysis of the XPS spectra of Pb, I and N elements of the “worked-spiro” sample after etching. The curve fitting results are shown in Fig. S4 and Note S1 (ESI†). According to the result, the peak observed in Fig. 4c means that methylamine migrates through the interface between spiro-OMeTAD and the perovskite after the device worked for 10 h under light illumination. This is strong evidence that the methylamine ion migrates into the spiro-OMeTAD layer from the perovskite after device working under AM 1.5G illumination for a long time, leading to a PCE decay in J–V measurements. This phenomenon is not found in fresh samples without working under AM 1.5G illumination. For another main ion in the perovskite, the iodine ion, it also has possibility to migrate into the spiro-OMeTAD layer, but our result shows that the iodine ion hardly moved into the spiro-OMeTAD layer (Note S2, ESI†). Our conclusion here that the main ion that migrates into the spiro-OMeTAD layer is the methylamine ion rather than the iodine ion is in accordance with previous literature.49 Finally, we tested the “worked-double” sample. The signal of the sulphur element was used as a probe this time (Fig. S3c, ESI†) because the area to be located was between the spiro-OMeTAD layer and CuSCN layer. The result can be seen in Fig. 4d. Like in the other two samples, a broad peak at 398.9 eV, originating from spiro-OMeTAD appeared. But no signal was observed beyond 401 eV compared with the “worked-spiro” sample. This phenomenon means that by applying the double-layer HTM configuration, no methylamine migrated into the spiro-OMeTAD layer after the device worked for a long time at the MPP under full sun illumination. This is strong evidence that CuSCN acts as a good blocking layer for ion migration, leading to an improved long-term stability for devices.
Combining the XPS measurement results of all three types of samples, we can propose an explanation for the long-term stability enhancement of double-layer HTM configuration devices. The schematic diagrams are shown in Fig. 5. For the devices that only have spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM, when stored under dark conditions, no obvious change at the interface between spiro-OMeTAD and the perovskite could be seen, as shown by the XPS measurement of the “fresh-spiro” sample. Whereas, when the devices were put under AM 1.5G and work at the MPP bias for a period of time, like the “worked-spiro” sample, an intense peak appeared at 401.7 eV, implying that a number of methylamine radicals migrated from the perovskite film into spiro-OMeTAD layer, as indicated in Fig. 5a. The migration of methylamine mainly has two impacts. On one hand, methylamine moving away from the perovskite would cause film decomposition, degradation of light harvesting ability, and then the long-term stability decay of the entire device. On the other hand, methylamine moving into spiro-OMeTAD would lead to degradation of the HTM and damages the hole transporting ability, and then cause performance decay of the device. For the devices that only have CuSCN as the HTM, polymerization of SCN− radicals will cause hole-selecting ability of the HTM to decrease,46 and then destroy the device performance. But for the devices with the double-layer HTM configuration, when a CuSCN layer was inserted between the perovskite film and spiro-OMeTAD film, no signal of methylamine was detected in the spiro-OMeTAD film during XPS measurement, even after the devices worked for 10 h under full sun illumination at the MPP bias, as observed in the “worked-double” sample. So the CuSCN layer could prevent methylamine from moving into the spiro-OMeTAD film, as shown in Fig. 5b exhibited. This is in accordance with our knowledge that the spiro-OMeTAD layer consists of many organic molecules and the molecules stack loosely in the layer. In contrast, in inorganic materials, such as CuSCN, atoms form lattices and stack densely in lattices. So methylamine can penetrate into the spiro-OMeTAD layer through the gap between molecules, while it is difficult to infiltrate into the gap between atoms in CuSCN. The suppression of methylamine migration by CuSCN would partly protect the perovskite from decomposition. At the same time, as methylamine migration was suppressed by the CuSCN layer, the spiro-OMeTAD layer can sustain its hole-selecting ability for a long time. That is to say, the CuSCN layer protected the spiro-OMeTAD layer and improved its stability. In turn, the hole-selecting ability of the spiro-OMeTAD layer will compensate the hole-selecting ability loss of the CuSCN layer caused by the polymerization of SCN− radicals with time in the long-term stability test.46 Therefore, the long-term stability of double-layer HTM devices was significantly enhanced.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram to show a possible mechanism of long-term stability enhancement. (a) After a long-time power output under full sun illumination, methylamine would migrate into spiro-OMeTAD and cause device degradation for the devices using spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM only. (b) For the double-layer HTM configuration devices, the migration process of methylamine into spiro-OMeTAD during a long-time power output would be suppressed by the CuSCN layer. 
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated that by the double-layer HTM configuration, the long-term stability of PSCs can be evidently improved. Using this method, the devices can sustain over 90% of the initial PCE after working at the MPP bias under AM 1.5G illumination for 10 h. The XPS measurement revealed the underlying reason for the improvement. A main aspect was methylamine migration, which would cause perovskite decomposition and spiro-OMeTAD degradation. When utilizing the double-layer HTM configuration, the methylamine migration was suppressed by the CuSCN layer and the long-term stability was enhanced afterwards. This work provides a novel double-layer HTM configuration for improved long-term stability of PSCs. It highlights the importance of suppressing ion migration for improving the long-term stability of PSCs and the function of CuSCN as an inorganic HTM in blocking ion migration in PSCs for better stability.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 51622201, 61571015, 91433102, 11404009, 51404293) and National 973 projects (2013CB932602, MOST) from the Ministry of Science and Technology, China.
References
T. M. Koh, K. Fu, Y. Fang, S. Chen, T. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 118, 16458–16462 Search PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lee, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn, J. H. Noh, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3974–3977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum and J. E. Moser, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T. Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png, accessed April, 2017.
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Yan, W. Zhou, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, W. Ma, S. Meng, H. Li, J. Wei, R. Fu, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, R. Fu, Y. Leprince-Wang, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fu, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, W. Zhou, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1829–1831 RSC .
Y. Li, J. K. Cooper, W. Liu, C. M. Sutter-Fella, M. Amani, J. W. Beeman, A. Javey, J. W. Ager, Y. Liu and F. M. Toma, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 CAS .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, H. Dong, L. Wang, N. Li, X. Guo, J. Li and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13587–13592 CAS .
Z. Hawash, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, M. V. Lee and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajeswari, M. Mrinalini, S. Prasanthkumar and L. Giribabu, Chem. Rec., 2017, 17, 1–20 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, C. Xue, Y. Li, P. Zhou, W. Liu, J. Zhu, S. Dai, C. Zhu and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28466–28473 CAS .
M. Lv, J. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Shao, Y. Xu and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17482–17488 CAS .
L. Hu, W. Wang, H. Liu, J. Peng, H. Cao, G. Shao, Z. Xia, W. Ma and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 515–518 CAS .
H. Rao, W. Sun, S. Ye, W. Yan, Y. Li, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7800–7805 CAS .
J. A. Christians, R. C. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 136, 758–764 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yu, F. Li, H. Wang, E. Alarousu, Y. Chen, B. Lin, L. Wang, M. N. Hedhili, Y. Li and K. Wu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6173–6179 RSC .
C. Zuo and L. Ding, Small, 2015, 11, 5528–5532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rao, S. Ye, W. Sun, W. Yan, Y. Li, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Z. Bian, Y. Li and C. Huang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Li, S. Ye, H. Rao, W. Yan, H. Peng, Y. Li, Z. Liu, S. Wang and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10806–10813 RSC .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CAS .
S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, H. Peng, Z. Bian, Z. Liu and C. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Yang, M. R. Sohn, S. Do Sung, Y. J. Kim, Y. Yoo, J. Kim and W. I. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 414–421 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful and M. Grätzel, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Jeng, K. C. Chen, T. Y. Chiang, P. Y. Lin, T. D. Tsai, Y. C. Chang, T. F. Guo, P. Chen, T. C. Wen and Y. J. Hsu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4107–4113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, P. Chen, M. Que, Y. Xing, W. Que, C. Niu and J. Shao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3630–3636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. K. Aldibaja, L. Badia, E. Mas-Marzá, R. S. Sánchez, E. M. Barea and I. Mora-Sero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9194–9200 CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber and A. Abate, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kumara, A. Konno, G. Senadeera, P. Jayaweera, D. De Silva and K. Tennakone, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 69, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wijeyasinghe and T. D. Anthopoulos, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2015, 30, 104002 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and D. T. Schwartz, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 1501–1509 CrossRef .
R. Cao, F. Xu, J. Zhu, S. Ge, W. Wang, H. Xu, R. Xu, Y. Wu, Z. Ma and F. Hong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600814 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section for device preparation, SEM images, and XPS measurement results. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta03315jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the double-layer HTM configuration. (b) Top-view scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the perovskite film. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of a complete solar cell with the double-layer HTM architecture. Spiro-OMeTAD is denoted as “spiro” in (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  Relationship between the PCE of the PSCs with CuSCN as the HTM under different (a) chemicals added into the CuSCN solution, (b) annealing temperatures, and (c) annealing times. Each datum and error bar was calculated from 4 individual devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  
J–V and steady-state measurement of the PSCs. (a) J–V characteristics of solar cells with spiro-OMeTAD (black), CuSCN (blue) or both (red) as the HTM. (b) Statistical performance of 30 double-layer HTM devices. (c and d) Long-term stability test within 1000 s (c) and over 10 h (d) of solar cells with spiro-OMeTAD (black), CuSCN (blue) or both (red) as the HTM. The long-term stability test was conducted under AM 1.5G illumination and the devices were set at the MPP bias. “Spiro” in all figures refers to spiro-OMeTAD.	 

 	Fig. 4  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of the N 1s peak. (a) XPS spectra of the N 1s peak of the perovskite film (red) and spiro-OMeTAD film (black). (b–d) XPS spectra of the N 1s peak after argon ion etching at the interface between the perovskite layer and spiro-OMeTAD layer of the “fresh-spiro” sample (b) and “worked-spiro” sample (c) and at the interface between the spiro-OMeTAD layer and CuSCN layer of the“worked-double” sample (d).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram to show a possible mechanism of long-term stability enhancement. (a) After a long-time power output under full sun illumination, methylamine would migrate into spiro-OMeTAD and cause device degradation for the devices using spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM only. (b) For the double-layer HTM configuration devices, the migration process of methylamine into spiro-OMeTAD during a long-time power output would be suppressed by the CuSCN layer.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section for device preparation, SEM images, and XPS measurement results. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta03315j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
