Live wires: direct extracellular electron exchange for bioenergy and the bioremediation of energy-related contamination  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE02229F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE02229F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4896-4906Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLive wires: direct extracellular electron exchange for bioenergy and the bioremediation of energy-related contamination

        
          
            Derek R. 
            Lovley
          
        
      *
      Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. E-mail: dlovley@microbio.umass.edu
Received 
      27th July 2011
    , Accepted 7th October 2011First published on 28th October 2011AbstractMicroorganisms that can form direct electrical connections with insoluble minerals, electrodes, or other microorganisms can play an important role in some traditional as well as novel bioenergy strategies and can be helpful in the remediation of environmental contamination resulting from the use of more traditional energy sources. The surprising discovery that microorganisms in the genus Geobacter are capable of forming highly conductive networks of filaments that transfer electrons along their length with organic metallic-like conductivity, rather than traditional molecule to molecule electron exchange, provides an explanation for the ability of Geobacter species to grow in subsurface environments with insoluble Fe(III) oxides as the electron acceptor, and effectively remediate groundwater contaminated with hydrocarbon fuels or uranium and similar contaminants associated with the mining and processing of nuclear fuel. A similar organic metallic-like conductivity may be an important mechanism for microorganisms to exchange electrons in syntrophic associations, such as those responsible for the conversion of organic wastes to methane in anaerobic digesters, a proven bioenergy technology. Biofilms with conductivities rivaling those of synthetic polymers help Geobacter species generate the high current densities in microbial fuel cells producing electric current from organic compounds. Electron transfer in the reverse direction, i.e. from electrodes to microbes, is the basis for microbial electrosynthesis, in which microorganisms reduce carbon dioxide to fuels and other useful organic compounds with solar energy in a form of artificial photosynthesis that is more efficient and avoids many of the environmental sustainability concerns associated with biomass-based bioenergy strategies. The ability of Geobacter species to produce highly conductive electronic networks that function in water opens new possibilities in the emerging field of bioelectronics.

Broader context
Novel biological processes are a potential source of solutions for the need for new, sustainable energy strategies and the necessity of dealing with the legacy of environmental contamination associated with more traditional energy sources. The genomes of the microbial world encode a vast metabolic potential, which for the most part is poorly understood, but may provide some help for energy needs. This perspective gives a quick primer on the basic principles of direct extracellular electron transfer, a relatively recently discovered form of microbial respiration, and summarizes how continuing developments in the study of this one form of microbial respiration has led to a number of new concepts for bioenergy and the restoration of environments contaminated as the result of energy-related activities.

Introduction
Direct extracellular electron transfer (DEET), one of the most recently discovered forms of microbial respiration, offers the possibility of novel bioenergy strategies as well as cost-effective, sustainable approaches for the remediation of environments contaminated in the extraction, transportation, or use of fossil and nuclear fuels. In DEET, microorganisms form direct electrical connections with insoluble materials that can either accept or donate electrons. Common examples are Fe(III) oxides, electrodes, and even other microorganisms.
It is well known that microorganisms capable of DEET have a major impact on the natural cycling of carbon, metals, and nutrients1,2 and this topic will not be reviewed here. Rather, the focus is on surprising new information on how DEET is possible and new concepts for the application of DEET to bioenergy and the restoration of environments contaminated as the result of energy practices.
Distinguishing DEET from other forms of microbial respiration

        DEET requires unique physiological adaptations, which make it feasible for microorganisms to establish direct electrical connections with extracellular electron acceptors. DEET is fundamentally different than most other commonly considered forms of microbial respiration, such as reduction of oxygen, nitrate, sulfate, or carbon dioxide, in which the electron acceptors enter the cell and are reduced internally. DEET, by definition, requires that microorganisms transfer electrons outside the cell in order to reduce them.
An equally important distinction, is the significant difference between microorganisms that transfer electrons onto insoluble extracellular electron acceptors with DEET and microorganisms that produce soluble electron shuttles to transfer electrons to those electron acceptors. For example, Shewanella species are the most intensively microorganisms capable of reducing insoluble Fe(III) oxides or transferring electrons onto electrodes.3,4 However, Shewanella species release soluble molecules that shuttle electrons between the outer cell surface and Fe(III) oxides5–7 or electrodes.8–10 Although it has been suggested that Shewanella oniedensis can also make direct electrical contact with extracellular electron acceptorsvia conductive filaments,11,12 multiple lines of evidence have indicated that this is unlikely, as detailed below. Elegant studies have demonstrated how S. oniedensis can transfer electrons to the outer surface of the cell to the multi-heme cytochrome MtrC,13,14 but MtrC is a flavin reductase15 and requires flavin to reduce insoluble Fe(III) oxide at physiologically relevant rates.16
The difference between DEET and reductionvia an electron shuttle has important ecological consequences. It is frequently stated that Shewanella species play an important role in Fe(III) reduction and bioremediation in soils and sediments, but, to my knowledge there is not a single example where this has actually been shown to be the case. Molecular studies that avoid culture bias have repeatedly demonstrated that Shewanella species are not abundant in environments in which Fe(III) reduction is important and Shewanella species are not abundant when Fe(III) reducing microorganisms are stimulated to promote the reduction of organic or metal contaminants.2,17,18 Although many factors may influence which Fe(III) reducers predominate in soils and sediments,19 the necessity to produce an electron shuttle that may be lost from the cell may be a metabolic burden that lowers competitiveness in open environments.6,20 In a similar manner, Shewanella species are rarely detected on anodes in which a complex community serves as the inoculum for harvesting electricity.21 The elegance of studies on Shewanellaextracellular electron transport are without question. However, DEET and electron transfervia a shuttle are fundamentally different mechanisms and investigations whose ultimate purpose is to understand the mechanisms of metal reduction in subsurface environments or current production from organic wastes might more productively focus on other organisms.
It is likely that there are many microorganisms that are capable of DEET. However, to date, Geobacter species are the only microbes clearly demonstrated to rely on DEET to conserve energy for anaerobic growth that are also genetically tractable. Geobacter species are frequently numerically abundant organisms in soils and sediments and on the surface of electrodes where DEET is important,18,21 which suggests that they are environmentally significant agents of DEET. Unfortunately, Geobacter species are studied in few laboratories. Thus, this review of DEET and its energy and environmental impacts is strongly weighted with references from the author's laboratory.
Insoluble electron acceptors

        Fe(III) is the most abundant electron acceptor available for DEET in soils and sediments. When soils and sediments become waterlogged, oxygen is rapidly depleted and Fe(III) is typically the most abundant potential electron acceptor for microbial respiration.1,22Fe(III) is very poorly soluble at circumneutral pH, and is found as various Fe(III) oxides and other minerals, such as clays.23

        Mn(IV)
        oxides are second to Fe(III) in abundance as extracellular electron acceptors in many soils and sediments and may provide about 10% of the electron-accepting capacity of Fe(III) in these environments. The total electron flow to Fe(III) and Mn(IV) is based not only on the amount of Fe(III) and Mn(IV) in the environment, but also the extent to which the Fe(II) and Mn(II) produced from Fe(III) and Mn(IV) reduction are recycled back to Fe(III) and Mn(IV) (ref. 23,24, and references therein).
Humic substances are large complex, poorly defined organic compounds, which are often the most abundant form of organic matter in soils. Quinone moieties in humic substances can serve as electron acceptors for microbial respiration.25–28 Although initial studies focused on microbial reduction of soluble humic substances for technical simplicity, insoluble humic substances can also serve as electron acceptors.28 The importance of humic substances as electron acceptors in soils and sediments is difficult to quantify, but could be significant in some environments.6,28–30 One reason for this is that the reduced hydroquinone state of humic substances can abiotically react with Fe(III), reducing it to Fe(II) and regenerating the oxidized form of the humic substance. The addition of humic substances or humic substances analogs, such as anthraquione-2,6-disulfonate, can greatly accelerate the rate of Fe(III) reduction, suggesting that humic substances may be more accessible for microbial reduction than Fe(III) oxides, especially when they are soluble. Therefore, even if the total amount of reactive humic substances is low, a significant amount of electron flow may proceed through humic substances due to continuous recycling of the humics pool.
Other microorganisms may function as extracellular electron acceptors, through a process known as direct interspecies electron transfer (DIET). Initial evidence for DIET was seen in a co-culture of Geobacter metallireducens and Geobacter sulfurreducens.31 When grown under conditions that required the two species to exchange electrons in order to metabolize the ethanol that was provided as a substrate, the co-culture evolved over time to produce large (1–2 mm diameter) dual-species aggregates. Multiple lines of evidence ruled out the possibility that the two species were exchanging electrons via the well-known process of interspecies hydrogen transfer,32,33 in which one partner microorganism in the syntrophy disposes of electrons by reducing protons to hydrogen gas and the other partner oxidizes the hydrogen gas. DIET is expected to conserve more energy for microorganisms exchanging electrons than interspecies hydrogen transfer because it eliminates the multiple enzymatic steps necessary to first produce hydrogen and then consume it.34
Some microorganisms have the capacity to directly exchange electrons with electrodes.35–37 By convention, an electrode serving as an electron acceptor for microbial metabolism is referred to as an anode. Electron flux from the anode to a cathode, typically through metallic wire connection, yields an electrical current in what is commonly referred to as a microbial fuel cell.
Almost every review of microbe-electrode interactions points out that the ability to produce small amounts of electric current with microorganisms has been known for over 100 years. A major paradigm shift in microbe-electrode interactions was the relatively recent discovery that microorganisms could conserve energy to support their growth by completely oxidizing organic compounds to carbon dioxide with direct electron transfer to electrodes.38–40 One reason that this was an important distinction was that it demonstrated for the first time that organic compounds could be converted to electricity with high columbic efficiency. In previous studies the organic compounds were only partially metabolized leaving most of the electrons available in the initial substrate in organic products, rather than harvesting the electrons as current. The capacity for energy conservation from electron transfer to electrodes is also important because it makes current-producing microbial systems self-sustaining and thus robust.
When electrodes are poised at low electron potentials they can serve as electron donors for microbial respiration.41–43 In this instance the electrode is acting as a cathode. This form of respiration was first observed in Geobacter species using nitrate,44fumarate,44U(VI),45 or chlorinated compounds46 as an electron acceptor. A diversity of microorganisms may be capable of this process with a wide range of electron acceptors,41–43 but in most instances the microbiology has not been studied in sufficient detail to determine whether there is a direct exchange of electrons between the electrode and the cells.42
Mechanisms for DEET
Direct electron transfer to Fe(III) oxides
The finding that Geobacter species are often abundant constituents of environments in which Fe(III) reduction is an important process,18 coupled with the availability of a genetic system for Geobacter sulfurreducens47 established G. sulfurreducens as the initial organism of choice for developing a preliminary model for DEET to Fe(III). Gene deletion studies have identified a number of proteins that are essential for Fe(III) oxide reduction, but the model for Fe(III) reduction is far from complete.
The terminal step in the pathway appears to be electron transfer from the multi-heme, c-type cytochrome, OmcS48 to Fe(III) oxide. OmcS is required for Fe(III) oxide reduction49 and is specifically localized along the pili of G. sulfurreducens,50 which are also required for Fe(III) oxide reduction.51 The pili are 3–5 nm in diameter, typically 10–20 μm long, and are electrically conductive,51,52 and thus are also referred to as ‘microbial nanowires’. The simplest explanation for these observations is that the pili deliver the electrons to OmcS which transfers electrons to Fe(III). The fact that cells that produce pili, but not OmcS, do not reduce Fe(III) oxide suggests that there is a barrier to direct electron transfer from the pili to Fe(III) oxide.
Recent studies have revealed that electron conduction along the length of the pili of Geobacter sulfurreducens is similar to the metallic-like conductivity observed with some synthetic organic polymers.52 In other words, electron conduction along the length of the pili is through conjugated π orbitals of pilin constituents, presumably aromatic amino acids. This mechanism for long-range electron transport is a paradigm shift in biology because, in the previously known mechanisms for biological electron transfer, electrons are always associated with a specific molecule and move from molecule to molecule via tunneling or hopping over short distances. In fact, the initial suggestion that electrons could be transferred along Geobacter pili51 was met with significant criticism because a mechanism for electron conduction along a protein filament was not immediately apparent.3 However, multiple lines of evidence including: electrochemical gating studies; the temperature dependence of conductance; the pH dependence of conductance; and preliminary structural studies; suggest that electron transfer along pili is an organic metallic-like conduction, which might be attributed to π–π interchain stacking between aromatic amino acids conferring conductivity along the length of the pili.
The data demonstrating metallic-like conductivity along the pili rules out electron hopping between OmcS as the mechanism for long-range conduction along the pili. Additional evidence consistent with this conclusion is that the spacing between the OmcS molecules is too great for cytochrome-to-cytochrome electron transfer,50 a conclusion subsequently confirmed with atomic force microscopy (N. Malvankar, unpublished data). Furthermore, denaturing cytochromes does not impact electron conduction along the pili.52 Therefore, the proposed role of OmcS is to facilitate electron transfer from the pili to Fe(III) oxides (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Hypothesized electron transfer to Fe(III) oxides along conductive pili with the c-type cytochrome OmcS mediating electron transfer from pili to Fe(III) oxide. The actual electron transfer pathway may be much more complex and require additional proteins. 
This model for metallic-like electron transfer along the pili of Geobacter contrasts with the model that cytochromes are responsible for electron transport along conductive filaments of Shewanella oneidensis.11,12 However, as previously reviewed,3,53 there are serious criticisms of this cytochrome model, not the least of which is that the cytochromes important in extracellular electron transfer in S. oneidensis may not even be localized on the filaments that have been proposed to be conductive. Furthermore, packing of cytochromes close enough to promote electron transfer along the length of the filaments seems unlikely. Genetically removing the capacity for pilin production, and other experimental approaches, suggest that S. oneidensispili do not play an important role in extracellular electron transfer.9,54,55 Other structures associated with S. oneidensis that were previously identified as protein filaments are now thought to polysaccharide artifacts of sample preparation.56
Additional evidence for the importance of pili in Fe(III) oxide reduction in Geobacter species was the finding that adaptive evolution for enhanced Fe(III) oxide reduction by G. sulfurreducens selected for a mutation that enhanced the expression of PilA, the structural pilin protein.57 Furthermore, a strain that was selected for enhanced current production, which also had significantly greater pilin production,58 was also a superior Fe(III) oxide reducer (unpublished data).
An alternative model for extracellular electron transfer in G. sulfurreducens that does not invoke pili is that a polysaccharide matrix outside the cell is the primary location of electron transfer.59 However, this model does not account for the finding that the predominant c-type cytochrome in the extracellular matrix is OmcZ,59 which is not required for Fe(III) oxide reduction.60 OmcS, which is required for Fe(III) oxide reduction, is not found within the matrix.
One mystery is how electrons get transferred to the pili. Given the importance of the outer-surface cytochrome OmcB in electron transfer to Fe(III) oxide, one speculation is that this takes place at the outer cell surface. There are a number of additional c-type cytochromes and other putatively redox active proteins associated with the outer surface of the cell that could conceivably facilitate this transfer.49,61–64 Abundant periplasmic c-type cytochromes,65–67 may shuttle electrons from the inner membrane to the outer membrane or conceivably could transfer electrons to the base of the pili within the cell.
In soils and sediments, the insoluble Fe(III) that is available for microbial reduction is expected to be heterogeneously dispersed. The specific expression of flagella during growth on Fe(III) oxide, but not soluble Fe(III)-citrate, as well as apparent chemotaxis to Fe(II) led to the suggestion that Geobacter species remain motile during active Fe(III) reduction in order to hunt for new sources of Fe(III).68Geobacter species are readily collected from groundwater in subsurface environments in which there is rapid Fe(III) reduction69 and are predominately planktonic when rates of Fe(III) reduction are the highest in the subsurface. Furthermore, recent genetic studies have demonstrated that the presence of flagella greatly enhances Fe(III) reduction in subsurface sediments.70
In the planktonic state Geobacter species have less access to Fe(III), but their abundant c-type cytochromes may function as capacitors, storing electrons and permitting cells to continue to transfer electrons across the inner membrane.53,71 Once a new source of Fe(III) is found, the electrons stored in the cytochromes can be discharged.
There are still many aspects of Geobacter extracellular electron transfer that are not known. However, the current information makes it possible to envision how Geobacter species might function in the subsurface.
Direct electron transfer to electrodes

G. sulfurreducens is the only microorganism capable of producing high current densities with direct electron transfer to electrodes in which the mechanisms for electron transfer to electrodes have been investigated. The capacity of G. sulfurreducens to transfer electrons to electrodes is not impacted by the exchange of the medium within the anode chamber, which would remove any soluble molecules potentially involved in extracellular electron exchange39 and electrochemical analyses suggest that G. sulfurreducens establishes direct electrical contact with electrodes.72–78 The mechanisms for electron transfer to electrodes by G. sulfurreducens are of special interest because this organism produces the highest current densities of known pure cultures58,79 and because microorganisms closely related to G. sulfurreducens are frequently enriched when electrodes are used to harvest electricity from mixed communities.21,35–37
Although Fe(III) oxides and electrodes are both extracellular electron acceptors, the surface of an electrode and a soil containing heterogeneously dispersed Fe(III) are significantly different. Most importantly, an electrode can serve as a permanent electron sink whereas Fe(III) at any particular site will eventually be depleted. During active current production Geobacter species form thick (>50 μm) biofilms strongly attached to electrode surfaces.80–82 In contrast, as noted above, Geobacter species are primarily planktonic during active reduction of insoluble Fe(III). Therefore, the components involved in electron transfer to electrodes and insoluble Fe(III) may be the same, but function somewhat differently (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Model for electron transfer through anode biofilms of Geobacter sulfurreducens. OmcS, which is abundant in cells growing on Fe(III) oxide or in syntrophic cultures, is not as abundant in anode biofilms. The c-type cytochrome OmcZ is abundant and localized near the anode surface, it is not closely associated with cells or pili. Electrons released from cells move through the conductive biofilm matrix via conductive pili. OmcZ is hypothesized to facilitate electron transfer from the biofilm matrix to the anode in a manner similar to OmcS facilitating electron transfer from pili to Fe(III) oxide. 

G. sulfurreducens requires its conductive pili for optimal current production. A mutant strain that can not produce pili can not reduce Fe(III) oxide,51 but can still produce current, although at much lower levels than wild-type.60,80 This is associated with much thinner biofilms of the mutant in which only the cells in close association with the electrode surface appear to be metabolically active. The pilA-deficient mutant is still able to produce thick biofilms when fumarate, an alternative electron acceptor, is provided,60 suggesting that the potential structural role of the pili83 is not an important consideration. Additional evidence for the importance of pili in electron transfer was the finding that selective pressure for enhanced current production yielded a strain of G. sulfurreducens with greater pilin production.58
It appears that the pili of G. sulfurreducens provide a conductive network through anode biofilms, which have conductivities rivaling those of synthetic organic conductive polymers.52 There is a strong correspondence between biofilm conductance and the abundance of PilA protein in the biofilms of different strains of G. sulfurreducens and the biofilms have an organic metallic-like conductance that is similar to that of the pili.52 Facile electron conduction through the biofilms makes it feasible for even cells at substantial distance from the electrode to oxidize organic compounds and donate electrons to the conductive biofilm matrix and eventually to the electrode.52,60,80,81
Other important components for electron transfer to electrodes by G. sulfurreducens include the c-type cytochrome OmcZ (Fig. 2) and possibly other outer surface c-type cytochromes.74,76–78,84,85 OmcZ is a multi-heme cytochrome,86 which is not required for Fe(III) oxide reduction,60 but is highly expressed in current-producing biofilms and is required for optimal current production.60,75 Immunogold labeling studies have revealed that OmcZ is located outside the cell and in electrode biofilms OmcZ accumulates at the biofilm-electrode interface. These results have led to the suggestion that OmcZ functions as an “eletrochemical gate” facilitating electron transfer between the biofilm and the anode.87
Unfortunately, there has been little investigation of the mechanisms for electron transfer to electrodes in other microorganisms that are known to directly transfer electrons. A preliminary study with Geobacter metallireducens did demonstrate that pilin were necessary for significant current production in this species as well.70

          Gene expression and deletion studies with G. sulfurreducens suggested that the pathway for electrons transfer from electrodes to cells was different than electron transfer from cells to an electrode. Genes for components such as pili and OmcZ, that are essential for current production, and highly upregulated in current-producing biofilms,60 were not upregulated in current-consuming cells.88 Furthermore, deletion of these genes, which greatly inhibits current production, did not inhibit current consumption. In contrast, deleting a gene for a putative c-type cytochrome that was highly upregulated in current-consuming cells inhibited current consumption, but had no impact on current production.88
Direct interspecies electron transfer
Mechanisms for direct interspecies electron transfer have, as yet, only been studied in the co-culture of G. metallireducens and G. sulfurreducens described above. Sequencing the genomic DNA of the aggregates that the two Geobacter species formed as they adapted for rapid syntrophic ethanol metabolism revealed a single base pair mutation in G. sulfurreducens, which inactivated the regulatory genepilR.31 One impact of the inactivation of pilR is an increased expression of the pilin-associated cytochrome, OmcS,89 which was much more abundant in the aggregates than in wild-type cultures of G. sulfurreducens.31 Initiating co-cultures with a strain of G. sulfurreducens in which pilR had been deleted accelerated aggregate formation and ethanol metabolism. Attempts to initiate co-cultures with strains of G. sulfurreducens in which the gene for OmcS or PilA were deleted were unsuccessful.
These results, coupled with the finding that hydrogen or formate did not appear to be involved in electron exchange between the two species, suggested that selective pressure for rapid ethanol metabolism favored the formation of aggregates that could directly exchange electrons through a conductive matrix, rather than producing hydrogen or formate to function as an electron shuttle between the microorganisms. Further evidence for this was the finding that the aggregates were electrically conductive.31
There are still many questions about the mechanisms of electron exchange within the Geobacter co-culture, which may be better addressed now that methods for genetic manipulation of G. metallireducens have been developed.70 However, the current model (Fig. 3A) is that, much like direct electron transfer to electrodes, the pili of G. sulfurreducens, and presumably G. metallireducens, form a conductive matrix within the aggregates and cytochromes associated with the pili, and possibly the outer surface of the cells, facilitate electron transfer to and from the pili and cells.
 Fig. 3  Models for interspecies electron transfer. A. Interspecies electron transfer between Geobacter species. Multiple lines of experimental evidence suggest that OmcS and pili are important for the electron exchange and thus OmcS is hypothesized to make electrical contacts with as yet unknown cytochromes of G. metallireducens or conductive pili. B. Electron transfer in conductive methanogenic aggregates. Geobacter species (orange), and possibly other syntrophic bacteria, are hypothesized to contribute to aggregate conductivity with conductive pili, but the mechanisms by which methanogens (blue) can consume the electrons have yet to be determined. 
Role of DEET in energy supply and energy-related environmental concerns
The number of ways in which direct extracellular electron transfer (DEET) is known to impact on either the production of bioenergy or in dealing with the legacy of environmental degradation associated with fuel use continues to grow. Various aspects are described below, in rough order of the maturity of understanding of the topic.
Anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation
An environmental consequence of heavy reliance on fossil fuels is the widespread groundwater contamination associated with fuel spills and leaking storage tanks. The contaminants of greatest concern are BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzenes, and xylenes). These monoaromatic hydrocarbons are not only toxic, but also relatively water-soluble and thus can readily spread in water supplies. Anaerobic oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons coupled to the reduction of the Fe(III) naturally present in the subsurface takes place without prompting from humans, and can be an important mechanism limiting the spread of BTEX contamination.90–94
Furthermore, it is possible to stimulate this process by facilitating electron transfer to Fe(III). This can be accomplished with the addition of chelators that solubilize Fe(III), making the Fe(III) more accessible.95,96 An alternative is to promote electron transfer to insoluble Fe(III) by amending groundwater with humic substances or other electron shuttles.25 With either of these techniques, even benzene, which is generally regarded as the monoaromatic hydrocarbon most difficult to degrade under anaerobic conditions, can be rapidly degraded. The degradation of the gasoline additive methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) was stimulated with a similar strategy.97
An alternative strategy for accelerating the degradation of BTEX and other organic contaminants in the anaerobic subsurface is to provide electrodes as an electron acceptor.98 Aromatic hydrocarbons were anaerobically oxidized with a graphite electrode as the sole electron acceptor, under defined conditions with G. metallireducens, as well as with mixed microbial communities in sediments. The graphite electrodes adsorbed the aromatic hydrocarbons prior to degradation.98 Thus, an advantage of graphite electrodes as an electron acceptor amendment is that they concentrate the contaminants, the degradative microorganisms, and the electron acceptor at the same location. Fe(III) or other electron acceptors that could be added to the subsurface require constant replenishment, but graphite electrodes are a permanent source of electron-accepting capacity. Subsurface microorganisms are capable of transferring electrons to a graphite anode even when the cathode is placed meters above, in the aerobic zone of the subsurface.99 When it is feasible to extend the system so that it is exposed to the atmosphere, a hollow system that delivers air along the length of a tubular microbial fuel cell may be effective.100
An even simpler possibility is to employ a single conductive rod positioned so that it spans the anaerobic and aerobic zones and can function as both the anode and cathode.101 Such so-called microbial “electrochemical snorkels”101 were initially developed for wastewater treatment, but we are developing “subsurface snorkels” which could be an effective strategy for remediating hydrocarbon-contaminated soils and sediments. In this application a conductive material could be driven into the contaminated environment. Microorganisms can colonize the segment in the anaerobic, contaminated zone, oxidizing the benzene and other contaminants (Fig. 4). Electrons will flow through the conductive material to the portion exposed to the aerobic environment where electrons can be transferred to oxygen. When the anode portion is graphite or a similar adsorptive conductive material this will result in the desired co-localization of contaminants, microbes, and electron acceptor. Once installed such a system could be a low-cost, low-maintenance strategy to remove groundwater contaminants. Similar systems should be effective in contaminated aquatic sediments and helpful for enhancing waste removal in constructed wetlands. They could be a useful strategy for preventing methane emissions from landfills or wetlands, diverting carbon and electron flow to the subsurface snorkels and thus away from methane production. The general increase in redox potential associated with electron transfer to electrodes may mitigate other environmental concerns such as the production of sulfide and mercury methylation102 and might improve the cultivation of crops such as rice.
 Fig. 4  Subsurface snorkel for stimulating bioremediation of organic contaminants. Organic contaminants are oxidized at the anodic portion of the conductive graphite rod with electron transfer through the rod to aerobic water where electrons can reduce oxygen to form water. The subsurface snorkel functions in a manner similar to a benthic microbial fuel cell with the exception that there is no attempt to harvest current from the electron transfer. 
In order to optimize strategies for the remediation of BTEX contamination with subsurface snorkels or Fe(III) reduction, it will be important to better understand the mechanisms for benzene activation in those organisms that predominate in the environments of interest. Molecular analysis of environments in which BTEX was being degraded with the reduction of Fe(III) have found that Geobacter species were the predominant Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms.90–94 There are a number of Geobacter species available in pure culture capable of degrading aromatic compounds.103–105 To date aromatics metabolism in Geobacter species has primarily been studied in G. metallireducens106 and the recent development of a genetic system in this organism70 and the discovery that G. metallireducens is capable of anaerobic benzene degradation,107 suggests that this may be the Geobacter species of choice for further studies of the physiology of anaerobic benzene degradation.
Another aspect of anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation of importance to energy concerns is the potential for some microorganisms to anaerobically oxidize components of hydrocarbon deposits, degrading the quality of the reservoir. It is generally considered that the heating of deposits to 80–90 °C associated with deep burial kills hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms, sterilizing the deposits.108 However, it was recently found that Ferroglobus placidus anaerobically oxidizes a diversity of straight-chain and branched alkanes, as well as aromatic hydrocarbons with the reduction of Fe(III) at temperatures as high as 94 °C.109,110 Therefore, further investigation of the mechanisms controlling microbial degradation of petroleum hydrocarbon deposits is warranted.

          DEET role in dealing with the legacy of the nuclear fuel cycle
Radionuclides are released as contaminants from a wide diversity of energy-related processes including burning of coal and oil and gas exploration as well as activities more directly associated with the mining, processing, and utilization of nuclear materials.111 The conversion of oxidized forms of radionuclides to less soluble reduced forms is a promising bioremediation strategy for both in situ and ex situ approaches. Most investigation has focused on microbial reduction of U(VI), which will be briefly summarized here as an example. Please see other reviews for more extensive coverage of microbial reduction of a wider diversity of radionuclides.111–113
Many microorganisms that can reduce Fe(III) can also reduce soluble U(VI) to the much less soluble U(IV).111,114 Prior to the discovery of microbial U(VI) reduction,115–117 it was generally considered that reduction of U(VI) in sedimentary environments was primarily an abiotic process. However, evaluation of the possibility of U(VI) reduction by likely abiotic reductants, such as Fe(II) or sulfide, has indicated that such abiotic reduction is unlikely under conditions typically found in subsurface environments. Uranium ores, such as roll-front deposits, are thought to form from the reductive precipitation of uranium. Thus, it seems possible that microorganisms that carry out DEET are responsible for those ores.118
The much more intensively studied aspect of microbial U(VI) reduction is the possibility of stimulating the activity of U(VI)-reducing microorganisms to prevent the migration of uranium in contaminated ground water.114 One potential strategy for this is to feed microorganisms electrons with an electrode.45 However, the more commonly considered alternative is to provide organic electron donors to enhance the growth of metal-reducing microorganisms.114 Microbial growth can primarily be attributed to the reduction of Fe(III), or sulfate once Fe(III) is depleted, because even in uranium-contaminated environments the amount of uranium that is available as an electron acceptor is typically quite low (<100 μM).118 There are many considerations that may influence the effectiveness of in situuranium bioremediation, which are often site-specific and will not be discussed in detail here.
Different organic amendments appear to stimulate the growth of different U(VI)-reducing microorganisms and which microorganisms emerge during in situuranium bioremediation may also be influenced by geochemical or other environmental conditions. For example, acetate additions at a former uranium-mining site in Rifle, CO have consistently resulted in significant enrichments of Geobacter species, which can account for over 90% of the microorganisms in the groundwater during the height of bioremediation.64,69,119 This predominance of Geobacter species, and the known ability of Geobacter species to reduce U(VI), suggests that Geobacter species are the agents for U(VI) reduction. However, given the low concentrations of U(VI) (<10 μM) in the groundwater, it is conceivable that some microorganisms at a very low abundance could be responsible for U(VI) removal. At other sites U(VI)-reducing microorganisms such as Anaeromyxobacter, Desulfovibrio, and Desulfosporosinus as well as Geobacter species, are abundant during in situuranium bioremediation.120–122
Microbial U(VI) reduction may be a fortuitous process given that U(VI) concentrations in natural environments are very low and there is little incentive for microorganisms to evolve specific mechanisms for U(VI) reduction in order to enhance their growth. Many Fe(III)- and sulfate-reducing microorganisms contain c-type cytochromes, which can readily reduce U(VI)in vitro.123Gene deletion studies have implicated c-type cytochromes either on the outer surface of the cells124,125 or in the periplasm126 in U(VI) reduction.111
Production of electricity from organic wastes with DEET
Microbial fuel cells are the application of DEET to the bioenergy field for which there have been by far the most publications in the last decade. These publications have been reviewed on a regular basis (see for example37,127–130) and will not be comprehensively reviewed here.
It is a relatively simple matter to produce small amounts of electric current from organic wastes with a microbial fuel cell, which makes it a very popular science fair project. The often-stated driver for more sophisticated microbial fuel cell research is large-scale conversion of wastes to electricity. Unfortunately, the inability to generate high current densities under conditions that could be scaled to the large volumes necessary for waste water treatment has raised doubts whether this goal is practical.129,131,132 The economics of wastewater treatment with microbe-electrode interactions could be improved with the production of valuable products at the cathode such as hydrogen, caustic soda, or peroxide133 but these applications will also require that the scaling issue be resolved.
The short-term application of microbial fuel cells appears to be in localized production of small amounts of power. For example, benthic microbial fuel cells harvest electrical power from marine sediments and may be used to power underwater electronic devices, eliminating the expense and technical difficulty of continuous replacement of traditional batteries.134–136 The anode is buried in the sediment and is colonized by microorganisms that can oxidize electron donors in the sediment with electron transfer to the anode. In organic-rich sediments this may be members of the Geobacteraceae family38,137 or other organisms.138Sulfide can be an important electron donor in sulfide-rich sediments. The abiotic oxidation of sulfide to elemental sulfur can provide some electrons, and then microorganisms such as Desulfobulbus,139 can oxidize the elemental sulfur to sulfate, increasing the current contribution from sulfide. Other near term applications of microbial fuel cells are likely to be autonomous robots140 and sensors.141
Producing fuels and other desirable chemicals with DEET
The ability of microorganisms to accept electrons from electrodes as an electron donor offers the possibility of converting electrical energy to other energy forms. This may be an attractive option when electricity is derived from renewable, but intermittent technologies such as solar and wind. One solution to storing electrical energy is to capture the energy in covalent chemical bonds,142 preferably in chemicals that can be stored, distributed, and utilized within the existing infrastructure.
Microbial electrosynthesis is one possibility for such an energy conversion. As originally defined143 microbial electrosynthesis is the process in which microorganisms use electrons provided with electrodes to reduce carbon dioxide to organic products that are then released from the cells.42,143,144 A diversity of acetogenic microorganisms were used to generate acetate in proof-of-concept studies, but diversion of the central intermediate, acetyl-CoA, to the production of other more valuable products should readily be feasible with genetic engineering. For example, acetyl-CoA can be converted to butanol, which is an attractive transportation fuel because it can be stored and distributed within the existing fossil fuel infrastructure and can be combusted in automobile engines designed to combust gasoline without engine modification.
If microbial electrosynthesis can be scaled up it may prove to have advantages over biomass-based strategies for the production of fuels and other useful organic chemicals. When powered with solar energy microbial electrosynthesis is essentially an artificial form of photosynthesis with the same net overall reaction as plant-based photosynthesis in which solar energy powers the conversion of carbon dioxide and water to organic compounds with oxygen as a byproduct. However, as previously discussed in detail,42,143,144 microbial electrosynthesis is expected to be more efficient than biomass-based strategies because microbial electrosynthesis: 1) offers much greater efficiencies in harvesting solar energy; 2) directs energy inputs to the production of desired organic products rather than generating biomass, eliminating the further energy inputs and waste generatation associated with processing biomass; and 3) avoids the substantial energy inputs of fertilization and cropping associated with biomass production. Furthermore, microbial electrosynthesis is expected to be more environmentally sustainable than biomass-based approaches. Growing plants of any kind requires arable land and potentially removes biomass from the food supply. Intensive agriculture consumes significant water resources and pollutes water with nutrients. Converting biomass to fuels can also consume large quantities of water. In contrast, microbial electrosynthesis is possible anywhere the sun shines (or wind or geothermal energy is available), will not divert resources from the food supply, and can be run as a continuous closed system, consuming little water. However, much research is required before microbial electrosynthesis can become a practical large-scale process.
Alternatives to electrosynthesis of liquid transportation fuels include microbial reduction of carbon dioxide to methane145,146 or microorganisms catalyzing the reduction of protons to hydrogen.147–149Geobacter sulfurreducens is the only pure culture yet found to catalyze hydrogen production with a cathode as the sole electron donor150 and provides a genetically tractable model organism with which to study and potentially optimize this process further.
Another possibility for exploiting microbe-electrode interactions for production of fuels and other desirable organic chemicals is to use an electrode to alter the endproducts of metabolism. For example, providing an electrode as an electron acceptor made it feasible for a genetically engineered strain of Shewanella oneidensis to convert glycerol, a waste product of biodiesel production, to ethanol.151Electron transfer to the electrode consumed the two electrons that needed to be disposed of to make this reaction feasible. Reduction of organic acids to alcohols that can serve as fuels with electrodes serving as a cathode is another alternative.133
Potential role of DEET in converting wastes to methane
The conversion of organic wastes to methane in upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactors and related systems is one of the most mature and effective bioenergy technologies.132,152 Like many other methanogenic environments, the degradation of complex mixtures of organic matter in anaerobic digestors requires an effective exchange of electrons between the microorganisms that degrade fatty acids and alcohols to acetate and the methanogens that can consume the electrons released in this metabolism.32,33 It has generally been considered that hydrogen or formate function as the interspecies electron carriers and there are many defined, multispecies co-cultures in which this is the case.32,33 However, it is difficult to track hydrogen and formate metabolism within the more complex aggregates of cells that form in methanogenic digestors.
Recent evidence suggests that direct interspecies electron transfer (DIET) is a likely alternative, at least in some UASB aggregates.153 Aggregates from a UASB reactor treating brewery waste were electrically conductive, in a manner similar to the aggregates, discussed above, that G. metallireducens and G. sulfurreducens produced while directly exchanging electrons to metabolize ethanol.31 The temperature dependence of the conductance in the methanogenic aggregates was consistent with the organic metallic-like conductivity observed in the pili and biofilms of G. sulfurreducens. The methanogenic aggregates did not significantly metabolize hydrogen added at high levels, suggesting that the microbial community was not adapted to transfer hydrogen. The aggregates had some potential to convert formate to methane, suggesting that there was the possibility for interspecies formate transfer, but the potential for formate metabolism was well below what would be required for interspecies formate transfer to be the major form of electron exchange. Geobacter species accounted for 25% of the 16S rRNA gene sequences recovered with PCR primers designed to amplify the sequences of all microorganisms, suggesting that Geobacter species were significantly contributing to the UASB aggregate conductivity. The probable role of the Geobacter species was to function as syntrophic microorganisms oxidizing ethanol and fatty acids larger than acetate to acetate (Fig. 3B). It is likely that other microorganisms were also contributing to the UASB aggregate conductivity. Methanogens that can directly accept electrons from metallic iron have been previously described,154,155 consistent with the concept that methanogens might be able to directly accept electrons released into a conductive matrix by other microorganisms. As is typical for wastewater aggregates, Methanosaeta species were the predominant methanogens in the conductive aggregates153 and it seems likely, based on the recent discovery of a complete carbon dioxide reduction pathway in Methanosaeta genomes that Methanosaeta might have the capacity to accept electrons with the production of methane.153
If DIET is an important component of electron flow in methanogenic wastewater aggregates, this understanding could lead to the design of even more effective and stable methanogenic syntrophic associations. However, study of aggregates from a wider diversity of digesters and the electron transfer capabilities of methanogens and other microorganisms within aggregates is warranted. This should include an investigation of electron flow in wetlands and other natural methanogenic environments that contribute to the global carbon cycle. Furthermore, DIET is expected to play an important role with microbial associations involved in the anaerobic oxidation of methane,31,34 which also has a significant impact on the global methane cycle.156
Future contributions of DEET to energy and related environmental concerns
Although DEET is a relatively unexplored form of microbial respiration, findings in just the last couple of years have demonstrated that as new basic discoveries are made they suggest new practical applications. More work on the ecology of microorganisms responsible for DEET is likely to aid in the design of better bioremediation strategies for energy-related environmental contamination. Rapid advances in molecular biology and computational analysis have made it feasible to address bioremediation with a systems biology approach, which is expected to accelerate the design of optimized restoration strategies.157,158 The rapidly evolving understanding of DEET via highly conductive protein networks is likely to aid in the further development of mature bioenergy approaches, such as conversion of wastes to methane, as well as developing novel strategies such as microbial electrosynthesis. Furthermore, the possibility of producing highly conductive materials with inexpensive organic feed stocks such as acetate52 may lead to new developments in the emerging field of bioelectronics, reducing costs or introducing new applications. Studies on the possibility that a wider diversity of microorganisms are capable of DEET and the mechanisms of electron transfer is warranted. In general, it seems likely that more in-depth investigation of the vast, as yet untapped metabolic potential of the wide diversity of microorganisms on earth could provide additional solutions to energy-related needs.
Acknowledgements
Research in our laboratory on extracellular electron transfer and its applications is currently funded by: 1) the Office of Science (BER) U. S. Department of Energy through Cooperative Agreement No. DE-FC02-02ER63446, Award No. DE-SC0004114, Award No. DE-SC0004080, Award No. DE-SC0004814, Award No. DE-SC0004485, and Award No. DE-SC0006790; 2) the Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E), U.S. Department of Energy, under Award Number DE-AR0000087 and Award Number DE-AR0000159; and 3) the Office of Naval Research Grant No. N00014-09-1-0190, Grant No. N00014-10-1-0084, and Grant No. N00014-10-C-0184.
References
D. R. Lovley, Microbiol. Rev., 1991, 55, 259–287 CAS .
D. R. Lovley, D. E. Holmes and K. P. Nevin, Adv. Microb. Physiol., 2004, 49, 219–286 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, T. C. Squier, J. M. Zachara and J. K. Fredrickson, Mol. Microbiol., 2007, 65, 12–20 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Fredrickson, M. F. Romine, A. S. Beliaev, J. M. Auchtung, M. E. Driscoll, T. S. Gardner, K. H. Nealson, A. L. Osterman, G. Pinchuk, J. L. Reed, D. A. Rodionov, J. L. M. Rodrigues, D. A. Saffarini, M. H. Serres, A. M. Spormann, I. B. Zhulin and J. M. Tiedje, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2008, 6, 592–603 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Newman and R. Kolter, Nature, 2000, 405, 93–97 Search PubMed .
K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Geomicrobiol. J., 2002, 19, 141–159 CrossRef CAS .
H. von Canstein, J. Ogawa, S. Shimizu and J. R. Lloyd, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 615–623 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lanthier, K. B. Gregory and D. R. Lovley, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2008, 278, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
E. Marsili, D. B. Baron, I. Shikhare, D. Coursolle, J. A. Gralnick and D. R. Bond, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, S.-J. You and J.-Y. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2530–2533 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Gorby, S. Yanina, J. S. McLean, K. M. Rosso, D. Moyles, A. Dohnalkova, T. J. Beveridge, I. S. Chang, B. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, D. E. Culley, S. B. Reed, M. F. Romine, D. A. Saffarini, E. A. Hill, L. Shi, D. A. Elias, D. W. Kennedy, G. Pinchuk, K. Watanabe, S. Ishii, B. E. Logan and K. H. Nealson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11358–11363 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. El-Naggar, G. Wanger, K. M. Leung, T. D. Yuzvinsky, G. Southam, J. Yang, W. M. Lau, K. H. Nealson and Y. A. Gorby, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 18127–18131 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Hartshorne, C. L. Reardon, D. Ross, J. Nuester, T. A. Clarke, A. J. Gates, P. C. Mills, J. K. Fredrickson, J. M. Zachara, L. Shi, A. S. Beliaev, M. J. Marshall, M. Tien, S. L. Brantley, J. N. Butt and D. J. Richardson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 22169–22174 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Clarke, M. J. Edwards, A. J. Gates, A. Hall, G. F. White, J. Bradley, C. L. Reardon, L. Shi, A. S. Beliaev, M. J. Marshall, Z. Wang, N.J. Watmough, J. K. Fredrickson, J. M. Zachara, J. N. Butt and D. J. Richardson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 9384–9389 CrossRef CAS .
D. Coursolle, D. B. Baron, D. R. Bond and J. A. Gralnick, J. Bacteriol., 2010, 192, 467–474 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Ross, S. L. Brantley and M. Tien, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2009, 75, 5218–5226 CrossRef CAS .
O. L. Snoeyenbos-West, K. P. Nevin, R. T. Anderson and D. R. Lovley, Microb. Ecol., 2000, 39, 153–167 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, T. Ueki, T. Zhang, N. S. Malvankar, P. M. Shrestha, K. Flanagan, M. Aklujkar, J. E. Butler, L. Giloteaux, A.-E. Rotaru, D. E. Holmes, A. E. Franks, R. Orellana, C. Risso and K. P. Nevin, Adv. Microb. Physiol., 2012 Search PubMed  , in press.
K. Zhuang, M. Izallalen, P. J. Mouser, H. Richter, C. Risso, D. R. Lovley and R. Mahadevan, ISME J., 2011, 5, 305–316 CrossRef .
R. Mahadevan, D. R. Bond, J. E. Butler, A. Esteve-Nunez, M. V. Coppi, B. O. Palsson, C. H. Schilling and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 72, 1558–1568 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Kiely, J. M. Regan and B. E. Logan, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2011, 22, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, Annu. Rev. Microbiol., 1993, 47, 263–290 CrossRef CAS .
B. Thamdrup, Adv. Microb. Ecol., 2000, 16, 41–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. Blothe and E. R. Roden, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2009, 75, 468–473 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, J. D. Coates, E. L. Blunt-Harris, E. J. P. Phillips and J. C. Woodward, Nature, 1996, 382, 445–448 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, J. L. Fraga, E. L. Blunt-Harris, L. A. Hayes, E. J. P. Phillips and J. D. Coates, Acta Hydrochim. Hydrobiol., 1998, 26, 152–157 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Scott, D. M. McKnight, E. L. Blunt-Harris, S. E. Kolesar and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 2984–2989 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Roden, A. Kappler, I. Bauer, J. Jiang, A. Paul, R. Soesser, H. Konishi and H. Xy, Nat. Geosci., 2010, 3, 417–421 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 2472–2478 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kappler, M. Benz, B. Schink and A. Brune, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 2006, 47, 85–92 CrossRef .
Z. M. Summers, H. Fogarty, C. Leang, A. E. Franks, N. S. Malvankar and D. R. Lovley, Science, 2010, 330, 1413–1415 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. McInerney, J. R. Sieber and R. P. Gunsalus, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2009, 20, 623–632 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Stams and C. M. Plugge, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 568–577 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol., 2011, 10, 101–105 CrossRef .
D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 4, 497–508 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2008, 19, 564–571 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley and K. P. Nevin, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2011, 22, 441–448 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Bond, D. E. Holmes, L. M. Tender and D. R. Lovley, Science, 2002, 295, 483–485 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 1548–1555 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Chaudhuri and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Thrash and J. D. Coates, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 3921–3931 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol. Rep., 2011, 3, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, F. Aulenta, M. Villano and L. T. Angenent, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 324–333 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Gregory, D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2004, 6, 596–604 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Gregory and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 8943–8947 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Strycharz, T. L. Woodward, J. P. Johnson, K. P. Nevin, R. A. Sanford, F. E. Loeffler and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 5943–5947 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Coppi, C. Leang, S. J. Sandler and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2001, 67, 3180–3187 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, T. Mester, L. Morgado, T. Arakawa, M. L. Sharma, K. Inoue, C. Joseph, C. A. Salgueiro, M. J. Maroney and D. R. Lovley, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2011, 1807, 404–412 CAS .
T. Mehta, M. V. Coppi, S. E. Childers and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 8634–8641 CrossRef CAS .
C. Leang, X. Qian, T. Mester and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 4080–4084 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reguera, K. D. McCarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS .
N. Malvankar, M. Vargas, K. P. Nevin, A. E. Franks, C. Leang, B.-C. Kim, K. Inoue, T. Mester, S. F. Covalla, J. P. Johnson, V. M. Rotello, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 573–579 CrossRef .
D. R. Lovley, Geobiology, 2008, 6, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Bouhenni, G. J. Vora, J. C. Biffinger, S. Shirodkar, K. Brockman, R. Ray, P. Wu, B. J. Johnson, E. M. Biddle, M. J. Marshall, L. A. Fitzgerald, B. J. Little, J. K. Fredrickson, A. S. Beliaev, B. R. Ringeisen and D. A. Saffarini, Electroanal., 2010, 22, 856–864 CAS .
X. Jiang, J. Hu, L. A. Fitzgerald, J. C. Biffinger, P. Xie, B. R. Ringeisen and C. M. Lieber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2010, 107, 16806–16810 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dohnalkova, M. J. Marshall, B. W. Arey, K. H. Williams, E. C. Buck and J. K. Fredrickson, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 77, 1254–1262 CrossRef CAS .
P.-L. Tremblay, Z. M. Summers, R. H. Glaven, K. P. Nevin, K. Zengler, C. Barrett, Y. Qui, B. Ø, Palsson and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 13, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, K. P. Nevin, B.-C. Kim, A. E. Franks, A. Klimes, L. M. Tender and D. R. Lovley, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3498–3503 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Rollefson, C. S. Stephen, M. Tien and D. R. Bond, J. Bacteriol., 2011, 193, 1023–1033 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Nevin, B.-C. Kim, R. H. Glaven, J. P. Johnson, T. L. Woodard, B. A. Methé, R. J. DiDonatoJr, S. F. Covalla, A. E. Franks, A. Liu and D. R. Lovley, PLoS One, 2009, 4, e5628 Search PubMed .
C. Leang, M. V. Coppi and D. R. Lovley, J. Bacteriol., 2003, 185, 2096–2103 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mehta, S. E. Childers, R. Glaven, D. R. Lovley and T. Mester, Microbiology, 2006, 152, 2257–2264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, G. Reguera, T. Mester and D. R. Lovley, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2007, 277, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Holmes, T. Mester, R. A. O'Neil, M. J. Larrahondo, L. A. Adams, R. Glaven, M. L. Sharma, J. A. Ward, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Microbiol., 2008, 145, 1422–1435 CrossRef .
J. R. Lloyd, C. Leang, A. L. Hodeges-Myerson, M. V. Coppi, S. Cuifo, B. Methe, S. J. Sandler and D. R. Lovley, Biochem. J., 2003, 369, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Methé, K. E. Nelson, J. A. Eisen, I. T. Paulsen, W. Nelson, J. F. Heidelberg, D. Wu, M. Wu, N. Ward, M. J. Beanan, R. J. Dodson, R. Madupu, L. M. Brinkac, S. C. Daugherty, R. T. DeBoy, A. S. Durkin, M. Gwinn, J. F. Kolonay, S. A. Sullivan, D. H. Haft, J. Selengut, T. M. Davidsen, N. Zafar, O. White, B. Tran, C. Romero, H. A. Forberger, J. Weidman, H. Khouri, T. V. Feldblyum, T. R. Utterback, S. E. Van Aken, D. R. Lovley and C. M. Fraser, Science, 2003, 302, 1967–1969 CrossRef .
J. E. Butler, N. D. Young and D. R. Lovley, BMC Genomics, 2010, 11, 40 CrossRef .
S. E. Childers, S. Ciufo and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2002, 416, 767–769 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Anderson, H. A. Vrionis, I. Ortiz-Bernad, C. T. Resch, A. D. Peacock, R. Dayvault, S. Marutzky, D. R. Metzler, K. Karp, M. Lowe, D. C. White, P. E. Long and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 5884–5891 CrossRef CAS .

          P.-L. Tremblay, M. Aklujkar, C. Leang and D. R. Lovley,  2011, manuscript submitted.
A. Esteve-Nunez, J. Sosnik, P. Visconti and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 10, 497–505 CrossRef CAS .
E. Marsili, J. B. Rollefson, D. B. Baron, R. M. Hozalski and D. R. Bond, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 7329–7337 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dumas, R. Basseguy and A. Bergel, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5235–5241 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Busalmen, A. Esteve-Nunez, A. Berna and J. M. Feliu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4874–4877 CrossRef CAS .
H. Richter, K. P. Nevin, H. Jia, D. A. Lowy, D. R. Lovley and L. M. Tender, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 506–516 CAS .
E. Marsili, J. Sun and D. R. Bond, Electroanal., 2010, 22, 865–874 CAS .
J. P. Busalmen, A. Esteve-Nunez, A. Berna and J. M. Feliu, Bioelectrochemistry, 2010, 78, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Esteve-Nunez, J. P. Busalmen, A. Berna, C. Gutierrez-Garran and J. M. Feliu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2066–2069 CAS .
K. P. Nevin, H. Richter, S. F. Covalla, J. P. Johnson, T. L. Woodard, H. Jia, M. Zhang and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 10, 2505–2514 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reguera, K. P. Nevin, J. S. Nicoll, S. F. Covalla, T. L. Woodard and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 72, 7345–7348 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Franks, K. P. Nevin, R. H. Glaven and D. R. Lovley, ISME J., 2010, 4, 509–519 CrossRef .
A. E. Franks, K. P. Nevin, H. Jia, M. Izallalen, T. L. Woodard and D. R. Lovley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 113–119 CAS .
G. Reguera, R. B. Pollina, J. S. Nicoll and D. R. Lovley, J. Bacteriol., 2007, 189, 2125–2127 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Holmes, S. K. Chaudhuri, K. P. Nevin, T. Mehta, B. A. Methe, A. Liu, J. E. Ward, T. L. Woodard, J. Webster and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2006, 8, 1805–1815 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Katuri, P. Kavanagh, S. Rengaraj and D. Leech, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4758–4760 RSC .
K. Inoue, X. Qian, L. Morgado, B.-C. Kim, T. Mester, M. Izallalen, C. A. Salgueiro and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 3999–4007 CrossRef CAS .
K. Inoue, C. Leang, A. E. Franks, T. L. Woodard, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol. Rep., 2010, 3, 211–217 CrossRef .
S. M. Strycharz, R. H. Glaven, M. V. Coppi, S. M. Gannon, L. A. Perpetua, A. Liu, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Bioelectrochemistry, 2011, 80, 142–150 CrossRef CAS .
K. Juarez, B.-C. Kim, K. P. Nevin, L. Olvera, G. Reguera, D. R. Lovley and B. A. Methe, J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2009, 16, 146–158 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, M. J. Baedecker, D. J. Lonergan, I. M. Cozzarelli, E. J. P. Phillips and D. I. Siegel, Nature, 1989, 339, 297–299 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Rooney-Varga, R. T. Anderson, J. L. Fraga, D. Ringelberg and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1999, 65, 3056–3064 CAS .
R. T. Anderson and D. R. Lovley, Bioremediation J., 1999, 3, 121–135 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. M. Roling, B. M. van Breukelen, B. L. Braster and H. W. van Verseveld, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2001, 67, 4619–4629 CrossRef CAS .
M. Staats, M. Braster and F. M. Roling, Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 13, 1216–1227 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, J. C. Woodward and F. H. Chapelle, Nature, 1994, 370, 128–131 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, J. C. Woodward and F. H. Chapelle, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1996, 62, 288–291 CAS .
K. T. Finneran and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 1785–1790 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, S. M. Gannon, K. P. Nevin, A. E. Franks and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 12, 1011–1020 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Williams, K. P. Nevin, A. E. Franks, A. Englert, P. E. Long and D. R. Lovley, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, Z. Zhou and L. Zhuang, J. Soils Sediments, 2010, 10, 1427–1433 CrossRef CAS .
B. Erable, L. Etcheverry and A. Bergel, Biofouling, 2011, 27, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
L. De Schamphelaire, K. Rabaey, P. Boeckx, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Microb. Biotechnol., 2008, 1, 446–462 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley and D. J. Lonergan, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1990, 56, 1858–1864 CAS .
O. Prakash, T. M. Gihring, D. D. Dalton, K.-J. Chin, S. J. Green, D. M. Akob, G. Wanger and J. E. Kostka, Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol., 2010, 60, 546–553 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Coates, D. J. Lonergan, H. Jenter and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1996, 62, 1531–1536 CAS .
J. E. Butler, Q. He, K. P. Nevin, Z. He, J. Zhou and D. R. Lovley, BMC Genomics, 2007, 8, 180 CrossRef .

          T. Zhang, K. P. Nevin, M. A. Barlett, S. M. Gannon, T. S. Bain and D. R. Lovley, Abstracts of the American Society for Microbiology Annual Meeting,  2011.
A. Wilhems, S. R. Larter, I. Head, P. Farrimond, R. di-Primio and C. Zwach, Nature, 2001, 411, 1034–1037 CrossRef .
D. E. Holmes, C. Risso, J. A. Smith and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 77, 5926–5933 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Risso, D. E. Holmes, J. A. Smith and D. R. Lovley, Abstracts of the American Society for Microbiology Annual Meeting,  2011.
B. R. Mohapatra, O. Dinardo, W. D. Gould and D. W. Koren, Miner. Eng., 2010, 23, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lloyd and J. C. Renshaw, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2005, 16, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lloyd and D. R. Lovley, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2001, 12, 248–253 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Wall and L. R. Krumholz, Annu. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 60, 149–166 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, E. J. P. Phillips, Y. A. Gorby and E. R. Landa, Nature, 1991, 350, 413–416 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley and E. J. P. Phillips, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1992, 26, 2228–2234 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley and E. J. P. Phillips, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1992, 58, 850–856 CAS .
K. T. Finneran, R. T. Anderson, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, Soil Sediment Contam., 2002, 11, 339–357 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Holmes, R. A. O'Neil, H. A. Vrionis, L. A. N'Guessan, I. Ortiz-Bernad, M. J. Larrahondo, L. A. Adams, J. A. Ward, J. S. Nicoll, K. P. Nevin, M. A. Chavan, J. P. Johnson, P. E. Long and D. R. Lovley, ISME J., 2007, 1, 663–677 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. North, S. L. Dollhopf, L. Petrie, J. D. Istok, D. L. Balkwill and J. E. Kostka, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2004, 70, 4911–4920 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cardenas, W.-M. Wu, M. B. Leigh, J. Carley, S. Carroll, T. Gentry, J. Luo, D. Watson, B. Gu, M. Ginder-Vogel, P. K. Kitanidis, P. M. Jardine, J. Zhou, C. S. Criddle, T. L. Marsh and J. M. Tiedje, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2008, 74, 3718–3729 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hwang, W. Wu, T. Gentry, J. Carley, G. A. Corbin, S. L. Carroll, D. B. Watson, P. M. Jardine, J. Zhou, C. S. Criddle and M. W. Fields, ISME J., 2009, 3, 47–64 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Lovley, P. K. Widman, J. C. Woodward and E. J. P. Phillips, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1993, 59, 3572–3576 CAS .
E. S. Shelobolina, M. V. Coppi, A. A. Korenevsky, L. N. DiDonato, S. A. Sullivan, H. Konishi, H. Xu, C. Leang, J. E. Butler, B. C. Kim and D. R. Lovley, BMC Microbiol., 2007, 7, 16 CrossRef .
M. J. Marshall, A. S. Beliaev, A. C. Dohnalkova, D. W. Kennedy, L. Shi, Z. Wang, M. I. Boyanov, B. Lai, K. M. Kemner, J. S. McLean, S. B. Reed, D. E. Culley, V. L. Bailey, C. J. Simonson, D. A. Saffarini, M. F. Romine, J. M. Zachara and J. K. Fredrickson, PLoS Biol., 2006, 4, e268 Search PubMed .
R. B. Payne, D. M. Gentry, B. J. Rapp-Giles, L. Casalot and J. D. Wall, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2002, 68, 3129–3132 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Debabov, Microbiology, 2008, 77, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pant, G. Van Bogaert, L. Diels and K. Vanbroekhoven, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 1533–1543 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, C. M. Li, S.-J. Bao, Z. Lu and Y. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1290–1292 RSC .
T. H. Pham, K. Rabaey, P. Aelterman, P. Clauwaert, L. De Schamphelaire, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Eng. Life Sci., 2006, 6, 285–292 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. McCarty, J. Kim and J. Bae, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 7100–7106 CAS .
K. Rabaey and R. A. Rozendal, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2010, 8, 706–716 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Reimers, L. M. Tender, S. Fertig and W. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 192–195 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Tender, C. E. Reimers, H. A. Stecher, D. E. Holmes, D. R. Bond, D. A. Lowy, K. Pilobello, S. J. Fertig and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Biotechnol., 2002, 20, 821–825 CAS .
L. M. Tender, S. M. Gray, E. Groveman, D. A. Lowy, P. Kauffman, J. Melhado, R. C. Tyce, D. Flynn, R. Petrecca and J. Dobarro, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 571–575 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Holmes, D. R. Bond, R. A. O'Neil, C. E. Reimers, L. R. Tender and D. R. Lovley, Microb. Ecol., 2004, 48, 178–190 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. White, C. E. Reimers, E. E. Cordes, G. F. Dilly and P. R. Girguis, ISME J., 2009, 3, 635–646 CrossRef .
D. E. Holmes, D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2004, 70, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS .
C. Melhuish, I. Ieropoulos, J. Greenman and I. Horsfield, Auton. Rob., 2006, 21, 187–198 CrossRef .
I. S. Chang, J. K. Jang, G. C. Gil, M. Kim, H. J. Kim, B. W. Cho and B. H. Kim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2004, 19, 607–613 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Nevin, T. L. Woodard, A. E. Franks, Z. M. Summers and D. R. Lovley, mBio, 2010, 1, e00103–10 CrossRef .
K. P. Nevin, S. A. Hensley, A. E. Franks, Z. M. Summers, J. Ou, T. L. Woodard, O. L. Snoeyenbo-West and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 77, 2882–2886 CrossRef CAS .
M. Villano, F. Aulenta, C. Ciucci, T. Ferri, A. Giuliano and M. Majone, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3085–3090 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, D. Xing, D. F. Call and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 3953–3958 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Rozendal, A. W. Jeremiasse, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Jeremiasse, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Bioelectrochemistry, 2010, 78, 39–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Geelhoed, H. V. M. Hamelers and A. J. M. Stams, Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 2010, 13, 307–315 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Geelhoed and A. J. Stams, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 815–820 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Flynn, D. E. Ross, K. A. Hunt, D. R. Bond and J. A. Gralnick, mBio, 2010, 1, e00190-10 CrossRef .
G. Lettinga, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, 1995, 67, 3–28 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morita, N. S. Malvankar, A. E. Franks, Z. M. Summers, L. Giloteaux, A. E. Rotaru, C. Rotaru and D. R. Lovley, mBio, 2011, 2, e00159–11 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Dinh, J. Kuever, M. MacBmann, A. W. Hassel, M. Stratmann and F. Widdel, Nature, 2004, 427, 829–832 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uchiyama, K. Ito, K. Mori, H. Tsurumaru and S. Harayama, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 1783–1788 CrossRef CAS .
L. Caldwell, J. R. Laidler, E. A. Brewer, J. O. Eberly, S. C. Sandborgh and F. S. Colwell, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 6791–6799 CrossRef .
D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2003, 1, 35–44 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mahadevan, B. O. Palsson and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2011, 9, 39–50 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Novel biological processes are a potential source of solutions for the need for new, sustainable energy strategies and the necessity of dealing with the legacy of environmental contamination associated with more traditional energy sources. The genomes of the microbial world encode a vast metabolic potential, which for the most part is poorly understood, but may provide some help for energy needs. This perspective gives a quick primer on the basic principles of direct extracellular electron transfer, a relatively recently discovered form of microbial respiration, and summarizes how continuing developments in the study of this one form of microbial respiration has led to a number of new concepts for bioenergy and the restoration of environments contaminated as the result of energy-related activities.


 	Fig. 1  Hypothesized electron transfer to Fe(III) oxides along conductive pili with the c-type cytochrome OmcS mediating electron transfer from pili to Fe(III) oxide. The actual electron transfer pathway may be much more complex and require additional proteins.	 

 	Fig. 2  Model for electron transfer through anode biofilms of Geobacter sulfurreducens. OmcS, which is abundant in cells growing on Fe(III) oxide or in syntrophic cultures, is not as abundant in anode biofilms. The c-type cytochrome OmcZ is abundant and localized near the anode surface, it is not closely associated with cells or pili. Electrons released from cells move through the conductive biofilm matrix via conductive pili. OmcZ is hypothesized to facilitate electron transfer from the biofilm matrix to the anode in a manner similar to OmcS facilitating electron transfer from pili to Fe(III) oxide.	 

 	Fig. 3  Models for interspecies electron transfer. A. Interspecies electron transfer between Geobacter species. Multiple lines of experimental evidence suggest that OmcS and pili are important for the electron exchange and thus OmcS is hypothesized to make electrical contacts with as yet unknown cytochromes of G. metallireducens or conductive pili. B. Electron transfer in conductive methanogenic aggregates. Geobacter species (orange), and possibly other syntrophic bacteria, are hypothesized to contribute to aggregate conductivity with conductive pili, but the mechanisms by which methanogens (blue) can consume the electrons have yet to be determined.	 

 	Fig. 4  Subsurface snorkel for stimulating bioremediation of organic contaminants. Organic contaminants are oxidized at the anodic portion of the conductive graphite rod with electron transfer through the rod to aerobic water where electrons can reduce oxygen to form water. The subsurface snorkel functions in a manner similar to a benthic microbial fuel cell with the exception that there is no attempt to harvest current from the electron transfer.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
