Self-assembled bulk heterojunctions from integral molecules with nonconjugately linked donor and acceptor units for photovoltaic applications  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE00206B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00206B
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3190-3210Self-assembled bulk heterojunctions from integral molecules with nonconjugately linked donor and acceptor units for photovoltaic applications

        
          
            Hao 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huaizhi 
            Gao
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tasawar 
            Hayat
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ahmed 
            Alsaedi
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Zhan'ao 
            Tan
          
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, P. R. China
bBeijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China. E-mail: tanzhanao@mail.buct.edu.cn
cNAAM Research Group, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      7th February 2020
    , Accepted 13th April 2020First published on 14th April 2020AbstractA bicontinuous interpenetrating donor–acceptor network with a suitable phase-separated domain size is crucial for fabricating highly efficient organic bulk heterojunction solar cells considering the fact that it guarantees effective exciton dissociation and smooth charge transport. For traditional binary blend bulk heterojunctions, the photoactive layer is a simple physical mixture of the donor and acceptor; further, the size of phase separation is primarily determined by the aggregation characteristics of the donor and acceptor. Moreover, it is difficult to control and stabilize it. To resolve this problem, a kind of donor–acceptor integral molecule in which the donor and acceptor units are linked by nonconjugated flexible linking units has been proposed. The energy levels and absorption spectra of the integral molecules can be easily controlled by tuning the donor and acceptor units. Furthermore, these integral molecules can form a microphase-separated bulk heterojunction of the donor and acceptor phases via a self-assembly process of the molecule, which is governed by the flexible linking unit responsible for connecting the donor and acceptor units. Since the donor and acceptor units of the integral molecules are connected by nonconjugated units, the scale of aggregation and morphological stability can be easily controlled. In this review, we first introduce the unique characteristics of three typical donor–acceptor integral molecules and then highlight their current developments. For each donor–acceptor molecule, we attempt to give a detailed summary with regard to their design and synthesis, and an in-depth understanding on the basic mechanism of molecular self-assembly and the performance comparison of SMSCs. In the end, the prospect and potential improvements in the donor–acceptor integral molecule are addressed. We believe that emerging donor–acceptor molecules can provide worthwhile opportunities for the fabrication of efficient and stable organic solar cells.Hao LiuHao Liu is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan in the State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Sources, North China Electric Power University. His research interest lies in the design and synthesis of organic semiconductors for photovoltaic applications.Huaizhi GaoHuaizhi Gao received his Master's degree from the College of Chemical Engineering, Qinghai University, in 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research interests mainly focus on organic photovoltaics.Jun LinJun Lin is a Professor at the School of Renewable Energy in North China Electric Power University, China. Dr Lin obtained his PhD from the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University in 2004. His major research interests include membrane materials for use in fuel cells and gas separation, as well as thermally conductive polymer composites. He has published more than 70 refereed papers in SCI journals and 2 book chapters and has 10 Chinese patents.Tasawar HayatTasawar Hayat (born in Khanewal, Punjab)—Distinguished National Professor and former Chairperson of the Mathematics Department at Quaid-I-Azam University—is renowned worldwide for his seminal, diversified, and fundamental contributions toward models relevant to physiological systems, control engineering, climate change, renewable energy, low-carbon technologies, environmental issues, non-Newtonian fluids, wave mechanics, homotopic solutions, stability, and nanofluids, as well as several other areas. He has the honor of being a Fellow of the Pakistan Academy of Sciences, Third World Academy of Sciences (TWAS), and Islamic World Academy of Sciences in mathematical sciences.Ahmed AlsaediAhmed Alsaedi obtained his PhD from Swansea University (UK) in 2002. He has broad research experience in applied mathematics. His fields of interest include dynamical systems, nonlinear analysis involving ordinary differential equations, fractional differential equations, mathematical modeling, biomathematics, and Newtonian and Non-Newtonian fluid mechanics. He served as the Chairman of the Mathematics Department at KAU; presently, he is serving as the Director of the Research Program at KAU. Under his formidable leadership, this program has been running fairly successfully and has attracted a large number of highly rated researchers and distinguished professors from all over the world.Zhan'ao TanZhan'ao Tan is a Professor in Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, since 2018, and he has worked in the Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University, since 2009. Currently, he leads the Group of Organic Optoelectronic Materials and Devices. He received his PhD in Physical Chemistry in 2007 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and then came to Pennsylvania State University, USA, as a Postdoctoral Fellow from 2007 to 2009, researching semiconductor quantum-dots-based light-emitting diodes and photovoltaics. His present research interests include polymer solar cells, semiconductor nanocrystal-based optoelectronics, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells, and flow batteries.
1. Introduction
Clean and renewable energy has begun to become an indispensable part for the sustainable development of humanity. During the past few decades, increasing attention has been paid toward thin-film organic solar cell (OSC) technology because of its advantages such as being lightweight and low cost, as well as enabling the easy realization of large-area and flexible devices.1–5 Rapid progresses seen in OSCs have been achieved with respect to their power conversion efficiency (PCE) and long-term stability with efforts being directed toward material synthesis, morphology control, and device structure optimization.
During the early development of OSCs, Schottky-type OSCs were investigated, which comprise organic semiconductors sandwiched between two electrodes with different work functions. The PCEs of such devices were very low due to the lack of a driving force for exciton separation.6 In 1986, C. W. Tang used an n-type organic molecule, PV, as the electron acceptor and a p-type organic molecule, CuPc, as the electron donor to fabricate planar heterojunction solar cells, where the photogenerated excitons could be effectively separated at the donor–acceptor interfaces; considerably improved PCE (nearly 1%) could be consequently achieved.7 Ten years later, Heeger's group demonstrated the fabrication of bulk heterojunction OSCs with the soluble conjugated polymer MEH-PPV (donor) and the fullerene derivative PCBM (acceptor).8 The bicontinuous donor–acceptor networks within the bulk heterojunction guarantee the formation of independent carrier transportation channels and sufficient contact interface within the photoactive layer, paving the way for the development of bulk heterojunction OSCs.
To further enhance the PCE of OSCs, in-depth studies with regard to morphology control, developing novel donor and acceptor materials with high mobility, and broad absorption spectra have been conducted. For example, solvent annealing and thermal treatment have been used to control the phase separation between poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and PCBM,9 and PCE exceeding 5% can be achieved for OSCs.10 Intramolecular charge transfer strategies have also been used to synthesize conjugated polymer donor materials to considerably broaden the absorption spectra of the photoactive layer.11 Meanwhile, the desired phase separation and interpenetrating network structure formed between the donor and acceptor can be tuned by using different functional groups of polymer donors, resulting in enhanced PCE of over 6.7%.11 The narrow bandgap polymer considerably improved the phase-separated domain size between the fullerene acceptor and donor, which demonstrated fibrous morphology and PCE in excess of 10%.12
With regard to electron acceptors, indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA), with a LUMO energy level that is much higher than that of PCBM, was synthesized; further, OSCs based on P3HT:ICBA exhibited higher open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.84 V.13 In 2015, Zhan's group developed a novel non-fullerene electron acceptor (ITIC) that overcame the shortcomings of limited energy-level variability and weak absorption in the visible region of fullerene acceptors, and fullerene-free OSCs with PCE up to 6.8% have been demonstrated.14 Further optimizing the molecular structure of ITIC by side-chain engineering can further enhance the PCE up to 13%.15,16 Moreover, Erjun Zhou's group designed and synthesized a new type of non-fullerene acceptor material with an A2–A1–D–A1–A2 skeleton, and the devices prepared using this material could yield high Voc exceeding 1.0 V.17–20 Recently, a new class of non-fullerene acceptor, namely, Y6, was reported, which employed a ladder-type electron-deficient-core-based central fused ring with a benzothiadiazole core; the corresponding PCE of the OSCs reached up to 15.7% due to its extensive absorption in the infrared region and complementary absorption with the donor material, PM6.4
For bulk heterojunction OSCs, the nanoscale morphology of the photoactive layer has a crucial effect on the PCE and stability of devices, since the photoactive layer is a simple physical mixture of the donor and acceptor. Further, the size of phase separation is primarily determined by the aggregation characteristics of the donor and acceptor, which could be largely attributed to the relative concentrations of the donor and acceptor materials, nature of solvent, processing conditions, additives, thermal treatment, and other experimental factors.21,22 Therefore, fine-tuning and stabilizing the morphology of the microphase separation within the photoactive blend layer is the key toward realizing efficient and stable OSCs.
To resolve this problem, a type of donor–acceptor integral molecule in which donor and acceptor units linked by nonconjugated flexible linking units has been proposed. The energy levels and absorption spectra of such integral molecules can be easily controlled by tuning the donor and acceptor units. Furthermore, the integral molecules can form a microphase-separated bulk heterojunction of the donor and acceptor phases via a self-assembly process of the molecule, which is governed by a flexible linking unit, responsible for connecting the donor and acceptor units. Since the donor and acceptor units of the integral molecules are connected by nonconjugated units, the scale of aggregation and morphological stability could be easily controlled. Therefore, such integral-molecule-based self-assembled bulk heterojunction OSCs have received continuous attention, and the comprehensive consideration of absorption spectrum, molecular energy levels, and assembly behavior is critical to boost the performance of OSCs based on integral molecules.
According to the chemical structure, the donor–acceptor integral molecules can be simply divided into three types: donor–acceptor integral small molecules, double-cable polymers, and block copolymers. The molecular and assembly schematics are shown in Fig. 1. The donor–acceptor integral small molecule comprises p-type electron donor units and n-type electron acceptor units linked by nonconjugated units, as shown in Fig. 1a. During film formation, the donor units of adjacent molecules assemble into the hole transport domains and the acceptor units of the adjacent molecules assemble into the electron transport domains. In double-cable polymers (Fig. 1b), the backbone is typically composed of a p-type electron donor with an n-type electron acceptor linked via a nonconjugated unit on its side chain. Because of self-assembly, p-type backbone skeletons aggregate into the hole transport channels and n-type side chains aggregate into the electron transport channels. For block copolymers, the p-type electron donor block and n-type electron acceptor block are connected by a nonconjugated flexible chain, as shown in Fig. 1c. Similar to the double-cable polymer, p-type blocks assemble into hole transport channels, and n-type blocks assemble into electron transport channels. Moreover, the length and chemical composition of the flexible chain that link the donor and acceptor units are the decisive factors for the donor–acceptor molecular packing arrangement of the molecules and the separation of the nanophase. This suggests that both these units are covalently connected by a flexible link chain of a sufficient length to allow the donor–acceptor molecules to self-organize into separate domains of appropriate size. Moreover, the creation of a redox gradient in the donor and acceptor units around the flexible link chain as well as the introduction of substituents for improving hole and electron mobilities could contribute toward limiting charge recombinations. In the photoactive layer of the above three molecules, a bicontinuous bulk heterojunction can be self-assembled via donor and acceptor units and the domain size can be controlled by the flexible linking units. Therefore, photogenerated excitons can be separated at the donor and acceptor interfaces; then, they can be transported through the donor and acceptor channels, respectively. They are ultimately collected by the respective electrodes.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of (a) donor–acceptor integral small molecules, (b) double-cable polymers, and (c) block copolymers. Simulated molecular self-assembly models represented by S15, C2, and Q3, respectively. 
In this review, we first introduce the unique characteristics of the three typical donor–acceptor integral molecules and then highlight their current developments. For each integral molecule, we attempt to provide a detailed summary regarding their design and synthesis principles, and an in-depth understanding into the basic mechanism of molecular self-assembly and photovoltaic performance. In the end, the prospect and potential improvements in the donor–acceptor integral molecules are addressed, and we believe that emerging donor–acceptor integral molecules can provide worthwhile opportunities for fabricating efficient and stable OSCs.
2. Donor–acceptor integral molecules
2.1 Integral small molecule
Small-molecule compounds have a defined chemical structure as compared to polymers, which can be readily synthesized, purified, and characterized by a variety of techniques; further, their molecular structures and functions can also be more clearly analyzed. The formation of a stacked structure in a donor–acceptor small molecule depends on various factors, such as charge transfer between the donor and acceptor, shape matching, and interaction of the side chain; this includes the covalently bonded electron-donating moiety and electron-withdrawing moiety that comprise the heterojunction structures. Since the polymer lacks a backbone, the reason due to which small organic molecules form a better continuous ordered phase-separated structure during self-assembly needs to be urgently investigated (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Chemical structures of donor–acceptor integral small molecules, S1–S19. 
In 1995, Imahori et al. reported the first donor–acceptor integral fullerene derivative (S1); here, an oligophenylenevinylene group is attached to C60 through a pyrrolidine ring.23 The attachment of a carotenoid to a fullerene can substantially increase the effective absorption cross section for photoinduced electron transfer in the visible region as well as suppress the notorious ability of fullerenes to sensitize singlet oxygen. These fullerene-based dyads open the door to photochemistry, particularly electron transfer chemistry, which arises from the fullerene excited singlet state. In 2000, Jean-FranÁois Nierengarten et al. synthesized fullerene-oligophenylenevinylene hybrids S2 (namely, C60-3PV and C60-4PV), and their electronic properties as well as potential toward incorporation into photovoltaic devices were investigated.24 Both electrochemical and photophysical studies in solution revealed that there are small electronic ground-state interactions between the covalently bonded oligophenylenevinylene moiety and the fullerene sphere. Photophysical investigations revealed that in a fluid solution, efficient singlet–singlet photoinduced energy transfer occurs, whereas electron transfer is a minor process. Photovoltaic cells have been prepared using both C60-3PV and C60-4PV: photoinduced electron transfer does take place in these devices; this is the first attempt toward fabricating OSCs from donor–acceptor integral small molecules. In order to tune the photovoltaic performance of such devices, fullerene–oligophenyleneethynylene (OPE) conjugates (S3) have been synthesized.25 The efficiency of these devices can be significantly improved by increasing the donating ability of the OPE moiety and the charge transport properties can be modulated by the intrinsic fullerene/OPE mass ratio.
In 2000, Janssen et al. described the synthesis of a series of oligo(p-phenylenevinylene)-fulleropyrrolidines, i.e., OPVn-C60 (S4).26 The photophysical properties of these donor–acceptor dyads were studied as a function of the conjugation length in solvents and as thin films. In a polar solvent, electron transfer in these dyads occurs via a two-step process of a very fast singlet energy transfer prior to charge separation. In thin solid films, a long-life charge-separated state can be formed after photoexcitation, which can be attributed to the migration of charges toward different molecules. Photovoltaic devices based on OPV4-C60 were fabricated, and encouraging short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 235 μA cm−2 and Voc of 650 mV could be obtained under white-light illumination of ∼65 mW cm−2. These findings indicate that donor–acceptor dyads form a bicontinuous donor–acceptor network, giving an important clue for the future design of more efficient molecular bulk heterojunction materials. The action of the dyad device clearly indicates concurrent electron and hole transport through a bicontinuous donor–acceptor network.
In 2002, Roncali et al. designed and synthesized a donor–acceptor integral small molecule comprising a quaterthiophene that was singly or doubly attached to a C60 group via a single or double Bingel reaction (S5 and S6). Due to the face-to-face orientation of the donor and acceptor units in S6, the geometrically constrained rate constants of the electron and energy transfers of S6 are orders of magnitude higher than those of flexible compound S5.27 In 2007, the same group studied the synthesis of various molecular structures that combined C60 units with TTF. The photovoltaic characteristics of compound S7 with central segments of two C60 units connected to quinone-type TTF were analyzed on a ITO/PEDOT:PSS/S7/LiF/Al device. The device exhibited a Jsc value of 0.25 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.32 V, and PCE of 0.03% under white-light illumination of 75 mW cm−2. Among them, compound S8, which is linked by TTF and C60 units, exhibited the highest absorption at a wavelength of 451 nm (ε = 49000 mol−1 cm3 dm−1). Besides the inability to induce suitable phase separation and interpenetrating network structures, different stoichiometric ratios and different connection methods between TTF and C60 could considerably enhance the life of excitons.28 Further, the same group designed and synthesized a conjugated molecular structure linking four C60 units on the conjugated framework that linked the different groups (phenyleneethynylene and phenylenevinylene). Single-material solar cells (SMSCs, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/S9/LiF/Al) afford PCE of 0.015% for S9 under white-light illumination.29 The inefficiency of this device can be attributed to the excessive molecular size and excessive rigidity, which makes it impossible to induce suitable phase separation between the donor and acceptor phases in the film so that charge transfer can efficiently occur.
In 2002, Michele et al. synthesized the donor–acceptor integral molecule of the fullerene–azothiophene dyad (S10).30 The SMSCs with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/S10/Al was fabricated. Under white-light illumination of 80 mW cm−2, the Voc of the device was 0.66 V, Jsc was 1.60 mA cm−2, and FF was 28%, ultimately affording PCE of 0.37%. The strong absorption of the dyad in the visible spectrum coupled with the optimization of the thickness of the active layer contributed toward enhancing the overall device performance. In 2007, Hashimoto and colleagues synthesized molecule S11 that linked the C60 unit with an oligothiophene-conjugated chain via a flexible oligomeric (oxyethylene) linker as the intermediate. Because of the presence of two longer terminal alkyl chains on the molecule, nanofiber structures up to 200 nm could be formed in the film; further, self-assembly induced by π–π interactions of the thiophene groups enabled the fabrication of thin films with nanostructured fibers (Fig. 2a and b).31 Under the AM1.5 condition, the SMSC (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/S11/Al) yielded Jsc of 0.93 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.70 V, and PCE of 0.15%. This PCE was still higher than that of the blended device based on oligothiophene and PCBM, which also indicated that the self-assembly process of the determined molecular structure afforded a better phase separation structure than that obtained when physically blending the binary structures. Further, the same group reported the synthesis of a donor–acceptor small molecule containing oligo(p-phenylenevinylene), wherein the C60 block was attached to the middle of the conjugated chain via a polyether linker (S12).32 By observing the absorption spectra of both these polymers, it was found that the absorption characteristic peak was red-shifted from 336 to 439 nm, and the photovoltaic properties of the material were analyzed on the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/S12/PDMS-PMMA/Al. After thermal annealing at 150 °C for 1 min in an inert atmosphere, the Voc value of the cell was 0.88 V under white-light illumination of 100 mW cm−2; further, the Jsc value was 3.30 mA cm−2 and the PCE of the device was 1.28%. The reason for the high efficiency of such small molecules can be attributed to the fact that the donor unit with a higher chain length can facilitate the formation of the desired interpenetrating network structure and phase separation size with the acceptor unit during self-assembly.
 Fig. 2  (a and b) AFM height and phase images of S11 film on ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate; (c) powder XRD pattern of S11 in the bulk measured at 20 °C. Inset: schematic representation of the proposed structure for S11 in films; (d) 2D GIXRD pattern of S14. Lower inset: intermolecular and intramolecular distances; upper inset: crystalline size; (e–g) AFM height and phase images as well as TEM images of the S14-based device.31,34 
In 2012, Banerji et al. sensitized fullerenes by the covalent attachment of a diketopyrrolopyrrole chromophore.33 Triads of 3,6-dithien-2-yl-2,5-dialkylpyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-1,4-dione (DTDPP) covalently linked at the nitrogen positions to two [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid ester (PCB) units via alkyl chains of different lengths were synthesized (S13). The absorption spectra of the triads are the composite of the ones recorded with the separate parent molecules of fullerene and DTDPP, indicating weak electronic coupling between the subunits. Ultrafast fluorescence spectroscopy revealed the multiphasic excitation dynamics of energy transfer due to different molecular conformations induced by the flexibility of the alkyl linkers, with time constants ranging from the sub-picosecond levels to the 100–150 ps scale. In 2016, K. Narayanaswamy et al. designed and synthesized a new low-bandgap dyad DPP-C60, which comprised covalently linked dithiafulvalene-functionalized diketopyrrolopyrrole as the donor and fullerene (C60) as the acceptor (S14).34 In Fig. 2d, the striking feature of a single-material film is the crystalline size, which is 24.4 and 41.5 nm for the interplane and in-plane directions, respectively. Such a large fibril volume with long-range ordering is the key toward efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport in DPP-C60. Via AFM and TEM, it is obvious that molecular self-assembly forms a stacked molecular arrangement structure in layers as well as a uniform continuous interpenetrating network; further, the surface roughness is 5.3 nm. Therefore, the film with the above surface morphology could let the electrons and holes to be more effectively separated and transferred. The PCE of SMSCs fabricated using DPP-C60 as the active layer could reach 2.17%.
Recently, a novel donor–acceptor small-molecule benzodithiophene-rhodanine–[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (BDTRh–PCBM, S15), comprising three covalently linked blocks (one p-type oligothiophene-containing BDTRh moiety and two n-type PCBM), was designed and synthesized by Nguyen.35 The SMSCs prepared using S15 afforded PCE of 2.44% and the maximum external quantum efficiency of 46%. When compared with physically blended BDTRh and PCBM, the SMSC showed more efficient charge transfer and lower energy loss, resulting in Voc of 0.97 V. When compared with the binary blending system, the self-aggregation effect in the self-assembly process is weak, and π–π stacking between the donor groups is weakened, too; therefore, a more suitable phase separation size can be obtained. In addition, SMSCs showed excellent device and morphological stability; further, the PCE did not decrease within 100 h under 80 °C.
Roncali et al. designed and synthesized dual-functioning 3D-conjugated donor–acceptor integral molecules with triphenylamine as the core, containing different amounts of peripheral electron acceptor groups (S16).36 Light-emitting OSCs based on S16 exhibited both interesting PCE under intense simulated solar irradiation and electroluminescence under moderate voltage. Under white-light illumination of 88 mW cm−2, the SMSCs (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/S16/Al) afforded Jsc of 1.70 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.76 V, FF of 27%, and PCE of 0.40%. Hagemann et al. synthesized an all-in-one molecule for OSCs (S17).37 This all-in-one molecule compound integrated all the functionalities needed for solar cell action with regard to light harvesting and carrier generation and separation, as well as facilitating transport and contact with the external electrodes. A convergent synthesis strategy comprised around 60 steps in the preparation of regioregular oligothiophenes, zinc porphyrin, bis(terpyridine) ruthenium(II) complex, hetero-oligo-phenylenevinylene, and functional end groups. However, since the molecular structure limits the phase separation size during the self-assembly process, a continuous interpenetrating network structure cannot be formed, which resulted in the low PCE of SMSCs fabricated using S17.
In 2017, Kumar synthesized nonmetallized and metallized porphyrin-fullerene materials S18 and S19 (H2P-C60 and ZnP-C60, respectively) and studied the mechanism of charge transport in the molecule. In addition, they proved that porphyrin functional groups were excellent as donor–acceptor small molecules. Metallized molecules influence the self-assembly process via metal coordination bonds; however, nonmetallized small molecules can result in stable and unambiguous self-assembly, which can yield efficient photon capture, charge generation, and charge separation. The quenching of nonmetallized porphyrins is more pronounced than that of metallized porphyrins since the photoinduced charge transport process between porphyrins and fullerenes can result in the faster inactivation of the singlet excited state. Subsequently, the research team optimized this structure to obtain S19. The optimized structure further proved that the charge separation process can become much faster than that obtainable from the original structure by investigating the transient absorption spectroscopy. At the same time, S19 and S18 were compared in both film and solution. The charge-separated transient substances (cationic and anionic radicals) and the different self-assembly processes between the two molecules were observed within a very short delay time. Nevertheless, the aggregation effect of such structures during the assembly process was considerable. Therefore, a continuous interpenetrating network structure could not be obtained, and hence, an efficient SMSC could not be achieved, too.38,39
From the abovementioned examples, it is evident that it is difficult to form a continuous interpenetrating network structure because of the molecular structure limitation of donor–acceptor small molecules, and the aggregation effect can be easily induced. The structure of a non-fullerene donor–acceptor small molecule with non-fullerene as the acceptor unit still necessitates further research. Based on non-fullerene acceptor materials developed in recent years, there is considerable development potential for donor–acceptor small molecules.
2.2 Double-cable polymers
For a double-cable polymer, the conjugated backbone works as the hole transport channel and the pendant acceptor units aggregate to form the electron transport channel. Different acceptor units of the side chain of the polymer are ordinarily stacked along the surface to form a fibrillar center with the backbone structure of the polymer suspended around the center of the cluster. Consequently, the donor and acceptor phases are formed by the self-assembly of a p-type main chain and an n-type side chain during film preparation, and they exhibit the characteristics of bipolar electron–hole charge transport. The advantage of a double-cabled donor–acceptor molecule is that it allows the rapid decomposition of the holes and electrons (generated by the donor and acceptor phases) by means of the two “cables,” respectively, to effectively suppress charge recombinations; consequently, it has become a hotspot for research (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Chemical structures of double-cable polymers, C1–C11. 
In subsequent works, conjugated double-cable polymers with fullerene as the acceptor units have seen continuous improvements. In 2001, except small molecules, Janssen et al. also designed and synthesized donor–acceptor conjugated polymers derived from fullerene. Furthermore, the donor unit of C1 was synthesized via a palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of diiodobenzene, carrying a pendant methanofullerene, and oligo(p-phenylenevinylene), end-capped with two reactive ethynylenes, under inert conditions in 1,2-dichlorobenzene/triethylamine.40 Experiments revealed that there is a light-induced electron transfer reaction between the donor and acceptor units. Further, the SMSC (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/C1/Al) with C1 as the active layer showed Jsc of 0.42 m cm−2, Voc of 0.83 V, FF of 29%, and PCE of 0.1% under white-light illumination (100 mW cm−2, AM1.5 G).
In 2007, we designed and synthesized polythiophene high-solubility double-cable polymer PT-F (C2) with comparatively high content of C60 side chains; here, the donor and acceptor units were connected by flexible carbon–oxygen bonds.41 When compared with the film structure of PT-K and PCBM blend without C60 units on the side chain, AFM characterization revealed an obvious change in the roughness (Fig. 3a). The films prepared using donor–acceptor molecules have more continuous and uniform surface morphology and smaller phase separation structures. The absorption and photoluminescence spectra reveal that there is no interaction between the polythiophene main chain and C60 on the side chain in the ground state, but they interact strongly in the excited state. The maximum PCE of OSCs based on PT-F is 0.52% under AM1.5 illumination at 100 mW cm−2, which is 5 times higher than the maximum PCE (0.10%) of the device based on PT-K and PCBM with a binary blend structure.
 Fig. 3  (a) AFM images of the surface of S11 film and (b) the surface of the film of a blend of C2 and PCBM.41 
In 2012, Lav et al. synthesized and characterized intrinsic ambipolar molecule C3, containing carbazole (electron donor) and fullerene (electron acceptor) moieties bonded to each other by a hexyl group.42 Further, C3 characterized that the self-assembly processes of the donor polymer backbone and acceptor side chain during film preparation are affected by the hydrogen bond to form phase separation structures of different sizes. Further, fluorescence spectrophotometry data confirmed that the electron transport occurs from the carbazole to C60 unit. In 2015, Ramar used dry FeCl3 Lewis acid as the catalyst to synthesize C4, a polyisothianaphthene (PITN)–fullerene (C60) donor–acceptor double-cable polymer, by means of the Friedel–Crafts reaction.43 UV-visible absorption data and cyclic voltammetry data revealed that PITN–C60 retained the electronic properties of PITN and C60; further, the occurrence of photogenerated electron transfer from PITN to C60 was confirmed. However, as shown in Fig. 4g–i, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) data confirmed that C4 could not form a continuous uniform structure of phase separation, which caused obvious holes with large sizes during film preparation because of strong conjugation and induced aggregation.
 Fig. 4  (a) AFM height images of C8 after thermal treatment for 10 min at 120 °C; (b) pristine PDI 1; (c) pristine C8 without PDI; (d) heat-treated 4:1 C8 without PDI/PDI blend; (e) pristine 1:4 C8 without PDI/PDI blend; (f) heat-treated 1:4 C8 without PDI/PDI; (g) TEM image of PITN. (h and i) HRTEM images of C60 and C4, respectively. Insets show the SAED patterns of the respective samples.43,47 
Although many improvements have been made with regard to the molecular structure in these reports, the PCE of the consequent SMSC devices with an active layer composed of a double-cable polymer has not seen considerable improvements. The foremost reason for limiting the PCE of such SMSC devices can be divided into two aspects: on one hand, the proximity or direct conjugation of the donor and acceptor units may facilitate charge recombinations; on the other hand, there are no suitable donor and acceptor phases in the process of self-assembly, and the lack of effective channels for carrier collection and separation can also increase charge recombinations. In this case, some similarities of the issues are presented between the SMSCs and blend-typed heterojunction cells designed and prepared based on the fullerene system. Both these structures require the generation of phase-separated nanostructures with appropriate size and continuity. At present, C60-based conjugate binary system yielded a string of fixed concepts with respect to light absorption, exciton generation, transport, and collection occurring in a linear order. However, a molecule having a fullerene unit should be considered as a unit of a three-dimensional material since charge generation and transport do not always follow an ideal linear path of the designed molecular structure. Moreover, with research and development, an acceptor unit in which C60 is used as the core can limit the absorption range, energy level, and bandgap width of the acceptor molecule, which can fundamentally limit the further development of the SMSC. Researchers have also experimented with other non-fullerene acceptor units for the design and synthesis of acceptor molecules.
As an n-type transport material, anthraquinone has high electron affinity to effectively promote the separation of excitons, which is often used as a functional group as a part of photovoltaic materials. It has been used to synthesize and prepare double-cable donor–acceptor molecules. In 2004, M. Catellani et al. designed and synthesized double-cable polymer C5, which contained an acceptor moiety (anthraquinone or tetracyanoanthraquinonedimethane) and 3-alkylthiophene monomers.44 During this process, the anthraquinone monomer content was a worthwhile contender for adjusting the donor–acceptor ratio as well as the electronic properties of the molecule. In addition, their potential use as photosensitive materials was also studied via FTIR light-induced absorption and light-induced electron spin resonance spectroscopy. The obtained results revealed that the photoinduced electron transfer from the polythiophene skeleton to the anthraquinone substituent and its adjustability could be changed by modifying the content of the acceptor unit, which guided the subsequent steps.
In 2008, Janssen et al. synthesized PPX-ANT (C6) by using anthraquinone as the side-hung electron acceptor unit.45C6 comprises diethynyl-1,4-phenylene fluorene or phenylene units bearing a pendant 9,10-anthraquinone moiety side chain. However, it is possible that the anthraquinone structure affects the self-assembly process such that a good phase separation structure cannot be obtained and a meaningful photoelectric device cannot be realized, too. Based on earlier research, Mohamad et al. used P3HT and anthraquinone acceptor groups to synthesize PT-AQ (C7) in 2011, and they determined the photoelectric properties of the donor–acceptor molecules.46 The relationship between the phase separation structure formed by self-assembly and light absorption in the molecule was determined via testing. It may be noted that the molecular structure of the acceptor unit (anthraquinone) in the donor–acceptor molecule is relatively simple and the rigidity is weak, which consequently leads to the limitation of the self-assembly process; therefore, the PCE of the final device is only 0.02%.
In 2011, Mohamad et al. designed and synthesized C8, a double-cabled polymer containing a backbone of alternating 2,7-linked carbazole repeat units and covalently bonded perylenediimide (PDI) substituent with dithienyl repeating units.47 In order to study the effect of PDI units on the framework of the polymer and its photophysical interaction, three reference polymers with the same backbone as that of C8 but with different PDI substituents were prepared and analyzed. Testing of the polymer of this type revealed that the apparent electron transfer from the polymer backbone to the PDI monomer was observed due to covalent bonding, indicating highly quenched excitons, weak solution, and thin-film fluorescence. From Fig. 4, the AFM data reveal that as the proportion of PDI decreases, a continuous interpenetrating network structure cannot be formed; besides, the contact area between the donor and acceptor phases is reduced, resulting in a decrease in the path of electron transport.
In the past two years, Li Weiwei et al. developed a series of double-cable polymers for the preparation of highly efficient SMSCs using perylene bisimide (PBI) as the acceptor unit (C9). This novel polymer contained the electron donor poly(benzodithiophene) (BDT) as the linear conjugated framework for hole transport and PBI unit for electron transport, which were connected via a dodecyl linker.48 Therefore, by using this novel polymer structure, the quantum efficiency could be improved since nanophase separation was optimized between the donor and acceptor units. Then, sulfur and fluorine substituents were used to adjust the energy level and crystallinity of the conjugated polymer. Further, the conjugated BDT main chain and PBI side-chain unit in the block polymer followed the preferential π–π stacking direction, which could facilitate interchain charge transport to be perpendicular to the plane. In Fig. 5g and h, GISAXS shows that the characteristic distance of these polymers is about 5–6 nm, and the distance between the donor and acceptor units is about 2.1 nm. From Fig. 5e and f, two-fold d-spacings (as shown in the TEM images) between the PBDTT backbone and PBI unit are close to the GISAXS data. In addition, due to the fact that the linear conjugated backbone acted as a scaffold for the crystallization of the PBI group during self-assembly, the donor and acceptor groups afforded better phase separation. Meanwhile, with up to 80% internal quantum efficiency, optimized nanophase separation could be used to realize efficient excitation dissociation and charge transport; the PCE of the consequent SMSC device was as high as 4.18%.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) AFM phase images and (d–f) bright-field TEM images of C9 thin films fabricated from a CB/DIO solution and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. Insets: Fourier transform of a part of the images to determine d-spacings; (g) illustration of C9 in the nanostructures. BDT is indicated in blue color and PBI, red color; (h) GISAXS profiles of C9 thin films spin-cast onto Si substrates using CB/DIO and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min.48 
Subsequently, Li Weiwei et al. developed three novel conjugated polymers C10 (SCP3) based on a DPP and BDT backbone and PBI side chains for use in SMSCs.49 Moreover, they found that the linear skeleton of polymer C10 under self-assembly could form an aligned structure when compared with polymer SCP1 that possessed a hexylthiophene unit. Therefore, more suitable nanophase separation between them could be obtained, since the acceptor units were located between the conjugated backbones, which also resulted in the higher efficiency of 2.74% that could be achieved by the SMSCs based on C10. Hence, the obtained data reveal that microphase separation can be optimized to achieve high-performance SMSCs by fine-tuning the chemical structure of the polymer.
In 2017, Chen et al. developed double-cabled polymer C11 comprising poly(fluorene-alt-thiophene) (PFT), n-butoxyl linker, and PDI pendants.50 They found that C11 is almost nonconductive, and the hole and electron mobility is 10−10 cm2 V−1 s−1. This means that there is no charge transfer inside the molecule, but energy can be transferred from the donor PFT chain to the acceptor PDI unit. Therefore, it could be doped as the active agent at the P3HT–PCBM interface, which could change the phase separation structure by its two-phase affinity and optimize the interpenetrating network structure of the blended layer, thereby resulting in effective charge generation from P3HT excitons as well as efficient charge transport; further, the photocurrent and stability of cells could be enhanced. In the subsequent contents of this paper, the donor–acceptor small-molecule structure prepared by combining with fullerene has also achieved comparative results.
The abovementioned studies reveal that different types of donor and acceptor units can be used to prepare double-cable polymers. In the design of a donor–acceptor material, the size of the structure, type, and conjugation of the molecular donor and acceptor units can be adjusted by considering the self-assembly process of the blended heterojunction solar cells. On this basis, the synthesis of double-cable donor–acceptor molecules should be reexamined; further, the preparation of SMSCs can provide a new direction for the development of OSCs.
2.3 Block copolymers
It is well known that block copolymers are composed of at least two donor blocks or acceptor blocks, which can form various phase-separated nanostructures via molecular self-assembly; further, they are also the major way for achieving orderly and stable distribution of the donor and acceptor units. In addition, the energy levels of the donor and acceptor units and the range of light absorption, size, and continuity of the crystal phase, as well as the structure and properties of the interface of the donor and acceptor units, are crucial elements that influence the photoelectric properties of the film. However, systematic studies regarding the rigidity of the block copolymer backbone framework, branch density of the acceptor group, and form of copolymers are still insufficient. Copolymers comprising conjugated donor and acceptor blocks have been reported many times, but many aspects with regard to achieving a rational active layer structure of ideal OSCs are worthy of further investigations (Scheme 3).
 Scheme 3  Chemical structures of block donor–acceptor copolymers Q1–Q17. 
In 2000, Hadziioannou et al. reported a donor–acceptor, rod–coil diblock copolymer with the objective of enhancing the photovoltaic efficiency of the poly(p-phenylenevinylene)-C60 (PPV-C60, Q1a) system by incorporating both the components in the molecular architecture via self-structuring using microphase separation.46 Relevant studies found that the self-assembly process in rod–coil-type molecules could enhance order between the molecular layers, but reduce the internal stability of the molecular layer, resulting in a liquid crystal phase of the block copolymer at room temperature. A pinning effect could be achieved by increasing the fullerene content in order to improve stability after film formation. Q1b can be obtained by changing the end group of the donor unit of Q1a.47Q1b also exhibits the self-assembly behavior of rod–coil diblock copolymers when used as the active layer, and it yields an enhanced photovoltaic response. The same research group subsequently changed the research method and changed the polymer capping group to obtain Q1c.48 Evidently, this method could be used to determine the correlation between the self-organization of rod–coil diblock copolymers and film morphology. Under other similar conditions, the performance of SMSCs using Q1 as the active layer is superior to that of PPV and polystyrene connected with C60 blended as the active layer.51–53 In 2008, Hadziioannou et al. reported a similar block copolymer Q2a consisting of poly[(2,5-di(2′-ethyl)hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (DEH-PPV) end-capped with 2,2,5-trimethyl-4-phenyl-3-azahexane-3-oxyl nitroxide (TIPNO) as the initiator for the nitroxide-mediated radical polymerization (NMRP) of the coil block with C60 side-chain units.49 By using different butyl acrylate (BA)/chloromethylstyrene (CMS) ratios, the polymer/monomer feed ratio could afford a better molecular structure. The effects of the molecular weight of the coil block and molecular weight of the grafted fullerene on the molecular self-assembly process were investigated. From Fig. 6a and b, it is evident that Q2a does not form a long-range ordered interpenetrating network structure, but it exhibits an independent fibrous structure. Rod–coil microphase separation can enhance order between the layers, but it eventually destroys this order. Fullerenes prevent the formation of lamellar phases by pinning the coil segments, but the addition of fullerenes can considerably affect the assembly of the polymer nanocrystals. In the same year, Hadziioannou et al. simplified the molecular structure of Q2a to synthesize Q2b, and they characterized the photoelectric performance.54,55
 Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structure of Q2a; (b) AFM phase image of as-deposited copolymer Q2a; (c) surface topographic and (d) phase images of a Q5 film spin-coated from a chlorobenzene solution onto an ITO-coated glass substrate; AFM phase images of (e) Q7a and (f) random copolymer films. (g) AFM phase images of Q4b; (h) TEM images of the self-assembled structure of Q4a.50,57,59,61 
In early 2001, Zhang et al. reported the polymerization of a fullerene unit with the polythiophene main chain and substituted it with solubilizing side chains to obtain copolymer Q3.56 The inclusion of the side-chain-bonded fullerenes does not prevent the ordering of the polythiophene main chain at low concentrations. The organization of the polymer is not seriously disturbed even at 14 mol% of the fullerene-carrying side chains, and the sufficient mobility of polymer chains can accommodate the geometric relaxation upon treatment with chloroform vapor. Moreover, the PCE of 0.60% was obtained under low-light-intensity monochromatic light of 505 nm and 0.10 mW cm−2.
In 2009, Lee et al. synthesized Q4a (P3HT-b-C60) molecule, which was based on a P3HT and fullerene derivative via two-step (GRIM polymerization and ATRP) coupling followed by linking a fullerene derivate (PCBA) to the second block.57 It also exhibited well-defined phase morphology with the formation of a bicontinuous structure after annealing at 150 °C, as shown in Fig. 7. When comparing the photoluminescence spectra of the P3HT-b-C60 film with those of the P3HT/PCBM blend film, it was found that P3HT-b-C60 showed the complete quenching of photoluminescence, while the P3HT/PCBM blend showed certain photoluminescence. This shows that charge transfer was more effective in P3HT-b-C60 block copolymers than that in the P3HT/PCBM blends. In the same year, Nguyen et al. synthesized Q4b (P3HT-b-P(SxAy)-C60).58 Changes in the molecular structure had a significant impact on the assembly of molecules in the film, and a fibrous phase similar to Q4a was not formed. Although a large number of rigid C60 units are present in the copolymer, self-assembly can be observed in the obtained copolymer; further a repeatable, well-defined, long-range nanofiber structure is formed similar to that of the typical rod–coil block copolymer. This is the first time that the formation of nanofibers has been demonstrated in block copolymers when using C60. However, due to their complicated structures, there are obvious voids on the film surface, and it is impossible to form phase separation and continuous interpenetrating network structures with an appropriate size. Further, Nguyen et al. synthesized thiophene blocks and polystyrene with C60 side chains to afford Q5 (P3HT-b-P(S89BAz11)-C60),59 which was similar to Q2. AFM data confirmed that P3HT was partially self-assembled into a very regular nanofiber structure under thermodynamic equilibrium, while the polystyrene block connected by C60 was attached to the side wall of the nanofiber (Fig. 6c and d). However, the electron and hole mobilities of these copolymers were fairly different; therefore, equilibrium could not be achieved, yielding poor PCE. Only ternary blending can be used to dope it into the P3HT and PCBM binary structure, which can change the morphology of the blended film and improve the device performance.
 Fig. 7  AFM (a–d) height and (e–h) phase images of annealed copolymer Q7b films; (i–l) AFM topographical (left) and phase images (right) of SMSC active materials from an annealed film of Q8b and annealed Q8b layer incorporating electrospun nanofibers.62,64 
In 2009, Charvet et al. reported Q6, a block copolymer synthesized by porphyrins and C60 units.60 By means of various tests, Q6 could be observed to self-assemble into nanofibers with a uniform diameter. The TEM image revealed that the nanofibers comprised regularly alternating zinc porphyrin and C60 perpendicular to their long axes. In addition, the nanofibers exhibited excellent photoconductivity and bipolar charge transfer capability, electron mobility of 3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, and hole mobility of 3.7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. The porphyrin and C60 units formed separate stacked structures in the fibers, and the stacked direction was not perpendicular to the long axis of the fiber; therefore, the authors concluded that the photocurrent propagated in the vertical direction rather than along the one-dimensional nanofibers.
In addition to the above copolymers with P3HT, fullerene, and other monomers, Hashimoto et al. reported block copolymer Q7a in 2010.61 This copolymer was synthesized by the quasi-active polymerization of 3-alkylthiophene catalyzed by Ni(dppp)Cl2 and linked with a C60 side chain. Further, the UV-vis absorption spectrum revealed that the absorption of Q7a in film and the absorption in solution showed a red-shift in the absorption peak near 610 nm. According to the crystal state of P3HT, the P3HT block self-assembled into a fibrillar structure because of crystallization and is separated from the other blocks, as shown in Fig. 6e and f. In addition, rigid fullerene units can aggregate around the polythiophene fibers, which could induce nanoscale self-assembled phase separation. Moreover, SMSCs prepared with Q7a showed PCE of 1.70% (Jsc: 6.15 mA cm−2; Voc: 0.54 V; FF: 51%). Moreover, the device exhibited excellent thermal stability, and no significant change was observed when the device was treated at 130 °C for 80 h. In 2012, Miyanishi introduced fullerene functional groups into a block to synthesize block copolymer Q7b with a controllable block length, which was strikingly similar to Q7a, via quasi-living polymerization catalyzed by Ni(dppp)Cl2.62 Unlike Q7a, CO units were used in the polythiophene donor unit of Q7b. The AFM phase diagram revealed that the self-assembly of P3HT and fullerene groups afforded clear nanostructures with uniform size. Photovoltaic devices based on this polymer could afford PCE of 2.5% when compared with SMSCs reported earlier; further, much higher FF of 63% could be achieved as compared to those obtained from other SMSCs. These results revealed that the rational design of a block copolymer material could be used to fabricate suitable SMSC devices without necessitating a binary blend structure.
Subsequently, in 2015, Massimiliano et al. synthesized bromoalkane with fullerenes to afford copolymer Q8a (COP2).63 OSCs could be prepared by directly using Q8a as the active layer. After the optimization of surface morphology, thickness, and thermal annealing, the aggregation of the donor and acceptor units during the self-assembly process could be effectively avoided. The PCE reached 4.19%, which is the highest value in the reported SMSCs. Q8a demonstrated that the possibility of using a block copolymer for the preparation of SMSCs exceeded that when using binary blended structures. In 2017, Filippo et al. further adjusted Q8a to optimize the molecular structure to reduce the issue of the affected charge recombinations of the SMSCs.64 Block copolymer Q8b (CoP(3DDT)-(C60HT)) with high solubility, regioregularity, and fullerene content was further synthesized by studying the correlation between the layered structure of the active layer given by the photovoltaic characteristics of the solar cells as well as electrospinning results. The obtained results suggested that by optimizing the interpenetrating network structure and nanoscale structure of the active layer, the efficiency of SMSCs could be considerably improved, and the highest efficiency could be achieved. Further, these results indicated that the structure of the molecular arrangement of appropriate molecular orientation formed in the self-assembly process could improve the performance of OSCs relative to that in the aggregation mode of the physical blending of the binary structure.64
In 2016, Thelakkat et al. proposed an approach to obtain copolymer Q9 (P3HT-b-PPC61BM), which could be used to exercise high control over the molecular weight, donor–acceptor component content, and fullerene grafting density.65 The fullerene grafting density of the block copolymer obtained by using this method could be controlled within the range of 26 to 60 wt%, while the total proportion of P3HT to PC60BM could be maintained in the range of 1:0.70 to 1:0.92. Q9 showed bipolar charge transport in organic field-effect transistors; more importantly, changes in the grafting density of high fullerene could increase the electron mobility by two orders of magnitude, which proved that a suitable fullerene ratio could yield a better interpenetrating network structure during self-assembly and improve the separation and transport of charge.
As mentioned above in the discussion on double-cabled polymers, researchers also applied non-fullerene acceptor materials in manufacturing block copolymers. In 2007, Thelakkat et al. synthesized block copolymer Q10.66 This block copolymer exhibited an ideal linear nanodomain with a diameter of 15 nm, which was in the same range as the exciton diffusion length. A shift in the HOMO value obtained by different donor units linked to Q10 could lead to an increase in the energy-driving force at the donor–acceptor interface, thereby improving the Jsc value of these SMSC devices to become higher than 1.1 mA cm−2, with the consequent PCE of 0.32%. Long linear morphology is essential to promote charge percolation. The block copolymer domain alignment can be induced by means of solvent annealing or by using an electric field.
Subsequently, the same research group synthesized polymer Q11a (P3HT-b-PPerAcr) with P3HT as the donor group and perylene bisimide as the acceptor.67 The specific crystal structure formed by the self-assembly of these two structures was observed in the experiment, and the structure domain of microphase separation was evident; this conclusion was also confirmed via scanning electron microscopy (SEM). On the basis of Q11a, the research group further prepared Q11b by adding 1H-1,2,3-triazole, further optimizing the preparation process of the device in order to study the self-assembly of the block copolymer and the crystallization characteristics of each component.68 During this research, microphase-separated block copolymers were found to support bipolar charge transport, and the mobilities of electrons and holes were largely dependent on the orientation of the microphase, connectivity, and molecular order within the microphase. Similarly, in 2009, Zhang et al. prepared another block copolymer Q11c by adding a vinyl bond.69 The SMSCs afforded Jsc of 0.67 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.59 V, and PCE of 0.11% under white-light illumination of 100 W cm−2. Furthermore, under thermal annealing at 150 °C for 20 min, Jsc increased to 2.57 mA cm−2, and FF increased from 28% to 38%, while the PCE improved to 0.49%. From the SEM data, the backbone of the long-range ordered polymer and spherical rigid acceptor unit could be clearly observed, indicating that thermal annealing could further optimize the self-assembly process to form a better phase-separated structure.
In 2007, Sun et al. reported novel -donor-bridge–acceptor-bridge-type block copolymer Q12 with alkyl-derivatized poly-p-phenylenevinylene (PPV) as the donor block and sulfone–alkyl-derivatized PPV as the acceptor block; further, the bridge was a nonconjugated and flexible unit.70 Although X-ray diffraction data revealed that the copolymer possessed some phase domains formed by self-assembly, the intrinsic nanophase separation and molecular self-assembly of the block unit could not form a continuous interpenetrating network structure, causing inefficient separation and charge transport. Furthermore, the SMSC device had fairly limited PCE with Jsc of only 58 μA cm−2, while Voc was high as 1.10 V.
Similarly, in 2015, Wu et al. reported water-soluble poly(3-hexylthiophene)-block-poly(phenyl isocyanide) block copolymer Q13 (P3HT-b-PPI), which was polymerized by P3HT and the hydrophilic tri(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether chain (poly(phenyl isocyanide) (PPI)).71 It has become the focus of research for its interesting rigid helical structure as well as its application in chiral recognition and supramolecular self-assembly. Moreover, the self-assembly effects in different solvents were different due to the intermolecular π–π interactions of the P3HT blocks. However, in the film preparation process, the aggregation phenomenon was considerably severe, and larger-sized particles were formed instead of a continuous interpenetrating network structure, which contributed toward the fact that a worthwhile phase separation structure could not be obtained.
In 2016, Sivula et al. designed block copolymer Q14 (MBC1) with DPP and poly(bithiophene-thienothiophene).72 The worthwhile charge transport performance of Q14 as the active layer was proven by standard characterization. In addition, morphological characterization revealed that Q14 could self-assemble into nanoscale domains. Further, benzothiadiazole has been widely used in various organic photoelectric materials due to its excellent photoelectric properties. In 2015, Gomez et al. synthesized block copolymer Q15a (poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)-b-poly((9,9-bis(2-octyl)fluorene-2,7-diyl)-alt-(4,7-di-(thiophene-2-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-5′,5′′-diyl))), motivated by self-assembled conjugated block copolymers.73 The rate constant of charge transfer in the model interface of the donor block copolymer was examined using density functional theory (DFT): the obtained results showed that intermolecular charge recombinations could be largely dependent on the interfacial width, with the presence of a sharp interface inhibiting intermolecular charge recombinations. Configurations based on a single FTBT repeat unit and α-sexithiophene are used, where perpendicular molecules were translated to calculate the charge transfer rate constant by using DFT. In 2015, Verduzco et al. further optimized the previous work, and a morphological analysis of Q15b revealed that the crystal orientation of the polymer was independent of the side-chain composition, and it was mainly determined by the post-treatment process.74 GISAXS analysis revealed that when compared with the P3HT–PFTBT system without side chains on the TBT unit, the molecular spacing was significantly reduced in the block copolymer samples with the added side chains. This suggests that future works should focus on increasing the use of side chains that separate phases between the polymer blocks.
In 2015, Sommer et al. performed a very similar study, successfully synthesizing poly(carbazole-alt-dithienylbenzothiadiazole) segment (SF-PCDTBT) as the electron acceptor block in combination with P3HT as the donor block (Q16a).75 P3HT self-assembled into the crystal structure via π–π interchain stacking of the conjugated thiophene ring as well as the space between the alkyl side-chain separation and polymer backbones (Fig. 8g–i). It has been proven that nanoscale layered morphology from the self-assembly of the P3HT-b-PFTBT block copolymers yielded PCE of 2.7%. In addition, the phase separation of the block copolymers fabricated using SF-PCDTBT-b-P3HT exhibited the orientation of the surface of the P3HT domain, and the addition of additives had no impact on the arrangement and composition of the self-assembly (Fig. 8a–f). Moreover, there was no relation among device efficiency, intermolecular alignment, and crystal orientation, largely because of the fact that they were independent of each other. In the same year, Verduzco published a similar work, too. Subsequently, Gomez et al. fabricated a similar polymer, namely, Q16b.76 From the GIWAXS data shown in Fig. 8j–m, the addition of 1-chloronaphthalene could be used to control the crystals of the P3HT block from mostly face-on to edge-on packing. Meanwhile, it was found that the dominant crystal orientation was not critical to block copolymers, whether face-on or edge-on. Instead, the wide distribution of the microcrystalline orientation ensured a transfer path for charges along any direction, enabling the efficient extraction of charges in photovoltaic devices.
 Fig. 8  (a–f) AFM height images (inset: phase image) of Q16a; (g) 1D GISAXS intensity profiles as a function of the scattering vector q of the three thin films. Corresponding 1D GIWAXS profiles for (h) in-plane and (i) out-of-plane a-axis of Q16a.75 (j and k) 2D grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) data of Q15b films cast from solutions without 1-chloronaphthalene (j) and with 5% 1-chloronaphthalene as the solvent additive (k) (all the samples were annealed at 165 °C for 10 min); (l and m) schematic illustrations for π-stacking within P3HT domains denoting the molecular orientation for Q16b films cast from solutions without a solvent additive and cast from 5% 1-chloronaphthalene solutions.76 
In 2015 and 2017, Jones et al. synthesized a library of P3HT block poly((9,9-dialkylfluorene)-2,7-diyl-alt-[4,7-bis(alkylthiophen-5-yl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole]-2′,2′′-diyl) (PFTBT) donor–acceptor all-conjugated block copolymer (Q17). A preliminary morphological analysis revealed that phase separation existed in the thin film, because of which different polymers could self-assemble into ordered morphology; further, the length scale was determined by the degree of polymerization. The block copolymers under investigation exhibited an out-of-plane crystal orientation after deposition; on thermal annealing at higher temperatures, the crystal orientation flips to in-plane orientation. In addition, the aggregation state in the solution can also affect the self-assembly process. Currently, with non-fullerene as a research hotspot, continuous investigations into block copolymers based on different unit types of BDT and IDT as the core have promising development prospects (Table 1).77,78
Table 1 Performance of SMSCs fabricated from donor–acceptor integral molecules




Name

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Radioactivity (mW cm−2)
Reference number





S4

0.235
0.65
25
0.04
65

22




S7

0.25
0.32
27
0.03
75

24




S10

1.60
0.66
28
0.37
100

26




S11

0.93
0.70
23
0.15
100

27




S12

3.30
0.88
44
1.28
100

28




S14

6.70
0.66
49
2.17
100

30




S15

7.02
0.97
36
2.44
100

31




S16

1.70
0.76
27
0.40
100

32




C1

0.42
0.83
29
0.10
100

36




C2

2.41
0.75
38
0.52
100

37




C8

0.07
0.72
21
0.011
100

43




C9

7.60
0.92
60
4.18
100

44




C10

8.96
0.68
0.45
2.74
100

45




C7

0.11
0.72
25
0.02
100

42




Q3

10.00
0.75
25
0.6
0.1 (505 nm)

52




Q7a

6.15
0.54
51
1.7
100

57




Q7b

7.04
0.50
60
2.13
100

58




Q8a

13.5
0.58
53
4.19
100

59




Q8b

13.3
0.68
62
5.58
100

60




Q10

1.14
0.69
32
0.32
100

62




Q11c

2.57
0.51
37
0.49
100

65




Q16a

1.95 ± 0.4
1.08 ± 0.02
45 ± 5
0.95 ± 0.28
100

71





3. Conclusion
Owing to their low cost, marginal environmental impact, light weight, and flexibility, OSCs are expected to be in a better position to resolve the problems encountered in photovoltaic conversion. In recent years, comprehensive investigations into OSCs have made spectacular progress; since the PCE has exceeded 15%, they can enter the stage of industrial production. Research based on non-fullerene acceptor materials has significantly improved the device efficiency of OSCs, guiding further development in the chemical synthesis of donor–acceptor materials. Further, it could prompt studies that focus on the next step of industrialization, which is reductions in cost, simplifications in preparation processes, and improvements in device stability. Furthermore, from these viewpoints, SMSCs have pertinently unique advantages that may have a tremendous impact on the future of organic photovoltaic solar cells.
When compared with binary blended OSCs, SMSCs provide an efficient avenue to induce better phase separation between the donor and acceptor phases, thereby yielding better morphological stability. In order to further improve the performance of SMSC devices, film morphology and photoelectric characteristics could be optimized by designing the donor–acceptor polymer with a single molecule. Therefore, in the molecular design and synthesis processes, the selection of donor and acceptor blocks, charge carrier mobility, charge stoichiometry, dielectric constant, and connection between donor and acceptor blocks need to be considered. The molar ratio and alkyl spacing between the donor and acceptor, as well as the crystal arrangement of the units, can yield an ideal continuous interpenetrating network structure, which could be used for the effective generation and transport of charge. As discussed in this paper, donor–acceptor molecules, double-cable polymers, and block copolymers represent different research directions for SMSCs. Since most of the double-cable polymer and block copolymer structures comprise flexible chains as the connection unit, suitable surface morphology with phase separation can be achieved. As compared to double-cable polymers, the donor unit of a block copolymer is more complex, yielding more possibilities for the size and continuity of the crystalline phase. Donor–acceptor integral molecule synthesis is easier, but it is very likely that a continuous interpenetrating network structure cannot be formed during the self-assembly process due to the lack of a polymer backbone and connection via a flexible chain. Moreover, the carrier transport distance between the donor and acceptor units also limits further development. According to this, the issue related to low FF and low Jsc values of SMSCs could be largely attributed to this performance. Currently, the most highly efficient SMSCs are fabricated by using block polymers, which can be chiefly attributed to their achievable diversified structures of phase separation during the process of molecular self-assembly. This also offers infinite possibilities for design and synthesis strategies. Based on the current molecular structures of block copolymers, principal directions for studies during the subsequent stage can involve SMSC synthesis with spectral complementarity, matched energy level, and high efficiency with stability. Lately, the emergence of non-fullerene acceptors has also provided a novel avenue for the development of SMSCs. These different approaches have made remarkable advances, facilitating the realization of PCE values of about 5%. These properties can be used as an excellent starting point, which have proven that SMSCs can represent a reliable method to achieve highly efficient OSCs that can be easily fabricated. Although a range of issues persist in the current period, the simple and efficient manufacturing of SMSCs can definitely have a tremendous impact on the field of new energy and promote the sustainable development of energy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51873007, 51961165102, 21835006), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities in China (2019MS025, 2018MS032, 2017MS027, 2017XS084).
References
D. Wöhrle and D. Meissner, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 129–138 CrossRef .
J. B. Christoph, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 21–26 Search PubMed .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and S. S. Niyazi, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H. L. Yip, T. K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Zhang, X. Liu and J. H. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604059 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Dimitrov, A. A. Bakulin, C. B. Nielsen, B. C. Schroeder, J. Du, H. Bronstein, I. McCulloch, R. H. Friend and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18189–18192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. WudI and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 273–292 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, J. H. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. He, J. H. Hou and Y. F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1377–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Zhao, Y. K. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. H. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiao, A. Tang, Y. Wang, F. Gao, K. Tajima, H. Bin, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 7, 1704507 Search PubMed .
A. Tang, W. Song, B. Xiao, J. Guo, J. Min, Z. Ge, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3941–3947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tang, B. Xiao, F. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801582 CrossRef .
B. Xiao, A. Tang, J. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Wei and E. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602269 CrossRef .
J. H. Hou, O. Inganäs, H. F. Richard and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cravino, Polym. Int., 2007, 56, 943–956 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, S. Cardoso, D. Tatman, S. Lin, L. Noss, R. G. Seely, L. Sereno, J. D. C. Chessa, A. T. Moore, L. A. Moore and D. Gust, Photochem. Photobiol., 1995, 62, 1009–1014 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Eckert, J. F. Nicoud, J. F. Nierengarten, S. G. Liu, L. Echegoyen, F. Barigelletti, N. Armaroli, L. Ouali, V. Krasnikov and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 7467–7479 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gu, D. Tsamouras, C. Melzer, V. Krasnikov, J. P. Gisselbrecht, M. Gross, G. Hadziioannou and J. F. Nierengarten, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 1, 124–127 CrossRef .
E. Peeters, P. A. Hal, J. Knol, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 69–75 CrossRef .
P. A. v. Hal, A. H. E. Beckers, J. C. S. Meskers, J. A. R. Janssen, B. Jousselme, P. Blanchard and J. Roncali, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 5415–5429 CrossRef .
N. Martín, L. Sánchez, Á. M. Herranz, B. llescas and M. D. Guldi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1015–1024 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Fernández, S. Luis, D. Veldman, M. M. Wienk, C. Atienza, M. D. Guldi, J. A. R. Janssen and N. Martín, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 3189–3196 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Maggini, G. Possamai, E. Menna, G. Scorrano, N. Camaioni, G. Ridolfi, G. Casalbore-Miceli, L. Franco, M. Ruzzi and C. Corvaja, Chem. Commun., 2002, 18, 2028–2029 RSC .
T. Nishizawa, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 2440–2445 RSC .
T. Nishizawa, K. H. Lim, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2469–2471 RSC .
N. Banerji, M. Wang, J. Fan, E. S. Chesnut, F. Wudl and J.-E. Moser, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13286 RSC .
K. Narayanaswamy, A. Venkateswararao, P. Nagarjuna, S. Bishnoi, V. Gupta, S. Chand and S. P. Singh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12334–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Nguyen, T. H. Lee, B. Gautam, S. Y. Park, K. Gundogdu, J. Y. Kim and H. Y. Woo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702474 CrossRef .
A. Cravino, P. Leriche, O. Alévêque, S. Roquet and J. Roncali, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3033–3037 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hagemann, M. Jorgensen and C. F. Krebs, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 5546–5559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gupta, S. Naqvi, M. Jewariya, S. Chand and R. Kumar, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2017, 30, e3685 CrossRef .
N. Gupta, C. Sharma, M. Kumar and R. Kumar, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 13276–13286 RSC .
A. M. Ramos, M. T. Rispens, J. K. J. v. Duren, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6714–6715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Tan, J. H. Hou, Y. J. He, E. J. Zhou, C. H. Yang and Y. F. Li, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1868–1873 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Lav, F. Tran-Van, P. H. Aubert and C. Chevrot, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 1923–1929 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramar and R. Saraswathi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 852–861 CrossRef CAS .
M. Catellani, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 2–6 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gómez, B. Raúl, D. Veldman, J. Segura and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 4953–4960 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Mohamad, S. S. Chauhan, H. Yi, A. J. Cadby, D. G. Lidzey and A. Iraqi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1723–1730 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Mohamad, A. Fischereder, H. Yi, A. J. Cadby, D. G. Lidzey and A. Iraqi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 851–862 RSC .
G. Feng, J. Li, F. J. M. Colberts, M. Li, J. Zhang, F. Yang, Y. Jin, F. Zhang, R. A. J. Janssen, C. Li and W. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18647–18656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lai, C. Li, J. Zhang, F. Yang, F. J. M. Colberts, B. Guo, Q. M. Wang, M. Li, A. Zhang, R. A. J. Janssen, M. Zhang and W. Li, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7073–7077 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, J. Lu, D. Wang, C. Zheng, H. Wu, H. Zhang and D. Gao, Macromolecules, 2017, 51, 80–90 CrossRef .
U. Stalmach, D. B. Boer, C. Videlot, P. F. Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5464–5472 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bert, U. Stalmach, P. F. Hutten, C. Melzer, V. V. Krasnikov and G. Hadziioannou, Polymer, 2001, 42, 9097–9109 CrossRef .
M. H. Veen, B. Boer, U. Stalmach, I. K. Wetering and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3673–3684 CrossRef .
S. Barrau, T. Heiser, F. Richard, C. Brochon, C. Ngov, K. v. d. Wetering, G. Hadziioannou, D. V. Anokhin and D. A. Ivanov, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2701–2710 CrossRef CAS .
F. Richard, C. Brochon, N. Leclerc, D. Eckhardt, T. Heiser and G. Hadziioannou, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 885–891 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Zhang, S. Mattias, R. M. Andersson, M. Maggini, S. Bucella, E. Menna and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2001, 24, 1871–1874 CrossRef .
J. U. Lee, A. Cirpan, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1483 RSC .
C. Yang, J. K. Lee, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5416 RSC .
M. Dante, C. Yang, B. Walker, F. Wudl and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1835–1839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Charvet, S. Acharya, P. J. Hill, M. Akada, M. Y. Liao, S. Seki, Y. Honsho, A. Saeki and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 11, 18030–18031 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Miyanishi, Y. Zhang, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6723–6725 RSC .
S. Miyanishi, Y. Zhang, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6424–6437 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lanzi, E. Salatelli, T. Benelli, D. Caretti, L. Giorgini and F. P. Di-Nicola, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 42121 CrossRef .
F. Pierini, M. Lanzi, P. Nakielski, S. Pawłowska, O. Urbanek, K. Zembrzycki and T. A. Kowalewski, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4972–4981 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hufnagel, M. Fischer, T. Thurn-Albrecht and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1637–1647 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, S. M. Lindner and M. Thelakkat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1493–1500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, A. S. Lang and M. Thelakkat, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7901–7904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gupta, C. R. Singh, R. H. Lohwasser, M. Himmerlich, S. Krischok, P. Muller-Buschbaum, M. Thelakkat, H. Hoppe and T. Thurn-Albrecht, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12309–12318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. L. Zhang, A. Cirpon, P. T. Russell and T. Emrick, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1079–1082 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Sun, C. Zhang, A. Ledbetter, S. Choi, K. Seo, C. E. Bonner, M. Drees and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 043117 CrossRef .
M. Su, S. Y. Shi, Q. Wang, N. Liu, J. Yin, C. Liu, Y. Ding and Z. Q. Wu, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6519–6528 RSC .
A. Gasperini, M. Johnson, X. Jeanbourquin, L. Yao, A. Rahmanudin, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Polym. Chem., 2016, 8, 824–827 RSC .
H. Kuang, M. J. Janik and E. D. Gomez, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2015, 53, 1224–1230 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Smith, Y.-H. Lin, J. W. Mok, K. G. Yager, J. Strzalka, W. Nie, A. D. Mohite and R. Verduzco, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 8346–8353 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lombeck, H. Komber, A. Sepe, R. H. Friend and M. Sommer, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7851–7860 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, Y. Lee, Y. H. Lin, J. Strzalka, C. Wang, A. Hexemer, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, R. Verduzco, Q. Wang and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4599–4608 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mitchell, E. Gann, S. Huettner, C. R. Singh, J. Subbiah, L. Thomsen, C. R. McNeill, M. Thelakkat and D. J. Jones, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4942–4951 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mitchell, W. W. H. Wong, M. Thelakkat and D. J. Jones, Polym. J., 2016, 49, 155–161 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Hao Liu	Hao Liu is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan in the State Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Sources, North China Electric Power University. His research interest lies in the design and synthesis of organic semiconductors for photovoltaic applications.
Huaizhi Gao	Huaizhi Gao received his Master's degree from the College of Chemical Engineering, Qinghai University, in 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research interests mainly focus on organic photovoltaics.
Jun Lin	Jun Lin is a Professor at the School of Renewable Energy in North China Electric Power University, China. Dr Lin obtained his PhD from the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University in 2004. His major research interests include membrane materials for use in fuel cells and gas separation, as well as thermally conductive polymer composites. He has published more than 70 refereed papers in SCI journals and 2 book chapters and has 10 Chinese patents.
Tasawar Hayat	Tasawar Hayat (born in Khanewal, Punjab)—Distinguished National Professor and former Chairperson of the Mathematics Department at Quaid-I-Azam University—is renowned worldwide for his seminal, diversified, and fundamental contributions toward models relevant to physiological systems, control engineering, climate change, renewable energy, low-carbon technologies, environmental issues, non-Newtonian fluids, wave mechanics, homotopic solutions, stability, and nanofluids, as well as several other areas. He has the honor of being a Fellow of the Pakistan Academy of Sciences, Third World Academy of Sciences (TWAS), and Islamic World Academy of Sciences in mathematical sciences.
Ahmed Alsaedi	Ahmed Alsaedi obtained his PhD from Swansea University (UK) in 2002. He has broad research experience in applied mathematics. His fields of interest include dynamical systems, nonlinear analysis involving ordinary differential equations, fractional differential equations, mathematical modeling, biomathematics, and Newtonian and Non-Newtonian fluid mechanics. He served as the Chairman of the Mathematics Department at KAU; presently, he is serving as the Director of the Research Program at KAU. Under his formidable leadership, this program has been running fairly successfully and has attracted a large number of highly rated researchers and distinguished professors from all over the world.
Zhan'ao Tan	Zhan'ao Tan is a Professor in Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, since 2018, and he has worked in the Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University, since 2009. Currently, he leads the Group of Organic Optoelectronic Materials and Devices. He received his PhD in Physical Chemistry in 2007 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and then came to Pennsylvania State University, USA, as a Postdoctoral Fellow from 2007 to 2009, researching semiconductor quantum-dots-based light-emitting diodes and photovoltaics. His present research interests include polymer solar cells, semiconductor nanocrystal-based optoelectronics, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells, and flow batteries.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of (a) donor–acceptor integral small molecules, (b) double-cable polymers, and (c) block copolymers. Simulated molecular self-assembly models represented by S15, C2, and Q3, respectively.	 

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structures of donor–acceptor integral small molecules, S1–S19.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) AFM height and phase images of S11 film on ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate; (c) powder XRD pattern of S11 in the bulk measured at 20 °C. Inset: schematic representation of the proposed structure for S11 in films; (d) 2D GIXRD pattern of S14. Lower inset: intermolecular and intramolecular distances; upper inset: crystalline size; (e–g) AFM height and phase images as well as TEM images of the S14-based device.31,34	 

 	Scheme 2  Chemical structures of double-cable polymers, C1–C11.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) AFM images of the surface of S11 film and (b) the surface of the film of a blend of C2 and PCBM.41	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) AFM height images of C8 after thermal treatment for 10 min at 120 °C; (b) pristine PDI 1; (c) pristine C8 without PDI; (d) heat-treated 4:1 C8 without PDI/PDI blend; (e) pristine 1:4 C8 without PDI/PDI blend; (f) heat-treated 1:4 C8 without PDI/PDI; (g) TEM image of PITN. (h and i) HRTEM images of C60 and C4, respectively. Insets show the SAED patterns of the respective samples.43,47	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) AFM phase images and (d–f) bright-field TEM images of C9 thin films fabricated from a CB/DIO solution and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. Insets: Fourier transform of a part of the images to determine d-spacings; (g) illustration of C9 in the nanostructures. BDT is indicated in blue color and PBI, red color; (h) GISAXS profiles of C9 thin films spin-cast onto Si substrates using CB/DIO and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min.48	 

 	Scheme 3  Chemical structures of block donor–acceptor copolymers Q1–Q17.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structure of Q2a; (b) AFM phase image of as-deposited copolymer Q2a; (c) surface topographic and (d) phase images of a Q5 film spin-coated from a chlorobenzene solution onto an ITO-coated glass substrate; AFM phase images of (e) Q7a and (f) random copolymer films. (g) AFM phase images of Q4b; (h) TEM images of the self-assembled structure of Q4a.50,57,59,61	 

 	Fig. 7  AFM (a–d) height and (e–h) phase images of annealed copolymer Q7b films; (i–l) AFM topographical (left) and phase images (right) of SMSC active materials from an annealed film of Q8b and annealed Q8b layer incorporating electrospun nanofibers.62,64	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–f) AFM height images (inset: phase image) of Q16a; (g) 1D GISAXS intensity profiles as a function of the scattering vector q of the three thin films. Corresponding 1D GIWAXS profiles for (h) in-plane and (i) out-of-plane a-axis of Q16a.75 (j and k) 2D grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) data of Q15b films cast from solutions without 1-chloronaphthalene (j) and with 5% 1-chloronaphthalene as the solvent additive (k) (all the samples were annealed at 165 °C for 10 min); (l and m) schematic illustrations for π-stacking within P3HT domains denoting the molecular orientation for Q16b films cast from solutions without a solvent additive and cast from 5% 1-chloronaphthalene solutions.76	 


S4
	0.235	0.65	25	0.04	65	
22


S7
	0.25	0.32	27	0.03	75	
24


S10
	1.60	0.66	28	0.37	100	
26


S11
	0.93	0.70	23	0.15	100	
27


S12
	3.30	0.88	44	1.28	100	
28


S14
	6.70	0.66	49	2.17	100	
30


S15
	7.02	0.97	36	2.44	100	
31


S16
	1.70	0.76	27	0.40	100	
32


C1
	0.42	0.83	29	0.10	100	
36


C2
	2.41	0.75	38	0.52	100	
37


C8
	0.07	0.72	21	0.011	100	
43


C9
	7.60	0.92	60	4.18	100	
44


C10
	8.96	0.68	0.45	2.74	100	
45


C7
	0.11	0.72	25	0.02	100	
42


Q3
	10.00	0.75	25	0.6	0.1 (505 nm)	
52


Q7a
	6.15	0.54	51	1.7	100	
57


Q7b
	7.04	0.50	60	2.13	100	
58


Q8a
	13.5	0.58	53	4.19	100	
59


Q8b
	13.3	0.68	62	5.58	100	
60


Q10
	1.14	0.69	32	0.32	100	
62


Q11c
	2.57	0.51	37	0.49	100	
65


Q16a
	1.95 ± 0.4	1.08 ± 0.02	45 ± 5	0.95 ± 0.28	100	
71


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
