Inhibiting the absorber/Mo-back contact decomposition reaction in Cu 2 ZnSnSe 4 solar cells: the role of a ZnO intermediate nanolayer  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA11419H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11419H
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8338-8343Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInhibiting the absorber/Mo-back contact decomposition reaction in Cu2ZnSnSe4 solar cells: the role of a ZnO intermediate nanolayer

        
          
            Simón 
            López-Marino
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marcel 
            Placidi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Amador 
            Pérez-Tomás
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jordi 
            Llobet
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Victor 
            Izquierdo-Roca
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xavier 
            Fontané
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew 
            Fairbrother
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Moises 
            Espíndola-Rodríguez
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Diouldé 
            Sylla
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alejandro 
            Pérez-Rodríguez
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Edgardo 
            Saucedo
          
        
      *a
aIREC, Catalonia Institute for Energy Research, Jardins de les Dones de Negre 1, 08930 Sant Adrià del Besòs (Barcelona), Spain. E-mail: esaucedo@irec.cat;  Fax: +34 933563802;   Tel: +34 933562615
bIMB-CNM, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain
cIN2UB, Departament d'Electrònica, Universitat de Barcelona, C. Martí i Franquès 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
Received 
      9th April 2013
    , Accepted 24th May 2013First published on 24th May 2013AbstractThis work reports a process based on the use of an ultrathin (10 nm) ZnO intermediate layer for the improvement of the absorber/back contact interface region in Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) kesterite solar cells. Raman microprobe measurements performed directly on the substrate surface after mechanical removal of the absorber layer indicate the occurrence of a decomposition reaction of Cu2ZnSnSe4 in contact with the Mo substrate. This leads to a significant degradation of the quality of the absorber/back contact interface, with the formation of a high density of voids. The presence of an intermediate ZnO layer on the Mo coated substrates inhibits the decomposition reaction, because it prevents interaction between the CZTSe and Mo layers during the annealing process. This leads to a significant improvement in the interface morphology as observed by detailed cross-section scanning electron microscopy. It also correlates with the observed increase of the device conversion efficiency from 2.5% up to 6.0%. The improvement in the optoelectronic characteristics of the cells could be related to a significant decrease of the device series resistance due to the formation of a smoother interface with low density of voids, resulting from the effective inhibition of the CZTSe decomposition reaction at the Mo back contact layer.
1 Introduction
In recent years Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4-based (CZTSSe) solar cells have gained a lot of interest within the photovoltaic community. Their potential to achieve low-cost production as well as high efficiency devices is a key feature contributing to the placement of CZTSSe at the front line of alternative thin film technologies. Currently, the record efficiency is 11.1% for the CZTSSe compound,1 while for the pure sulfide (CZTS) and selenide (CZTSe) phases they are 8.4% and 9.2% respectively.2,3 Up to now, most of the same device fabrication processes used for the more mature CuInGaSe2 (CIGS) technologies have been used for kesterites, with few attempts to develop a customized technology for this material, based on its own peculiarities [see for example ref. 4 and 5, where alternate etching processes and buffer layers are proposed]. Among the challenges for the improvement of the current efficiencies it is necessary to improve the level of compositional control and to be able to detect in a reliable way the presence of potentially detrimental secondary phases, the control of recombination processes and doping mechanisms, and select the most suitable contact materials.6
One of the latest challenges that have been noted, another peculiarity of kesterites with respect to chalcopyrites, has been very recently evidenced by Scragg et al.7 These authors have reported experimental evidence – based on transmission electron microscopy and Raman scattering measurements – on the existence of a decomposition reaction of Cu2ZnSnS4 in the vicinity of the Mo back contact which leads to a potential degradation of the absorber/back contact interface due to the formation of binary secondary phases. Existence of this reaction has also been proposed for the selenide compound, but no experimental data have been published for this system to date. Based on thermodynamic calculations the Gibbs free energy of formation for the decomposition reaction was determined to be −100 kJ for the pure selenide compound, and −150 kJ for the sulfide one. Additionally, the work of Scragg et al. was done using a sulfur-free atmosphere in the annealing processes. This contrasts with the thermal treatments usually performed for the synthesis of device grade absorbers, which are done in S(Se) or H2S(Se) containing atmospheres, in some cases also with Sn or SnS(Se)1–4 to prevent Sn loss during the annealing. This gives strong motivation for the study of the potential occurrence of this decomposition reaction in the case of the selenide system when using standard thermal processes. In this framework, this communication reports the analysis of the decomposition reaction of the kesterite compound in contact with Mo for the selenide case, under standard annealing conditions (i.e. under an atmosphere containing Se and Sn), and showing its impact on the optoelectronic properties of the devices. Experimental evidence on the occurrence of this reaction has been obtained from the detailed combined analysis of the processed films and structures by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in combination with Raman scattering. A new kesterite customized process is proposed and demonstrated for the inhibition of this decomposition reaction, based on the use of an ultrathin ZnO intermediate layer that is deposited onto the Mo-coated substrates before the growth of the metal precursors and the selenization step.
2 Experimental details

Substrate preparation: 10 × 10 cm2 Mo coated soda-lime glass (800 nm, R□ = 0.16 Ω □−1) was used as the standard substrate, and was deposited by DC-magnetron sputtering deposition (Ac450, Alliance Concepts, 4.3 W cm−2, 0.0006 mbar, 10 sccm Ar, 120 °C, 39 min) using 99.99% purity targets. Additionally, 10 nm and 20 nm of i-ZnO were deposited onto some Mo substrates by DC-pulsed magnetron sputtering deposition (CT100, Alliance Concepts, 1.48 W cm−2, 0.001 mbar, 19.9 sccm Ar and 0.1 sccm O2, room temperature, 90 s (10 nm) or 180 s (20 nm)), using 99.99% purity targets, and after a cleaning process of the substrate with concentrated ammonia solutions in an ultrasonic bath.

Metallic layer deposition by DC-magnetron sputtering: as precursors for CZTSe absorber films, Cu/Sn/Cu/Zn metallic stacks have been deposited by DC-magnetron sputtering (Ac450 Alliance Concepts) using 99.99% purity targets. The Cu/Sn/Cu/Zn stack order was selected for the following reasons: (i) we start with a very thin Cu layer (<10 nm) deposited onto the substrates because it improves the morphology of the Sn layer that is deposited in the next step (reduced roughness); (ii) Sn is the second layer in order to prevent or reduce the evaporation of volatile Sn–Se species during the annealing process; (iii) Cu was deposited in the middle of the stack because of its high diffusion coefficient and because it readily alloys with Sn to form bronze and with Zn to form brass; and finally (iv) Zn was deposited on the top of the stack to promote the accumulation of Zn-excess towards the surface. The conditions for the deposition of each metal were: Sn (0.64 W cm−2, 0.001 mbar, 42 min), Cu (1.27 W cm−2, 0.001 mbar, 23 min) and Zn (1.27 W cm−2, 0.001 mbar, 17 min). In all cases the substrate was rotated at 10 rpm and unheated, i.e. deposition was made at room temperature, though some heating may occur as a result of the deposition process. The thickness of the stacks was determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy (Fisherscope XVD) which was previously calibrated with inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) measurements. The overall composition of the stacks calculated from the XRF measurements was: Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.75–0.80 and Zn/Sn = 1.22–1.25.

Reactive annealing: the metallic precursor samples (2.5 × 2.5 cm2 in area) were reactively annealed in a three zone tubular furnace capable of working in vacuum (10−4 mbar) and inert gas atmosphere (Ar). For this step a graphite box (23.5 cm3 in volume) was used under a selenium + tin atmosphere at 525 ± 2 °C for 45 min in a 1 bar Ar atmosphere, and using two crucibles, one with 50 mg of selenium powder (Alfa-Aesar, 99.995%) and the other with 4–5 mg of tin powder (Alfa-Aesar, 99.999%). The heating ramp was 20 °C min−1, and the cooling down to room temperature was allowed to occur naturally, and typically took 2 hours.

Device fabrication: absorbers were etched with HCl 10% v/v at 75 °C for 300 seconds and then rinsed with deionized water.4 Devices were fabricated by depositing CdS (60 nm) by chemical bath deposition onto the kesterite layers, followed by the DC-pulsed sputtering deposition of i-ZnO (50 nm) and ZnO:Al (450 nm, R□ = 19 Ω □−1) (CT100, Alliance Concepts). For the optoelectronic characterization 3 × 3 mm2 cells were scribed using a microdiamond scriber MR200 OEG, thus avoiding the necessity of metallic grid deposition onto the ZnO:Al surface.

Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and focused ion beam (FIB): two types of samples were prepared for the study of the back region morphology, using cross-section SEM observations by mechanical cleavage of the samples and also by FIB cross-sectioning. The FIB used in this work is a Zeiss 1560XB Cross Beam able to work with a sample size up to 150 mm. The FIB has circuit editing and nanomachining capabilities. The field emission focused ion beam optics has a liquid gallium ion emitter with an acceleration voltage of 3 kV to 30 kV and beam current of 1 pA to 20 nA with a maximum resolution of 7.0 nm. The system contains a multiple injector needle system for 5 different gases including gas chemistry solution for ion or electron beam deposition of platinum-containing material. Cross-section morphological images were obtained using a Zeiss Series Auriga field emission SEM.

I–V characterization under illumination and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements: to measure the optoelectronic properties a Sun 3000 class AAA solar simulator from Abet Technology (uniform illumination area of 15 × 15 cm2) was used. Measurements were carried out after the calibration of the system with a reference Si solar cell under AM 1.5 illumination and fixing the temperature of the samples to 298 K. The EQE of the cells was measured with a Bentham PVE300 system in the 300–1600 nm wavelength range, and calibrated by using Si and Ge photodiodes.

Raman scattering measurements: for the Raman measurements a HR800-UV Horiba-Jobin Yvon spectrometer coupled with an Olympus metallographic microscope was used. Backscattering measurements were made using a 532 nm excitation wavelength with the laser spot focused on the surface of samples. The power was kept below 0.45 mW at a magnification of 100× (spot diameter approx. 0.8 μm). Measurements were performed by focusing the laser spot onto the surface of the substrate after mechanical removal of the absorber layer. Mapping measurements were made by scanning a 10 × 10 μm2 area with 1 μm steps, using a motorized x–y table coupled to the Raman set-up.
3 Results and discussion
In this process ZnO was chosen as an intermediate layer because it is readily available in conventional thin film solar cell fabrication processes as part of the window layer. Furthermore, Zn is a constituent element of kesterites and O is displaced relatively easily by Se in the typical annealing conditions used in this technology, minimizing potential oxygen contamination effects. We investigated the effect of the ZnO intermediate layer on the morphology and presence of secondary phases in the substrate region, as well as its impact on the optoelectronic parameters of the solar cells, for absorbers prepared on Mo-coated substrates (i) without a ZnO intermediate precursor layer, and (ii) covered with 10 nm and 20 nm of ZnO.
Cross-section SEM micrographs of the fabricated cells from CZTSe absorbers prepared with and without an intermediate ZnO layer (10 nm) are shown in Fig. 1, including images from samples cross-sectioned by a focused ion beam (FIB) (Fig. 1C and D). In all cases, we observe the formation of a relatively thick MoSe2 layer (with a thickness of hundreds of nanometers). This indicates that the intermediate ZnO layer does not act as a barrier layer for Mo selenization under the annealing conditions studied. Formation of similar MoSe2 layers has been observed for CZTSe3 and CIGS.8 Furthermore, in both cases, large grains of several microns are observed, larger than those reported at lower annealing temperatures (450 °C) and pressures (1 × 10−3 mbar Ar) in particular for the kesterite selenide compound.9 Notably however, the CZTSe film grown directly onto Mo has a dense grain structure with a fairly homogeneous large grain size. For the films grown onto the ZnO intermediate layer the formation of a bi-layer structure, with larger grains at the front and smaller ones at the back, is achieved. While this result seems to contradict the observed enhancement of the back morphology of the films annealed with a ZnO intermediate layer, we will show later that the degradation of the back contact region presented in Fig. 1A and C is related to the decomposition of CZTSe when in contact with Mo. We will demonstrate also that one of the products of this decomposition is CuxSe. The presence of this Cu binary phase at the back contact region could explain the absence of the bi-layer structure, because it is known to act as a crystallization flux (at least for CIGSe technology, see for example ref. 10), and probably helps to improve the grain growth at the back region, avoiding the formation of small grains close to the substrate.
 Fig. 1  SEM cross-sections of solar cells (a) without the ZnO intermediate layer, (b) with ZnO 10 nm; and images obtained on a lamella prepared by FIB (c) without the ZnO intermediate layer and (d) with ZnO 10 nm. 
As is clear from Fig. 1A, the interface between MoSe2 and CZTSe is characterized by the presence of voids resulting from the thermal treatment. The presence of voids in this region has already been observed in other works for both the sulfide and selenide kesterite compounds, grown by several different methods.2,3,11,12 By introducing an intermediate ZnO layer of only 10 nm over the Mo coated substrate before the preparation of the precursor metallic stack, a significant improvement in the interface morphology is observed (see Fig. 1B). The roughness and density of voids are clearly reduced. The same improvement in the morphology of the back absorber region is observed when a 20 nm ZnO intermediate layer is used (images not shown). A more detailed view of the MoSe2/CZTSe interface is shown in Fig. 1C and D with samples prepared for cross-section by FIB. Fig. 1C confirms the deterioration of the back region under the applied thermal treatment conditions, with several large voids (of hundreds of nanometers) and a rough interface. Conversely, when the ZnO intermediate layer is used, the number and size of voids is dramatically reduced (Fig. 1D). The presence of such a thin ZnO layer does not appear to have any significant impact on the thickness of the absorber, or on the surface roughness.
To determine the effect of the ZnO intermediate layer on the back contact morphology, it is important to remark that this study was carried out preparing at least three FIB cross-sections in samples prepared in different experimental runs, with and without the ZnO intermediate layer. In all cases, the presence of the ZnO layers leads to an improved morphology of the back region as is already presented in Fig. 1, in particular due to the drastic reduction of voids. We can discard influences due to differences in the state of the Mo layer (poor cleaning, poor Mo morphology), because the same substrates were used for the preparation of all absorbers. The observed improvement of the morphology could be related to the minimization/elimination of the decomposition reaction between Mo and CZTSe.7 In this case, ZnO simply prevents the direct contact between Mo and CZTSe, thus inhibiting the decomposition. Nevertheless, we cannot discard that the presence of the ZnO intermediate layer can have an additional impact on the adhesion properties of the CZTS layer, enhancing, for structural or mechanical reasons, the Mo/CZTSe interface (modifications on the diffusion, dewetting, densification, and grain growth). Later, we will provide evidence that there are clear chemical reasons for this improvement, related to the decomposition of CZTSe kesterite, when in contact with Mo.

Fig. 2 shows the illuminated current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the best performing CZTSe cells. The device with a 10 nm thick ZnO layer exhibited the highest efficiency (6.0%), followed by the 20 nm ZnO device (4.2%), while the reference cell (processed without the ZnO intermediate layer) only yielded 2.5%. This result demonstrates the beneficial effect of the proposed ZnO interfacial layer to improve the quality of the interface between the kesterite absorber and the MoSe2 formed at the back contact region. In the figure, we present the best results obtained up to now as well as the average values using at least 9 cells, based on the analysis of several absorbers prepared with and without the ZnO intermediate layer in different runs. In most cases, we found that the solar cells containing this layer exhibit higher efficiencies than the ZnO free absorbers. Comparing the obtained results, there is a moderate increase of the Voc from 314 mV (reference cell) to 364 mV (10 nm ZnO cell). These values are not far from the highest Voc values reported in the literature for the pure selenide or Se-rich system.3,13–16 Increasing the efficiency is mainly due to the significant reduction of the series resistance (Rs) and the consequent increase of the Jsc and fill factor (FF) values. This is likely related to the high series resistance values from the reference device. Solar cells without ZnO interfacial layers have Rs values around 2–3 Ω cm2, in agreement with values reported elsewhere for cells with similar efficiency.13 The device prepared with a 10 nm ZnO intermediate layer exhibits a drastic reduction of the Rs to values of 0.5 Ω cm2, also in close agreement with series resistances reported for high efficiency devices.3,17 This improvement is potentially related to the lower roughness and the drastic reduction of voids at the back absorber region, as shown in Fig. 1A and C. Finally, when the ZnO intermediate layer thickness is increased to 20 nm, we observe an increase in the Rs (1.5–2 Ω cm2), which affects the Jsc and FF values. This could be related to the increase of the thickness of the ZnSe layer formed during selenization of the ZnO (20 nm) layers, which start to introduce an additional series resistance to the device.
 Fig. 2  
J–V characteristics of the processed CZTSe cells under AM 1.5G illumination. The maximum and average efficiency Eff., open-circuit voltage Voc, short-circuit current density Jsc, fill factor FF, shunt and series resistance Rsh and Rs are given in the figure. The inset shows the measured quantum efficiency from these devices. 
The corresponding external quantum efficiencies (EQE) for the cells are shown in the inset of Fig. 2. For the standard cell, the maximum value of the EQE is relatively low (around 48%), increasing to around 60–70% for the 10 nm ZnO processed cells.
This increase in the EQE correlates with the higher Jsc values obtained for these cells. The three curves have a similar shape along the wavelengths corresponding to the absorption in the space charge region (SCR), implying that in principle the most important factor limiting the Jsc in these devices is not due to recombination in the SCR. Improvement of this parameter for the ZnO processed cells is likely mainly related to the decrease of the series resistance resulting from the better quality of the CZTSe/MoSe2 interface region (with the observed decrease in the density of voids and interface roughness). Additionally, the band gap estimated by the EQE is approximately 0.93–0.95 eV in the three cases, suggesting similar optical properties of the three absorber types analyzed.
To investigate the origin of the deterioration of the interface region between the absorber and the back Mo contact, Raman measurements were performed on the selenized samples with the excitation laser directly focused on the surface of the substrate region after mechanical removal of the absorber. In order to avoid some uncertainties associated with the mechanical removal process, we studied the substrate and the back absorber region of the removed samples. Analyzing with Raman spectroscopy in mapping mode a representative area of both the substrate and back absorber region, we can confirm that the films were removed at the interface between MoSe2 and CZTSe. In all cases, we do not observe the CZTSe characteristic peaks on the substrates, nor the MoSe2 peaks on the back absorber region, strongly suggesting that the layer is mechanically removed just at the interface between these two layers. Fig. 3A shows the Raman spectra obtained from the samples processed without and with the 10 nm ZnO intermediate precursor layer, respectively. The spectrum from the ZnO processed layer is characterized by the presence of a dominant peak at 240 cm−1 and weaker peaks at about 169 cm−1 and 286 cm−1 which have been identified with vibrational modes characteristic of MoSe2.18,19 The spectrum also shows a contribution at 250 cm−1 that agrees with the main peak reported for ZnSe.18 This suggests that the surface substrate region from this sample is mostly constituted by MoSe2, with the presence of some ZnSe as the secondary phase. In contrast, the spectrum from the surface substrate region of the sample processed without any intermediate ZnO layer shows a significant increase in the relative intensity of the ZnSe Raman peak, and the presence of an additional contribution at about 260 cm−1 which has been identified with the main vibrational mode from a CuxSe binary phase (x ≤ 1.8).20,21 This confirms the enhanced formation of unexpected secondary phases during the selenization process in the samples processed without the ZnO intermediate layer. It is important to remark that in the Cu-poor conditions used in these films, the probability for the occurrence of binary Cu–Se phases would be expected to be low.
 Fig. 3  Raman spectra of selenized samples at the back region for films prepared with a 10 nm ZnO intermediate layer and without (A). Distribution of the CuxSe (B) and ZnSe (C) secondary phases in the back region. 

Fig. 3B and C show a mapping Raman image of the same 10 × 10 μm2 surface substrate region corresponding to the reference sample processed without a ZnO intermediate layer. These figures show the plot in a color code of the relative intensity of the main ZnSe (Fig. 3B) and CuxSe (Fig. 3C) Raman peaks in relation to that of the main MoSe2 peak. It is evident that the relative intensity of the Raman contribution from both secondary phases exhibits very similar spatial distributions. This suggests that the origin of both phases is strongly related. A statistical analysis of the data presented in Fig. 3B and C shows that the variation of the distribution of both phases is lower than 10%, suggesting a reasonably homogeneous distribution, and indicating the complete removal of the CZTSe layer from the substrate. In addition, we do not observe the presence of CuxSe and ZnSe in the analysis of the back absorber region of the sample without ZnO, suggesting that all the secondary phases remain on the substrate. Taking this into account, we propose the following reaction pathway corresponding to the decomposition of the kesterite selenide compound in contact with the Mo substrate: Cu2ZnSnSe4(s) + 1/2Mo(s) → Cu2Se(s) + ZnSe(s) + SnSe(s) + 1/2MoSe2(s)(1) xCu2Se(s) + (1 − (x/2))Se2(g) → 2CuxSe(s)(2) SnSe(s) + 1/2Se2(g) → SnSe2(g)(3)
This pathway is similar to that reported in ref. 7 for the sulfide case (reaction (1)), although in this case the presence of the chalcogen during the annealing leads to the presence of additional selenization reactions (2) and (3), with the formation of more oxidized CuxSe species (reaction (2)) and the phase transformation of SnSe to the more volatile species SnSe2 (reaction (3)). These reactions explain the detection of the Raman active phase CuxSe and the increase in the intensity of the peak corresponding to ZnSe in the Raman spectrum from the sample processed without the ZnO intermediate layer and also why there is no signal for Sn–Se secondary phases (in contrast with the sulfide compound case, as reported by Scragg et al.7). In our case, evaporation during the thermal treatment of highly volatile SnSe2 species would contribute to the observed formation of voids at the absorber/MoSe2 interface region, although other contributions (dewetting, densification, grain growth, diffusion) cannot be excluded. The Raman spectra measured from the samples processed with the 20 nm ZnO intermediate layer are very similar to those from the samples processed with the thinner 10 nm ZnO intermediate layer. All these data confirm the potential of the proposed approach to prevent the kesterite decomposition in contact with Mo, evidencing a simple way to protect the back interface region from this detrimental reaction.
4 Conclusion
In summary, we have demonstrated that Cu2ZnSnSe4 decomposes in contact with Mo, as has been previously demonstrated for the case of the sulfide compound. This decomposition is also observed under standard reactive annealing conditions with a Se containing atmosphere, indicating that even the presence of the chalcogen in the atmosphere is not enough to prevent this detrimental reaction. The main difference from the mechanism proposed for the sulfide case in the absence of the chalcogen in the atmosphere is that its presence during the annealing promotes the formation of more highly oxidized CuxSe binary species and the selenization of SnSe to more volatile SnSe2 species that are presumably at the origin of the observed voids at the back absorber region. Additionally, we have found that inclusion of a thin ZnO intermediate layer (10 nm) on the surface of the Mo-coated substrates leads to a significant inhibition of the decomposition reaction, allowing the formation of higher quality absorber/back contact interfaces. The presence of this ZnO nanolayer prevents direct contact between Mo and CZTS, and inhibits the decomposition. This correlates with the observed improvement in the optoelectronic characteristics of the processed cells. These data demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed processes for the control of the quality of the absorber/back contact interface region for these advanced thin film photovoltaic devices.
Acknowledgements
This research was partially supported by Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, project KEST-PV (ref. ENE2010-121541-C03-1) and the Framework 7 program under the projects PVICOKEST (PIRSES-GA-2009-269167) and KESTCELLS (FP7-PEOPLE-2012-ITN-316488), and by European Regional Development Funds (ERDF, FEDER Programa Competitivitat de Catalunya 2007–2013). Authors from IREC and the University of Barcelona belong to the M-2E (Electronic Materials for Energy) Consolidated Research Group and the XaRMAE Network of Excellence on Materials for Energy of the “Generalitat de Catalunya”. E. S. thanks the Government of Spain for the “Ramon y Cajal” fellowship (RYC-2011-09212), V. I. for the “Juan de la Cierva” fellowship (JCI-2011-10782), and D. S. for the PTA fellowship (PTA2011-5985-I).
References
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 72–76 CAS .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Vora, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippo, B. To, J. Mann, W.-C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fairbrother, E. García-Hemme, V. Izquierdo-Roca, X. Fontané, F. A. Pulgarín-Agudelo, O. Vigil-Galán, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8018–8021 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Haight, N. Sakai, H. Hiroi, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 193904 CrossRef .
S. Siebentritt and S. Schorr, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 512–519 CAS .
J. Scragg, J. Timo Wätjen, M. Edoff, T. Ericson, T. Kubart and Ch. Platzer-Björkman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19330–19333 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abou-Ras, G. Kostorz, D. Bremaud, M. Kälin, F. V. Kurdesau, A. N. Tiwari and M. Dfbeli, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 433–438 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Fairbrother, E. Saucedo, X. Fontane, V. Izquierdo-Roca, D. Sylla, M. Espindola-Rodriguez, F. A. Pulgarín-Agudelo, O. Vigil-Galán, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, in Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC) 38th IEEE,  2012, pp. 002679–002684 Search PubMed.
N. Barreau, J. Lähnemann, F. Couzinié-Devy, L. Assmann, P. Bertoncini and J. Kessler, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 93, 2013–2019 CrossRef .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Prog. Photovoltaics., 2012, 20, 6–11 CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W.-Ch. Yang, B. C. Walker, E. A. Stach, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17384–17386 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zoppi, I. Forbes, R. W. Miles, P. J. Dale, J. Scragg and L. M. Peter, Prog. Photovoltaics., 2011, 19, 315–319 Search PubMed .
G. M. Ilari, C. M. Fella, C. Ziegler, A. R. Uhl, Y. E. Romanyuk and A. N. Tiwari, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 104, 125–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7060–7065 CAS .
A. Fairbrother, X. Fontané, V. Izquierdo-Roca, M. Espindola-Rodriguez, S. López-Marino, M. Placidi, J. López-García, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 1836–1842 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mousel, A. Redinger, R. Djemour, M. Arasimowicz, N. Valle, P. Dale and S. Siebentritt, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 535, 83–87 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fontané, L. Calvo-Barrio, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo, A. Pérez-Rodriguez, J. R. Morante, D. M. Berg, P. J. Dale and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 181905 CrossRef .
A. Bollero, L. Kaupmees, T. Raadik, M. Grossberg and S. Fernández, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 4163–4168 CrossRef CAS .
V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo, J. S. Jaime-Ferrer, X. Fon-tané, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, V. Bermúdez and J. R. Morante, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, H521–H524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishii, K. Shibata and H. Nozaki, J. Solid State Chem., 1993, 105, 504–511 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM cross-sections of solar cells (a) without the ZnO intermediate layer, (b) with ZnO 10 nm; and images obtained on a lamella prepared by FIB (c) without the ZnO intermediate layer and (d) with ZnO 10 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  
J–V characteristics of the processed CZTSe cells under AM 1.5G illumination. The maximum and average efficiency Eff., open-circuit voltage Voc, short-circuit current density Jsc, fill factor FF, shunt and series resistance Rsh and Rs are given in the figure. The inset shows the measured quantum efficiency from these devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  Raman spectra of selenized samples at the back region for films prepared with a 10 nm ZnO intermediate layer and without (A). Distribution of the CuxSe (B) and ZnSe (C) secondary phases in the back region.	 
Cu2ZnSnSe4(s) + 1/2Mo(s) → Cu2Se(s) + ZnSe(s) + SnSe(s) + 1/2MoSe2(s)	(1)
xCu2Se(s) + (1 − (x/2))Se2(g) → 2CuxSe(s)	(2)
SnSe(s) + 1/2Se2(g) → SnSe2(g)	(3)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
