A layered structure at the surface of P3HT /PCBM blends   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP20734B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP20734B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14993-15002Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsA layered structure at the surface of P3HT/PCBM blends†

        
          
            Natalya 
            Schmerl
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gunther 
            Andersson
          
        
      *
      Flinders Centre for NanoScale Science and Technology, Flinders University, PO Box 2100, Adelaide SA 5001, Australia. E-mail: gunther.andersson@flinders.edu.au
Received 
      11th March 2011
    , Accepted 21st June 2011First published on 18th July 2011AbstractIn an organic photovoltaic device, a layer consisting of two organic compounds, one functioning as an electron acceptor and the other as an electron donor, is sandwiched between two electrodes. Sufficient concentration of the electron acceptor is required at the interface to the low work function electrode as well as sufficient concentration of the electron donor at the interface to the high work function electrode. Frequently used compounds are poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). It is reported in the literature that blends of these materials show a gradient throughout the polymer layer within devices due to phase separation. The direction of the gradient is dependent on the surface energy of the substrates onto which the polymer solutions are spincoated. This is assumed to be detrimental in the usual device structure of photovoltaic devices. In this report the surface of the blend was studied with a combination of a depth profiling technique sensitive for elemental composition and two electron spectroscopy techniques differing in their surface sensitivity. After spin coating, a thin layer of PCBM with a thickness of approximately a single monolayer was found just below the blend surface. The implication for organic photovoltaic devices is discussed.
Introduction
It is widely accepted that increasing the resources for harvesting solar energy is required in order to meet the increasing demand in worldwide energy consumption. Solar cells based on polymers are a promising alternative to the inorganic photovoltaic counterparts in regards to features such as flexibility and cost efficiency.1
Organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs) with power conversion efficiencies around 8% have been realised,1 but the efficiency and device lifetime require further improvement for cell production to be commercially viable.
The standard structure of an OPV consists of an active layer of polymers sandwiched between two metallic electrodes. In the polymeric active layer an electron acceptor and an electron donor polymer are usually combined to form a bulk hetero-junction (BHJ) layer in the form of a blend. Absorbed light in this layer generates excitons which then separate into electrons and holes at the first available interface between the electron acceptor and electron donor materials. Subsequently, electrons transfer to the low work function electrode and holes to the high work function electrode. The BHJ/electrode interfaces need to be designed to allow as much as possible barrier free transport of the charge carriers over the interface. This requires a matching of the energy levels of electron and hole transport materials with those of the electrodes. Further, the electron donor material must be present in a sufficient concentration at the low work function electrode while likewise the electron acceptor must be present in a sufficient concentration at the high work function electrode. A comprehensive overview can be found in ref. 2.
The most frequently used procedure to fabricate OPVs is spin coating a solution containing the acceptor and donor compounds onto the high work function electrode to form the BHJ layer. The high work function electrode itself is deposited on a transparent substrate and often consists of a layer of the highly conductive polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) spincoated on indium-tin-oxide (ITO). After depositing the BHJ onto the high work function electrode, the low work function electrode is deposited on the BHJ by thermal evaporation of a thin layer of low work function material (e.g. LiF or Ca) and subsequently a metal layer of silver or aluminium. In this device structure it is aimed to achieve a sufficient concentration of the hole transporting polymer of the BHJ at the BHJ/PEDOT:PSS interface and a sufficient concentration of the electron transporting compound at the BHJ/low work electrode.
Frequently used materials in BHJ OPVs are blends of poly (3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). Concentration gradients of P3HT and PCBM have been found in blends of these two materials where the gradient depends on the relative surface energy of the materials.3–8 The component with the lower surface energy γ segregates to the surface of the blend layer for cases where a substrate with a surface energy higher than those of PCBM and P3HT is used. As P3HT has a lower surface energy than PCBM (γP3HT: 27 mN m−1, γPCBM: 38 mN m−1),5 the gradient in the spin coated BHJ layer usually shows a high concentration of the hole transporting material P3HT at the surface of the BHJ while the electron transporting material PCBM is found at the BHJ/substrate interface. The substrates used in these cases are the high work function electrode ITO covered with PEDOT:PSS (γPEDOT:PSS: 45.7 mN m−1)3 or silicon covered with a layer of native SiO2 (γSiO2: 77.4 mN m−1).3 In some cases a layered structure on a length scale of a few nanometres was found.9 Xue et al. also found a stratification with a wetting layer of P3HT at the blend surface after annealing.10
The situation at the BHJ/substrate interface is somewhat more complicated. In general, a higher than bulk concentration of P3HT is found at the BHJ/substrate interface for cases where the surface energy of the substrate is larger than those of the BHJ components.3,4,8 Varying results were found for the influence of annealing on the concentration gradient. While Xu et al. found that annealing moves the P3HT towards the BHJ/PEDOT:PSS interface, Campoy-Quiles found the opposite trend. It must, however, be noted that in the first case fluorinated PCBM was used (FPCBM) and in the latter case PCBM. Despite the overall gradient through the BHJ, a wetting layer of P3HT at the substrate/BHJ interface was reported by Xue et al.10 when PEDOT:PSS was used as a substrate.
The gradient found in the BHJ could be detrimental for the operation of OPVs, as the concentration of the hole transporting material at the interface to the high work function electrode could be too low and likewise the concentration of the electron transporting material could be too low at the interface to the low work function electrode. By modifying the gradient in the BHJ layer by replacing PEDOT:PSS with the low surface energy polymer poly(thienothiophene):Nafion, the gradient of the hole and electron transporting materials could be strongly influenced. However, this modification of the OPV structure had no influence on the device performance as shown by Germack et al.11 Using an inverted device architecture and spin coating the polymer blend on the low work function electrode improved the device performance.12 Given that more than one parameter was altered in each of the aforementioned cases, it is difficult to make final conclusions about the influence of the gradient of the polymer concentrations in the BHJ on the device performance. Recently Oh et al. reported that inserting a layer of P3HT between the BHJ and SiO2 leads to an inversion of the gradient in the BHJ layer with a decreasing P3HT concentration at the surface of the BHJ. The respective devices with PEDOT:PSS/ITO electrodes showed a considerable increase in efficiency.13
Lateral phase separation was also reported.8 It is generally assumed that the phase separation occurs during the crystallisation of the materials in the BHJ which is promoted by annealing.5,14–17 The process of the separation of PCBM and P3HT in the blend of these two materials was studied in detail by Watts et al.18 who found that small PCBM rich crystals are formed within the blend with depletion zones around the PCBM rich crystals. The morphology of the blend could be influenced by adding thiols,19 adding electron withdrawal groups to the thiophene polymer,20 or by using various solvent mixtures.21,22
While it is known that there are concentration gradients on a large scale, the composition of the surface and the near-surface region of the blends is not known at the same level of detail. A composition of the surface that differs largely from the composition of the bulk will have strong implications for the understanding of the function of P3HT/PCBM based OPVs. In the present work we are using the depth profiling technique Neutral Impact Collision Ion Scattering Spectroscopy (NICISS) to determine the concentration depth profiles at the surface with a depth resolution of a few Å, and electron spectroscopy to characterise the materials present at the surface. The electron spectroscopy techniques used are UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and metastable induced electron spectroscopy (MIES). UPS and MIES both probe the valence electron structure but differ in their surface sensitivity. While UPS probes up to a depth of a few nanometres, MIES is sensitive exclusively to the outermost layer of a sample.
The aim of the present study is to understand the composition and electronic structure of the surface and near-surface area of the P3HT:PCBM. This information is important for later modification of the structure of the BHJ layer, as the structures of both electrode/polymer interfaces are one of the key factors influencing the performance of polymer based OPVs.
Experimental
Materials
P3HT with a regioregular electronic grade (type 4002E) was purchased from Rieke Metals and PCBM (99%) from Solenne bv. Both organic compounds were stored in a nitrogen atmosphere under dark cool conditions. Orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB) (reagent plus grade) from Sigma was used as a solvent.5 The solvent has been tested carefully for the presence of impurities, in particular surface active impurities. No impurities were found. Samples were prepared by spin coating 1% polymer weight solutions on silicon wafers. Silicon wafer substrates were washed in aqueous Pyroneg solution, rinsed in deionised water, sonicated in ethanol, re-rinsed in ethanol and dried with N2. Pyroneg was supplied by Johnson Diversey and forms a caustic solution in water. Solutions were stirred in a nitrogen atmosphere for about 12 h before spin coating in the dark. Blend solutions with ratios by weight of 40∶60, 50∶50 and 60∶40 P3HT to PCBM were investigated.
All surfaces studied here are surfaces of PCBM, P3HT or P3HT/PCBM blends after spin coating on silicon wafers with a native SiO2 layer.
Methods: NICISS
The design of the NICISS equipment is described in ref. 23. NICISS is a technique able to obtain the concentration depth profiles of the elements at soft matter surfaces up to a depth of about 20 nm and a resolution of a few Å in the near-surface region.23 In a NICISS experiment the target is bombarded with a pulsed beam of inert gas ions––mostly helium ions––with a kinetic energy of several keV.23 The energy of the projectiles backscattered from the atoms in the target is determined by their time-of-flight (TOF) from the target to the detector. The projectiles lose energy during the backscattering process, and the energy transfer depends on the mass of the target atom. This first type of energy loss is used to identify the element from which a projectile is backscattered. The projectiles also lose energy on their trajectory through the bulk due to small angle scattering and electronic excitations of the molecules constituting the target (stopping power).24 This energy loss is used to determine the depth of the atom from which a projectile is backscattered. In combination, these two types of energy losses are used to determine the concentration depth profiles of the elements. Helium cannot be backscattered from hydrogen as the latter is lighter than helium. Thus no energy loss profiles of hydrogen appear in NICIS spectra, but a broad background of sputtered hydrogen is present. The data evaluation to obtain the concentration depth profiles is described in detail in ref. 25. NICISS has been used before to analyse interfaces in organic electronics.26,27
For the NICISS measurements shown here, helium ions with an energy of 3 keV were used as projectiles. The samples were mounted on a rotating disc. The surface of the samples was investigated in concentric circles with a total surface area of about 1 cm2. The ion dose was kept below 5 × 1013 ions cm−2.
The shape of the NICIS spectra is given by the concentration depth profiles and the finite energy resolution of the method. The energy loss straggling (the distribution of energy losses due to small angle scattering and electronic excitations), the distribution of inelastic energy losses during the backscattering event and the time and energy resolution due to the technique to generate the pulsed ion beam determine the resolution in NICIS spectra. The measured concentration depth profiles can be deconvoluted to reveal more details of the profiles when the resolution of the method is known. The deconvolution procedure is described in ref. 24 and 28 and we briefly summarise the details here.
The gas phase spectra used to calibrate the zero mark of the depth scale also provide information about the energy distribution during the backscattering process, and the time and energy resolution occurring as a consequence of the technique used to generate the pulsed ion beam. The spectrum of a gas jet consists almost entirely of projectiles backscattered from individual atoms with no contribution from other energy-loss processes such as those due to the stopping power in a bulk sample. Therefore the measured spectrum of a gas jet consists of a series of peaks due to each element present in the gas jet. Each of these peaks has a finite full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) that is due to the distribution in inelastic energy loss of the collision process. The energy loss straggling has been determined experimentally when measuring the energy loss of helium projectiles passing through a gas phase.24,28 Thus the gas phase spectra of the elements together with the measured energy loss straggling are used to deconvolute the measured spectra.24,28
For measuring gas phase spectra a gas jet with low gas density is generated at the same position in the NICISS equipment where the solid sample is placed. The substance used to generate the gas jet consists of small molecules including the desired element. Carbon disulfide was used for the case of sulfur and air for oxygen to generate the gas jets.
The deconvolution was carried out with a program based on the genetic algorithm. The program is similar to that described in ref. 23.
In ref. 29 two peaks with a separation of 10 Å can be clearly identified in the measured concentration depth profile of bromide of the tetrabutylphosphonium bromide solution in formamide. A clear minimum can be identified between the peaks giving evidence that structures separated by a few Å can be resolved in a NICIS spectrum.
Methods: UPS and MIES
Sample investigations utilising MIES and UPS were performed in a UHV apparatus built by SPECS (Berlin, Germany). The apparatus is equipped with a two stage cold cathode gas discharge from MFS (Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany) to simultaneously generate metastable helium atoms (He*3S1) and UV light (He I line). The spectra of the electrons emitted from the samples were recorded with a hemispherical Phoibos 100 energy analyser from SPECS. MIE and UP spectra were recorded at a pass energy of 10 eV. At this pass energy the analyser has an energy resolution of 400 meV as evaluated from the Fermi edge of polycrystalline silver. The apparatus is further equipped with a non-monochromatic X-ray source for Mg and Al Kα radiation, and an ion source for rare gas ions with kinetic energy from 1 to 5 keV. The angle between both the He*/UV light irradiation and the analyser and the X-ray irradiation and the analyser is 54°. The base pressure of the UHV chamber is a few 10−10 mbar. However, UHV conditions are not required for the experiments shown here.
In a UPS experiment the sample is irradiated with UV photons leading to photoionization via the photoelectric effect. The energy of emitted electrons is given by Ekin,hν = E(hν) − Ebin(1)where Ekin,hν is the kinetic energy of the emitted electron, E(hν) is the photon energy (21.2 eV for the He I line used here) and Ebin is the binding energy of the electron before excitation. For UPS the electron density in the near-surface area is measured. The information depth is limited by the electron mean free path of the emitted electrons. The electron mean free path in organic compounds is around 10 Å for the excitation energy used in these experiments.30
In a MIES experiment the sample is irradiated with He* atoms which are de-excited at the surface via Auger de-excitation or resonant neutralisation with subsequent Auger neutralisation.31,32 The first process applies in particular for organic materials and semiconductors while the latter applies for metal surfaces. Resonant neutralisation is only possible for materials with electronic states filled up to the Fermi level. The energy of the helium atom is transferred to the sample surface, leading to the excitation and emission of electrons in the sample. The energy of the emitted electrons is given by Ekin,He* = E(He*) − Ebin(2)where Ekin,He* is the kinetic energy of the emitted electron, E(He*) is the excitation energy of the He* atoms and Ebin the binding energy of the electron before excitation. The majority of He* atoms emitted from the UV/He* source are in the 3S1 state which has an excitation energy of 19.8 eV. Due to the large cross section for the de-excitation processes, the He* react with the sample at a distance of a few Å from the surface.31 For this reason MIES is sensitive to the electronic structure of only the outermost layer.
All MIES/UPS measurements shown here have been taken successively on the same day. As the changes in intensity of the MIES/UPS source are negligible within a period of a few hours, a comparison of the spectra can be based on their absolute intensity.
Results and discussion
NICISS results
In Fig. 1 NICIS-TOF spectra of layers of PCBM, P3HT and a 50∶50 blend of P3HT and PCBM are shown. Vertical bars indicate the onset of the signal of He projectiles backscattered from the elements constituting the samples. Oxygen and carbon can be identified in the spectrum of PCBM and are the main components of this compound. Also a small signal due to silicon was found showing the presence of an impurity. It is most likely that the silicon found is part of siloxane, an impurity commonly found in hydrocarbons.33 The coverage with silicon is about 1.5 × 10−10 mol cm−2 which can be estimated as being a surface coverage of about 20% with siloxane (SiOR1R2) units where R1 and R2 are short alkyl chains. We found a ratio of 1∶10 between the concentration of oxygen and carbon in PCBM while nominally the ratio should be 1∶36 according to the chemical formula of PCBM. It is known that PCBM partially oxidises which affects the operation of OPVs slightly by inducing traps for the charge carriers in the BHJ.34 The spectrum of P3HT shows sulfur and carbon. They are the main constituents of this polymer. Sulfur, oxygen and carbon can be identified in the blend spectrum and also a small contribution of silicon.
 Fig. 1  NICIS TOF spectra of PCBM, P3HT and a 50∶50 blend of P3HT and PCBM. An offset is added to the spectra for clarity. Vertical bars indicate the onset of the signal of helium projectiles backscattered from the elements sulfur, silicon, oxygen and carbon. 
In Fig. 2A the as measured concentration depth profile of sulfur at the surface of the P3HT layer is shown, and Fig. 2B displays the corresponding deconvoluted concentration depth profile. The profiles show that the sulfur concentration is higher at the surface by a factor of about 2 compared to the bulk concentration. One possible reason for this could be that the backbone of the P3HT molecule with the sulfur containing group is oriented towards the surface. However, this is unlikely given that the presence of the alkyl chains of the 3HT units should lead to a lower surface energy than the presence of the thiophene containing backbone at the surface. Also, the sulfur profile shows an overall excess of sulfur at the surface which cannot alone be the result of a preferred orientation of the polymer molecules. Another possibility is that shorter polymer molecules or oligomer units with shorter alkyl chains remaining in the polymer from the synthesis adsorb at the surface. We will discuss this question further in context with the electron spectroscopy data.
 Fig. 2  Concentration depth profiles of (A) sulfur of pure P3HT as measured and (B) deconvoluted concentration depth profile of sulfur of P3HT. The error bars shown are due to the uncertainty of the deconvolution procedure. 
It should be noted that the oscillation of the concentration between 10 and 50 Å is not significant given the uncertainty of the deconvolution. The error bars shown are due to the uncertainty of the deconvolution procedure.
It can be seen that the profile in Fig. 2A shows intensity at negative depth. The reason for this is the finite energy resolution of NICISS. No count rate is found at negative depth after deconvoluting the concentration depth profiles with the function representing the energy resolution of the method as can be seen in Fig. 2B.
The as measured concentration depth profiles for sulphur and oxygen of the 50∶50 blend are shown in Fig. 3A and 3B respectively. The bulk concentration found for PCBM is about 4 × 10−4 mol cm−2. This corresponds to a mole ratio between PCBM and the 3HT units of about 1∶14. In a 50∶50 blend the concentration of PCBM is about 8 × 10−4 mol cm−2, i.e. a ratio between PCBM and the 3HT units of 1∶4, taking the density of the polymers into account. Thus the PCBM concentration is considerably lower in the near-surface region of the blend. The substrate used here is silicon with a layer of native SiO2. SiO2 has a higher surface energy than both P3HT and PCBM. Thus the finding of a considerably lower PCBM concentration in the near-surface region of the blend corresponds to the observation reported by various authors, who found that PCBM is enriched at the substrate/BHJ interface when the substrate onto which the blend is spin coated has a surface energy higher than those of the BHJ layer components.3–7
 Fig. 3  Concentration depth profiles of (A) sulfur and (B) oxygen of the 50∶50 P3HT:PCBM blend. 
The onset of the sulfur profiles in Fig. 3A shows two different gradients; at a depth <4 Å the gradient is steeper than the gradient between 4 and 25 Å. At a depth greater than 25 Å the graphs of sulfur are almost constant. The kink at a depth of about 4 Å is a hint that the sulfur profile is non-monotonic. The profile of oxygen shows a peak at a depth of about 5 Å. The deconvolution of the concentration depth profiles reveals more details. In Fig. 4A the deconvoluted concentration depth profiles of sulfur and in Fig. 4B that of oxygen for the non-annealed 50∶50 P3HT:PCBM blend are shown. The combination of the measured, deconvoluted and the fitted profiles (the convolution of the deconvoluted profiles) is shown in both figures. The fitted profile fits well to the measured profile in both cases. The deconvoluted sulfur profiles show a non-monotonic profile with the maximum at the onset followed by a minimum at a depth around 5 Å. The minimum is about 6 Å wide. The oxygen profile shows a maximum below the surface at a depth of 2 to 4 Å and a width of about 6 Å.
 Fig. 4  Deconvoluted concentration depth profiles of (A) sulfur and (B) oxygen of the non-annealed 50∶50 P3HT:PCBM blend. The error bars shown are due to the uncertainty of the deconvolution procedure. 
The measurements of the 40∶60 and 60∶40 blend show similar results and can be found in the ESI.†35
In Fig. 5 the deconvoluted sulfur and oxygen concentration depth profiles are shown together for comparison: in Fig. 5A, the profiles of the non-annealed, and Fig. 5B the profiles of the annealed sample are shown. Fig. 5 shows that the maximum of the oxygen concentration just falls into the minimum of the sulfur profile. As sulfur represents thiophene and oxygen PCBM, comparing the concentration depth profiles shows that the surface of the polymer is covered with a thiophene or a thiophene related compound while there is an enrichment of the PCBM just below the surface. The changes between the profiles of the non-annealed sample (Fig. 5A) and the annealed sample (Fig. 5B) are small. In Fig. 5A the outermost layer containing sulfur is somewhat thinner and lower in sulfur concentration and the oxygen concentration in the subsurface layer is somewhat higher. This corresponds to the finding in Fig. 3 that the onset of the sulfur concentration depth profile of the annealed sample is shifted to lower depth compared to that of the non-annealed sample.
 Fig. 5  Comparing the deconvoluted concentration profiles of (A) the non-annealed and (B) the annealed blend. 
The formation of a PCBM rich layer just below the blend surface has to be related to the report by Watts et al.18 who found that PCBM aggregates in the blend and forms small crystals in PCBM/P3HT blends. The authors also determined the diffusion constant of PCBM in the blend. The PCBM structure formed in the near-surface region has a thickness of about a single monolayer. The layer is almost closed as the P3HT concentration reduces almost to zero in its depletion region. As NICISS cannot resolve the lateral structure, we do not know the lateral size of this PCBM structure. However, the PCBM structure must have laterally a much larger dimension than parallel to the surface normal given the high PCBM concentration. This finding shows similarities to the findings of Watts et al.18 who showed that the PCBM crystals formed in the polymer blend have the shape of needles thus showing different sizes in different dimensions. Even though PCBM has a higher surface energy than P3HT, the area just below the blend surface seems to be a favourable place for the PCBM to diffuse. The reason why the near-surface area is a favourable place to form aggregates cannot be answered with the current work.
The concentration profiles of sulfur show a higher concentration at the surface of the blend than in the bulk. This is concluded not only from the absolute concentration of the sulfur at the surface but also because some PCBM is present in the outermost layer, a conclusion which is also supported by the MIES data shown later. The presence of PCBM at the surface means that the sulfur containing compound does not fill the entire space in the outermost layer. Thus in the total volume occupied by the sulfur containing species, sulfur has a higher relative concentration than in the bulk. Thus the concentration depth profiles show that the unknown sulfur containing compound is also present at the blend surface.
MIES/UPS results
In Fig. 6A MIE and UP spectra of PCBM are shown, Fig. 6B those of P3HT, and in Fig. 6C the spectra of a 50∶50 blend of P3HT and PCBM. The UP spectra of PCBM correspond to the spectra reported in the literature.36Ref. 36 shows UP spectra with an electron density in two regions in the low binding energy range peaking at about 2.2 and 3.6 eV, thus with a difference in binding energy of 1.4 eV. The authors show by means of density-of-state (DOS) calculations that the region centred at 2.2 eV corresponds to molecular orbitals of the C60 backbone while the region centred at around 3.6 eV includes both orbitals from the C60 backbone and the side chain. The MIE spectra show both features as well. However, the region centred at the lower binding energy is lower in intensity than the region at the higher binding energy. Due to the fact that MIES is sensitive exclusively to the outermost layer, we can conclude that the side chain of PCBM is oriented towards the surface. Further, between 5 and 11 eV several other structures can be identified. The intensity ratios of the peaks in the UP spectrum are different to those in the MIE spectrum.
 Fig. 6  MIE and UP spectra of (A) PCBM, (B) P3HT and (C) a 50∶50 blend of P3HT and PCBM. 
The UP spectra of P3HT correspond to the spectra reported in the literature.37–39 The structures below 5 eV binding energy correspond to π-orbitals of the conjugated backbone,37 while the structures above 5 eV binding energy correspond to σ-states of the polymer backbone.37,38 The MIE spectrum corresponds to the spectra shown in ref. 39 and shows the highest count rate at the 10.8 eV peak, but almost no count rate at binding energies below 5 eV. It has to be kept in mind that the NICIS spectra show an enhanced sulfur concentration at the surface which is related above to the presence of a further compound at the surface, possibly a compound with a shorter alkylchain and smaller number of repeat-units of the polymer. A possible consequence for the interpretation of the MIE spectrum is that the spectrum might be not entirely the spectrum of the P3HT polymer molecules itself. We will come back to the discussion when considering the blend spectra.
The UP and MIE spectra of the blend should show features of the spectra of the pure materials. For MIES the concept of fitting spectra of mixtures or solutions as a linear combination of the spectra of the pure compounds has been applied successfully.40–42 The concept has also been used for fitting UP spectra38 and relies only on the assumption that the components in the mixture or solution do not chemically react. This assumption certainly holds for P3HT/PCBM blends. The spectrum of a mixture of two or more components can then be written as (3)where S is the spectrum of the mixture, Si the spectra of the pure components and fi fitting coefficients or weighting factors. In the case of MIES, the fi represent the fraction of the surface covered with the species i, and Si the MIE spectra of the pure compounds. In the case of UPS the fi give the fraction of the volume probed by UPS that is occupied by the species i.
In Fig. 7A the measured MIE spectrum of the non-annealed 50∶50 PCBM:P3HT blend is shown together with a fit of the measured spectrum according to eqn (3). The MIE spectrum can be fitted reasonably well up to a binding energy of 10.5 eV as can be seen from the residual in Fig. 7A. At binding energies larger than 10.5 eV, the fit shows deviations, most likely due to the fact that the intensity of the secondary electrons differs between the samples. As the spectra of the pure compounds and the blend have been measured on the same day within a short period of time, we can assume that the weighting factors fi show quantitatively how much of the blend surface is covered with the respective compound. The coefficients to fit the MIE spectrum of the 50∶50 blend are 0.67 ± 0.1 for P3HT and 0.33 ± 0.1 for PCBM which means that about a third of the surface is covered with PCBM. Two third of the surface is covered with P3HT. However, when discussing the spectra of pure P3HT it had to be noted that the MIE spectrum of P3HT might not be or might be not entirely the spectrum of the P3HT polymer molecules itself due to the presence of a further compound.
 Fig. 7  (A) Fit of the MIE spectrum of the 50∶50 blend using a linear combination of the MIE spectra of PCBM and P3HT. (B) Using eqn (5) to eqn (7) for determining the UP spectrum of the upper 5 Å (the unknown compound) related to UPS with the spectrum of the non-annealed 50∶50 blend, of the PCBM and P3HT, the approximated spectrum for the sample at a depth larger than 5 Å (Σ > 5 Å) and the difference between the blend and the last spectrum (top 5 Å). (C) Variation of the electron mean free path when calculating the spectrum of the unknown compound. 
The same procedure could in principle be applied to the UP spectra. However, in the case of the spectra shown here it is not possible to achieve a reasonable good fit to the measurement of the blend with a linear combination of the UP spectra of PCBM and P3HT as per eqn (3). The best fit using these two reference spectra results in a residual with intensities up to a few 10% of the spectrum of the blend, in particular in the region between 3 and 8 eV binding energy. The reason for finding that this fitting procedure of the UP spectrum of the blend is not successful is most likely that the surface of the blend as well as of the P3HT is covered with a further compound. However, the structure and nature of this compound are not yet known. In the case that there is indeed a further compound present at the surface, the ratio between the contributions of the unknown compound––the compound also covering the P3HT––and that of the true P3HT––the compound forming the bulk of P3HT––would be different in the spectrum of the P3HT sample and that of the blend. The reason for this is that the PCBM occupies some of the volume of the blend just below the surface and thus reduces the presence of P3HT in the region close to the surface. Thus the ratio between the unknown compound at the surface and the true P3HT in the bulk near the surface is not the same for the P3HT sample and the blend. Due to the fact that in a UP spectrum the signal is recorded from a few monolayers, the UP spectrum of the P3HT compound in the blend must be different to the UP spectrum of the sample formed by P3HT alone. In contrast, as the surface of the P3HT compound seems to be covered entirely with the further compound, the fitting of the MIE spectra with eqn (3) is successful.
We can use the fact that the spectrum of the blend cannot be fitted with eqn (3) to find a first approximation for the UP spectrum of the unknown compound by assuming that the UP spectrum of the blend is given by three contributions. The first component originates from the PCBM with the distribution in the concentration depth profile as given by Fig. 5B. The second component originates from the P3HT with the distribution given by Fig. 5B as well. However, assuming that the surface is covered by the unknown compound, we take only the sulfur containing species into account from the minimum of the sulfur profile in the blend up to larger depth. The spectrum of the third component is then given by the difference between the measured spectrum and the sum of the first and second components.
The contribution of the PCBM and P3HT to the measured UP spectrum of the blend can be calculated based on their concentration depth profiles in Fig. 5B, and the attenuation of the emitted electrons on their trajectory to the surface. The latter is given by the well-known formula for the attenuation of electrons passing through matter I(E,d) = I0·exp(−d/λcos(θ))(4)where I0 is the intensity generated in the depth d, λ the electron mean free path and θ the angle of observation, i.e. between the surface normal and the direction of observation (the direction from the sample to the detector). For the measurements here, θ is 90°.
The contribution of PCBM to the blend spectrum is given by (5)where IblendPCBM is the contribution of PCBM to the UPS intensity in the spectrum of the blend, IPCBM is the spectrum of PCBM, and creloxygen(d) is the concentration depth profile of PCBM (as given by the concentration depth profile of oxygen) as volume fraction in the blend. The intensity of electrons emitted from PCBM has to be normalised by the total intensity of emitted electrons thus it has to be divided by the integral given in the denominator. In the same way we calculate the contribution IblendP3HT of P3HT to the spectrum by calculating (6)where crelsulfur(d) is the concentration depth profile of P3HT (as given by the concentration depth profile of sulfur). The integral starts in this case from a depth of 5 Å, i.e. at the minimum of the sulfur concentration depth profile.
The contribution of the unknown species could be calculated in a similar way as in eqn (6) in instances where the spectrum of the unknown species would be known. Instead, we determine the spectrum of the unknown compound Iunknown by Iunknown = Iblend − IblendPCBM − IblendP3HT(7)In Fig. 7B the spectra for the 50∶50 blend, the P3HT, and the PCBM samples are shown. Also shown is the sum of the spectra of P3HT and PCBM as calculated with eqn (5) and (6) (labelled ‘Σ > 5 Å’). The bottom spectrum is a spectrum calculated with eqn (7) (labelled ‘top 5 Å’).
The assumption made for this procedure needs to be discussed before discussing the results. Firstly, the integral with the depth as variable is over the depth from zero to infinity while in practice it is sufficient to take the integral up to a finite depth, here we use 6 nm. Secondly, the difference in electron density of PCBM and P3HT is taken into account because the spectra used are those of the respective materials in the blend and the variation in the intensity of the source can be neglected. However, in case the electron density is different for the different materials, i.e. PCBM, P3HT and blend, using the same value for the electron mean free path is a simplification. However, given that the densities of the materials are similar, this difference in the electron mean free path is of minor importance. Thirdly, the value for the mean free path of the electrons is about 10 Å30 but has an uncertainty. Thus we varied the value between 5 and 20 Å to take this uncertainty into account. This variation is somewhat larger than the uncertainty in the value of the electron mean free path. The change in the different spectra is minor as can be seen in Fig. 7C, where calculated spectra Iunknown for an electron mean free path of 5, 10 and 20 Å, respectively, are shown. Thus the choice of the electron mean free path is of minor importance. Fourthly, the depth scale used for the NICISS data is not necessarily the same as the length scale given with the electron mean free path. However, for the procedure to determine the stopping power in organic matter43 (the stopping power relates the depth to the energy loss scale), electron spectroscopy methods have been used to determine the layer thickness of the organic layers, i.e. methods similar to that used here for the analysis. Also, the variation by a factor of 4 in the electron mean free path of the emitted electrons described above leads only to small variations of the calculated spectrum of the unknown compound thus giving confidence that a mismatch between the length scale of NICISS and UPS does not strongly influence the procedure used here to determine the spectrum of the unknown compound.
The calculated spectrum of the unknown compound shown in Fig. 7B at the P3HT and blend surface has to be considered as a first approximation. This spectrum shows similarities to that of P3HT at energies larger than 6 eV. At energies below 6 eV a structure at about 4.5 eV can be identified while the intensities below 3 eV are completely missing. In contrast, the intensity in the P3HT spectrum cuts off at 0.7 eV. A similar observation in regard to the intensities at low binding energies could be made when comparing the UP and MIE spectra of P3HT, as the MIE spectrum shows a low count rate at binding energies below 5 eV. We considered two explanations for this observation. The first explanation is a preferred orientation of the P3HT molecules with the alkyl chains pointing towards the surface which would be in accordance with the finding of Xue et al.10 The second explanation is the presence of a further compound covering the surface. The second explanation of the MIE spectra has to be considered as the more likely explanation, given that the UP spectra of the blend and the NICISS measurements suggest the presence of a further compound at the surface. However, the second explanation has to be treated with caution as we do not have a direct evidence for the nature of the further compound.
The spectrum of the unknown component in Fig. 7B shows similarities with that of thiophene, bithiophene and terthiophene:44 at energies less than 2 eV there is almost no intensity for these compounds while the electron density of sexithiophene starts at about 1.5 eV, i.e. at 0.5 eV less energy. Bithiophene and terthiophene show peaks at around 2.5 and 3 eV while thiophene shows only a monotonic increase in electron density between 2.5 and 5 eV. Thus it is likely that the unknown compound is a mixture of monomers and short oligomers, at least some of them with an alkylchain attached. However, the only evidence for our hypothesis of the nature of the unknown compound is the fact that the oligomers with attached alkyl chains are used as reactants for polymerising P3HT. It must be noted that only a very low amount of such remaining monomers and short chain oligomers would be required to cover the surface of the polymer layers. The amount could be that low that their presence could barely be measured with analytical techniques probing the bulk. As an example, NMR would not allow detecting a component with a concentration less than a few tenths of a percent. Impurities can readily form complete monolayers at a sample surface even at bulk concentration of a few orders of magnitude less than the above estimation of the NMR sensitivity.
Missing electron density at low binding energy means that the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the unknown compound is much lower (i.e. at a higher binding energy of the electrons) than that of the P3HT. A decrease in the HOMO means that the compound has deeper traps for the charge carriers. As a consequence, the unknown compound will lead to a higher recombination rate than P3HT polymer molecules in the vicinity of PCBM.
Finding an additional compound at the surface of P3HT could have implications on the meaning of the surface energy measurements of P3HT. As the additional compound covers the surface of P3HT it has a lower surface energy and affects the surface energy measurements of P3HT. Thus it is possible that the surface energy values reported are not that of pure P3HT but of the additional but unknown compound. Further, as the MIE spectrum of P3HT is almost identical to that in ref. 39, the additional compound could be a usual constituent in most P3HT samples.
Implication for the operation of OPVs
The implication of the surface structure for the function of OPVs is twofold. Firstly, the important finding of the work here is that the distribution of PCBM throughout the BHJ is more complicated than known so far. We find a thin layer of PCBM just below the blend layer surface even though there is a gradient in the BHJ formed by PCBM and P3HT such that the overall concentration of PCBM is high at the BHJ/substrate interface and the overall concentration of P3HT high at the surface of the BHJ when using a high surface energy substrate. The high concentration of PCBM at the blend surface is beneficial for the charge transport over the BHJ/low work function interface in the case that the low work function electrode is deposited onto the surface of the blend layer. However, the gradient of concentration through the entire layer could still be detrimental for transporting electrons towards the BHJ/low work function interface. It is shown that changing the gradient in the BHJ by changing the surface of the high work function electrode, i.e. the surface of the substrate onto which the PCBM/P3HT blend was spincoated, did not improve the performance of the devices.11 In contrast, inverting the structure of devices by spin coating the polymer blend on ITO modified with Cs2CO3 improved the device performance.12 In the inverted structure the PCBM rich side is connected to the low work function electrode formed by the Cs2CO3 modified ITO. It is unclear whether or not a change in the concentration of PCBM and P3HT at the interfaces of the electrodes (by changing the gradient within the BHJ layer) has an influence on the device performance at all, as in both cases further properties of the devices have been changed, i.e. not only the distribution within the BHJ layer.
Secondly, the high concentration of a hole transporting compound between PCBM and the electrode deposited onto the spin coated BHJ surface could lead to a large recombination rate of electrons and holes thus affecting the efficiency of the OPVs. The problem becomes even more serious as the compound at the surface of the BHJ is not P3HT but a similar compound (e.g. short thiophene oligomers) with most likely a HOMO lower than that of the P3HT, thus being able to trap electrons at a lower energy than the P3HT. It must be noted, however, that the evaporated electrode intermixes with the polymer blend surface during evaporation and thus the presence of a monolayer of a substance adversely affecting the device performance might be of lower importance. The influence of intermixing at this interface has also been discussed in ref. 10.
Conclusion
The important finding of this work is that there is a high PCBM concentration close to the surface of the BHJ layer after spin coating implying the formation of a phase rich in PCBM just below the surface. This finding has similarities to the phase separation in the bulk of the PCBM/P3HT blend reported by Watts et al.18 However, it must be noted that at least in one dimension the size of the phases is very different. In the case described here, the layer of PCBM close to the surface is only about one monolayer thick, while the crystals reported in ref. 18 grow to a size of μm. We also found that the PCBM rich layer forms close to the surface but does not form the outermost layer. This is in agreement with the fact that the surface energy of P3HT is lower than that of PCBM.
We found that the MIE spectrum of the blend surface can be fitted as a linear combination of the spectra of samples made of PCBM and P3HT alone. In contrast, the UP spectra could not be fitted as linear combination of the spectra of samples of PCBM and P3HT alone which is attributed to the presence of the additional sulfur containing compound in P3HT. We developed a procedure to determine as a first approximation the UP spectrum of this unknown compound which shows similarities to the P3HT spectrum. However, in the approximated spectrum of the unknown compound in particular, electron densities at low binding energy are missing. We thus concluded that the HOMO of this substance is lower than that of P3HT. Comparing the spectra with monomers and short oligomers of thiophene suggests that a small amount of these compounds is present in the P3HT and covers the surface after spin coating.
There are implications for the function of OPVs. The presence of a layer rich in PCBM close to the surface of the spin coated BHJ layer supports the charge transport over the interface, while the presence of the unknown compound could reduce the charge transport as it will promote the recombination of charge carriers at the interface between the BHJ and the low work function electrode. The gradient of PCBM and P3HT in the BHJ is most likely less detrimental for the function of OPVs due to the PCBM rich layer close to the surface of the polymer blend layer after spin coating.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the School of Chemical and Physical Sciences of Flinders University and by a grant of the Australian research council (LE0989068). We want to thank Prof. H. Morgner and A/Prof. M. Johnston for fruitful discussion.
References
T. D. Nielsen, C. Cruickshank, S. Foged, J. Thorsen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1553 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185 RSC .
D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, B. H. Hamadani, L. J. Richter, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach and D. M. DeLongchamp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 233303 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, L.-M. Chen, G. Yang, C.-H. Huang, J. Hou, Y. Wu, G. Li, C.-S. Hsu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2575 RSC .
A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. J. Pearson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. C. Dennison, H. Hamamatsu, M. W. A. Skoda, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2444 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamamoto, D. Kitazawa, J. Tsukamoto, T. Shibamori, H. Seki and Y. Nakagawa, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 2115 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Felicissimo, D. Jarzab, M. Gorgoi, M. Forster, U. Scherf, M. C. Scharber, S. Svensson, P. Rudolf and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4899 RSC .
B. Xue, B. Vaughan, C.-H. Poh, K. B. Burke, L. Thomsen, A. Stapleton, X. Zhou, G. W. Bryant, W. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15797 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, R. J. Kline, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach, M. F. Toney, L. J. Richter and D. M. DeLongchamp, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3828 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Liao, L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 173303 CrossRef .
J. Y. Oh, W. S. Jang, T. I. Lee, J.-M. Myoung and H. K. Baik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 023303 CrossRef .
M. Shin, H. Kim, J. Park, S. Nam, K. Heo, M. Ree, C. S. Ha and Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 748 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vanlaeke, A. Swinnen, I. Haeldermans, G. Vanhoyland, T. Aernouts, D. Cheyns, C. Deibel, J. D'Haen, P. Heremans, J. Poortmans and J. V. Manca, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2150 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. v. Bavel, E. Sourty, G. d. With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 507 .
J.-H. Huang, F.-C. Chien, P. Chen, K.-C. Ho and C.-W. Chu, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1669 CrossRef CAS .
B. Watts, W. J. Belcher, L. Thomsen, H. Ade and P. C. Dastoor, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8392 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 240 CrossRef .
Y. Yao, J. Hou, Z. Xu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1783 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andersson and H. Morgner, Surf. Sci., 1998, 405, 138 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andersson, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2007, 75, 032901 CrossRef .
G. Andersson, T. Krebs and H. Morgner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 136 RSC .
G. Andersson, H. H. P. Gommans, A. W. Denier van der Gon and H. H. Brongersma, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3299 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. P. Gommans, A. W. Denier van der Gon, G. G. Andersson, L. J. van IJzendoorn, R. M. T. Pijper and H. H. Brongersma, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 5756 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andersson, H. Morgner and P. Pohl, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2008, 78, 032904 CrossRef .
G. Andersson and H. Morgner, Surf. Sci., 2000, 445, 89 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Seah and W. A. Dench, Surf. Interface Anal., 1979, 1, 2 CrossRef CAS .
H. Morgner, Adv. At., Mol., Opt. Phys, 2000, 42, 387 Search PubMed .
F. Voigts, F. Bebensee, S. Dahle, K. Volgmann and W. Maus-Friedrichs, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 40 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andersson, H. H. Brongersma, A. W. Denier van der Gon, L. J. van IJzendoorn and M. P. de Jong, Synth. Met., 2001, 113, 245 .
M. O. Reese, A. M. Nardes, B. L. Rupert, R. E. Larsen, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles and N. Kopidakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3476 CrossRef CAS .
See ESI†.
K. Akaike, K. Kanai, H. Yoshida, J. y. Tsutsumi, T. Nishi, N. Sato, Y. Ouchi and K. Seki, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 023710 CrossRef .
J. Ghijsen, R. Lazzaroni, V. Parenté, J. L. Brédas, A. Lachkar, A. Selmani and R. L. Johnson, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1996, 78, 355 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dannetun, M. Boman, S. Stafstrom, W. R. Salaneck, R. Lazzaroni, C. Fredriksson, J. L. Bredas, R. Zamboni and C. Taliani, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 99, 664 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Hao, T. Hosokai, N. Mitsuo, S. Kera, K. K. Okudaira, K. Mase and N. Ueno, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 10365 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oberbrodhage, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2000, 107, 231 CrossRef CAS .
B. Heinz and H. Morgner, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1998, 96, 83 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kirmse and H. Morgner, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2193 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andersson and H. Morgner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 1999, B155, 357 Search PubMed .
A. Chandekar and J. E. Whitten, Synth. Met., 2005, 150, 259–264 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp20734bThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:
Ekin,hν = E(hν) − Ebin	(1)
Ekin,He* = E(He*) − Ebin	(2)

 	Fig. 1  NICIS TOF spectra of PCBM, P3HT and a 50∶50 blend of P3HT and PCBM. An offset is added to the spectra for clarity. Vertical bars indicate the onset of the signal of helium projectiles backscattered from the elements sulfur, silicon, oxygen and carbon.	 

 	Fig. 2  Concentration depth profiles of (A) sulfur of pure P3HT as measured and (B) deconvoluted concentration depth profile of sulfur of P3HT. The error bars shown are due to the uncertainty of the deconvolution procedure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Concentration depth profiles of (A) sulfur and (B) oxygen of the 50∶50 P3HT:PCBM blend.	 

 	Fig. 4  Deconvoluted concentration depth profiles of (A) sulfur and (B) oxygen of the non-annealed 50∶50 P3HT:PCBM blend. The error bars shown are due to the uncertainty of the deconvolution procedure.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparing the deconvoluted concentration profiles of (A) the non-annealed and (B) the annealed blend.	 

 	Fig. 6  MIE and UP spectra of (A) PCBM, (B) P3HT and (C) a 50∶50 blend of P3HT and PCBM.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  (A) Fit of the MIE spectrum of the 50∶50 blend using a linear combination of the MIE spectra of PCBM and P3HT. (B) Using eqn (5) to eqn (7) for determining the UP spectrum of the upper 5 Å (the unknown compound) related to UPS with the spectrum of the non-annealed 50∶50 blend, of the PCBM and P3HT, the approximated spectrum for the sample at a depth larger than 5 Å (Σ > 5 Å) and the difference between the blend and the last spectrum (top 5 Å). (C) Variation of the electron mean free path when calculating the spectrum of the unknown compound.	 
I(E,d) = I0·exp(−d/λcos(θ))	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
Iunknown = Iblend − IblendPCBM − IblendP3HT	(7)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp20734b

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
