Traps in metal halide perovskites: characterization and passivation  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR05739H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR05739H
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 22425-22451Traps in metal halide perovskites: characterization and passivation

        
          
            Xincan 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenwu 
            Li
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory for Micro/Nano Optoelectronic Devices of Ministry of Education and Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Structural Physics and Devices, School of Physics and Electronics, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China. E-mail: yhu@hnu.edu.cn
bInstitute for Optoelectronics, Department of Materials Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. E-mail: wwli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn
Received 
      4th August 2020
    , Accepted 2nd October 2020First published on 5th October 2020AbstractMetal halide perovskites (MHPs) have become a research focus in the field of optoelectronics due to their excellent optoelectronic properties and simple and cost-effective thin film manufacturing processes. In particular, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of solar cells (SCs) and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) based on perovskite materials have reached 25.2% and 21.6%, respectively, in a short period, making perovskites especially promising for fabricating next-generation optoelectronic devices. Despite these inspiring results, obtaining high-performance, high-stability MHP-based devices still faces many challenges, among which the defects and the consequent traps in MHPs are key factors. Defect-induced traps can trap charge carriers or even act as non-radiative recombination centers, seriously degrading the device performance, causing hysteresis and deteriorating the stability of MHP-based devices. Thus, understanding the chemical/physical nature of traps and adopting appropriate strategies to passivate traps are important to enhance the device performance and stability. Herein we present a review in which the knowledge and understanding of traps in MHPs are considered and discussed. Moreover, the latest efforts on passivating traps in MHPs for improving device performance are summarized, with the hope of providing guidance to future development of high-performance and high-stability MHP-based devices.Xincan QiuXincan Qiu received her M.S. degree in physics from Central South University under the supervision of Prof. Bingchu Yang, and she is currently a Ph.D. candidate studying at Hunan University. Her research focuses on perovskites for field-effect transistors and optoelectronic applications and photophysical studies.Yu LiuYu Liu received his B. E. degree in electronic science and technology from Hunan University, and he is currently a Ph.D. candidate at Hunan University. His present research interests include charge transport physics in organic and perovskite semiconductors.Wenwu LiWenwu Li received his B.S. degree in microelectronics from North University of China in 2007, and Ph.D. degree in microelectronics and solid state electronics from East China Normal University in 2012. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at National Institute for Materials Science (Japan) and China Southern Power Grid Co. Ltd from 2012 to 2014. In 2014 he was appointed as a full professor in electronic engineering at East China Normal University. His research interests include microelectronic devices and applications. He is the author of more than 70 peer reviewed articles including Nature Communications, Advanced Materials, and IEEE EDL.Yuanyuan HuYuanyuan Hu is a professor at Hunan University in China. He received his B.S. from Nanjing University in 2008 and his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge in 2015. He was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California, Santa Barbara from 2015–2017. His current research is on the fabrication, characterization and understanding of electronic and photonic devices based on solution-processable semiconductors.
1. Introduction
In the past few years, metal halide perovskites (MHPs) have attracted significant attention in the field of optoelectronics. Because of the excellent optoelectronic properties of MHPs, such as high optical absorption coefficients (105 cm−1), long carrier diffusion length, suppressed recombination (defect tolerance), and well-balanced charge transport,1 MHPs have attracted wide attention and made great progress in many aspects, such as application in solar cells (SCs),2–8 light emitting diodes (LEDs),9–14 photodetectors (PDs),15–19 field effect transistors (FETs),20–25etc. Among them, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have reached an efficiency of 25.2% in just 10 years,26 and an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 21.6% has been achieved in perovskite LEDs.27 Thus, MHP-based devices have been regarded as important candidates for next-generation optoelectronic devices. Moreover, MHPs possess the advantages of solution-processability and flexibility, which make them very promising for large-scale commercialization and integration.28–33
For an ideal semiconductor, it has to have a perfect lattice, and each atom (ion or molecule) should be regularly arranged at a prescribed position without any defects or impurities. However, in actual situations, the crystal nucleation growth process and post-processing process are unavoidable, introducing defects. Unlike traditional silicon materials, MHPs are generally considered to be “soft ionic crystals with low thermal stability and low defect-formation energy,34–37 which leads to the easy formation of a variety of point defects (such as vacancies, interstitials, and antisites) in thin films. In addition, the combination of point defects and defect arrays in MHPs will form defects of different dimensions. These defects can trap, scatter charge carriers,38–41 or act as non-radiative recombination centers,42–45 affecting the quantum efficiency of photoluminescence of thin films.46–48 They are also responsible for causing ion-migration49–51 and the corresponding device hysteresis.52–54 These behaviors caused by defects thereby reduce the performance of MHP-based devices and threaten the long-term stability of the devices. Therefore, understanding the nature of defects/traps in MHPs and providing effective solutions for reducing their effects are crucial to the further development and application of MHP-based devices.
In this review, we first introduce the basic fundamentals of perovskites including the structure and characteristics of three-dimensional (3D) and two-dimensional (2D) MHPs. We then summarize the results of theoretical studies on defects in MHPs and the effects of defects on the photoelectric properties of MHPs, hoping to provide a preliminary understanding about defect physics in MHPs. After that, the typical characterization methods of trap states in MHPs are briefly introduced and the experimentally measured trap density of states (tDOS) by various groups are compared. In particular, we summarize and categorize various defect passivation strategies that have been developed so far, which provide some insights into the preparation of MHP-based devices with high performance and long-term stability.
2. Basics of MHPs
Historically, the earliest perovskite materials were discovered in the chlorite-rich skarn by Prussian mineralogist Gustav Rose in 1839, and the mineral material was named after Tsarist mineralogist Count Lev A. Perovskiy.55 This material consists of oxides of calcium and titanium, which is the origin of the Chinese name for perovskite materials. Today, perovskite materials refer not only to calcium and titanium composite oxides (CaTiO3), but also to all compounds of the chemical formula ABX3. According to the classification of X-site elements, perovskite materials can also be divided into metal oxide perovskites and metal halide perovskites (MHPs). Among them, MHPs have achieved good results in SCs and LEDs, and thus are the focus of this review. This section mainly introduces structures of MHPs and their properties as a function of dimensionality.
2.1 3D MHPs
In 3D MHP family, the A-site is occupied by a small organic or inorganic cation (e.g., [CH3NH3]+(MA+), [CH3(NH2)2]+(FA+), Cs+, and Rb+), while the B-site is a divalent metal cation (e.g., Pb2+, Sn2+, or Ge2+) and the X-site is a halogen anion (e.g., I−, Br−, or Cl−). As shown in Fig. 1b, where “X” as an anion bonding with “A” and “B” cations with different sizes, the 3D network is made of a series of corner-sharing BX6 octahedra with the “A” cations occupying the cubic octahedral cavities, maintaining the electroneutrality of the system. Treating all ions as rigid spheres and considering a close packing configuration yields the concept of tolerance factor (τ) and octahedral factor (μ), with the parameter definition formula as follows: (1) (2)where RA, RB, and RX are the ionic radii for the corresponding ions.56 Tolerance factors and octahedral factors can quantitatively describe the stability of the perovskite structure and predict the emerging perovskite structure. Typical 3D MHP structural tolerance factors and octahedral factors are 0.81 ≤ τ ≤ 1.1 and 0.44 ≤ μ ≤ 0.90, respectively.57
 Fig. 1  (a) A vintage specimen of chlorite-calcite skarn from the akhmatovskaya Kop’ sporting superb pseudo-cubic perovskite crystals. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (b) Crystal structure of 3D ABX3MHP. (c) Schematic representation of perovskites by dimensionality engineering. 
Depending on the A-site cation composition, 3D MHPs can be subdivided into organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites and all-inorganic perovskites, both of which have excellent electrical and optical properties.58,59 The chemical and structural diversity of this material family enables a wide range of optoelectronic applications.60 The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has been boosted from 3.8% to 25.2%,2,26 within the last few years due to the excellent semiconductor properties of 3D MHPs, such as high optical absorption coefficient, long exciton diffusion length and suppressed recombination (defect tolerance), small exciton binding energy and well-balanced charge transfer.61–64 Moreover, MHPs have been proven to be good light emitting bodies due to their extremely high color purity, adjustable luminous color, adjustable band gap and low non-radiative recombination rate.65,66 Organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs have created a myth in the field of photovoltaic devices, but poor stability has always been a challenging problem for scientists.67–72 Compared with organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, all-inorganic perovskites have excellent carrier transport characteristics, and also have high humidity and heat stability and photoelectric stability.73–77 Also in the LED field, all-inorganic perovskite-based LEDs have been reported to have better stability.78–80
2.2 2D MHPs
Recently, 2D MHPs have been realized experimentally and demonstrated to have attractive properties. The general stoichiometric formula for this material is (R-NH3)2An−1BnX3n+1, where n represents the number of metal halide octahedra between adjacent insulating organic cation layers, R-NH3+ is an aliphatic or aromatic ammonium cation, such as C4H9-NH3+ and C6H5-CH2CH2-NH3+, the B cation is generally a divalent metal, and X is a halide. When n = 1, it is a pure 2D MHP; when n is another integer, it is a quasi 2D MHP (Fig. 1c).81–83 Unlike 3D MHP (n = ∞) structures, the organic long-chain cations introduced in 2D MHPs do not match the cubic octahedral cavity formed by the BX6 octahedron, and so the inorganic lead-halogen layer is separated along the edge 〈110〉 or 〈001〉 oriented lamellar structure to adapt to these organic long-chain molecules.
Compared to 3D MHPs, the advantages of 2D layered MHPs include improved moisture resistance, excellent light and thermal stability, ultra-low self-doping behavior, and significantly reduced ion migration effects.84–90 2D MHPs have become a hot research topic in PSCs. In addition, the 2D MHP material's quantum confinement effect,91 variable structure composition, and easy-to-fabricate characteristics make them promising for nanodevice applications. For example, they exhibit strong light absorption and photoluminescence at room temperature, making them interesting for LEDs and PDs.10,92–97
3. Defects in MHPs
3.1 Point defects
It is well documented that the formation of materials is thermodynamically controlled by their formation energy, and so the substance with the lowest formation energy exists in its most stable state. For the preparation of MHPs, we mostly use solution spin-coating or vacuum thermal evaporation technologies to prepare perovskite films. Due to the nature of solution processing and the rapid crystal growth of perovskite thin films at relatively elevated temperatures, a wide range of defects are expected to form depending on the precursor composition and processing conditions, among which point defects are the most basic and simplest kind of defects as illustrated in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of typical point defects in MHPs: (a) Ideal structure (perfect lattice). (b) Vacancy. (c) Interstitial. (d) Antisite. 
Taking the classic and most commonly studied organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (MAPbI3) as an example, early studies showed 12 intrinsic point defects in the material: three kinds of vacancies (VMA, VPb, VI), three kinds of interstitials (MAi, Pbi, Ii), and six kinds of antisites (MAPb, PbMA, MAI, PbI, IMA, IPb, AB means A on B site).98 The formation of defects is dependent on the defect formation energy (DFE, Hf), the value of which allows us to estimate the density of the relevant defects since the density is proportional to exp(−Hf/kT). For a high DFE, the corresponding defect density is low. The DFE is closely related to the chemical potential of the constituent element and the Fermi energy of the material.99 In addition to DFE, the defect transition energy levels are also important as they are strong indicators of whether the defect states are deep or shallow. The defect with a transition level deep in the band gap generally acts as Shockley-Read-Hall nonradiative recombination centers, which is detrimental to the performance of SCs and LEDs.
Theoretical calculation is a powerful tool to investigate how the electrical properties of MHPs are influenced by defects, as well as providing valid guidance for defect engineering through material design. With the help of theoretical calculations, the formation and properties of simple point defects in MHPs can be deeply investigated. Disclosing the formation energies and transition energy levels are usually realized through first-principles calculations This method has been widely used to investigate the characteristics of point defects in semiconductors according to their inherent properties on the atomic scale.100–103 Here, we mainly summarize and compare the theoretical calculation results regarding defects in MAPbI3, aiming to provide a preliminary understanding of defects in MHP materials.
Yin et al. studied the electronic properties of MAPbI3 by first-principles calculation based on density-functional theory (DFT). The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used for the exchange–correlation functional, while spin–orbit coupling (SOC) was not taken into account (GGA-non-SOC).99 For MAPbI3, CH3NH3 and Pb provide one electron and two electrons, respectively, to three I ions, thereby forming a 1.5 eV band gap between the unoccupied Pb p orbital and occupied I p orbital, as shown in Fig. 3a and b. The DFE and transition energy levels of point defects of MAPbI3 were calculated under three different conditions (I-rich/Pb-poor, moderate and I-poor/Pb-rich). Overall, they found that those defects with low formation energies such as Ii, MAi (Inerstitials), VI, VPb, VMA (Vacancies) and MAPb, PbMA, MAI (Antisites) have very shallow transition energy levels. In contrast, the defects with deep transition levels, such as IMA, IPb, Pbi and PbI have relatively high formation energies (Fig. 3c). Therefore, they claim that the dominant defects in MAPbI3 are shallow defects, which is consistent with the fact that MAPbI3-based PSCs exhibit high defect tolerance, long electron–hole diffusion length and high open-circuit voltage.1,99 Similarly, Buin et al. explored the formation energy and transition level of defects in MAPbI3 through DFT.104,105 The calculated formation energies of point defects in MAPbI3 are not exactly the same but still very comparable to the above results. They found that all vacancies produce either slightly perturbed states in the bands (which do not capture carriers), or shallow traps within the bandgap, implying that carriers can still relax easily to valence band (VB) or conduction band (CB). Only certain interstitials (Pbi) and antisites associated with Pb and I (PbI and IPb) form electronic states deep inside the bandgap yet they have high formation energies.
 Fig. 3  (a) The band structure of MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2014. (b) All total DOS and the partial DOS of selective atoms. (c) Transition energy levels of MAPbI3 from DFT calculations (GGA without SOC) by Yin et al.: (red) the intrinsic acceptors and (blue) intrinsic donors. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. Comparison of calculated transition energy levels of point defects in MAPbI3 by Yin et al. (d) and by Agiorgousis et al. (e). Adapted from ref. 109 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (f) Transition energy levels of VI, Ii, IMA, Pbi, and PbMA in β-MAPbI3 calculated using GGA-non-SOC, GGA-SOC, and HSE-SOC calculations. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
However, some different results suggest that the defects do introduce deep-level trap states in MAPbI3.100,106–108 Agiorgousis et al. used the same first-principles calculation method to calculate the energy levels of defects in MAPbI3.109 It was found that intrinsic defects VI, Pbi, PbMA and IMA are responsible for the formation of Pb dimers or I trimers, which at certain charge states give rise to deep transition levels within the band gap, serving as recombination centers (RCs) detrimental to the device performance of SCs or LEDs (see Fig. 3e).
Nevertheless, conflicting results on the positions of several native defect levels in MAPbI3 were obtained by Du et al., who employed Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functionals including SOC (HSE-SOC) for DFT calculations.110 They showed that self-interaction error and the neglect of SOC in many previous DFT calculations resulted in incorrect positions of valence and conduction band edges, although their difference, which is the band gap, is in good agreement with the experimental value. This problem has led to incorrect predictions of defect-level positions.110 As shown in Fig. 3f, previous results from the GGA-non-SOC method were compared with the one obtained by using HSE-SOC. The results of HSE-SOC calculations show that among the intrinsic point defects, only iodine vacancies (Ii) and their complex (IMA) induce deep levels inside the band gap, acting as nonradiative recombination centers.110
Overall, despite the discrepancy in the results of these theoretical studies, there is consensus that the presence of iodide vacancies, MA vacancies or interstitials only causes shallow traps. Although it is well accepted that considerable deep-level trap states are present in MAPbI3, their origin indeed remains to be further clarified. Recent experimental studies have indicated the presence of considerable deep-level trap states in MAPbI3, possibly originating from defects such as iodide interstitial and Pb antisite defects.40 All these studies provide important information and knowledge of defect properties, and pave the way for future studies of defects and dopants in various halide perovskite materials.
3.2 Bulk defects
Point defects are the simplest defects and the most basic units for theoretical research, and they can be divided into Frenkel defects (vacancy-interstitial pairs) and Schottky defects (vacancies-only). In real semiconductor materials such as MAPbI3, depending on the growth conditions, point defects and defect pairs form a series of dimensional defects through different configurations and combinations. One-dimensional (1D) defects refer to the ones arranged in one direction in the crystal, which are mainly various forms of dislocations. When a crystal plane is not stacked in the prescribed manner, differently oriented crystallites are combined together so that two-dimensional (2D) defects are formed on the crystal surface. Three-dimensional (3D) defects, namely, body defects, include precipitates (small volumes with different crystal structures), large voids and second-phase domains. The defect region has a different lattice structure, lattice constant, material density, chemical composition and physical properties from other parts of the crystal, which will cause the volume change of the crystal pattern. In short, the existence of any type of defect (points, arrays, configurations, and combinations) in MHPs can cause different degrees of crystal structure changes, and consequently result in changes of optoelectronic properties of MHPs.
3.3 Surface defects and grain boundaries (GBs)
It is well acknowledged that the coordination number for ions at the crystal surfaces is always lower than that in the bulk material. Consequently, the nonstoichiometric material surface is comprised of a local excess of positive or negative ions, depending on the Miller index of the exposed surface. Several theoretical calculations have been carried out to investigate the chemical nature of surface defects in MAPbI3. It is worth noting that different results were obtained when calculations were performed considering point defects as surface defects instead of bulk defects. As an example, iodide vacancies and interstitials at the surface were predicted to form deep-level traps although they were electronically benign as bulk defects.111,112 In comparison, the PbI antisite defect at the surface exhibited particularly lower formation energy than that in the bulk, indicating that this defect should form more readily on the surface.113 Generally speaking, two typical surface defect sites have been reported to generate deep charge traps in MAPbI3: anionic defects (Pb–I antisites and undercoordinated iodide ions) on a PbI2-terminated surface and cationic defects (Pb clusters and undercoordinated Pb ions) on an MAI-terminated surface.29
Additionally, GBs are ubiquitous in polycrystalline films and are formed due to a break in the crystal structure of the material. The different orientations of neighboring crystal grains give rise to dislocations, misplaced atoms (interstitials), vacancies, and distorted bond angles/bond distances at GBs.40 Some theoretical studies and experimental investigations have shown that GBs of perovskite materials can form deep traps, and the occurrence of nonradiative recombination processes can lead to loss of device performance.40,102,114,115
In polycrystalline perovskite thin films, defects or impurities are likely to be concentrated at GBs and at the film surfaces. Indeed, a much shorter measured photoluminescence recombination lifetime of polycrystalline perovskite films than the intrinsic carrier recombination lifetime from a single crystal have been reported, indicating that there is still a high density of defects at the surface and GBs of polycrystalline films that are not benign electronically.29 These defects are detrimental to device performance by causing carrier trapping and non-radiative recombination, and also can cause other device instability issues, including ion migration and associated current hysteresis, and device degradation in ambient environment.29,116 Therefore, better identification and characterization of the defect-induced trap states in MHPs is an important step for achieving high-performance MHP-based devices, which will be discussed below.
4. Trap states in MHPs
Defect-induced trap states have a significant impact on the performance of MHP-based devices, and also play an important role in the stability of PSCs and other devices.70,117 Understanding the distribution of trap states in space and energy is fundamental in clarifying the effect of traps on charge transport and recombination in perovskite materials and devices. In this section, we will briefly introduce the commonly used trap-state characterization technologies for MHPs, and summarize the characterization results of trap-states (density and energy level) in MAPbI3 films/crystals.
It is well known that traps in semiconductors can capture and trap charge carriers, which will influence the electrical and optical properties of the materials. In addition, traps can be equivalent to a localized capacitor, and the charge capturing behavior will affect their capacitance characteristics. As with capacitive behavior, the trapped charge is released from the trap state under certain thermal excitation energies, thereby generating an excitation current. According to the above phenomenon, various characterization methods have been applied to measure the tDOS. Here we mainly discuss the results of tDOS in MAPbI3 obtained from a few of the most commonly used techniques which can give a profile of tDOS.
4.1 Trap states characterized by space charge limited current (SCLC) method
The SCLC method has been widely used to measure the tDOS in MHPs. The physical mechanism is as follows: when a trap-free semiconductor is subjected to a sufficiently large electric field through Ohmic contacts, charges will be injected into the bulk of the material to form a current which is limited by space-charge effects and exhibit a transition from Ohmic current to SCLC current. However, when traps are present, the current will be dominated by trap-filling behavior before entering into the SCLC regime (Fig. 4b). The form of the current versus voltage curve in the region of space-charge-injected currents can therefore be used to obtain information about trap densities (Fig. 4b).118 The SCLC method is based on a single charge injection device and can give a different type of charge defect (electron traps or hole traps) density, as shown in Fig. 4c.58,119–122 Moreover, the temperature-dependent SCLC measurements can be carried out for obtaining the energy depth of the trap states. More details about the operation of this technique can be found in the reference.122
 Fig. 4  Current–voltage traces and trap density. (a) The device structure of electron-only and hole-only MHP devices, respectively. The SCLC method can selectively characterize the electron-trap density and hole-trap density of MHP by fabricating electron-only or hole-only devices. (b) I–V curve for a hole-injecting MAPbI3 single crystal (ohmic regime → trap-filling transition → SCLC regime). (c) I–V curve as a function of temperature for a MAPbI3 single crystal contacted using titanium (inset) to favor electron injection (left) and using MoO3/Au/Ag (inset) to favor hole injection (right). (d) Density of the trap states within the bandgap of MAPbI3 single crystals extracted from the temperature-dependent SCLC method. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. 
Adinolfi et al. extracted the density of the trap state of MAPbI3 single crystals using the temperature-dependence SCLC method, with the tDOS shown in Fig. 4d.122 The tDOS close to the VB exhibits a peak of 0.1 eV, with a total density of traps about 3 × 1010 cm−3 (obtained by integrating the lower part of the tDOS with respect to energy). Similarly, a defined peak of ≈0.2 eV from the CB and a total density of 3 × 1011 cm−3 were observed for electron traps.122
4.2 Trap states characterized by thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) method
TAS is also a well-established method to directly measure the density of charge traps and has been widely used to measure the energy dependent tDOS of semiconductor films.123–126 This method generally requires a complete SC device for measurements (Fig. 5a). The TAS reflects the thermal emission rates of carriers from electronically active defects or traps in a semiconductor with variations in the device junction capacitance as a function of frequency. When the frequency of the applied AC modulation signal varies (DC bias is usually set to be 0 V), the Fermi level EF shifts, and the occupation of defect levels changes continuously and leads to an additional defect-induced change in the charge. This results in carriers being captured to and emitted from these defect levels, which contributes to the measured capacitance. This capacitance is frequency dependent and when the AC modulation is faster than the time constant associated with this capture and emission process, the defect-induced capacitance will decrease, giving a transition frequency which is related to the depth of the defects (Fig. 5b). By performing TAS measurements at different temperatures, the defect density and energy distribution in the semiconductor band gap can be obtained.127,128 The detailed procedures of extracting tDOS from TAS measurements have been well-explained inliteratures.128,129
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the complete SC device used in TAS method. (b) Temperature-dependent TAS measurement of MHP-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (c) An example tDOS distribution in MAPbIxCl1−x derived using TAS technique. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2014. (d) Summary chart of tDOS results of MAPbI3 thin films measured by TAS method in different laboratories. 

Fig. 5c shows an example tDOS distribution in MAPbIxCl1−x derived using TAS based on the SC device by Samiee et al.131 The defect density as a function of energy shows a major peak at around 0.65 eV below CB, with a peak value of 3 × 1016 cm−3 eV−1. The sharp decrease in density at low energies probably corresponds to tail states near the CB with a Urbach energy of 18 meV.
Although quite a lot of tDOS results about MAPbI3 crystals/films have been reported in literatures, only a few of them provide complete information about the location of the measured tDOS, i.e. whether it is below CB or above VB. For example, Duan et al. used the TAS method to probe tDOS distribution in MAPbI3 films,130 which exhibits a broad spectrum with the maximum density value of 2 × 1017 cm−3 eV−1 at 0.167 eV above the VB, and the moderate density of deeper level defect (above 0.3 eV) is also observed (see Fig. 5d). Xue et al. investigated the tDOS of MAPbI3 films by TAS; trap levels with activation energies varying in the range of 0.16–0.25 eV above the VB were found for samples with different crystallinity and morphology (Fig. 5d).129 These results have provided us important information for deeply understanding the electronic structure of MHPs. However, by far there have been few experimental results about the tDOS nearby the CB of MAPbI3 obtained using the TAS method, which demands further investigations.
4.3 Trap states characterized by drive-level capacitance profiling (DLCP) method
Although the TAS method has been widely used for extracting tDOS, this method is not able to profile the spatial distribution of tDOS in the semiconductor films or crystals. Recently, Ni et al. demonstrated that the DLCP method can provide well characterized spatial and energetic distributions of carrier and trap densities in MHPs.132 As shown in Fig. 6a, the X denotes the distance from the junction barrier (n+–p junction) where the traps may be able to dynamically change their charge states with the AC bias δV, and δX denotes the differential change of X with respect to δV. The DLCP method exploits the dependence of junction capacitance on the magnitude of the AC voltage (δV) used to measure it, which yields the trap density exactly at this X position.133,134 Meanwhile, this technique allowed us to derive the energetic distribution (Eω) of trap states by tuning the frequency of the AC bias or temperature (T), which is similar to that in TAS. In this way, both the trap density as well as the trap depth could be extracted. By changing the DC bias that was applied to the depletion region of the junction, trap states at different positions in real space can also be achieved. The specific procedures for extracting tDOS using this DLCP method are detailed in the literatures.133,134
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of band bending of a p-type semiconductor with deep trap states in an n+–p junction. (b) The device structure of a MAPbI3 device measured by DLCP. (c) The tDOS results obtained by TAS and DLCP methods in MAPbI3 single crystals. (d) Dependence of the trap density on the profiling distance of a MAPbI3 thin single crystal measured at an AC frequency of 10 kHz. (e) The spatial and energy distributions of the tDOS in the MAPbI3 thin crystal. (f) The spatial and energy distributions of the tDOS in the MAPbI3 thin film. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2020. 
Ni et al. first compared the tDOS results obtained by TAS and DLCP methods in MAPbI3 single crystals (see Fig. 6b for the device structure). Both tDOS spectra showed three trap bands with Eω values of 0.27 eV (zone I), 0.35 eV (zone II), and greater than 0.40 eV (zone III), verifying the effectiveness of the DLCP method (Fig. 6c). Then they profiled the spatial distribution of trap states in MAPbI3 single crystals. It is seen that as the profiling position changed from the interfaces to the interior of the single crystal, the trap density decreased (Fig. 6d). This result indicated that the majority of the trap states were near the surface of the MAPbI3 thin single crystal. Furthermore, the authors were able to depict the spatial and energy distributions of the tDOS in the MAPbI3 single crystal (Fig. 6e). The results clearly show that deep traps are mainly located in the surface region of the MAPbI3 thin single crystal, whereas the shallower traps are prevalent throughout the entire single crystals. Additionally, the tDOS of the MAPbI3 polycrystalline thin film was characterized, which shows a similar feature of trap distribution to the thin single crystals but with much higher trap density values. Again, most of the deep trap states (trap band III) are found to locate close to the MAPbI3/PTAA interface (Fig. 6f). These results provide important insights into tDOS in MHPs and enable the correlation of trap density with SC performance, which is crucial to future device optimization.
4.4 Summary of the trap characterization methods and results
Among the three techniques used to characterize tDOS, the SCLC method has the advantage of being simple to implement by measuring the current–voltage characteristics of devices. Since the SCLC method is based on a single charge injection device, it can give different types of charge defect (electron trap or hole trap) densities, and the energy depth of the trap states can be obtained by temperature-dependent SCLC. However, for this SCLC method, it is assumed that the current rapidly rises toward the trap-free curve with increasing applied voltage due to the filling of traps. But in fact, this rapid rise may also be caused by field ionization of the traps, or even in certain cases from the onset of double injection.118 Therefore, the extracted density of trap states could be deviated from the true ones.
For TAS and DLCP methods, both of them are actually based on frequency dependent capacitance measurements in a solar cell-like device. The properties of the interfaces in the device inevitably have influence on the measurement of tDOS. Moreover, these two methods cannot well distinguish between VB and CB tDOS. If VB state and CB state have similar shape and density, the analysis of admittance data would lead to an overestimated defect density.127 In addition, it is possible that the trapped charge with a longer thermal emission time cannot affect the capacitance signal, which also reduces the accuracy of the measured defect density.
Overall, the above-mentioned methods have provided us valuable information regarding tDOS in MHPs. It has been known that the trap density of MAPbI3 single crystal is in the range of 109–1012 cm−3, which is much lower than the trap density of the thin film form of 1016–1019 cm−3. The traps with a wide energy level distribution of 0.10–0.69 eV in MAPbI3 films are generally measured by different techniques, while the energy level value of traps in MAPbI3 single crystal is as low as 0.10–0.15 eV, which is consistent with the DFT predictions.122 The spatial and energetic distributions of trap states in MHPs are crucial to understanding the performance of corresponding optoelectronic devices. More importantly, it is essential to reduce tDOS or mitigate the impact of defects in MHPs to enhance the device performance and stability of MHP-based devices.
5. Trap passivation in MHPs
As mentioned above, defects are inevitable in MHPs especially in solution-processed perovskite films. The bulk defects in perovskites are mainly point defects, including ion vacancies, interstitials and antisite ions. Most vacancy defects produce shallow trap states near the band edge, but deep level defects (such as interstitial and antisite defects) will cause nonradiative recombination and affect device performance. Particularly, a large number of studies have shown that deep-level traps may exist at the surface and GBs of solution-processed perovskite thin films, which are undisputedly fatal to the photovoltaic or photoluminescence performance of the material. Thus, suppressing and passivating these deep-level traps in MHP films is fundamentally crucial. Fortunately, the ionic character of the perovskite lattice has enabled various defect passivation approaches through interaction between the defects and functional groups.113 To date, much research work has been performed and much progress has been made in this respect. In this section, we will briefly outline the latest effective strategies for defect passivation in MHPs, including ionic bonding passivation, Lewis acid–base chemistry passivation, polymer passivation and 2D perovskite passivation.
5.1 Passivation by ionic bonding
Ionic bonds are chemical bonds formed between two oppositely charged ions. Ionic bonding involves the complete transfer of one or more valence electrons from one atom to another to afford an electrostatic interaction between two ions of complementary charge (a positively charged cation and a negatively charged anion). Due to the charged nature of defects in perovskites, ionic bonding can be used as a unique passivation technique. The selective introduction of ions with a charge complementary to a given defect, which is usually realized by adding specific ionic compounds in a certain proportion into the perovskite precursor solution, can bond with the defect and effectively annihilate the corresponding trap states. Passivation by ionic bonding has recently gained significant interest for its proven ability to improve the stability and efficiency of PSCs.

5.1.1 Cations for ionic bonding. 
Through ionic bonding and other electrostatic interactions with the negatively charged defects of perovskite materials, metal cations have proven to be effective passivating agents. The introduction of metal cations usually has a positive effect on inhibiting the anionic defects like I interstitial and Pb–I antisite substitution. Hsieh et al. reported early that the performance of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) SCs was greatly improved by alkali metal doping,135 which not only provides a rational guideline for copper-based photovoltaic devices, but also for other photovoltaic devices, such as the emerging PSCs. As early as 2017, Bi et al. reported for the first time that metal ions have the ability to passivate GBs in MAPbI3.136 The spontaneous increase of the PCE of PSCs associated with the reduction of tDOS at the GBs of perovskite films was observed during their storage under both ambient and inert conditions. Through secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) measurement, it was found that Na+ diffused from the underneath ITO glass substrate to the device (Fig. 7a). It is believed that Na+ ion contributes to the improvement of the PCE by passivating the GBs in perovskite although the mechanism was not explained. This work revealed the possible passivation function of the Na-containing soda lime glass (SLG) substrates for PSCs, and paved the way for further research on passivation technology by using appropriate amounts of monovalent ions.136
 Fig. 7  Passivation by metal cations. (a) Schematic diagram of the spontaneous passivation of perovskite hybrids by Na+ in an ITO glass substrate. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) J–V curves of PSCs based on perovskite doped with 10 μmol of LiI, NaI, KI, RbI, and CsI. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (c) Schematics of the doping mechanism of Cs/MA/FA perovskite doped with Cs+, Rb+, and K+. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) Mechanisms of lattice relaxation. Schematic #2 illustrates the local strain, which is reduced either by the formation of point defects (#3) or by the incorporation of small ions (#1). The distortion angle (θ = 180° angle (B–X–B′)) decreases via strain relaxation. (e) Time-integrated PL spectra and time-dependent PL traces showing the passivation effect of Cd2+. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
Subsequently, Son et al. systematically studied the passivation effect of alkali metal ions (Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+ and Cs+) doped on MHPs,137 as shown in Fig. 7b. A series of experiments with alkali metal iodides of LiI, NaI, KI, RbI and CsI reveals that potassium ion (K+) is the right element for hysteresis-free PSCs. Devices made by adding KI to different compositions of perovskite precursor solutions have obtained similar results, indicating that the passivation of K+ has certain universality. Theoretical studies suggest that the atomistic origin of the hysteresis of the PSCs is not the migration of iodide vacancy but results from the formation of the iodide Frenkel defect. K+ is best for preventing Frenkel defects as compared to other alkali metal cations since K+ ion fits well into the Oh interstitial site and prevents I ion migration. Cao et al. performed similar studies and confirmed that the incorporation of properly sized alkali cations, such as K+, results in reduced hysteresis of the PSCs (Cs/MA/FA perovskite), weakened poling effects, and improved photostability of perovskites, all pointing to suppressed ion migration.138 They attributed this to the alkali ion occupancy at the interstitial site of the perovskite lattice, which was predicted to increase ion migration barriers. This finding explains the reason why the doping effect is dependent with the size of the extrinsic alkali cations. The large alkali cation Cs+ prefers to occupy the A sites of the perovskite lattice, and incorporation of a small amount of excess Cs+ in Cs/MA/FA perovskite has negligible effects on the lattice structure and hysteresis of the PSCs. The large Rb+ cations have a stronger tendency to segregate from the Pb–I cages to form a yellow phase; therefore, they can only be used at very low concentrations. The small Na+ cations can be incorporated into the perovskite lattice at higher concentrations, but are less effective in blocking ion migration than Rb+ and K+ cations (see Fig. 7c).138 In contrast, Kubicki et al. found that Rb+ (K+) is not incorporated into the 3D perovskite lattice.139 Rather, it separates into RbPbI3 (in Rb-doped systems with only iodine), and can potentially act as a passivation layer.
Obviously, K+ and other metal ions (such as Na+, Rb+, Ni+, etc.) can effectively passivate the perovskite bulk defects, but due to the conflicting locations of the reported metal ions, the true physical mechanism is not yet completely clear.141–144 Therefore, further research on the metal ion passivation mechanism will greatly promote the development in this field.
In addition to monovalent ions, divalent or trivalent metal cations are also frequently used as passivators. For example, Gong et al. introduced Ni2+ ions into the PbI2 precursor solution, which mainly distributed among MA cations and octahedral [PbI6]4− and had a strong impact on suppressing the generation of the Pb interstitial and Pb–I antisite substitution.145 Saidaminov et al. suggested the concept to relax the remaining lattice strain on B/X sites to maximize further the formation energy of iodine vacancies in CsMAFA MHPs by incorporating Cd, which is isovalent to Pb but has a smaller ionic radius, into crystal structures (see Fig. 7d).140 DFT calculations showed that Cd incorporation indeed relaxes the lattice strain and suppresses the formation energy of iodine vacancy by ≥0.5 eV. As shown in Fig. 7e, PL intensity and lifetime measurements revealed that the Cd incorporation effectively reduces recombination rates.


5.1.2 Anions for ionic bonding. 
On the other hand, anions are usually incorporated to passivate cationic defects such as Pb interstitials and halide vacancies. For MHP materials, halogen vacancy defects have a lower formation energy than other types of defects, and are easier to form in the material, affecting the photoelectric performance of MHPs. Li et al. performed DFT calculations to reveal that different oxidation states of halogen vacancy defects will largely affect the formation of trap states in the band gap.146 Halogen anion vacancy defects lead to a positive charge at the vacancy defect, and the Pb–Pb distance at the vacancy defect increases due to Coulomb repulsion between metal cations Pb2+, but no trap state will be formed in the band gap. The halogen cation vacancies lead to a negative charge at the vacancy defects, and Pb2+ between the vacancy defects form a Pb–Pb dimer due to Coulomb attraction, resulting in the formation of deep-level trap states in the band gap; on the other hand, Pb–Pb dimer's formation leads to the generation of Pb vacancy defects, and correspondingly, a very shallow trap state can also be observed in the vicinity of the top of the VB. The neutral iodine vacancy acts as an electron donor, creates a hole trap near the conduction band (CB), increases nonadiabatic electron–phonon coupling, and accelerates charge recombination. So, the iodine cation and neutral iodine vacancies should be strongly avoided.
It is generally believed that excessive iodide ions in the precursor solution have an inhibitory effect on iodine vacancies. For example, Abdi-Jalebi et al. reported that KI was able to enhance the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of (Cs,MA,FA)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 by adding it to the perovskite precursor. This improvement in PLQY was attributed to that KI introduces excess iodide to compensate for any halide vacancies at the GBs and surfaces, thereby inhibiting halide migration and suppressing any additional non-radiative decay arising from interstitial halides.147
One of the most frequently reported anions for the passivation of defects in MHPs is chloride ion (Cl−). In this regard, chloride ion passivation is realized by adding PbCl2, MACl, FACl, PbCl, NH4Cl or CsCl to the perovskite precursor.148–153 Although Cl− will partially volatilize during the annealing process,154 the remaining Cl− can dope the perovskite and passivate defects at the surface and GBs. Both Grätzel and Zhu research groups have shown that the use of excessive MACl results in a perovskite film with higher crystallinity and larger grain size, suppressing the formation of structural defects (Fig. 8a).155,156 Nan et al. showed that the stronger electronegativity of chlorine (vs. iodine) and the associated more rigid bonds with lead ions result in suppressed lattice distortions and shift the density of holes and electrons far from the defect centers. Thus, the deep trap states created by lead and iodine vacancies can be healed by introducing a tiny amount of Cl− (Fig. 8b).157 Saidaminov et al. carried out DFT calculations to investigate the role of Cl in relaxing the lattice strain and reducing the vacancy density. They found that when I was partially replaced by Cl, the Pb–I bond lengths decreased, as did the Pb–I–Pb distortion angles, and the I vacancy formation was suppressed by the increase of DFE ≥ 0.3 eV.140 Overall, the chlorine dopants either smooth out structural defects at GBs, seed crystallization of higher quality grain, suppress dynamic disorders or inhibit vacancy formations.
 Fig. 8  Passivation by anions. (a) Top-view SEM images of triple A-cation perovskite films without (top) and with MACl additive (bottom) in the starting solution. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (b) Schematic diagram of Cl doping mechanisms. The crossover from spatially localized to delocalized excited states (ES) in defective perovskites is reflected by the extension of charge densities in the vicinity of the vacancies. The electron (hole) density is shown by red (yellow) circles on lead (iodine) ions. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (c) A schematic illustration of enhancing the hydrogen bond between the halogen and MA/FA ions, and strengthening the ionic bond between the halogen and metal ions through increasing the electronegativity of halogen. (d) Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra with a log scale for the y axis. (e) Trap state density (NT) of the CsFAMA and CsFAMA-F solar devices by temperature-dependent admittance spectroscopy measured at 290 K. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
With the smallest radius of the halogen ions, the fluoride ion (F−) has the strongest electronegativity and can form a strong chemical bond with cations (Fig. 8c). By comparing the properties of PSC devices fabricated by adding 0.1% NaX (X = I, Br, Cl, or F) to CsFAMA perovskite, Li et al. found that NaF enabled the greatest improvements in terms of suppressing non-radiative recombination (Fig. 8d and e).36 They argued that the F− suppresses the formation of halide anion and organic cation vacancies, through a unique strengthening of the chemical bonds with the surrounding lead and organic cations.
Besides halogen anions, there are other anions that also can be passivators when incorporated into precursor solutions. For instance, the pseudohalide thiocyanate anion (SCN−) has been used as a dopant in MAPbI3, and generally results in larger grain sizes and fewer trap states than pure MAPbI3.158–161 However, the passivation mechanism of SCN− remains controversial. Some reports argued that SCN− can replace I− because of the very close ionic radii between them,159 which changes the electronic structure of MAPbI3, or even lead to the formation of 2D structure MA2Pb(SCN)2I2,162 while some others proposed that during the perovskite film formation, MA+ cations and the SCN− anions react and form HSCN and CH3NH2 gases, after which the excess Pb2+ and I− form PbI2 to passivate GBs.161

5.2 Passivation by Lewis acid–base chemistry
Lewis acids (Lewis bases) are substances capable of accepting (donating) a pair of electrons from an electron-rich (electron-deficient) substance via coordination or electrostatic interactions. A Lewis acid with the ability to accept a pair of nonbonding electrons can passivate an electron-rich defect, which can also be considered as a Lewis base. For example, the undercoordinated I− and antisite PbI3− may lead to deep traps at the surface and GBs of MHPs films. The addition of Lewis acids can form Lewis acid–base adducts with them, passivating traps and reducing undesirable nonradiative recombination. Similarly, electron-deficient defects such as Pb2+ interstitials can be strongly bonded by Lewis bases.163 The Lewis acid–base chemical passivation method can well eliminate deep-level trap recombination centers caused by anion and cation defects and has been proved to be an effective technology to improve the performance and stability of MHP-based PSCs. Notably, although the passivation of defects by Lewis acids or bases can be performed by incorporating them into perovskite precursor solutions before film deposition,164–168 here we mainly summarize the results of post-deposition treatments with a variety of Lewis acids or bases, since the former method may involve complex passivation mechanisms more than just forming Lewis acid–base adducts.

5.2.1 Passivation by Lewis acids. 
The most representative Lewis acid passivators are fullerene (C60) and its derivatives (PC61BM, IC60BA, etc.). Fullerene-based materials are widely used in PSCs as electron transport materials and interface modification materials due to their high electron affinity, small reorganization energy, and high electron mobility.169–171 More than that, it is found these fullerene molecules, when deposited on the surface and GBs of MHP films, can effectively passivate the charge trap states in these regions (Fig. 9a). In 2014, Shao et al. revealed and emphasized the importance of the PCBM surface passivation effect for a much reduced tDOS of MAPbI3.123 Generally, the spontaneous radiative recombination between trap states leads to a red-shifted emission peak compared with that from the band edge transition, while passivation of these trap states can blue-shift the PL peak, as illustrated in Fig. 9b.123 Xu et al. reported the formation of the MAPbI3-PCBM hybrid solid, in which PCBM is homogeneously distributed throughout the film at perovskite GBs. The PCBM passivates the key PbI3− antisite defects during the perovskite self-assembly (Fig. 9c), and DFT calculations reveal that the deep trap state is much reduced and becomes much shallower upon the PCBM passivation (Fig. 9d).172 These studies demonstrated the feasibility of Lewis acid passivation and elucidated the passivation mechanism.
 Fig. 9  Passivation by Lewis acids. (a) The chemical structures of the n-type fullerene derivatives, IC60BA, PC61BM, and C60 (top) and the schematic diagram of trap passivation at the surface and GBs of MHP films (bottom). (b) Schematic of PL peaks blue-shift upon PCBM passivation. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (c) Details of such interactions: in hybrid solution, electron transfer is induced between the perovskite anions (I−) and PCBM, which results in a PCBM radical anion and PCBM-halide radical. (d) The wave function overlap shows the hybridization between PCBM and defective surface, enabling the electron/hole transfer for passivation (top). DFT calculation of DOS shows that deep trap state (black) induced by the Pb–I antisite defect is reduced and becomes much shallower (red) upon the adsorption of PCBM on defective halide (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (e) Schematic view of the halogen bond interaction between the IPFB (halogen bond donor) and a generic halogen anion (X−) with sp3-hybridized valence electrons (top) and the IPFB assembly on the crystal surface (bottom). (f) Illustration of the electrostatic interaction between the undercoordinated halide (X−) on the perovskite surface and the hole injected in the Spiro-OMeTAD (top), and the electrostatic screening of the halide (X−) via halogen bond complexation of IPFB on the perovskite surface (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
In addition, Abate et al. introduced a surface passivation method for organic–inorganic halide PSCs by assembling iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB) via supramolecular halogen bonding.173 They found that the highly electronegative fluorine atoms inductively withdraw electron density out of the aromatic ring, which in turn withdraws electron density from the iodine bonded to the aromatic ring (–C–I), leaving a partial positive charge on this halogen (Fig. 9e). The electron deficient nature of this iodine makes it act as an electron acceptor, which can interact with electron-rich sites such as halogen anions (X−, Lewis base) in terms of halogen bonding. Fig. 9f shows that without treatment, undercoordinated halide anions act as hole traps, leading to a significant accumulation of charge at the perovskite/hole transporter heterojunction. This leads to faster recombination and is likely to result in a disadvantageous charge density profile within the hole transporter and perovskite film, which should inhibit fast and efficient charge extraction under working conditions. The IPFB binds to and screens the electrostatic charge from the undercoordinated halide ions, resolving the issue. In addition to these examples, a handful of Lewis acids have been suggested to be used for trap passivation in perovskites, such as TPFP,174 BCF,175etc.


5.2.2 Passivation by Lewis bases. 
Contrary to Lewis acids, Lewis bases such as pyridine, thiophene, thiol, and compounds containing carboxyl and amine groups, are capable of donating a lone-pair electron to coordinate with, and passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ or Pb clusters, forming Lewis acid–base adducts (Fig. 10a and b).176 Pyridine and thiophene are the first Lewis bases introduced to passivate perovskites. In 2014, Noel et al. treated the surface of a perovskite layer with thiophene and pyridine to effectively passivate uncoordinated lead ions.177 Effective defect passivation occurs in the perovskite crystal via coordinate bonding between the sulfur (S) atom in thiophene or nitrogen (N) atom in pyridine and under-coordinated lead ions in the MAPbI3−xClx. Later, Wen et al. compared a series of thiophene derivatives for their passivation effects, including thiophene (TP), 3-methylthiohene (MTP), 3-ethylthiophene (ETP), 3-butylthiophene (BTP), 3-hexylthiophene (HTP), and 3-dodecylthiophene (DTP), all of which were found to have a significant passivation effect on MAPbI3 films.178
 Fig. 10  Passivation by Lewis bases. (a) Schematic of the interaction between Lewis base and MHPs. (b) Diagram depicting the formation of a dative bond between Lewis acid and Lewis base (left), and the passivation of trap states (right). Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2016. (c) The molecular structures of HMDA and EDEA. (d) Fluence-dependent PLQY. (e) TCSPC probed PL lifetime. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (f) Total DOS of MAPbI3-based PSCs with and without IDIC. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2016. (g) Steady state PL spectra of pristine and passivated perovskite films. (h) TRPL spectra of pristine and passivated perovskite films. The fluence and the excitation density were 5.5 nJ cm−2 and 3.4 × 1014 cm−3 respectively. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2019. (i) Schematic illustration of the origin of D4TBP passivation effect on different defect sites. (j) PL spectra of pristine and D4TBP perovskite films. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
In addition to S and N atoms, other functional groups with lone-pair electron bearing atoms like oxygen (O) or phosphorus (P) also have Lewis base characteristic, which can also passivate defects in perovskite materials. DeQuilettes et al. studied the effect of post-deposition treatments with three Lewis bases (Tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO), 1-octadecanethiol (ODT), and triphenylphosphine (PPh3)) on the photoluminescence behavior of MAPbI3 thin films. Extended PL lifetimes and improved PLQE values were observed in all the three post-treated films, among which TOPO has the best passivation effect.181 These passivation results clearly show the role of N, S, O and P single functional groups in reducing non-radiative recombination associated with surface defects and GBs.174
A noteworthy finding regarding Lewis base passivation by organic molecules was reported by Xu et al. recently.27 They revealed that a strong hydrogen bond is easily formed between the passivation functional group molecule and the perovskite organic cation, which weakens the coordination between the Lewis base functional groups and the defect site of the perovskite, and affects the passivation efficiency. Specifically, they used two organic molecules containing amino groups: 2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)diethylamine (EDEA) and hexamethylenediamine (HMDA) to passivate FAPbI3 for LEDs (Fig. 10c), and found that the O atom in EDEA polarized the passivating amino group through the inductive effect, reducing their electron-donating ability and corresponding hydrogen-bonding ability. This results in enhanced coordination of the functional groups with the perovskite defect sites and hence much improved passivation efficiency (Fig. 10d and e).27
It is natural to expect that molecules with two or more Lewis base groups will have multiple pairs of lone-pair electrons, and thus enhanced binding strength with perovskites and stronger ability for defect passivation. As shown in Fig. 10f, Lin et al. suggested that a π-conjugated organic semiconductor molecule IDIC, which provides the Lewis base carbonyl (CO) and cyano (CN) as electron-withdrawing end groups, can effectively passivate the Lewis acid traps (e.g., under-coordinated Pb ions and Pb clusters) on the surface and at the GBs of MAPbI3.176 Zhang et al. designed a new molecule 2-mercaptopyridine (2-MP), which is a combination of sulfhydryl and pyridine.179 Both the N atom and the S atom in the mercapto group of 2-MP can coordinate with the Pb2+ cation to form a stable chelating structure, which was named the bidentate anchored passivation strategy. Compared to the monodentate counterparts of pyridine (Py) and p-toluenethiol (PTT), 2-MP passivation on the MAPbI3 film resulted in twofold improvement of photoluminescence lifetime (Fig. 10g and h) and remarkably enhanced tolerance to chlorobenzene washing and vacuum heating. Following this, Guo et al. employed IT-4F, a Lewis base molecule containing carbonyl (CO), cyano (CN) and thiophene groups that all have been reported to be excellent passivation agents, to significantly reduce the trap states in MAPbI3.182
A very instructive study was carried out by Huang's research group to understand the passivation capability of different functional groups including carboxyl, amine, isopropyl, phenethyl, and tert-butylphenethyl groups. It was revealed that carboxyl and amine groups would heal charged defects via electrostatic interactions, and the neutral iodine related defects can be reduced by the aromatic structures. On the basis of the understanding, as shown in Fig. 10i, they designed a new passivation molecule D-4-tertbutylphenylalanine (D4TBP) which contains all three passivation functional groups, i.e., 4-tert-butylphenyl, amine, and carboxyl ones, and this molecule was shown to enable superior passivation ability than the ones with only one functional group.180 Here, we summarize the common Lewis acid and Lewis base molecular structures used to passivate perovskites, as shown in Fig. 11, respectively.
 Fig. 11  Lewis acid–base chemistry passivation. Molecular structure of common Lewis acids and Lewis bases. 
Based on the above discussions, developing new passivation agents with both Lewis acid and Lewis base functional groups may be a feasible strategy to realize the passivation effect simultaneously on positive and negative charge defects in perovskites. In this context, Zheng et al. proposed that zwitterion-structured molecules should have a good passivation effect, because they have both negative and positive ions.29 They used a quaternary ammonium halide (QAH) molecule like choline chloride with separate positive and negative ions for effectively passivating defects in MAPbI3 (Fig. 12a). The better passivation effect of choline chloride than PCBM verifies that both cationic and anionic defects in MHPs need to be considered in passivation techniques (Fig. 12b). Subsequently, this group proposed a new sulfonic zwitterion, 3-(decyldimethylammonio)-propane-sulfonate inner salt (DPSI), which plays a dual role in regulating crystallization behavior and passivating perovskite defects.168 As shown in Fig. 12c and d, this molecule can neutralize the positive and negative charge components of the charged defect at the surface and GBs of perovskite films. Similarly, Zhang et al. designed a fullerene electrolyte (PCBB-3N-3I) dipole interlayer to simultaneously passivate both positively and negatively charged surface defects.183 The Lewis acid, i.e., a fullerene moiety, is known to passivate negatively charged defects such as PbI3− and under-coordinated I−, and the iodide in PCBB-3N-3I is proposed to bind under-coordinated Pb2+via electrostatic interaction, as supported by DFT calculations. In Fig. 12e, we summarized the molecular structures of these zwitterion-structured molecules. All these studies show the promising strategy for passivating defects in MHPs by developing efficient agents with appropriate Lewis acid and base groups. In fact, since organic semiconductors generally can be deemed as Lewis acids (n-type semiconductors) or Lewis bases (p-type semiconductors), there are vast possibilities to find effective trap passivators which meanwhile is efficient in charge transport from the large collection of small-molecule organic semiconductors.
 Fig. 12  Passivation by zwitterion-structured molecules. (a) Schematic illustration of QAHs assembled on the defect sites. The red and blue symbols represent the N atom and O atom of the choline chloride molecule, respectively. (b) The tDOS obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy for devices with PCBM (blue), and choline chloride passivation layers (red). Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (c) The DPSI molecules were repelled to the GBs and film surfaces for trap passivation after the perovskite film formation. (d) The tDOS obtained by TAS for MAPbI3 devices with and without DPSI. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (e) Molecular structure of frequently used zwitterion-structured molecules. 

5.3 Passivation by polymers
Although significant progress has been made in passivating defects in perovskites, work is still ongoing in the search for exceptionally stable, environmentally friendly, and inexpensive materials which can be used for facile and cost-effective defect passivation. Indeed, it has been frequently reported that introducing polymer deactivators through anti-solvent technology, including insulating polymers and semiconducting polymers, is an effective method to repair surface and GB defects. The defect repairing mechanism is again mainly based on the Lewis acid–base interaction, i.e. the lone electron pairs at the N, O or S of polymers can be delocalized to the 6p empty orbits of Pb2+ to form coordination bonds.184 Following this principle, quite a few insulating polymers have been employed for passivating defects in perovskites. For example, Wang et al. reported the improvement of the photovoltaic performance of PSCs through the insertion of a solution-processed PMMA layer between MAPbI3 and spiro-OMeTAD, and this performance improvement was ascribed to the passivation of trap states in the perovskite layer by PMMA.185 Zuo et al. explored using polymers polymer poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PVP), and polyacrylic acid (PAA) trap-state passivation by the incorporation of polymer additives into the MAPbI3 film. They pointed out that compared to small molecules, polymers can form more stable and reliable interactions with the perovskite grains and could conceivably cross-link grains to improve film stability.184 In addition, poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), a polymer with a lone electron pair on the C–O bond, was demonstrated to heal surface defects when it was capped on the MAPbI3 film.186
In addition to insulating polymers, semiconducting polymers with π-conjugated cores such as poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) have also been proven to be highly effective in passivating defects of MHPs. In the case of a thin P3HT layer on the top of the CsPbI2Br film, DFT calculations reveal that the S atoms bond with Cs atoms (Cs–S: 4.03 Å) to passivate the interfacial positively charged under-coordinated Cs+ ions. In addition, S atoms also bond to Pb (S–Pb: 3.36 Å) atoms and passivate the antisite defects, known as deep-level defects and the most detrimental defects in PSCs.187 Typical polymer semiconductors used in organic SCs like PCDTBT and PBDB-T have also been reported to passivate the trap states of the MHPs through the formation of Lewis acid–base adducts.188,189 Some polymers that have been reported to be capable of passivating traps in MHPs are shown in Fig. 13. Given that so many polymer semiconductors have been developed by far, there are vast opportunities to realize highly efficient and facile methods of trap passivation utilizing polymer semiconductors.
 Fig. 13  Passivation by polymers. Molecular structure of the reported polymer trap passivators. 
5.4 Passivation by incorporating 2D perovskites
Large-size non-volatile, long-chain organic cations can be introduced into 3D perovskites to replace the organic cations, forming 2D layered perovskites. The 2D perovskite surface possesses low surface defects and vacancies, and high moisture tolerance. According to literature reports, the presence of 2D perovskites can suppress nonradiative charge recombination by passivating defects of 3D perovskites.190,191 More recently, 2D/3D heterostructures have emerged as a viable approach to combine the superior stability of 2D perovskites and the high efficiency of the 3D ones.192–196 Thus, it has become a promising strategy for the development of PSCs and LEDs based on 2D/3D perovskite heterostructures with long-term stability and high efficiency.
The most common method for preparing 2D/3D perovskite materials is to introduce ammonium cations in the precursor solution, such as n-butylammonium (BA+), octylammonium (OA+), phenylethylammonium (PEA+), etc. For instance, Wang et al. introduced BA+ into the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IyBr1−y)3 3D perovskite, and the formation of 2D perovskite platelets interspersed between highly oriented 3D perovskite grains was observed.192 Inhibition of non-radiative recombination within this “heterostructured” film was detected, which was postulated to be due to passivation of interfacial GBs.192 Specifically, the creation of type I band alignment between 2D and 3D perovskite at GBs is an effective approach to mitigate the effect of traps. In such a case, when charges reach this interface from within the 3D grain, they will be reflected remaining in the 3D perovskite and not suffer from trapping and recombination at the GBs (Fig. 14a).192,194,197,198 Subsequently, Lee et al. incorporated 2D phenylethylammonium lead iodide (PEA2PbI4) perovskite into the precursor solution of FAPbI3.199 The 2D perovskite was found to spontaneously form at the GBs to passivate defects (Fig. 14b), as indicated by the tenfold enhancement in PL lifetime, and this enhancement could be more significant when a small amount of Cs was incorporated in the 3D perovskite (FA0.98Cs0.02PbI3) (Fig. 14c). Moreover, the large phenylethylammonium molecules are believed to facilitate formation of the cubic FAPbI3 phase during crystallization.199 Overall, this approach to utilize spontaneously formed 2D perovskite at the GBs of 3D perovskite provides a feasible approach for further enhancing the stability and performance of perovskite materials.
 Fig. 14  Passivation by incorporating 2D perovskites. (a) Proposed electronic band offsets of the 2D–3D heterojunction. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Schematics of the device incorporating a polycrystalline 3D perovskite film with a 2D perovskite at GBs. (c) Steady-state and TRPL spectra of the perovskite films incorporating bare FAPbI3, FAPbI3 with the 2D perovskite and FA0.98Cs0.02PbI3 (FACsPbI3) with the 2D perovskite. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Illustration of the one-step blade-coating for fabricating the 2D/3D perovskite film. (e) Steady-state PL of the 3D and 2D/3D heterostructure perovskite films. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2020. 
A more facile method for forming 2D/3D perovskite structures is the in situ growth of 2D perovskite capping layer on the top of the 3D perovskite film, which is also called post-treatment or post-deposition. Lin et al. introduced a method to form 2D/3D stacking structures by the reaction of a 3D perovskite with n-butylamine (BA) and n-butylammonium iodide (BAI).194 It is speculated that the formation of 2D perovskites may heal the surface defects due to the conversion of the defective surface of 3D perovskites into 2D perovskites. The larger size of BA+ as compared to MA+ is supposed to also play a key role in stopping the volatilization of MA or I2. This is because neither the volatilization of the BA+ ion itself nor the exchanges of BA+ with inner MA+ ions is easy. Following this, more and more types of ammonium cations, including OA+, PEA+ were employed to form 2D/3D perovskites for the passivation of GBs and the inactivation of surface trap states in 3D perovskites by this post-deposition method.190,201–203 However, the passivation mechanism behind this method is still controversial. Very recently, Mahmud et al. combined experimental energy level data from UPS and inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES) measurements with numerical device simulations to clarify the role of the 2D passivation layers. Although electronic contribution cannot be excluded, their analysis provided strong support for chemical passivation accounting for the trap passivation behavior.203
A noteworthy work regarding forming 2D perovskites on 3D perovskites was reported by Hu et al.200 Different from the previous studies where a two-step deposition is implemented to form the 2D perovskite atop a 3D perovskite, they achieved the formation of the layered 2D/3D heterostructure via in situ growth of a thin layered 2D perovskite on top of the 3D MAPbI3 perovskite bulk by a one-step scalable blade-coating process with the organic cation S-benzyl-lcysteine (SBLC) included in the precursor solution. Thanks to the amphiphilic structure of the large-size molecule SBLC and its unique solubility behavior, a thin layer of 2D perovskite is perfectly self-assembled to cover the surface of the 3D perovskite by a one-step scalable printing process (Fig. 14d). Fig. 14e shows the PL of 3D and 2D/3D perovskite films which reveals a stronger PL intensity of the 2D/3D heterostructure perovskite film compared to the 3D film. The enhanced emission intensity indicates the suppression of the non-radiative recombination which is caused by surface defects. The as-formed 2D capping perovskite by this simple and easy-to-use method can serve as a surface defect passivation layer which greatly suppresses nonradiative recombination. This work has laid a good foundation for the large-scale manufacturing of highly efficient perovskite optoelectronic devices with enhanced environmental stability.
Finally, we summarize the device results of utilizing the abovementioned passivation methods for achieving high-performance perovskite SCs and perovskite LEDs in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
Table 1 Summary of trap passivation for perovskite SCs




Passivation agent
MHPs
Device structure
Passivation method
PCE (%) (WO/W)
Ref.




Na+
FAMAPbI3−xBrx
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/BCP/Cu
Ionic bonding
18.8/20.2

136



K+
(FAPbI3)0.875(CsPbBr3)0.125
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Ionic bonding
17.62/18.71

137



K+
Cs0.11MA0.15FA0.74Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3
FTO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Ionic bonding
18.02/19.01

138



Ni2+
MAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Ionic bonding
17.25/20.6

145



Cd2+
Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8PbI2.55Br0.45
ITO/TiO2-Cl/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Ionic bonding
20.5/20.5

140



KI
(Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Ionic bonding
17.3/21.5

147



Cl−
(FAPbI3)0.87(MAPbBr3)0.13
FTO/TiO2/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Ionic bonding
19.83/21.65

155



Cl−
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Ag
Ionic bonding
14.82/16.77

156



Cl−
FAPbI3
FTO/NiOx/MHPs/PCBM/TiOx/Ag
Ionic bonding
13.24/20.65

149



F−
(Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41)Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Ionic bonding
19.68/21.92

36



SCN−
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/PCBM/Ca/Al
Ionic bonding
7.24/11.07

158



PCBM
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/C60/BCP/Al
Lewis acid
7.3/14.09

123



PCBM
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis acid
8.1/14.4

172



IPFB
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-Al2O3/MHPs/Spiro/Ag
Lewis acid
13.0/15.7

173



TMPP
Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis acid
18.05/19.13

174



TPPO
Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis acid
18.05/19.10

174



TPFP
Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis acid
18.05/22.02

174



BCF
(FAMACs)Pb(I,Br)
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/PTAA/Au
Lewis acid
13.41/20.32

175



Th
MAPbI3−xClx
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
8.3/14.1

177



Py
MAPbI3−xClx
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
8.3/15.5

177



TP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.08/18.87

178



MTP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.08/18.82

178



ETP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.08/19.17

178



BTP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.08/19.44

178



HTP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.08/19.89

178



DTP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.08/19.20

178



IDIC
MAPbI3
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu
Lewis base
13.5/19.5

176



2-MP
MAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.35/20.28

179



Py
MAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.35/19.02

179



PTT
MAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Lewis base
18.35/18.74

179



IT-4F
MAPbI3
FTO/Li-NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
Lewis base
15.59/18.35

182



VA
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu
Lewis base
19.1/20.1

180



PAA
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu
Lewis base
19.1/20.6

180



D4TBP
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu
Lewis base
19.1/21.4

180



QAH
MAPbI3
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu
Zwitterion molecule
17.1/20.59

29



DPSI
FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/C60/BCP/Cu
Zwitterion molecule
19.1/21.1

168



PCBB-3N-3I
MAPbI3
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/Al
Zwitterion molecule
17.7/21.1

183



PMMA
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Polymer
14.6/16.4

185



PVP
MAPbI3−xClx
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Polymer
18.05/20.23

184



PAA
MAPbI3−xClx
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Polymer
18.05/19.65

184



PEO
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/C60/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Polymer
15.29/16.46

186



PS
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/C60/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Polymer
15.29/15.92

186



PS
Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Ag
Polymer
19.24/20.46

204



P3HT
CsPbI2Br
ITO/TiO2/MHPs/Au
Polymer
—/12.02

187



PDTBDT-FBT
(FAMACs)Pb(I,Br)
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Polymer
16.85/18.03

205



PCDTBT
MAPbI3−xClx
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/PCBM/Bphen/Ag
Polymer
12.42/15.76

188



PBDB-T
(CsPbI3)0.04(FAPbI3)0.82(MAPbBr3)0.14
FTO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Polymer
17.28/19.85

189



BAI
FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IxBr1−x)3
FTO/SnO2/PCBM/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
16.9/20.6

192



PEA2PbI4
FAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
16.41/21.06

199



BAI
MAPbI3
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/C60/BCP/Cu
Incorporating 2D MHPs
15.84/19.00

194



HTAB
(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/P3HT/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
15.8/22.8

206



PEAI
Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
17.02/18.51

190




n-BAI
Cs0.07Rb0.03FA0.765MA0.135PbI2.55Br0.45
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PMMA:PCBM/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
20.02/22.77

203



BAI
Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
14.17/15.74

201



OAI
Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
14.17/15.19

201



BABr
(Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3
ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au
Incorporating 2D MHPs
17.5/19.8

202



SBLC
MAPbI3
ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/BCP/Ag
Incorporating 2D MHPs
18.46/20.14

200





Table 2 Summary of trap passivation for perovskite LEDs




Passivation agent
MHPs
Device structure
Passivation method
EQE (%) (WO/W)
Ref.




MgBr
CsPbBr3
ITO/TFB/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Ionic bonding
0.036/3.597

207



MABr
MAPbBr3
SOCP/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Ionic bonding
—/8.53

95



LiBr
CsPbBr3
ITO/NiOx/TFB/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Ionic bonding
2.83/16.2

14



TOPO
PEA2(FAPbBr3)n−1PbBr4
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Lewis base
12.12/14.36

48



HMDA
FAPbI3
ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au
Lewis base
7.1/10.9

27



TTDDA
FAPbI3
ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au
Lewis base
7.1/16.4

27



DDDA
FAPbI3
ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au
Lewis base
7.1/11.8

27



EDEA
FAPbI3
ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au
Lewis base
7.1/16.5


27




ODEA
FAPbI3
ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au
Lewis base
7.1/19.0

27



5AVA
MAPbBr3
ITO/ZnO/MHPs/TFB/MoOx/Au
Lewis base
0.008/0.43

208



8AOA
MAPbBr3
ITO/ZnO/MHPs/TFB/MoOx/Au
Lewis base
0.008/0.19

208



PMA
MAPbBr3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Lewis base
0.31/9.63

209



EDA
MAPbBr3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/SPW-111/LiF/Ag
Lewis base
0.12/6.19

210



PEI
MAPbBr3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/SPW-111/LiF/Ag
Polymer
0.12/0.58

210



PEO
CsPbBr3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Polymer
0.89/4.76

211



PEG
CsPbBr3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Polymer
0.31/1.20

212



PFN
PEA2(CsPbBr3)2PbBr4
ITO/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Polymer
—/14.4

213



BAI
MAPbI3
ITO/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
1.0/10.4

11



BABr
MAPbBr3
ITO/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
0.09/17.1

11



BAI
MAPbI3
Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
0.19/6.9

214



DDAI
MAPbI3
Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
0.19/2.4

214



PMAI
MAPbI3
Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
0.19/10.8

214



PEAI
MAPbI3
Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
0.19/8.0

214



FPMAI
MAPbI3
Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
0.19/13.4

214



BnA
MAPbBr3
FTO/Buf-HIL/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
2.50/4.23

215



PEABr
PA2(CsPbBr3)n−1PbBr4
ITO/NiOx/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al
Incorporating 2D MHPs
3.46/7.51

216





6. Conclusions
Since the discovery of feasible applications in the field of SCs, MHPs have been attracting extensive attention due to their low-temperature solution processing technology, low material cost, and rapid growth of MHP-based device performance. Despite the rapid development of SCs and LEDs based on MHPs, high performance and long-term operational stability are still the main factors limiting their large-scale production and commercial use. In order to improve the performance and stability of perovskite optoelectronic devices, passivating deep-level traps to reduce non-radiative recombination and inhibit ion migration has been shown to have inestimable effects.
Thus, here we reviewed the understanding about defect physics and trap states in MHPs, as well as the latest progress on trap passivation in MHPs, by which we hope to actively promote the further development of PSCs and other MHP-based devices. Starting with a brief introduction of the structure of MHPs in terms of 3D and 2D MHPs, we have then introduced the discussions and conclusions about intrinsic defects in MHPs. Although the DFE and transition energy levels of those point defects in MAPbI3 are still in debate, it is generally accepted that the easy-to-form point defects such as iodide vacancies, MA vacancies or interstitials only cause shallow traps. However, at the surface and GBs of MAPbI3 films, the thing is different and two types of defects: cationic defects (iodine vacancies and undercoordinated Pb2+) and anionic defects (Pb–I antisites and undercoordinated iodide ions) are believed to cause deep-level traps. Several commonly used techniques for probing trap states in MHPs and the corresponding results are also summarized, by which we get a general idea about the tDOS of MHPs. After that, we particularly focus on summarizing the trap passivation strategies that have been developed recently. It has to be admitted that so many methods have been proposed to passivate traps yet we have only categorized a few of them since we believe these are the commonly used ones with relatively well-understood passivation mechanisms.
In summary, although great progress has been made in understanding the defect physics and passivating trap states in MHPs, we think there is still much room to further deepen our knowledge. The techniques that can be adopted to passivate traps in MHPs are still in fast development, and we expect to see more efficient trap-passivating methods and deeper understanding about the passivation physics in the future. Through these efforts, we are sure to obtain more efficient and stable devices such as SCs, LEDs and FETs based on MHPs, promoting the large-scale application of MHPs in electronic and optoelectronic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. Hu is thankful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61804051) and Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (2018RS053 and 2019GK2245) for financial support.
References
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 RSC .
M. Z. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–396 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1377 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. W. Zhang, X. L. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. M. Chu, Q. F. Ye, X. X. Li, Z. G. Yin and J. B. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, B. Yang, H. Chen, G. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Yuan, H. Huang, H. Xie, D. Niu, Y. Gao and C. Zhou, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, R. P. Sabatini and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801996 CrossRef .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Xiao, R. A. Kerner, L. F. Zhao, N. L. Tran, K. M. Lee, T. W. Koh, G. D. Scholes and B. P. Rand, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 108–115 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Zhang, X. L. Yang, Q. Jiang, P. Y. Wang, Z. G. Yin, X. W. Zhang, H. R. Tan, Y. Yang, M. Y. Wei, B. R. Sutherland, E. H. Sargent and J. B. You, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, J. N. Li, Y. T. Zou, H. Xu, K. C. Wen, S. S. Wan, S. Bai, T. Song, J. A. McLeod, S. Duhm, F. Gao and B. Q. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 4099–4105 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Zhou and J. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700256 CrossRef .
F. P. G. de Arquer, A. Armin, P. Meredith and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
W. Tian, H. P. Zhou and L. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1702107 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Wei, J. Guo, P. A. Chen, S. P. Liu, J. Li, L. L. Miao, N. N. Wang, Z. J. Chen, J. P. Wang, H. J. Chen and Y. Y. Hu, Org. Electron., 2019, 75, 105372 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Miao and F. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1741–1791 RSC .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. J. Hu, W. L. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, B. Y. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. C. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1601935 CrossRef .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushima, S. Hwang, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, C. J. Qin, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10275–10281 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushima, F. Mathevet, B. Heinrich, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, C. J. Qin, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, J. C. Ribierre and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 253301 CrossRef .
P.-A. Chen, J. Guo, M. Nouri, Q. Tao, Z. Li, Q. Li, L. Du, H. Chen, Z. Dong, L. Chang, Y. Liu, L. Liao and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 2353–2362 RSC .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-effciency.html
         (accessed: August 2020).
W. Xu, Q. Hu, S. Bai, C. Bao, Y. Miao, Z. Yuan, T. Borzda, A. J. Barker, E. Tyukalova, Z. Hu, M. Kawecki, H. Wang, Z. Yan, X. Liu, X. Shi, K. Uvdal, M. Fahlman, W. Zhang, M. Duchamp, J.-M. Liu, A. Petrozza, J. Wang, L.-M. Liu, W. Huang and F. Gao, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 418–426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao and Y. Yan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–19 Search PubMed .
X. P. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. J. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Z. Lin, H. T. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. S. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Hong, J. Lee, H. Kang, G. Kim, S. Kee, J.-H. Lee, S. Jung, B. Park, S. Kim, H. Back, K. Yu and K. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 3604 CrossRef .
M. Jost, T. Bertram, D. Koushik, J. A. Marquez, M. A. Verheijen, M. D. Heinemann, E. Kohnen, A. Al-Ashouri, S. Braunger, F. Lang, B. Rech, T. Unold, M. Creatore, I. Lauermann, C. A. Kaufmann, R. Schlatmann and S. Albrecht, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Wang, H. P. Zhou, J. N. Hu, B. L. Huang, M. Z. Sun, B. W. Dong, G. H. J. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. H. Chen, L. Li, Z. Q. Xu, N. X. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265–266 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, F. Wang, H. Tian, Q. Feng, H. Zhang, R. Liang, Y. Shen, Z. Ju, G.-Y. Gou, N. Deng, Y.-T. Li, J. Ren, D. Xie, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2860–2868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chen, N. X. Li, L. G. Wang, L. Li, Z. Q. Xu, H. Y. Jiao, P. F. Liu, C. Zhu, H. C. Zai, M. Z. Sun, W. Zou, S. Zhang, G. C. Xing, X. F. Liu, J. P. Wang, D. D. Li, B. L. Huang, Q. Chen and H. P. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef .
Y. P. Zhang, C. K. Lim, Z. G. Dai, G. N. Yu, J. W. Haus, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Phys. Rep., 2019, 795, 1–51 CrossRef CAS .
N. X. Li, S. X. Tao, Y. H. Chen, X. X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. W. Qiu, Z. Q. Xu, G. H. J. Zheng, L. G. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. F. Liu, Y. Z. Lun, J. W. Hong, X. Y. Wang, Y. Q. Liu, H. P. Xie, Y. L. Gao, Y. Bai, S. H. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H. P. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
Q. D. Sun and W. J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14905–14908 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, A. J. Barker, G. Grancini, W. Zhang, J. M. Ball, A. R. S. Kandada, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3472–3481 RSC .
E. Conwell and V. F. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev., 1950, 77, 388–390 CrossRef .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Avila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, M. Yavari, K. Domanski, P. Yadav, B. Niesen, J. P. C. Baena, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 151–165 RSC .
G. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Avila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837–1838 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, Q. Li Na, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872–873 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ban, Y. Zou, J. P. H. Rivett, Y. Yang, T. H. Thomas, Y. Tan, T. Song, X. Gao, D. Credington, F. Deschler, H. Sirringhaus and B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
K. B. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. W. Gong, J. X. Lu, L. Q. Xie, W. J. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Z. Yan, W. Q. Li, X. Y. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. H. Xiong and Z. H. Wei, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, N. N. Wang, H. Tian, J. S. Guo, Y. Q. Wei, H. Chen, Y. F. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. R. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. W. Fu, D. C. Kong, D. X. Dai, Y. Z. Jin, G. Q. Li, H. Li, Q. M. Peng, J. P. Wang and W. Huang, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–250 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Yang, X. W. Zhang, J. X. Deng, Z. M. Chu, Q. Jiang, J. H. Meng, P. Y. Wang, L. Q. Zhang, Z. G. Yin and J. B. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shielda and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
S. Meloni, T. Moehl, W. Tress, M. Franckevicius, M. Saliba, Y. H. Lee, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Z. G. Xiao, Y. B. Yuan, Y. C. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. F. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. S. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumueller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690–3698 RSC .
S. van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Chakhmouradian and P. M. Woodward, Phys. Chem. Miner., 2014, 41, 387–391 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Shao and Q. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3218–3227 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R. H. Friend and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16099 CrossRef .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Graetzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Graetzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, J. P. C. Baena, M. Saliba, A. Abate and M. Graetzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600396 CrossRef .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146–154 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Z.-K. Tan, D. Di, M. L. Lai, L. Jiang, J. H.-W. Lim, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2640–2644 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391–402 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2528–2540 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Lu, L. Sun, E. J. Crumlin and B. Yildiz, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75–76 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500963 CrossRef .
Y. Yang and J. You, Nature, 2017, 544, 155–156 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z.-K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Xu, Z. Lu, Y. Ma, H. Zhu, Y. Hu, C. Xiao, X. Yi, G. Zhu, H. Lv, L. Ma, T. Chen, Z. Tie, Z. Jin and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15829–15832 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. X. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. G. Jiu, M. J. Yuan and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356–1368 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, C. Wu, D. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Qi, N. Zhu, G. Liu, X. Li, H. Hu, Z. Chen, L. Xiao and B. Qu, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900254 CrossRef CAS .
E.-C. Shen, J.-D. Chen, Y. Tian, Y.-X. Luo, Y. Shen, Q. Sun, T.-Y. Jin, G.-Z. Shi, Y.-Q. Li and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Gratzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–592 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700086 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 668–679 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, F. Cao, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Ning, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, Y. Yan, S. V. Kershaw, L. Zhang, A. L. Rogach and X. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef .
J. Calabrese, N. L. Jones, R. L. Harlow, N. Herron, D. L. Thorn and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2328–2330 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Li, Y. Q. Zhang, C. Liang, G. C. Xing, X. L. Liu, F. Y. Li, X. T. Liu, X. T. Hu, G. S. Shao and Y. L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805323 CrossRef .
C. Ma, D. Shen, T.-W. Ng, M.-F. Lo and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800710 CrossRef .
H. Ren, S. Yu, L. Chao, Y. Xia, Y. Sun, S. Zuo, F. Li, T. Niu, Y. Yang, H. Ju, B. Li, H. Du, X. Gao, J. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. L. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. N. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L. W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. D. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Tsai, W. Y. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. S. Toumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
J. W. Xiao, L. Liu, D. L. Zhang, N. De Marco, J. W. Lee, O. Lin, Q. Chen and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700491 CrossRef .
L. Mao, W. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS .
C. Katan, N. Mercier and J. Even, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3140–3192 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Dou, Y. Yang, J. B. You, Z. R. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Fang, Q. F. Dong, Y. C. Shao, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 679–680 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Cheng, G. Wang, D. Li, Q. He, A. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. Ding, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, R. Li, Y. Cao, Y. Wei, Y. Miao, W. L. Tan, X. Jiao, H. Chen, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Zou, Y. Wang, M. Yang, C. Yi, N. Wang, F. Gao, C. R. McNeill, T. Qin, J. Wang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804771 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Su, V. G. Hadjiev, S. Dai, Z. Qin, H. A. Calderon Benavides, Y. Ni, Q. Li, J. Jian, M. K. Alam, H. Wang, F. C. R. Hernandez, Y. Yao, S. Chen, Q. Yu, G. Feng, Z. Wang and J. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902492 CrossRef .
F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902579 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K. H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zakutayev, C. M. Caskey, A. N. Fioretti, D. S. Ginley, J. Vidal, V. Stevanovic, E. Tea and S. Lany, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1117–1125 CrossRef CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Yun, X. Zhou, J. Even and A. Hagfeldt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15806–15817 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281–6286 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, R. Comin, J. Xu, A. H. Ip and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4405–4412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi and M.-H. Du, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 174103 CrossRef .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4654 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y.-Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570–14575 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Du, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1461–1466 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uratani and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 742–746 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Hu, D. Xie and Y. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 3731–3737 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, J. Xue, K.-L. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Fenning, G. Xu, S. Nuryyeva, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. L. Yang, J. Zhu, M. Wang, S. Tan, I. Yavuz, K. N. Houk and Y. Yang, Science, 2019, 366, 1509–1510 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon, S. Y. Chen, X. G. Gong and S. H. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1791–1794 CrossRef CAS .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E.-P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 RSC .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–13 Search PubMed .
R. H. Bube, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 1733–1737 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–6 Search PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, X. Zhou, R. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, X. Wang, C. Li, S. Liu and R. P. H. Chang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3071–3078 RSC .
V. Adinolfi, M. Yuan, R. Comin, E. S. Thibau, D. Shi, M. I. Saidaminov, P. Kanjanaboos, D. Kopilovic, S. Hoogland, Z.-H. Lu, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3406–3410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Hu, E. M. Hutter, P. Rieder, I. Grill, J. Hanisch, M. F. Aygueler, A. G. Hufnagel, M. Handloser, T. Bein, A. Hartschuh, K. Tvingstedt, V. Dyakonov, A. Baumann, T. J. Savenije, M. L. Petrus and P. Docampo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703057 CrossRef .
C. Ran, J. Xu, W. Gao, C. Huang and S. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581–4610 RSC .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, P. W. M. Blom, C. Melzer, B. de Boer, J. K. J. van Duren and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 795–801 CrossRef CAS .
T. Walter, A. R. Herberholz, C. Muller and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4411–4420 CrossRef CAS .
R. Herberholz, M. Igalson and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 318–325 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Xue, X. B. Hu, Y. X. Guo, G. E. Weng, J. C. Jiang, S. Q. Chen, Z. Q. Zhu and J. H. Chu, Appl. Opt., 2020, 59, 552–557 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Duan, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 112–116 RSC .
M. Samiee, S. Konduri, B. Ganapathy, R. Kottokkaran, H. A. Abbas, A. Kitahara, P. Joshi, L. Zhang, M. Noack and V. Dalal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 153502 CrossRef .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W.-Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Science, 2020, 367, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Pang, H. Xu, C. Tang, L.-K. Meng, Y. Ding, H.-T. Cai, J. Xiao, R.-L. Liu, W.-Q. Zeng and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Warren, E. T. Roe, D. W. Miller, W. N. Shafarman and M. C. Lonergan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 203901 CrossRef .
Y. T. Hsieh, Q. F. Han, C. Y. Jiang, T. B. Song, H. J. Chen, L. Meng, H. P. Zhou and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502386 CrossRef .
C. Bi, X. Zheng, B. Chen, H. Wei and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1400–1406 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, S. X. Tao, P. A. Bobbert, C.-P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707350 CrossRef .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14173–14180 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648–649 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. I. Dar, A. Sadhanala, S. P. Senanayak, F. Giordano, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3264–3269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. S. Yun, Q. Ma, J. Zheng, C. F. J. Lau, X. Deng, J. Kim, D. Kim, J. Seidel, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Pazoki, B. Philippe, M. I. Dar, M. Alsari, A. Sadhanala, G. Divitini, R. Imani, S. Lilliu, J. Kullgren, H. Rensmo, M. Grätzel and R. H. Friend, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7301–7311 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, L. Guan, H. Pan, Q. Sun, X. Zhao, H. Li, H. Pan, Y. Shen, Y. Shao, L. Sun, Z. Cui, L. Ding and M. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804286 CrossRef .
W. Li, Y.-Y. Sun, L. Li, Z. Zhou, J. Tang and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15753–15763 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–498 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Chai, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7149–7155 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xie, C.-C. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, M. Cai, X. Liu, X. Yang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1942–1949 RSC .
Q. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Fu, W. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803095 CrossRef .
J. I. Uribe, J. Ciro, J. F. Montoya, J. Osorio and F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1047–1052 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, Z. Yu, K. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, J. Shi, D. Spronk, P. N. Rudd, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Joule, 2019, 3, 177–190 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pool, A. Gold-Parker, M. D. McGehee and M. F. Toney, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7240–7243 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yantara, F. Yanan, C. Shi, H. A. Dewi, P. P. Boix, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2309–2314 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, M. Saliba, P. Yadav, P. Holzhey, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802646 CrossRef .
M. Yang, Z. Li, M. O. Reese, O. G. Reid, D. H. Kim, S. Siol, T. R. Klein, Y. Yan, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17038 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nan, X. Zhang, M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. D. Stranks, G. Lu and D. Beljonne, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702754 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, B. Li, W. Huang, D. Gao and Z. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11997–11999 RSC .
A. Halder, R. Chulliyil, A. S. Subbiah, T. Khan, S. Chattoraj, A. Chowdhury and S. K. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3483–3489 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. Piacentino and C. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7617–7620 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, C. Xiao, C. Wang, B. Saparov, H.-S. Duan, D. Zhao, Z. Xiao, P. Schulz, S. P. Harvey, W. Liao, W. Meng, Y. Yu, A. J. Cimaroli, C.-S. Jiang, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, G. Fang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5214–5221 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Ganose, C. N. Savory and D. O. Scanlon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4594–4598 CrossRef CAS .
T. Niu, J. Lu, R. Munir, J. Li, D. Barrit, X. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706576 CrossRef .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311–319 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, S. R. Raga, E. J. Juarez-Perez, X. Yao, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono, Z. Ning, H. Tian and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703670 CrossRef .
Z. Fang, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhao, S. Chu, J. Zhang and Z. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909754 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Deng, B. Chen, H. Wei, X. Xiao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, Z. Yu, Y. Liu, Q. Wang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803428 CrossRef .
C. A. Reed and R. D. Bolskar, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1075–1120 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, J. Zou, W.-C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14976–14981 RSC .
L.-L. Deng, S.-Y. Xie and F. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700435 CrossRef .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Dou, S. Kou, J. Dang, Y. Ji, G. Yang, W.-Q. Wu, D.-B. Kuang and M. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Xia, H. Yang, H. A. Malik, F. Han, H. Shu, X. Yao, Z. Wan and C. Jia, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104509 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, L. Shen, J. Dai, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Wei, W. Ma, X. C. Zeng, X. Zhan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604545 CrossRef .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Wen, S. Yang, P. F. Liu, L. J. Tang, H. W. Qiao, X. Chen, X. H. Yang, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703143 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Z. Wu, C. Shen, E. P. Li, C. X. Yan, W. W. Zhang, H. Tian, L. Y. Han and W. H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803573 CrossRef .
S. Yang, J. Dai, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, Y. Zhou, X. Xiao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5781–5787 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. Koch, S. Burke, R. K. Paranji, A. J. Shropshire, M. E. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Ma, H. Lei, F. Yao, B. Li, L. Xiong and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5919–5925 RSC .
M. Zhang, Q. Chen, R. Xue, Y. Zhan, C. Wang, J. Lai, J. Yang, H. Lin, J. Yao, Y. Li, L. Chen and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1700106 CrossRef .
F. Wang, A. Shirnazaki, F. Yang, K. Kanahashi, K. Matsuldi, Y. Miyauchi, T. Takenobu, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and K. Matsuda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1562–1568 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, S. G. Motti, R. Sorrentino and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2609–2619 RSC .
Q. S. Zeng, X. Y. Zhang, X. L. Feng, S. Y. Lu, Z. L. Chen, X. Yong, S. A. T. Redfern, H. T. Wei, H. Y. Wang, H. Z. Shen, W. Zhang, W. T. Zheng, H. Zhang, J. S. Tse and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705393 CrossRef .
C.-C. Zhang, M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, Y.-R. Jiang, H.-R. Liu, Y.-G. Yang, X.-Y. Gao and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2572–2579 RSC .
P.-L. Qin, G. Yang, Z.-W. Ren, S. H. Cheung, S. K. So, L. Chen, J. Hao, J. Hou and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706126 CrossRef .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Wang, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706923 CrossRef .
G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 4–22 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, E. Oveisi, J. Ryu, O. Almora, M. Tschumi, P. A. Schouwink, G. Seo, S. Heo, J. Park, J. Jang, S. Paek, G. Garcia-Belmonte and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 952–959 RSC .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Z. Chen, S. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 654–658 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J.-Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702714 CrossRef .
S. Gharibzadeh, B. Abdollahi Nejand, M. Jakoby, T. Abzieher, D. Hauschild, S. Moghadamzadeh, J. A. Schwenzer, P. Brenner, R. Schmager, A. A. Haghighirad, L. Weinhardt, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1970079 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, C. Roldan-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef .
D. S. Lee, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Chen, Y. Cho, X. Deng, J. Seidel, S. Lim, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 647–654 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, T.-H. Han, C. Choi, S.-Y. Chang, S.-J. Lee, N. De Marco, H. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef .
J. Hu, C. Wang, S. Qiu, Y. Zhao, E. Gu, L. Zeng, Y. Yang, C. Li, X. Liu, K. Forberich, C. J. Brabec, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. Mai and F. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000173 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Koh, V. Shanmugam, X. T. Guo, S. S. Lim, O. Filonik, E. M. Herzig, P. Muller-Buschbaum, V. Swamy, S. T. Chien, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2122–2128 RSC .
S. Gharibzadeh, B. A. Nejand, M. Jakoby, T. Abzieher, D. Hauschild, S. Moghadamzadeh, J. A. Schwenzer, P. Brenner, R. Schmager, A. A. Haghighirad, L. Weinhardt, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803699 CrossRef .
M. A. Mahmud, D. The, Y. Yin, H. T. Pham, D. Walter, J. Peng, Y. Wu, L. Li, H. Shen, N. Wu, N. Mozaffari, G. Andersson, K. R. Catchpole, K. J. Weber and T. P. White, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907962 CrossRef .
M. Li, X. Yan, Z. Kang, Y. Huang, Y. Li, R. Zhang and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18787–18795 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Li, Y. Yang, X. Lai, Q. Su, D. Wu, G. Li, K. Wang, S. Chen, X. W. Sun and A. K. K. Kyaw, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900029 CrossRef .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–512 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, Y. Zou, S. A. Bourelle, T. Zhai, T. Wu, Y. Tan, Y. Li, J. Li, S. Duhm, T. Song, L. Wang, F. Deschler and B. Sun, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 924–932 RSC .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, J. Si, X. Liang, Y. Jin, J. Wang and W. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 141102 CrossRef .
S. Lee, J. H. Park, Y. S. Nam, B. R. Lee, B. Zhao, D. Di Nuzzo, E. D. Jung, H. Jeon, J.-Y. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, R. H. Friend and M. H. Song, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3417–3423 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, J. H. Park, B. R. Lee, E. D. Jung, J. C. Yu, D. Di Nuzzo, R. H. Friend and M. H. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1784–1792 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Y. Zou, T. Wu, M. Ban, V. Pecunia, Y. Han, Q. Liu, T. Song, S. Duhm and B. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700338 CrossRef .
L. Song, X. Guo, Y. Hu, Y. Lv, J. Lin, Z. Liu, Y. Fan and X. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4148–4154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, M. Ban, Y. Yang, S. Bai, C. Wu, Y. Han, T. Wu, Y. Tan, Q. Huang, X. Gao, T. Song, Q. Zhang and B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24320–24326 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, N. Rolston, K. M. Lee, X. Zhao, M. A. Reyes-Martinez, N. L. Tran, Y.-W. Yeh, N. Yao, G. D. Scholes, Y.-L. Loo, A. Selloni, R. H. Dauskardt and B. P. Rand, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802060 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. S. Kim, J.-M. Heo, M. Pei, I.-H. Park, Z. Liu, H. J. Yun, M.-H. Park, S.-H. Jeong, Y.-H. Kim, J.-W. Park, E. Oveisi, S. Nagane, A. Sadhanala, L. Zhang, J. J. Kweon, S. K. Lee, H. Yang, H. M. Jang, R. H. Friend, K. P. Loh, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3378 CrossRef .
Z. Ren, L. Li, J. Yu, R. Ma, X. Xiao, R. Chen, K. Wang, X. W. Sun, W.-J. Yin and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2569–2579 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Xincan Qiu	Xincan Qiu received her M.S. degree in physics from Central South University under the supervision of Prof. Bingchu Yang, and she is currently a Ph.D. candidate studying at Hunan University. Her research focuses on perovskites for field-effect transistors and optoelectronic applications and photophysical studies.
Yu Liu	Yu Liu received his B. E. degree in electronic science and technology from Hunan University, and he is currently a Ph.D. candidate at Hunan University. His present research interests include charge transport physics in organic and perovskite semiconductors.
Wenwu Li	Wenwu Li received his B.S. degree in microelectronics from North University of China in 2007, and Ph.D. degree in microelectronics and solid state electronics from East China Normal University in 2012. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at National Institute for Materials Science (Japan) and China Southern Power Grid Co. Ltd from 2012 to 2014. In 2014 he was appointed as a full professor in electronic engineering at East China Normal University. His research interests include microelectronic devices and applications. He is the author of more than 70 peer reviewed articles including Nature Communications, Advanced Materials, and IEEE EDL.
Yuanyuan Hu	Yuanyuan Hu is a professor at Hunan University in China. He received his B.S. from Nanjing University in 2008 and his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge in 2015. He was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California, Santa Barbara from 2015–2017. His current research is on the fabrication, characterization and understanding of electronic and photonic devices based on solution-processable semiconductors.
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) A vintage specimen of chlorite-calcite skarn from the akhmatovskaya Kop’ sporting superb pseudo-cubic perovskite crystals. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (b) Crystal structure of 3D ABX3MHP. (c) Schematic representation of perovskites by dimensionality engineering.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of typical point defects in MHPs: (a) Ideal structure (perfect lattice). (b) Vacancy. (c) Interstitial. (d) Antisite.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The band structure of MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2014. (b) All total DOS and the partial DOS of selective atoms. (c) Transition energy levels of MAPbI3 from DFT calculations (GGA without SOC) by Yin et al.: (red) the intrinsic acceptors and (blue) intrinsic donors. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. Comparison of calculated transition energy levels of point defects in MAPbI3 by Yin et al. (d) and by Agiorgousis et al. (e). Adapted from ref. 109 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (f) Transition energy levels of VI, Ii, IMA, Pbi, and PbMA in β-MAPbI3 calculated using GGA-non-SOC, GGA-SOC, and HSE-SOC calculations. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current–voltage traces and trap density. (a) The device structure of electron-only and hole-only MHP devices, respectively. The SCLC method can selectively characterize the electron-trap density and hole-trap density of MHP by fabricating electron-only or hole-only devices. (b) I–V curve for a hole-injecting MAPbI3 single crystal (ohmic regime → trap-filling transition → SCLC regime). (c) I–V curve as a function of temperature for a MAPbI3 single crystal contacted using titanium (inset) to favor electron injection (left) and using MoO3/Au/Ag (inset) to favor hole injection (right). (d) Density of the trap states within the bandgap of MAPbI3 single crystals extracted from the temperature-dependent SCLC method. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the complete SC device used in TAS method. (b) Temperature-dependent TAS measurement of MHP-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (c) An example tDOS distribution in MAPbIxCl1−x derived using TAS technique. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2014. (d) Summary chart of tDOS results of MAPbI3 thin films measured by TAS method in different laboratories.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of band bending of a p-type semiconductor with deep trap states in an n+–p junction. (b) The device structure of a MAPbI3 device measured by DLCP. (c) The tDOS results obtained by TAS and DLCP methods in MAPbI3 single crystals. (d) Dependence of the trap density on the profiling distance of a MAPbI3 thin single crystal measured at an AC frequency of 10 kHz. (e) The spatial and energy distributions of the tDOS in the MAPbI3 thin crystal. (f) The spatial and energy distributions of the tDOS in the MAPbI3 thin film. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from AAAS, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  Passivation by metal cations. (a) Schematic diagram of the spontaneous passivation of perovskite hybrids by Na+ in an ITO glass substrate. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) J–V curves of PSCs based on perovskite doped with 10 μmol of LiI, NaI, KI, RbI, and CsI. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (c) Schematics of the doping mechanism of Cs/MA/FA perovskite doped with Cs+, Rb+, and K+. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) Mechanisms of lattice relaxation. Schematic #2 illustrates the local strain, which is reduced either by the formation of point defects (#3) or by the incorporation of small ions (#1). The distortion angle (θ = 180° angle (B–X–B′)) decreases via strain relaxation. (e) Time-integrated PL spectra and time-dependent PL traces showing the passivation effect of Cd2+. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 8  Passivation by anions. (a) Top-view SEM images of triple A-cation perovskite films without (top) and with MACl additive (bottom) in the starting solution. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (b) Schematic diagram of Cl doping mechanisms. The crossover from spatially localized to delocalized excited states (ES) in defective perovskites is reflected by the extension of charge densities in the vicinity of the vacancies. The electron (hole) density is shown by red (yellow) circles on lead (iodine) ions. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (c) A schematic illustration of enhancing the hydrogen bond between the halogen and MA/FA ions, and strengthening the ionic bond between the halogen and metal ions through increasing the electronegativity of halogen. (d) Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra with a log scale for the y axis. (e) Trap state density (NT) of the CsFAMA and CsFAMA-F solar devices by temperature-dependent admittance spectroscopy measured at 290 K. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  Passivation by Lewis acids. (a) The chemical structures of the n-type fullerene derivatives, IC60BA, PC61BM, and C60 (top) and the schematic diagram of trap passivation at the surface and GBs of MHP films (bottom). (b) Schematic of PL peaks blue-shift upon PCBM passivation. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (c) Details of such interactions: in hybrid solution, electron transfer is induced between the perovskite anions (I−) and PCBM, which results in a PCBM radical anion and PCBM-halide radical. (d) The wave function overlap shows the hybridization between PCBM and defective surface, enabling the electron/hole transfer for passivation (top). DFT calculation of DOS shows that deep trap state (black) induced by the Pb–I antisite defect is reduced and becomes much shallower (red) upon the adsorption of PCBM on defective halide (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (e) Schematic view of the halogen bond interaction between the IPFB (halogen bond donor) and a generic halogen anion (X−) with sp3-hybridized valence electrons (top) and the IPFB assembly on the crystal surface (bottom). (f) Illustration of the electrostatic interaction between the undercoordinated halide (X−) on the perovskite surface and the hole injected in the Spiro-OMeTAD (top), and the electrostatic screening of the halide (X−) via halogen bond complexation of IPFB on the perovskite surface (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 10  Passivation by Lewis bases. (a) Schematic of the interaction between Lewis base and MHPs. (b) Diagram depicting the formation of a dative bond between Lewis acid and Lewis base (left), and the passivation of trap states (right). Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2016. (c) The molecular structures of HMDA and EDEA. (d) Fluence-dependent PLQY. (e) TCSPC probed PL lifetime. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (f) Total DOS of MAPbI3-based PSCs with and without IDIC. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2016. (g) Steady state PL spectra of pristine and passivated perovskite films. (h) TRPL spectra of pristine and passivated perovskite films. The fluence and the excitation density were 5.5 nJ cm−2 and 3.4 × 1014 cm−3 respectively. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2019. (i) Schematic illustration of the origin of D4TBP passivation effect on different defect sites. (j) PL spectra of pristine and D4TBP perovskite films. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  Lewis acid–base chemistry passivation. Molecular structure of common Lewis acids and Lewis bases.	 

 	Fig. 12  Passivation by zwitterion-structured molecules. (a) Schematic illustration of QAHs assembled on the defect sites. The red and blue symbols represent the N atom and O atom of the choline chloride molecule, respectively. (b) The tDOS obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy for devices with PCBM (blue), and choline chloride passivation layers (red). Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (c) The DPSI molecules were repelled to the GBs and film surfaces for trap passivation after the perovskite film formation. (d) The tDOS obtained by TAS for MAPbI3 devices with and without DPSI. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2018. (e) Molecular structure of frequently used zwitterion-structured molecules.	 

 	Fig. 13  Passivation by polymers. Molecular structure of the reported polymer trap passivators.	 

 	Fig. 14  Passivation by incorporating 2D perovskites. (a) Proposed electronic band offsets of the 2D–3D heterojunction. Reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (b) Schematics of the device incorporating a polycrystalline 3D perovskite film with a 2D perovskite at GBs. (c) Steady-state and TRPL spectra of the perovskite films incorporating bare FAPbI3, FAPbI3 with the 2D perovskite and FA0.98Cs0.02PbI3 (FACsPbI3) with the 2D perovskite. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Illustration of the one-step blade-coating for fabricating the 2D/3D perovskite film. (e) Steady-state PL of the 3D and 2D/3D heterostructure perovskite films. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from WILEY-VCH, copyright 2020.	 

Na+	FAMAPbI3−xBrx	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/BCP/Cu	Ionic bonding	18.8/20.2	
136

K+	(FAPbI3)0.875(CsPbBr3)0.125	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Ionic bonding	17.62/18.71	
137

K+	Cs0.11MA0.15FA0.74Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3	FTO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Ionic bonding	18.02/19.01	
138

Ni2+	MAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Ionic bonding	17.25/20.6	
145

Cd2+	Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8PbI2.55Br0.45	ITO/TiO2-Cl/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Ionic bonding	20.5/20.5	
140

KI	(Cs0.06FA0.79MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Ionic bonding	17.3/21.5	
147

Cl−	(FAPbI3)0.87(MAPbBr3)0.13	FTO/TiO2/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Ionic bonding	19.83/21.65	
155

Cl−	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Ag	Ionic bonding	14.82/16.77	
156

Cl−	FAPbI3	FTO/NiOx/MHPs/PCBM/TiOx/Ag	Ionic bonding	13.24/20.65	
149

F−	(Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41)Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Ionic bonding	19.68/21.92	
36

SCN−	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/PCBM/Ca/Al	Ionic bonding	7.24/11.07	
158

PCBM	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/C60/BCP/Al	Lewis acid	7.3/14.09	
123

PCBM	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis acid	8.1/14.4	
172

IPFB	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-Al2O3/MHPs/Spiro/Ag	Lewis acid	13.0/15.7	
173

TMPP	Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis acid	18.05/19.13	
174

TPPO	Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis acid	18.05/19.10	
174

TPFP	Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis acid	18.05/22.02	
174

BCF	(FAMACs)Pb(I,Br)	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/PTAA/Au	Lewis acid	13.41/20.32	
175

Th	MAPbI3−xClx	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	8.3/14.1	
177

Py	MAPbI3−xClx	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	8.3/15.5	
177

TP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.08/18.87	
178

MTP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.08/18.82	
178

ETP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.08/19.17	
178

BTP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.08/19.44	
178

HTP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.08/19.89	
178

DTP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbBr0.45I2.55	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.08/19.20	
178

IDIC	MAPbI3	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu	Lewis base	13.5/19.5	
176

2-MP	MAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.35/20.28	
179

Py	MAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.35/19.02	
179

PTT	MAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Lewis base	18.35/18.74	
179

IT-4F	MAPbI3	FTO/Li-NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	Lewis base	15.59/18.35	
182

VA	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu	Lewis base	19.1/20.1	
180

PAA	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu	Lewis base	19.1/20.6	
180

D4TBP	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu	Lewis base	19.1/21.4	
180

QAH	MAPbI3	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/C60/BCP/Cu	Zwitterion molecule	17.1/20.59	
29

DPSI	FA0.85MA0.15Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/C60/BCP/Cu	Zwitterion molecule	19.1/21.1	
168

PCBB-3N-3I	MAPbI3	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/Al	Zwitterion molecule	17.7/21.1	
183

PMMA	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Polymer	14.6/16.4	
185

PVP	MAPbI3−xClx	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Polymer	18.05/20.23	
184

PAA	MAPbI3−xClx	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Polymer	18.05/19.65	
184

PEO	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/C60/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Polymer	15.29/16.46	
186

PS	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/C60/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Polymer	15.29/15.92	
186

PS	Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	FTO/TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Ag	Polymer	19.24/20.46	
204

P3HT	CsPbI2Br	ITO/TiO2/MHPs/Au	Polymer	—/12.02	
187

PDTBDT-FBT	(FAMACs)Pb(I,Br)	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Polymer	16.85/18.03	
205

PCDTBT	MAPbI3−xClx	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/PCBM/Bphen/Ag	Polymer	12.42/15.76	
188

PBDB-T	(CsPbI3)0.04(FAPbI3)0.82(MAPbBr3)0.14	FTO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Polymer	17.28/19.85	
189

BAI	FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IxBr1−x)3	FTO/SnO2/PCBM/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	16.9/20.6	
192

PEA2PbI4	FAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	16.41/21.06	
199

BAI	MAPbI3	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/C60/BCP/Cu	Incorporating 2D MHPs	15.84/19.00	
194

HTAB	(FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/P3HT/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	15.8/22.8	
206

PEAI	Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	17.02/18.51	
190


n-BAI	Cs0.07Rb0.03FA0.765MA0.135PbI2.55Br0.45	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PMMA:PCBM/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	20.02/22.77	
203

BAI	Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	14.17/15.74	
201

OAI	Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	14.17/15.19	
201

BABr	(Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3	ITO/SnO2/MHPs/Spiro/Au	Incorporating 2D MHPs	17.5/19.8	
202

SBLC	MAPbI3	ITO/PTAA/MHPs/PCBM/BCP/Ag	Incorporating 2D MHPs	18.46/20.14	
200


MgBr	CsPbBr3	ITO/TFB/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Ionic bonding	0.036/3.597	
207

MABr	MAPbBr3	SOCP/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Ionic bonding	—/8.53	
95

LiBr	CsPbBr3	ITO/NiOx/TFB/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Ionic bonding	2.83/16.2	
14

TOPO	PEA2(FAPbBr3)n−1PbBr4	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Lewis base	12.12/14.36	
48

HMDA	FAPbI3	ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au	Lewis base	7.1/10.9	
27

TTDDA	FAPbI3	ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au	Lewis base	7.1/16.4	
27

DDDA	FAPbI3	ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au	Lewis base	7.1/11.8	
27

EDEA	FAPbI3	ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au	Lewis base	7.1/16.5	

27


ODEA	FAPbI3	ITO/ZnO:PEIE/MHPs/TPB/MoOx/Au	Lewis base	7.1/19.0	
27

5AVA	MAPbBr3	ITO/ZnO/MHPs/TFB/MoOx/Au	Lewis base	0.008/0.43	
208

8AOA	MAPbBr3	ITO/ZnO/MHPs/TFB/MoOx/Au	Lewis base	0.008/0.19	
208

PMA	MAPbBr3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Lewis base	0.31/9.63	
209

EDA	MAPbBr3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/SPW-111/LiF/Ag	Lewis base	0.12/6.19	
210

PEI	MAPbBr3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/SPW-111/LiF/Ag	Polymer	0.12/0.58	
210

PEO	CsPbBr3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Polymer	0.89/4.76	
211

PEG	CsPbBr3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Polymer	0.31/1.20	
212

PFN	PEA2(CsPbBr3)2PbBr4	ITO/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Polymer	—/14.4	
213

BAI	MAPbI3	ITO/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	1.0/10.4	
11

BABr	MAPbBr3	ITO/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	0.09/17.1	
11

BAI	MAPbI3	Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	0.19/6.9	
214

DDAI	MAPbI3	Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	0.19/2.4	
214

PMAI	MAPbI3	Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	0.19/10.8	
214

PEAI	MAPbI3	Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	0.19/8.0	
214

FPMAI	MAPbI3	Polyimide/AgNWs/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	0.19/13.4	
214

BnA	MAPbBr3	FTO/Buf-HIL/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	2.50/4.23	
215

PEABr	PA2(CsPbBr3)n−1PbBr4	ITO/NiOx/MHPs/TPBi/LiF/Al	Incorporating 2D MHPs	3.46/7.51	
216


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
