Emerging electronic applications of fullerene derivatives: an era beyond OPV   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC04038C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC04038C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 16143-16163Emerging electronic applications of fullerene derivatives: an era beyond OPV†

        
          
            Jian 
            Liu
          
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Shuyan 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Molecular Aggregation Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: shuyan_shao@tju.edu.cn
bZernike Institute of Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands
cYunnan Key Laboratory for Micro/Nano Materials & Technology, National Center for International Research on Photoelectric and Energy Materials, School of Materials and Energy, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, P. R. China. E-mail: qiuli@ynu.edu.cn
dDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 41296, Sweden
Received 
      26th August 2021
    , Accepted 18th October 2021First published on 20th October 2021AbstractHummelen et al. for the first time reported the synthetic route and characterization of a soluble methanofullerene derivative in 1995. In the same year, such a fullerene derivative was successfully used as the acceptor of internal donor–acceptor heterojunctions in the field of organic photovoltaics (OPV). Since then, it has opened an era of fullerene derivatives towards OPV application until 2015. Beyond OPV, several new research directions for solution-processable fullerene derivatives recently appeared, including perovskite solar cells, organic thermoelectrics, molecular electronics, and organic electrochemical transistors. This review highlights the important role of fullerene derivatives in these emerging research areas and summarizes the recent progress in the development of fullerene derivatives in these new research fields. These fields require fullerene derivatives with new properties, such as strong electron-donating ability, large polarity, or excellent water permeability. Therefore, new design strategies of fullerene derivatives and device engineering considerations are desired.
Jian Liu
Jian Liu received his BS in Chemistry from Huazhong University of Technology in 2008. He obtained his PhD degree in Polymer Physcics and Chemistry from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science in 2013. After one-year stay in Prof. Wallace Choy's group in Hongkong University as a research associate, he joined Prof. L. Jan Anton Koster's group in University of Groningen as a postdoc in 2015. In 2020, he joined Prof. Christian Müller's group in Chalmers University of Technology as a posdoc for one year. Now he has gone back to China to join a new position as a professor. His research interests involve organic thermoelectrics, organic/perovskite photovoltaics, and new-concept hydrogen detectors.
Li Qiu
Li Qiu received his BS in Biotechnology from Lanzhou University in 2005. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. After conducting postdoctoral research in the groups of J. C. (Kees) Hummelen (University of Groningen, NL), and Wei Zhang (University of Colorado, Boulder, USA) during 2014–2018, he joined the faculty at Yunnan university where he is currently Associate Professor. His research interests involve functional materials including fullerene derivatives and organic porous materials for energy and environmental applications.
Shuyan Shao
Shuyan Shao received her BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering in 2006 from Hebei University in China. In 2011, she received her PhD degree at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, China. In July of the same year, she joined Linköping University as a postdoctoral researcher. From 2014 to 2020, she worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in University of Groningen for about six years. Since December 2020, she has been an associate professor in Tianjin University. Her research interests include perovskite solar cells, field effect transistors and memristors.
1. Introduction
Since their discovery in 1985,1 fullerenes have been extensively studied due to their unique structural and electronic properties. Fullerenes have many unique and fascinating features, such as high electron affinity,2 small reorganization energy,3,4 excellent electron mobility,5,6etc. In 1992, Sariciftci et al. demonstrated that a conjugated polymer was able to transfer electrons efficiently to a buckminsterfullerene C60, generating long-lived charge-separated states.7 Nevertheless, the poor solubility of C60 limited its processing to be high cost vacuum based techniques. An important breakthrough came when Hummelen et al. synthesized a soluble methanofullerene derivative (PCBM) in 1995.8 This initiates intensive research into the low cost solution processing of fullerene derivatives in opto-electronics. Soon after, PCBM was blended with a conjugated polymer poly(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene) (MEH-PPV) by a solution process, which formed the first bulk heterojunction organic photovoltaics (OPV). Efficient photoinduced electron transfer occurs at the interfaces of polymer donor/fullerene derivative acceptor, and the separated holes and electrons are collected by the two different electrodes via a bicontinuous network of internal donor–acceptor heterojunctions.9 Since then, it has opened an era of using fullerene derivatives as the acceptor towards bulk-heterojunction OPV application.
At early stage of the bulk heterojunction OPV, the most representative polymer donor and fullerene derivative acceptor used in the OPV are regioregular poly-(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and PCBM respectively, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the OPV device based on P3HT/PCBM reached reproducibly over 4% by post treatment such as solvent/thermal annealing.10,11 Importantly, Li and coworkers synthesized a new C60 derivative, indene–C60 bisadduct (IC60BA), which possesses better solubility and 0.17 eV the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital level (LUMO) up-shift than that of PCBM.12 The OPV devices based on P3HT/IC60BA shows a PCE of 6.48%, representing an increase by 60% compared to that of P3HT/PCBM system.13 A significant breakthrough was made by Tang and coworkers, achieving a record high PCE of ∼10% for a single junction BHJ-OPV device based on the PTB7-Th polymer with [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) acceptor.14 Afterwards, it became difficult to further improve the PCE of single-junction fullerene derivative-based OPVs because of the narrow window of tuning the optoelectronic properties of fullerene derivatives, such as bandgap, electron affinity, or molecular orientation. In the past several years, non-fullerene acceptors with more freedom for tailoring the chemical structures have been largely developed, and continually push the PCE of single-junction OPVs ahead.15 However, most non-fullerene acceptors exhibit much lower electron mobilities than those of fullerene acceptors.16 Therefore, fullerene acceptors are still widely employed in high performance ternary or tandem organic solar cells which are used in combination with non-fullerene acceptors.17,18
Apart from the applications in the field of OPV devices, several new research directions for fullerenes and their derivatives emerged in the past years. For example, fullerenes and their derivatives can function as electron transport layer or cathode buffer layer in perovskite solar cells (the chemical structures of fullerene and fullerene derivatives are shown in Fig. 1). Due to the excellent charge transport properties and thermal stability, recent research efforts were directed to explore the possibility of using fullerenes and their derivatives as the active materials for organic thermoelectrics and organic electrochemical transistors. Among them, Fullerene buckyballs exhibit high affinity for coinage metals and large surface area available for contact, being attractive candidates for applications in molecular electronics both in single-molecule junctions and large-area junctions comprising self-assembled molecular ensembles. This review highlights the important role of fullerene derivatives in these emerging research directions and summarizes the recent progress in the development of fullerene derivatives in these new research fields. These fields require fullerene derivatives with new properties, such as strong electron-donating ability, large polarity, or excellent water permeability. Thus, new design strategies of fullerene derivatives and device engineering considerations are desired.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of fullerene and fullerene derivatives discussed in this review. 
2. Fullerene derivatives for perovskite solar cells
2.1 Simple introduction of perovskite solar cells
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received considerable attention as a cost-effective alternative to conventional solar cells because of their advantages of high efficiency and low cost.19,20 The three dimensional light-absorbing perovskites can be represented by the general formula ABX3 (A = CH3NH3+, CH(NH2)2+, Cs+, etc.; B = Pb2+, Sn2+, etc.; X = I−, Br−, Cl−), which adopt the ABX3 perovskite structures.21 Perovskite materials have excellent optoelectronic properties, such as high absorption coefficient, high carrier mobility, and long carrier diffusion length.22,23 Benefiting from these merits, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs has increased from 3.8% to 25.5% in the past few years.24–28 Such a high PCE becomes competitive with the commercialized crystalline-Si and inorganic semiconductor thin film solar cells, offering a bright future of PSCs toward efficient utilization of sustainable energy.
For the state-of-the-art PSCs, their architectures can be generally categorized into three main types: mesoporous n–i–p structures, planar n–i–p structures and planar p–i–n structures (Fig. 2a–c), where n refers to an n-type semiconductor functioning as an electron transporting layer (ETL), i represents a perovskite, and p denotes a p-type semiconductor acting as a hole transporting layer (HTL). Although tremendous advances have been accomplished for PSCs during the past decade, further achieving better device efficiency and stability with minimum hysteresis are still urgently desired so as to meet the requirement of large-scale commercial applications.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of three type of device architecture of perovskite solar cells: (a) mesoporous n–i–p structure, (b) planar n–i–p structure, and (c) planar p–i–n structure. 
Since fullerene derivatives exhibit high electron affinity, high electron mobility and small reorganization energy, fullerenes and their derivatives have been widely utilized in PSCs by means of being incorporated as ETL or interfacial layer between perovskite layers and electrodes or as additives within perovskite layers. In the following subsection, we review the development of perovskite solar cells by incorporating fullerene derivatives into the device architecture in a way of ETL, interfacial layer or an additive into perovskite matrix, respectively.
2.2 Fullerene based electron transport/cathodic interfacial layer for the p–i–n structure

2.2.1 Fullerene based electron transport layer. 
Fullerene derivatives such as PCBM or indene–C60 bisadduct (IC60BA) were first reported as electron transport layer in the p–i–n PSCs by Chen and coworkers in 2013 (Fig. 3a).29 The LUMO levels of fullerene derivatives align well with the conduction band of perovskite materials (Fig. 3b), facilitating efficient charge separation at the perovskite/fullerene interfaces. Their work demonstrated the feasibility of fullerene derivatives as the electron transport layer for p–i–n PSCs although the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was limited to be only 3.9% mainly because of insufficient device optimization. Soon after, the device efficiency was increased to 7.4% by merely employing a thicker CH3NH3PbI3 layer together with the PCBM ETL.30 Later on, the PCE was further increased to 16.3% due to an drastic enhancement in short-circuit current density (JSC) by using [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) instead of PCBM as the ETL.31 Afterwards, growing research were directed to uncover which property of fullerene derivative based ETL determines the device performance and stability.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic device structure of planar p–i–n PSCs with C60 as ETL and (b) the corresponding scheme of the energy level alignment of each layer in the PSCs; (c) device structure of planar p–i–n PSCs with PCBM or ICBA as ETL and C60/BCP as the cathode buffer layer, and (d) the corresponding energy level alignment. Reprinted with permission from the ref. 29 (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH) and the ref. 35 (Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH). 
The higher-lying LUMO levels of fullerene derivatives dictates the VOC of PSCs. 
To increase the VOC of fullerene-based PSCs, many research works explored the effects of the LUMO level of fullerene derivatives as ETLs on the VOC of the p–i–n PSCs. For example, five fullerene derivatives including two indene fullerene derivatives (IPB or IPH) and three methanofullerene derivatives (PC61BM, PCBH, or PC61BB) were evaluated as ETLs in p–i–n PSCs.32 The devices based on indene fullerene derivatives exhibited higher VOC and PCE than those of devices based on PCBM, which correlates well with the higher LUMO energy levels of indene fullerenes. Similarly, Cao and coworkers reported an indene fullerene bisadduct, C60(CH2)(Ind) to replace PCBM as the ETL in PSCs for maximizing the VOC. As compared to PCBM with a low lying LUMO (−3.8 eV), C60(CH2)(Ind) possesses a slightly lower electron mobility but a higher LUMO energy level (−3.66 eV). As a consequence, the VOC and PCE were improved from 1.05 V and 16.2% to 1.13 V and 18.1% when PC61BM was replaced by C60(CH2)(Ind).33 The strategy of using fullerene derivative based ETL with higher-lying LUMO levels is even more effective for achieving VOC for the PSCs with wide bandgap perovskite absorbing layer. The conduction band of CH3NH3PbBr3 is ≈0.5 eV higher than that of CH3NH3PbI3 and PCBM. In this case, IC60BA is more suitable to be ETL because its LUMO energy level is ≈0.2 eV higher than that of PCBM, matching much better with the conduction band of CH3NH3PbBr3.34 As a consequence of reduced energy barrier at the CH3NH3PbBr3/IC60BA interface, devices exhibited a remarkably high VOC of 1.61 V. Similar improvements were also observed in solar cells when wide bandgap perovskite (FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (FA = HC(NH2)2) was used as light absorber and IC60BA as the ETL. The wide bandgap PSCs with the IC60BA ETL showed a remarkable improvement in VOC up to 20 mV on average as compared to those using the PCBM ETL.35
Passivating the surface traps of perovskite layer by fullerene-based ETL enhances the device performance. 
Huang and coworkers demonstrated that fullerene layers deposited on the top of perovskites can effectively passivate the charge trap states on the surface and grain boundaries of the perovskite materials, and eliminate the notorious hysteresis in the current–voltage curves.36 The traps on the surface of the perovskite film is also one of dominating factors that lead to severe light-soaking effect of the working PSCs. PCBM as ETL failed to passivate those traps efficiently, and therefore the devices heavily suffered from light soaking with the PCE improving from 3.8% to 11.7% after light soaking. To eliminate the light-soaking phenomenon in PSCs, a fulleropyrrolidine with a hydrophilic triethylene glycol monoethyl ether side chain (PTEG-1) was employed as the ETL (Fig. 4a–c).37 Devices based on PTEG-1 exhibited a negligible light soaking effect, with a PCE of 15.2% before light soaking and a minor increase to 15.7% after light soaking. The elimination of light soaking effect is attributed to the high dielectric constant and electron donating properties of PTEG-1, which helps to suppress the trap-assisted recombination at the perovskite/PTEG-1 interfaces.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the proposed mechanism for the light soaking phenomenon, (b) VOCs measured after light soaking for the devices using PCBM and PTEG-1 as EELs at different temperatures, (c) J–V characteristics under illumination for the devices using PTEG-1 as EELs, (d) device structure of the perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells and schematic illustration for the crosslinking of C60-SAM with silane-coupling agent (ET, electron transfer), (e) images of the devices based on 10D-CLCS ETLs after exposure to water droplet for 4 min, and (f) Photovoltaic PCE (black curves) and normalized PCE (red curves) of the typical perovskite devices with PCBM and 10D-CLCS ETLs in an ambient environment without encapsulation as a function of storage time. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and from ref. 44 with permission from the springer nature. 
Electron mobility, film morphology and structure ordering of fullerene derivatives determine the charge extraction efficiency. 
Jen and coworkers systematically studied the influence of electron mobility of fullerene based ETLs on the photovoltaic performance.38 The PCE of IC60BA, PCBM, and C60-based devices is 8.06%, 13.37%, and 15.44%, respectively, which follows the trend of increased electron mobility in the fullerene layer. Their work clearly illustrated that high electron mobility fullerenes could effectively promote charge dissociation/transport in PSCs and enhance photovoltaic performance. Besides, the temperature dependent behavior of the solar cells using fullerene derivatives as ETL has also been investigated. As the temperature decreases, the solar cells using PCBM got worse mainly due to gradually reduced FF. For instance, the device using PCBM showed a VOC of 0.41 V, a JSC of 20.73 mA cm−2, an FF of 0.48, and PCE of 4.12% at 298 K. When the temperature decreases, the FF decreases monotonically to 0.14 at 215 K, and a prominent S-shape kink appears in the J–V curves. Such a decending trend in the performance continues as the temperature drops further and overall the PCE decreases down to 1.41% at 140 K. This was attributed to the deteriorated charge extraction as the conductivity of PCBM drops for about one order of magnitude with decreased temperature. In a striking contrast, the device exhibited steady power output over the same broad temperature window in the case of efficient charge extraction when n-doped PCBM or the highly conductive PTEG-1 was employed as ETL. This highlights the conductivity or mobility as an important parameter of the ETLs for achieving efficient solar cells.
Xie and coworkers further investigated the effects of charge-transporting, and film-forming properties of fullerene-based ETLs on the resulting photovoltaic performance.39 Three C60 derivatives, EDNC, BDNC, and PCBM were introduced into p–i–n PSCs as ETLs. Because of better surface morphology, the EDNC-based device exhibited higher PCE (12.64%) than that of BDNC-based device. Huang and coworkers reported that reducing the disorder of the PCBM layer by a simple solvent annealing method is beneficial to increase the VOC of CH3NH3PbI3 PSC devices without sacrificing either short-circuit current or the fill factor.40 This study further pointed out that the ordered PCBM film leads to a significant decrease in the electronic density of states along with an increase in the quasi-Fermi level of the photogenerated electrons, contributing to the improvements of both VOC and PCE (19.4%). The wide distributed electronic density of states (DOS) caused by the energy disorder of the PCBM layer can reduce the quasi-Fermi level of the photogenerated electrons and thus reduce the device VOC. The VOC of the device was enhanced from 1.04 to 1.13 V by reducing the structural disorder of PCBM, without sacrificing the JSC and FF.
Hydrophobicity of fullerene derivative based ETL determines the ambient stability of PSCs. 
The instability of PSCs is a major challenge that should be addressed before any practical applications of PSCs. To enhance the stability of PSCs, hydrophobic fullerene derivatives were explored in p–i–n PSCs.41–43 These hydrophobic ETL can efficiently prevent the moisture penetration into the perovskite layer, which significantly enhanced the device stability in ambient. For example, a new fullerene derivative C5-NCMA was designed to function as the ETL in p–i–n PSCs.43 Compared with the benchmark PCBM, C5-NCMA has a higher hydrophobicity, higher LUMO energy level and stronger ability of self-assembly. Devices based on C5-NCMA showed PCE of 17.6% with negligible hysteresis, which is higher than that of PCBM (16.1%). Under a controlled humidity of 30% in ambient at room temperature without encapsulation, the PSCs with PCBM ETL showed a significant loss (80%) of the efficiency after 30 days. In contrast, the PSCs based on C5-NCMA were shown to be very stable with 30% of efficiency loss after 30 days. Similarly, Huang and co-workers employed crosslinkable silane-functionalized and doped fullerene as the ETL.44 Crosslinkable silane molecules with hydrophobic functional groups are bonded onto C60-substituted benzoic acid self-assembled monolayer (C60-SAM) to improve the water-resistant (Fig. 4d–f). Notably, a relatively thick fullerene layer is needed to enhance the water resistivity but inevitably degrades the charge transport of ETL. To improve the electron conductivity of the crosslinked C60-SAM ETL, methylammonium iodide (MAI) was introduced to n-doped the crosslinked layer. With those efforts, PSCs exhibited PCE of 19.5% without hysteresis. More importantly, these devices retained nearly 90% of their original high efficiency after exposing to an ambient environment for 30 days.


2.2.2 Fullerene based cathode interfacial layer. 
Although fullerene derivatives are excellent ETLs for the p–i–n structured PSCs, most of them such as PCBM or PC71BM cannot form satisfied ohmic contact with typical rear electrodes including Ag or Al. To address this issue, cathode interfacial layers such as bathocuproine (BCP),29 TiOx,45 LiF,46 PFN,47 were inserted between the ETL and the electrode. This strategy was inherited from the OPV field. The community of PSCs has a strong interest in exploring solution-processed and structure-tailorable fullerene derivatives as the cathode interfacial layer, which is supposed to provide excellent electronic coupling with the fullerene-based ETL.
Fullerene derivatives with polar functional groups including oligoether and crown-ether have been developed as cathode interfacial layer in p–i–n PSCs. A fullerene derivative with oligoether side chains (bis-C60) was employed as an efficient electron-selective interfacial layer between PCBM and Ag electrode to align the energy levels at PCBM/Ag interface.48 To further enhance the ambient stability of p–i–n PSCs, a novel C60 derivative F-C60 with a perfluoroalkyl side-chain was synthesized.49 By blending F-C60 with bis-C60 to form a hybrid cathode interlayer between PCBM and Ag cathode, it simultaneously enhanced the photovoltaic performance and ambient stability of PSCs. The long hydrophobic perfluoroalkyl side-chains on F-C60 can effectively prevent moisture penetration into the perovskite films, which dramatically improved the air stability of PSCs. A crown-ether functionalized fullerene PCBC was synthesized and applied as CBLs in p–i–n PSCs.50 The introduction of the PCBC cathode interfacial layer can improve the interfacial ohmic contact between PCBM and the Al electrode, which greatly enhanced the device performance to 15.08%. In addition, an amine functionalized fullerene derivative DMAPA-C60 was used as a dipolar cathode buffer layer for p–i–n PSCs.51 The formation of an interfacial dipole layer by DMAPA-C60 layer can reduce the work function of Ag electrode and facilitate a selective quasi-Ohmic contact at PCBM/Ag interfaces, which greatly improved the FF to 77% and PCE to 13.4%. A fulleropyrrolidine with amine substituent (C60–N) was employed as cathode interfacial layer between Ag electrode and PCBM ETL.52 The C60–N interlayer can enhance recombination resistance, increase electron extraction rate, and decrease the work function of Ag electrode, which improved the device performance from 7.5% to 15.5%. The use of a fullerene amine interlayer PCBDAN was reported to reduce the interface barrier between the PCBM ETL and Ag electrode and also protect device from water corrosion.53 The device with PCBDAN exhibited a PCE of 17.2%, with an increase of 25% compared with the device without PCBDAN. Moreover, the device with PCBDAN showed negligible hysteresis. Recently, a methanol-soluble diamine-modified fullerene derivative PCBDANI was applied as cathode buffer layer in PSCs.54 The device with PCBDANI single cathode interfacial layer exhibited improved PCE of 15.45%, which was attributed to the formation of an interfacial dipole at the PCBM/Al interface arising from the amine functional group and the suppression of interfacial recombination by the PCBDANI interlayer.

2.3 Fullerene-based interlayer between ETL and perovskite in n–i–p PSCs
As it is well known that TiO2 is widely used as ETL material for n–i–p PSCs. However, these solar cells usually suffer from reduced stability upon UV exposure and anomalous hysteresis of J–V curve due to the electron traps on the surface of TiO2.55,56 To address these issues, various fullerene derivatives have been employed as the interlayer to passivate the traps at the TiO2 surface. Snaith and coworkers employed C60-SAM to modify the surface of the TiO2 compact layer, which suppressed the charge recombination at the perovskite/TiO2 interface and improved the performance of the n–i–p PSCs.57 Upon such surface modification, devices exhibited a PCE of 17.3% with significantly reduced hysteresis. In addition, fullerene C60 and its derivative PCBM were also widely used to passivate the TiO2 surface, which not only improve the efficiency, but also remove the hysteresis in n–i–p PSCs (Fig. 5a–c).58,59 A fullerene derivative with a carboxyl group (PCBA) efficiently passivated the traps at TiO2 surface by forming a chemical bond between TiO2 and its carboxyl group,60 which significantly increases the robustness against the sequential solution processing of the perovskite layer. As a consequence of efficient electron extraction and reduced hole recombination at the perovskite/TiO2 interface, the device achieved a PCE of 17.76% with a high VOC of 1.16 V. The effectiveness of fullerenes and their derivatives as surface modifiers still holds for other metal oxides, such as ZnO,61 In2O3,62 SnO2,63 CeOx,64etc. For instance, PCBM was used to modify the surface of ZnO for low-temperature processed n–i–p PSCs.61 The PCBM interlayer smoothens the surface of ZnO, facilitating the growth of high-quality perovskite layer and resulting in hysteresis-free devices with a PCE of 14.5%. PCBM was also used to passivate the surface of the In2O3 ETL by filling up the pinholes or cracks along In2O3 grain boundaries, enhancing the performance of the n–i–p PSCs.62
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns of PbI2 on glass/FTO/TiO2 and glass/FTO/TiOx/60-PCBM before and after the deposition. The inset shows the enlarged CH3NH3PbI3 XRD pattern between 251 and 301 on two substrates, (b) SEM top-view of CH3NH3PbI3 grown on TiO2/FTO/glass (left) and 60-PCBM/TiOx/FTO/glass (right). (c) The short-circuit current density transients for photovoltaic devices FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au and FTO/TiOX/PCBM/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au during illumination, (d) schematic diagram of the α-bis-PCBM or PCBM-containing perovskite process, and (e) the stability of corresponding perovskite solar cells under continuous full-sun illumination and maximum power point tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and Reprinted with permission from the ref. 74 (Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH). 
2.4 Perovskite–fullerene bulk heterojunction
Sargent and co-workers reported the use of perovskite–PC61BM bulk heterojunction in n–i–p PSCs to reduce hysteresis and improve device performance.65 The homogeneously distributed PCBM can passivate iodide-rich trap sites on the perovskite grains and promote electron extraction, leading to suppressed hysteresis and enhanced VOC. The perovskite–PCBM bulk heterojunction concept was also extended to p–i–n PSCs, leading to a high FF of 0.82 without obvious hysteresis.66 The excellent performance of perovskite–fullerene bulk heterojunction device was contributed to high conductivity and balanced electron and hole extraction of the perovskite–PCBM film. The incorporation of PCBM in the bulk of the perovskite film can suppress ion movement and increase charge extraction efficiency, mitigating hysteresis and improving the device performance.67 In addition, 1D PCBM nanorods were added into the perovskite to form a wrinkle-like bicontinuous perovskite layer.68 The interconnected PCBM nanorods within the perovskite matrix efficiently facilitated the photogenerated charge separation and carrier transport, resulting in a PCE of 15.3% with improved operational stability.
To control the distribution of PCBM in the perovskite layer, a novel perovskite–fullerene graded heterojunction was developed, further enhancing the performance of p–i–n PSCs (Fig. 5d).69 Compared to the planar and bulk heterojunctions, graded heterojunction structure was beneficial to the selective charge collection at both anode and cathode. As a result, the graded heterojunction structure significantly improved the photogenerated carrier collection, resulting in highly efficient solar cells with small hysteresis and good stability. Thereby, a certified PCE of 18.21% with an active area over 1 cm2 was obtained. This strategy is not limited to PCBM and can be extended to other C60 derivatives as well as pristine fullerene (C60 and C70),70–73 leading to improved charge collection, reduced charge trap density, minimized hysteresis and prolonged device stability.
Zhang et al. reported a hydrophobic isomer-pure bis-PCBM (α-bis-PCBM) as a templating agent for the perovskite film.74 The incorporated α-bis-PCBM promoted perovskite crystal nucleation and increased the crystallinity, leading to improved electron extraction (Fig. 5d and e). In addition, α-bis-PCBM can passivate the voids or pinholes generated in the active layer and prevent the erosion of perovskites by moisture, resulting in the improved stability of PSCs. Consequently, a PCE of 20.8% was obtained for α-bis-PCBM-containing PSCs, compared with 19.9% of PCBM-containing PSCs. More importantly, the α-bis-PCBM-containing PSCs exhibited excellent stability under heat and the simulated sunlight. Similarly, recently, Jen and co-workers reported the use of perovskite–fullerene heterojunction with a fluoroalkyl-substituted fullerene (DF-C60) for efficient and ambient stable PSCs.75 DF-C60 can effectively passivate the defects and grain boundaries in the perovskite film to facilitate charge transport/collection. As a result, an enhanced PCE of 18.11% with small hysteresis was achieved, which might be due to the preferential distribution of low surface energy DF-C60 nearby the surface region of the perovskite–fullerene film. More importantly, the perovskite–fullerene device showed excellent ambient stability without encapsulation, which was attributed to the hydrophobic nature of DF-C60.
3. Fullerene derivatives for organic thermoelectrics
Organic thermoelectric materials (OTEs) have attracted increasing attention as they hold a promise of low-cost, environmentally benign, large-scale and mechanically flexible thermoelectric technology.76–82 The energy conversion efficiency of TE materials is defined by the figure of merit ZT = S2σT/κ, where S is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electrical conductivity, T is the absolute temperature and κ is the thermal conductivity.83 The thermal conductivities of organic semiconductors are typically low, which leaves the power factor (S2σ) as the most important parameter to be optimized for efficient thermoelectrics. Recently, significant progress has been made in p-type organic thermoelectric studies with ZT = 0.42 by using p-type doped conjugated polymers.84,85 Both efficient p-type and n-type TE materials are required for practical applications (Fig. 6a). However, the development of n-type organic thermoelectric materials still lags behind that of their p-type counterparts due to the lack of efficient n-type doped materials.86–90 Fullerenes and fullerene derivatives are among best n-type organic semiconductors with high electron mobility of >10 cm2 V−1 s−1 and good thermal stability for potential TE applications.77,91 Molecular doping represents a key strategy to modulate charge carrier density for optimizing the power factor and ZT value.92–95 Early-stage studies demonstrated that fullerene could be efficiently doped by the vapor of alkali metals in a sealed environment,96 sometimes even leading to the superconducting behavior.97 Adachi and coworkers reported a bilayered structure composed of C60 and cesium carbonate (Cs2CO3) for n-type organic thermoelectrics. Both C60 and Cs2CO3 are thermally deposited (Fig. 6b), and the penetration length of Cs2CO3 into the underlying C60 matrix is around 30 nm. By optimizing the thickness of C60 layer, an electrical conductivity of >8 S cm−1 and a power factor of 20.5 μW m−1 K−2 were achieved when modifying the substrate with self-assembled monolayers.98 Menke et al. reported two organic dimetal complexes Cr2(hpp)4 and W2(hpp)4 as n-dopants for doping fullerene C60, leading to an electrical conductivity of 4 S cm−1. The doping process caused a shift of the Fermi level towards the electron transport level of the n-doped C60.99 Bao and coworkers introduced 2-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1,3-dimethyl-1H-benzoimidazol-3-ium iodide (o-MeO-DMBI-I) as an n-type dopant for vacuum-processed C60. The resultant co-evaporated film achieved an electrical conductivity as high as 5.5 S cm−1.100
 Fig. 6  (a) Device architecture of thermoelectric generator, (b) the schematic process of molecular n-doping by thermal evaporation, and (c) molecular doping by a solution process. 
Fullerene derivatives not only reserve the most of optoelectronic properties of fullerene but also possess excellent solution processability. PCBM is one of the most famous fullerene derivatives. Bao and coworkers developed a new, solution-processable n-type dopant, named (4-(1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihy-dro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)phenyl)dimethylamine (N-DMBI). PCBM can be effectively doped with N-DMBI by solution processing, and the electrical conductivity of doped films was significantly increased up to 1.9 × 10−3 S cm−1.101 Alex and coworkers reported a conductive fulleropyrrolidinium iodide (FPI) film obtained via simple solution process (as shown in Fig. 6c) that achieves high conductivity (as high as 2.0 × 10−2 S cm−1). Electron transfer between the iodide on FPI and fullerene core results in effective n-doping to achieve highly conductive FPI film. This doping process proceeds smoothly at room temperature under room light without any harsh activation condition. By blending FPI with PCBM, an even higher conductivity of 3.2 × 10−2 S cm−1 is obtained in the cast thin films.102 The same group further demonstrated effective doping of fullerenes via simple solution processed blend of PCBM and common tetrabutylammonium salts (TBAX, X− = F−,OH−, AcO−, Br−, I−) to achieve high conductivity up to 5.6 × 10−3 S cm−1. They proposed that direct electron transfer between the anions of TBAXs and n-type semiconductors induces the effective doping (Fig. 7a and b).103 Weber et al. proposed a different doping mechanism for fullerene-based materials by tetrabutylammonium salts. They demonstrated that the formation of C60 radical anions (C60˙−) is the result of an initial chemical reaction between the nucleophile (F− or OH−) with C60, followed by electron transfer to a second fullerene molecule.104
 Fig. 7  (a) Electron transfer between n-type organic semiconductors and anion based salts, (b) the electrical conductivities of doped PCBM by different anion salts, (c) the synthetic routine of o-Me-DMBI-I, and (d) the plot of electrical conductivity as a function of doping concentration for doped PCBM by o-Me-DMBI-I. Reprinted with permission from the ref. 103 (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH) and from the ref. 101 (Copyright 2010 American Chemistry Society) 
In general, the doping process of vapor or solution processed organic materials is realized by alloying host and dopant molecules in solid films. In this scenario, the doping efficiency is limited by the phase separation induced by the incorporation of dopant molecules. To address this issue, Liu and coworkers reported to increase the host-dopant miscibility by using a fullerene derivative with a hydrophilic triethylene glycol type side chain (PTEG-1) as the host and n-DMBI as the dopant.105 PTEG-1 molecules packed in a layered structure with the layers oriented parallel to the substrate and the triethylene glycol type side chain as the interlayer space, and the dopant molecules were preferentially confined within the interlayer. The dopant loading does not disturb the π–π stacking of host molecules and even improves the ordering of the thin film. Correspondingly, a conductivity of up to 2.05 S cm−1 and a power factor of 16.7 μW m−1 K−2 were achieved due to the enhanced doping efficiency. Qiu and coworkers further modified n-DMBI by using the triethylene glycol type side chain, which was used as the dopant for PTEG-1. By doing so, the host-dopant miscibility in PTEG-1/glycolated DMBI blend was improved as compared to PTEG-1/N-DMBI system, leading to increased doping efficiency and boosting the power factor to 19 μW m−1 K−2.106
Beyond host-dopant miscibility, molecular order is another parameter to determine the performance of organic thermoelectric materials. Liu et al. studied a series of fullerene derivatives with an n-dodecyl side chain (PPA) or oligoethylene glycol (EG) side chains of different lengths (PDEG-1, PTEG-1, PTeEG-1 and PPEG-1) for thermoelectrics.107 They found that the molecular order could be improved by simultaneous control of the polarity and the length of side chains, leading to a simultaneous increase in electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient. In addition, EG side chains improved the air stability of n-doped fullerene derivatives films as compared to an alkyl side chain. The same group further exploited the scope of doping engineering as an enabler for better-performing and thermally stable doped fullerene derivatives.108 PTEG-1 was doped either by “coprocessing doping” with n-type dopants such as n-DMBI and TBAF or by “sequential doping” through thermal deposition of Cs2CO3. Solid-state diffusion of Cs2CO3 appears to dope PTEG-1 in the strongest manner, leading to the highest electrical conductivity of ∼7.5 S cm−1 and power factor of 32 μW m−1 K−2. In addition, Cs2CO3-doped fullerene derivative films are most thermally stable, likely due to a coordinating interaction between the polar side chain and Cs+-based species, which immobilizes the dopant. The ‘phonon-glass electron-crystal’ concept has triggered most of the progress that has been achieved in inorganic thermoelectrics in the past two decades. However, the thermoelectric performances of these organic materials are largely limited by low molecular order and they are therefore far from being ‘electron crystals’. Liu et al. reported a molecularly n-doped fullerene derivative with meticulous design of the side chain that approaches an organic ‘PGEC’ thermoelectric material (Fig. 8a and b).109 This thermoelectric material exhibits an excellent electrical conductivity of >10 S cm−1 and an ultralow thermal conductivity of <0.1 W m−1 K−1, leading to the best figure of merit ZT = 0.34 among all reported single-host n-type organic thermoelectric materials (Fig. 8c). The key factor to achieving the record performance is to use ‘arm-shaped’ double-triethylene-glycol-type side chains, which not only offer excellent doping efficiency (∼60%) but also induce a disorder-to-order transition upon thermal annealing.
 Fig. 8  (a) 2D-GIWAXS patterns of PTEG-2 films before and after thermal annealing, (b) representative snapshot of PTEG-2 molecular packing, as atomistically resolved by molecular dynamics simulations; the unit cell is highlighted in blue, and (c) electrical conductivity and figure of merit ZT as a function of working temperature. Reprinted with permission from the ref. 109 (copyright 2020 Springer Nature) 
4. Fullerene derivatives for transistor devices
Transistors are the fundamental building block in modern circuitry and are used as either signal amplifiers or on/off switches. The field effect is a phenomenon in which the conductivity of a semiconductor changes due to the application of an electric field normal to its surface. The electric field is applied via a metallic gate in the device. Organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), utilizing organic semiconductor and dielectric layers, show several competitive advantages over their inorganic counterparts, such as low-temperature and low-cost processing, excellent mechanical flexibility, and easy tunability of various properties via molecular structure tailoring.110 OFETs are composed of three terminals, the source, drain, and gate, as well as an organic semiconductor layer and an insulating layer between the semiconductor and gate (Fig. 9a). The field-effect charge mobility (μ) and on/off ratio are two key parameters to assess an organic channel layer.
 Fig. 9  Schematic device architecture of (a) organic field-effect transistors and (b) organic electrochemical transistors. 
For a device with nearly ideal transfer characteristics, the current Id varies with gate voltage Vg for a given source–drain voltage Vsd in the linear and saturation regimes, respectively, according to (1) (2)Where W, L, A, Ci, and VT are width, length, cross-section area of the channel, dielectric constant of the insulated layer, and the threshold voltage of transfer curve, respectively. The field-effect mobility can reliably be extracted from a linear fit of the gate voltage dependence of the current in the linear regime or the square root of the current in the saturation regime.
Dating back to 1993, Ogata and coworkers investigated the charge transport properties of vapor-phase grown fullerene C60 single crystals by using the time-of-flight technique, and they obtained an electron mobility of 0.5 ± 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1,5 demonstrating its excellent n-type charge transport capability. Ten years later, Iwasa and coworkers reported performance of C60 thin-film field-effect transistors and characterizations of C60 thin-films on SiO2 substrates fabricated by molecular beam deposition.111 The resultant OFET Devices, fabricated and characterized under high vacuum without exposing to air, routinely showed current on/off ratios of >108 and field-effect electron mobility in the range of 0.5–0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1. Anthopoulos et al. reported on organic n-channel field-effect transistors and circuits based on C60 films grown by hot wall epitaxy.112 Electron mobility was found to strongly depend on the substrate temperature during film growth and on the type of the gate dielectric. Top-contact transistors employing LiF/Al electrodes and a polymer dielectric exhibited maximum electron mobility of 6 cm2 V−1 s−1. Bao and coworkers described a simple, yet efficient, droplet-pinned crystallization method to grow large arrays of aligned C60 single crystals.113 The resultant well-aligned C60 single-crystal needles and ribbons showed electron mobility as high as 11 cm2 V−1 s−1 (average mobility: 5.2 ± 2.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 from needles; 3.0 ± 0.87 cm2 V−1 s−1 from ribbons).
To realize low-cost and large-area fabrication of OFETs, the community became significantly interested in using soluble organic semiconductors as the channel material. Brabec et al. presented the first PCBM-based n-type field-effect transistor,114 where both the dielectric layer and channel film were spin-coated from solution. With source and drain contacts from Ca, an electron mobility of 4.5 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 was determined. They argued that the reasonably high electron mobility together with its intrinsic stability qualifies PCBM as an ideal candidate for n-type OFETs. Anthopolous et al. showed the OFETs based PCBM exhibited an ambipolar charge transport. Under appropriate biasing conditions, the transistors demonstrated a hole mobility and an electron mobility of 1.0 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 8.0 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, and on/off current ratio of 106 for both p-type and n-type operation mode.115 These results indicate that PCBM is a potential candidate for applications in organic complementary-like technology based on a single solution-processable semiconductor. Like PCBM, another solution-processable PC70BM was also reported to exhibit ambipolar charge transport. The electron and hole mobility were measured to be 1.0 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.0 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.116 Bao and the coworkers also reported the increase in electron mobility of PCBM-based OFETs from 1.7 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 1.2 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 by eliminating the traps on SiO2 surface through coating a thermally cross-linked BCB layer.101 In addition, molecular n-doping of PCBM channel layer by n-DMBI was proved as an effective strategy for increasing the ambient stability of the n-type OFETs. Rossbauer and coworkers conducted a comparative study of the n-type doping effects in solution-processed fullerenes and fullerene derivatives. Their results indicate that molecular doping could increase the electron mobility and stability under electric bias of fullerenes based OFETs but slightly adversely impact those parameters in fullerene derivatives-based devices.117
The charge transport of OFETs, occurring within a thin (∼10 nm) layer in the vicinity of the semiconductor/dielectric interface, is characterized as two-dimensional. Distinctly, an organic electrochemical transistor (OECT), which uses electrolyte as the gating material, facilitates penetration of ions into the bulk of the channel, leading to bulk doping and three-dimensional charge transport (Fig. 9b). Owing to the high transconductance, OECT devices have been shown to be efficient transducers of biological activity, with applications ranging from neutral interfacing to biosensing.118,119 Beyond these applications of bioelectronics, OECTs are being developed for printed electronics and neuroinspired electronics.120 Due to the motion of both electronic and ionic charges in the channel, mobility extraction cannot be, in a straight forward manner, performed via the transconductance method as applied for field effect transistors (FETs). Therefore, device transconductance of an OECT is descibed by the slope of the Id–Vg transfer curve, gm = ∂Id/∂Vg:121  where μ is the electronic carrier mobility, and C* is the capacitance of the channel per unit volume. VT is the threshold voltage, and W, L, and d are the width, lenght, and thickness of the channel material, repectively. The product of C* and μ is thus a material-dependent parameter, which could be used to evaluate OECT channel material.
In most previous work, conjugated polymers were typically used as active layers for OECT devices. However, small-molecule-based semiconductors are also promising materials for OECT active layers because of their high electronic mobilities that can reach 20–40 cm2 V−1 s−1,122 one to two orders of magnitude larger than that of the best-performing conjugated polymers. Given that volumetric doping requires ion penetration into the free volume of the film, it is thus interesting to consider whether the same design and operating principles established for conjugated polymers will apply to more crystalline small-molecule semiconductor thin film. A few groups have replaced alkyl side chains in conjugated polymers with glycolated side chains,123–125 increasing C* and enabling faster switching speeds. Ginger and coworkers demonstrated that a fullerene derivative with glycolated side chains, 2-(2,3,4-tris(methoxtriglycol) phenyl) [60]fulleropyrrolidine (C60-TEG), is a promising material for n-type OECTs (Fig. 10).126 They showed that C60-TEG operates as an n-type OECT with a C* of 220 ± 50 F cm−3, a μ of 3 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, and a μC* of 7.0 ± 2.0 F cm−1 V−1 s−1. In the study, spectroelectrochemistry, electrochemical quartz crystal micro-balance, and atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements of the thickness changes upon doping were used to compare ion uptake and electrochemical doping of C60-TEG and PCBM (Fig. 11). It was demonstrated that many of the design rules for conjugated polymer-based OECTs are applicable to small-molecule-based OECTs, namely that the side-chain chemistry dictates how easily ions are transported through the active layer.
 Fig. 10  OECT device performance for C60-TEG. (a) Schematic of the OECT device. (b) Chemical structures of C60-TEG and PCBM. (c) Transfer curve for C60-TEG (W = 400 μm, L = 20 μm, d = 140 nm, VDS = 0.6 V). (d) Output curves for C60-TEG at a series of gate biases (Vg) with the same dimensions. Reprint with the permission from the ref. 126 (Copyright 2019 American Chemistry Society). 
 Fig. 11  Monitoring the current and change in mass with EQCM and electrochemically-induced thickness changes with AFM while performing cyclic voltammetry shows that C60-TEG swells with ions upon doping, while PCBM does not. (a) Applied bias (vs. Ag/AgCl), current, change in mass, and change in height as a function of time for C60-TEG for one doping/dedoping cycle (−0.3 V to 0.8 V to −0.3 V). The red and blue shaded regions show doping and dedoping, respectively. (b) Schematic showing the processes that occur at the doping onset, dedoping onset, and when the film is fully dedoped. No anions and only one cation is shown for clarity. (c) Monitoring the same parameters for C60-TEG (blue) and PCBM (red) for four doping/dedoping cycles, demonstrating reversibility. We note that the dedoping onset does not match the voltage minimum because of the kinetics associated with doping/dedoping the film. Reprint with the permission from the ref. 126 (Copyright 2019 American Chemistry Society). 
5. Fullerene derivatives for molecular electronics in large-area junctions
5.1 Introduction of molecular electronics
Molecular electronics (ME) refers to the research field where molecules serve as the building blocks for molecular electronic components. After the groundbreaking study on charge-transport through molecules by Mann and Kuhn in 1971,127 the concept of ME was formally proposed by Aviram and Ratner in 1974 in a theoretical paper that describes asymmetric charge transport through a single molecule,128 which means a single molecule or molecular ensemble could be fabricated into electronic devices, such as diodes, resistors, capacitors, etc., unlimiting possibilities for industrial technological development as the structural and electrical properties of organic molecules can be adjusted at will.
In principle, MEs aim to reveal the mechanisms of charge transport and ultimately control electricity flow through molecular junctions. Undoubtedly, the development of suitable molecules is the most important driver for MEs. Various molecules have been thoroughly studied as suitable molecular components. Among them, Fullerenes exhibit high affinity for coinage metals and large surface area available for contact, being attractive candidates for applications in ME both in single-molecule junctions (e.g., scanning tunneling microscopy/mechanical break-junctions) and large-area junctions comprising (self-assembled) molecular ensembles. As most of the fullerene-based single-molecule junctions employ pristine129–132 or endohedral fullerenes133,134 (both are insoluble in most solvents) as the active component, this section (review) mainly focuses on the large-area junctions formed with monolayers of solution-processable fullerene derivatives.
5.2 Recent progress in fullerene derivatives for large-area junctions

5.2.1 Assembled methods for fullerene-based monolayers. 
5.2.1.1 Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). 
SAMs are highly ordered molecular assemblies formed spontaneously via chemisorption on surfaces, which typically comprise two electrode-molecular ensemble interfaces, i.e., the bottom electrode-anchoring group interface and the terminal group-ambient interface. The anchoring group along with the tails are crucial to the robust junction formation. For fullerene derivatives, the anchoring group could be either fullerene cage or other functional groups. Until now, three main methods have successfully been developed as follows:135
(1) Direct adsorption method. Due to the high affinity for coinage metals, the fullerene cage can be employed as anchoring group directly via fulleroid–metal interaction for chemisorption.136–140 Additionally, the direct absorption can be also achieved via functionalization of fullerenes with other chemical anchoring groups such as thiol,141–146 disulfide,147 pyridine,148,149 and phenanthroline.150 To mitigate assembly complications of functionalized fullerene derivatives on metal electrodes mainly originated from the formation of head-to-tail assemblies, stepwise approaches as follows are usually needed.
(2) Exchange method. The functionalized fullerene molecules can be exchange into substrates pre-passivated with a SAM (e.g. an alkylthiol SAM) in a solution containing the fullerene derivatives with the same anchoring group (e.g. thiol), till fullerene head groups reach maximum packing density.151 The timescale is usually 24 h for thiolates–thiolates exchange.152–154 The exchange method can help to preserve the packing structure of pristine monolayer, ensuring that all the fullerene cages sit above the alkane monolayer, since fullerene cages are never exposed to bare electrode surfaces.
(3) Post-modification method. Besides the exchange method, fullerene cages could be introduced onto a SAM pre-adsorbed on a substrate as well. To this end, the SAM needs to bear a terminal functionality that can undergo either a bond-forming reaction with pristine fullerene (e.g. amine155–157 and azido158 groups), or a non-covalently interacting with fullerene derivatives (e.g. host–guest interaction).159,160
5.2.1.2 Langmuir Blodgett monolayers (LBMs). 
Besides, fullerene-based monolayers could be formed as well using LBM or similar film techniques followed by evaporating the top metal electrode, where the monolayers are physisorbed, unlike the chemisorption in the above three methods, between the electrodes.161–163


5.2.2 Fullerene-based assembled monolayers for molecular diodes. 
Diodes, also known as rectifiers, conduct current only in one direction under forward bias condition. In molecular diodes, high current rectification ratios (RRs), defined as RR = |I(+V)/I(−V)| or |J(+V)/J(−V)| (I is the current, J is the current-density, and V is the external voltage bias), are desired, which could be adjusted by tailoring the chemical and supramolecular structure of the diode molecules, and/or altering the contacts.
Fullerenes with unique electronic properties, large volume, spherical symmetry and high affinity for noble metals are promising candidates in molecular diodes. The first example of fullerene monolayers using their electron accepting property was reported by Metzger and coworkers in 2003.161 Based on the Aviram–Ratner proposal of a unimolecular electrical rectifier, the diode molecule should comprise an electron donor moiety (D) and an electron acceptor moiety (A) connected through an insulating saturated “σ” bridge128,164 or a π bridge,165–167 they employed a D–π–A molecule dimethyanilinoazirino[60]fullerene 1 (Fig. 12) as the diode molecule and observed asymmetric I/V characteristics across a LBM of this fullerene derivative sandwiched between two gold electrodes. Due to the absence of an insulating aliphatic chain in the LBM, the current was up to 10−5 A and no reverse rectification curves were observed. Furthermore, the RR at 1.5 V could reach a record of 20000. At low potentials from −1.5 to 0.6 V, the sigmoid and mildly asymmetric I/V curve fitted excellently to the equation for elastic charge transport, confirming the presence of a tunneling current occurring through the fullerene layer. Similarly, LB and Langmuir–Schaefer monolayers of some other [60]fullerene conjugates such as dyads 2 and 3 (Fig. 12) were reported later, and both displayed similar rectifying behavior with 1. For dyad 2, the authors firstly verified that interaction with the molecular orbitals, i.e., the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the electron donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the electron acceptor end, were involved in the mechanism of rectification. Afterwards, the role of molecular orbitals in the molecular rectification has been thoroughly investigated.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of a LBM of 1 sandwiched between two gold substrates, and chemical structures of other fullerene-based dyads 2 and 3 used as molecular rectifiers. 
In recent years, Nijhuis and Whitesides have demonstrated that the rectification is mediated by the highest-occupied π-state (HOPS, translated from HOMO) of the Fc (ferrocene or biferrocene) or the lowest-unoccupied π-state (LUPS, translated from the LUMO) of bipyridine (Bp) and naphthoquinone (Nq) moieties in AgTS/S(CH2)11Bp//Ga2O3/EGaIn or AgTS/S(CH2)11Bp//Ga2O3/EGaIn junctions, respectively, where EGaIn is eutectic GaIn alloy. In both cases, the RR values are extremely sensitive to the volume and packing of the π-system. To address this challenge, we took advantage of the large volume and spherical symmetry of C60 and the mixed SAM prepared via the exchange method to report a robust mixed SAM of n-dodecanethiolate (SC10) and n-undecanethiolate terminated with fullerene (FSC11) for high RRs (the second-highest among the reported molecular rectifiers till then).151 This preparation method could prevent phase segregation and preserve the SAM packing, and thus mitigate the above-mentioned sensitivity, while the large volume of C60 would benefit the high RRs (a RR value of 617 was obtained from a ‘hero junction’ at 0.95 V). We found the RR could be controlled by the amount of fullerene head groups that sit above the alkane monolayer. As shown in Fig. 13, RR increases gradually with the exchange time and saturated after 24 h when the packing density of fullerene head groups is maximum. The rectification in FSC11 is originated from the different mechanisms of charge transport at forward and reverse bias: only tunneling at negative V and tunneling plus hopping (LUPS of fullerene hops to EGaIn) at positive V. The difference of the tunneling barrier width at ±V therefore accounts for the rectification. Moreover, the rectifying behavior is consistent in conductive probe AFM junctions (in which ∼70 molecules are contacted by a Au-coated tip) and large-area junctions (in which the SAMs are contacted by a conical EGaIn electrode).
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of a AgTS/FSC11//Ga2O3/EGaIn junction prepared by incubating a SAM of SC10 on AgTS in a solution of FSC11. (b) Plots of log|J| (the units of J are A cm−2) versus V for SC10 SAMs on AgTS before and after incubation with FSC11. (c) A plot of log|R| versus the exchange time for which SC10 SAMs were exposed to solutions of FSC11. (d) A schematic showing the mechanism of rectification. The LUPS of fullerene is pushed out of or brought into resonance with the Ag electrode at negative V and positive V, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 150@Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
As aforementioned, the exchange method is needed to mitigate assembly complications of functionalized fullerene derivatives on coinage metal electrode due to high affinity of fullerene for noble metals. On the other hand, this character provides an excellent chance to attain good junction stability and robustness associated with the anchoring site, as the fragility and the spontaneous oxidation has been commonly observed in chemisorption via thiol–metal bond for ME.140,168 In 2020, Chiechi and coauthors reported the formation of thiol-free self-assembled bilayers of glycol-ether-functionalized fullerene PTEG-1 (SAB of PTEG-1), where fullerene cages located at both the substrate via fulleroid–gold interactions and ambient interface via dipole–dipole interactions between the glycol ether (GE) chains as depicted in Fig. 14a.140 Interestingly, the topmost layer of PTEG-1 could undergo in-place exchange with arbitrary GE moieties to form PTEG-1 mixed GESAMs (Fig. 14b), which means any molecule bearing a glycol ether tail can form robust SAMs for ME application. For example, various robust mixed SAMs with different top alkane layers (AlkylGE) could be successfully fabricated. Compared to the thiolate SAMs, the as-obtained GESAMs exhibit excellent stability to ambient conditions for several weeks (Fig. 14c and d), while almost all junctions comprising thiolate-SAMs yielded short circuits after one day in ambient conditions due to the spontaneous oxidation of thiolates. Furthermore, molecular rectification could be observed of the mixed SAMs with different top layers such as ferrocene or fullerene (i.e. SAB of PTEG-1), the rectification of which is totally mediated by the frontier molecular orbitals of the molecules in the top layer (i.e. the bottom PTEG-1 layer does not have any disturbing effect).169 GESAMs reported there create an excellent opportunity to extract useful functionality from robust/static devices and represent a significant step forward in the applications of ME.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the transition from a SAM into a SAB of PTEG-1. (b) Schematic of the exchange process in which SABs of PTEG-1 are converted to GESAMs of alkylGEs. (c) Plots of log|J| determined at ±0.5 V as a function of number of days, and (d) log|J| vs. potential measured at days 1 and 28 in AuTS/PTEG-1//alkylGEs//EGaIn junctions. All samples were kept under ambient conditions (adapted with permission from ref. 140@Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group). 


5.2.3 Fullerene-based monolayers for molecular transistors. 
As a fundamental element of integrated circuits, transistors can control the flow of electricity between the source and drain electrodes by customizing the voltage that applied at the gate electrode. Molecular transistors mean individual molecules act as the active electronic component in the transistors. Different from other MEs in which molecules are anchored to a metal electrode, molecular transistors usually need silicon oxide (SiO2) as the substrate. Although a couple of studies for the fullerene SAMs on SiO2 have been reported,158,170–174 their investigations on the molecular transistors are still rare. In 2011, Itoh and co-workers demonstrated the formation of uniform monolayers of C60 or C60–ferrocene conjugated molecule 4 and 5 anchored with carboxylic acids onto an amino-terminated SiO2 surface (Fig. 15).175 Their effects on n-type and p-type organic field-effect transistor (OFET) made from C60 were then investigated. The authors found that due to the donor (ferrocene)–acceptor (C60) interactions in the conjugated molecule, the carrier generation in n-type FET is more efficient in the presence of ferrocene than in its absence, therefore the mobility of the device with a monolayer of 5 was twice as high as with the monolayer of 4. While in p-type OFET, a lowering of the carrier mobility for 5 based device was observed due to the similar reason. Since their specialty in configuration, the construction and characterization of such molecular transistors needs much more effort either in single-molecule junctions or large-area junctions.175,176
 Fig. 15  (The top panel) Chemical structures of fullerene derivatives 4 and 5 functionalized with five carboxylic acids, and (the bottom panel) schematic illustration of an OFET fabricated for C60 transistors. Fc: ferrocene (adapted with permission from ref. 175@Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). 

6. Conclusion and outlook
Fullerene derivatives are best known as the acceptor materials in OPV field. After 2015, their role was mostly replaced by non-fullerene organic acceptors as the latter offer much better power conversion efficiency. However, fullerene derivatives were successfully employed in other emerging research directions such as perovskite solar cells, organic thermoelectrics, organic field-effect/electrochemical transistors, and large-area molecular electronics in the past many years. In this review, we overview the significant progress achieved by fullerene derivatives in these emerging fields, and different requirements of molecular design of fullerene derivatives were discussed in each section. In most cases, pristine fullerene derivatives were used as the ETL, cathode buffer layer or additives into perovskite matrix for perovskite solar cells, and channel layer in organic field-effect transistors. It seems the LUMO level, charge mobility, packing order and film morphology play major roles in these scenarios. Sometimes, thick fullerene derivative ETLs call for molecular n-doping to reduce the device resistance. For organic thermoelectrics, fullerene derivatives should possess a relatively large polarity to enable miscible blending with polar dopant molecules for increasing doping efficiency and thermoelectric performance. A similar insight into molecular design was noticed for organic electrochemical transistors as they require penetration of extrinsic ionic species into the fullerene derivative channel layer to stabilize the injected charge carriers. As for large-area molecular electronics, fullerene derivatives should be able to form a closely-packed monolayer on metallic substrates. The molecular orbitals of fullerene derivatives set by the chemical structure determine the rectification of SAM-based diodes. Importantly, the excellent affinity of buckyball with coinage metals releases the requirement of thiol-group, which is usually necessary for other molecules based diodes.
Although fullerene derivatives lose the market in OPV, they are still promising candidates for other emerging research directions. The made progress in the past years will certainly encourage more investigation of fullerene derivatives. The obtained insights of molecular design for these new topics discussed in this review, which are different to those achieved in OPV field, will benefit to the future research. Compared to other organic semiconductors such as conjugated polymer or non-fullerene small molecule, fullerene derivatives have higher dielectric constants, which are favorable for perovskite solar cells and organic thermoelectrics. If we could better leverage this property together with suitable energy level, good charge mobility and packing order, it is believed that the fullerene derivatives will set new records in these emerging research directions.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict to declare.
Acknowledgements
Li Qiu acknowledges the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51962036). We would like to thank Dr Xinkai Qiu for valuable discussions on the Section 5 (Fullerene derivatives for molecular electronics in large-area junctions).
References
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O’Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Reed and R. D. Bolskar, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1075–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Guldi, P. Neta and K.-D. Asmus, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4617–4621 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori and Y. Sakata, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 537–546 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frankevich, Y. Maruyama and H. Ogata, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 214, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, J. Zou, W.-C. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14976–14981 RSC .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hummelen, B. W. Knight, F. LePeq, F. Wudl, J. Yao and C. L. Wilkins, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5532 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, Y. He and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4355–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-D. Chen, C. Cui, Y.-Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q.-D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K.-Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, R. Xia, H. L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Science, 2018, 361, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, B. Adilbekova, Y. Firdaus, E. Yengel, H. Faber, M. Sajjad, X. Zheng, E. Yarali, A. Seitkhan, O. M. Bakr, A. El-Labban, U. Schwingenschlögl, V. Tung, I. McCulloch, F. Laquai and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 545–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jia, M. Chen and S. Yang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2256–2282 RSC .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. Il Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL, http://https//www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html (accessed 17 March 2021).
J. Y. Jeng, Y. F. Chiang, M. H. Lee, S. R. Peng, T. F. Guo, P. Chen and T. C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, T. Salim, N. Mathews, M. Duchamp, C. Boothroyd, G. Xing, T. C. Sum and Y. M. Lam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 399–407 RSC .
C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng and C.-G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15897–15903 RSC .
L. Gil-Escrig, C. Momblona, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3667–3672 RSC .
Q. Xue, Y. Bai, M. Liu, R. Xia, Z. Hu, Z. Chen, X.-F. Jiang, F. Huang, S. Yang, Y. Matsuo, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602333 CrossRef .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang and S. H. Chang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4077–4085 RSC .
Y. Lin, B. Chen, F. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, Y. Shao, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, C. Wang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700607 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shao, M. Abdu-Aguye, L. Qiu, L.-H. Lai, J. Liu, S. Adjokatse, F. Jahani, M. E. Kamminga, G. H. ten Brink, T. T. M. Palstra, B. J. Kooi, J. C. Hummelen and M. Antonietta Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2444–2452 RSC .
P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
S.-M. Dai, L.-L. Deng, M.-L. Zhang, W.-Y. Chen, P. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Li, Z. Tan, S.-Y. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2017, 468, 146–151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15001 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tian, K. Kochiss, E. Castro, G. Betancourt-Solis, H. Han and L. Echegoyen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7326–7332 RSC .
C. Tian, E. Castro, T. Wang, G. Betancourt-Solis, G. Rodriguez and L. Echegoyen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31426–31432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, T. Zhang, C. Hu, Y. Yang, X. Zheng and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, L. Shen, D. Wang, W. Wei and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Seo, S. Park, Y. Chan Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon and S. Il Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2642 RSC .
J. You, Y. (Michael) Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, F. Lin and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600027 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Jiao, M. Lei, Y. Zhou, B. Song and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9278–9284 RSC .
H. Azimi, T. Ameri, H. Zhang, Y. Hou, C. O. R. Quiroz, J. Min, M. Hu, Z.-G. Zhang, T. Przybilla, G. J. Matt, E. Spiecker, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401692 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Bag, L. A. Renna, Z. A. Page, P. Kim, T. Emrick, D. Venkataraman and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501606 CrossRef .
J. Xie, X. Yu, X. Sun, J. Huang, Y. Zhang, M. Lei, K. Huang, D. Xu, Z. Tang, C. Cui and D. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan and C. Zhu, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 214–222 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C.-Z. Li, R. H. Friend, A. K.-Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tao, S. Neutzner, L. Colella, S. Marras, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. Gandini, M. De Bastiani, G. Pace, L. Manna, M. Caironi, C. Bertarelli and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2365–2370 RSC .
M. Shahiduzzaman, K. Yamamoto, Y. Furumoto, T. Kuwabara, K. Takahashi and T. Taima, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 1735–1737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, W. Li, X. Zhang, Q. Xu, Q. Liu, C. Li and Z. Bo, Small, 2016, 12, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jäger, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qin, J. Ma, W. Ke, P. Qin, H. Lei, H. Tao, X. Zheng, L. Xiong, Q. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Lu, G. Yang and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8460–8466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, D. Zhao, C. Xiao, C. Wang, A. J. Cimaroli, C. R. Grice, M. Yang, Z. Li, C.-S. Jiang, M. Al-Jassim, K. Zhu, M. G. Kanatzidis, G. Fang and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14276–14283 RSC .
X. Wang, L.-L. Deng, L.-Y. Wang, S.-M. Dai, Z. Xing, X.-X. Zhan, X.-Z. Lu, S.-Y. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1706–1712 RSC .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Nat.
Photonics, 2016, 10, 196–200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. Jia, Y. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Zhang, T. Pang, Y. Zhu and S. Luan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15638–15643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ran, Y. Chen, W. Gao, M. Wang and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8566–8572 RSC .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Yue, M. Cai, F. Xie, E. Bi, A. Islam and L. Han, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16148 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sandoval-Torrientes, J. Pascual, I. García-Benito, S. Collavini, I. Kosta, R. Tena-Zaera, N. Martín and J. L. Delgado, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2023–2029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Liu, P. Du, J. Zheng and X. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1245–1255 RSC .
C. Liu, W. Li, H. Li, C. Zhang, J. Fan and Y. Mai, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13967–13975 RSC .
J. Pascual, I. Kosta, T. Tuyen Ngo, A. Chuvilin, G. Cabanero, H. J. Grande, E. M. Barea, I. Mora-Seró, J. L. Delgado and R. Tena-Zaera, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2679–2685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Luo, N. Pellet, C. Yi, X. Li, X. Zhao, T. J. S. Dennis, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606806 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, F. Lin, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, T. Zhao, P.-W. Liang, Z. Zhu, Y. Sun and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 417–425 CrossRef CAS .
M. Culebras, C. Gómez and A. Cantarero, Materials, 2014, 7, 6701–6732 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, H.-L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 549–565 CrossRef CAS .
T. O. Poehler and H. E. Katz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8110 RSC .
B. T. McGrail, A. Sehirlioglu and E. Pentzer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1710–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Bell, Science, 2008, 321, 1457–1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Sootsman, D. Y. Chung and M. G. Kanatzidis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8616–8639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kroon, D. A. Mengistie, D. Kiefer, J. Hynynen, J. D. Ryan, L. Yu and C. Müller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6147–6164 RSC .
O. Bubnova, Z. U. Khan, A. Malti, S. Braun, M. Fahlman, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-H. Kim, L. Shao, K. Zhang and K. P. Pipe, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 719–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, P. Li, D. Du and J. Ouyang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602116 CrossRef .
K. Shi, F. Zhang, C.-A. Di, T.-W. Yan, Y. Zou, X. Zhou, D. Zhu, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 2–5 Search PubMed .
B. Russ, M. J. Robb, F. G. Brunetti, P. L. Miller, E. E. Perry, S. N. Patel, V. Ho, W. B. Chang, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc, C. J. Hawker and R. A. Segalman, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3473–3477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Schlitz, F. G. Brunetti, A. M. Glaudell, P. L. Miller, M. a. Brady, C. J. Takacs, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2825–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mai, R. a Schlitz, G. M. Su, D. Spitzer, X. Wang, S. L. Fronk, D. G. Cahill, M. L. Chabinyc and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 2–5 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, H. Sun, U. Ail, M. Vagin, P. O. Å. Persson, J. W. Andreasen, W. Thiel, M. Berggren, X. Crispin, D. Fazzi and S. Fabiano, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10764–10771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, B. C.-K. Tee, J. J. Cha, Y. Cui, J. W. Chung, S. Y. Lee and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2760–2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Bubnova, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16456–16459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Menke, D. Ray, H. Kleemann, K. Leo and M. Riede, Phys. Status Solidi, 2015, 252, 1877–1883 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bubnova, Z. U. Khan, A. Malti, S. Braun, M. Fahlman, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Pernstich, B. Rössner and B. Batlogg, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 321–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Haddon, A. F. Hebard, M. J. Rosseinsky, D. W. Murphy, S. J. Duclos, K. B. Lyons, B. Miller, J. M. Rosamilia, R. M. Fleming, A. R. Kortan, S. H. Glarum, A. V. Makhija, A. J. Muller, R. H. Eick, S. M. Zahurak, R. Tycko, G. Dabbagh and F. A. Thiel, Nature, 1991, 350, 320–322 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inabe, H. Ogata, Y. Maruyama, Y. Achiba, S. Suzuki, K. Kikuchi and I. Ikemoto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 69, 3797–3799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sumino, K. Harada, M. Ikeda, S. Tanaka, K. Miyazaki and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 093308 CrossRef .
T. Menke, D. Ray, J. Meiss, K. Leo and M. Riede, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 093304 CrossRef .
P. Wei, T. Menke, B. D. Naab, K. Leo, M. Riede and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3999–4002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wei, J. H. Oh, G. Dong and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8852–8853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, F. Ding, X. Li and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2457–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, F. Ding, H.-L. Yip, P.-W. Liang, X. Li and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4425–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Weber, C. Bradley and M. C. Lonergan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 303–307 RSC .
J. Liu, L. Qiu, G. Portale, M. Koopmans, G. ten Brink, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701641 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Liu, R. Alessandri, X. Qiu, M. Koopmans, R. W. A. Havenith, S. J. Marrink, R. C. Chiechi, L. J. Anton Koster and J. C. Hummelen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21234–21241 RSC .
J. Liu, L. Qiu, G. Portale, S. Torabi, M. C. A. Stuart, X. Qiu, M. Koopmans, R. C. Chiechi, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. Anton Koster, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. P. Garman, J. Dong, B. van der Zee, L. Qiu, G. Portale, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6664–6671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, B. van der Zee, R. Alessandri, S. Sami, J. Dong, M. I. Nugraha, A. J. Barker, S. Rousseva, L. Qiu, X. Qiu, N. Klasen, R. C. Chiechi, D. Baran, M. Caironi, T. D. Anthopoulos, G. Portale, R. W. A. Havenith, S. J. Marrink, J. C. Hummelen and L. J. A. Koster, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kobayashi, T. Takenobu, S. Mori, A. Fujiwara and Y. Iwasa, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2003, 4, 371 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Anthopoulos, B. Singh, N. Marjanovic, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Montaigne Ramil, H. Sitter, M. Cölle and D. M. De Leeuw, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 213504 CrossRef .
H. Li, B. C.-K. Tee, J. J. Cha, Y. Cui, J. W. Chung, S. Y. Lee and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2760–2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Waldauf, P. Schilinsky, M. Perisutti, J. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2084–2088 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. D. Anthopoulos, C. Tanase, S. Setayesh, E. J. Meijer, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. De Leeuw, Adv. Mater., 2004, 327, 2174–2179 CrossRef .
T. D. Anthopoulos, D. M. De Leeuw, E. Cantatore, P. Van Hof, J. Alma and J. C. Hummelen, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 054503 CrossRef .
S. Rossbauer, C. Müller and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7116–7124 CAS .
D. Khodagholy, T. Doublet, P. Quilichini, M. Gurfinkel, P. Leleux, A. Ghestem, E. Ismailova, T. Hervé, S. Sanaur, C. Bernard and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1575 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lin, F. Yan, J. Yu, H. L. W. Chan and M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3655–3660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Van De Burgt, A. Melianas, S. T. Keene, G. Malliaras and A. Salleo, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 386–397 CrossRef .
S. M. Kim, C. H. Kim, Y. Kim, N. Kim, W. J. Lee, E. H. Lee, D. Kim, S. Park, K. Lee, J. Rivnay and M. H. Yoon, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3858 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Takeya, M. Yamagishi, Y. Tominari, R. Hirahara, Y. Nakazawa, T. Nishikawa, T. Kawase, T. Shimoda and S. Ogawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 102120 CrossRef .
A. Savva, R. Hallani, C. Cendra, J. Surgailis, T. C. Hidalgo, S. Wustoni, R. Sheelamanthula, X. Chen, M. Kirkus, A. Giovannitti, A. Salleo, I. McCulloch and S. Inal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907657 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Maria, B. D. Paulsen, A. Savva, D. Ohayon, R. Wu, R. Hallani, A. Basu, W. Du, T. D. Anthopoulos, S. Inal, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch and A. Giovannitti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008718 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wijeratne, U. Ail, R. Brooke, M. Vagin, X. Liu, M. Fahlman and X. Crispin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 11899–11904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Bischak, L. Q. Flagg, K. Yan, C. Z. Li and D. S. Ginger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28138–28144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mann and H. Kuhn, J. Appl. Phys., 1971, 42, 4398–4405 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aviram and M. A. Ratner, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 29, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
C. Evangeli, K. Gillemot, E. Leary, M. T. González, G. Rubio-Bollinger, C. J. Lambert and N. Agraït, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2141–2145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Klöckner, R. Siebler, J. C. Cuevas and F. Pauly, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 245404 CrossRef .
Z. Tan, D. Zhang, H.-R. Tian, Q. Wu, S. Hou, J. Pi, H. Sadeghi, Z. Tang, Y. Yang, J. Liu, Y.-Z. Tan, Z.-B. Chen, J. Shi, Z. Xiao, C. Lambert, S.-Y. Xie and W. Hong, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1748 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nasri, A. Boubaker, B. Hafsi, W. Khaldi and A. Kalboussi, IEEE Sens. J., 2018, 18, 248–254 CAS .
N. Almutlaq, Q. Al-Galiby, S. Bailey and C. J. Lambert, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13597–13602 RSC .
L. Rincón-García, A. K. Ismael, C. Evangeli, I. Grace, G. Rubio-Bollinger, K. Porfyrakis, N. Agraït and C. J. Lambert, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 289–293 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bonifazi, O. Enger and F. Diederich, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 390–414 RSC .
S. Modesti, S. Cerasari and P. Rudolf, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 2469–2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pedio, K. Hevesi, N. Zema, M. Capozi, P. Perfetti, R. Gouttebaron, J. J. Pireaux, R. Caudano and P. Rudolf, Surf. Sci., 1999, 437, 249–260 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sogo, Y. Sakamoto, M. Aoki, S. Masuda, S. Yanagisawa and Y. Morikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3504–3506 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Shi, M. A. Van Hove and R.-Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 7341–7355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, V. Ivasyshyn, L. Qiu, M. Enache, J. Dong, S. Rousseva, G. Portale, M. Stöhr, J. C. Hummelen and R. C. Chiechi, Nat. Mater., 2020, 1–8 CAS .
X. Shi, W. B. Caldwell, K. Chen and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 11598–11599 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fibbioli, K. Bandyopadhyay, S.-G. Liu, L. Echegoyen, O. Enger, F. Diederich, D. Gingery, P. Bühlmann, H. Persson, U. W. Suter and E. Pretsch, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1721–1729 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gu, J. K. Whitesell and M. A. Fox, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 4075–4080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kang, H. Ma, M.-S. Kang, K.-S. Kim, A. K. Y. Jen, M. H. Zareie and M. Sarikaya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1512–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Shon, K. F. Kelly, N. J. Halas and T. R. Lee, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 5329–5332 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Kim, M.-S. Kang, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5058–5062 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. Hoang, L. M. Rogers and F. D’Souza, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, B. Xu, Y. Li, C. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Shi, H. Fang, S. Xiao and D. Zhu, New J. Chem., 2001, 25, 1191–1194 RSC .
H. Fang, C. Du, S. Qu, Y. Li, Y. Song, H. Li, H. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 364, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
O. Domínguez, L. Echegoyen, F. Cunha and N. Tao, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 821–824 CrossRef .
L. Qiu, Y. Zhang, T. L. Krijger, X. Qiu, P. van’t Hof, J. C. Hummelen and R. C. Chiechi, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2365–2372 RSC .
S. Kumar, J. T. van Herpt, R. Y. N. Gengler, B. L. Feringa, P. Rudolf and R. C. Chiechi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12519–12526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Saavedra, C. M. Barbu, A. A. Dameron, T. J. Mullen, V. H. Crespi and P. S. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10741–10746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Patole, C. J. Baddeley, D. O’Hagan and N. V. Richardson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13997–14000 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Caldwell, K. Chen, C. A. Mirkin and S. J. Babinec, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 1945–1947 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, W. B. Caldwell and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 1193–1194 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Sahoo and A. Patnaik, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 268, 43–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Tsukruk, L. M. Lander and W. J. Brittain, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 996–999 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arias, L. A. Godínez, S. R. Wilson, A. E. Kaifer and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6086–6087 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, A. Palkar, A. Fragoso, P. Prados, J. de Mendoza and L. Echegoyen, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2063–2068 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Metzger, J. W. Baldwin, W. J. Shumate, I. R. Peterson, P. Mani, G. J. Mankey, T. Morris, G. Szulczewski, S. Bosi, M. Prato, A. Comito and Y. Rubin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1021–1027 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Gayathri and A. Patnaik, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1977–1979 RSC .
A. Honciuc, A. Jaiswal, A. Gong, K. Ashworth, C. W. Spangler, I. R. Peterson, L. R. Dalton and R. M. Metzger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 857–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Metzger and C. A. Panetta, New J. Chem., 1991, 15, 209–221 CAS .
R. M. Metzger, B. Chen, U. Höpfner, M. V. Lakshmikantham, D. Vuillaume, T. Kawai, X. Wu, H. Tachibana, T. V. Hughes, H. Sakurai, J. W. Baldwin, C. Hosch, M. P. Cava, L. Brehmer and G. J. Ashwell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 10455–10466 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Metzger, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 950–957 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Baldwin, B. Chen, S. C. Street, V. V. Konovalov, H. Sakurai, T. V. Hughes, C. S. Simpson, M. V. Lakshmikantham, M. P. Cava, L. D. Kispert and R. M. Metzger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4269–4277 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Martin, D. Ding, J. K. Sørensen, T. Bjørnholm, J. M. van Ruitenbeek and H. S. J. van der Zant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13198–13199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qiu, S. Rousseva, G. Ye, J. C. Hummelen and R. C. Chiechi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Chupa, S. Xu, R. F. Fischetti, R. M. Strongin, J. P. McCauley, A. B. Smith, J. K. Blasie, L. J. Peticolas and J. C. Bean, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 4383–4384 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Tsukruk, M. P. Everson, L. M. Lander and W. J. Brittain, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 3905–3911 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gulino, S. Bazzano, G. G. Condorelli, S. Giuffrida, P. Mineo, C. Satriano, E. Scamporrino, G. Ventimiglia, D. Vitalini and I. Fragalà, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1079–1084 CrossRef CAS .
B. Park, P. Paoprasert, I. In, J. Zwickey, P. E. Colavita, R. J. Hamers, P. Gopalan and P. G. Evans, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4353–4357 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guérin, S. Lenfant, S. Godey and D. Vuillaume, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2680–2690 RSC .
Y. Itoh, B. Kim, R. I. Gearba, N. J. Tremblay, R. Pindak, Y. Matsuo, E. Nakamura and C. Nuckolls, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 970–975 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Lau, H. Sadeghi, G. Rogers, S. Sangtarash, P. Dallas, K. Porfyrakis, J. Warner, C. J. Lambert, G. A. D. Briggs and J. A. Mol, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 170–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† To honour Prof. Kees Hummelen's retirement.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Jian Liu
	Jian Liu received his BS in Chemistry from Huazhong University of Technology in 2008. He obtained his PhD degree in Polymer Physcics and Chemistry from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science in 2013. After one-year stay in Prof. Wallace Choy's group in Hongkong University as a research associate, he joined Prof. L. Jan Anton Koster's group in University of Groningen as a postdoc in 2015. In 2020, he joined Prof. Christian Müller's group in Chalmers University of Technology as a posdoc for one year. Now he has gone back to China to join a new position as a professor. His research interests involve organic thermoelectrics, organic/perovskite photovoltaics, and new-concept hydrogen detectors.

Li Qiu
	Li Qiu received his BS in Biotechnology from Lanzhou University in 2005. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. After conducting postdoctoral research in the groups of J. C. (Kees) Hummelen (University of Groningen, NL), and Wei Zhang (University of Colorado, Boulder, USA) during 2014–2018, he joined the faculty at Yunnan university where he is currently Associate Professor. His research interests involve functional materials including fullerene derivatives and organic porous materials for energy and environmental applications.

Shuyan Shao
	Shuyan Shao received her BS degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering in 2006 from Hebei University in China. In 2011, she received her PhD degree at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Science, China. In July of the same year, she joined Linköping University as a postdoctoral researcher. From 2014 to 2020, she worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in University of Groningen for about six years. Since December 2020, she has been an associate professor in Tianjin University. Her research interests include perovskite solar cells, field effect transistors and memristors.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of fullerene and fullerene derivatives discussed in this review.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of three type of device architecture of perovskite solar cells: (a) mesoporous n–i–p structure, (b) planar n–i–p structure, and (c) planar p–i–n structure.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic device structure of planar p–i–n PSCs with C60 as ETL and (b) the corresponding scheme of the energy level alignment of each layer in the PSCs; (c) device structure of planar p–i–n PSCs with PCBM or ICBA as ETL and C60/BCP as the cathode buffer layer, and (d) the corresponding energy level alignment. Reprinted with permission from the ref. 29 (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH) and the ref. 35 (Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the proposed mechanism for the light soaking phenomenon, (b) VOCs measured after light soaking for the devices using PCBM and PTEG-1 as EELs at different temperatures, (c) J–V characteristics under illumination for the devices using PTEG-1 as EELs, (d) device structure of the perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells and schematic illustration for the crosslinking of C60-SAM with silane-coupling agent (ET, electron transfer), (e) images of the devices based on 10D-CLCS ETLs after exposure to water droplet for 4 min, and (f) Photovoltaic PCE (black curves) and normalized PCE (red curves) of the typical perovskite devices with PCBM and 10D-CLCS ETLs in an ambient environment without encapsulation as a function of storage time. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and from ref. 44 with permission from the springer nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD patterns of PbI2 on glass/FTO/TiO2 and glass/FTO/TiOx/60-PCBM before and after the deposition. The inset shows the enlarged CH3NH3PbI3 XRD pattern between 251 and 301 on two substrates, (b) SEM top-view of CH3NH3PbI3 grown on TiO2/FTO/glass (left) and 60-PCBM/TiOx/FTO/glass (right). (c) The short-circuit current density transients for photovoltaic devices FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au and FTO/TiOX/PCBM/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au during illumination, (d) schematic diagram of the α-bis-PCBM or PCBM-containing perovskite process, and (e) the stability of corresponding perovskite solar cells under continuous full-sun illumination and maximum power point tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and Reprinted with permission from the ref. 74 (Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device architecture of thermoelectric generator, (b) the schematic process of molecular n-doping by thermal evaporation, and (c) molecular doping by a solution process.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Electron transfer between n-type organic semiconductors and anion based salts, (b) the electrical conductivities of doped PCBM by different anion salts, (c) the synthetic routine of o-Me-DMBI-I, and (d) the plot of electrical conductivity as a function of doping concentration for doped PCBM by o-Me-DMBI-I. Reprinted with permission from the ref. 103 (Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH) and from the ref. 101 (Copyright 2010 American Chemistry Society)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) 2D-GIWAXS patterns of PTEG-2 films before and after thermal annealing, (b) representative snapshot of PTEG-2 molecular packing, as atomistically resolved by molecular dynamics simulations; the unit cell is highlighted in blue, and (c) electrical conductivity and figure of merit ZT as a function of working temperature. Reprinted with permission from the ref. 109 (copyright 2020 Springer Nature)	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic device architecture of (a) organic field-effect transistors and (b) organic electrochemical transistors.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 		 

 	Fig. 10  OECT device performance for C60-TEG. (a) Schematic of the OECT device. (b) Chemical structures of C60-TEG and PCBM. (c) Transfer curve for C60-TEG (W = 400 μm, L = 20 μm, d = 140 nm, VDS = 0.6 V). (d) Output curves for C60-TEG at a series of gate biases (Vg) with the same dimensions. Reprint with the permission from the ref. 126 (Copyright 2019 American Chemistry Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  Monitoring the current and change in mass with EQCM and electrochemically-induced thickness changes with AFM while performing cyclic voltammetry shows that C60-TEG swells with ions upon doping, while PCBM does not. (a) Applied bias (vs. Ag/AgCl), current, change in mass, and change in height as a function of time for C60-TEG for one doping/dedoping cycle (−0.3 V to 0.8 V to −0.3 V). The red and blue shaded regions show doping and dedoping, respectively. (b) Schematic showing the processes that occur at the doping onset, dedoping onset, and when the film is fully dedoped. No anions and only one cation is shown for clarity. (c) Monitoring the same parameters for C60-TEG (blue) and PCBM (red) for four doping/dedoping cycles, demonstrating reversibility. We note that the dedoping onset does not match the voltage minimum because of the kinetics associated with doping/dedoping the film. Reprint with the permission from the ref. 126 (Copyright 2019 American Chemistry Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of a LBM of 1 sandwiched between two gold substrates, and chemical structures of other fullerene-based dyads 2 and 3 used as molecular rectifiers.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of a AgTS/FSC11//Ga2O3/EGaIn junction prepared by incubating a SAM of SC10 on AgTS in a solution of FSC11. (b) Plots of log|J| (the units of J are A cm−2) versus V for SC10 SAMs on AgTS before and after incubation with FSC11. (c) A plot of log|R| versus the exchange time for which SC10 SAMs were exposed to solutions of FSC11. (d) A schematic showing the mechanism of rectification. The LUPS of fullerene is pushed out of or brought into resonance with the Ag electrode at negative V and positive V, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 150@Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the transition from a SAM into a SAB of PTEG-1. (b) Schematic of the exchange process in which SABs of PTEG-1 are converted to GESAMs of alkylGEs. (c) Plots of log|J| determined at ±0.5 V as a function of number of days, and (d) log|J| vs. potential measured at days 1 and 28 in AuTS/PTEG-1//alkylGEs//EGaIn junctions. All samples were kept under ambient conditions (adapted with permission from ref. 140@Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 15  (The top panel) Chemical structures of fullerene derivatives 4 and 5 functionalized with five carboxylic acids, and (the bottom panel) schematic illustration of an OFET fabricated for C60 transistors. Fc: ferrocene (adapted with permission from ref. 175@Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society).	 
Footnote
† To honour Prof. Kees Hummelen's retirement.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
