Micropatterning of graphene sheets: recent advances in techniques and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM00102K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM00102K
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8179-8191Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMicropatterning of graphene sheets: recent advances in techniques and applications

        
          
            Jin-Yong 
            Hong
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jyongsik 
            Jang
          
          
        
      *
      World Class University program of Chemical Convergence for Energy & Environment (C2E2), School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. E-mail: jsjang@plaza.snu.ac.kr
Received 
      5th January 2012
    , Accepted 8th February 2012First published on 9th March 2012AbstractMicropatterning of graphene sheets is an emerging research field and advances in this area have developed a variety of practical routes to patterned graphene sheets, which have great potential in various applications such as transparent electrodes, field effect transistors, chem/biosensors and energy devices. This review provides an overview of commonly used techniques for graphene sheet patterning (broadly, lithography, soft-lithography, and direct writing). The basic concepts and significant issues with respect to the patterning strategies and tools are briefly introduced, and the examples of much outstanding research are highlighted. Our aim is to present a comprehensive review of research activities that concentrate on micro-patterning of graphene sheets.Jin-Yong HongJin-Yong Hong received his BS degree (2006) in department of polymer science and engineering from Chungnam National University. He is currently pursuing his MS and PhD degrees in chemical and biological engineering from Seoul National University. His research focuses on the development of versatile synthetic routes towards graphene nanomaterials and their various applications under the guidance of Prof. Jyongsik Jang. His research interests also include conducting-polymer nanomaterials, functional carbon nanomaterials, transparent electrodes, and nanocomposites.Jyongsik JangProf. Jyongsik Jang received his BS degree (1978) and MS degree (1983) in chemical technology from Seoul National University and his PhD (1988) in macromolecular science and engineering from Case Western Reserve University. He joined the faculty at Seoul National University in 1991, and currently serves as the program manager of Chemical Convergence for Energy & Environment (C2E2) program. His research focuses on the fabrication of functional nanomaterials and their applications such as graphene, conducting polymers, chem/biosensors, solar cells, and nanocomposites.
1. Introduction
Graphene, a flat monolayer of carbon atoms tightly packed into a two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb lattice, has attracted enormous attention in recent years owing to its fascinating physical properties including quantum electronic transport, a tunable band gap, extremely high mobility, high elasticity and electromechanical modulation.1–6 In particular, their optical transparency (∼97.7%) and high carrier mobility (200000 cm2 v−1 s−1) attract significant attention aimed at numerous potential applications in electronics and optoelectronics as a candidate material for the next generation electronic devices.7,8 The successful implementation of graphene-based electronic devices requires high-resolution patterning at defined positions with large-scale control of location and orientation.
To date, the fabrication of graphene-based electronic devices is largely based on simple and reliable methods which are available for graphene patterning with desirable configurations in micrometre and sub-micrometre scales. Several chemical and physical techniques have been developed for the patterning of graphene sheets.9 These approaches can be classified into “lithography”, “soft-lithography”, and “direct writing” according to the type of patterning tools used in the process. While colloidal particles, photo-mask, and electron beam (e-beam) can be utilized as lithographic techniques, soft-lithographic methods include microcontact printing (μCP), microtransfer molding (μTM), transfer printing and solvent-assisted micromolding (SAMIM). In addition, many attempts have been made to pattern graphene sheets by a maskless process. These efforts include a “direct writing” pattern on a substrate using laser ablation, dip pen nanolithography (DPN), and inkjet printing (IJP) methods.10–16
Even though such remarkable progress has been made in the patterning of graphene sheets over the past few years, to the best of our knowledge, there is limited information regarding the overview of this significant and rapidly growing research field. In this feature article, we outline the versatile strategies toward well-defined patterning graphene sheets with tailored shapes and line widths. The recent achievements in the fabrication of graphene sheet patterns have been extensively reviewed with respect to the lithography method, soft-lithography method and direct writing method, including a brief discussion of each methodology. Moreover, prospective applications including transparent electrodes, field effect transistors, chem/biosensors and energy devices will be addressed.
2. Micropatterning techniques for graphene sheets
2.1 Lithography
The lithography method is probably the most well-established technique for patterning. It has been stimulated by the microelectronics, where it is used for the fabrication of integrated circuits. The advantages of this technique, such as high resolution and accuracy, allow the preparation of patterns with features of several-hundred nanometres in size.17–21
Colloidal lithography is an elegant and emerging technique for creating nanoscale patterns. This technique employs two-dimensional (2D) arrays of colloid particles (typically polystyrene (PS) or poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) beads with a narrow size distribution) as masks for etching or sputtering processes.22 Spontaneous formation of well-ordered colloidal arrays provides lithographic masks or scaffolds for creating useful patterns. For example, ordered graphene nanodisk arrays have been successfully fabricated by combining colloidal lithography and a reactive ion etching (RIE) process. Fig. 1 shows the schematic illustration of the graphene nanodisk array fabrication process. First, the graphene sheets were transferred to a SiO2/Si substrate. Optical microscopy was used to locate the interested thin graphene sheets where the single-layer graphene sheet was further confirmed by Raman spectra. Second, a monolayer of highly ordered PS spheres was self-assembled on the water surface using a technique reported by J. Rybczynski et al.23 Such a monolayer was lifted off from the water surface using the previously mentioned SiO2/Si substrate with graphene sheets. After the lift-off procedure, O2 RIE was carried out to morph the closely packed PS nanospheres into arrays of separated nanospheres and to etch a portion of the graphene sheets that was not protected by the nanospheres. Finally, the PS spheres were removed by sonication in chloroform for a few seconds, resulting in periodic graphene nanodisk arrays. Interestingly, the dimension of graphene nanodisks could be effectively tuned by varying the size of polystyrene spheres.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the graphene nanodisk array fabrication process. (a) The graphene sheets were transferred to the SiO2/Si substrate. (b) The PS spheres were arranged on the SiO2/Si substrate with graphene. (c) O2 RIE was carried out to etch a portion of the graphene sheets that was not protected by the PS spheres. (d) Removal of PS spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
A facile approach of making scalable nanocomposite and electro-patterned films is also reported using graphene oxide (GO) and poly(N-vinylcarbazole) (PVK).24 This method involves the layering of PS colloidal templates, electrodeposition of the composite film on the template array, and finally removal of the sacrificial templates to reveal the patterned GO–PVK arrays. The electro-patterned film of the GO/PVK nanocomposite was confirmed by the atomic force microscopy (AFM) topography measurements (Fig. 2). The AFM image shows the hexagonally and highly closed packed 2D PS colloidal (500 nm size) template array on the ITO substrate. The high magnification AFM image clearly illustrates the highly porous and inter-connected 2D hexagonal network of the GO/PVK nanocomposite film. The contact mode and current topography images prove that the electro-patterned GO/PVK nanocomposite films indicate the same inverse colloidal array of the highly ordered and hexagonal interconnected network.
 Fig. 2  AFM topography 2D images (3D on the inset) of the (a) PS-colloidal template array and (b and d) electro-patterned nanocomposite film of GO–PVK after colloidal template removal. (c) AFM amplitude 2D image and (e) line profile of the high magnification topography image. (f) Determination of total thickness (t1), protrusion thickness (t2) of the patterned film and inner (d1), outer (d2) diameters of the cavity. (g) Current-sensing-AFM 2D image (5 mm × 5 mm) with the 3D image on the inset. Reprinted from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, patterned graphene sheets with controllable feature size and shape were demonstrated using versatile photocoupling chemistry.25 The overall procedure for preparing patterned graphene sheets is presented in Fig. 3. Using solvent-exfoliated graphene sheets as a starting material, micropatterned graphene sheets were successfully generated with feature sizes ranging from micrometres to centimetres. In particular, the quality of the generated pattern is highly dependent on the initial graphene sheets. As a result, single layers of graphene sheets can be readily patterned using this approach. This photocoupling chemistry-based method is low cost, occurs at room temperature, and is induced by a fast and tunable light activation. Since the coupling chemistry can be initiated by other energy sources such as electrons and heat, nanoscale patterns are possible using higher resolution lithography tools such as electron beam or near-field probes.
 Fig. 3  Fabrication of patterned graphene: (a) functionalization of the substrate with PFPA; (b) spin-coating graphene flakes onto the substrate; the inset is the TEM image of the graphene flakes, scale bar ¼ 200 nm; (c) UV irradiation through a photomask; and (d) development of the patterned graphene by sonication and solvent washing. Inset: UV-initiated reaction of PFPA and examples of synthesized PFPA coupling agents. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another approach had demonstrated that the patterning of graphene sheets was prepared using a metal etch mask.26 Using the metal etch mask, the delamination of underlying graphene sheets was minimized. The graphene sheets were covered with a nickel (Ni) mask which is later removed by non-oxidizing acids. This metal etch mask avoids the exposure of the active graphene layers with polymers during plasma processing, reducing the possibility of polymer residues. Namely, the introduction of the metal etch mask seems to have a minimal impact on the graphene and prevents contamination by polymer residues.
2.2 Soft lithography
Over the last few years, a number of non-photolithographic techniques for patterning graphene sheets have been demonstrated as an alternative to the conventional lithography method. Among these approaches, the soft-lithographic method is a promising strategy for the fabrication of micro- and nanostructures.27–31 Soft lithography offers many advantages over conventional lithography, including its low cost, experimental simplicity and flexibility, and compatibility with a range of sample geometries. A variety of soft-lithographic techniques have been introduced such as microcontact printing (μCP), microtransfer molding (μTM), transfer printing and solvent-assisted micromolding (SAMIM).
In general, the μCP is considered one of the most useful fabrication methods for large area (>cm2) patterning. The μCP is a form of soft lithography that uses the relief patterns on a master polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp to form patterns. The mold is “inked” with the material to be transferred to the substrate and contact is made between the substrates. Recently, the conductive multilayered polymer/exfoliated graphite nanoplatelet (xGnP) nanocomposite films were developed through combining the μCP and layer-by-layer self-assembly.32 Conductive xGnP films were formed on PDMS stamps without any oxidation/reduction steps (Fig. 4). By adsorbing a weakly bound poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) layer onto a PDMS stamp, the entire multilayer film can be completely transferred to a polyelectrolyte multi-layer coated substrate.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the process to form exfoliated graphite nanoplatelet, subsequent film formation on poly(dimethylsiloxane) and transfer to a polyelectrolyte multi-layer-coated substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
The μTM method could be used to pattern parallel and isolated microstructures in a controllable manner. Recently, the fabrication of reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-based microelectrode array (MEA) was developed using a modified μTM method.33 In this study, the micropatterned rGO-based MEA could be readily obtained by chemically reducing the localized GO contact of the microwells in the PDMS mold. Reduced GO was selectively obtained by closely contacting the assembled GO film onto the ITO electrode with the PDMS mold filled with hydrazine solution in the microwells (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the procedures for fabrication of the rGO-based microelectrode array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Currently, transfer printing has been recognized as a simple, efficient and versatile technique for the generation of the graphene pattern. Ajayan et al. described the facile transfer printing process using gold film as a transfer stamp.34 The gold film was used as a transfer stamp to exfoliate pre-fabricated graphene patterns from the highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surface. The exfoliated graphene patterns were successfully transfer-printed onto substrates, and the transferred printed patterns consist of single layer and few layers of graphene with macroscopic continuity. A similar transfer printing way to form patterned graphene sheets has been designed by Chou and coworkers.35 They used the pillars on a stamp to cut and exfoliate graphene islands from graphite. The transfer printing was utilized to place the islands from the stamp into the device active areas on a substrate with a placement accuracy potentially in nanometres.
Approaches based on spontaneous self-assembly provide an appealing alternative as a simple and cost-effective method that can offer highly ordered surface patterns in an intrinsically scalable manner. In particular, solvent-evaporation-driven self-assembly has been recognized as an efficient bottom-up method to produce a range of complex structures. Self-organizing rGO patterns were prepared with well-controlled spatial arrangement in terms of self-assembly.36Fig. 6 illustrates the formation of a self-assembled rGO pattern by the controlled solvent evaporation method. Self-organizing rGO patterns were formed on a substrate by controlled solvent evaporation with a few guiding measures, such as specific geometry formed between guide lens and substrate, evaporation temperature, concentration of the rGO suspension, and the surface chemistry of rGO and substrates.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly of PIL:RG-O sheets and the corresponding AFM image. (b) Optical microscopy images of PIL:RG-O self-assembly patterns on the Si substrate. The Si substrate was treated with acid solution to give hydrophilic surfaces with a water contact angle of ∼3°. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
2.3 Direct writing
In addition to lithographical techniques, non-lithographic methods based on “direct writing” have been developed for fabricating graphene sheet patterns.37–41 Compared with conventional lithography, these methodologies have some advantages such as reliability, amenability, upwards scalability and low cost. Most importantly, the direct writing patterning does not require the masking or photoresist steps.
A femtosecond laser, as a focused laser beam, has been applied for the surface modification or microstructuring of thin films with high spatial resolution. Loh et al. employed a focused laser beam to create an extended area of micropatterned GO and reduced GO multilayers on quartz substrates.42Fig. 7 illustrates the fabrication steps of patterning GO and the conversion to reduced GO multilayer films. The rGO-based conducting channels were formed by oxidative burning of the GO films in air. When the focused laser beam was incident on the multilayer GO film, the laser energy was rapidly converted into local heat at the irradiated area. The intense heating raised the temperature of the irradiated area above 500 °C in air, resulting in localized oxidative burning of GO. Consequently, the rGO-based conducting channels could be achieved with tunable width and length.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the creation of microfeatures on GO nanosheets with an optical microscope-focused laser beam. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Micropatterning and microribbon fabrication of large area graphene film using CVD are also demonstrated with a femtosecond laser cutting process.43 Homogeneous microribbon or other patterned structure was formed, and the width of the patterned graphene sheets could be controlled with control of laser energy and preprogramming of the laser ablation process. Once the suitable laser beam doses were determined, the sharp edge profile and clean etching were obtained. Scanning electron microscopic study revealed that the clear cutting line in vertical and horizontal directions was manipulated in the graphene film with laser ablation and formed individual microribbons (5 μm width and sub-centimetre scale in length).
Dip-pen nanolithography (DPN) is also used for defining monolayer graphene sheets and patterning of gold electrodes through writing of an alkylthiol on thin films of gold evaporated graphene sheets.44 The merits of the DPN method include the minimization of electron-beam irradiation damage and targeted patterning of individual devices with imaging and writing under ambient conditions. In this study, nano-scaled graphene devices were fabricated to isolate a graphene sheet and pattern the electrical contacts (Fig. 8). The AFM tip was inked with an alkylthiol solution and used to mask parts of the gold film against etching, thereby forming electrical contacts to the graphene sheet.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of graphene device fabrication. The graphene flake shown in step 2 consists of multilayer (lighter) and monolayer (darker) regions. The multilayer regions are exposed and etched away in steps 3 and 4, respectively, leaving behind the monolayer graphene shown in step 5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Another AFM-based direct writing technique has been developed for GO patterns on Si/SiO2.45 Various patterns were successfully prepared with different shapes and dimensions using the DPN system. The GO patterns could be easily generated in contact mode. The force between the Si AFM tip and substrate, used to scratch the GO film, could be readily adjusted by changing the set point (2.0 to 4.0 V). Interestingly, various single-layer GO patterns such as gaps, ribbons, squares, triangles, and zigzags could be constructed using this method.
Inkjet printing (IJP) has been extensively investigated as an alternative tool for the line patterning of graphene sheets.46 To be printed through a nozzle in IJP, conducting ink has to meet specific conditions including optimization of suitable solubility, viscosity, and surface tension.47–49 Jang and coworkers reported a simple and effective route for the fabrication of patterned graphene sheets using an IJP method.50 The overall procedure for the line patterning of graphene sheets by IJP is illustrated in Fig. 9. Graphene sheets that consisted of a few layers were successfully patterned on a poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) film with high resolution. Furthermore, the patterned graphene sheets could be also simply controlled by varying the concentration of the GO ink and the number of print passes. Interestingly, the graphene-based thin film exhibited sustained electrical conductivity, and manipulating the gradient pattern offered an attractive opportunity to control the sheet resistance at designed positions. For the IJP technique, high quality patterns could be also printed on diverse flexible substrates, including paper, PET and polyimide (PI), using aqueous GO suspensions as a graphene-based conducting ink. The graphene-based patterns on various plastic substrates had a high electrical conductivity after thermal reduction, and more importantly, they retained the same conductivity over severe bending cycles.
 Fig. 9  (a) The fabrication of patterned GO on a PET film by IJP. (b) Large-area patterned GO (left image) and graphene sheets resulted from the reduction procedure (right image). (c) The reduction process was performed by mild-thermal annealing at 90 °C with hydrazine and ammonia vapor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
3. Applications of micropatterned graphene sheets
Graphene has shown exceptional electrical, optoelectrical, mechanical and chemical properties and, thus, has emerged to be a valuable platform for various applications. In the following section, we address recent progress of micropatterned graphene sheets for various applications, including electrode, transistor, chem/biosensor and supercapacitor applications. The following applications of micropatterned graphene sheets pave the way for the practical application and industrialization of the advanced science and technology.
3.1 Electrode
Typically, indium tin oxide (ITO) is one of the most widely used transparent conducting materials. However, high cost, limited supply and brittle nature of indium restrict its application in a flexible substrate, motivating the search for highly transparent and conducting materials to replace ITO. The next generation of optoelectronic devices requires transparent conductive electrodes to be lightweight, flexible, cheap, environmentally attractive, and compatible with large-scale manufacturing methods. As mentioned previously, because of the extraordinary thermal, chemical and mechanical stability of graphene, combined with its superior carrier mobility and high transparency, it is considered to be a promising material for future optoelectronic devices.51,52
Jang et al. have reported a flexible electrode composed of overlapped graphene sheets, which were printed onto a flexible plastic substrate by using IJP techniques.53Fig. 10 demonstrates the practical applications of foldable printed circuit boards. An electrically conductive wire (100% graphene sheets, thickness of 300 nm, width of 5 mm) was patterned on a polyimide film. The pattern designed on computer software (Fig. 10a) is inkjet-printed repeatedly for 30 passes. The LEDs were connected in series and applied by a 27.0 V DC power supply. The electrically connected LEDs could be turned on by applying voltage, demonstrating the electrically conductive pathway of the graphene-based printed circuit (Fig. 10b and c).
 Fig. 10  Graphene-based electronic circuit: (a) designed pattern for inkjet printing. (b and c) Digital photographs of graphene-based electronic circuit turn off (b) and turn on (c). Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Graphene-based thin film was also applied as an electrode for the wideband (WB) dipole antenna.50 Using IJP, pre-patterned GO sheets with various line widths were successfully fabricated without any additives and transformed into a few layers of graphene sheets by a reduction process. To clarify how well-defined patterns were formed without ink spread, a dotted line having a gap of 70 μm between dots was printed and then a current was measured by two probes of the multimeter connecting both ends of the dotted line (Fig. 11a–d). The current of the dotted line was zero unlike that of the full lines, which indicated that each dot of the dotted line was electrically distinct from each other, and the patterned graphene sheets were synthesized properly without ink spread. Fig. 11e shows the RL curve of the dipole antenna using a patterned graphene sheet electrode. The graphene sheet-based WB dipole antenna was implemented with 500 MHz bandwidth and a high transmitted power efficiency of 96.7%, and it can be applied for signal receiving apparatus such as a radio frequency identification (RFID) tag, airport passenger screening to detect nearby objects, and in a body sensor network using the medical implant communication service (MICS) band.
 Fig. 11  Optical microscopy images of patterned graphene-based thin films with a width of (a) 70, (b) 100, and (c) 200 μm. (d) The electrical measurement of the full line and consecutive repeated pattern having a gap of 70 μm between dots in the dotted line by using the multimeter. The pattern was magnified by optical microscopy (scale bar: 125 μm). (e) The return loss curve of the dipole antenna application using a patterned graphene sheet electrode. Inset: smith chart impedance diagram of the designed dipole antenna. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Recently, flexible and transparent graphene films as an acoustic actuator electrode were demonstrated using the IJP method (Fig. 12a).54 Most of all, the potential to control the shape and size of the graphene sheet pattern is expected to offer a great feasibility for the thin film acoustic actuator stereo heights and widths. Fig. 12b depicts the acoustic response of a graphene-based thin film speaker with different electrode thicknesses (60, 90 and 120 nm). The overall frequency responses were enhanced with increasing the film thickness, particularly over the midrange frequency. In addition, the acoustic actuators with a graphene electrode had higher responses over all frequencies than those with a PEDOT:PSS electrode. In particular, the graphene-based PVDF film with a thickness of 60 nm had a 10 dB higher response in the treble frequency range than the commercial thin film, which meant that the sound level of the graphene-based transducer could produce at least 3.1 times higher than that of the commercial transducer at the same driving voltage. Moreover, frequency responses under the flat and bending conditions (radius: 6 cm) of the graphene-based transducer with a thickness of 120 nm were evaluated in Fig. 12c. The frequency response was obviously enhanced in the bass and midrange frequency under the bending condition compared to the flat condition. This result could be explained by waves of sound energy being focused under the bending condition. The next generation of the graphene-based acoustic actuator is expected to operate without expensive high-power voltage amplifiers due to low power consumption as a transparent, extremely thin and lightweight loudspeaker.
 Fig. 12  (a) Photograph of a PVDF-based thin film acoustic actuator using flexible and transparent graphene electrodes. (b) The frequency response of the graphene-based thin film transducer with three different electrode thicknesses. (c) Each frequency response under the flat and bending conditions (radius: 6 cm) of a graphene-based thin film transducer. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Transistor
The field-effect transistor (FET) is one of the potential applications of micropatterned graphene sheets. Graphene is unique as a channel material, because unlike other semiconductors, graphene does not require impurity doping to conduct electricity. In particular, graphene presents the phenomenon of self-doping.55 Self-doping refers to the electric field effect in graphene, which allows the charge carrier type and concentration to be controlled with an outside electric field, or rather gate voltage. Graphene-based FET devices with a single back gate have been investigated, and experimental values of the field-effect mobility of graphene are one order of magnitude higher than those of silicon (Si).56–58
Organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) with a patterned single graphene sheet as source and drain electrodes were prepared using μCP.59 A single graphene sheet was transferred to various substrates in a pattern defined by the geometry of the PDMS stamp. With single crystalline rubrene as an active channel, the devices exhibited excellent p-type characteristics. The highest mobility of a transferred rubrene transistor was 10.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 with approximately 107 of on/off ratio, as shown in Fig. 13. It could be explained that the low Schottky barrier between the single graphene layer and rubrene crystal led to excellent output curves showing up to 100 μA at a gate voltage of −20 V.
 Fig. 13  (a) ID–VG transfer curve of OFETs with patterned SLG using the transferred method. The inset optical microscopy image shows top view of an OFET with single crystal rubrene on the patterned SLG source and drain electrodes. (b) Output characteristics of SLG electrode based OFETs. The gate voltage carried from 0 V to −30 V with a step of −10 V. The inset shows the low bias voltage magnification of the main panel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Based on the prepared graphene electrodes, copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) thin film OFETs with bottom-contact configuration were also fabricated by the vacuum deposition technique.60 CuPc is selected as the organic active layer because of its outstanding chemical stability and relatively high field-effect mobility. In this study, only the graphene works as the electrode in CuPc OFET devices even though the CuPc film contacts with both the graphene and the metal Al. These results also confirm that the graphene is an excellent electrode material suitable for organic electronics.61–65 Consequently, the CuPc film device based on graphene electrodes exhibits high performance with the mobility at 0.053 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the on/off ratio at 105, providing promising application in low-cost and light-weight OFETs.
Recently, Ahn et al. reported a promising route to the fabrication of an all-graphene-based FET array on a stretchable rubber substrate using a low-temperature printing process (Fig. 14).66 All device components, including channel region and S/D electrodes, were transferred onto a substrate and then the gate insulator and gate electrode were printed in a manner that avoids the need for high-temperature processes. Notably, all-graphene-based transistors were fabricated on rubber substrates without traditional metal electrodes. All the devices were operated within a low voltage region (2 V) with a high on-current. The ultrahigh capacitance of the ion gel gate dielectric yielded the low-voltage and high-current operation. The specific capacitance of the ion gel was measured to be 5.17 μF cm−2 at 10 Hz, much larger than typical values for 300 nm thick SiO2 dielectrics (10.8 nF cm−2). The resulting monolithic devices displayed several advantages such as good mechanical stretchability, optical transmittance, simple device design, and improved contact at the channel-to-S/D interface.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration and electrical characteristics of high-performance, transparent, stretchable graphene FETs on a PDMS rubber substrate. (a) Schematic diagrams of mono-, bi-, and tri-layer graphene FETs. (b) Transfer characteristics of graphene FETs as a function of the number of graphene layers. (c) Hole and electron mobilities of graphene FETs as a function of the number of graphene layers. The inset shows the microscopy image of tri-layer graphene FETs on PDMS (scale bar, 300 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Chem/biosensor
Many kinds of sensors using various nanomaterials have been described for both chemical and biological applications. To date, considerable attention has been directed towards the development of miniaturized, reliable, and highly sensitive sensors.67–76 Discovery of graphene has opened a new area that promises ultra-sensitive and ultra-fast chem/biosensors due to its conductivity variation as a function of extent of surface adsorption, large specific surface area, and low Johnson noise.77–81 The sensing mechanism of graphene-based chem/biosensors is based on the charge transfer between the adsorbed molecules and graphene sheets. As molecules adsorb onto the graphene surface, the location of adsorption experiences a charge transfer with graphene as a donor or acceptor, thus changing the Fermi level, carrier density, and electrical resistance of graphene. While this phenomenon occurs in other materials, graphene is superior due to its high electrical conductivity and low noise which makes this change in resistance detectable. Owing to these characteristics, various graphene-based sensors have been developed for both chemical and biological uses.
For example, a rugged and flexible graphene-based sensor was fabricated using the IJP technique, followed by patterning of rGO onto the flexible PET substrate (Fig. 15).82 When inkjet-printed rGO/PET films are exposed to electron-withdrawing vapors, the conductivity increases drastically. The sensing performance of the rGO/PET sensor is attributed to the effective adsorption of NO2 vapors onto the rGO surface. In general, the NO2 is a strong oxidizer with electron-withdrawing ability. Accordingly, electron transfer from the rGO surface to adsorbed NO2 vapors leads to enriched hole concentration and enhanced electrical conduction in the rGO/PET sensor. Fig. 15c depicts the sensitivity change as a function of NO2 gas concentration. The sensitivity increased linearly in the range of 10 ppm to 500 ppb. However, signal recovery time was slow compared with response time, consistent with previous studies showing strong chemisorption of NO2 vapor upon a graphene surface.83 However, the conductivity rGO/PET sensor decreased toward saturated organic vapors, for example, CH3OH, C2H5OH, C6H5OH3, etc., as well as NH3 (Fig. 15d). This phenomenon is in good agreement with a recent study using rGO.84 Consequently, it can be considered that the rGO/PET sensors can reversibly and selectively detect the general class of electron-withdrawing vapors such as NO2, Cl2, etc.
 Fig. 15  (a) AFM image of rGO film obtained by reduction of the film with ascorbic acid. (b) Digital image of an inkjet-printed rGO/PET four-probe sensor. Vapor sensing by inkjet-printed rGO/PET obtained by ascorbic acid reduction of dispersed graphene oxide. (c) Plot of resistance versus time when the film was exposed to a NO2 vapor. Inset: Plot of resistance versus vapor concentration. (d) Selectivity plot: sensor exposed to saturated organic vapors, CH3OH, C2H5OH, C6H5OH3, C6H14, CH2Cl2, NH3, Cl2, and NO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
To detect hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), micropatterned graphene sheets were also used as the working electrode for the enzyme-free electrochemical sensor.85 A graphene-based working electrode was fabricated using the IJP method and annealing in Ar/H2, together with a Pt electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode to form the electrochemical sensor system. To fabricate a graphene working electrode, ferrocene (Fc) was used to modify the electrode. The result demonstrated the excellent electrocatalytic performance of the Fc–RGO adduct modified electrode, which could be attributed to the cooperative effect due to the π–π stacking between Fc and RGO and the enhanced charge transportation between the printed graphene electrode and the solution due to the presence of the Fc–RGO adduct.
In particular, the micropatterned graphene sheets with proteins are relevant to bioscience applications such as biomolecular sensors, single-cell sensors, and tissue engineering. Curtis et al. demonstrated a general strategy for the noncovalent chemical modification of epitaxial graphene for protein immobilization and micropatterning.86 The chemical modification of graphene sheets for protein crosslinking was performed using bifunctional molecule 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (PYR-NHS). The aromatic pyrenyl group in PYR-NHS interacts strongly with the basal plane of graphene via π stacking. Micrometre-resolution spatial patterning of proteins onto graphene was accomplished using μCP, and a fluorescent image of PYR-treated EG micropatterned with glucose oxidase is presented in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  Micropatterned proteins: (a) glucose oxidase and (b) laminin on epitaxial graphene treated with PYR-NHS. Scale bars are 20 and 10 μm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Supercapacitor
Supercapacitors (also called electrochemical capacitors and ultracapacitors) based on carbon materials have some advantages such as high capacitive energy density and low material cost.87,88 In particular, graphene possesses a high electrical conductivity, high surface area, and outstanding mechanical properties comparable with or even better than CNTs. The specific surface area of a single graphene sheet is 2630 m2 g−1, larger than that of activated carbon and carbon nanotubes. These superior characteristics make graphene a most promising material for supercapacitors.89–92 In addition, its mechanical strength and flexibility are attractive as conformal electrode materials particularly for flexible supercapacitors. From this viewpoint, micropatterned graphene sheets have been applied to flexible supercapacitors.
A facile fabrication of graphene-based supercapacitors was developed using direct laser writing of micro-supercapacitors on hydrated GO films.93 This technique provides the patterning of the GO surface into rGO–GO–rGO structures in various geometries with micrometre resolution. Both in-plane and conventional sandwich electrodes with reduced graphite oxide were also patterned (Fig. 17). The as-prepared laser-patterned devices (rGO–GO–rGO) demonstrated the excellent electrochemical performance without the use of an external electrolyte. The substantial amounts of trapped water in the graphite oxide made it simultaneously a good ionic conductor and an electrical insulator. It played the role in an electrolyte and an electrode separator with ion transport characteristics similar to that observed for Nafion membranes.94,95 As a result, the resulting micro-supercapacitor devices exhibited good cyclic stability, and energy storage capacities comparable to existing thin-film supercapacitors.
 Fig. 17  Schematics of CO2 laser-patterning of free-standing hydrated GO films to fabricate rGO–GO–rGO devices with in-plane and sandwich geometries. The black contrast in the top schematics corresponds to rGO, and the light contrast to unmodified hydrated GO. For in-plane devices, three different geometries were used, and the concentric circular pattern gives the highest capacitance density. The bottom row shows photographs of patterned films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2011 Right Managed by the Nature Publishing Group. 
Lee and coworkers also studied graphene-based supercapacitor electrodes using the IJP method.96 Hydrophilic GO dispersed in water was found to be a stable ink for inkjet printing of GO with the lateral spatial resolution of 50 μm. Electrically conductive graphene electrodes were formed by thermal reduction of printed GO patterns (Fig. 18a and b). It has been known that the microscale patternability is expected to enable novel designs of inter-digitized electrode arrays, particularly for fabricating flexible micro-supercapacitors. As shown in Fig. 18c, inkjet-printed graphene electrodes exhibited fairly rectangular CV curves at scan rates in the range of 0.01 to 0.5 V−1 s−1, which was indicative of capacitive behavior. The specific capacitance slightly decreased from 125 to 121 F g−1 (96.8% capacitance retention) over 1000 CV cycles at a constant scan rate of 50 mV−1 s−1. The charging/discharging curves were fairly linear, again demonstrating capacitive behavior (Fig. 18d).
 Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of a circular GO dot printed on the Ti foil surface after 20 printing passes at a spatial resolution of ∼50 μm. (b) SEM images of IPGE printed on the Ti surface used for electrochemical evaluation. Electrochemical properties of IPGE: (c) cyclic voltammograms measured at different scan rates and (d) constant current charge/discharge curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. 
A very interesting route to the graphene-based electrode has been proposed by directly patterning the graphite on cellulose paper.97 The shear peeling method was introduced in order to increase the graphite surface area for supercapacitor application. The rough surface structure of paper enabled the exfoliation and adhesion of the graphitic materials. It formed continuous conducting paths on the surface, and provided significant adsorption area for double layer formation. As a result, the patterning of graphite on paper produced multilayer graphene with a large portion of edge structures. The as-fabricated paper supercapacitor demonstrated stable long cycling performance with 90% capacity retention after 15000 cycles and a high areal capacitance of 2.3 mF cm−2. In addition, the solvent-free deposition technique represented a low cost, environmentally friendly, highly scalable and versatile fabrication method for integrated paper-based energy devices.
4. Summary
The demand for patterned graphene sheets with tailored shapes and line widths has led to the development of diverse patterning techniques. These approaches can be classified into “lithography”, “soft-lithography”, and “direct writing” according to the type of patterning tools used in the process. Since each patterning approach has its own strength and shortcomings, various fabrication techniques are still needed depending on the specific requirements.
Previous methods for fabricating patterned graphene sheets mainly relied on lithographic techniques. The lithography has reached a high level of maturity and precision. Although the lithographic methods are suitable for large-scale fabrication of a variety of patterns, there are some limitations such as additional etching processes, substrate restriction surface contamination, and high operating cost. The soft-lithographic method provides an alternative to the conventional lithographic technique. The soft-lithographic technique offers the simplicity and flexibility in forming specific patterns. Despite these advantages, several issues still remain to be solved before the industrial implementation of the soft-lithographic technique: deformation of the elastomeric stamp or mold, density of defects in the formed pattern, and difficulty in high-resolution registration. Recently, several non-lithographic methods based on “direct writing” have been also developed for patterned graphene sheets. Compared with lithographic methods, the direct writing method provides a facile and practical process to produce micropatterned graphene sheets, and has some advantages such as reliability, amenability, upwards scalability and low cost. Direct writing methods have great potential to emerge as a high throughput, parallel processing technique for the patterning of graphene sheets.
Micropatterned graphene sheets have many unexplored potentials as well as extensive future research into the development of various patterning strategies. Moreover, novel concepts toward micropatterning techniques strive to the emerging and promising applications of micropatterned graphene sheets in the next generation.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (no. 2011-0017125), and by the WCU (World Class University) program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (R31-10013).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubbonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Long, J.-Y. Hong, W. Li, J. Miyawaki, L. Ling, I. Mochida, S.-H. Yoon and J. Jang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6254 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Heersche, P. Jarillo-Herrero, J. B. Oostinga, L. M. K. Vandersypen and A. Morpurgo, Nature, 2007, 446, 56 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3615 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1998, 28, 153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 551 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5221 RSC .
R. D. Piner, J. Zhu, F. Xu, S. Hong and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 1999, 283, 661 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ginger, H. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 30 CrossRef .
B. Li, C. F. Goh, X. Zhou, G. Lu, H. Tantang, Y. Chen, C. Xue, F. Y. C. Boey and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4873 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Boey, F. Huo, L. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 2273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Geissler and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1249 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Han, B. Ozyilmaz, Y. B. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef .
L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Fatsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 356 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pang, H. N. Tsao, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3488 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, G. Lu, X. Qi, S. Wu, H. Li, F. Boey and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19119 CAS .
C. X. Cong, T. Yu, Z. H. Ni, L. Liu, Z. X. Shen and W. Huang, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6529 CAS .
J. Rybczynski, U. Ebels and M. Giersig, Colloids Surf., A, 2003, 219, 1 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pernites, A. Vergara, A. Yago, K. Cui and R. Advincula, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9810 RSC .
L. Lui, G. Zorn, D. G. Castner, R. Solanki, M. M. Lerner and M. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5041 RSC .
S. Kumar, N. Peltekis, K. Lee, H.-Y. Kim and G. S. Duesberg, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 390 CrossRef .
Z. Wei, D. E. Barlow and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3141 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Su, D. Fu, A.-Y. Lu, K.-K. Liu, Y. Xu, Z.-Y. Juang and L.-J. Li, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 185309 CrossRef .
S.-H. Hur, D.-Y. Khang, C. Kocabas and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5730 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Chabinyc, A. Salleo, Y. Wu, P. Liu, B. S. Ong, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13928 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, G. Lu, X. Zhou, X. Cao, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10455 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Hendricks, J. Lu, L. T. Drzal and I. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2008 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, M. Xue, X. Ma, M. Zhang and T. Cao, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 6426 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, S. Ci, W. Gao and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1353 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, Z. Fu and S. Y. Chou, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3840 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Kim, S. W. Kwon, S. J. Park, D. H. Yoon, K. S. Suh and W. S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2734 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Li, Y. Xu, J. Liang, X. Zhao, S. Chen, Y. Chen and J. Tian, J. Opt., 2011, 13, 085601 CrossRef .
D. C. Bell, M. C. Lemme, L. A. Stern, J. R. Williams and C. M. Marcus, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455301 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Lemme, D. C. Bell, J. R. Williams, L. A. Stern, B. W. H. Baugher, P. Jarillo-Herrero and C. M. Marcus, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2674 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Stohr, R. Kolesov, K. Xia and J. Wrachtrup, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5141 CrossRef CAS .
K. Salaita, Y. H. Wang and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Q. Bao, B. Varghese, L. A. L. Tang, C. K. Tan, C. Sow and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 67 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kalita, L. Qi, Y. Namba, K. Wakita and M. Umeno, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1569 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Wang, N. Stander, R. M. Stoltenberg, D. G. Gordon and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6409 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, X. Zhou, H. Li, Z. Yin, B. Li, L. Huang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6164 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Mana, S. Wang, M. Jaiswal, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5265 CrossRef .
J. Cho, K. H. Shin and J. Jang, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, K. H. Shin and J. Jang, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5066 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, J. Ha and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1772 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Y. Shin, J.-Y. Hong and J. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2113 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Hong, K.-Y. Shin, O. S. Kwon, H. Kang and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7182 RSC .
K.-Y. Shin, J.-Y. Hong and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8527 RSC .
N. M. R. Peres, F. Guinea and A. H. C. Neto, Ann. Phys., 2006, 321, 1559 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, L. Gomez, Z. Xu, L.-M. Chen, K. S. Nelson, C. Zhou, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2098 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Oostinga, H. B. Heersche, X. Liu, A. F. Morpurgo and L. M. K. Vandersypen, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 151 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kang, B. Kim, K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. H. Lee, J. Hone, P. Kim and C. Nuckolls, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3531 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liao, Q. Wan, H. Liu and Q. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 103301 CrossRef .
Q. He, H. G. Sudibya, Z. Yin, S. Wu, H. Li, F. Boey, W. Huang, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3201 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, S. Wu, S. Gao, X. Cao, Z. Yin, H. Li, P. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5038 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Sudibya, Q. He, H. Zhang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1990 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Q. He, W. Shi, B. Li, Z. Zeng, Y. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1199 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, X. Cao, H. G. Ong, J. W. Cheah, X. Zhou, Z. Yin, H. Li, J. Wang, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3058 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, B. J. Kim, H. Jang, S. C. Yoon, C. Lee, B. H. Hong, J. A. Rogers, J. H. Cho and J. Ahn, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4642 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, J.-H. Kim, N. Lee, B.-G. Kim and J. Jang, ChemBioChem, 2008, 9, 634 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, S. Ko and J. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 9992 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang and J. Bae, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 122, 7 CrossRef .
S. Ko and J. Jang, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, M. Chang and H. Yoon, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1616 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, M. Chang and J. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 431 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, J.-Y. Hong and J. Jang, Small, 2007, 3, 1774 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, O. S. Kwon, S. J. Park, E. Y. Park, S. A. You, H. Yoon and J. Jang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7992 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Kwon, T. J. Hong, S. K. Kim, J. H. Jeong, J. S. Hahn and J. Jang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1307 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, S. H. Lee, O. S. Kwon, H. S. Song, E. H. Oh, T. H. Park and J. Jang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2755 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Dan, Y. Lu, N. J. Kybert, Z. T. Luo and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1472 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. M. Li, H. B. Feng, J. Lu and J. H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2782 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, Y. Yamashiro and K. Matsumoto, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3318 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, Z. Y. Li, Z. R. Liu, G. Zhou, S. G. Hao, J. Wu, B. L. Gu and W. H. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13442 CAS .
O. Leenaerts, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 125416 CrossRef .
V. Dua, S. P. Surwade, S. Ammu, S. R. Agnihotra, S. Jain, K. E. Roberts, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and S. K. Manohar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2154 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, L. E. Ocola and J. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 083111 CrossRef .
J. D. Fowler, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, Y. Yang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 301 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, J. Liang, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 675 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Kodali, J. Scrimgeour, S. Kim, J. H. Hankinson, K. M. Carroll, W. A. de Heer, C. Berger and J. E. Curtis, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, J. Bae and M. Choi, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choi, B. Lim and J. Jang, Macromol. Res., 2008, 16, 200 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. C. Vivekchand, C. S. Rout, K. S. Subrahmanyam, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Chem. Sci., 2008, 120, 9 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Murugan, T. Muraliganth and A. Manthiram, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5004 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. Fan, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496 CrossRef CAS .
T. Thampan, S. Malhotra, H. Tang and R. Datta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 3242 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Park, H. J. Ahn and Y. E. Sung, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 500 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Le, M. H. Ervin, H. Qiu, B. E. Fuchs and W. Y. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 355 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, L. Hu, H. Wu, X. Xie and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3368 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Jin-Yong Hong	Jin-Yong Hong received his BS degree (2006) in department of polymer science and engineering from Chungnam National University. He is currently pursuing his MS and PhD degrees in chemical and biological engineering from Seoul National University. His research focuses on the development of versatile synthetic routes towards graphene nanomaterials and their various applications under the guidance of Prof. Jyongsik Jang. His research interests also include conducting-polymer nanomaterials, functional carbon nanomaterials, transparent electrodes, and nanocomposites.
Jyongsik Jang	Prof. Jyongsik Jang received his BS degree (1978) and MS degree (1983) in chemical technology from Seoul National University and his PhD (1988) in macromolecular science and engineering from Case Western Reserve University. He joined the faculty at Seoul National University in 1991, and currently serves as the program manager of Chemical Convergence for Energy & Environment (C2E2) program. His research focuses on the fabrication of functional nanomaterials and their applications such as graphene, conducting polymers, chem/biosensors, solar cells, and nanocomposites.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the graphene nanodisk array fabrication process. (a) The graphene sheets were transferred to the SiO2/Si substrate. (b) The PS spheres were arranged on the SiO2/Si substrate with graphene. (c) O2 RIE was carried out to etch a portion of the graphene sheets that was not protected by the PS spheres. (d) Removal of PS spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  AFM topography 2D images (3D on the inset) of the (a) PS-colloidal template array and (b and d) electro-patterned nanocomposite film of GO–PVK after colloidal template removal. (c) AFM amplitude 2D image and (e) line profile of the high magnification topography image. (f) Determination of total thickness (t1), protrusion thickness (t2) of the patterned film and inner (d1), outer (d2) diameters of the cavity. (g) Current-sensing-AFM 2D image (5 mm × 5 mm) with the 3D image on the inset. Reprinted from ref. 24 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Fabrication of patterned graphene: (a) functionalization of the substrate with PFPA; (b) spin-coating graphene flakes onto the substrate; the inset is the TEM image of the graphene flakes, scale bar ¼ 200 nm; (c) UV irradiation through a photomask; and (d) development of the patterned graphene by sonication and solvent washing. Inset: UV-initiated reaction of PFPA and examples of synthesized PFPA coupling agents. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the process to form exfoliated graphite nanoplatelet, subsequent film formation on poly(dimethylsiloxane) and transfer to a polyelectrolyte multi-layer-coated substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the procedures for fabrication of the rGO-based microelectrode array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-assembly of PIL:RG-O sheets and the corresponding AFM image. (b) Optical microscopy images of PIL:RG-O self-assembly patterns on the Si substrate. The Si substrate was treated with acid solution to give hydrophilic surfaces with a water contact angle of ∼3°. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the creation of microfeatures on GO nanosheets with an optical microscope-focused laser beam. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of graphene device fabrication. The graphene flake shown in step 2 consists of multilayer (lighter) and monolayer (darker) regions. The multilayer regions are exposed and etched away in steps 3 and 4, respectively, leaving behind the monolayer graphene shown in step 5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The fabrication of patterned GO on a PET film by IJP. (b) Large-area patterned GO (left image) and graphene sheets resulted from the reduction procedure (right image). (c) The reduction process was performed by mild-thermal annealing at 90 °C with hydrazine and ammonia vapor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 10  Graphene-based electronic circuit: (a) designed pattern for inkjet printing. (b and c) Digital photographs of graphene-based electronic circuit turn off (b) and turn on (c). Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Optical microscopy images of patterned graphene-based thin films with a width of (a) 70, (b) 100, and (c) 200 μm. (d) The electrical measurement of the full line and consecutive repeated pattern having a gap of 70 μm between dots in the dotted line by using the multimeter. The pattern was magnified by optical microscopy (scale bar: 125 μm). (e) The return loss curve of the dipole antenna application using a patterned graphene sheet electrode. Inset: smith chart impedance diagram of the designed dipole antenna. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photograph of a PVDF-based thin film acoustic actuator using flexible and transparent graphene electrodes. (b) The frequency response of the graphene-based thin film transducer with three different electrode thicknesses. (c) Each frequency response under the flat and bending conditions (radius: 6 cm) of a graphene-based thin film transducer. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) ID–VG transfer curve of OFETs with patterned SLG using the transferred method. The inset optical microscopy image shows top view of an OFET with single crystal rubrene on the patterned SLG source and drain electrodes. (b) Output characteristics of SLG electrode based OFETs. The gate voltage carried from 0 V to −30 V with a step of −10 V. The inset shows the low bias voltage magnification of the main panel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration and electrical characteristics of high-performance, transparent, stretchable graphene FETs on a PDMS rubber substrate. (a) Schematic diagrams of mono-, bi-, and tri-layer graphene FETs. (b) Transfer characteristics of graphene FETs as a function of the number of graphene layers. (c) Hole and electron mobilities of graphene FETs as a function of the number of graphene layers. The inset shows the microscopy image of tri-layer graphene FETs on PDMS (scale bar, 300 μm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) AFM image of rGO film obtained by reduction of the film with ascorbic acid. (b) Digital image of an inkjet-printed rGO/PET four-probe sensor. Vapor sensing by inkjet-printed rGO/PET obtained by ascorbic acid reduction of dispersed graphene oxide. (c) Plot of resistance versus time when the film was exposed to a NO2 vapor. Inset: Plot of resistance versus vapor concentration. (d) Selectivity plot: sensor exposed to saturated organic vapors, CH3OH, C2H5OH, C6H5OH3, C6H14, CH2Cl2, NH3, Cl2, and NO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 16  Micropatterned proteins: (a) glucose oxidase and (b) laminin on epitaxial graphene treated with PYR-NHS. Scale bars are 20 and 10 μm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematics of CO2 laser-patterning of free-standing hydrated GO films to fabricate rGO–GO–rGO devices with in-plane and sandwich geometries. The black contrast in the top schematics corresponds to rGO, and the light contrast to unmodified hydrated GO. For in-plane devices, three different geometries were used, and the concentric circular pattern gives the highest capacitance density. The bottom row shows photographs of patterned films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2011 Right Managed by the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of a circular GO dot printed on the Ti foil surface after 20 printing passes at a spatial resolution of ∼50 μm. (b) SEM images of IPGE printed on the Ti surface used for electrochemical evaluation. Electrochemical properties of IPGE: (c) cyclic voltammograms measured at different scan rates and (d) constant current charge/discharge curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
