Perspective on theoretical methods and modeling relating to electro-catalysis processes  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC02998J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC02998J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9937-9949Perspective on theoretical methods and modeling relating to electro-catalysis processes

        
          
            Qiang 
            Li†
, 
      
        
          
            Yixin 
            Ouyang†
, 
      
        
          
            Shuaihua 
            Lu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaowan 
            Bai
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yehui 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Shi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chongyi 
            Ling
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jinlan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      School of Physics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China. E-mail: jlwang@seu.edu.cn
Received 
      25th April 2020
    , Accepted 25th June 2020First published on 25th June 2020AbstractElectro-catalysis is expected to be a promising clean alternative for energy conversion, and the search for effective and stable electro-catalysts is fundamental. Theoretical calculations play an important role in the rational design and optimization of the performance of electro-catalysts by revealing active sites for reactions and corresponding reaction mechanisms. However, the simulation of electrochemical processes under realistic conditions, for instance, electrode–electrolyte interface structures and the dynamic movement of species around the interface, is still limited. In this review, we summarize advances in theoretical methods and models for the description of thermodynamics and kinetics in electro-catalysis, including solvent effects, externally applied potentials, and many-body interactions. Multiple innovative methods and models are covered with specific examples, and the scope for future development is discussed.
Qiang Li
Qiang Li obtained his BS (2009) degree in Chemistry from Huaiyin Normal University and completed his PhD (under the supervision of P. D. Dr Karin Fink) at Karlsruhe Institute for Technology (2012.7–2015.10). He is now an associate researcher at Southeast University. His current research interests focus on chemical reactions on the surfaces or edges of low-dimensional materials.
Yixin Ouyang
Yixin Ouyang obtained his BS degree from Southeast University in 2015. He is currently working on his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Jinlan Wang at the School of Physics at Southeast University. His current research interests focus on developing efficient catalysts for some key electrocatalytic reactions.
Jinlan Wang
Jinlan Wang is currently a distinguished professor at the School of Physics at Southeast University. She got her PhD from the Department of Physics, Nanjing University in 2002. Then, she obtained three years of postdoctoral experience at the Chemistry Division, Argonne National Laboratory. Since 2006, she has been at Southeast University as a faculty member and developed a computational physics and chemistry group. Her current research interests mainly focus on the multi-scale simulation of two-dimensional materials, varying from growth mechanisms to electronic and optical properties to the design of new functional materials.
1. Introduction
With rapidly growing energy consumption and energy demand, the depletion of non-renewable energy resources like fossil fuels, petroleum, and natural gas, together with consequent environmental pollution by the combustion of such energy carriers are two severe challenges for human society in the 21st century. Therefore, clean energy conversion, including energy storage and reversible energy utilization, has attracted extensive interest, and the electro-catalysis method has been generally considered to be one of the most promising solutions to the energy crisis.1 The key to electro-catalytic processes is developing efficient electro-catalysts with low cost, high activity, earth-abundance, strong stability and high selectivity for many energy conversion pathways with multiple targets, including reduction processes like the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), CO reduction reaction, nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), and oxidation processes such as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) etc.2–11
The identification of active sites and a deep understanding of reaction mechanisms play a central role in the rational design and optimization of electro-catalysts. Unfortunately, the electrode–electrolyte interface structure, reaction intermediates, and ultrafast reaction processes are difficult to capture experimentally. In this respect, first-principles methods, mostly based on density functional theory (DFT), help to gain insight into the relationship between observed electro-catalytic behavior and active site properties. DFT calculations can often provide detailed atomic structure around active sites and the energetics of elementary reaction processes at specific sites, helping to interpret the catalytic properties observed experimentally and predict the performance of new catalysts.12 However, the emerging area of electro-catalysis imposes new challenges on theoretical methods and models. Typically, the description of the electrode–electrolyte (solid–liquid in this review) interface, where electrochemical reactions occur, is still limited in first-principles modeling due to the complexity and dynamic behavior of the solid structure, solvents, electrolyte species and reactant/intermediates involved in heterogeneous catalysis.13,14 Furthermore, the treatment of applied external electric potential, which has a crucial impact on the activity and selectivity of electro-catalysts, raises another challenge for periodic calculations, as electric neutrality and reference potential are required for an accurate description.15 In addition, DFT methods are also challenged by difficulties in the dynamic evolution of electrode–electrolyte interface structures with very long timescales. Overall, a full and reliable description of the electro-catalytic process should involve the modeling of the electrode–electrolyte interface with species dissolved in solvents, and the operating conditions including applied potential, the concentration of various species and pH effects.16,17
To tackle these challenges, theoretical models, such as implicit solvation models based on Poisson–Boltzmann electrostatics from the modified electric double layer, and explicit modeling by ab initio molecular dynamics and multiscale kinetics, have been developed and improved by many notable groups.18–22 These methods facilitate the simulation of electrochemical processes and provide insightful information into multiple catalytic reactions. In this perspective, we will briefly introduce recent advances in theories and methods for the simulation of electro-catalysis, and both achievements and limitations will be discussed. We group the theoretical methods and models applied to electro-catalysis as thermodynamic, kinetic barrier and multiscale analyses; the unconventional technique of machine learning is also addressed at the end. The details may be not specific, but we list references and case examples, mostly concerning the recently active area of CO2RR and NRR, for readers to trace relevant work.
2. Thermodynamics
2.1 Computational hydrogen electrode model
The computational hydrogen electrode (CHE), proposed by Nørskov et al., with the example of electrochemical oxygen reduction over Pt(111), led to significant growth in computational electro-catalytic processes.23 To avoid treating complex solvated protons, the combination of the proton and electron at 0 V is in equilibrium with gaseous H2. As an external electric potential is applied, the chemical potential of a proton–electron pair is lowered by a certain amount of eU to maintain equilibrium: (1)where e is the (positive) electron charge. Therefore, the free energy change of each electrochemical step, the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) processes, is yielded by static DFT calculations of adsorbed species. The thermal corrections are involved in free energy by frequency calculation. (2)where ΔE is the reaction energy difference between the product and reactant of the CO2RR occurring on the catalysts, which can be obtained directly from DFT computations; ΔEZPE, TΔS, and  are zero-point energy correction, entropy correction and enthalpic temperature correction at T = 298 K, respectively (Fig. 1a), which were calculated from the vibrational frequencies vi. h and KB are the Planck constant and Boltzmann constant, respectively. For surface adsorbates, only vibration modes of the adsorbates were taken into account for thermodynamic correction, assuming that changes in the vibrations of the catalyst surface caused by the presence of the adsorbate were minimal.24
 Fig. 1  (a) Assessment of free energies starting from DFT calculations and adding zero-point energy, entropy, and solvation corrections. (b) An example of a free energy diagram of the NRR process along the reaction coordinate. Reprinted with permission.30 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic plot of the abundance of DOS (D′(E) = D(E)W(E)), defined as the DOS and weight function multiplied near the Fermi level. The derivative of the Fermi–Dirac function is used as the weight function. Reprinted with permission.43 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) |ΔGH| as a function of the number of electrons the O atom gains (Ne). Reprinted with permission.45 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
For gas molecules such as O2, CO, CO2 and N2, the correction of the thermodynamic quantity needs to include the contributions of vibration, translation, rotation and electronic excitation to the partition function. Then the corrections are obtained from the relationship between partition function with internal energy (U), enthalpy (H) and entropy (S). G(T) = EDFT + ZPE + H(T) − TS. Table 1 compares the thermodynamic corrections from experiments25 with the correction method used for surface adsorbates (considering only vibration contributions) and the partition function based approach. Clearly, a partition function based method that considers contributions from vibration, translation, rotation and electronic excitation fits better with experimental values for entropy and enthalpy. However, it is still questionable whether the ZPE obtained from frequency calculations based on a harmonic approximation and electronic energy from DFT can achieve a high level of accuracy or not. It is stated that the PBE exchange–correlation functional fails to deal correctly with the free energy of O2, CO and CO2 molecules.24,26 Therefore, thermodynamic experimental data based on standard formation energies as a reference are often applied.24,27–29 Note the corrections play an important role in energy calculations, leading to a significant influence on the calculated results.
Table 1 Contributions to the free energy of a gas molecule from zero-point energy correction, enthalpic temperature correction, and entropy via vibrational correction, a partition-function-based method, and experimental values. The error in formation energy is given by the difference between the experimental value and calculated results from the PBE functional. All values are given in eV






Vibrationsa
Partition function
Exp.b
Error (ΔGf)b PBE


ZPE



−TS
ZPE

H(T)
−S(T)

H(T)
−S(T)





a The contribution of a frequency below 50 cm−1 is calculated as 50 cm−1.
b Experimental values are obtained from NIST.25
c Method in ref. 29.
d Formation energy is based on the reaction: G(N2) = 2G(NH3)–3G(H2)–2Gf(NH3).





H2
0.2729
0.0454
−0.1246
0.2667
0.0893
−0.4031
0.0878
−0.4037
−0.0824


H2O
0.5719
0.0455
−0.1246
0.5657
0.1029
−0.5838
0.1026
−0.5835
−0.0624


CO2
0.3128
0.0535
−0.1351
0.3066
0.0980
−0.6622
0.0971
−0.6606
0.1324/0.1627


CO
0.1378
0.0454
−0.1245
0.1317
0.0899
−0.6109
0.0899
−0.6108
−0.5124/−0.2527


O2
0.1031
0.0455
−0.1247
0.0969
0.0900
−0.6345
0.0900
−0.6339
0.18c


N2
0.1566
0.0454
−0.1246
0.1504
0.0899
−0.5924
0.0899
−0.5921
−0.48d




Based on thermodynamic analysis, all possible reaction paths in a sequence of proton transfers along with their energy profiles can often be seen in theoretical discussions, as shown in an example of the NRR process on B-doped graphene in Fig. 1b.30 The elementary step with the most positive energy change ΔGmax along the unified reaction path is determined as the potential-determining step, and also as the estimated limiting potential. The optimum reaction path with the smallest ΔGmax among all possible paths is then established. Therefore, from a purely thermodynamic perspective, it is possible to depict the overall free-energy landscapes of numerous targeted materials and active sites. On the basis of the CHE model, many research groups, including our group, have carried out a large number of theoretical studies in recent years on electro-catalytic processes, such as HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR and NRR.9,31–36
2.2 Scaling relationship and descriptors
The calculated limiting potential, as derived from the CHE model, depends mainly on the adsorption energies of the two intermediates with the largest energy difference along the reaction paths. Intriguingly, the adsorption energies of the intermediates at the same specific active sites across a range of catalyst surfaces are found to scale approximately with the adsorption energy of the central, i.e. the scaling, relationship.37,38 ΔGi = a0,iΔG0 + b0,i(3)
Volcano-type activity plots can be obtained with the scaling relationships of reaction intermediates, complying with the Sabatier principle, which states that optimal catalytic activity occurs when the adsorption energies are in an intermediary state, that is neither too strong nor too weak. In the case of CO2RR, only Cu based catalysts can lead to deep reduction products like hydrocarbons and alcohols, as the adsorption energy of CO is located closer to the volcano peak than those of other metals.39 Although the scaling relations enable us to accurately capture the trends in catalytic activity through volcano plots, it is also a severe restriction on obtaining optimal activities by forbidding the free tuning of the adsorption energies of the intermediate.38 The strategies to break scaling relations for effective electrochemical CO2RR were well summarized in previous reviews.7,40 Recently, by extending the dual-site strategy to single-atom catalysts, we designed monolayer C2N-supported heteronuclear dual-atom catalysts to break scaling relations for CO2RR.41 Through the tuning of the adsorption energy of key intermediates by dual-metal sites, two heteronuclear dual-atom catalysts were selected from 21 candidates, which can catalyze the reduction of CO2 to methane at low limiting potentials.
To gain further insight, the adsorption energies and the corresponding linear scaling relationship were proved to be related to the d-band properties of metallic surfaces.37 In the d-band model, the change in the adsorption energy across the metal surfaces arises from the electronic structure of the surface itself. The d-band center εd with respect to the Fermi energy, defined as: (4)where D(E) is the density of states (DOS) of the d states of metal atoms, and E is the energy of the d electrons. In a series of metals, a higher εd indicates that a decrease in the filling of the empty anti-bonding states leads to stronger binding energy. Later on, the d-band theory was further developed as the Fermi-abundance (DF) model,42 as the whole frontier electronic band of the metal surfaces is reactive but not every state in the band contributes equally to the surface bonding. Therefore, the reactivity of a catalytic surface should be determined by both DOS (D(E)) and the weight function (W(E)) that quantifies the degree of contribution of each electronic state to the surface bonding (Fig. 1c). The Fermi-abundance (DF) model is defined as follows: (5)where the multiplication of density of states and weight function is defined as the abundance of DOS near the Fermi level, namely D′(E) = D(E)W(E). A larger DF value represents a high distribution of occupied states near the Fermi level, corresponding to a strong binding strength between adsorbates and metal surfaces. With the modified d-band model, our group found a general reason to explain the origin of the HER activity of MXene based catalysts.43
From the scaling relationships and volcano plots, we noticed that the electro-catalytic activity trends on candidate materials can be assessed by a central energetic quantity, such as the adsorption energies and d-band center, which are also termed descriptors. Apart from adsorption energies and d-band centers, other descriptors have also been proposed to link the catalytic activity with quantities that can be easily obtained, such as surface distortion9 and generalized coordination numbers.44 A simple activity descriptor based on the charge redistribution for HER was proposed in our previous work, where the electron number of surface O atoms was found to be responsible for the H binding strength on the surface of O-terminated MXenes (Fig. 1d).45,46 On the basis of this descriptor, the excellent HER activity of several Mxenes, including Ti2CO2, W2CO2, and TiVCO2, was predicted.
2.3 Solvation effect
Electro-catalytic processes are concerned with the interface between a catalyst surface and electrolytes, while an accurate description of the interface imposes a big challenge for modern theoretical methods.13,47,48 The electric double layer model was founded decades ago to describe the electrode–electrolyte interface and gain an insight into the ion distribution and the charging behavior of the interface.49 The treatment of the electrolyte basically refers to two main approaches in current theoretical schemes: an implicit description that builds upon classical continuum models and a fully explicit simulation. The implicit model neutralizes the charged ions, which is essential for periodic calculations. It has the merits of a low computational cost and qualitatively accurate results. Several types of implicit models have been proposed and the Polarizable Continuum Model (PCM) is probably the most general and widespread one.14 Implementations of the PCM model have been reported for several widely used electronic structure codes, such as Quantum ESPRESSO,50,51 CP2K,52 and VASP (VASPsol).53 In PCM, the electrode is treated quantum-mechanically in a cavity while the electrolyte is represented as a polarizable dielectric continuum described by the isotropic dielectric permittivity function ε.20,53 As the electrode interacts with the electrolyte, the dielectric medium readjusts and polarizes to stabilize the charge distribution of the system by considering the polarization of the electrolyte by the electronic structure of the electrode, the corresponding response of the electrode to the electrolyte, and the effects of cavitation and dispersion. The interface between the electrode and electrolyte is described in such a way that the relative permittivity of the electrolyte and the electrode electronic charge density show the following functional dependence (Fig. 2a): (6)where εb denotes the relative permittivity of the bulk solvent, and the cavity shape function ζ is expressed as: (7)
 Fig. 2  (a) The spatial decomposition of the electrode–electrolyte system into solute, interface, and electrolyte regions for an fcc Pt(111) surface embedded in an electrolyte. Reprinted with permission.20 Copyright 2019, AIP Publishing. (b) Left: Field distribution on Pt(111) with explicit solvent molecules and a solvated sodium ion; right: field distribution on Pt(111) with implicit solvation, charged to have the same work function as in the left panel. Reprinted with permission.16 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The two parameters, an electron density cutoff nc and a smoothness parameter σ, determine the solvation and ion effect. The implicit electrolyte model is then defined by the generalized Poisson–Boltzmann equation and the additional local potential.20 Within the PCM framework, the cation effect can be considered as an electric field contributing to the total energy E:54,55 (8)where μ and α represent the intrinsic dipole moment and polarizability values for the adsorbate, and the electric field is denoted as ε.
Despite the incorporation of solvation energy into the free energy calculation in the CHE model, these homogeneous solvation models cannot represent directional interactions that are crucial to describing the stabilization of adsorbed species, or the solvent molecules do not act as a uniform homogeneous medium. For instance, Asthagiri et al. considered several water molecules or a single-water layer at the metal surface to model solvation effects, and they proposed that the experimentally observed production of methane and ethylene on Cu(111) catalysts occurs through the reduction of carbon monoxide (*CO) to a hydroxymethylidyne (*COH) intermediate,56 instead of the *CHO species proposed by the Nørskov group.24 Chan et al. pointed out several challenges relating to the linearized Poisson–Boltzmann/polarizable continuum models, which place charge unphysically close to the surface and adsorbates, and include excessively steep ramping of the dielectric constant from the surface to the bulk solvent.16 In addition, the field distribution by PCM with the default parameters provides a very different picture from an explicit model with a solvated cation (Fig. 2b).
Explicit models, on the other hand, include solvent molecules and cations on the electrode surfaces for quantum mechanical calculations. Therefore, the interaction between solvent and electrode can be accurately described, e.g. structures of adsorbates and free energy with long-range electrostatic interactions, Fermi energy directly influenced by local changes in the solvent, and pH and cation effects. However, the explicit models require a considerable number of solvent molecules and large supercells to converge the average structure of the liquid and avoid artificial electron work functions and molecular arrangements due to the size effect.19,57 Bilayer water structures, extracts from the water bulk phase in a hexagonal arrangement, on metal surfaces are often applied by static DFT to model the interface between electrode and solution, where the catalytic reactions occur. Nevertheless, the layered water structure would be fixed at an energetically favorable local point and typically assumed to be ice-like for numerical convenience, while the exact form of the bilayer structure is sensitive to both thermodynamic preferences and the kinetics allowed under experimental conditions (applied potential and temperature).58 The dynamic solvent structure and arrangement have non-negligible influence on adsorbate geometries, energies, and then reaction pathways beyond the electric field effect due to the electrochemical potential.59
Direct ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), on the one hand, provides dynamic and reliably accurate information for the electrode–electrolyte interface and electronic polarization effects, which can be very useful in modeling electro-catalytic systems (Fig. 3a and b).60 These simulations have been invaluable in identifying not only how a solution can externally influence the surface chemistry, but how it can also actually participate directly in the chemistry.47,61 The Groß group performed an AIMD study on the solvation effect of a Pt(111) surface with six water layers, where partial charge transfer from the first water layer toward the Pt electrode is observed, implying a demand for quantum chemical treatment of the interface interaction.19 On the other hand, the simulation determines the geometric and electronic structure at each time step by DFT calculations and requires a statistical average over a large number of atomic configurations for sampling, making the methods extremely computationally expensive. Besides, the AIMD simulations require large unit cells. With a large cell containing 144 water molecules, where a variation of ±0.23 eV in the work function remains along the trajectory, the change can reach ±0.61 eV with a lower number of water molecules.57 Under these circumstances, recent studies have initiated AIMD simulations to gain detailed information on the solvated reaction mechanisms with plausible assumptions and techniques to reduce computation costs. For example, it is generally suggested that the AIMD simulations should run for at least 30–40 ps for a given interface structure in order to simulate water in a liquid phase and yield statistically significant results.62 To improve the time efficiency, the Goddard and Liu groups adopt a strategy to reduce the total computational time based on a combination of two levels of theory.63–66 A reactive molecular dynamics (RMD) simulation using the ReaxFF reactive force field for electrode and water is firstly carried out for a long time of 2 ns; then AIMD simulation follows with the pre-equilibrated interface structure obtained by RMD. In this way, the time steps of independent AIMD at 298 K can then be shortened to be 10 ps, which has been shown to be sufficient for retrieving thermodynamic functions and vibrational spectra for liquids.
 Fig. 3  (a) An explicit model for a water/Pt(100) interface (∼6 water layers); (b) an explicit + Na+ model (∼6 water layers +1 Na); and (c) an explicit + implicit model (∼3 water layers + implicit solvation model). Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Another alternative is hybrid methods, which retain an ab initio consideration of the effect of solvent and cations at the interface and leave other solvent molecules either for the implicit model (microsolvation) or force field (QM/MM).15,18,48,67 The mixed models minimize computational costs with an attempt to account for direct interaction at the interface, like hydrogen bonding, by a finite number of solvent molecules (Fig. 3c). Nevertheless, the main challenge for the hybrid method is to identify enough solvent molecules and reasonable molecular arrangements to capture the crucial effects. The method is then mainly applied in molecule systems or in embedding cluster calculations by quantum chemistry approaches, while studies on periodic surfaces have been reported in only a very few cases.13,68 Heyden et al. proposed a hybrid quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) approach, which divided the total energy in solution into two parts: the energy calculated in vacuum by periodic slab models and a perturbation term (the solvation energy) calculated by cluster models embedded in a point-charge field of the solvent.48 As an application, the authors investigated the initial O–H and C–H bond cleavages of ethylene glycol (EG) over Pt(111) in an aqueous-phase environment. They concluded that for processes involving hydrogen bonding, like O–H bond cleavage, both the transition state and the product state are stabilized in a solvent environment, while the C–H bond dissociations give similar results for the hybrid method and inexplicit model.
2.4 Applied potential
Realistic modeling of electrochemical reactions should also include the external potential, defined as the electromotive force applied to a cell consisting of a working electrode and a reference electrode, under experimental conditions. The CHE model (eqn (1)) takes the potential as a constant term, −eU, in all elemental steps, which should be improved, as the potential can have effects on the adsorption, reaction, and desorption of species on the electrode. Many research groups have proposed a variety of schemes implemented within DFT models for a charged interface, yet the computational simulations of a constant potential are still challenging.15
A slab model for the periodic calculation can be charged with a fraction of an electron that is either added or subtracted on the electrode surface, as proposed by Neurock et al., and the potential can thus be varied continuously.69 However, the requirement of a neutral system simultaneously introduces a homogenous background charge, which can be delocalized everywhere in space. Moreover, the simulation requires a large supercell to prevent image interaction. It is also suggested that a counter charge can emerge in a plane layer, which is far away from the electrode and solvent layers, but this may result in unfeasible electrostatic potentials.70,71 A different strategy is to place a varying number of additional hydrogen atoms in the ice-like water layers since electrode surfaces at negative potentials have a high coverage of hydrogen (Fig. 4).72,73 As the hydrogen atoms are solvated into the electrolyte to form protons while the electrons transfer to the catalyst surfaces, the surface charge can then be modulated by varying the proton/electron concentration. The scale between the charged surfaces with the two models described above and a potential applied to the electrode (U) is related to the work-function ϕ of the system and the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), as outlined by Trasatti.74 U = ϕ − ϕSHE(9)
 Fig. 4  An electrostatic potential profile averaged on the surface plane as a function of the z-axis. The blue line was calculated from the neutral system and the red line from the charged system by additional H highlighted in yellow. Reprinted with permission.72 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
The work function ϕ is defined by the potential of the electrons (at the Fermi level) relative to a vacuum, Evac − EFermi, and it changes with the varying of the electrons. The absolute position of the SHE is also relative to the vacuum level, but the value is not well determined and is commonly taken from experiments to range from 4.44 eV to 4.85 eV.75
Both the above-mentioned methods correspond to constant charge electronic structure calculations while electrochemical reactions operate at a constant potential, which is defined by the work function according to eqn (9). In other words, the work function of the charged surface needs to be fixed to keep the potential constant. However, the work function changes with varying coordinates during the reactions due to the finite simulation cell sizes.76 Besides, the work function is also sensitive to the explicitly treated water molecules in solvated models, arising from a static dipole term produced by the orientation of the water molecules and a charge polarization term, which corresponds to the charge transfer or Pauli repulsion at the electrode surface and water interface.19,77,78 By calculating the potential of zero charge (PZC), which is defined as the potential at which no excess charge exists on metal surfaces, Cheng et al. found that the majority of the interface dipole potential is induced by the charge transfer from water to the surface, while water orientation provides only a small contribution under the PZC conditions (∼0.0–0.2 eV).79 Skylaris et al. showed the inconsistency of the PZC calculated from explicit and implicit (default parameters) solvation models, and the PCM can be further improved by parametrizing the cavity according to individual atoms.78 To reduce or avoid the finite-size effect, Nørskov et al. employed a cell extrapolation method by calculating the energy changes with increasing cell sizes; then the energies can be extrapolated to an infinite cell size.73 This approach can be quite costly computationally for complex reactions and systems, based on the roughly cubic scaling of DFT with system size. Later on, the group further proposed a charge extrapolation technique for reducing the computation cost by linking the slope of the energy, which depends linearly on potential change, with the Bader charge change between states. Nevertheless, the charge-partitioning in a DFT calculation is very sensitive to field-sensitive chemical steps.18 Another alternative for a constant potential is continuum charging methods, where the Fermi energy is controlled with a specific number of electrons and the compensating charge is distributed in the continuum solvent model, which is solved self-consistently using a linearized Poisson–Boltzmann equation.71,80,81 εb∇2ϕ(r) − εbkb2∇2ϕ(r) = 4π(ρDFT(r) +ρext(r))(10) (11)where ϕ(r) is the potential field, ρDFT is based on the charge density of the DFT scheme, ρext denotes the charge density of the bound charge and ionic charges of the cations and anions in the electrolyte. kb2 represents the inverse Debye screening length in the bulk electrolyte. The valence number and the number densities of the ionic species i in the bulk are included as Z and Ni, respectively. To validate the assumptions in the model, Head-Gordon et al. calculated the PZC for a variety of surfaces and the results agree with the experiments within a mean average error of 0.09 eV.81 Nevertheless, the drawback of the approach is that it carries with it all the limitations of using a continuum model for the solvent and electrolyte distribution.
3. Kinetic barriers
The CHE model provides thermodynamics data along the reaction path, and kinetic barriers involved in electrochemical reactions are not considered. It simply takes the largest positive free energy differences among all the elementary steps as the activation barrier for the rate-limiting step. It can occasionally be noticed that the hydride-transfer mechanism is applied to determine the energy barriers for electrochemical reactions like CO2RR.82–84 Specifically, solved protons firstly form hydrides on metal surfaces and then perform a nucleophilic attack on ascorbates like CO2. Transition states of surface reactions without proton–electron pair coupling are extrapolated to the solvated system. For the electro-reduction of a surface-bound species, the activation barrier is instead determined by an equivalent surface hydrogenation reaction, which can be calculated by the nudged elastic band (NEB) method and zero-point energy correction.56 However, the energy barrier of hydrogen transfer becomes the rate-determining step and the reaction is highly thermally dependent, instead of being a potential-dependent reaction. In this respect, our group proposed a brand new mechanism for the NRR process on noble metals.85 As shown in Fig. 5a, surface hydrogenation is found to be the first step instead of N2 adsorption. This step is also the potential-determining step that can occur at low potential. N2 can react with surface *H to generate *N2H2 by conquering a relatively high energy barrier, which determines the overall reaction rate. Therefore, NRR on noble metal catalysts can take place at low potentials, but with a low NH3 yield rate. The theoretical results agree well with the experiments.
 Fig. 5  (a) A schematic diagram of the surface-hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR on noble-metal-based catalysts. (b–d) Simplified schematic diagrams of metadynamics, umbrella sampling, and slow-growth along a hypothetical constrained variable. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
To model a proton coupled electron transfer process, the electrolyte should be explicitly incorporated in a computationally tractable manner. Earlier attempts included a solvent limit for electrode surfaces with low numbers of water molecules for AIMD simulations or a pre-optimized hexagonally close-packed ice-like network of water molecules for static DFT calculations. However, neither of these models can provide accurate features of the liquid-like water networks, as we discussed in Section 2.3. With ever-increasing computational powers and reasonable approximations, recent studies21,63–66 have initiated enhanced sampling methods including constrained MD, metadynamics, and umbrella sampling, to include adequate layers of water molecules for explicit treatment, providing a unified framework for computing free energies to sample the reaction-relevant areas of potential energy surfaces along with reaction coordinates, which are defined by a selected number of collective variables (CVs). In electrochemical reactions, the CVs describe the motion from solved protons to adsorbates and the structural evolution of the adsorbates.
Within a general umbrella sampling scheme, multiple regional “windows” at a bias potential V were set with initial structures with different reaction coordinate values along the selected CV.86 (12)where h and ω are parameters controlling the height and width of the Gaussian peak. The system in each window is thus constrained in a defined region along the CV, and the adjacent windows allow a slight overlap of the reaction coordinate for proper construction of the potential of mean force (PMF) curve, integration of which provides free energy profiles.
The constrained MD (slow-growth) method defines a geometric parameter ξ, which changes linearly from the initial state (IS) to the final state (FS) with a velocity of transformation ; along with the selected CV. The irreversible work w, which relates to the free energy via Jarzynski's identity in the limit of infinitesimally small, can be computed.66,84,87 (13)where F is the free energy calculated at general coordinate q which is evolving with t.
In metadynamics, the Hamiltonian is modified with an extra bias potential term acting on selected CVs, which are time dependent, to force the system to leave local minima and thus sample low-probability states.21,63,65 (14)
The bias term is updated with a new Gaussian potential with a time increment tG, and defined by a sum of Gaussian hills with height h and width ω. The biased potential is related to the free energy in the limit of infinite simulation time. (15)
A schematic pictures of the three approaches can be seen in Fig. 5b–d. It seems that the slow-growth approach stands out from the three as the most inexpensive, although all three sampling methods require a lot of computational time to have adequate samples. In fact, a number of constrained MD simulations for the windows are necessary, and other degrees of freedom suggest the CV may lead to unreal situations. Metadynamics can incorporate several CVs in one elementary step and achieve accurate results with small perturbations, providing detailed information on the potential energy surfaces. In turn, the simulation time should be long enough for reasonable sampling; otherwise, the results from several tests can be very different.63
4. Multiscale analysis
The above sections introduce models and methods for the calculation of the free energies and kinetic barriers of the elementary processes in the electro-catalytic cycles based on DFT level, focusing on either the surfaces of the catalysts or the interface between catalyst and electrolyte. Furthermore, the active sites can be sensitive to the surrounding environment, including local concentrations, temperatures, and fields, which change during the reactions with overall heat and mass transport in an electrochemical cell.17 In these cases, multiscale modeling approaches are applied to describe the reactive processes or charge transport at large scales. Typically, microkinetic models of either mean-field rate equation or spatially resolved kinetic Monte Carlo type provide invaluable mechanistic insight into reaction mechanisms, rate-determining steps and the role or interplay of different active sites.17,88,89
Microkinetic modeling based on the mean-field rate approximation, with its low computational cost, is widely applied in heterogeneous catalysis.88,90 The overall electrochemical reaction can be divided into a set of coupled elementary steps, where each step is subject to a net rate (r) in combination with the forward (k+) and backward (k−) reactions.91,92 r = k+θmA − k−θnB(16)where θi denotes the coverage of adsorbates/intermediates on the surfaces, and follows the site conservation role: (17)
The rate constants were calculated based on transitional state theory with activation barriers (Ea) associated with applied potentials U. (18)where Ai represents an effective pre-exponential factor and βi denotes the symmetric factor, Ui is the reversible potential of step i deduced from Ui = −ΔGi/e. Subsequently, the coverage of certain adsorbates/intermediates is correlated with the corresponding activation energies and applied potentials. Using a steady-state approximation, which assumes that the coverage of all surface intermediates does not change with time , the set of differential equations from all coupled steps can then be solved numerically. Therein, the relation curve between the applied potential with the coverage of all the adsorbates/intermediates can be generated, and the turn over frequency (TOF) derived. The potential-dependent current density, which enables a direct comparison with experimental data and predicts the performance of designed catalysts, is defined as: j = eρTOFe−(19)where ρ is the surface density of active sites and TOFe− is the TOF of electrons. Another step is to study the sensitivity of the rate to the free energy of intermediate states, the degree of rate control,93 (20)where r stands for the overall reaction rate and Ki denotes the equilibrium constant of elementary step i.
It is apparent that kinetic modeling is simplified with several assumptions to solve the sets of differential equations effectively. Meanwhile, such assumptions neglect certain factors that have an influence on the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of the elementary reactions. Typically, the simple microkinetic model assumes that there are no adsorbate–adsorbate interactions, which can have a considerable effect on the overall reaction rate for situations with high surface coverage. In that case, the Nørskov group takes the lateral adsorbate–adsorbate interactions into consideration by a first-order or second-order expansion in the coverage for the differential adsorption energy.94–96 A stricter way is to perform lattice kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, accounting for spatial correlations and diffusion issues of the adsorbates.97 However, the limitation for practical applications of kMC, similar to explicit AIMD simulations, is the timescale problem, and acceleration techniques are commonly applied for certain interests. Most kMC studies currently relate to thermal reactions like ammonia syntheses and CO oxidation,98,99 while very few cases concern electro-catalytic processes. Bligaard et al. used a translation algorithm and developed a lattice kMC solver for the kinetic study of CO oxidation on fcc(111) transition.100 Results of systematic comparisons indicate that the kMC simulations provide additional insight into mean-field simulations for cases where diffusion and adsorbate–adsorbate interactions contribute to the mixing of the adsorbates. Greeley et al. performed the first case study of a combined DFT and kMC on NO reduction on Pt(100), and predicted NO stripping curves in excellent agreement with experiments.101
The importance of mass transport effects on the overall performance of heterogeneous reactions is highlighted by various studies,102–105 and the rational design of electro-catalysts requires a deep understanding of the electrochemical reactions at different scales. However, the incorporation of microkinetic descriptions from mesoscopic up to macroscopic scale is at an early stage and less advanced.17 Bell et al. combined a continuum model for species transport with a microkinetic model for cathode reaction dynamics, including diffusion, migration and the interconversion of anionic species.106 The transport model of all species at the cathode and anode surfaces is modeled by the Nernst–Planck equations: (21)where Ni is the molar flux, Di is the diffusion coefficient, ci is the concentration of the ith species, x is the position, zi is the charge number, ui is the mobility of ion obtained from the Nernst–Einstein relationship, F stands for Faraday's constant, and ϕl denotes the electrolyte potential. Meanwhile, the transport model fulfills the general conservation of mass equation: (22)where Ri is the volumetric rate of formation of species i. Later on, Chan et al. described electrostatic potential by using the Poisson equation, forming Poisson–Nernst–Planck (PNP) equations.22 (23)where εb and ρ refer to the bulk dielectric permittivity and charge density, respectively. In addition, the multiscale model (Fig. 6) also includes the charged electric double layer, the effect of cation–cation repulsion and the associated finite ion size effects, thus reproducing the experimental CO polarization curve and revealing insight into reaction mechanisms.
 Fig. 6  A schematic illustration of the multiscale approach to electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. The reaction kinetics obtained from field-dependent DFT calculations are used to parameterize a microkinetics model. The model is coupled to a continuum mass transport model, which models the diffusion, migration, and reaction of species inside the boundary layer. Reprinted with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
5. Machine learning
Although DFT calculation allows for estimation of thermodynamic and kinetic reaction parameters with a fair accuracy and relatively low computational cost compared with traditional Hartree–Fock based methods, the simulation cycles remain time-consuming due to the complexity of the reaction network and a wide range of material systems. In recent years, with the development of interdisciplinary integration, computer science technology has been applied to the design of catalytic materials, which brings new ideas to interdisciplinary research. Among them, the most representative area is a machine learning algorithm, aiming to realize the design of targeted functional materials, so as to accelerate the material research and development process.107–109 Currently, machine learning has made remarkable progress in functional material design. With the help of the machine learning method, our group predicted the band gaps of more than 5000 kinds of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite and nearly 20000 kinds of inorganic mixed halide perovskite materials with DFT accuracy.110,111 Subsequently, we successfully screened more than 200 kinds of stable and non-toxic perovskite solar cell candidate materials with appropriate band gaps.111 Ulissi et al. used a combination of machine learning and surrogate-based optimization to predict electro-catalyst performance, and candidate surfaces across 54 alloys for CO2RR and 102 alloys for HER were finally identified from 1499 alloys of 31 different elements.112 Kim et al. developed a slab graph convolutional neural network to predict surface catalytic reaction by evaluating the binding energies, and four new NRR catalysts with low limiting potential and high faradaic efficiency were found from 870 candidate materials.113 Ideally, as the material system has an effective structure–activity relationship, machine learning algorithms can “learn”, so as to predict the target properties of materials in a facile way and break the constraints of traditional trial-and-error methods. The most prominent advantage of the machine learning algorithm is avoiding complicated and time-consuming processes, such as solving quantum mechanical equations, and revealing reaction processes, etc., in a short time.
There are three challenges in the application of machine learning technology in the design of electro-catalysts. Firstly, a high-quality universal data set for catalytic activity needs to be established. So far, databases collected from studies involving preparation–structure–activity relationships of catalysts are missing, and also the databases may face problems like deficiency and inconsistency of data from different levels of theory or experiment.107 Secondly, the search for feature descriptors with physical/chemical significance and transplantation is ongoing. A single catalytic descriptor based on prior physical and chemical knowledge is often limited to describing the reaction process of various systems.114 The description of the activity and selectivity of the catalysts, especially for the presence of surface vacancies, doping, and co-adsorption molecules, is uneasy. Last but not least, machine learning models for the kinetic processes of catalytic reactions need to be constructed. As mentioned above, MD methods often provide deep and accurate results for catalytic reactions, while these methods suffer from expensive cost, short simulation times and small length scales.115,116 Most of the existing electro-catalytic machine learning models are simply based on a description of reaction activity, without considering the dynamic effect, and there is still a gap between them and complex real electro-catalytic models.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
To summarize, this review presents commonly applied theoretical methods and models for electro-catalysis over a wide range, from simple adsorption energy calculations by DFT to multiscale analysis including microkinetics and mass transport, from approximated energetic calculations in a vacuum to complicated simulations considering explicit solvent molecules, pH, cations, multiple species in the solvent and external applied potentials. With ever-increasing computing power and rapid method development, computational approaches based on first-principles have made considerable progress on electro-catalysis over the past decade. The reviewed models and methods, such as the CHE model, applied potential methods, the treatment of electrode–electrolyte interface, and multiscale analysis, have overcome some of the challenges in this area and have demonstrated great success in providing mechanistic understanding for experiments, thus bridging the gap between theory and experiment. Moreover, theoretical calculations, especially DFT based modeling, establish composition–structure–activity relationships involved in heterogeneous catalysis and predict catalytic behavior at the atomic level. In the future, theoretical methods will continue to play an essential role in understanding and predicting electro-catalytic activity to shed new light onto catalyst design. However, realistic simulations of electrochemical reactions under experimental conditions remain a grand challenge from many perspectives, and continuous efforts are required.
The CHE model represents a very simple and widely used model for electro-catalysis from a thermochemical perspective, allowing screening of extensive candidates as effective catalysts with scaling relationships and descriptors like binding energies and coordination numbers. Besides, these data can be applied for machine learning schemes for further reduction in computational costs. However, the limitations of ML on catalysts currently rest on two facts, (a) the limited number of training datasets. For descriptors like binding energy, which are obtained by DFT calculations, it is hardly feasible to obtain hundreds or thousands of individuals. Nevertheless, training datasets with small numbers may lead to over-fitting and incorrect predictions.117 (b) The choice of descriptors. The descriptors should have high relevance to the catalytic activity or structures, and more relevant descriptors will also result in better predictions.
The energetic calculations within the CHE model can also be applied in combination with thermal corrections, solvent and external electric fields, but these corrections need to be used with caution. In the case of thermal properties, the calculated frequencies based on a harmonic approximation may be attributed to unexpected disturbance from lattice vibration other than 3N degrees of freedom of the adsorbates, and vibrations can have large effects on the free energies, especially for small numbers. Moreover, it should be noted that the correction methods for adsorbates and gas-phase molecules are different.118 As for the solvent effect and external electric fields, the simulations should involve reliable methods to model the electrode–electrolyte interface. On the one hand, polarizable continuum models based on the linear Poisson–Boltzmann equation, providing a solution with less computational effort, have been successfully utilized in numerous studies of electro-catalysis. However, the implicit models may fail for cases involving strong interactions like hydrogen bonding or local cation effects. On the other hand, AIMD treats the solvent, water in most cases, ions and cations explicitly, and captures the dynamic changes in the interface and surroundings. With the help of enhanced sampling methods such as slow-growth, umbrella sampling, and metadynamics, the free energy profiles along defined specific reaction coordinates can be collected statistically and thus the kinetic barrier can consequently be obtained. In addition to the dynamic change in the solvents, more attention also needs to be paid to structural evolution, as the activity is highly dependent on the structure around the active sites.119,120 Therefore, we expect that AIMD calculation will play an important role in understanding the detailed reaction mechanism of electro-catalysis, as the CHE model is constrained by thermodynamics. Nevertheless, the limitation for AIMD, and also the kinetic Monte Carlo model, which includes multiple effects, is the timescales that are commonly required to be long enough to sample over adequate trajectories for reasonable analysis. The dilemma, in our opinion, can be alleviated by force-field approaches and machine learning techniques, and the implementation of such methods into software like VASP is expected.116 It should be recognized that all these models are within the framework of DFT, which suffers from inherent approximations and may cause inaccurate predictions with strongly correlated systems.121 It is strongly suggested that further microkinetic studies should be performed with the obtained thermodynamics and kinetic barriers, which will not require much computational effort. Subsequently, the rate-determining step of the overall reaction, concentration of the intermediates, adsorbate–adsorbate interactions, polarization curves, etc. can be further illuminated.
The incorporation of an applied external potential at the electrode surface remains a big challenge for computational electro-catalysis. With implicit and explicit solvation models, the applied potential can be modulated by charges or extra hydrogen atoms. However, a constant potential is hard to maintain as the Fermi level or the work function is very sensitive to the charge transfer and dynamics at the interface. Several groups have recommended that the constant potential can be treated by a linearized Poisson–Boltzmann equation with polarizable continuum models, as we discussed in Section 2.4,16,66,81 but the model still requires further case studies for validation.
To link theory with experiments, multiscale approaches that combine all the effective factors are encouraged. These approaches have proved to be in excellent agreement with experiments and thus provide insight into detailed mechanisms.22,106,122 However, the inclusion of all the mentioned thermodynamics, kinetics, and mass transport data, etc. is very time-consuming and exhausting. Therefore, the development of effective and facile methods and models for electro-catalysis will require continuous effort in coming years.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21525311, 21773027 and 21703032), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China. The authors are grateful for computational resources from the Big Data Computing Center of Southeast University and National Supercomputing Center of Tianjin.
Notes and references
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 4998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
J. K. Norskov and C. H. Christensen, Science, 2006, 312, 1322–1323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, R. Xia and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 255–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Ge, C. Liu, G. Wang and W. Xing, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 4, 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vasileff, C. Xu, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Qiao, Chem, 2018, 4, 1809–1831 CAS .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chattot, O. Le Bacq, V. Beermann, S. Kühl, J. Herranz, S. Henning, L. Kühn, T. Asset, L. Guétaz, G. Renou, J. Drnec, P. Bordet, A. Pasturel, A. Eychmüller, T. J. Schmidt, P. Strasser, L. Dubau and F. Maillard, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 827–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, G. Kour, X. Mao and A. Du, J. Catal., 2020, 382, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, K. Reuter and A. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 599–606 RSC .
Z. W. Chen, L. X. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23782–23802 RSC .
Y. Basdogan, A. M. Maldonado and J. A. Keith, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci., 2020, 10, 1446 Search PubMed .
O. Andreussi and G. Fisicaro, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2019, 119, e25725 CrossRef .
A. Roldan, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 10, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gauthier, S. Ringe, C. F. Dickens, A. J. Garza, A. T. Bell, M. Head-Gordon, J. K. Nørskov and K. Chan, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 920–931 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bruix, J. T. Margraf, M. Andersen and K. Reuter, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 659–670 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gauthier, C. F. Dickens, H. H. Heenen, S. Vijay, S. Ringe and K. Chan, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 6895–6906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sakong and A. Groß, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 149, 084705 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mathew, V. S. C. Kolluru, S. Mula, S. N. Steinmann and R. G. Hennig, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 234101 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cheng, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard III, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4767–4773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ringe, C. G. Morales-Guio, L. D. Chen, M. Fields, T. F. Jaramillo, C. Hahn and K. Chan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 RSC .

          M. W. Chase, NIST Standard Reference Database 13, NIST-JANAF Thermochemical Tables, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg MD,  1998 Search PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7282–7285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Su, S. H. Chan and Q. Sun, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6658–6664 CrossRef CAS .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. I. Martínez, J. M. García-Lastra, M. Mogensen and J. Rossmeisl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7699–7701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Martínez, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 045120 CrossRef .
C. Ling, X. Niu, Q. Li, A. Du and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14161–14168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ling, Q. Li, A. Du and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36866–36872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, Q. Li, C. Ling, Y. Zhang, Y. Ouyang, X. Bai and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4865–4871 RSC .
Y. Ouyang, Q. Li, L. Shi, C. Ling and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2289–2294 RSC .
Y. Qin, H.-H. Wu, L. A. Zhang, X. Zhou, Y. Bu, W. Zhang, F. Chu, Y. Li, Y. Kong, Q. Zhang, D. Ding, Y. Tao, Y. Li, M. Liu and X. C. Zeng, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 610–619 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Xiao, H. Peng, X. Hong, K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, S. K. Matta, G. Will and A. Du, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800419 CrossRef .
B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 1995, 343, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, T. Hatsukade, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram, J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14107–14113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li and Q. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600463 CrossRef .
Y. Ouyang, L. Shi, X. Bai, Q. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 1807–1813 RSC .
B. Huang, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6239–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang, Q. Li and J. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1397–1403 CrossRef CAS .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. Tymoczko, V. Colic, Q. H. Vu, M. D. Pohl, K. Morgenstern, D. Loffreda, P. Sautet, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bandarenka, Science, 2015, 350, 185–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9026–9032 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang, Q. Chen and J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600180 CrossRef PubMed .
C. D. Taylor and M. Neurock, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2005, 9, 49–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saleheen and A. Heyden, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2188–2194 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Grahame, Chem. Rev., 1947, 41, 441–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. Buongiorno Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, N. Colonna, I. Carnimeo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, P. Delugas, R. A. DiStasio, A. Ferretti, A. Floris, G. Fratesi, G. Fugallo, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, F. Giustino, T. Gorni, J. Jia, M. Kawamura, H. Y. Ko, A. Kokalj, E. Küçükbenli, M. Lazzeri, M. Marsili, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, N. L. Nguyen, H. V. Nguyen, A. Otero-de-la-Roza, L. Paulatto, S. Poncé, D. Rocca, R. Sabatini, B. Santra, M. Schlipf, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, I. Timrov, T. Thonhauser, P. Umari, N. Vast, X. Wu and S. Baroni, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 465901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari and R. M. Wentzcovitch, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 395502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. VandeVondele, F. Mohamed, M. Krack, J. Hutter, M. Sprik and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 014515 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mathew, R. Sundararaman, K. Letchworth-Weaver, T. A. Arias and R. G. Hennig, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 084106 CrossRef PubMed .
L. D. Chen, M. Urushihara, K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7133–7139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Resasco, L. D. Chen, E. Clark, C. Tsai, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, K. Chan and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11277–11287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Nie, W. Luo, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, J. Catal., 2014, 312, 108–122 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakong, K. Forster-Tonigold and A. Groß, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 194701 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Schnur and A. Groß, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 125003 CrossRef .
J. A. Herron, Y. Morikawa and M. Mavrikakis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 4937–4945 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cheng, L. Wang, B. V. Merinov and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7787–7790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bagger, L. Arnarson, M. H. Hansen, E. Spohr and J. Rossmeisl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1506–1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Magnussen and A. Groß, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4777–4790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard III, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13802–13805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, A. Fortunelli and W. A. Goddard III, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 7718–7722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard III, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5773–5777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Michel, J. Zaffran, A. M. Ruppert, J. Matras-Michalska, M. Jędrzejczyk, J. Grams and P. Sautet, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12450–12453 RSC .
S. Xu and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8732–8738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Filhol and M. Neurock, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 402–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Otani and O. Sugino, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 115407 CrossRef .
K. Letchworth-Weaver and T. A. Arias, Phys. Rev. B, 2012, 86, 075140 CrossRef .
T. Sheng, D. Wang, W. Lin, P. Hu and S. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 446–454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, E. Skúlason, M. E. Björketun, V. Tripkovic and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 466, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1991, 36, 1659–1667 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skulason, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. Greeley, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3241–3250 RSC .
K. Chan and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2663–2668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tripkovic, M. E. Björketun, E. Skúlason and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 115452 CrossRef .
G. Bramley, M.-T. Nguyen, V.-A. Glezakou, R. Rousseau and C.-K. Skylaris, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2020, 16, 2703–2715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Le, M. Iannuzzi, A. Cuesta and J. Cheng, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 016801 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jinnouchi and A. B. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8747–8750 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Goodpaster, A. T. Bell and M. Head-Gordon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1471–1477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J.-X. Liu, B. Zijlstra, I. A. W. Filot, Z. Zhou, S. Sun and E. J. M. Hensen, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 200–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Pérez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Göttle, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Solis, A. G. Maher, D. K. Dogutan, D. G. Nocera and S. Hammes-Schiffer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 485–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ling, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Bai, L. Shi and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18264–18270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, Z. Wang, D. Wang, H.-F. Wang and P. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21478–21483 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oberhofer, C. Dellago and P. L. Geissler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6902–6915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Besora and F. Maseras, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci., 2018, 8, 1372 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Fang and Z.-P. Liu, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4364–4376 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Motagamwala, M. R. Ball and J. A. Dumesic, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2018, 9, 413–450 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Li and T. Heine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12732–12735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Hansen, V. Viswanathan and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6706–6718 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Campbell, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2770–2779 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Medford, C. Shi, M. J. Hoffmann, A. C. Lausche, S. R. Fitzgibbon, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 794–807 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, A. J. Medford, X. Liu, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, S. F. Bent and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3705–3714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, P. Schlexer, J. Xiao, Y. Ji, L. Wang, R. B. Sandberg, M. Tang, K. S. Brown, H. Peng, S. Ringe, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov and K. Chan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chatterjee and D. G. Vlachos, J. Comput. – Aided Mater. Des., 2007, 14, 253–308 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, H. Wang, N. Q. Su, S. Duan, T. Shen and X. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5816–5826 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Cao, Z.-J. Shao and P. Hu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 7348–7364 RSC .
T. Lu and F. Chen, J. Comput. Chem., 2012, 33, 580–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Chun, V. Apaja, A. Clayborne, K. Honkala and J. Greeley, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3869–3882 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huš, M. Grilc, A. Pavlišič, B. Likozar and A. Hellman, Catal. Today, 2019, 338, 128–140 CrossRef .
S. Matera, S. Blomberg, M. J. Hoffmann, J. Zetterberg, J. Gustafson, E. Lundgren and K. Reuter, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4514–4518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maestri, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10244–10254 RSC .
S. Suter and S. Haussener, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1668–1678 RSC .
M. R. Singh, J. D. Goodpaster, A. Z. Weber, M. Head-Gordon and A. T. Bell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 8812–8821 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Schlexer Lamoureux, K. T. Winther, J. A. Garrido Torres, V. Streibel, M. Zhao, M. Bajdich, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. Bligaard, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 3581–3601 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sanchez-Lengeling and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Science, 2018, 361, 360–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev and A. Walsh, Nature, 2018, 559, 547–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu, Q. Zhou, L. Ma, Y. Guo and J. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, Q. Zhou, Y. Ouyang, Y. Guo, Q. Li and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3405 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tran and Z. W. Ulissi, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, B. C. Yeo, Y. Park, H. M. Lee, S. S. Han and D. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 709–720 CrossRef CAS .
R. Daiyan, W. H. Saputera, H. Masood, J. Leverett, X. Lu and R. Amal, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902106 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. R. Kermode and A. De Vita, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 096405 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jinnouchi, J. Lahnsteiner, F. Karsai, G. Kresse and M. Bokdam, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 122, 225701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, R. Christensen and A. Khorshidi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 10978–10985 RSC .
J. Hussain, H. Jónsson and E. Skúlason, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5240–5249 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Cui, M. B. Ross, D. Kim, Y. Sun and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, C. S. Kley, Y. Li and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10560–10565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Chen, M. Bajdich, J. M. P. Martirez, C. M. Krauter, J. A. Gauthier, E. A. Carter, A. C. Luntz, K. Chan and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3202 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ringe, E. L. Clark, J. Resasco, A. Walton, B. Seger, A. T. Bell and K. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3001–3014 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contribute equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Qiang Li
	Qiang Li obtained his BS (2009) degree in Chemistry from Huaiyin Normal University and completed his PhD (under the supervision of P. D. Dr Karin Fink) at Karlsruhe Institute for Technology (2012.7–2015.10). He is now an associate researcher at Southeast University. His current research interests focus on chemical reactions on the surfaces or edges of low-dimensional materials.

Yixin Ouyang
	Yixin Ouyang obtained his BS degree from Southeast University in 2015. He is currently working on his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Jinlan Wang at the School of Physics at Southeast University. His current research interests focus on developing efficient catalysts for some key electrocatalytic reactions.

Jinlan Wang
	Jinlan Wang is currently a distinguished professor at the School of Physics at Southeast University. She got her PhD from the Department of Physics, Nanjing University in 2002. Then, she obtained three years of postdoctoral experience at the Chemistry Division, Argonne National Laboratory. Since 2006, she has been at Southeast University as a faculty member and developed a computational physics and chemistry group. Her current research interests mainly focus on the multi-scale simulation of two-dimensional materials, varying from growth mechanisms to electronic and optical properties to the design of new functional materials.
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Assessment of free energies starting from DFT calculations and adding zero-point energy, entropy, and solvation corrections. (b) An example of a free energy diagram of the NRR process along the reaction coordinate. Reprinted with permission.30 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic plot of the abundance of DOS (D′(E) = D(E)W(E)), defined as the DOS and weight function multiplied near the Fermi level. The derivative of the Fermi–Dirac function is used as the weight function. Reprinted with permission.43 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) |ΔGH| as a function of the number of electrons the O atom gains (Ne). Reprinted with permission.45 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 



H2	0.2729	0.0454	−0.1246	0.2667	0.0893	−0.4031	0.0878	−0.4037	−0.0824
H2O	0.5719	0.0455	−0.1246	0.5657	0.1029	−0.5838	0.1026	−0.5835	−0.0624
CO2	0.3128	0.0535	−0.1351	0.3066	0.0980	−0.6622	0.0971	−0.6606	0.1324/0.1627
CO	0.1378	0.0454	−0.1245	0.1317	0.0899	−0.6109	0.0899	−0.6108	−0.5124/−0.2527
O2	0.1031	0.0455	−0.1247	0.0969	0.0900	−0.6345	0.0900	−0.6339	0.18c
N2	0.1566	0.0454	−0.1246	0.1504	0.0899	−0.5924	0.0899	−0.5921	−0.48d
ΔGi = a0,iΔG0 + b0,i	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  (a) The spatial decomposition of the electrode–electrolyte system into solute, interface, and electrolyte regions for an fcc Pt(111) surface embedded in an electrolyte. Reprinted with permission.20 Copyright 2019, AIP Publishing. (b) Left: Field distribution on Pt(111) with explicit solvent molecules and a solvated sodium ion; right: field distribution on Pt(111) with implicit solvation, charged to have the same work function as in the left panel. Reprinted with permission.16 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 3  (a) An explicit model for a water/Pt(100) interface (∼6 water layers); (b) an explicit + Na+ model (∼6 water layers +1 Na); and (c) an explicit + implicit model (∼3 water layers + implicit solvation model). Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
U = ϕ − ϕSHE	(9)

 	Fig. 4  An electrostatic potential profile averaged on the surface plane as a function of the z-axis. The blue line was calculated from the neutral system and the red line from the charged system by additional H highlighted in yellow. Reprinted with permission.72 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 
εb∇2ϕ(r) − εbkb2∇2ϕ(r) = 4π(ρDFT(r) +ρext(r))	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 5  (a) A schematic diagram of the surface-hydrogenation mechanism for the NRR on noble-metal-based catalysts. (b–d) Simplified schematic diagrams of metadynamics, umbrella sampling, and slow-growth along a hypothetical constrained variable. Reprinted with permission.85 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
r = k+θmA − k−θnB	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
j = eρTOFe−	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)

 	Fig. 6  A schematic illustration of the multiscale approach to electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. The reaction kinetics obtained from field-dependent DFT calculations are used to parameterize a microkinetics model. The model is coupled to a continuum mass transport model, which models the diffusion, migration, and reaction of species inside the boundary layer. Reprinted with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 
Footnote
† These authors contribute equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
