Alternative current electroluminescence and flexible light emitting devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC01267B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01267B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5553-5572Alternative current electroluminescence and flexible light emitting devices

        
          
            Wanasinghe Arachchige Dumith Madushanka 
            Jayathilaka
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Amutha 
            Chinnappan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ju Nie 
            Tey
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Wei
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Seeram 
            Ramakrishna
          
          
        
      *a
aCentre for Nanofiber and Nanotechnology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, 119260, Singapore. E-mail: mpecam@nus.edu.sg; seeram@nus.edu.sg
bSingapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, Singapore, Singapore
Received 
      6th March 2019
    , Accepted 4th April 2019First published on 5th April 2019AbstractElectroluminescence (EL), the light emission under an applied electrical potential, is one of several key light emitting techniques applied over a vast range of applications. Alternative Current Electroluminescent (ACEL) is one of the major light emitting techniques discussed under EL. Even though it possesses some intrinsic advantages over Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and Light Emitting Cells (LEC), it has not been thoroughly discussed like LEDs and most of the time has been kept under the shadow of LEDs. On the other hand, flexible light emitting devices have become an emerging trend in the field as they are widely applied in consumer electronics and wearable devices, where an ACEL technique can make a significant impact for their development. This review discusses the ACEL technique in detail covering different device architectures, materials and fabrication methods highlighting the use of electrospinning techniques. In the second part, the review briefly summarizes research works in the flexible light emitting field, covering both optical and mechanical performances.
Wanasinghe Arachchige Dumith Madushanka Jayathilaka
W. A. D. M. Jayathilaka received his bachelor's honors degree in Mechanical Engineering in 2015 from the University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka. Currently, he is a PhD candidate in Prof. Seeram Ramakrishna's research group (NUSCNN) at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore. His current research interests focus on flexible electroluminescence devices based on electrospinning processes.
Amutha Chinnappan
Dr Amutha Chinnappan received her PhD degree in organic nanomaterials using ionic liquids for energy applications from Myongji University, South Korea in 2013. She then worked as a BK21 Postdoctoral Fellow until 2015, and after that became an Assistant Professor (Research) at the Department of Energy, Science and Technology, Myongji University. She is currently working as a Senior Research Fellow at the Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore. Her current research interests include green chemistry, conducting cables/wires, smart textiles, wearable/flexible electronics, and ionic liquid-based functional nanomaterials for energy applications.
Seeram Ramakrishna
Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng (seeram@nus.edu.sg; seeramrk@yahoo.com) is the Director of Center for Nanofibers and Nanotechnology at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore (NUS). NUS is ranked among the top ten engineering and technology universities in the world. He chairs the Circular Economy Taskforce, and a member of Enterprise Singapore's ISO/TC323 committee on Circular Economy. He is a Highly Cited Researcher (Clarivate Analytics). Thomson Reuters identified him among the World's most influential scientific minds. A European study (http://www.webometrics.info/en/node/58) placed him among the only 800 researchers in the world with H-index above 135 in the history of science and technology. He co-authored ∼1000 SCI listed international journal papers which received ∼88000 citations and ∼140 H-index. He is a member of the World Economic Forum Committee on the Future of Production, and Singapore Smart Manufacturing Technology standards Committee. He innovated electro-hydrodynamic technology to mass-produce nanofibers and nanoparticles with new functionalities.
Introduction
Light has become a remarkable part of human life as people seek different yet efficient light emitting sources throughout civilization. With the invention of electricity, people have explored light emission from extremely heated metallic filaments though it was a byproduct with low efficiency. Later, research on different semiconducting materials under electrical potential has led the way towards identification of cold light emission and opened the field of electroluminescence. Electroluminescence (EL) principle is the method of light emission as a result of an applied electrical potential or a flow of electric current across an active material. Here, based on the process of light generation within the active material, the EL principle is further divided into different categories where ACEL and LED outshine all other mechanisms due to their high efficiencies and wider applicability.
This electroluminescence phenomenon has been previously identified as cold emission of light and has been on the discussion table since the early 1900s where it is believed that George Destriau first introduced the term ‘electroluminescence’ in 1935.1 He reported the illuminating behavior of ZnS (zinc sulphide) powders soaked in castor oil upon the application of a high electric potential. However, throughout history, the term Electroluminescence Display (ELD) has been shared among four types of devices1 namely, powder phosphor devices, thin-film electroluminescence devices (TFEL), thick-dielectric electroluminescence device and LEDs. Later, in 1955, a review published by Piper and Williams2 reviewed available electroluminescence techniques and proposed three possible mechanisms of excitation: field ionization, ionization by impact and charge carrier injection which later was trimmed down to two basic operations: high-field EL and injection EL.3
Luminous behavior under a comparatively large electric field is defined as high-field EL principle and typically operated under the application of large alternative currents (AC). The earliest stage of EL, which used powder phosphor material, is currently known as ‘powder EL’ and categorized under high-field EL. In addition to that, TFEL devices are also powered by an AC supply and listed under high-field EL. In contrast, injection EL behavior has been observed from forward biased p–n junctions i.e., from LEDs. The properties of light output are controlled by the diode material and wide band semiconductor diodes produce light output within the visible spectrum.3
Even though there are number of review articles summarizing LED working principles and current trends,4–8 there are few recent discussions about the ACEL technique. Given that properties and advantages are shadowing some aspects in LED-based light emission and displays, the ACEL technique should be discussed in detail covering its materials and fabrication techniques. At the same time, with current trends on flexible electronics, it is important to understand the role of light emitting devices in that field along with their challenges and opportunities for development. Hence, this review will be a guide for a better and sound understanding of ACEL devices and will provide opportunities to identify and tackle challenges in flexible light emitting devices in general.
In this review, authors discuss the ACEL technique in detail covering its mechanism, materials and fabrication methods while briefing LED principles for comparison. Under the discussion of materials, authors briefly looked into the applicability of the electrospinning technique in each discussed subsection with the intention of highlighting the electrospinning technique as a possible candidate for ACEL fabrication. As the second part of this review, authors summarized different research works discussed under flexible light emitting devices. As a quick yet detailed and comprehensive analysis, different research findings have been tabulated highlighting key mechanical and optical outputs of each at the end of the respective sections.
Light emitting principles
Based on this understanding, the field of EL-based displays has evolved throughout the years developing efficient and attractive designs. Current trends in display and lighting technology are mainly governed by two major principles: high-field EL (ACEL) and LED based displays. The operating mechanisms of each of those two principles are quite different from each other and have their own advantages and disadvantages under different operating conditions. A brief introduction on their operation principles and comparative advantages is discussed in the following section.
Light emitting diodes
Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) are simple semiconductor p–n junctions, which were first reported by a Russian inventor Oleg Losev9 in 1920. Like in any other p–n junction diodes, a LED allows the current flow towards only one direction which subsequently allows the junction material to emit light under a forward bias condition. The LED is often considered as a point illuminous source since the diode occupies less than 1 mm2 of space. For applications and commercialization, it is built up with electrodes and a lens for light scattering.
The luminous behavior of a LED is explained as injection electroluminescence where the luminescence is produced due to the injection of minority carriers in the p–n junction.10 In a typical LED, a positively doped semiconductor layer lies in contact with a negatively doped semiconductor layer. Under thermal equilibrium (unbiased state), a depletion region is created between these two layers (p–n junction) forming a diffusion potential (Vd). This potential acts as an insulator layer between them and prevents any further current flow. When the junction is forward biased, (positive voltage is applied to p-side and negative voltage is applied to n-side), holes from p-side are pushed to the opposite side while electrons from n-side are pushed in the opposite direction. Successively, when a hole and an electron combine, they emit optical radiation. Fig. 1 illustrates a simple energy diagram of a LED under an unbiased condition and forward biased conditions.
 Fig. 1  (a) p–n junction of a LED under thermal equilibrium. (b) Under the positive biased conditions, electrons and holes are recombined and emit light. (Reproduced with permission ref. 10, copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons). 
According to the basis of quantum theory, during this recombination process, electrons directly jump from the conduction band to the valence band. Since electrons are jumping from a higher energy band to a lower energy band, they emit the excess amount of energy as radiation. In this situation, the excess amount is equal to the bandgap energy (Eg) of the junction. This bandgap energy can be related to the wavelength (λ) of the radiation emission as the above equation where ‘h’ stands for the Planck constant and c stands for the speed of light.10 λ ≈ (h × c)/Eg(1)
This provides a huge advantage for applicability of LEDs in various application fields. As a result, by selecting suitable materials, the wavelength of the output radiation can be manipulated easily from the infra-red region to different colors within the visible region and even to the ultraviolet spectrum as well.
Since the device structure replicates the structure of a diode, they both possess the same I–V characteristic curves. Under a forward bias state, when the bias voltage is sufficiently large enough to overtake the depletion region barrier, current flows through and emits light. Typically, the forward bias voltage of a p–n junction is in the range of 1–2 V and hence a low voltage DC (direct current) can easily power up a LED to its full brightness.
However, LEDs possess several intrinsic disadvantages as well. The fabrication method is one such key limitation of LEDs. There are number of different methods available for p–n junction fabrications like Metal Organic Chemical Vapour Deposition (MOCVD), Hydride Vapour Phase Epitaxy (HVPE), Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) and others.10,11 A key similarity among these methods is the need of special environmental conditions. They need specially controlled environments or chambers to fabricate LEDs which ultimately results in complex manufacturing processes.3,6 On the other hand, the efficiency of a LED is improved by introducing several additional functional layers like a hole injection layer, hole transporting layer or hole blocking layer to the basic configuration.6,12,13 This has further enhanced the complexity of LED fabrication processes.
Moreover, since light emission occurs at the junction, it is very necessary to protect the junction and light structure from environmental variables like temperature, humidity, dust etc.10 This has raised the requirement of packaging against any potential environmental factors which result in another complex process step for fabrication processes. Additionally, it affects the ruggedness of the overall device as well.
These limitations have compromised the use of LEDs in large area light applications and a number of outdoor applications.
Alternative current electroluminescence (ACEL)
In contrast with LED technology, ACEL works based on a high-field EL principle. This phenomenon was first identified by Destriau in 1935.1 During his study, Destriau suspended his phosphor powders (Cu doped ZnS) in castor oil while insulating that from its electrodes by means of mica sheets.14 The device replicated a capacitor, where the phosphor material is separated from electrodes by an insulating layer. Upon the application of a high AC voltage, he observed light emission from his device which led the way for an understanding of the EL phenomenon under a high electric field, and the device's structure made it possible to develop thinner light emitting devices covering wider areas.
A typical device structure consists of an opaque conductor; first dielectric layer, a phosphor layer, second dielectric layer and a transparent electrode in sequence (Fig. 2(a)). Over the past years, several alternations have been developed for the device structure and will be discussed in another section. When an AC voltage is applied across its two terminals, the illuminance centers within the phosphor layer excite and emit light.3,14–16 In order to understand the working principle, the whole process is divided into a few steps:16 (1) electron injection, (2) electron transport, (3) impact excitation and (4) radiative recombination and optical outcoupling, which is illustrated as in Fig. 2(b).17
 Fig. 2  (a) An example of an electroluminescence device representing capacitive structure (phosphor material is sandwiched between two MgF2 insulating layers). (b) Operating principle of a typical ACEL device with steps. (Reproduced with permission,17 copyright 2004 Springer Nature). 
Upon application of sufficient AC voltage, a high electric field is developed within the phosphor layer. When the electric field inside the phosphor is large enough, electrons trapped at the insulator–phosphor interface are injected into the phosphor layer.3 The injection is governed by different mechanisms and at higher electrical fields, tunneling emission has become predominant.3 These injected electrons are then transported to the opposite electrode across the phosphor layer. As those electrons accelerate across the phosphor layer, they impact and excite luminance centers (luminance impurities) of the phosphor layer to their excited stage (E) from ground state (G) (Fig. 2(b)). As those excited luminance centers return to their respective ground states (G), the excess energy is released in the form of photon emission.16 As the excited luminance particles reach the ground state, the accelerated electrons are trapped at the opposite phosphor–insulator interface.
Threshold voltage (Vth) is one key parameter defining the performances of an EL device. Threshold voltage is defined as the voltage at which the luminance output of 1 cd m−2 is achieved.18 In general, the threshold voltage is considered as the point when the electron injection from an insulator–phosphor interface starts and is a function of dielectric properties of the insulator layer and the phosphor layer. After this point, the luminosity increases exponentially until it hits its saturation value. Another parameter which defines the performance is L40, which is defined as the luminosity of the ACEL device at 40 V above its threshold voltage value.18 This voltage value is an important parameter since most EL devices are operated at this voltage value. The peak output wavelength, or the color output of an ACEL device, is the next important factor to note. Since the light emission is dependent on the excitation and relaxation of luminescence particles within the phosphor layer, different phosphor materials (especially different luminescence impurities) result in different colors.19 Metal sulfides doped with transition metals serve as the phosphor layer for most EL devices and the transition metal works as the luminescence center since the sulfide provides the host matrix. The luminance intensity of an EL device is basically controlled by the applied voltage and frequency. For some phosphor particles, the peak emission wavelength shows a slight blue shift as the frequency of the applied signal increases.20,21
One of the very important characteristics of an ACEL device is its ability to be formed into a very thin structure. Submicron range active layer thickness allows a device to made into a thin structure as it enhances its flexibility. ACEL devices are surface light sources where the emission is uniform across the whole surface area. When compared with a point light source like LED, this is vital for wide area lighting and display applications. Moreover, the emissive nature of the display provides wider viewing angles as well.15 Above all these characteristics, the ruggedness of the EL lamp shines. Since electron injection at the insulator–phosphor interface doesn’t depend on the environmental temperature, the operating temperature window of an EL display can be between −60 °C to even up to 95 °C.22 The working temperature of the control electronic circuit is the limiting factor. The next most important advantage of an ACEL device is its fabrication process. Unlike LEDs, an ACEL has a very simple fabrication process which even can be carried out in an ambient environment.19 This allows the development of large area display devices, which can be fabricated with simple processes like printing.23–25
Despite being a thin surface light emitting display, ACEL devices have some inherent disadvantages as well. Limited color capabilities are significant. Typically, a single material system emits light in very narrow wavelength range and hence a color conversion layer is required to build up other colors. In addition, they have widely limited in uses in backlight applications due to low lumen output ratings. However, this has not been highlighted in many applications since they are not used in high luminance applications like in hallway lighting or with lamp-posts. Even though they are capable of working in a wider temperature window, humidity has been reported as one such environmental limitation.26 When exposed to humid conditions, brightness has been reported to degrade over time, raising the need of encapsulation.
Apart from materials and device architecture, the electrical characteristics of an ACEL device have also created some limitations for its operation. A main concern is its AC voltage requirement.27 Though not significant for household applications, wearable displays or any other portable lighting devices would need to have an inverter to provide larger AC voltages above 100 V. However, when compared with LEDs, EL devices require very low current densities and extremely low power requirements as well.
Alternative current electroluminescence (ACEL)
In the previous section, an overview on working principles of an ACEL device was presented with a quick glance at its applicability, advantages and limitation as compared with LEDs. In this section, a detailed overview of ACEL device architecture, materials and fabrication methods will be discussed together with different performance enhancing approaches.
ACEL devices were of interest in a number of research groups throughout the past few decades. Different material systems have been used to achieve different colors, different light output levels targeting different applications. Tiwari et al.17 prepared an ACEL device with manganese doped zinc sulphide (ZnS:Mn) as the phosphor material (Fig. 2(a)) to evaluate its electrical characteristics. An electron beam evaporation technique was used for the deposition of all layers except a tin oxide (SnO2) transparent electrode. The obtained luminosity of the ZnS:Mn phosphor was found to have an S-shaped relationship with applied voltage while the frequency and the luminosity had linear relationships. Park et al.21 prepared a flexible EL device with silver nanowire (AgNW) electrodes. This device has shown remarkable flexibility properties (Fig. 3(a)), as conventional ITO (Indium Tin Oxide) electrodes tend to crack after repetitive bending cycles. Wang et al.28 mixed EL phosphor particles with stretchable polymers to achieve a highly flexible and stretchable light emitting device which sustained 180° bending and over 100% stretching without significant luminance sacrifice (Fig. 3(b)). A wearable EL watch developed with a dispenser printing method is another interesting work.25 All functional layers of the EL watch were printed on a fabric substrate and achieved a maximum of 200 cd m−2 light intensity when powered by a 400 V, 2000 Hz AC voltage input. Fig. 3(c) shows29 another interesting work on dispenser printed ACEL device with luminescence of 44 cd m−2 at 400 V, 400 Hz.
 Fig. 3  (a) Flexible EL device with AgNW electrodes lighting after several bending and recovering cycles (reproduced with permission,21 copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd). (b) Bending and twisting of a stretchable EL device (reproduced with permission,28 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons). (c) ACEL device printed on textile (reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons). 
Device architecture
Device architecture of an EL device can be explained as the arrangement of device functional layers; conductive layers, insulator layers and phosphor layer to maximize its performance. From the study of different device architectures, two major classes can be identified. The first and most common architecture is a layer by layer device resembling tandem device architecture. Here, the functional layers are deposited on a substrate material and the simplicity of the fabrication process has resulted in wide applicability over a range of products. However, most widespread application range includes flat displays and lights which extends over a large area. The second structural approach is based on the concept of lighting wires or yarns. In this approach, the total device is developed in the form of a long cylindrical cable which later can be weaved into a large area fabric light source.30
Tandem device architecture is a very traditional approach where electrode-dielectric-phosphor-dielectric-electrode layers are sequentially deposited on top of each other. There, one electrode and one insulator layer must be transparent to facilitate light emission (Fig. 4(a)15). The concept is based on the requirement of duplicating a capacitor to isolate phosphor material from applied current.31 This double insulator approach was particularly developed in the 1970s to overcome electrical breakdown and stability issues.15
 Fig. 4  (a) EL device fabricated on a glass substrate with traditional double insulator approach (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 15). (b) Flexible EL device with single dielectric layer approach (reproduced with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). (c) Phosphor particles embedded in dielectric organic binder (reproduced with permission from ref. 33, copyright 2007, John Wiley & Sons). (d) Flexible EL with EL particles and dielectric particles embedded in binder matrix (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 34). (e) Forward EL architecture (reproduced with permission from ref. 35, copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd). (f) Reverse device architecture (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 36). (g) Application of color conversion layer (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 38). (h) Floating electrode device with split bottom electrode (image courtesy light tape ref. 39). 
Over time, different variations in this traditional device architecture have been introduced to the field to enhance their properties and increase applicability over a wide range of applications. During later stages of EL-based research and device commercialization, this two insulator layer approach has been dropped and switched to a single insulator layer approach which provides isolation from an opaque electrode.26 The single dielectric layer configuration has provided thinner and more flexible devices while retaining original luminance properties.21 In the device prepared by Schrage and Kaskel,32 they deployed the single insulating layer approach with a barium titanate (BaTiO3) dielectric layer to isolate their phosphor from a silver electrode (Fig. 4(b)). As an alternative approach to traditional device design, Silver et al.33 proposed a single emissive layer approach. There, the emissive layer was formed by suspending phosphor particles in a mixer of dielectric particles and an organic binder oil, which acted as a local dielectric field for phosphor particles (Fig. 4(c)). More recently, Stauffer and Tybrandt34 also devised a similar kind of device where EL particles and BaTiO3 particles are filtered into a single layer (Fig. 4(d)).
In this device architecture, another classification is available based on the arranged sequence of device functional layers. First, in a forward architecture, the substrate is transparent, and the functional materials are applied on top of that starting from a transparent electrode (Fig. 4(e)). Here, the light emission is collected through the substrate.35 However, this approach is limited only to transparent substrate materials. For other kinds of materials, the reverse architecture is used where the transparent electrode is formed as the final layer on top of the phosphor material (Fig. 4(f)).36 This approach enabled the use of almost any substrate material including fabric,25 paper,23 metal24 and even ceramics.37 In addition to these current layers, during color tuning of the EL device, another color filtration layer is applied over the transparent surface (Fig. 4(g)).38 Further details on this topic will be discussed in detail in another section. Further on, a floating electrode approach has also been applied for EL devices (Fig. 4(h)).39 There, the bottom electrode in a reversed architecture EL device is split into two driven electrodes where the top transparent electrode works as the floating electrode.26 This resembles an arrangement of two EL devices in series and requires a comparatively higher electrical field as well.
The second type of structural design approach is based on the development of light emitting yarns. Here, the light emitting device is fabricated around a conductive base wire.30 As shown in Fig. 5(a), the phosphor layer is isolated from the base conductor with an insulator layer and the second electrode is completed by a thin conductive wire wrapped around the phosphor layer. One of the key advantage of this yarn-like structure is its potential to be integrated into fabrics and other flexible displays. An EL wire is a very popular commercial application of yarn-like device structures. As shown in Fig. 5(b), its device architecture is quite the same as the one we discussed earlier.40 It has already been applied over a number of wearable designs and other lighting applications and has even been developed into a concept in hobby electronics.41
 Fig. 5  (a) EL device fabricated into a yarn-like light emitting device (left) and its application in a fabric (right); ((1) electro-conductive base yarn; (2) dielectric insulation layer; (3) EL layer; (4) dielectric transparent layer; (5) conductive yarn; (6) alternating current voltage source) (reproduced with permission from ref. 30, copyright 2012 SAGE publications). (b) Device architecture of commercial EL. Wire and its application in fashion showcase (image courtesy: How stuff Works). 
Fabrication methods
One of the key advantages of ACEL devices over LED lighting sources is its simple fabrication process. Typically, the fabrication process of a LED involves special environmental control measures like a vacuum chamber and material deposition is typically carried out by thermal deposition techniques.42–44 This limits the use of LEDs in large area light emitting device fabrications, as it involves costly scaling up of all fabrication equipment. In contrast with LED fabrication, ACEL fabrication requires very simple and open-air fabrication steps where the scaling up is very simple.
Where device architecture is concerned, an ACEL device has four or five device layers deposited on top of different substrates. The fabrication of a device can be carried out by a layer-by-layer deposition technique starting from the substrate layer with pre-fabricated individual materials. Under this section, fabrication of a device will be discussed without going into details of fabricating functional materials in each of those layers. Basically, device fabrication can be divided into two categories; printing and coating. Screen-printing45,46 is the most used printing method under the printing category while spray coating and spin coating dominate the other category. Even though sputtering,47,48 thermal evaporation49,50 and ion beam deposition17,51 have been used during early stages of EL device fabrications, researchers have moved towards much simpler fabrication methods like printing and coating.
Screen printing is a mass printing technique, where the printing paste consisting of functional materials is deposited through a fine screen with a rubber squeegee.23 The screen can be patterned with desired path designs and allows extremely accurate ink deposition which may be crucial in device fabrications. Basically, functional materials like PEDOT:PSS, ZnS:Cu or other phosphor materials are mixed with an ink which serves as the transport medium and additionally modifies the viscosity of the ink to ease the printing process. Screen printing has been employed during fabrications of multilayer watch fabrication,25,52 organic EL device fabrication38 and even in self-powered displays.53 In addition, this process provides huge variations over substrate materials like ITO,54 textiles,23,55 PET35,36,56 and even metal surfaces.57 In addition to screen printing, de Vos et al.58 used a dispenser printing technique while Angelo59 used an inkjet printing technique during his ACEL device fabrication process. One common factor among these printing approaches is the orientation of substrate material. Screen printing, inkjet printing or dispenser printing has been applied for planar surfaces. As a rather unconventional approach, Lee et al.60 proposed a pad printing technique where the ink is transferred to curved surfaces with silicon transfer pads. It should also be noted that each printing step is followed by annealing at elevated temperatures (slightly above 100 °C) before printing the subsequent layer.
Spin coating is the next highlighted device fabrication technique. A viscous coating ink is dropped on top of the substrate kept on a rotating disk and centrifugal force spreads out the ink over the surface of the substrate. After each of these spinning steps, the substrate is annealed to secure the thin film and to prepare it for the next coating step. Spin coating has been used in a number of applications including organic light devices,61,62 different color emitting EL devices,63 flexible and stretchable light emitting devices28,64,65 and many more.66–70 In addition to this method, a spray coating technique has also been used during fabrication processes for a whole device as well as for one or two functional layers. Gupta et al.71 spray coated patterned ITO sheets with phosphor and boron nitride dielectric layers. Wroblewski et al.24 spray coated a curved metal surface with functional material to build up an interactive package lighting using the EL principle. They achieved different functional properties by varying spray deposition parameters like pressure and working distance. Schrage and Kaskel32 also spray coated an EL device onto a flexible PET substrate while Sloma et al.23 and Ely et al.35 used a spray coating technique for transparent electrodes. Moreover, Park et al.21 used a bar coating technique for their EL device as an alternative coating approach. Dias and Monaragala30 developed a yarn type EL device with an innovative yarn coating approach. They developed a custom coating device and UV curing apparatus foe this yarn coating system.
In addition to these printing and coating approaches, some unconventional approaches like injection molding72 and mold forming73 techniques have also been used. Where printing and coating approaches are concerned, both are simple fabrication methods which require less preparedness. They can be carried out as open-air fabrication processes and are easily scalable based on the requirements.
Electrospinning
Among different fabrication processes used in opto-electronic applications, electrospinning can be identified with its unique advantages.74 Electrospinning is a high-aspect ratio fiber formation technique where a polymer-based solution is pulled through by an electrostatic pull force. A typical electrospinning setup (Fig. 6(a)) consists of a polymer solution filled syringe with a metal needle, syringe driving pump, high voltage supply and a grounded collector. When a high voltage is applied across the needle and the collector, the solution droplet at the end of the needle tip is ionized and the charge distribution at the droplet results in Taylor cone formation and a subsequent fiber jet.75 As the jet of fibers accelerate through the air, the solvent used for polymer solution evaporates and the polymer becomes hardened as a mat of fibers and is collected at the collector. Basically, any polymer with sufficient molecular weight can be electrospun through this method and a number of variables like solution viscosity, polymer molecular weight, applied voltage, solution flow rate, tip-to-collector distance, ambient temperature and humidity control the nature and morphology of the fiber mat.75–79 This simple process can be easily scalable over a vast area and can result in a highly flexible, stretchable fiber mat with oriented polymer morphology along the fiber axis. In addition, polymer solutions, polymers containing quantum dots,80 carbon nanotubes,81 and ceramic dielectrics82,83 can also be mixed and electrospun with polymers enabling a new scope of application.
 Fig. 6  (a) Example of a typical electrospinning setup. (b) Electrospinning of ruthenium complexes into a LED (reproduced with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (c) Electrospun co-axial nanofiber for a LED (reproduced with permission from ref. 90, copyrights 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Due to these intrinsic properties, it has been widely used in the field of photonics over the past few years.74,84,85 When discussing light emitting devices these have been widely used in LEDs86–88 even though their presence in ACEL devices is not that significant. Vohra et al.86 blended a F8BT conjugate polymer with polyethylene oxide (PEO) and electrospun it into a single layer light emitting diode. Whereas in the work of Moran-Mirabal et al.88 they electrospun ruthenium(II) tris(bipyridine) onto gold electrodes and observed light emission at low voltages. Kim and Lee89 used hyperbranched conjugate polymers (HCP) in their electrospinning solution and prepared a full color emission fiber mat. By tuning the volume ratio of HCPs in the solution, they obtained emission over the visible spectrum. Yang et al.,90 electrospun co-axial nanofibers with ionic transition-metal complexes (iTMCs) as a luminescent material and fabricated a one-dimensional light emitting device with very low driving voltage.
Materials
The electroluminescence phenomenon has inseparable dependence on the materials used in it. During early stages, it was believed that sulfides possessed the luminance properties and exploration began based on different sulfides. Later, it was identified that the luminous impurity or the dopant material within a sulfide matrix makes the major contribution for electroluminescence.15 Researchers then developed a series of phosphor materials with different luminance properties. Not only the phosphor material, but also materials for other functional layers like dielectric and transparent electrodes also have been a subject of interest along the past few decades for better performances of ACEL devices.3,19,31 In this section, a detailed overview will be presented on the materials used in ACEL devices. The discussion will be organized according to the functional layer in which they have been used.
Phosphor materials
During the development of EL devices, the phosphor material is the center of interest. The phosphor material itself defines most optical characteristics of an EL device. Mostly, the phosphor is comprised with a sulfide host material doped with metals which act as the luminous centers during the excitation mechanism. One of the major requirements of choosing a host matrix is its band gap.3 Since the host matrix needs to be transparent to the generated light, it should have a band gap which is large enough to avoid any light absorptions. Metal sulfides (or II–IV compounds) have been widely used as the host matrix due to several lattice properties they can offer during operations.15,19 Apart from not absorbing luminance center emission, they should be great hosts for luminance centers.
Among a number of metal sulfides, zinc sulfide (ZnS,) is the most common host material.14,91–93 One of major reasons for that is its chemical stability as a host matrix for EL.94 In addition to ZnS, ZnSe95 and CdS96 have also been used as the host matrix in different applications. In addition, ZnGaS97 has also been used as another sulfide based host material. As, an alternative for traditional sulfides, (gallium arsenide) GaAs,98 gallium nitride47 (GaN) and zinc silicate57 (Zn2SiO4) based host matrices also have been reported in ACEL applications.
Luminous centers are the real contributors the light emission of the phosphor material. As they get excited by highly accelerated electrons, they emit light corresponding to their respective band energies. A chapter by Yoshida et al. in ref. 3 highlights the requirements for a luminous center like a large cross-sectional area and suitability of an ionic radius. Doping and co-doping the host matrix with different transition metals are key approaches of fabricating inorganic phosphor materials. Copper34,45,56,64,97,99,100 is the most favorite host matrix dopant and has been used in a number of different applications. However, a copper doped luminance matrix has shown two different color outputs upon excitation.
As Satya et al.56 have mentioned, ZnS:Cu (copper doped zinc sulfide) has shown both green and blue emission. It was concluded that the positioning of copper ions within the ZnS unit cell resulted in this variation in the emission spectrum. When the copper ions replaced Zn from a ZnS lattice, green color was emitted while blue originated when Cu ions were at the interstitial sites of ZnS. In addition to copper, manganese (Mn),17,57,97,101 erbium (Er)47,98 and dysprosium (Dy)102 have also been used as a single material doping for ACEL devices. To enhance performances further, co-doping has also been used. Copper–aluminum,25,53,71,103,104 copper–chlorine,20,21,46,70,105 and copper–manganese106 were highlighted while phosphor materials like erbium fluoride (ErF3)48 based phosphors have also been used in flexible devices.
Together with the development of organic electronics, the use of organic light emitting materials has become an option for old inorganic electroluminescence devices. Poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethyl hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene) (MEHPPV),61,107 alpha-NPD (N,N′-di(naphthalen-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenyl-benzidine)108 and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO)63 are some example organic EL phosphor materials and Table 1 summarizes some available phosphor material properties.17,20,21,25,34,45,47,48,56–58,63,64,71,97,99,102,104–107,109
Table 1 Different phosphor materials and their emission properties




Material
Wavelength (nm)
Color
Source




ZnS:Cu
∼430
Blue-green

Ref. 99



ZnS:Cu
∼500
Blue-green

Ref. 34



ZnS:Cu
∼455
Blue

Ref. 56



ZnS:Cu
∼525
Green

Ref. 56



ZnS:Cu
∼450
Blue

Ref. 64



ZnS:Cu
∼500
Green

Ref. 45



ZnS:Cu
∼500
Green

Ref. 25



ZnS:Mn
∼585
Yellow

Ref. 17



ZnS:Mn
∼570
Yellow-green

Ref. 97



ZnS:Cu, Mn
∼460 and 595
Blue and yellow

Ref. 106



ZnS:Cu, Al
∼530
Green

Ref. 71



ZnS:Cu, Al
∼540
Green

Ref. 58



ZnS:Cu, Al
∼420, 440 & 450
Blue

Ref. 104



ZnS:Cu, Cl
∼460
Blue-green

Ref. 105



ZnS:Cu, Cl
∼530
Blue-green

Ref. 20



ZnS:Cu, Cl
∼505
Green

Ref. 21



ZnS:Dy
∼490, 540 and 590
Blue, green, yellow

Ref. 102



ZnS:Mn, Dy
∼570 and 590
Yellow

Ref. 102



ZnS:ErF3
∼550
Green

Ref. 48



GaN:Er
∼550
Green

Ref. 47



Zn2SiO4:Mn
∼525
Green

Ref. 57



ZnGaS:Mn
∼600
Yellow-orange

Ref. 97



Alq3
457
Blue

Ref. 109



MEH-PPV
∼580
Yellow

Ref. 107



PFO
∼550
Green-yellow

Ref. 63





The application of electrospinning techniques in phosphor layer fabrication is one of the interesting phenomena under this project and Table 2 summarizes some selected works on this topic.88,89,110–115 Electrospinning has shown some improved properties especially in the field of organic light emitting applications by modifying and reordering polymer morphology. Specifically, in hyperbranched polymer-based emitting layer electrospinning,89 the branch orientation of the emitting polymer has resulted in color tuning of the output emission because the electrostatic pulling force can elongate and organize the conjugate polymer's orientation during electrospinning. Further, the polymer solution can be blended with different materials like nano particles, quantum dots, CNTs for enhanced emission and luminance efficiency of the emitting layer.
Table 2 Some reported electrospun fibers as a light emitting layer




Application
Material
Remarks
Ref.




LED
Ruthenium complexes
Fiber based light emission at very low voltages, light area is 240 × 325 nm2

88



LED – color conversion layer
PMMA embedded with multi-color dyes
Three color dyes electrospinning, multi-nozzle system, white light emission

110



Color conversion
HCP mixed with PEO
Hyperbranched polymer blends with PEO has resulted in white color emission

89



LED – down conversion
Quantum dots/PVK
White LEDs, green and red quantum dot polymers

111



LED
PEDOT:PSS, PANI, Ruthenium complexes
Co-axial electrospun LED, light emitting yarn

112



White light emission
PVA/ZnO
ZnO quantum dots mixed with PVA, high luminance due to surface defects

113



ACEL
ZnS:Cu/PVA
ZnS:Cu nano crystals were dispersed due to interaction with OH−

114



ACEL
ZnS:Mn/PVP
ZnS:Mn nanoparticles with cubic structure after annealing

115





Dielectric materials
In the ACEL working principle, the dielectric layer(s) bears an important role in the stability of these devices. In his review, Krasnov116 summarized some key roles a dielectric is supposed to play including protection against charge transport, charge storing, protection against leakage bound charges, stability in high electric fields, and stability against atmospheric conditions like humidity and many more. More importantly, the high dielectric constant of the material is of highest importance for lower driving voltages. Basically, two types of dielectric materials have been used over past years, inorganic and organic dielectric materials. Inorganic dielectric materials provide the highest dielectric constant but are crystalline in nature. On the other hand, organic dielectric materials provide comparatively low dielectric constant values and are suitable for flexible devices.31
In early device configurations with two dielectric layers, the one that lies between the transparent electrode and phosphor layer should allow the light to pass through with minimum absorption, while the other insulator should work as a mirror surface to reflect phosphor emission. This required additional engineering work for researchers and eventually they switched to a single dielectric configuration which lies behind the phosphor layer with reflective properties.3,116 This provided a few additional advantages including thinner devices, higher flexibility, one less processing step and cheaper fabrication with fewer materials and time.31
Inorganic dielectric materials can be further categorized into two sections as amorphous oxides/nitrides and ferroelectric materials. Silicon dioxide103,107,117 (SiO2), aluminum oxide48 (Al2O3), tantalum oxide51 (TaOx) and hafnium oxide108,118 are among some insulating oxides being used in ACEL applications. And for ferroelectric materials, barium titanate34,69,119–123 (BaTiO3) has been the most popular choice among a number of groups. The extremely high dielectric constant (in the range of 2000–3000 at room temperature)19 is the main reason for being so popular. Interestingly, Gao et al.54 used a diphase polycrystalline material for their EL device where (Ba0.4Ca0.6)TiO3:Pr3+ acts as both the phosphor and dielectric material by itself. This has shown peak EL emission at 617 nm and made a significant process simplification with just a single functioning layer.
The next category is organic dielectric materials. When compared with their inorganic counterparts, they possess very low dielectric constants (in the range of 5–2031) but show remarkable flexibility. Poly(vinylidene fluoride)63 (PVDF), polydimethylsiloxane28 (PDMS) and cyanoethyl pullulan61 (CEP) are some reported organic insulators. To enhance the flexibility of the insulating layer while retaining its high dielectric properties, inorganic materials in composites with organic binders like BaTiO3–PVDF124–127 composite have been implemented in EL devices. The dielectric properties can be easily tuned by modifying the volume fractions of inorganic compounds and they have provided high flexibility over the fabrication process as well. Based on the filler factor of high dielectric particles, the composite dielectric constant can be expressed as in eqn (2),128 where, εcomposite, εfiller and εmatrix stands for the dielectric constant of the composite, dielectric filler material and the polymer matrix, respectively. φfiller represents the volume fraction of dielectric filler material in the polymer matrix. (2)

Table 3 summarizes some reported works on dielectric nanofiber mats fabricated through electrospinning techniques.125,129–131 As Song et al.125 have specified, when dielectric nano particles are electrospun with dielectric polymers into nanofibers, the dielectric breakdown voltage can be improved. When an electric field is applied across the fiber mat, the anisotropic nature of fiber mat can improve the dielectric properties since the depolarization factor is larger in the in transverse direction than in longitudinal direction. Usually, the electrical breakdown of a dielectric film is due to electrical treeing across the film thickness. However, in a fiber mat, the electrical treeing phenomenon is harder to execute since the fibers provide a twisty or convoluted path for treeing and thus they provide more scattering centers to limit the treeing effect.
Table 3 Summary of electrospun nanofibers used as dielectric layer in electronic applications




Application
Materials
Remarks
Ref.




Dielectric layer
PI/BaTiO3
Simultaneous electrospinning/electro spraying for the composite nanofibers

129



Dielectric layer
PVP/BaTiO3
Based on the calcination temperature, the crystal properties can be tuned for better output

130



Dielectric layer
BaTiO3/PVDF–TrFE
Dopamine modification has improved the breakdown strength of dielectric

125



Luminance layer
BaTiO3/PVP
BaTiO3 has shown photoluminescence properties within visible region

131





Transparent electrode materials
The next important device layer is the transparent electrode of a device. The use of transparent electrode can be found in various electronic applications like light emitting devices, solar panels, and touch panels and hence it has been reviewed by several researchers as well.132–134 He and Tjong133 listed a few factors that needed to be considered during the selection of a transparent electrode as typical transmission (at 550 nm), electrical conductivity or sheet resistance, haze, thermal stability and typical thickness. In addition, when processability is considered, the fabrication method and fabrication cost should also be considered. Transparent electrode materials can be divided into three major categories: semiconductors, carbon based materials and metals.132 Here, organic transparent materials are listed under a second category of carbon-based materials.
Indium tin oxide (ITO) has been used widely for a long time because of its transmittance characteristics and electrical conductivity. ITO coated on a glass substrate38,51,66,71,120 also has been used by number of researchers on different occasions. It typically offers conductivity over 4000 S cm−1 and transparency values over 90%. Apart from ITO, tin oxide17 (SnO2) has also been used as a transparent electrode material. One major limitation of these semiconductor oxide materials is their poor flexibility which prevents them from being used in most flexible electronic applications. Further, a complex fabrication process can make them difficult to be used for large area lighting purposes. However, recent developments in organic chemistry have provided a chance to investigate the possibility of using conductive polymers as a transparent electrode material. Wang et al.134 suggested poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), polyaniline (PANI) and polypyrrole (PPY) as major candidates for organic transparent electrodes. These can offer very high mechanical flexibility and simple processing requirements despite being poor electrical conductors.143,144 Among them, PEDOT:PSS was the popular choice35,145–147 and had been used in ACEL devices with different chemical performance enhancements like doping.
In addition to conducting polymers, carbon nanotubes32,148,149 (CNTs) have also been used as transparent electrodes in EL devices. They have shown high transmittance and high conductivity properties while offering various fabrication options to be used. Alonso et al.150 used graphene as the transparent electrode and investigated the flexibility of the resulting device against its luminous properties. Moreover, Sloma et al.151 used a screen-printed CNT electrode for a textile EL device.
Metal nanowires are the next choice of electrode materials. Among them, copper nanowires152 has been used over a vast range of applications in opto-electronic devices. Excellent electrical conductive properties, high transmittance properties and high mechanical flexibility has favored the choice of metal nanowire electrodes1,42 Among different metal nanowires, copper nanowires141,153–157 (CuNW) can be seen more commonly due to the fact that it is cheap, widely available and bears very good electrical conductivity. Apart from that, silver nanowires21,34,158 (AgNW) and copper–nickel nanowires159 (Cu–Ni NW) also have been applied over EL devices.

Table 4 provides a quick overview on available transparent electrode designs fabricated with electrospinning techniques.135–142 PEDOT:PSS has been used by number of groups considering its ability to be mixed with different carrier polymers. As an alternative approach, polymerization precursors of conductive polymers can be electrospun with carrier polymers which then can be polymerized with vapor phase approaches. When considered with a fiber mat as a transparent electrode, light scattering properties of a fiber mat play a major role determining the overall transmittance.135 For PEDOT:PSS, different post-treatment approaches can enhance those factors resulting in overall enhanced optical transmittance. However, electrospun PEDOT:PSS nanofibers have resulted in lower conductivities than with spin coated electrodes, thus, we must use a carrier polymer which in most the cases is non-conductive. Different additive materials like CuNWs, AgNW, CNT and graphene can be used as conductivity enhancements with traditional electrospinning solutions.
Table 4 Electrospun transparent electrode materials




Application
Materials
Remarks
Ref.




Transparent electrode
PEDOT:PSS/PEO
PEDOT:PSS nanofibers on a non-planar surface, low conductive, post-treatments can enhance transmittance and conductivity properties

135



Transparent electrode
PEDOT:PSS/PEO
Humidity affected the fiber morphology, vertical stand-up fiber configuration

136



Conducting polymer mat
PEDOT:Tos/PDMS
EDOT has been polymerized on PDMS scaffold

137



Anisotropic actuation
PEDOT:PSS/PVP/PMMA
Dispersion of PEDOT:PSS on PVP/PMMA fiber mat

138



Transparent electrode
PEDOT:PSS/PVA
The metallic contact determines the overall resistivity

139



Electrode applications
PEDOT:PSS/PVA/rGO
rGO has increased the conductivity

140



Transparent electrode
Cu nanofiber mat
Nanofiber mat was heat treated to get Cu nanofiber mat

141



Transparent electrode
Cu nanofiber mat
Cu nanofiber was obtained by calcinating

142





Back electrode
Unlike in other functional layers, the back electrode or the opaque electrode has been given lesser interest with the development stages of EL devices. Even though we can see a number of innovative steps alongside of other functional layers, for back electrodes, there is hardly any innovation involved. That's because it's supposed to play very lesser important character in the device, being an electrode. In most cases, metallic materials are used as the electrode given that they have high conductivity and are not needed to be transparent. In reverse architecture, the metal is deposited on the substrate either by sputtering or pasting whereas in a forward approach the metal electrode becomes the top layer of the device.
Special attention has been given for some cases24 where graphene nanoparticles (GNP) were printed on top of a fabric material for the flexibility it can provide to the whole device. For screen printed devices, a special silver based screen print has been used25 but it requires low temperature curing. In addition to metallic materials, carbon based conductive ink mixed with silver nanoparticles has also been used by Lee et al.37
Performance enhancement
One of limitations that a typical ACEL device is subjected to is its limited color options and poor brightness properties, thus limiting them to a very restricted list of applications. As shown in Table 1, the color of an EL device is decided by the phosphor material used in it. Though different luminescent centers provide different color outputs in same host matrix, the synthesis process of those phosphor materials is complicated and can be expensive. When different luminescence principles like electroluminescence (ACEL, LED), mechanoluminescence and photoluminescence principles have been investigated, three approaches can be identified as possible color tuning approaches:73 obtaining a mixture of different emitting phosphors,160,161 use of color filtering layers after the original phosphor layer38,63,66,68 or use of active quantum dot based phosphor materials.51,73,162,163
Jeong et al.160,161 mixed ZnS:Cu–green phosphors and ZnS:Cu,Mn–orange phosphors in different volume fractions to tune the color output. Though this principle has been applied in mechanoluminescent devices, it can be easily applied with the electroluminescent principle as well. For example, in Zhang's work38 an organic photoluminescent dye was drop casted on an inorganic ACEL device to manipulate color output. Blue emitting phosphor was used as the emitting layer while poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-(benzo[2,1,3]thiadiazol-4,7-diyl)] (F8BT) and 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-tert-butyl-6-(1,1,7,7-tetramethyljulolidin-4-yl-vinyl)-4H-pyran (DCJTB) have been used for yellow and red down-conversion layers, respectively. Similarly, Xia et al.63 have used a yellow down-conversion layer of YAG:Ce (cerium doped yttrium aluminum garnet). Min et al.111 developed a poly-(9-vinylcarbazole) fiber mat with quantum dots as a filter layer for a blue light emission. Apart from use as a color rendering filter, quantum dots (QD) have been used as a light emitting material itself. Kobayashi et al.51 fabricated an ACEL device with a cadmium selenide/zinc sulfide (CdSe/ZnS) QD-based phosphor layer and proposed that its brightness can also be increased. Jeong et al.73 fabricated a white light emitting EL device where a QD embedded conversion layer was used with a ZnS:Cu phosphor layer and CdSe/CdZnS QDs was used within an elastomer matrix.
The second concern of a typical ACEL is its poor brightness, which limits its applications further. However, being a surface light emitting source has made maximum use out of poor brightness issues and turned it into uses for backlighting applications. When device architecture and working principles are considered, the electric field applied across the phosphor layer determines the brightness of the device. This is proved by the fact that the brightness or the EL intensity of a typical ACEL device is drastically increased with applied voltage and frequency of the signal. However, a high driving voltage can make the system complicated. As an alternative approach, Stauffer and Tybrandt34 prepared the phosphor layer as a composite of both phosphor and dielectric materials. Since dielectric materials were small in size compared with phosphor particles, they covered the phosphor particles effectively so that, upon application of driving voltage, phosphor particles were subjected to an extremely high electric field. They reported an impressive 700% improvement in ACEL brightness after their approach. Wen et al.64 embedded a conductive layer with zinc oxide whiskers to enhance the local electrical field. At the tips of the whiskers, the electric field becomes intensified and the field across the phosphor layer also is increased. This has eventually led to an enhanced luminous output. Carbon nanotubes (CNT) can also generate the same results and have been used by number of groups.46,61,103
Flexible electroluminescent devices
Together with the rise of wearable and flexible electronics, flexible light emitting materials have become a topic of key interest among different research groups and even fashion designers. Even before they were highlighted in the field of wearable electronics, flexible lights and displays were in the spotlight among electronic appliances like televisions and mobile phones.1 At present, applications are spread out from a simple and wearable light emitting wire to a wearable display and from a simple bendable light emitting film to large and attractive lighting panels for automobile decorations.
A light emitting wire or ‘EL wire’ (electroluminescence wire) is one of some very popular light emitting appliances trending among fashion enthusiastics. An EL wire is a thin and flexible wire which can be woven into fabrics to make different and attractive fashion designs, lighting appliances and even architectural designs (Fig. 7(a)). As shown in Fig. 7(b)–(d), fiber optic embedded fabrics,164 Light Emitting Diode (LED) based interactive dresses165 and LED laminated textiles166 explored new directions of wearable lighting appliances earlier in this decade.
 Fig. 7  Flexible lights and displays. (a) EL wire in designs (image courtesy: Rakuten). (b) Fiber optic embedded luminous fabric panel.164 (c) Texting shirt.165 (d) LED display laminated into textile.166 
Apart from these fashion clothing materials, mobile phones and other electronic appliances lead the list of beneficiaries for flexible lights/displays. Starting from early stages with bulky CRT (Cathode Ray Tubes) displays, the technology has evolved towards much thinner LCD (Liquid Crystal Displays) and later, LED-based displays.167 Development of the e-paper concept during the 1970s168 pushed the limitations of traditional display technologies and the progress of functional polymer materials169 has further fueled the invention of flexible displays. Currently, leading electronic manufacturers are racing each other to achieve high performing and customer satisfying flexible displays in their mobile phones or televisions.170,171 This has enabled a new application domain in advertising and automobile interior designs as well. Fig. 8 illustrates a few commercial applications of flexible displays.
 Fig. 8  (a) Sony rollable display panel demonstrating wrapping capabilities around a pencil170 (image courtesy: Sony). (b) Unbreakable flexible display introduced by Samsung171 (image courtesy: Samsung). (c) 14.7 inch large flexible organic LED display (image courtesy: Arizona State University, Flexible Electronics and Display Centre). (d) EL powered billboard during 2006 Commonwealth Games (image courtesy: Nejilock Technology). (e) Concept design for vehicle interior lighting (image courtesy: Glow-Tech). 
With current trends in technology and future predictions on novel techniques, the market share for flexible displays is predicted to be 13%, and soon growing to a market value of 15.5 billion dollars.172

Table 5 provides a quick overview and summarization of different flexible light emitting devices available through the literature. They have been put in a table together with their optical performances and mechanical performances highlighting key points of their device architectures.
Table 5 Summary of performances of flexible light emitting devices




Author
Device type
Light performance
Fabrication method
Device performance and key features
Ref.




Park et al. (2015)
ACEL
N/A@500 V, 400 Hz
Bar coating and screen-printing techniques
Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, PET substrate, more than 1200 bending-recovery cycles for transparent electrode

21



Sloma et al. (2014)
ACEL
N/A
Screen-printing
ACEL device on paper and textile substrates. On textile substrates, the device has shown some cracks after printing

23



De Vos et al. (2016)
ACEL
200 cd m−2@400 V, 2 kHz
Screen printing
On fabric substrate, formed into each segment of 7-segment display, functional digital watch, no flexibility data available

25



Wang et al. (2015)
ACEL
220 cd m−2@300 V, 50 kHz
Spin coating
Stretchable, EL particles are embedded in dielectric, over 100% strain ratio without drop in output

28



Schrage and Kaskel (2009)
ACEL
N/A@35 V, 1 kHz
Spray coating
CNT electrode spray coated on PET substrate, large bending angles have achieved, no data available for flexibility

32



Silver et al. (2008)
ACEL
200 cd m−2@110 V, 400 Hz
N/A
ITO coated PET substrate, mixing phosphor and dielectric together, no flexibility data available

33



Stauffer & Tybrandt (2016)
ACEL
35 cd m−2@200 V, 400 Hz
Filtration
Mixing both EL and dielectric together, AgNW transparent electrode, small drop in relative emission intensity after 100% strain, after 500 straining cycles

34



Ely et al. (2014)
ACEL
26 cd m−2@100 V, 400 Hz
Spray coating and screen printing
Spray coated PEDOT:PSS on PET substrate, no mechanical flexible data available

35



Zhang et al. (2016)
ACEL
100 cd m−2@110 V, 2 kHz
Screen printing
Printed on flexible substrate, no flexibility data available

38



Dias & Monaragala (2012)
ACEL
1.2 cd m−2@370 V, 1800 Hz
Yarn coating system
Co-axial EL wire, EL paste has been applied over a base yarn, can weave into fabric, copper wire is wrapped as electrode, no flexibility data available

30



De Vos et al. (2014)
ACEL
N/A
Screen printing
Screen-printed device on fabric material, bending radius as small as 9 mm

52



Verboven et al. (2018)
ACEL
N/A
Screen printing
Printed on textile substrate, follows honeycomb printing pattern for pixelate, silver back electrode

55



De Vos et al. (2016)
ACEL
600 cd m−2@400 V, 2 kHz
Dispenser printing
Dispenser printed on textile substrate, device thickness ∼200 μm, no flexibility data available

58



Wen et al. (2016)
ACEL
16 cd m−2@200 V, 100 kHz
Spin coating
Flexible EL device, more than 1000 bending cycles performed

64



Jun et al. (2018)
ACEL
55 cd m−2@500 Hz, 300 V
Spin coating
AgNW embedded in polymer matrix as the transparent electrode, minimum bending radius <100 μm, drop of luminance was 12.4% after 10000 bending to 500 μm

65



Kim et al. (2009)
ACEL
110 cd m−2@50 V, 27 kHz
Filtration and spin coating
CNT electrode as transparent electrode, PET substrate, No mechanical flexible data available

67



Jeong et al. (2017)
ACEL
8 cd m−2@500 V, 2 kHz
Drop casting
Quantum dot based EL, stretchable up to 60%, PDMS polymer matrix, AgNW transparent electrode, other flexibility data not available

73



Chung et al. (2014)
ACEL
211 cd m−2@170 V, 10 kHz
Drop casting and UV irradiation
Device fabricated on PET substrate, flexibility data not available

121



Sloma et al. (2011)
ACEL
39 cd m−2@N/A
Screen printing
Screen printed device on flexible substrate, fully functional even after 20 bending cycles

151



Yang et al. (2016)
ACEL
10 cd m−2@5 kV, 1 kHz
Mask deposition
Ionic conductor based transparent electrode, area strain of more than 1500%

173



Hu et al. (2011)
ACEL
44 cd m−2@400 V, 400 Hz
Dispenser printing
PET mesh-based fabric substrate, PEDOT:PSS printed on fabric as transparent electrode, flexibility data not available

174



Yang et al. (2014)
ACEL
15 cd m−2@80 V, 1400 Hz
Meyer rod coating
Graphene oxide as dielectric layer, reduced graphene oxide as the transparent electrode, fabricated on PET substrate, no flexibility data

175



Song et al. (2018)
ACEL
17 cd m−2@400 V, 50 kHz
Screen printing
Phosphor particles embedded in PDMS, silver nanowire electrode, multi-color output, around 8% degradation of output after 5000 cycles

176



You et al. (2017)
ACEL
95 cd m−2@300 V, 500 Hz
Spin coating
Phosphor material embedded in PUU, PDMS stretchable substrate, 20% drop of luminosity after 100% stretching, up to 150% stretching, tested for 4800 cycles of 50% stretching

177



Lee et al. (2018)
ACEL
176 cd m−2@500 V, 800 Hz
Screen printing
Multifunctional device, sound emitting, piezo-light convert, no flexibility data available

178



Jun et al. (2017)
ACEL
35 cd m−2@300 V, 400 Hz
Spin coating
Silver nanowire electrode based transparent electrode, 11% drop of luminosity after 5000 bending cycles of 10% bending stresses, dual side emission

179



Wang et al. (2011)
ACEL
1140 cd m−2@480 V, 16 kHz
Spin coating
Graphene transparent electrode, PET substrate, unchanged luminance under strain of 5.4%

180



Straue et al. (2012)
ACEL
20 cd m−2@1000 Hz, 140 V
Tape casting
ITO electrode on a PET substrate, no flexibility data available

181



Lee et al. (2018)
ACEL
650 cd m−2@14 V, 10 kHz
Spin coating
Ionic gel based dielectric layer, has been bended above 30 degree bending angles

182



En-on et al. (2017)
ACEL
45 cd m−2@250 V, 500 Hz
Screen printing
ITO coated PET substrate, no flexibility data available

183



Alonso et al. (2018)
ACEL
N/A
Spin coating
Graphene based electrode, fabricated on textile substrate, bending radius less than 10 mm, more than 1000 bending cycles and twisting cycles with less than 10% luminance output degradation

184



Wang et al. (2016)
ACEL
95 cd m−2@2 kHz, 4.5 V μm−1
Doctor blade coating
Maximum of 700% strain was achieved with just 30% drop of luminosity, ionic conductor based transparent electrode

185



Yakoh et al. (2018)
ACEL
N/A
Screen printing
Graphene based transparent electrode, fabricated on PET substrate, less than 5% drop of light intensity after 1000 bending cycles

186



Zhang et al. (2018)
ACEL
N/A
Spin coating
Stretchable device, metal meshed transparent electrode, phosphor material embedded in PDMS, has been tested up to 60% strain level

187



Liang et al. (2017)
ACEL
957 cd m−2@195 V, 2 kHz
Meyer rod coating
Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, maintained 88.4% luminance after 1000 bending cycles of 180 degree bending

188



Alonso et al. (2016)
ACEL
N/A@180 V, 681 Hz
Spin coating
Graphene based transparent electrode, deposited on PET substrate, almost similar emission with a radius curvature of 14 mm, over 1000 bending cycles over a 7 mm diameter tube

150



Withnall et al. (2010)
ACEL
250 cd m−2@N/A
Inkjet printing
Phosphor mixed with dielectric material, printed on flexible substrate material, interdigitated electrode design, flexibility data not available

189



Kim et al. (2011)
ACEL
N/A
Screen printing
Fabricated on glossy paper substrate with paper protective layer, flexibility data not available

190



Bellingham et al. (2017)
ACEL-fiber
N/A
Roll-to-roll yarn coating
Co-axial ACEL fiber fabrication, high bending radius

191



Larson et al. (2016)
LEC
N/A
Drop casting
480% stretchable, light emitting capacitor, elastomer substrate

192



Zhang et al. (2015)
LEC
800 cd m−2@13 V
Dip coating
Co-axial light emitting cell, CNT electrode, functional layers deposited around a metallic wire, can be woven to fabric

193



Orti and Bolink (2015)
LEC
125 cd m−2
N/A
Light emitting cell was fabricated around a flexible steel wire, can be integrated into fabric

194



Martinez-Sarti et al. (2016)
LEC
100 cd m−2@N/A
Spin coating
CNT based electrode material on flexible sheet, light emitting cell type device

195



Santos et al. (2008)
LEC
1 cd m−2@N/A
Spin coating
Ruthenium based phosphor, deposited on PET flexible substrate, no data available on flexibility

196



Tabares et al. (2016)
LED
N/A
Molecular beam epitaxy
Retained the same intensity at 1.4 cm radius of curvature, bending has resulted in shift in emission peaks due to change of band gap

42



Yang et al. (2012)
LED
N/A
Co-axial electrospinning
Co-axial LED, electrospun nanofiber, flexible

90



Yang and Dong (2009)
LED
N/A@3.2 V
Co-axial electrospinning
Co-axial light emitting fiber fabricated with electrospinning technique with ruthenium-based phosphor layer

112



Zhang et al. (2015)
LED
505 cd m−2@8.8 V
Wrapping and dip coating
Co-axial LED, CNT wrapped around fiber based substrate as electrodes

197



Zainelabdin et al. (2010)
LED
N/A, bias voltage 14 V
Spin coating
Flexible LED developed on plastic substrate, works well in elevated temperatures, larger bending angles

198



Yu et al. (2015)
LED
N/A
Drop casting
Chirality sorted CNT as the emitting layer, flexible substrate

199



Kim et al. (2011)
LED
200 cd m−2
Vapour phase deposition
Multi-color OLED, highly flexible, over 20000 bending cycles with less than 1 mm bending radius, more than 1 h dipping in water without compromising light output

200



Kwon et al. (2015)
LED
1400 cd m−2@10 V
Dip coating
PET fiber as the base, co-axial LED, no flexibility data available

201



O’Connor et al. (2007)
LED
N/A
Vacuum thermal evaporation
Material deposited on fiber shaped polyimide substrate, no flexibility data available

202



Lanz et al. (2016)
LED
4370 cd m−2@12 V
Spray coating
On conductive fabric substrate, long life-time, flexibility data is not available

203



White et al. (2013)
OLED
100 cd m−2@8 V
Spin coating
Flexible LED with organic phosphor, tested 100% stretching, highly flexible

204



Lian et al. (2017)
OLED
10000 cd m−2@8 V
Vacuum thermal evaporation
Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, no mechanical flexibility data available

205



Song et al. (2015)
OLED
30000 cd m−2@12 V
Thermal evaporation
Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, no mechanical flexibility data available

206



Jung et al. (2017)
OLED
40000 cd m−2@6.5 V
Vacuum thermal evaporation
Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, 6% drop of luminosity after 2000 bending cycles to 7 mm bending radius, roll-to-roll fabrication

207



Liang et al. (2014)
OLED
1100 cd m−2@20 V
Spin coating
Graphene and silver nanowire transparent electrode, 12% drop of brightness after 10 cycles of 20% stretching cycles

208



Wei et al. (2018)
OLED
6583 cd m−2@N/A
N/A
Gold doped graphene transparent electrode, organic phosphor, flexibility data not available

209



Uchida et al. (2009)
OLED
∼200 cd m−2@12 V
Vacuum thermal evaporation
Organic phosphor, custom fabricated transparent electrode, data on flexibility are not available

210



Liu et al. (2014)
OLED
40000 cd m−2@10 V
Vacuum thermal evaporation
Organic LED, silver based transparent electrode, transparent LED, no significant drop in luminance after 100 bending cycles for 8 mm

211



Wang et al. (2019)
OLED
2500 cd m−2@17 V
N/A
Deposited on PET substrate, copper nanowire based transparent electrode, no luminescence data on flexibility

212



Kim et al. (2017)
QD-LED
50000 cd m−2@N/A
Spin coating
Quantum dot embedded LED, silver nanowire as the flexible and transparent electrode

213



Kim et al. (2017)
QD-LED
1200 cd m−2@13 V
Spin coating
QD embedded LED, stretching up to 70%, has withstand 100 stretching cycles with just 12% increment in current density

214



Kim et al. (2017)
QD-LED
4800 cd m−2@4.5 V
Spin coating
PU substrate, quantum dot embedded LED, 20% luminescence drop after 300 bending cycles of 5 mm bending radius

215



Yang et al. (2014)
QD-LED
20000 cd m−2@10 V
Spin coating
Quantum dot embedded LED, drop of 10% luminescence output after 300 bending cycles over 4 mm diameter rod

216



Yang et al. (2013)
QD-LED
19625 cd m−2@10 V
Vacuum thermal evaporation
Quantum dot based emitting layer, deposited on tape substrate, can be applied over any surface, flexibility data not available

217





Conclusion and future aspects
Light emitting devices have evolved greatly from the days of their discovery. With current trends on wearables and miniaturizing electronics, flexible light emitting techniques have been introduced as well. Among different techniques, LED (Light emitting diodes) and ACEL (Alternative Current Electroluminescnce) have been used as key light emitting techniques among a number of individual techniques. Applications of flexible light emitting devices are already spread over a number of different commercial platforms. Even though luminance output seems poor compared with LED, ACEL devices possess a number of other key advantages which over-shadow the performances of LEDs. Simple fabrication processes, high luminance efficiency, simpler device architecture, smooth and surface light emission and ruggedness during operation have clearly made them industry ready and thus suitable for flexible light emitting devices.
During the early stages of its development, luminescence was identified and developed around sulfides. Later, as we moved through the timeline, the invention of semiconducting materials lightened up the LEDs and more recently, organic materials entered into the play with outstanding performances. However, one of the key concerns at the moment lies with the performances of material systems being used in these lighting devices. Since the applications of luminescence devices have expanded into wearables and outdoor applications, the demand for rugged materials has increased. Even though organic phosphor materials have shown unparalleled luminescence properties, their poor behaviours during intense ambient conditions like high humidity and high temperature have opened up the necessity that robust material systems are still needed.
On the other hand, researchers have also been busy developing device fabrication techniques to incorporate market requirements. Early stage thick film electroluminescence devices have been replaced with thinner and more flexible devices. Especially for LEDs, vacuum-based processes and nano fabrication techniques have been developed targeting portable electronic devices like mobile phones. However, having complicated and controlled-environmental-based fabrication techniques are less favourable with industrial scale production lines, especially for large area fabrications. Hence, current trends on fabrication techniques are more oriented towards simpler and open-air fabrication techniques like printing and coating techniques. The electrospinning technique is a nano-fiber fabrication process with a huge potential to be incorporated into industrial scale light emitting device fabrication. Since it is a simple and open-air fabrication method, the process is less complicated and its massive scalability can expand size limitations of the devices. Even though some electrospun organic light emitting devices have been developed at laboratory scales, still there are some points to be clarified before introducing them into industrial level light emitting device fabrications. Their future is bright.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Authors would like to acknowledge the supports provided by both Lloyd's Registration Foundation, UK and NUS Hybrid-integrated Flexible (Stretchable) Electronic Systems (HiFES) Program Seed Fund (Grant No. R265000628133). W. A. D. M. J. would like to acknowledge the support given by Commonwealth scholarship (GRSUR0000008 PVO Special Commonwealth Schsp) during the period of study.
References
A. N. Krasnov, Displays, 2003, 24, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Piper and F. E. Williams, Phys. Rev., 1955, 98, 1809–1813 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shea, IEEE Electr. Insul. Mag., 2004, 20, 46 Search PubMed .
M. K. Choi, J. Yang, T. Hyeon and D. Kim, npj Flex. Electron., 2018, 1–14 Search PubMed .
Z. Shuai and Q. Peng, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2016, nww024 CrossRef .
R.-P. Xu, Y.-Q. Li and J.-X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9116–9142 RSC .
D. Bozyigit and V. Wood, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 731–736 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qasim, W. Lei and Q. Li, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 3173–3185 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zheludev, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 189–192 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Winkler, Q. T. Vinh, T. Q. Khanh, A. Benker, C. Bois, R. Petry and A. Zych, LED Lighting, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2014, pp. 49–132 Search PubMed .
F. K. Yam and Z. Hassan, Microelectron. J., 2005, 36, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
K. Morii, M. Omoto, M. Ishida and M. Graetzel, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 7366–7368 CrossRef CAS .
B. Geffroy, P. le Roy and C. Prat, Polym. Int., 2006, 55, 572–582 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pakeva and R. Dafinova, Phys. Status Solidi, 1988, 106, K97–K100 CrossRef CAS .

          P. F. Smet, I. Moreels, Z. Hens and D. Poelman, Materials,  2010, 3, 2834–2883 Search PubMed .
J. C. Hitt, J. P. Bender and J. F. Wager, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2000, 25, 29–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tiwari, S. Tiwari and B. P. Chandra, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2004, 15, 569–574 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Rack and P. H. Holloway, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 1998, 21, 171–219 CrossRef .
M. Bredol and H. S. Dieckhoff, Materials, 2010, 3, 1353–1374 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, S. Do Han, J. D. Kim, S. P. Khatkar and Y. Woo Rhee, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 131, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Park, H. S. Jeong, J. H. Park, G. Deressa, Y. T. Jeong, K. T. Lim, J. H. Park, S. H. Lee and J. S. Kim, J. Lumin., 2015, 165, 216–219 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Whelan, Electroluminescent Lamps - Using electric current through a phosphor or semiconductor, http://edisontechcenter.org/electroluminescent.html, accessed 1 October 2018.
M. Sloma, D. Janczak, G. Wroblewski, A. Mlozniak and M. Jakubowska, Circuit World, 2014, 40, 13–16 CrossRef .

          G. Wroblewski, M. Sloma, D. Janczak, A. Mlozniak and M. Jakubowska, in Proceedings of the 2014 37th International Spring Seminar on Electronics Technology, IEEE, 2014, pp. 357–360.
M. de Vos, R. Torah, M. Glanc-Gostkiewicz and J. Tudor, J. Disp. Technol., 2016, 12, 1757–1763 Search PubMed .
R. Withnall, J. Silver, P. G. Harris, T. G. Ireland and P. J. Marsh, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2011, 19, 798–810 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Dean, J. Lumin., 1981, 23, 17–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Yan, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2876–2882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hu, D. Li, O. Ala, P. Manandhar, Q. Fan, D. Kasilingam and P. D. Calvert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 305–311 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dias and R. Monaragala, Text. Res. J., 2012, 82, 1164–1176 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Winscom, R. Withnall and J. Silver, Handbook of Digital Imaging, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2015, pp. 1–18 Search PubMed .
C. Schrage and S. Kaskel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1640–1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Silver, R. Withnall, P. G. Harris, P. J. Marsh, R. Kirk and F. Guinn, SID Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2008, 39, 182 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stauffer and K. Tybrandt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7200–7203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ely, A. Matsumoto, B. Zoetebier, V. S. Peressinotto, M. Kioshi, D. A. De Sousa and R. Maciel, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Winscom, P. G. Harris and J. Silver, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2016, 5, R211–R218 CrossRef CAS .

          T.-M. Lee, H.-C. Choi, J.-H. Noh and D.-S. Kim, in 2009 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, IEEE, 2009, pp. 943–946.
S. Zhang, R. J. W. Teo, H. Su, C. S. Tan and T. K. S. Wong, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 2879 CrossRef CAS .
More about Light Tape - Light Tape, http://www.lighttape.com/more-about-lighttape/#how, accessed 10 October 2018.

          J. Burgess, How Electroluminescent (EL) Wire Works | HowStuffWorks, https://science.howstuffworks.com/electroluminescent-wire.htm/printable, accessed 20 September 2018.

          T. Munzner, CoolNeon Projects, https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~tmm/tmmpix/coolneon/, accessed 20 September 2018.
G. Tabares, S. Mhedhbi, M. Lesecq, B. Damilano, J. Brault, S. Chenot, A. Ebongue, P. Altuntas, N. Defrance, V. Hoel and Y. Cordier, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2016, 28, 1661–1664 CAS .
Y. Kim, C. Wolf, Y. Kim, H. Cho, W. Kwon, A. Sadhanala, C. G. Park, S. Rhee, S. H. Im and H. Richard, ACS Nano, 2017, 1–29 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Liu, J. Feng, X. L. Ou, H. F. Cui, M. Xu and H. B. Sun, Org. Electron., 2016, 31, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ibañez, E. Garcia, L. Gil, M. Mollar and B. Marí, Displays, 2007, 28, 112–117 CrossRef .
J. Kim, M. J. Bae, T. Jeong, S. H. Park, S. Song, J. Lee, I. Han, D. Jung and S. Yu, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2010, 31, 1269–1271 CAS .
J. H. Kim, N. Shepherd, M. R. Davidson and P. H. Holloway, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4279–4281 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shepherd, D. C. Morton, E. W. Forsythe and D. Chiu, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 2342–2346 CrossRef CAS .
A. Perumal, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1589–1593 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, X. Chen, Y. Hou, Z. Xu, X. Yang, S. Yin, Z. Wang, X. Xu, S. Lau and B. Tay, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 325, 420–424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi, Y. Tani and H. Kawazoe, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, L966–L969 CrossRef CAS .
M. de Vos, R. Torah, S. Beeby and J. Tudor, Procedia Eng., 2014, 87, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, H. Tian, J. Li, Q. Li, J. Dai, T.-L. Ren, G. Dong and Q. Yan, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 48–56 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gao, M. Zhang and J. Zhang, Materials, 2017, 10, 565 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Verboven, J. Stryckers, V. Mecnika, G. Vandevenne, M. Jose and W. Deferme, Materials, 2018, 11, 290 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Satya, R. K. Mishra, D. K. Patel, K. R. Rao, V. Sudarsan and R. K. Vatsa, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 81, 127–133 CrossRef .
S. Lee, B. Jeon, T. Kang, W. Lee, A. M. Malik, S. Park, J. Lim, B. Park, Y. Jeong and J. Kim, J. Lumin., 2018, 196, 290–293 CrossRef CAS .
M. de Vos, R. Torah and J. Tudor, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 045016 CrossRef .

          P. D. Angelo, PhD thesis, University of Toronto,  2013 .
T. Lee, S. Hur, J. Kim and H. Choi, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 015016 CrossRef .
S.-Y. Jeon and S. Yu, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2017, 70, 442–445 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Kim, S. H. Cho, J. H. Lee, B. Jeong, R. H. Kim, S. Yu, T.-W. Lee, W. Shim and C. Park, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Chen, G. M. Smith, H. Sun, D. Yang, W. Nie, Y. Li, W. Huang, D. Ma and D. L. Carroll, J. Lumin., 2015, 161, 82–86 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wen, N. Liu, S. Wang, H. Zhang, W. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou and Y. Gao, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 23419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jun, Y. Kim, B. K. Ju and J. W. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 429, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Cho, S. S. Jo, I. Hwang, J. Sung, J. Seo, S. H. Jung, I. Bae, J. R. Choi, H. Cho, T. Lee, J. K. Lee, T. W. Lee and C. Park, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10809–10817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kim, D. W. Shin, J. Kim, S. H. Park, I. taek Han and J. B. Yoo, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3461–3465 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, Opt. Commun., 2014, 321, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Kim, H. Kim, T. Kim, S. Yu, J. W. Suk, T. Jeong, S. Song, M. J. Bae, I. Han, D. Jung and S. H. Park, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5078 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, M. J. Bae, S. H. Park, T. Jeong, S. Song, J. Lee, I. Han, J. B. Yoo, D. Jung and S. Yu, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 529–533 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Gupta, S. Singh, G. Kedawat, K. Kanika, P. Kumar, A. K. Gangwar, T. N. Narayanan, A. A. Marti, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5002–5008 RSC .
B. Middleton and V. Goodship, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2013, 53, 1554–1562 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Jeong, S. Song, H. Kim, S.-H. Baek, J. S. Kwak, L. S. Park, I. Yang, S. Hwang, J. E. Lee, S. K. Kim, S. W. Kim, K. C. Hwang, P. Ferreira, X. Li, K. Choquette and J. A. Rogers, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 8816–8822 RSC .
H. Cho, S. Y. Min and T. W. Lee, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2013, 298, 475–486 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Huang, Y. Z. Zhang, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2003, 63, 2223–2253 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baji, Y. W. Mai, S. C. Wong, M. Abtahi and P. Chen, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 703–718 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bhardwaj and S. C. Kundu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 325–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Persano, A. Camposeo, C. Tekmen and D. Pisignano, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2013, 298, 504–520 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Li and C. Wang, One-Dimensional nanostructures Electrospinning Technique and Unique Nanofibers, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,  2013, pp. 15–29 Search PubMed .
M. Li, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Tang and B. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3650–3656 CrossRef .
K. Ketpang and J. S. Park, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1603–1608 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Ávila, M. M. Reboredo, M. Castro and R. Parra, Mater. Res., 2013, 16, 839–843 CrossRef .

          Z. Wang, J. K. Nelson, N. Koratkar, L. S. Schadler, H. Hillborg and S. Zhao, in 2011 Annual Report Conference on Electrical Insulation and Dielectric Phenomena, IEEE, 2011, pp. 640–643.
A. Camposeo, L. Persano and D. Pisignano, SPIE Newsroom, 2013, 9–11 Search PubMed .
L. Persano, A. Camposeo and D. Pisignano, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 43, 48–95 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vohra, U. Giovanella, R. Tubino, H. Murata and C. Botta, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5572–5578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Vohra, G. Calzaferri, S. Destri, M. Pasini, W. Porzio and C. Botta, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1409–1416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Moran-Mirabal, J. D. Slinker, J. A. Defranco, S. S. Verbridge, R. Ilic, S. Flores-Torres, H. Abruña, G. G. Malliaras and H. G. Craighead, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 458–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim and T. S. Lee, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 303–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, C. R. Lightner and L. Dong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 622–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, T. Zhai, U. K. Gautam, L. Li, L. Wu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 175–287 CrossRef CAS .
A. Klausch, H. Althues, C. Schrage, P. Simon, A. Szatkowski, M. Bredol, D. Adam and S. Kaskel, J. Lumin., 2010, 130, 692–697 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Imam and M. Bakr, Superlattices Microstruct., 2014, 73, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bodo and P. K. Kalita, AIP Conf. Proc., 2010, 31, 31–36 CrossRef .
V. Wood, J. E. Halpert, M. J. Panzer, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2367–2371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peka and H.-J. Schulz, Phys. B, 1994, 193, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dimitrova and J. Tate, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 365, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Chang and K. Takahei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 433–435 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sabira, P. Saheeda and S. Jayalekshmi, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4, 4380–4388 Search PubMed .
A. A. Bol, J. Ferwerda, J. A. Bergwerff and A. Meijerink, J. Lumin., 2002, 99, 325–334 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Krasnov, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 1998, 37, 123–167 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Mishra, S. K. Mishra, S. P. Pandey and K. L. Mishra, Macromol. Symp., 2015, 347, 49–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bae, S. H. Park, T. W. Jeong, J. H. Lee, I. T. Han, Y. W. Jin, J. M. Kim, J. Y. Kim, J. B. Yoo and S. G. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 93–96 CrossRef .
P. Singh, B. Rajesh, S. Bishnoi, G. Swati, V. V. Jaiswal, V. Shanker and D. Haranath, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 17016–17022 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stanley, Y. Jiang, F. Bridges, S. A. Carter and L. Ruhlen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 055301 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ummartyotin, N. Bunnak, J. Juntaro, M. Sain and H. Manuspiya, Solid State Sci., 2012, 14, 299–304 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, L. Qian, F. Teng, Z. Xu and X. R. Xu, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 1–4 Search PubMed .
A. Perumal, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 103307 CrossRef .
V. Bulović, A. Shoustikov, M. Baldo, E. Bose, V. Kozlov, M. Thompson and S. Forrest, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 287, 455–460 CrossRef .
J. Kim, J. Noh, S. Jo, K. E. Park, W. H. Park and T. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6038–6044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Min, J. Bang, J. Park, C.-L. Lee, S. Lee, J.-J. Park, U. Jeong, S. Kim and T.-W. Lee, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11585 RSC .

          H. Yang and L. Dong, 2009 IEEE Nanotechnol. Mater. Devices Conf. NMDC 2009, 2009, pp. 118–120.
X. M. Sui, C. L. Shao and Y. C. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 113115 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Zhao and C. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 2480–2484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, Z. Jiang, C. Wang, Y. Xin, Z. Huang, S. Liu and C. Li, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3385–3387 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Krasnov, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 347, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Perumal, PhD thesis, Technische Universität Dresden (TUD), Germany,  2012 .
M. Fröbel, A. Perumal, T. Schwab, M. C. Gather, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 809–813 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, H. Su, C. S. Tan, T. K. S. Wong and R. J. W. Teo, Solid State Commun., 2017, 250, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, G. R. Choi, Y. C. Kim, J. C. Lee and J. H. Lee, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 3437–3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Chung, S. Song, K.-J. Yang, S. M. Jeong and B. Choi, Opt. Mater. Express, 2014, 4, 1824 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takashima and M. Itoh, Ferroelectrics, 2017, 512, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakamura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 949 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Zhao, F. Wang, Y. Ma, L. Wang, D. Chen, C. Zhao and W. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 403, 71–79 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, Y. Shen, H. Liu, Y. Lin, M. Li and C.-W. Nan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8063 RSC .
Y. H. Son, S. J. Kim, Y. M. Kim, G. E. Jang, M. S. Yoon, S. C. Ur, S. L. Ryu and S. Y. Kweon, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2008, 98, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, S. Xue, W. Zhang and J. Zhai, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 15633–15640 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chiang and R. Popielarz, Ferroelectrics, 2002, 275, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, Q. Wu, D. Zhao, W. Ye, M. Hanif and H. Hou, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 2567–2571 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bauer, C. S. Snyder, C. C. Bowland, A. M. Uhl, M. A. K. Budi, M. Villancio-Wolter, H. A. Sodano and J. S. Andrew, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99, 3902–3908 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Huang, W. Zhang and W. Pan, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 551, 131–135 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ellmer, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 809–817 CrossRef CAS .
L. He and S. C. Tjong, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2016, 109, 1–101 CrossRef .
P. Wang, L. Liu, D. Alemu, K. Li and B. Wen, Displays, 2013, 34, 301–314 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bessaire, M. Mathieu, V. Salles, T. Yeghoyan, C. Celle, J. Simonato and A. Brioude, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 950–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, B. Yalcin and M. Cakmak, Synth. Met., 2015, 203, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
F. Boubée de Gramont, S. Zhang, G. Tomasello, P. Kumar, A. Sarkissian and F. Cicoira, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 093701 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, T. Fukawa and M. Kimura, Polym. J., 2011, 43, 849–854 CrossRef CAS .
Chotimah, B. Winandianto, M. Munir, I. Kartini, A. Kusumaatmaja and K. Triyana, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1755, 2–7 Search PubMed .
G. A. Sarabi, M. Latifi and R. Bagherzadeh, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 020045 CrossRef .
S. Kim, H. Lee, D. Kim, D. Ko, D. Kim, H. Kim and S.-G. Yoon, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, L. Hu, M. W. Rowell, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, J. R. McDonough, J. Zhu, Y. Yang, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4242–4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rivnay, S. Inal, B. A. Collins, M. Sessolo, E. Stavrinidou, X. Strakosas, C. Tassone, D. M. Delongchamp and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11287 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Cruz-Cruz, M. Reyes-Reyes, M. A. Aguilar-Frutis, A. G. Rodriguez and R. López-Sandoval, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1501–1506 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, T. Mankowski, K. Balakrishnan, A. S. Shikoh, F. Touati, M. A. Benammar, M. Mansuripur and C. M. Falco, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16223–16230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4927 RSC .
Y. J. Lin, J. Y. Lee and S. M. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 664, 213–218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, C. Shearer and J. Shapter, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13413–13453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, G. Xin, J. Nam, S. M. Cho and H. Chae, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 6125–6129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Torres Alonso, G. Karkera, G. F. Jones, M. F. Craciun and S. Russo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16541–16545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Sloma, M. Jakubowska and M. Ciez, in Proceedings of the 2011 34th International Spring Seminar on Electronics Technology (ISSE), IEEE, 2011, pp. 558–562.
V. Nam and D. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 47 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhai, Y. Li, L. Chen, X. Wang, L. Shi, R. Wang and J. Sun, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1956–1966 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Hu, Q. Wang, J. Xiong, H. Yang, X. Meng, L. Tan, L. Chen and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26468–26475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Tran, T. H. Duong and H. C. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
T. He, A. Xie, D. H. Reneker and Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4782–4789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, N. Lin, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, Q. Xie, T. Zheng, N. Gao, S. Li, J. Kang, D. Cai and D. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2323 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yue, J. Yan and D. Meng, J. Semicond., 2015, 36, 123005 CrossRef .
I. E. Stewart, A. R. Rathmell, L. Yan, S. Ye, P. F. Flowers, W. You and B. J. Wiley, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5980 RSC .
S. M. Jeong, S. Song, S. Lee and N. Y. Ha, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6194–6200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Moon Jeong, S. Song, S. Lee and B. Choi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 051110 CrossRef .
D. Bozyigit, V. Wood, Y. Shirasaki and V. Bulovic, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 113701 CrossRef .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, D. Bozyigit, Y. Shirasaki, I. Rousseau, S. Geyer, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2927–2932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Luminous fabric, Luminous clothing, fiber optic clothing, fiber optic fabric, illuminated clothing, light up fabric, glowing fabric, LED clothing, http://www.lumigram.com/catalog/P8_LUMINOUS_FABRIC.php, accessed 6 October 2018.

          N. Yeap, LED clothes: the new little black dress, https://money.cnn.com/2015/06/15/technology/led-illuminating-outfits/index.html, accessed 6 October 2018.

          S. Van De Vorstenbosch, Turning clothing into information displays, https://phys.org/news/2015-09-turning-clothing-into-information-displays.html, accessed 5 October 2018.

          G. P. Crawford, Flexible Flat Panel Displays, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2005, vol. 2, pp. 1–9 Search PubMed .

          F. Ragnet, The “Less Paper” Office: How to Reduce Costs, Enhance Security and be a Better Global Citizen, 2008.
M. C. Choi, Y. Kim and C. S. Ha, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 581–630 CrossRef CAS .
Sony Develops a ‘Rollable’ OTFT-driven OLED Display that can wrap around a Pencil, https://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/News/Press/201005/10-<?pdb_no 070E?><?pdb_no 070E?>070E<?pdb END?><?pdb<?db_id PDB?> END?>/index.html, accessed 6 October 2018.
Samsung Display's ‘Unbreakable Flexible Panel’ Verified by UL, https://news.samsung.com/us/samsung-displays-unbreakable-panel-certified-underwriters-laboratories/, accessed 6 October 2018.

          J. Kang, Flexible Display Shipments to Increase Sharply in 2017, IHS Markit Says, https://technology.ihs.com/586660/flexible-display-shipments-to-increase-sharply-in-2017-ihs-markit-says, accessed 6 October 2018.
C. H. Yang, B. H. Chen, J. X. Zhou, Y. M. Chen and Z. G. Suo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4480–4484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hu, D. Li, O. Ala, P. Manandhar, Q. Fan, D. Kasilingam and P. D. Calvert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 305–311 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Liu, Z. Yin, Z. Du, L. Xie, M. Yi, J. Liu and W. Huang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 55671–55676 RSC .
S. Song, H. Shim, S. K. Lim and S. M. Jeong, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3331 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, Y. Kim, B. Ju and J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5486–5494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, T. Kang, W. Lee, M. M. Afandi, J. Ryu, J. Kim and S. Son, Phys. Status Solidi, 2018, 215, 1701071 CrossRef .
S. Jun, B. Ju and J. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 6–10 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Y. Chen, P. Li, X. Hao, J. Liu, R. Huang and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7149–7154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Straue, M. Rauscher, M. Dressler and A. Roosen, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 684–689 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, S. H. Cho, H. S. Kang, G. Kim, J. S. Kim, B. Jeong, E. H. Kim, S. Yu, I. Hwang, H. Han, T. H. Park, S. Jung, J. K. Lee, W. Shim and C. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13757–13766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. En-on, A. Tuantranont, T. Kerdcharoen and C. Wongchoosuk, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16885–16889 RSC .
E. Torres Alonso, D. P. Rodrigues, M. Khetani, D. Shin, A. De Sanctis, H. Joulie, I. de Schrijver, A. Baldycheva, H. Alves, A. I. S. Neves, S. Russo and M. F. Craciun, npj Flex. Electron., 2018, 2, 25 CrossRef .
J. Wang, C. Yan, G. Cai, M. Cui, A. Lee-Sie Eh and P. See Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4490–4496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yakoh, R. Álvarez-Diduk, O. Chailapakul and A. Merkoçi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20775–20782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, A. Khan, J. Cai, C. Liang, Y. Liu, J. Deng, S. Huang, G. Li and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21009–21017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liang, H. Hu, L. Liao, Y. He and C. Ye, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600535 CrossRef .
R. Withnall, P. Harris, J. Silver and S. Jones, SID Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2010, 41, 397 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, T. Jeong, S. H. Park, M. J. Bae, S. Song, J. Lee, I. Han, D. Jung, C. Liu and S. G. Yu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 2–5 Search PubMed .
A. Bellingham, N. Bromhead and A. Fontecchio, Materials, 2017, 10, 594 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Larson, B. Peele, S. Li, S. Robinson, M. Totaro, L. Beccai, B. Mazzolai and R. Shepherd, Science, 2016, 351, 1071–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, K. Guo, Y. Li, X. Li, G. Guan, H. Li, Y. Luo, F. Zhao, Q. Zhang, B. Wei, Q. Pei and H. Peng, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ortí and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 211–212 CrossRef .
L. Martínez-Sarti, A. Pertegás, M. Monrabal-Capilla, E. Gilshteyn, I. Varjos, E. I. Kauppinen, A. G. Nasibulin, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Org. Electron., 2016, 30, 36–39 CrossRef .
G. Santos, F. J. Fonseca, A. M. Andrade, A. O. T. Patrocínio, S. K. Mizoguchi, N. Y. M. Iha, M. Peres, W. Simões, T. Monteiro and L. Pereira, J. Non.-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354, 2571–2574 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, K. Guo, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Wang, Y. Luo, H. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Guan, B. Wei, X. Zhu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5621–5624 RSC .
A. Zainelabdin, S. Zaman, G. Amin, O. Nur and M. Willander, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1442–1448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, H. Liu, L. Peng and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 150206113335005 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, H.-J. Kwon, S. Lee, H. Shim, Y. Chun, W. Choi, J. Kwack, D. Han, M. Song, S. Kim, S. Mohammadi, I. Kee and S. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3511–3516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kwon, W. Kim, H. Kim, S. Choi, B.-C. Park, S.-H. Kang and K. C. Choi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500103 CrossRef .
B. O’Connor, K. H. An, Y. Zhao, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3897–3900 CrossRef .
T. Lanz, A. Sandström, S. Tang, P. Chabrecek, U. Sonderegger and L. Edman, Flexible Printed Electron., 2016, 1, 025004 CrossRef .
M. S. White, M. Kaltenbrunner, E. D. Głowacki, K. Gutnichenko, G. Kettlgruber, I. Graz, S. Aazou, C. Ulbricht, D. A. M. Egbe, M. C. Miron, Z. Major, M. C. Scharber, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 811–816 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lian, D. Dong, D. Feng and G. He, Org. Electron., 2017, 49, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, K. Ok, C. Lee, Y. Kim, M. Kwak, C. J. Han, N. Kim, B. Ju and J. Kim, Org. Electron., 2015, 17, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jung, C. Kim, M. Kim, H. Chae, J. H. Cho and S. M. Cho, Org. Electron., 2017, 41, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, L. Li, K. Tong, Z. Ren, W. Hu, X. Niu, Y. Chen and Q. Pei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1590–1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wei, H. Wang, J. Wang, P. Chen, W. Zhao, X. Chen, J. Guo, B. Kang and Y. Duan, Org. Electron., 2018, 63, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uchida, M. Wakana, M. Yahata, S. Dangtip, T. Osotchan, T. Satoh and Y. Sawada, J. Disp. Technol., 2009, 5, 188–191 CAS .
S. Liu, W. Liu, J. Yu, W. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Wen, Y. Yin and W. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 835–840 RSC .
Y. Wang, P. Liu, H. Wang, B. Zeng, J. Wang and F. Chi, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 2343–2350 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, Y. Fu, S. Kim, W. Lee, K. H. Lee, H. K. Chung, H. J. Lee, H. Yang and H. Chae, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1982–1990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Kim, C.-S. Lee, S. Kim, J. Hur, S. Lee, K. W. Shin, Y.-Z. Yoon, M. K. Choi, J. Yang, D.-H. Kim, T. Hyeon, S. Park and S. Hwang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5992–6003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Kim, J. W. Shim, Y.-J. You, Y. J. Lee, C. Park, D. K. Hwang and W. K. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1596–1600 RSC .
X. Yang, E. Mutlugun, C. Dang, K. Dev, Y. Gao, S. T. Tan, X. W. Sun and H. V. Demir, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8224–8231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          X. Yang, E. Mutlugun, Y. Gao, Y. Zhao, S. T. Tan, X. W. Sun and H. V. Demir, in 2013 IEEE Photonics Conference, IEEE, 2013, vol. 2, pp. 151–152.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Wanasinghe Arachchige Dumith Madushanka Jayathilaka
	W. A. D. M. Jayathilaka received his bachelor's honors degree in Mechanical Engineering in 2015 from the University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka. Currently, he is a PhD candidate in Prof. Seeram Ramakrishna's research group (NUSCNN) at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore. His current research interests focus on flexible electroluminescence devices based on electrospinning processes.

Amutha Chinnappan
	Dr Amutha Chinnappan received her PhD degree in organic nanomaterials using ionic liquids for energy applications from Myongji University, South Korea in 2013. She then worked as a BK21 Postdoctoral Fellow until 2015, and after that became an Assistant Professor (Research) at the Department of Energy, Science and Technology, Myongji University. She is currently working as a Senior Research Fellow at the Center for Nanofibers & Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore. Her current research interests include green chemistry, conducting cables/wires, smart textiles, wearable/flexible electronics, and ionic liquid-based functional nanomaterials for energy applications.

Seeram Ramakrishna
	Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, FREng (seeram@nus.edu.sg; seeramrk@yahoo.com) is the Director of Center for Nanofibers and Nanotechnology at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore (NUS). NUS is ranked among the top ten engineering and technology universities in the world. He chairs the Circular Economy Taskforce, and a member of Enterprise Singapore's ISO/TC323 committee on Circular Economy. He is a Highly Cited Researcher (Clarivate Analytics). Thomson Reuters identified him among the World's most influential scientific minds. A European study (http://www.webometrics.info/en/node/58) placed him among the only 800 researchers in the world with H-index above 135 in the history of science and technology. He co-authored ∼1000 SCI listed international journal papers which received ∼88000 citations and ∼140 H-index. He is a member of the World Economic Forum Committee on the Future of Production, and Singapore Smart Manufacturing Technology standards Committee. He innovated electro-hydrodynamic technology to mass-produce nanofibers and nanoparticles with new functionalities.

 	Fig. 1  (a) p–n junction of a LED under thermal equilibrium. (b) Under the positive biased conditions, electrons and holes are recombined and emit light. (Reproduced with permission ref. 10, copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons).	 
λ ≈ (h × c)/Eg	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) An example of an electroluminescence device representing capacitive structure (phosphor material is sandwiched between two MgF2 insulating layers). (b) Operating principle of a typical ACEL device with steps. (Reproduced with permission,17 copyright 2004 Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Flexible EL device with AgNW electrodes lighting after several bending and recovering cycles (reproduced with permission,21 copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd). (b) Bending and twisting of a stretchable EL device (reproduced with permission,28 Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons). (c) ACEL device printed on textile (reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) EL device fabricated on a glass substrate with traditional double insulator approach (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 15). (b) Flexible EL device with single dielectric layer approach (reproduced with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). (c) Phosphor particles embedded in dielectric organic binder (reproduced with permission from ref. 33, copyright 2007, John Wiley & Sons). (d) Flexible EL with EL particles and dielectric particles embedded in binder matrix (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 34). (e) Forward EL architecture (reproduced with permission from ref. 35, copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd). (f) Reverse device architecture (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 36). (g) Application of color conversion layer (reproduced with open access permission from ref. 38). (h) Floating electrode device with split bottom electrode (image courtesy light tape ref. 39).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) EL device fabricated into a yarn-like light emitting device (left) and its application in a fabric (right); ((1) electro-conductive base yarn; (2) dielectric insulation layer; (3) EL layer; (4) dielectric transparent layer; (5) conductive yarn; (6) alternating current voltage source) (reproduced with permission from ref. 30, copyright 2012 SAGE publications). (b) Device architecture of commercial EL. Wire and its application in fashion showcase (image courtesy: How stuff Works).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Example of a typical electrospinning setup. (b) Electrospinning of ruthenium complexes into a LED (reproduced with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (c) Electrospun co-axial nanofiber for a LED (reproduced with permission from ref. 90, copyrights 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

ZnS:Cu	∼430	Blue-green	
Ref. 99

ZnS:Cu	∼500	Blue-green	
Ref. 34

ZnS:Cu	∼455	Blue	
Ref. 56

ZnS:Cu	∼525	Green	
Ref. 56

ZnS:Cu	∼450	Blue	
Ref. 64

ZnS:Cu	∼500	Green	
Ref. 45

ZnS:Cu	∼500	Green	
Ref. 25

ZnS:Mn	∼585	Yellow	
Ref. 17

ZnS:Mn	∼570	Yellow-green	
Ref. 97

ZnS:Cu, Mn	∼460 and 595	Blue and yellow	
Ref. 106

ZnS:Cu, Al	∼530	Green	
Ref. 71

ZnS:Cu, Al	∼540	Green	
Ref. 58

ZnS:Cu, Al	∼420, 440 & 450	Blue	
Ref. 104

ZnS:Cu, Cl	∼460	Blue-green	
Ref. 105

ZnS:Cu, Cl	∼530	Blue-green	
Ref. 20

ZnS:Cu, Cl	∼505	Green	
Ref. 21

ZnS:Dy	∼490, 540 and 590	Blue, green, yellow	
Ref. 102

ZnS:Mn, Dy	∼570 and 590	Yellow	
Ref. 102

ZnS:ErF3	∼550	Green	
Ref. 48

GaN:Er	∼550	Green	
Ref. 47

Zn2SiO4:Mn	∼525	Green	
Ref. 57

ZnGaS:Mn	∼600	Yellow-orange	
Ref. 97

Alq3	457	Blue	
Ref. 109

MEH-PPV	∼580	Yellow	
Ref. 107

PFO	∼550	Green-yellow	
Ref. 63


LED	Ruthenium complexes	Fiber based light emission at very low voltages, light area is 240 × 325 nm2	
88

LED – color conversion layer	PMMA embedded with multi-color dyes	Three color dyes electrospinning, multi-nozzle system, white light emission	
110

Color conversion	HCP mixed with PEO	Hyperbranched polymer blends with PEO has resulted in white color emission	
89

LED – down conversion	Quantum dots/PVK	White LEDs, green and red quantum dot polymers	
111

LED	PEDOT:PSS, PANI, Ruthenium complexes	Co-axial electrospun LED, light emitting yarn	
112

White light emission	PVA/ZnO	ZnO quantum dots mixed with PVA, high luminance due to surface defects	
113

ACEL	ZnS:Cu/PVA	ZnS:Cu nano crystals were dispersed due to interaction with OH−	
114

ACEL	ZnS:Mn/PVP	ZnS:Mn nanoparticles with cubic structure after annealing	
115

	(2)

Dielectric layer	PI/BaTiO3	Simultaneous electrospinning/electro spraying for the composite nanofibers	
129

Dielectric layer	PVP/BaTiO3	Based on the calcination temperature, the crystal properties can be tuned for better output	
130

Dielectric layer	BaTiO3/PVDF–TrFE	Dopamine modification has improved the breakdown strength of dielectric	
125

Luminance layer	BaTiO3/PVP	BaTiO3 has shown photoluminescence properties within visible region	
131


Transparent electrode	PEDOT:PSS/PEO	PEDOT:PSS nanofibers on a non-planar surface, low conductive, post-treatments can enhance transmittance and conductivity properties	
135

Transparent electrode	PEDOT:PSS/PEO	Humidity affected the fiber morphology, vertical stand-up fiber configuration	
136

Conducting polymer mat	PEDOT:Tos/PDMS	EDOT has been polymerized on PDMS scaffold	
137

Anisotropic actuation	PEDOT:PSS/PVP/PMMA	Dispersion of PEDOT:PSS on PVP/PMMA fiber mat	
138

Transparent electrode	PEDOT:PSS/PVA	The metallic contact determines the overall resistivity	
139

Electrode applications	PEDOT:PSS/PVA/rGO	rGO has increased the conductivity	
140

Transparent electrode	Cu nanofiber mat	Nanofiber mat was heat treated to get Cu nanofiber mat	
141

Transparent electrode	Cu nanofiber mat	Cu nanofiber was obtained by calcinating	
142


 	Fig. 7  Flexible lights and displays. (a) EL wire in designs (image courtesy: Rakuten). (b) Fiber optic embedded luminous fabric panel.164 (c) Texting shirt.165 (d) LED display laminated into textile.166	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Sony rollable display panel demonstrating wrapping capabilities around a pencil170 (image courtesy: Sony). (b) Unbreakable flexible display introduced by Samsung171 (image courtesy: Samsung). (c) 14.7 inch large flexible organic LED display (image courtesy: Arizona State University, Flexible Electronics and Display Centre). (d) EL powered billboard during 2006 Commonwealth Games (image courtesy: Nejilock Technology). (e) Concept design for vehicle interior lighting (image courtesy: Glow-Tech).	 

Park et al. (2015)	ACEL	N/A@500 V, 400 Hz	Bar coating and screen-printing techniques	Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, PET substrate, more than 1200 bending-recovery cycles for transparent electrode	
21

Sloma et al. (2014)	ACEL	N/A	Screen-printing	ACEL device on paper and textile substrates. On textile substrates, the device has shown some cracks after printing	
23

De Vos et al. (2016)	ACEL	200 cd m−2@400 V, 2 kHz	Screen printing	On fabric substrate, formed into each segment of 7-segment display, functional digital watch, no flexibility data available	
25

Wang et al. (2015)	ACEL	220 cd m−2@300 V, 50 kHz	Spin coating	Stretchable, EL particles are embedded in dielectric, over 100% strain ratio without drop in output	
28

Schrage and Kaskel (2009)	ACEL	N/A@35 V, 1 kHz	Spray coating	CNT electrode spray coated on PET substrate, large bending angles have achieved, no data available for flexibility	
32

Silver et al. (2008)	ACEL	200 cd m−2@110 V, 400 Hz	N/A	ITO coated PET substrate, mixing phosphor and dielectric together, no flexibility data available	
33

Stauffer & Tybrandt (2016)	ACEL	35 cd m−2@200 V, 400 Hz	Filtration	Mixing both EL and dielectric together, AgNW transparent electrode, small drop in relative emission intensity after 100% strain, after 500 straining cycles	
34

Ely et al. (2014)	ACEL	26 cd m−2@100 V, 400 Hz	Spray coating and screen printing	Spray coated PEDOT:PSS on PET substrate, no mechanical flexible data available	
35

Zhang et al. (2016)	ACEL	100 cd m−2@110 V, 2 kHz	Screen printing	Printed on flexible substrate, no flexibility data available	
38

Dias & Monaragala (2012)	ACEL	1.2 cd m−2@370 V, 1800 Hz	Yarn coating system	Co-axial EL wire, EL paste has been applied over a base yarn, can weave into fabric, copper wire is wrapped as electrode, no flexibility data available	
30

De Vos et al. (2014)	ACEL	N/A	Screen printing	Screen-printed device on fabric material, bending radius as small as 9 mm	
52

Verboven et al. (2018)	ACEL	N/A	Screen printing	Printed on textile substrate, follows honeycomb printing pattern for pixelate, silver back electrode	
55

De Vos et al. (2016)	ACEL	600 cd m−2@400 V, 2 kHz	Dispenser printing	Dispenser printed on textile substrate, device thickness ∼200 μm, no flexibility data available	
58

Wen et al. (2016)	ACEL	16 cd m−2@200 V, 100 kHz	Spin coating	Flexible EL device, more than 1000 bending cycles performed	
64

Jun et al. (2018)	ACEL	55 cd m−2@500 Hz, 300 V	Spin coating	AgNW embedded in polymer matrix as the transparent electrode, minimum bending radius <100 μm, drop of luminance was 12.4% after 10000 bending to 500 μm	
65

Kim et al. (2009)	ACEL	110 cd m−2@50 V, 27 kHz	Filtration and spin coating	CNT electrode as transparent electrode, PET substrate, No mechanical flexible data available	
67

Jeong et al. (2017)	ACEL	8 cd m−2@500 V, 2 kHz	Drop casting	Quantum dot based EL, stretchable up to 60%, PDMS polymer matrix, AgNW transparent electrode, other flexibility data not available	
73

Chung et al. (2014)	ACEL	211 cd m−2@170 V, 10 kHz	Drop casting and UV irradiation	Device fabricated on PET substrate, flexibility data not available	
121

Sloma et al. (2011)	ACEL	39 cd m−2@N/A	Screen printing	Screen printed device on flexible substrate, fully functional even after 20 bending cycles	
151

Yang et al. (2016)	ACEL	10 cd m−2@5 kV, 1 kHz	Mask deposition	Ionic conductor based transparent electrode, area strain of more than 1500%	
173

Hu et al. (2011)	ACEL	44 cd m−2@400 V, 400 Hz	Dispenser printing	PET mesh-based fabric substrate, PEDOT:PSS printed on fabric as transparent electrode, flexibility data not available	
174

Yang et al. (2014)	ACEL	15 cd m−2@80 V, 1400 Hz	Meyer rod coating	Graphene oxide as dielectric layer, reduced graphene oxide as the transparent electrode, fabricated on PET substrate, no flexibility data	
175

Song et al. (2018)	ACEL	17 cd m−2@400 V, 50 kHz	Screen printing	Phosphor particles embedded in PDMS, silver nanowire electrode, multi-color output, around 8% degradation of output after 5000 cycles	
176

You et al. (2017)	ACEL	95 cd m−2@300 V, 500 Hz	Spin coating	Phosphor material embedded in PUU, PDMS stretchable substrate, 20% drop of luminosity after 100% stretching, up to 150% stretching, tested for 4800 cycles of 50% stretching	
177

Lee et al. (2018)	ACEL	176 cd m−2@500 V, 800 Hz	Screen printing	Multifunctional device, sound emitting, piezo-light convert, no flexibility data available	
178

Jun et al. (2017)	ACEL	35 cd m−2@300 V, 400 Hz	Spin coating	Silver nanowire electrode based transparent electrode, 11% drop of luminosity after 5000 bending cycles of 10% bending stresses, dual side emission	
179

Wang et al. (2011)	ACEL	1140 cd m−2@480 V, 16 kHz	Spin coating	Graphene transparent electrode, PET substrate, unchanged luminance under strain of 5.4%	
180

Straue et al. (2012)	ACEL	20 cd m−2@1000 Hz, 140 V	Tape casting	ITO electrode on a PET substrate, no flexibility data available	
181

Lee et al. (2018)	ACEL	650 cd m−2@14 V, 10 kHz	Spin coating	Ionic gel based dielectric layer, has been bended above 30 degree bending angles	
182

En-on et al. (2017)	ACEL	45 cd m−2@250 V, 500 Hz	Screen printing	ITO coated PET substrate, no flexibility data available	
183

Alonso et al. (2018)	ACEL	N/A	Spin coating	Graphene based electrode, fabricated on textile substrate, bending radius less than 10 mm, more than 1000 bending cycles and twisting cycles with less than 10% luminance output degradation	
184

Wang et al. (2016)	ACEL	95 cd m−2@2 kHz, 4.5 V μm−1	Doctor blade coating	Maximum of 700% strain was achieved with just 30% drop of luminosity, ionic conductor based transparent electrode	
185

Yakoh et al. (2018)	ACEL	N/A	Screen printing	Graphene based transparent electrode, fabricated on PET substrate, less than 5% drop of light intensity after 1000 bending cycles	
186

Zhang et al. (2018)	ACEL	N/A	Spin coating	Stretchable device, metal meshed transparent electrode, phosphor material embedded in PDMS, has been tested up to 60% strain level	
187

Liang et al. (2017)	ACEL	957 cd m−2@195 V, 2 kHz	Meyer rod coating	Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, maintained 88.4% luminance after 1000 bending cycles of 180 degree bending	
188

Alonso et al. (2016)	ACEL	N/A@180 V, 681 Hz	Spin coating	Graphene based transparent electrode, deposited on PET substrate, almost similar emission with a radius curvature of 14 mm, over 1000 bending cycles over a 7 mm diameter tube	
150

Withnall et al. (2010)	ACEL	250 cd m−2@N/A	Inkjet printing	Phosphor mixed with dielectric material, printed on flexible substrate material, interdigitated electrode design, flexibility data not available	
189

Kim et al. (2011)	ACEL	N/A	Screen printing	Fabricated on glossy paper substrate with paper protective layer, flexibility data not available	
190

Bellingham et al. (2017)	ACEL-fiber	N/A	Roll-to-roll yarn coating	Co-axial ACEL fiber fabrication, high bending radius	
191

Larson et al. (2016)	LEC	N/A	Drop casting	480% stretchable, light emitting capacitor, elastomer substrate	
192

Zhang et al. (2015)	LEC	800 cd m−2@13 V	Dip coating	Co-axial light emitting cell, CNT electrode, functional layers deposited around a metallic wire, can be woven to fabric	
193

Orti and Bolink (2015)	LEC	125 cd m−2	N/A	Light emitting cell was fabricated around a flexible steel wire, can be integrated into fabric	
194

Martinez-Sarti et al. (2016)	LEC	100 cd m−2@N/A	Spin coating	CNT based electrode material on flexible sheet, light emitting cell type device	
195

Santos et al. (2008)	LEC	1 cd m−2@N/A	Spin coating	Ruthenium based phosphor, deposited on PET flexible substrate, no data available on flexibility	
196

Tabares et al. (2016)	LED	N/A	Molecular beam epitaxy	Retained the same intensity at 1.4 cm radius of curvature, bending has resulted in shift in emission peaks due to change of band gap	
42

Yang et al. (2012)	LED	N/A	Co-axial electrospinning	Co-axial LED, electrospun nanofiber, flexible	
90

Yang and Dong (2009)	LED	N/A@3.2 V	Co-axial electrospinning	Co-axial light emitting fiber fabricated with electrospinning technique with ruthenium-based phosphor layer	
112

Zhang et al. (2015)	LED	505 cd m−2@8.8 V	Wrapping and dip coating	Co-axial LED, CNT wrapped around fiber based substrate as electrodes	
197

Zainelabdin et al. (2010)	LED	N/A, bias voltage 14 V	Spin coating	Flexible LED developed on plastic substrate, works well in elevated temperatures, larger bending angles	
198

Yu et al. (2015)	LED	N/A	Drop casting	Chirality sorted CNT as the emitting layer, flexible substrate	
199

Kim et al. (2011)	LED	200 cd m−2	Vapour phase deposition	Multi-color OLED, highly flexible, over 20000 bending cycles with less than 1 mm bending radius, more than 1 h dipping in water without compromising light output	
200

Kwon et al. (2015)	LED	1400 cd m−2@10 V	Dip coating	PET fiber as the base, co-axial LED, no flexibility data available	
201

O’Connor et al. (2007)	LED	N/A	Vacuum thermal evaporation	Material deposited on fiber shaped polyimide substrate, no flexibility data available	
202

Lanz et al. (2016)	LED	4370 cd m−2@12 V	Spray coating	On conductive fabric substrate, long life-time, flexibility data is not available	
203

White et al. (2013)	OLED	100 cd m−2@8 V	Spin coating	Flexible LED with organic phosphor, tested 100% stretching, highly flexible	
204

Lian et al. (2017)	OLED	10000 cd m−2@8 V	Vacuum thermal evaporation	Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, no mechanical flexibility data available	
205

Song et al. (2015)	OLED	30000 cd m−2@12 V	Thermal evaporation	Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, no mechanical flexibility data available	
206

Jung et al. (2017)	OLED	40000 cd m−2@6.5 V	Vacuum thermal evaporation	Silver nanowire based transparent electrode, 6% drop of luminosity after 2000 bending cycles to 7 mm bending radius, roll-to-roll fabrication	
207

Liang et al. (2014)	OLED	1100 cd m−2@20 V	Spin coating	Graphene and silver nanowire transparent electrode, 12% drop of brightness after 10 cycles of 20% stretching cycles	
208

Wei et al. (2018)	OLED	6583 cd m−2@N/A	N/A	Gold doped graphene transparent electrode, organic phosphor, flexibility data not available	
209

Uchida et al. (2009)	OLED	∼200 cd m−2@12 V	Vacuum thermal evaporation	Organic phosphor, custom fabricated transparent electrode, data on flexibility are not available	
210

Liu et al. (2014)	OLED	40000 cd m−2@10 V	Vacuum thermal evaporation	Organic LED, silver based transparent electrode, transparent LED, no significant drop in luminance after 100 bending cycles for 8 mm	
211

Wang et al. (2019)	OLED	2500 cd m−2@17 V	N/A	Deposited on PET substrate, copper nanowire based transparent electrode, no luminescence data on flexibility	
212

Kim et al. (2017)	QD-LED	50000 cd m−2@N/A	Spin coating	Quantum dot embedded LED, silver nanowire as the flexible and transparent electrode	
213

Kim et al. (2017)	QD-LED	1200 cd m−2@13 V	Spin coating	QD embedded LED, stretching up to 70%, has withstand 100 stretching cycles with just 12% increment in current density	
214

Kim et al. (2017)	QD-LED	4800 cd m−2@4.5 V	Spin coating	PU substrate, quantum dot embedded LED, 20% luminescence drop after 300 bending cycles of 5 mm bending radius	
215

Yang et al. (2014)	QD-LED	20000 cd m−2@10 V	Spin coating	Quantum dot embedded LED, drop of 10% luminescence output after 300 bending cycles over 4 mm diameter rod	
216

Yang et al. (2013)	QD-LED	19625 cd m−2@10 V	Vacuum thermal evaporation	Quantum dot based emitting layer, deposited on tape substrate, can be applied over any surface, flexibility data not available	
217


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
