Micropatterning by controlled liquid instabilities and its applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC03090D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC03090D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10411-10429Micropatterning by controlled liquid instabilities and its applications

        
          
            Dong Choon 
            Hyun†
a, 
      
        
          
            Minwoo 
            Park†
b and 

        
          
            Unyong 
            Jeong
          
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Polymer Science and Engineering, Kyungpook National University, 80 Daehak-Ro, Bukgu, Daegu, 41566, Korea
bDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul 04310, Korea
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science Technology, 77 Chengam-Ro, Nam-gu, Pohang 790-784, Korea. E-mail: ujeong@postech.ac.kr
Received 
      21st July 2016
    , Accepted 21st September 2016First published on 22nd September 2016AbstractRobust, reproducible patterning over large areas is essential to the fabrication of miniaturized devices. When production and cost-efficiency are concerned, guided-assembly is a promising strategy for patterning that combines the advantages of both the top-down and bottom-up approaches. Most guided-assembly methods are enabled by controlling the instabilities of liquid solutions or polymer melts to be patterned. These instabilities can be observed in different ways according to the patterning strategies. This article reviews the strategies for micropatterning that are based on the manipulation of liquid instabilities, covering both physical principles and experimental demonstrations. Specifically, we discuss four types of liquid instabilities, which can be controlled for the reliable formation of micropatterns: (i) localization of the instability under an electric field, (ii) adjustment of the evaporation front line during solvent evaporation, (iii) template-directed selective dewetting, and (iv) hierarchical capillary instability for generating complex patterns. We also highlight future prospects of the instability-driven micropatterning techniques.
Dong Choon Hyun
Dong Choon Hyun received his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Yonsei University, Korea (with Prof. Unyong Jeong) in 2011 on polymer patterning and its applications. He worked on the design and fabrication of biodegradable polymer particles and exploration of their applications in drug delivery as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Younan Xia's group at Georgia Institute of Technology. Since 2014, he has been working as an Assistant Professor of Polymer Science and Engineering at Kyungpook National University, Korea. His research interests include fabrication of non-conventional shaped particles, design of functional polymers, and their applications.
Minwoo Park
Minwoo Park received his BS degree (2008) in Materials Science and Engineering from Yonsei University, Korea. He received his PhD degree (2014) in the same department (with Prof. Unyong Jeong). He worked in Samsung Display as a senior researcher and moved to Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) to pursue postdoc research. He joined the Faculty of Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Sookmyung Women's University in 2016. His research interests include design of functional nanomaterials and device architecture for soft electronics and next-generation photovoltaics.
Unyong Jeong
Unyong Jeong received a BS degree in chemical engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH) in Korea (1998). He received a MA degree (2000) and a PhD degree (2003) in polymer physics in the same department. He joined Prof. Younan Xia's group as a postdoctoral fellow to study the synthesis and applications of inorganic nanostructured materials. Then, he joined Yonsei University in Korea (2006) and moved to Dept. of Materials Science and Engineering at POSTECH (2015) in March 2016. His research aims at understanding the mechanical electrical properties of conductive materials and fabricating stretchable electronic devices based on material synthesis, assembly of the materials, and formation of nanocomposites.
1. Introduction
Fabrication of miniaturized devices with multiple functions has been one of the major subjects of research in materials science and engineering. A key step to realize these devices is the patterning of functional materials at desired length scales. In general, the strategies for generating patterned microstructures can be divided into top-down and bottom-up approaches. Top-down approaches are processes from macroscale to micro-/nano-scale that create precise, small structures from macroscopic objects through various fabrication methods.1–4 Bottom-up approaches produce small systems/structures through assembly of atoms, molecules, particles, or other building blocks, which generally rely on self-assembly or self-organization.5,6 The terms self-assembly and self-organization are often used interchangeably in the soft-matter literature; in general, the former should refer to equilibrium situations, whereas the latter includes the non-equilibrium conditions.7 Synergistic combinations of both the top-down and bottom-up approaches compensate for their intrinsic disadvantages. One primary example of such combinations is guided-assembly with the assistance of lithographic patterns, which is a powerful method for assembling materials into useful patterns or structures. This guided-assembly strategy has attracted the attention of physicists, chemists and biologists in the last few decades because it can provide new opportunities for developing miniaturized multifunctional devices in a relatively simple and cheap way.8–14
Guided-assembly can be categorized into two approaches: field guidance and template guidance. In field-guided assembly, external fields such as pressure gradient and electric field lead to the assembly. In template-guided assembly, the existing surface patterns or nano-/micro-features are used as templates to confine the target materials. Most guided-assemblies take advantage of the instability of liquid solutions or polymer melts. This article reviews the recent progress in reproducible and robust patterning over large areas, specifically focusing on the liquid instability that is essential to the patterning processes. This review provides the physical concepts of the instabilities and the experimental demonstrations of each instability type. We first introduce the field-guided assembly by two robust instability controls: (i) localization of the instability under an electric field and (ii) adjustment of the evaporation front line during solvent evaporation. For the template-guided assembly, in the following section, we include (i) micropatterning by template-directed selective dewetting and (ii) capillary force lithography in confined geometries. The future prospects of the instability-controlled patterning are discussed in the final section.
2. Patterning by localized instability under an electric field
The instability of a non-conducting fluid on a conducting substrate under an external electric field, also known as electrohydrodynamic (EHD) instability, has been a subject of both theoretical and experimental studies.13–16 Steiner and coworkers demonstrated that an external electric field could destabilize the interface between a thin film of polymer liquid and air, generating micro- and nano-sized features over a large area.17 This phenomenon has attracted great attention because of its potential use in patterning various materials into small structures in a quick and inexpensive fashion. As shown in Fig. 1a, patterning based on EHD instability is conceptually simple. When an external electric field is applied to a polymer liquid placed between two electrodes, the initially flat polymer–air interface will be destabilized, generating a 2D array of pillar-like structures. The structures can be fixed by cooling the sample below the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the polymer while the electric field is still on. A dielectric spacer has to be included to maintain an air gap between the polymer liquid and the top electrode.
 Fig. 1  Patterning based on the instability of a non-conducting fluid under an electric field (EHD instability patterning). (a) Schematic illustration of the EHD instability patterning technique. When an external electric field is applied to a polymer melt sandwiched by two electrodes, the initially flat polymer–air interface will be destabilized, generating a 2D array of pillar structures. The structures will be fixed when the sample is cooled below the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the polymer. (b) Optical micrograph showing a 2D array of polymer pillars fabricated using a top electrode with a large triangular protrusion (reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2009 Elsevier). (c) Optical micrograph of an ordered triangular array of pillars fabricated by taking advantage of a top electrode with a network of interconnected triangular features (reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2006 Wiley). 
The formation of periodic structures can be explained using an EHD model.17,18 When an external electric field is applied, the difference in the dielectric constant (ε) between the polymer and air will cause an electrostatic stress at their interface. Because of thermal fluctuations, a small capillary wave will be generated at the polymer surface. The minimum and maximum points of the interface will then experience different electric field strengths, generating a lateral pressure gradient proportional to the square of the field strength. If the electrostatic stress is larger than the capillary pressure generated by the curvature of the interface, the magnitude of the wave will increase to reduce the separation between the liquid and the top electrode. The capillary pressure also increases as the protrusion of the wave is accelerated. Therefore, a balance between the electrostatic stress and the capillary pressure determines a characteristic wavelength, λ, for the wavy structure on the liquid surface. A comparison of the magnitude of electrostatic stress (∼ε0εV2/H2) with that of capillary pressure (∼γH/λ2) suggests a correlation between λ and the experimentally controllable parameters, including the interfacial tension (γ), the applied voltage bias (V), and the separation between the two electrodes (H):19 λ ∝ γ1/2H3/2V−1.(1)This scaling law indicates that the viscosity of the polymer liquid has no influence on λ, but it strongly affects the time required for generating patterned structures, which can vary from seconds to weeks depending on the viscosity.19
When the top electrode has a flat surface, the resulting polymer pillars will be poorly packed into a hexagonal array. This can be attributed to the random fluctuation at the polymer–air interface. The use of top electrodes with patterned surfaces, such as metallic masks with a variety of geometries, allows for spatial control of the electric field, leading to various types of highly ordered arrays for the pillars.20,21Fig. 1b shows a triangular array of polymer pillars fabricated using a top electrode with a triangular protrusion. Similarly, the use of a top electrode with a concentric ring protrusion led to the formation of polymer pillars in a concentric ring pattern.19 The polymer liquid close to the protrusion boundary of the top electrode is expected to experience a stronger electric field than other regions because of a smaller spacing between the top and bottom electrodes. Therefore, the pillars first grow at the boundary and then induce the growth of other pillars within the area of the protrusion. This technique can generate a highly ordered array of structures over a relatively small area as the packing in the central region is likely to lose order when a large area is involved. One solution to achieve ordered packing over a large area is to use a top electrode with a network of interconnected, narrow protrusions. The patterned electrode can be fabricated via two-step processes. In a typical process, spacers with a specific height are first formed on a Si wafer with a layer of thermally grown oxide. The spacers are prepared by etching the oxide layer with hydrofluoric acid. An ion-assisted etching process is then carried out to form narrow protrusions on the wafer with spacers.22 The growth of pillars is initially induced underneath the protrusion regions, generating an array of boundary pillars that conforms to the geometry of the protrusions. Then, highly ordered packing of the pillars develops in the regions enclosed by the boundary pillars. Fig. 1c shows an ordered array of triangular structures fabricated using a top electrode with a network of interconnected triangular features.22 The array extended over the entire patterned electrode (∼500 μm across). However, the complex, time-consuming processes involved in the fabrication of such a patterned electrode limit the practical use of this strategy.
Recently, Li and coworkers demonstrated the use of optically induced EHD instability for rapidly generating a desired pillar array.23,24 A polymer is first deposited on top of a photosensitive component-coated bottom electrode, followed by combining with a top electrode. The assembled sample is then placed between a digital projector and an optical microscope as shown in Fig. 2a. Irradiation under visible light with a regular grid pattern stimulates the photosensitive layer to induce a heterogeneous spatial distribution of the electric field between the two electrodes. This heterogeneity in the electric field allows for controlled nucleation of the pillars, generating a well-ordered array of pillars over a large area (Fig. 2b and c). Hu and coworkers used a flat electrode over an initially pre-patterned polymer to generate a spatially modulated electric field, which led to the easy fabrication of a highly ordered array of pillars with a high aspect ratio.25
 Fig. 2  Optically induced EHD instability patterning. (a) Schematic of the formation of a pattern by optically induced EHD instability. When a visible light with a regular grid pattern is irradiated, a photosensitive layer supported on a bottom electrode will induce a heterogeneous spatial distribution of the electric field between the two electrodes. The heterogeneity in the electric field leads to controlled nucleation of the pillars, generating a highly ordered array of pillars. (b) Visible light with a regular grid pattern of the letters “SIA” generated by the digital projector. (c) SEM image of a 2D array of polymer pillars fabricated by working with visible light with the regular grid pattern of (b) (reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2013 American Institute of Physics). 
Many efforts have been devoted to the fabrication of nanoscale features by using this technique. Several strategies have been employed to achieve smaller feature sizes: reduction of the interfacial tension (γ), increase of the applied voltage bias (V), decrease of the separation between the two electrodes (H), increase of the electrostatic stress, and use of electrodes patterned with nanoscale features. Reduction of γ can be realized by replacing the air gap with another layer of fluid that is compatible with the underlying polymer film.26,27 However, the wavelength cannot be greatly reduced by this approach because of the decrease in dielectric constant (ε) that can lower the effective electrostatic force at the interface. Nevertheless, the bilayer system is very attractive in that non-conventional, complex patterns can be obtained by taking advantage of the dewetting between the two polymer layers.28,29 When a strong electric field generated by an increase in V or a decrease in H is applied, structures small in size can be formed.17,18,30 However, dielectric breakdown of a polymer film and its bound fluid under a strong electric field limits the reduction of feature size.31 Russel and his coworker demonstrated the use of an ionic liquid to prevent the dielectric breakdown.32 They could reduce the size of features to the sub-microscale, as small as 351 ± 78 nm by working with a polymer–ionic liquid bilayer. This result was theoretically confirmed by using a numerical model suggested by Bhattacharjee and coworkers.33
A higher electrostatic stress at the interface can be achieved by increasing the dielectric constant (ε) of the polymer film. For example, incorporation of polystyrene (PS)-capped Au nanoparticles (NPs) in a PS film increased the effective dielectric constant from 2.6 (pristine PS) to 3.2, leading to a 20% reduction in λ.34 Doping polymer films with small organic ions and salts is also feasible for producing patterns with smaller feature sizes.35 The carbonyl groups of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) or ether oxygen of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) could complex with Li+ ions to increase the ε value.36,37
The use of a top electrode with a periodic array of sub-micron features is also a good strategy for generating nanoscale structures.17,38 The electric field is spatially modulated by the patterned electrode, inducing fluctuations of the polymer film with periodicities similar to those of the patterned electrode, ultimately replicating the pattern on the electrode. However, if the processing time is too long, the replicated polymer pattern will be driven by the secondary instabilities back to structures with the natural wavelength (λ) corresponding to the flat electrode.19 Theoretically, the smallest feature size is one half to one third of λH–d, where λ is the natural wavelength on the flat electrode and d is the depth of the protrusions on the electrode.19
Materials used in EHD instability patterning have been mostly polymers. This is because of their relevance to industrial applications, facile control over viscoelastic processing, convenience in preserving the pattern by quenching, and the diversity of polymer functionality through both chemical and surface modifications. However, EHD instability patterning is not a material-specific technique because any liquid can be destabilized at the interface. A monomer liquid with low viscosity has also been used to generate arrayed pillar structures within several minutes.39 A variety of inorganic materials have been applied to EHD instability patterning as well. Through a combination of EHD instability patterning and sol–gel processing, patterns of crystalline titanium oxide have been fabricated.40 Patterning based on the EHD instability has been applied to metals and semiconductors.41 This strategy involves the melting of metals using a pulsed laser for a short period of time (hundreds of nanoseconds) while applying an electric field to guide the flow of the molten metals into the desired geometry before solidification. In the case of Si, the fabricated line features had a width of 175 nm and a height of 90 nm. In addition, EHD instability patterning has allowed for the patterning of hybrid materials. In a demonstration, well-defined, hierarchical pillars consisting of CNTs and polymers were generated from their composite film.42 The aligning orientation of CNTs embedded within the structures could be tuned by adjusting the EHD parameters. The capability to simultaneously form composite structures and control the alignment of anisotropic components is potentially useful for integration of 1D nanomaterial-based composites into functional devices.
EHD instability patterning has been applied to biology-related studies. For example, arrays of polymeric posts have been used to mimic the ‘‘nano-hairs’’ on the pad of a gecko.43 The PS pillars have been used as templates to generate a porous polymeric separation membrane with high liquid permeability and size selectivity.44 Polymer patterns with microscale features have been utilized for studying the proliferation of cells.45 Recently, complex structures based on EHD instability have been applied to the fabrication of micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) devices, micro-fluidic mixers with high efficiency, and polymeric microlenses for optical devices.46–48 Very recently, Oppenheimer and coworkers demonstrated the use of this technique for fabricating a liquid-ion gate field-effect transistor (FET) device (Fig. 3a).49 With appropriately chosen experimental parameters, in combination with an electrode having a suitable pattern on its surface, they fabricated a highly ordered array of electrically conductive polymer (polypyrrole, PPy) pillars with a width of sub-micron scale over a very large area (Fig. 3b), followed by fabricating a vertical FET that is potentially useful in 3D multilevel memory devices.49 The change in the drain current (IDS) as a function of drain voltage (VDS) and gate voltage (Vg) of the p-type device is shown in Fig. 3c and its inset. Along with the transistor, these conductive polymer structures also have great potential for diverse applications such as in supercapacitors, photovoltaic systems, sensors, and electronic devices.
 Fig. 3  A FET device fabricated using EHD instability patterning. (a) Schematic of an ionic liquid-gated FET device based on an array of PPy pillars generated by EHD instability patterning. (b) AFM image and its cross-section analysis of an array of PPy pillars. (c) Change in IDS as a function of VDS of the device. The inset shows gate voltage (Vg) performance of the device (reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 
3. Patterning by controlling the evaporative front
The assembly of nonvolatile solutes during solvent evaporation from a liquid droplet has gained considerable interest as a non-lithographic technique capable of producing a variety of unique patterns.50–53 However, the spatial variation of evaporation and unexpected convection generally lead to the formation of irregular structures such as coffee rings, fingering patterns, and polygonal networks.54–56 In recent years, many studies have been directed to the fabrication of ordered structures by precisely controlling a solvent evaporation process. The readers can refer to several recently published review articles.57–59 This section will only focus on novel approaches that can provide reliable patterning over large areas.
A precise control of a three-phase contact line can facilitate the patterning of a solute material on a substrate. Dip-coating is capable of creating a straight, downward movement for the contact line. During this process, an outward capillary flow of the solvent takes place to compensate for the loss of solvent at the moving front. The flow carries the solutes to the three-phase contact line, resulting in a highly selective, horizontal deposition along the moving front.60 When a substrate is pulled out from a solution, the meniscus will be pinned by the uppermost line, dragged, and then stretched. The meniscus eventually breaks and moves until it is pinned at a new position on the substrate. This stick–slip motion leads to the deposition of 1D arrays of the solute with regular spatial distributions. If the concentration of a solution is relatively low, periodic domains of the solute can be obtained in the direction perpendicular to the contact line, which is a result of finger instability arising from a transverse instability of the evaporative dewetting front.61–65
Over the past two decades, great advancement has been made in the synthesis of nanoparticles. However, assembling them into ordered structures over a large area still remains a grand challenge. For a colloidal suspension of thiol-capped Au NPs, finger instabilities can develop when the mobility of the NPs is sufficiently low so that the NPs can be collected at the solvent front. The mobility is determined by parameters such as the length of the thiol molecule and the concentration of NPs.66,67 In a demonstration, highly ordered 1D arrays of NPs were fabricated without involving any lithographic process. A programmed dip-coating process, along with variation of the concentration of NPs and the adjustment of the wettability of a solution relative to a substrate, allows one to tune the orientation, width, and periodicity of the patterned array of NPs.60,61,65 Lenhert and coworkers discussed the mechanism of horizontal and vertical pattern formation based on the local curvature of the liquid meniscus at the three-phase contact line.68 During the dip-coating process, a thin solution layer is dragged across the substrate because of the difference in velocity between the withdrawing substrate and the movement of the three-phase line. At a relatively high surface pressure, the curvature of the meniscus is positive. The cylindrical liquid ridge breaks up into fingers due to Rayleigh instability, forming a vertical pattern. In the case of a relatively low surface pressure, the meniscus takes a negative curvature. The oscillation in the dynamic contact angle causes a stick–slip motion, leading to the formation of horizontal stripes. This assembly has allowed for the generation of an array of well-aligned wires made of transition metal dichalcogenides.69 These wires were processed to fabricate heterostructured WS2/MoS2 as well as flexible, transparent devices in combination with graphene electrodes, paving the way to innovative optical and electrical devices.
The same outcome is expected even when the movement of the three-phase line is horizontal. A sandwich system, in which a solution droplet is put on a substrate and covered with another substrate, can generate three types of microscale patterns with controllable size: dots, stripes and ladders.70 In one example, the flow coating technique has accomplished the fabrication of micro-stripes comprising diverse materials including DNA, nanowires, polymers and metal nanoparticles.71–73 Recently, Emrick and coworkers demonstrated the use of this technique for fabricating ribbons made of Au NPs.74 Stick–slip motion of the NP solution and then drying of the solvent leaves the ribbons consisting of dodecanethiol-capped Au NPs assembled on a substrate (Fig. 4a). Topography of the ribbons is strongly dependent on the density of the ligand on the surfaces of the NPs. The lower ligand density led to the better packing among the NPs within a ribbon because the surface energy of Au NPs increased as the ligand density decreased.74 As shown in Fig. 4b, the use of Au NPs with the lowest ligand density (7.1 molecules per nm2) (Au NP-1) led to the generation of fine ribbons without any breakage or coffee rings. The dimension of the ribbons was in the range of 500–700 nm and 30–50 nm for width and height, respectively. The electrical conductivity of the pristine Au NP ribbons was significantly increased from 56 S m−1 to 1.8 × 105 S m−1 after a thermal annealing process. This result suggests that the flow coating technique has great potential in the fabrication of metallic electrodes for electronic devices. Very recently, Cho and coworkers have fabricated a grid electrode made of metal NPs by working with this technique.75,76 The metallic grid electrode was successfully applied to various organic electronic devices, such as organic field-effect transistors, organic light-emitting diodes, organic solar cells, and flexible piezoelectric nanogenerators.75,76
 Fig. 4  Controlled evaporative patterning by flow coating. (a) Schematic of the formation of ribbons made of Au NPs by flow coating, illustrating the stick–slip deposition of Au NPs according to the translation of the substrate and the time–velocity profile of the translating substrate. (b) Optical microscopy (OM) images showing the morphologies of ribbons made of Au NPs depending on the deposition time and the ligand density of the NPs. Scale bars are 20 μm (reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). 
The use of the flow coating technique allows one to generate hierarchical structures. In one example, microscale stripes consisting of a highly ordered array of nano-sized poly(styrene)-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP) micelles were generated over large areas using this technique.77 These hierarchical structures can be further utilized as a nanoreactor for the generation of composite patterns made of polymer and inorganic nanoparticles. Lin and coworkers fabricated a stripe of an array of PS-b-P4VP micelles encapsulated with Au NPs.77 The NPs were formed from HAuCl4 coordinated with the P4VP cores (Fig. 5a). Exposure of the sample to O2 plasma etched out the polymer micelles, eventually leaving behind a stripe of an array of Au NPs (Fig. 5b). On the other hand, the use of PS-capped CdSe NPs allowed for the generation of P4VP core–CdSe shell structures, which was a result of the selective incorporation of the NPs into PS corona as illustrated in Fig. 5c. Fig. 5d and e show the AFM images of pristine and decorated PS-b-P4VP micelles, respectively. These advanced hierarchical structures have great potential in nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, magnetic devices, and bionanotechnology.
 Fig. 5  Composite structures made of polymer and inorganic NPs formed by a flow coating technique. (a) TEM image of a monolayer-thick strip consisting of an array of PS-b-P4VP/HAuCl4 micelles. (b) AFM image of an array of Au NPs obtained after oxygen plasma treatment. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of PS-b-P4VP micelles incorporated with PS-capped CdSe NPs. (d and e) AFM images of PS-b-P4VP micelles (d) before and (e) after decoration with CdSe NPs (reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). 
A precise control of the three-phase contact line can also be achieved with the use of restricted geometry. When a drop of solution is confined underneath a curved surface supported on a flat substrate (a curve-on-flat geometry), a pattern with high regularity is created after the evaporation of solvent.78,79Fig. 6a shows a schematic illustration of the formation of a pattern by a spherical lens-on-flat geometry. A drop of solution with a nonvolatile solute (mostly polymers) is trapped in the spherical lens-on-flat geometry. Because of the imposed geometrical restriction, the evaporation rate of solvent is the highest at the capillary edge, which will jam the solute into the edge, and thereby pin the contact line (stick). The initial contact angle of the capillary edge, θi, gradually decreases due to the evaporative loss of solvent, to a critical angle, θc, at which the capillary force (the de-pinning force) becomes larger than the pinning force. This change leads to a jump of the contact line to a new position (slip). The successive stick–slip motion of the contact line generates patterned structures with high regularity.80Fig. 6b shows the polymer stripes formed with a wedge-on-flat geometry. The stripes are nanoscale in height and microscale in width, respectively. By changing the concentration of the polymer solution, the height (hd) and the width of the stripes can be manipulated. At low concentrations, the contact line is pinned for a short time, leading to the deposition of less solute (i.e., smaller values for both height and width). At the same time, the slip distance to the next position, λC–C, becomes short.81 The properties of used solvent have a direct impact on λC–C and hd, too. The use of a solvent with a lower boiling point leads to the generation of structures with larger hd and λC–C.81 This result is due to a great loss in volume for the solvent (ΔV) as driven by its fast evaporation.
 Fig. 6  Controlled evaporative patterning by a confined curve-on-flat geometry. (a) Schematic of the formation of patterns by a spherical lens-on-flat geometry. The successive stick–slip motion of the contact line leads to the generation of patterned structures with high regularity. (b) Polymer stripes formed with a wedge-on-flat geometry (reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010 Wiley). (c) A variety of complex, highly regular patterns fabricated by working with the upper surfaces with various shapes: concentric square stripes generated by the pyramid-on-Si geometry (upper) and concentric triangular contour lines made by using the triangular-slice sphere-on-Si geometry (lower) (reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009 Wiley). 
As shown in Fig. 6b, the structures generated using a curve-on-flat geometry have a gradient in spacing. This gradient is a result of the competition between the pinning force and the capillary force.81 The pinning force (Fpin) is linearly proportional to the total length of the contact line, ∼ 2πX, where X is an absolute position of the patterned structure away from the curve-on-flat center (λC–C = Xi − Xi−1). On the other hand, the capillary force (Fcap = 16πγlvX × arctan(4αR/X2)) is nonlinear with X, where γlv is the surface tension of the solvent, and α and R are the height of meniscus and the radius of curvature of the contact line, respectively. The imbalance between the linear Fpin and the nonlinear Fcap leads to a nonlinear evaporative loss in the volume of the solvent (ΔV), and consequently, the formation of a gradient in spacing between the features.
The use of upper surfaces with various shapes allows for the generation of complex structures.82Fig. 6c illustrates the complex, highly regular patterns generated using a square-pyramid (upper) and a triangular-slice sphere (lower). These geometries direct the stick–slip motion of the contact line. With this guidance, the solute is deposited in a way that conforms to the shapes of the upper surface. The interfacial interaction between the solute and the substrate has been controlled to generate non-conventional, highly ordered structures such as fingers, serpentines, jagged stripes, and punch hole arrays.79,83
Lin and coworkers demonstrated the use of curve-on-flat geometry for patterning three types of conjugated polymers: poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), poly(3-butylthiophene) (P3BT) and P3BT-b-P3HT (P3BHT).84 During evaporation of the solvent, the polymer stripes were successfully generated. The gradient in spacing between the features was observed for all the polymers (Fig. 7a–i). However, morphology of the features was dependent on the type of polymer. The stripes of P3BT were sharp and straight. This result is because of the difference in interfacial interaction between the polymer and a Si substrate (Fig. 7d–f). An increase in the length of alkyl side chain from butyl to hexyl decreases the surface energy of polymer and leads to unfavorable interfacial interaction between the polymers (P3HT and P3BHT) and the substrate, which results in finger instability of the polymers (Fig. 7a–c and g–i).84 The stripes could be formed directly on a patterned P++Si/SiO2/Au substrate for measuring their electrical conductivity as shown in Fig. 7j. The P3HT and P3BHT stripes became more electrically conductive after solvent annealing for 12 h, which was a result of the increase in crystallinity of the polymer chains (Fig. 7k). On the other hand, the annealing made the crystallinity of P3BT lower, which led to a decrease in the conductivity of the polymer.
 Fig. 7  Patterning of conjugated polymers based on a confined curve-on-flat geometry. AFM images of conjugated polymer stripes taken in three different regions (X1–X3). (a–c) P3HT, (d–f) P3BT, and (g–i) P3BHT. (j) Schematic illustration of the arrangement of the polymer stripes on a P++Si/SiO2/Au substrate. (k) Change in the direct current of the stripes before and after solvent annealing for 12 h (reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2013 Wiley). 
In addition to polymers, other functional materials including nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, graphene, and DNA have been ordered using this technique.85–88 The broad applicability to diverse materials enables this technique to find a wide range of potential applications in photonics, electronics, optoelectronics, and bioengineering.
4. Patterning by template-directed selective dewetting
Morphological development driven by the dewetting of a polymer thin film is a powerful means to achieve micro- and nanoscale structures over large areas. The dewetting of a thin film on a defect-free homogeneous substrate starts with the formation of holes.89–94 These holes gradually grow and then coalesce, ultimately producing isotropic droplets. However, the random distribution of droplets in space limits the use of the dewetting phenomenon as a surface patterning technique. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to the achievement of dewetting in a controlled manner. One of the main approaches is to use physical or chemical templates.95–100
Physical template-directed dewetting is a simple, powerful strategy for bringing the long-range order to the dewetted morphologies. When the temperature is higher than the glass transition temperature (Tg) of a polymer, the dewetting of the polymer film on a topological substrate will start from the edges of the topological protrusions. This is because the Laplace pressure of the polymer film sharply increases at the edges. The polymer chains located at the edges move to the recessed regions on the substrate for lowering the pressure.97 The same outcome can be observed when a polymer solution is spin-coated on a topological substrate.101–105 Kargupta and Sharma have theoretically studied the dewetting phenomenon of a thin film on a physically templated, chemically homogeneous substrate.106 For demonstrating the dynamics of a thin film on a topological substrate, they derived a dimensionless equation from the Navier–Stokes equation using the lubrication approximation:106 (2)The equation considers three forces: unsteady force (1st term) corresponding to the viscous effect that retards the growth of the instability, surface tension force (2nd term) arising from the local curvature at the interface, and excess intermolecular force (3rd term). The surface topography is given as a function of the position coordinates, Z = B·F(X,Y), where B is the dimensionless amplitude of the roughness function F(X,Y). H(X,Y,T) is the dimensionless local height for the film with mean thickness, h0. The dimensionless conjoining pressure Φ(χ) is given as Φ(χ) = ∂ΔG/∂χ, where χ is the local film thickness and defined as χ = [H(X,Y) − B·F(X,Y)]. ΔG is the excess intermolecular interaction energy per unit area. The conjoining pressure Φ(χ) depends on the local thickness χ of a liquid film supported on a topological substrate. A gradient in Φ(χ) causes the flow of the liquid film in the direction of decreasing ΔG. When ∂Φ/∂χ < 0, the film will become unstable. Taken together, it is concluded that the thinner film at the edges of the topological protrusions may undergo spontaneous spinodal dewetting.
More complex structures have been generated by using substrates with a variety of geometries.99,107 Theoretical studies have suggested experimental conditions for perfect templating of a liquid film by a topological substrate.106,107 The key parameter is a commensuration between the mean length scale of dewetting (λD ∼ h2) and the periodicity of surface topography (λP). The physical template-directed dewetting loses its effectiveness for a relatively thicker film on a substrate with small periodicity (i.e., λD ≫ λP).
In the case of chemical templates, there are two regions with different conjoining pressures. Dewetting of a liquid film on a chemically patterned substrate is driven by a potential gradient (∇Φ) that arises from the difference in wettability between the two regions. The liquid flows from the less wettable region (high pressure) to the more wettable region (low pressure) even when the spinodal stability condition (∂Φ/∂χ > 0) is satisfied over the entire liquid surface. Three conditions are required to perfectly replicate the chemical pattern on the substrate:106,108 (i) λh < λP < 2λh, where λh is the characteristic length scale of instability, (ii) Wc < Wless < Wt, where Wless, Wc, and Wt are the width of the less wettable region, the critical width, and the transition width, and (iii) the liquid film remains stable on the more wettable region. Bringing chemical heterogeneity to a topological substrate allows for the generation of non-conventional, dewetted structures.97,109,110 In one example, the use of a physicochemically-patterned substrate, prepared by covering the partial regions on a topological substrate with another material, demonstrated the generation of an asymmetric polymer pattern.109
Template-directed dewetting has been further developed to fabricate multiple polymer patterns because simultaneous, coupled deformation of polymer–air and polymer–polymer interfaces offers a very complex motion of the polymer chains.111,112 Ding and coworkers studied the thermal dewetting of a bilayer with a corrugated interface.113–115 They observed the formation of ordered domains aligned orthogonally to the direction of the initial stripes as the bottom layer underwent surface tension-induced flattening prior to capillary breakup of the top layer.113,114 They also created many hierarchical structures by adjusting the geometry and properties of the individual layers.115 Recently, Mukherjee and coworkers have systematically studied the dewetting of a PS–PMMA bilayer on a grating patterned substrate.116,117 The bilayer was prepared by directly spin-coating each polymer solution in a mutually exclusive solvent on the patterned substrate in order. On a patterned substrate of a 2D array of square pillars with low surface energy (γsub < γPMMA and γPS), three different morphologies for the bottom PMMA layer can be formed depending on the concentration of the polymer solution (CPMMA) used for the spin-coating process: (i) an array of PMMA droplets arranged along the substrate grooves at very low CPMMA (Fig. 8a), (ii) an interconnected network of PMMA threads filling the grooves of the substrate at intermediate CPMMA (Fig. 8b), and (iii) a continuous bottom layer at high CPMMA (Fig. 8c). Morphology of the top PS layer depends strongly on the morphology of the bottom PMMA layer as well as the concentration of the polymer solution (CPS). An ordered array of core (PMMA)–shell (PS) droplets is generated by spin-coating the polymer solutions with very low CPMMA and CPS (Fig. 8d), which is a result of the minimization of surface energy. With an increase of CPS, the core–shell droplet structures change to an interconnected network of PS threads filling the grooves of the substrate with the pre-existing PMMA droplets covered (Fig. 8e). In the case of intermediate CPMMA and low/intermediate CPS, the as-cast morphology is always thread on thread. As CPS increases, the top PS layer becomes continuous, covering the interconnected network of PMMA threads. However, introduction of a post-thermal annealing process allows for the evolution of the morphologies, leading to the generation of non-conventional patterns consisting of multiple polymers such as submerged, embedded, and encapsulated structures. A continuous bilayer is formed for both high CPMMA and CPS. When thermally annealed, the thinnest part of the bottom PMMA layer on the top of the pillars ruptures first and retracts towards the pillar edges. The top PS film also ruptures over the pillars, eventually resulting in bilayer threads over the substrate grooves (Fig. 8f).
 Fig. 8  Patterning of multiple polymers by template-directed dewetting. (a–c) Three different morphologies for the bottom PMMA layer on a patterned polymer substrate depending on the concentration of PMMA solution (CPMMA) used for the spin-coating process: (a) very low CPMMA, (b) intermediate CPMMA, and (c) high CPMMA. (d–f) Morphologies of the top PS layer on the pre-existing PMMA bottom layer depending on CPMMA and CPS: (d) both very low CPMMA and CPS, (e) very low CPMMA and intermediate CPS, and (f) both high CPMMA and CPS (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Similarly, Jeong and coworkers demonstrated the use of a microwrinkled substrate as a physical template for the fabrication of patterned structures comprising multiple polymers: PS, poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) (Fig. 9).101 The key to success is to use the orientation change of a wrinkled topology in response to the direction of an external strain applied to the substrate. As shown in Fig. 9a, PCL is first deposited in the trenches of a wrinkled layer via template-directed dewetting. Compressing parallel to the formed polymer lines generates a new wrinkled surface normal to the initial wrinkling topology. The new surface guides the dewetting of PEG, leading to the deposition of the second polymer in the trenches of the new wrinkled surface. With this concept, diverse 2D patterns can be fabricated. One example is shown in Fig. 9b, demonstrating a 2D pattern with a textile structure. The use of post-treatment such as solvent and/or thermal annealing induces a secondary dewetting, generating non-conventional structures such as arrows, double bells, and encapsulated dots (Fig. 9c and d).
 Fig. 9  Patterning of multiple polymers by template-directed dewetting. (a) Schematic of wrinkle-assisted patterning of multiple polymers (PS, PCL, and PEG). PCL is first deposited in the trenches of the wrinkled PS layer. Compressing parallel to the PCL lines generates a new wrinkle pattern normal to the initial wrinkles, which guides the dewetting of PEG. (b) 2D pattern with a textile structure. (c and d) Non-conventional patterns produced by post-treatment: (c) an arrow pattern via solvent annealing and (d) a double bell pattern via thermal annealing (reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2010 Wiley). 
The use of functional materials for patterning increases the versatility of template-directed dewetting. In one example, a composite stripe consisting of a polymer and metal NPs, patterned into the trenches on a zig-zag shaped template, was demonstrated as a stretchable electrode.102 Ohzono and coworkers have demonstrated the use of polyimide (PI) microwrinkles supported on a poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) elastomer to form liquid filaments of various materials including organic solvents, liquid crystals, and ionic liquids.118–122 After putting a small droplet of the materials, a bendable polyimide (PI) film is brought close to the surface of the microwrinkle for generating the liquid bridge between them, which leads to selective deposition of the materials in the grooves of the microwrinkles. The deposition of these materials depends strongly on topography of the microwrinkles. Among them, a spatially confined nematic liquid crystal (NLC) exhibits a new periodic molecular alignment with periodic domains of alternating twist deformations and a line defect of a zigzag form having equal lengths of ‘zig’ (lR) and ‘zag’ (lL) (Fig. 10a).122 This novel configuration arises from the intrinsic anisotropy in the elasticity of NLC molecules and the opposite boundary conditions: (i) the vertical alignment of NLC molecules at the flat NLC–air interface and (ii) the planar alignment of NLC molecules at the curved NLC–groove interface. Injection of vapor molecules with chirality into the NLC phase results in the imbalance of ‘zig’ and ‘zag’. When the chiral molecules with right handedness are introduced, the length of the right-handed domain (lR) with orange color will increase (Fig. 10b). This result is attributed to the fact that the right-handed twisted distortion of the NLC is strengthened by the injection of chiral molecules. The change in morphology of the line defect depends on the enantiomeric excess and concentration of vapor molecules, and is completed in a few seconds. In the case of carvone molecules, the minimum concentration to achieve the morphological imbalance was approximately 5 p.p.m. The high sensitivity as well as the rapid response and the simplicity of the setup make the system potentially useful as a versatile tool that can analyze the chirality of vapor molecules including their odor, environmental chemicals, and drugs. They also demonstrated the use of the zigzag line defect for fine control of colloidal assembly.121 Kink, a core of the line defect is more energetically unfavorable than other regions, which results in stronger binding of beads at the defect core (Fig. 10c). A further understanding of how the surface anchoring and the size of colloidal particles affect the trapping can provide potentially a new route for the manipulation of colloidal assembly.
 Fig. 10  Periodic alignment of a NLC spatially confined in a wrinkled surface. (a) Schematic showing a zigzag line defect of a NLC confined in a groove of the microwrinkle. Hybrid anchoring conditions of NLC molecules are indicated by blue double-headed arrows. The nail symbols (T) represent the projection of the preferentially aligned direction of the NLC (called the director n) onto the plane of the surface (the head of the nail comes out of the surface). Blue cylinders illustrated in the lower panel shows the cross-sectional distribution of n at different points of the line defect. (b) Polarized optical microscopy (POM) images showing the change in the length of the right-handed (lR) and left-handed (lL) domains on exposure to chiral vapor molecules (scale bar, 10 μm). A sensitive tint plate (S) is used for imaging the change in the domain with the polarizer (P) and the analyzer (A) (reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). (c) Schematic and POM images of beads trapped at the kinks of the line defect. Scale bar is 15 μm (reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). 
However, despite the promising scientific and technological potential of template-directed dewetting, the generated features are still microscale in size. This limitation is attributed to the weak destabilizing force and high surface tension involved in the dewetting process. Recently, Sharma and coworkers have demonstrated the use of a solvent mixture consisting of good and poor solvents for a polymer to generate sub-microscale structures with high ordering and tunable shape.123–125 The resultant structures have been employed as arrays of polymeric microlens for tuning the optical properties.125
5. Patterning by capillary instability in confined geometry
Placing a mold with confined geometry on the top of a polymer layer enables one to guide the dewetting of the polymer. One exemplary approach employing this concept is capillary force lithography (CFL), which allows for the generation of geometry-controllable, micro- and nano-structures over large areas without the use of any external force.126–134 This approach involves the use of an elastomeric stamp, a prime element of soft lithography for molding a polymer melt. When a patterned PDMS mold placed on the top of a polymer layer is heated above the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the polymer, the capillary force will drive the polymer melt into the recessed regions on the mold, leading to the formation of a negative replica of the mold. The resultant structure is dependent on the thickness of the polymer film. A polymer layer thick enough to completely fill the recessed regions on the mold leaves a complete replica with a residual layer on the substrate (Fig. 11a). On the other hand, the use of a thin film leads to the formation of a concave replica without a residual layer (Fig. 11b). In the case of an extremely thin film, the concave structures go through additional dewetting in the recessed regions on the mold, as they are disconnected (Fig. 11c). The theoretical maximum height (hmax) that a polymer melt can rise to in the recessed regions on a mold is given as hmax = (2γpoly/aircosθ)/(ρgL), where γpoly/air is the surface tension at the polymer–air interface, θ is the contact angle at the polymer/mold interface, ρ is the density of the polymer, g is the gravitational constant, and L is the width of the recessed region on the mold, respectively.126 The time, t, required for complete molding of the polymer is defined as t = 2ηz2/(Rγpoly/aircosθ), where η is the viscosity of the polymer melt, z is the length of the recessed region to be filled, and R is the hydraulic radius (∼0.5L), which indicates that t is strongly affected by η.127 For PMMA with a molecular weight (Mw) of 34000, it takes a long time (≫1 h) to fill the recessed regions at a temperature slightly above its Tg, which is attributed to high η (9.61 × 106 Pa s at 105 °C) given by high entanglement of the polymer chains.135 A higher temperature (Tg + 20–40 °C) is required to achieve quick generation of the polymer patterns. A crystalline polymer is more suitable for this process because of an abrupt drop in η of the melt at its melting point (Tm). One example is a biocompatible and semi-crystalline polymer, PCL. η of the polymer at its Tm (∼60 °C) is 2.06 × 103 Pa s. This low η makes the polymer completely patterned in very short time (<3 min).129,135
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the process for patterning of the polymer using the CFL technique. At temperatures above Tg of a polymer, capillary force drives the polymer melt into the recessed regions on a mold. (a) For a thick film, a complete pattern with a residual layer is generated. (b) In the case of a thin film, a concave pattern is formed without a residual layer. (c) In the case of an extremely thin film, a concave pattern is separated due to the disconnection of a meniscus formed in the recessed regions. 
Recently, an advanced CFL technique has been introduced for producing complex patterns. Those strategies take advantage of various phenomena at the interface of the mold and the polymer, such as adhesion, temperature-directed polymer mobility, partial curing kinetics, and vacuum-assisted migration.136–141 Among them, UV-assisted CFL involving photo-polymerization of a UV-curable resin is a very powerful strategy for the generation of striking, non-conventional polymer structures.142 This method involves two sequential molding steps. Under UV exposure, the use of a PDMS mold with a microscale pattern leads to the generation of partially cured microstructures. Partial curing is a result of the presence of oxygen in the recessed regions on the mold. Oxygen reacts with the radicals generated from the photoinitiator, hindering the UV curing of the resin.142 The partially cured microstructure is further molded with a polyurethane acrylate (PUA) mold having a nano-pattern for producing additional nanostructures on the top of the pre-formed microstructures. It is critical to optimize the UV exposure time because excess curing limits the capillary action of the resin. The hierarchical nanohairs fabricated using this UV-assisted CFL were highly adhesive even on a rough surface (roughness < 20 μm) without any structural degradation.143 This adhesive property can offer great potential for mimicking multi-scale functional surfaces in nature such as lotus leaves and gecko foot hairs. The second molding at a low pressure (∼10−2 Pa) allows the partially cured resin to be driven into the channel on the nanoscale mold, leading to the formation of suspended bridge structures including lines, meshes, circles, and dots.142 The suspended polymer-bridge structures are of potential benefit for smart electronic devices, photonic devices and microfluidic systems.
Various applications of the CFL technique have been found in the fields of inorganic patterning, organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), and solar cells. Jeong and coworkers demonstrated the use of the CFL technique for micro-patterning of inorganic materials without vacuum deposition.135,144,145 A composite line pattern made of PEO and HAuCl4 is first fabricated using a PDMS mold.144 The line pattern is then cross-molded by working with the same mold. Complexation between protonated ether groups of the polymer and AuCl4− increases the surface tension of the composite melt, which leads to additional dewetting of the composite.144 As a result, an array of the composite dots is generated. Post-treatments including exposure to N2H4 vapor and sintering eventually allow for the formation of an array of Au nanodots that can be potentially useful in diverse optical applications based on surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Similarly, the micropatterning of metals and metal chalcogenides was also achieved by the same group.135 They used the viscoelastic flow of PCL features generated by the CFL technique for the fabrication of various inorganic patterns. An inorganic material to be patterned is randomly deposited on the surface of the PCL features, followed by thermal annealing (Fig. 12a). When heated above the Tm of the polymer, the viscoelastic polymer melt will spread, gathering the inorganic material in the recessed regions. The incompatibility of the polymer melt with the inorganic material induces phase separation between the two materials. Eventually, fine inorganic structures are produced. If an inorganic material has a high melting point (i.e., Ag NPs), porous inorganic patterns will be generated after thermal annealing (Fig. 12b). On the other hand, for an inorganic material with a low melting point (i.e., a-Se), solid lines with smooth surfaces are created after the same process (Fig. 12c). Embedding of Ag lines in a PDMS matrix enabled one to fabricate stretchable and conductive composite electrodes with high stretchability (up to ε = 0.4) and retained resistance (∼35 Ω) up to 300 stretching cycles (Fig. 12d and e).145
 Fig. 12  Patterning of inorganic materials using viscoelastic flow of polymer topography. (a) Schematic of the pattern formation process. Due to the abrupt viscosity drop of a crystalline polymer at a temperature above its melting point (Tm), the polymer melt spreads. The inorganic materials phase-separated from the polymer melt are pushed due to flow of the polymer melt and collected in the recessed regions. After reduction and sintering processes, pure inorganic patterns are generated: (b) porous Ag lines and (c) solid a-Se lines (reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011 Wiley). (d) Stretchable composite conductors made of Ag NPs and PDMS. (e) Change in the resistance in the range of ε = 0% to 40% during 300 stretching cycles (a, b, d and e: reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011 Wiley) (c: reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2012 Royal Chemical Society). 
Salleo and coworkers demonstrated the use of this technique for the fabrication of a FET based on C8-BTBT with high performance.146 C8-BTBT droplets in 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene first spread on a Si substrate, followed by being molded with a PDMS mold. An array of well-aligned, residual layer-free C8-BTBT channels is generated after evaporation of the solvent. The field-effect mobility was 1.6 cm2 V−1 s−1. Similarly, melting of small molecules at a low annealing temperature enables one to fabricate patterned channels. Fig. 13a shows the schematic of the fabricating process of an OFET with an array of C10-BTBT channels.147 When heated above the isotropic temperature of C10-BTBT (>122.1 °C), liquid C10-BTBT fills the recessed regions on the PDMS mold without a residual layer remaining on the gate substrate. The OM image of Fig. 13b shows the fabricated OFET device. The OFET exhibited an excellent field-effect mobility of 1.74 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 13c).
 Fig. 13  Fabrication of high-performance OFETs using the CFL technique. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabricating process of OFETs based on C10-BTBT as an active channel. Melting of C10-BTBT at a temperature above Tiso leads to the filling of the melt in the recessed regions on a PDMS mold conformally in contact with a gate substrate. Au source (S) and drain (D) are made by thermal evaporation. (b) Optical micrograph of the resultant OFET. (c) Transfer curves of the device obtained at a source–drain voltage (VDS) of −30 V (reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2013 Wiley). 
Gau and coworkers took advantage of the CFL technique to make nanosized gratings and nanoholes on the surface of ZnO and active layers of their solar cells.148 The generated structures led to the enhancement of light trapping within the P3HT/PCBM heterojunction solar cells and also made the pathway for charge transfer shorter, improving the efficiency of the solar cells. Rogers and coworkers demonstrated the use of the CFL technique for improving the performance of their device.149 They generated a SU-8 epoxy pattern by working with this technique, which was then removed by reactive ion etching for fabricating Si nanostructures. The resultant structures made the trapping of light more efficient. Similarly, Jung and coworkers reported that the greater absorption and electrical enhancement arising from Al cavities could significantly improve the power conversion efficiency (26.4% for the initial value).150
Further applicability of the CFL technique has been expanded to gas sensors. Iyer and coworkers reported a “grafting to” approach in combination with this technique for the fabrication of a linear array of Pd nanocubes.151 Poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) was selectively grafted onto the surface of poly(glycidylmethacrylate) (PGMA) on alternating PGMA and PS stripes made using the CFL technique, followed by attaching Pd nanocubes through electrostatic attraction. The array of Pd nanocubes with high density could be integrated into a circuit for the fabrication of a miniature hydrogen sensor. Hu and coworkers demonstrated the use of this technique for patterning reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and fabricating a wafer-scale thin film transistor and a gas sensor.152 The resultant rGO pattern exhibited high field-effect mobility (2.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes and 0.84 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons) and electrical conductivity (100–1000 S m−1), as well as high sensitivity (R/R0 = 1.1) for NH3 gas.
Recently, CFL-based patterning has also found potential application in biomedical engineering. DeSimone and coworkers fabricated a microneedle patch for the delivery of vaccines using the CFL technique in combination with the traditional polymerization method.153 The use of a biodegradable, water soluble polymer, poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP), in the fabrication process not only gave water soluble properties but also allowed for the quick fabrication of the patch. Another successful biomedical application of the CFL technique has been found in control of cell growth. Suh and coworkers guided the growth of cells on an array of biocompatible hydrogel nanopillars that was fabricated using UV-assisted CFL.154,155 The great organization of cells on the nanopillars is a result of strong cell–cell interaction given by the surface topography. Furthermore, a systematic variation in local densities of the topography gave rise to the migration of cells toward a target area, facilitating the self-assembly of cells. These results suggest that cell organization by the control of local densities and anisotropy of surface topography is potentially useful for implantable biomedical devices and tissue scaffolds for regenerative or tissue engineering.
Even though the CFL technique has been rapidly developed as a versatile, effective and low-cost tool for large area patterning, some limitations still remain. High resolution of a pattern is essential to achieve high-performance of electronic devices. However, the CFL technique has difficulty in nanoscale patterning, which is attributed to the limited resolution of a primarily used elastomer mold. In addition, the thermal annealing process for the generation of patterns can degrade semiconducting polymers, hindering the direct use of this technique for the fabrication of organic electronic devices. In spite of its high potential for the constitution of multiscale and hierarchical building blocks, studies on the phase separation or self-organization of polymer blends during the CFL process have still not been conducted.128
6. Perspectives
Micro- and nano-patterning of materials has been a long endeavor in terms of both scientific understanding and industrial needs. Although many approaches have been developed to achieve the goal, only a few methods have been successful from the perspective of expense, reliability, and large-area capability. Guided-assembly, which combines the advantages of both the bottom-up self-assembly and the top-down lithographic approach, is a promising strategy.
Most of the guided-assemblies are enabled by controlling the instabilities of liquid solutions or polymer melts to be patterned. The instabilities are observed in different ways according to the patterning strategies. We have, in this review, introduced the strategies for patterning that are based on the manipulation of liquid instabilities: (i) patterning by localized instability under an electric field, (ii) patterning enabled by the controlled evaporative front, (iii) patterning by template-directed selective dewetting, and (iv) patterning by capillary instability in a confined geometry. In addition, the physical principles of liquid instabilities and the experimental demonstrations have been discussed. Approaches for patterning by other means such as excimer lasers, light, magnetic fields, pressure gradient, shear gradient, and focused ion beam have not been addressed here.
Very recently, the instability effects have been used to fabricate complicated features with the use of viscous materials and their instability. In an example, the use of reversible creasing instability for a swollen elastomer was demonstrated to selectively deposit water droplets. This strategy is potentially useful to form non-conventional polymer patterns on diverse substrates including curved surfaces.156 The formation of plastic liquid patterns by stretching an elastomer was demonstrated, the so-called ratcheting instability patterning,157 which can be a new, facile strategy for patterning soft materials governed by a model of elastic–plastic deformation.
Currently, the utilization of guided assembly expands beyond its application to polymer patterning. The broad applicability to diverse materials, including metal oxides, metal nitrides, metals, superconductors, magnetic materials, dielectrics, and aligned biomaterials, enables the guided assembly to find a wide range of potential applications in photonics, electronics, optoelectronics, and bioengineering. For example, the CFL technique has been used for generating anisotropic metallic nanostructures that are potentially useful for optical and electromagnetic applications.141,158 Guided assembly is moving toward the fabrication of nano-patterns as well. Patterning of sub-10 nm Ge islands on Si(100) has been achieved by guided assembly.159 Amphiphilic regioregular polythiophenes underwent guided-assembled on the nanoscale.160 Regular assembly of block copolymers has been attained on a substrate with a 2D chemical pattern fabricated by electro-oxidation nanolithography.161 Entropy-driven segregation of nanoparticles in a multilayered composite polymer is also an example of the efforts of guided assembly toward nanoscience.162
Even though the guided assembly which is mainly based on the control of liquid instabilities has seen considerable advancement, it still has challenging issues in terms of reliability and complexity for the pattern design as compared with the conventional lithography techniques. Furthermore, the reproducibility is not yet enough to be applicable to industrial use. Patterning by controlled evaporative front and template-directed selective dewetting is quite sensitive to the environmental surroundings (humidity, temperature, and so on), which makes the formation of highly reproducible patterns over large areas difficult. EHD instability patterning exhibits the limitation of pattern resolution over large areas due to Ostwald ripening.163 In the case of the CFL technique, thermal expansion of an elastomeric mold causes the asymmetric liquid instabilities in a confined geometry, which leads to the poor uniformity in the shape and dimension of a pattern formed over a large area.129 Taken together, solving these issues will be a critical direction of future study.
Acknowledgements
U. J. acknowledges the financial support from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIP) (Project No. NRF-2015R1A2A1A10054164) and KRICT's core project (SI-1602) funded by the Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology. D. H. thanks the support from Basic Science Research Program (NRF-2015R1D1A1A01059812) funded by the Ministry of Education (MOE) and National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF).
References
S. Wu, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, T. Hasegawa, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga and M. A. Aono, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 93 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. Li, G. J. Richards and J. P. Hill, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hino, T. Hasegawa, K. Terabe, T. Tsuruoka, A. Nayak, T. Ohno and M. Aono, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 013003 CrossRef .
T. Ohno, T. Hasegawa, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, J. K. Gimzewski and M. Aono, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, M. Akada, J. P. Hill, Q. Ji, R. Charvet and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2285 RSC .
K. Sakakibara, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Small, 2011, 7, 1288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fialkowski, K. J. M. Bishop, R. Klajn, S. K. Smoukov, C. J. Campbell and B. A. Grzybowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Conley Jr., L. Stecker and Y. Ono, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 292 CrossRef .
X. Xiong, C. L. Chen, P. Ryan, A. A. Busnaina, Y. J. Jung and M. R. Dokmeci, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 295302 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Cheng, C. T. Rettner, D. P. Sanders, H. C. Kim and W. D. Hinsberg, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheng, J. Pitera, O. H. Park, M. Flickner, R. Ruiz, C. T. Black and H. C. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 143106 CrossRef .
A. Winkleman, B. D. Gates, L. S. McCarty and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
G. Taylor and A. McEwan, J. Fluid Mech., 1965, 22, 1 CrossRef .
J. R. Melcher and C. V. Smith, Phys. Fluids, 1969, 12, 778 CrossRef .
A. Gailitis, J. Fluid Mech., 1977, 82, 401 CrossRef .
A. Onuki, Physica A, 1995, 217, 38 CrossRef .
E. Schäffer, T. Thurn-Albrecht, T. P. Russell and U. Steiner, Nature, 2000, 403, 874 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Schäffer, T. Thurn-Albrecht, T. P. Russell and U. Steiner, Europhys. Lett., 2007, 53, 518 CrossRef .
N. Wu and W. B. Russel, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 180 CrossRef CAS .
P. Deshpande and S. Y. Chou, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2001, 19, 2741 CAS .
P. Deshpande, L. F. Pease III, L. Chen, S. Y. Chou and W. B. Russel, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2004, 70, 041601 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wu, L. F. Pease III and W. B. Russel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1992 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H. Yu, N. Liu, J. D. Mai, L. Liu, G.-B. Lee and W. J. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 214101 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, F. Fei, L. Liu, H. Yu, P. Yu, Y. Wang, G.-B. Lee and W. J. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 264103 CrossRef .
H. Tian, J. Shao, Y. Ding, X. Li and H. Hu, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 1433 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, T. Kerle, S. M. Baker, D. A. Hoagland, E. Schäffer, U. Steiner and T. P. Russell, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 2377 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, T. Kerle, T. P. Russell, E. Schäffer and U. Steiner, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 3971 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, T. Kerle, T. P. Russell, E. Schäffer and U. Steiner, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 6255 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Morariu, N. E. Voicu, E. Schaffer, Z. Lin, T. P. Russell and U. Steiner, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dickey, A. Raines, E. Collister, R. Bonnecaze, S. Sreenivasan and C. Willson, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 117 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Pease and W. B. Russel, Langmuir, 2003, 20, 795 CrossRef .
C. Y. Lau and W. B. Russel, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7746 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nazaripoor, C. R. Koch and S. Bhattacharjee, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bae, E. Glogowski, S. Gupta, W. Chen, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2722 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, C. Wang, J. Shao, Y. Ding and X. Li, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 12654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Latif, M. Aziz, N. Katun, A. M. M. Ali and M. Z. Yahya, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1401 CrossRef CAS .
K. Such, J. Stevens, W. Wieczorek, M. Siekierski and Z. Florjanczyk, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 32, 2221 CrossRef .
H. Nazaripoor, C. R. Koch, M. Sadrzadeh and S. Bhattacharjee, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 1074 RSC .
M. D. Dickey, E. Collister, A. Raines, P. Tsiartas, T. Holcombe, S. Sreenivasan, R. T. Bonnecaze and C. G. Willson, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2043 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Voicu, M. Saifullah, K. Subramanian, M. E. Welland and U. Steiner, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 554 RSC .
S. Y. Chou and Q. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Goldberg-Oppenheimer, D. Eder and U. Steiner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1895 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Northen and K. L. Turner, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, G. Liu, M. Dickey and C. G. Willson, Polymer, 2004, 45, 8469 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Frey, I. Y. Tsai, T. P. Russell, S. K. Hanks and Y. Wang, Biophys. J., 2006, 90, 3774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. El Moctar, N. Aubry and J. Batton, Lab Chip, 2003, 3, 273 RSC .
V. Vespini, O. Gennari, S. Coppola, G. Nasti, L. Mecozzi, V. Pagliarulo, S. Grilli, C. Carfagna and P. Perraro, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2015, 4, 7600208 Search PubMed .
X. Li, H. Tian, Y. Ding, J. Shao and Y. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9975 CAS .
J. J. S. Rickard, I. Farrer and P. G. Oppenheimer, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Bigioni, X. M. Lin, T. T. Nguyen, E. I. Corwin, T. A. Witten and H. M. Jaeger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Martin, M. O. Blunt, E. Pauliac-Vaujour, A. Stannard, P. Moriarty, I. Vancea and U. Thiele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 116103 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Khanal and E. R. Zubarev, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Rabani, D. R. Reichman, P. L. Geissler and L. E. Brus, Nature, 2003, 426, 271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pauliac-Vaujour, A. Stannard, C. Martin, M. O. Blunt, I. Notingher, P. Moriarty, I. Vancea and U. Thiele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 176102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. X. Nguyen and K. J. Stebe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 164501 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Tsukruk, H. Ko and S. Peleshanko, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 65502 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2010, 48, 2552 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma and J. Hao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5457 RSC .
A. R. Tao, J. Huang and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, R. Fan, S. Connor and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 119, 2466 CrossRef .
J. Huang, F. Kim, A. R. Tao, S. Connor and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. van Hameren, P. Schön, A. M. van Buul, J. Hoogboom, S. V. Lazarenko, J. W. Gerritsen, H. Engelkamp, P. C. M. Christianen, H. A. Heus and J. C. Maan, Science, 2006, 1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. van Hameren, A. M. van Buul, M. A. Castriciano, V. Villari, N. Micali, P. Schön, S. Speller, L. M. Scolaro, A. E. Rowan and J. A. A. W. Elemans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, A. R. Tao, S. Connor, R. He and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pauliac-Vaujour, A. Stannard, C. Martin, M. O. Blunt, I. Notingher, P. Moriarty, I. Vancea and U. Thiele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 176102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Vancea, U. Thiele, E. Pauliac-Vaujour, A. Stannard, C. Martin, M. Blunt and P. Moriarty, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 78, 041601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lenhert, M. Gleiche, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Lee, J.-B. Lee, J. Singh, K. Rana and J.-H. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yabu and M. Shimomura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 575 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kang, W. S. Hwang, Z. Lin, S. H. Kwon and S. W. Hong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, C. Zhang, B. Jiang, W. Han and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. H. Lee, P. K. Sudeep, T. Emrick and A. J. Crosby, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lawrence, J. T. Pham, D. Y. Lee, Y. Liu, A. J. Crosby and T. Emrick, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, D. Y. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, J. K. Kim, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, T.-W. Lee and J. H. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12380 CAS .
J. H. Park, D. Y. Lee, W. Seung, Q. Sun, S.-W. Kim and J. H. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7802 CAS .
B. Li, W. Han, B. Jiang and Z. Lin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hong, M. Byun and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 520 CrossRef .
W. Han and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Byun, W. Han, F. Qiu, N. B. Bowden and Z. Lin, Small, 2010, 6, 2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Xia, S. W. Hong, Z. Lin, F. Qiu and Y. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 066104 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Hong, M. Byun and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hong, J. Wang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, M. He, M. Byun, B. Li and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Xia and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 119, 1892 CrossRef .
T. Y. Kim, S. W. Kwon, S. J. Park, D. H. Yoon, K. S. Suh and W. S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hong, W. Jeong, H. Ko, M. R. Kessler, V. V. Tsukruk and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2114 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, W. Han, M. Byun, L. Zhu, Q. Zou and Z. Lin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Reiter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 68, 75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yerushalmi-Rozen, T. Kerle and J. Klein, Science, 1999, 285, 1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Steiner, J. Klein, E. Eiser, A. Budkowski and L. J. Fetters, Science, 1992, 258, 1126 CAS .
R. Seemann, S. Herminghaus and K. Jacobs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 5534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sharma and R. Khanna, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 3463 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reiter, R. Khanna and A. Sharma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Higgins and R. Jones, Nature, 2000, 404, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, F. Xie and O. K. C. Tsui, Polymer, 2005, 46, 8416 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rehse, C. Wang, M. Hund, M. Geoghegan, R. Magerle and G. Krausch, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2001, 4, 69 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mukherjee, M. Gonuguntla and A. Sharma, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 2069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xing, C. Luo, Z. Wang and Y. Han, Polymer, 2007, 48, 3574 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kim and H. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 332 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hyun, G. D. Moon, C. J. Park, B. S. Kim, Y. Xia and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Hyun, M. Park, C. J. Park, B. Kim, Y. Xia, J. H. Hur, J. M. Kim, J. J. Park and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ohzono and H. Kitahata, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2395 RSC .
S. Roy, K. J. Ansari, S. S. K. Jampa, P. Vutukuri and R. Mukherjee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1887 CAS .
N. Bhandaru, A. Das, N. Salunke and R. Mukherjee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kargupta and A. Sharma, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1893 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mukherjee, D. Bandyopadhyay and A. Sharma, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2086 RSC .
K. Kargupta and A. Sharma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 4536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rockford, Y. Liu, P. Mansky, T. Russell, M. Yoon and S. Mochrie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 2602 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xue and Y. Han, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 269 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bandyopadhyay, A. Sharma and C. Rastogi, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 14048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bandyopadhyay and A. Sharma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2237 CAS .
D. U. Ahn and Y. Ding, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 3794 RSC .
Z. Zhang, D. U. Ahn and Y. Ding, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1972 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. Wang and Y. Ding, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, D. Biswas, N. Salunke, A. Das, P. Vutukuri, R. Singh and R. Mukherjee, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 935 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bhandaru, A. Das and R. Mukherjee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1073 RSC .
T. Ohzono, H. Monobe, K. Shiokawa, M. Fujiwara and Y. Shimizu, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4658 RSC .
T. Ohzono, H. Monobe, R. Yamaguchi, Y. Shimizu and H. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 014101 CrossRef .
H. Monobe, T. Ohzono, H. Akiyama, K. Sumaru and Y. Shimizu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2212 CAS .
T. Ohzono and J. Fukuda, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 701,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms1709 .
T. Ohzono, T. Yamamoto and J. Fukuda, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3735,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms4735 .
A. Verma and A. Sharma, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Verma and A. Sharma, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4928 CrossRef CAS .
A. Verma and A. Sharma, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 11119 RSC .
K. Y. Suh, Y. S. Kim and H. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1386 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Suh, M. C. Park and P. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2699 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ho, J. Zou, B. Zdyrko, K. S. Iyer, I. Luzinov and I. Luzinov, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 401 RSC .
B. Kim, M. Park, Y. S. Kim and U. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4695 CAS .
C. M. Bruinink, M. Péter, P. A. Maury, M. de Boer, L. Kuipers, J. Huskens and D. N. Reinhoudt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1555 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, V. Klep and I. Luzinov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Im, K. W. Bong, B.-S. Kim, S. H. Baxamusa, P. T. Hammond, P. S. Doylen and K. K. Gleason, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Suh and H. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 405 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Hyun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 76321 RSC .
M. Park, Y. Xia and U. Jeong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Jeong, S. H. Lee, P. Kim and K. Y. Suh, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Jeong, S. H. Lee, J. K. Kim and K. Y. Suh, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Jeong, R. Kwak, J. K. Kim and K. Y. Suh, Small, 2008, 4, 1913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kwak, H. E. Jeong and K. Y. Suh, Small, 2009, 5, 790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, M. Park and U. Jeong, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, Z. Zhao, J. Chen, T. Yang and P. S. Cremer, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Jeong, R. Kwak, A. Khademhosseini and K. Y. Suh, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 331 RSC .
H. E. Jeong, J.-K. Lee, H. N. Kim, S. H. Moon and K. Y. Suh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 5639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, D. C. Hyun, J. Kim, Y. S. Kim and U. Jeong, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, H. Cho, S. Park and U. Jeong, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4343 RSC .
P. S. Jo, A. Vailionis, Y. M. Park and A. Salleo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kim, K.-S. Jang, J. Kim, J. C. Won, M. H. Yi, H. Kim, D. K. Yooun, T. J. Shin, M.-H. Lee, J.-W. Ka and Y. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Cheng and C. Gau, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 566 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shir, J. Yoon, D. Chanda, J.-H. Ryu and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. An, C. Cho, J. K. Choi, J.-M. Park, M. L. Jin, J.-Y. Lee and H.-T. Jung, Small, 2014, 10, 1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zou, B. Zdyrok, I. Luzinov, C. L. Raston and K. S. Iyer, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1033 RSC .
J. Zhang, P. A. Hu, R. Zhang, X. Wang, B. Yang, W. Cao, Y. Li, X. He, Z. Wang and W. O’Neill, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 714 RSC .
K. A. Moga, L. R. Bickford, R. D. Geil, S. S. Dunn, A. A. Pandya, Y. Wang, J. H. Fain, C. F. Archuleta, A. T. O’Neill and J. M. DeSimone, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, P. Kim, I. Song, J. M. Cha, S. H. Lee, B. Kim and K. Y. Suh, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, C.-H. Seo, K. Han, K. W. Kwon, A. Levchenko and K.-Y. Suh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Yang, L. Jin, D. R. Clarke and Z. Suo, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 3820 RSC .
S. Kim, J.-W. Jung, T.-S. Lee, J.-H. Jeong, S. Y. Lee, S.-M. Yang and J.-R. Jeong, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2012, 8, 71 CrossRef CAS .
O. Guise, J. Ahner, J. John, T. Yates, V. Vaithyanathan, D. G. Schlom and J. Levy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 171902 CrossRef .
D. R. Greve, N. Reizel, T. Hassenkam, J. Bøgelund, K. Kjaer, P. B. Howes, N. B. Larsen, M. Jayaraman, R. D. McCulloug and T. Bjørnholm, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 1502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, S. Park, S. Wang, T. P. Russell, B. M. Ocko and A. Checco, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2268–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, Q. Zhang, T. Emrick, A. C. Balazs and T. P. Russel, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 229 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lau and W. B. Russel, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7746 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to the preparation of this review article.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Dong Choon Hyun
	Dong Choon Hyun received his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Yonsei University, Korea (with Prof. Unyong Jeong) in 2011 on polymer patterning and its applications. He worked on the design and fabrication of biodegradable polymer particles and exploration of their applications in drug delivery as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Younan Xia's group at Georgia Institute of Technology. Since 2014, he has been working as an Assistant Professor of Polymer Science and Engineering at Kyungpook National University, Korea. His research interests include fabrication of non-conventional shaped particles, design of functional polymers, and their applications.

Minwoo Park
	Minwoo Park received his BS degree (2008) in Materials Science and Engineering from Yonsei University, Korea. He received his PhD degree (2014) in the same department (with Prof. Unyong Jeong). He worked in Samsung Display as a senior researcher and moved to Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) to pursue postdoc research. He joined the Faculty of Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Sookmyung Women's University in 2016. His research interests include design of functional nanomaterials and device architecture for soft electronics and next-generation photovoltaics.

Unyong Jeong
	Unyong Jeong received a BS degree in chemical engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH) in Korea (1998). He received a MA degree (2000) and a PhD degree (2003) in polymer physics in the same department. He joined Prof. Younan Xia's group as a postdoctoral fellow to study the synthesis and applications of inorganic nanostructured materials. Then, he joined Yonsei University in Korea (2006) and moved to Dept. of Materials Science and Engineering at POSTECH (2015) in March 2016. His research aims at understanding the mechanical electrical properties of conductive materials and fabricating stretchable electronic devices based on material synthesis, assembly of the materials, and formation of nanocomposites.

 	Fig. 1  Patterning based on the instability of a non-conducting fluid under an electric field (EHD instability patterning). (a) Schematic illustration of the EHD instability patterning technique. When an external electric field is applied to a polymer melt sandwiched by two electrodes, the initially flat polymer–air interface will be destabilized, generating a 2D array of pillar structures. The structures will be fixed when the sample is cooled below the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the polymer. (b) Optical micrograph showing a 2D array of polymer pillars fabricated using a top electrode with a large triangular protrusion (reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2009 Elsevier). (c) Optical micrograph of an ordered triangular array of pillars fabricated by taking advantage of a top electrode with a network of interconnected triangular features (reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2006 Wiley).	 
λ ∝ γ1/2H3/2V−1.	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Optically induced EHD instability patterning. (a) Schematic of the formation of a pattern by optically induced EHD instability. When a visible light with a regular grid pattern is irradiated, a photosensitive layer supported on a bottom electrode will induce a heterogeneous spatial distribution of the electric field between the two electrodes. The heterogeneity in the electric field leads to controlled nucleation of the pillars, generating a highly ordered array of pillars. (b) Visible light with a regular grid pattern of the letters “SIA” generated by the digital projector. (c) SEM image of a 2D array of polymer pillars fabricated by working with visible light with the regular grid pattern of (b) (reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2013 American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 3  A FET device fabricated using EHD instability patterning. (a) Schematic of an ionic liquid-gated FET device based on an array of PPy pillars generated by EHD instability patterning. (b) AFM image and its cross-section analysis of an array of PPy pillars. (c) Change in IDS as a function of VDS of the device. The inset shows gate voltage (Vg) performance of the device (reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  Controlled evaporative patterning by flow coating. (a) Schematic of the formation of ribbons made of Au NPs by flow coating, illustrating the stick–slip deposition of Au NPs according to the translation of the substrate and the time–velocity profile of the translating substrate. (b) Optical microscopy (OM) images showing the morphologies of ribbons made of Au NPs depending on the deposition time and the ligand density of the NPs. Scale bars are 20 μm (reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  Composite structures made of polymer and inorganic NPs formed by a flow coating technique. (a) TEM image of a monolayer-thick strip consisting of an array of PS-b-P4VP/HAuCl4 micelles. (b) AFM image of an array of Au NPs obtained after oxygen plasma treatment. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of PS-b-P4VP micelles incorporated with PS-capped CdSe NPs. (d and e) AFM images of PS-b-P4VP micelles (d) before and (e) after decoration with CdSe NPs (reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 6  Controlled evaporative patterning by a confined curve-on-flat geometry. (a) Schematic of the formation of patterns by a spherical lens-on-flat geometry. The successive stick–slip motion of the contact line leads to the generation of patterned structures with high regularity. (b) Polymer stripes formed with a wedge-on-flat geometry (reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010 Wiley). (c) A variety of complex, highly regular patterns fabricated by working with the upper surfaces with various shapes: concentric square stripes generated by the pyramid-on-Si geometry (upper) and concentric triangular contour lines made by using the triangular-slice sphere-on-Si geometry (lower) (reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2009 Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 7  Patterning of conjugated polymers based on a confined curve-on-flat geometry. AFM images of conjugated polymer stripes taken in three different regions (X1–X3). (a–c) P3HT, (d–f) P3BT, and (g–i) P3BHT. (j) Schematic illustration of the arrangement of the polymer stripes on a P++Si/SiO2/Au substrate. (k) Change in the direct current of the stripes before and after solvent annealing for 12 h (reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2013 Wiley).	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Patterning of multiple polymers by template-directed dewetting. (a–c) Three different morphologies for the bottom PMMA layer on a patterned polymer substrate depending on the concentration of PMMA solution (CPMMA) used for the spin-coating process: (a) very low CPMMA, (b) intermediate CPMMA, and (c) high CPMMA. (d–f) Morphologies of the top PS layer on the pre-existing PMMA bottom layer depending on CPMMA and CPS: (d) both very low CPMMA and CPS, (e) very low CPMMA and intermediate CPS, and (f) both high CPMMA and CPS (reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 9  Patterning of multiple polymers by template-directed dewetting. (a) Schematic of wrinkle-assisted patterning of multiple polymers (PS, PCL, and PEG). PCL is first deposited in the trenches of the wrinkled PS layer. Compressing parallel to the PCL lines generates a new wrinkle pattern normal to the initial wrinkles, which guides the dewetting of PEG. (b) 2D pattern with a textile structure. (c and d) Non-conventional patterns produced by post-treatment: (c) an arrow pattern via solvent annealing and (d) a double bell pattern via thermal annealing (reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2010 Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 10  Periodic alignment of a NLC spatially confined in a wrinkled surface. (a) Schematic showing a zigzag line defect of a NLC confined in a groove of the microwrinkle. Hybrid anchoring conditions of NLC molecules are indicated by blue double-headed arrows. The nail symbols (T) represent the projection of the preferentially aligned direction of the NLC (called the director n) onto the plane of the surface (the head of the nail comes out of the surface). Blue cylinders illustrated in the lower panel shows the cross-sectional distribution of n at different points of the line defect. (b) Polarized optical microscopy (POM) images showing the change in the length of the right-handed (lR) and left-handed (lL) domains on exposure to chiral vapor molecules (scale bar, 10 μm). A sensitive tint plate (S) is used for imaging the change in the domain with the polarizer (P) and the analyzer (A) (reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). (c) Schematic and POM images of beads trapped at the kinks of the line defect. Scale bar is 15 μm (reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the process for patterning of the polymer using the CFL technique. At temperatures above Tg of a polymer, capillary force drives the polymer melt into the recessed regions on a mold. (a) For a thick film, a complete pattern with a residual layer is generated. (b) In the case of a thin film, a concave pattern is formed without a residual layer. (c) In the case of an extremely thin film, a concave pattern is separated due to the disconnection of a meniscus formed in the recessed regions.	 

 	Fig. 12  Patterning of inorganic materials using viscoelastic flow of polymer topography. (a) Schematic of the pattern formation process. Due to the abrupt viscosity drop of a crystalline polymer at a temperature above its melting point (Tm), the polymer melt spreads. The inorganic materials phase-separated from the polymer melt are pushed due to flow of the polymer melt and collected in the recessed regions. After reduction and sintering processes, pure inorganic patterns are generated: (b) porous Ag lines and (c) solid a-Se lines (reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011 Wiley). (d) Stretchable composite conductors made of Ag NPs and PDMS. (e) Change in the resistance in the range of ε = 0% to 40% during 300 stretching cycles (a, b, d and e: reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011 Wiley) (c: reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2012 Royal Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  Fabrication of high-performance OFETs using the CFL technique. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabricating process of OFETs based on C10-BTBT as an active channel. Melting of C10-BTBT at a temperature above Tiso leads to the filling of the melt in the recessed regions on a PDMS mold conformally in contact with a gate substrate. Au source (S) and drain (D) are made by thermal evaporation. (b) Optical micrograph of the resultant OFET. (c) Transfer curves of the device obtained at a source–drain voltage (VDS) of −30 V (reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2013 Wiley).	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to the preparation of this review article.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
