Simultaneous improvements in self-cleaning and light-trapping abilities of polymer substrates for flexible organic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA09351A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA09351A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2379-2387Simultaneous improvements in self-cleaning and light-trapping abilities of polymer substrates for flexible organic solar cells†

        
          
            Eunwook 
            Jeong‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Guoquing 
            Zhao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Myungkwan 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Seung Min 
            Yu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jongjoo 
            Rha
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jongmoon 
            Shin
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Young-Rae 
            Cho
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Jungheum 
            Yun
          
        
      *a
aSurface Technology Division, Korea Institute of Materials Science, Changwon, Gyeongnam 51508, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jungheum@kims.re.kr; jmshin@kims.re.kr;  Fax: +82-55-280-3570;   Tel: +82-55-280-3515
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yescho@pusan.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-51-514-4457;   Tel: +82-51-510-2389
cJeonju Center, Korea Basic Science Institute, Jeonju, Jeonbuk 54907, Republic of Korea
Received 
      24th October 2017
    , Accepted 3rd January 2018First published on 19th January 2018AbstractOrganic solar cells (OSCs) supported on mechanically flexible and optically transparent polymer substrates have been receiving increased attention owing to their noticeable merits of low cost, light weight, and flexible design that are unattainable by their existing counterparts supported on rigid glass substrates. However, technical issues such as relatively low photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies and long-term stabilities of OSCs on polymer substrates require the enhancement and maintenance of the efficiency of OSCs. In this study, a simple, direct vacuum deposition strategy was used to fabricate a multifunctional silica nanoparticle array (SNA) layer on polymer substrates for improving and maintaining the light harvesting efficiencies of OSCs; this induces simultaneous and significant enhancements in the light-scattering and contaminant-repelling (or self-cleaning) properties of the substrate. The SNA layer led to improved light scattering features, representing haze transmittances ranging from 3.4% to 80.4% in the visible spectral range with strong influences of its geometrical features on the hydrophobic/oleophobic characteristics of the substrate. Any contaminant-induced reduction in the performance of OSCs could be successfully prevented by the strong contaminant-repelling feature, characterized by high contact angles (>150°) and low sliding angles (<15°) for water and ethylene glycol, without compromising the optical transparency of the polymer substrate. A combination of the SNA layer and oxide/metal/oxide (OMO) electrode coating on each side of the polymer substrate provides a promising solution to improve the performance of OSCs. The power conversion efficiency was enhanced by 13.31% compared to that of an OSC based on the same polymer substrate without the SNA layer.
Introduction
Organic-based optoelectronic devices, largely represented by organic solar cells (OSCs) and organic light-emitting diodes, supported on flexible and transparent polymer substrates have lately received increased attention because of their advantages over optoelectronic devices supported on rigid glass substrates.1–3 The promise of flexible optoelectronic devices is mainly attributed to the excellent mechanical flexibility and low weight of the polymer substrates, which are expected to fulfil the state-of-the-art device configuration for foldable, bendable, portable, and even wearable devices. The compatibility of the fabrication method with existing continuous, high-throughput manufacturing methods using roll-to-roll deposition techniques also enhances the technical merits in terms of facile fabrication and cost effectiveness.1,3,4 In contrast, the integration of optoelectronic devices with polymer substrates leads to technical limitations associated with a lower attainable power conversion efficiency (PCE) and a serious reduction in the PCE within a relatively short period of usage compared to any of their competing counterparts supported on rigid glasses. A single, universally applicable solution is not available to simultaneously overcome these issues because the undesirable properties are closely related to the demerits of the inherent optical, structural, and thermal properties of the polymer materials compared to those of the glasses. However, when the focus is narrowed to the exploration of the contribution of polymer substrates for improving and maintaining the device efficiency, a special emphasis is placed on designing polymer substrates not only to increase the amount of photons passing through the optoelectronic devices, but also to maintain a high optical transparency for operation in an ambient environment.
It has been recognized that the accumulation of various contaminants, including dust particles and fingerprint residues, on the substrate surfaces causes a serious reduction in the optical transparency of the optoelectronic devices.5–9 The contamination issue is especially severe for flexible optoelectronic devices because oily contaminants from contact and noncontact sources easily leave opaque traces on the polymer substrate surfaces. Optically transparent nanostructures exhibiting strong contaminant-repelling (or self-cleaning) properties, represented by their hydrophobicity and oleophobicity, are routinely applied to prevent surface contamination.10–15 Notably, strong light scattering can occur as a result of the morphology-dependent interference, known as Mie scattering,16,17 when the dimensions of the contaminant-repelling nanostructures are comparable to the wavelengths of the incident light. This provides an opportunity for improving the conversion efficiencies of the optoelectronic devices by manipulating the penetration path length of the incident light across the photoactive polymers. Despite such potential, an effective methodology for simultaneously achieving contaminant-repelling and appropriate light-scattering performances has not yet been reported for the polymer substrates used for flexible optoelectronic devices, mainly owing to the absence of a generally acceptable and practical method for fabricating a multifunctional nanostructure on polymer substrates.
In detail, typical nanostructures currently in use for attaining hydrophobic and oleophobic features of polymers include periodic polymer nanostructures and oxide-nanoparticle coatings. Periodic polymer nanostructures are fabricated by lithography,11,14 imprinting,18 molding,13 and plasma etching techniques,19–21 whereas oxide-nanoparticle coatings are generally fabricated by solution-based coating processes.22–24 Moreover, distinct efforts have been made to achieve controlled optical features, relevant to antireflection and light-scattering, of polymer substrates using very similar morphological structures with different ranges of dimensions.25,26 However, surprisingly, the previous research efforts were only confined to investigation of the antireflective features of the aforementioned contaminant-repelling nanostructures on polymers.27–34 No systematic investigation on implementing an efficient nanostructure simultaneously exhibiting strong contaminant-repelling and light-scattering features has been reported, given its promising potential to improve and maintain the performance of flexible optoelectronic devices on polymer substrates.
The purpose of this study is to design a highly effective but practical polymer substrate by applying a unique multifunctional nanostructure that simultaneously affords strong contaminant-repelling and light-harvesting features on polymer substrates for use in flexible OSCs. This task was achieved by a unique methodology recently developed for the direct vacuum deposition of a silica nanoparticle array (SNA) on polymer substrates, utilizing conventional plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD).4,35 The previous work has already provided detailed information on design features and dimensions of the SNA for improving the light scattering performances of polymer substrates.4 In this study, further efforts were made to optimize the fabrication of the SNA in response to requirements for simultaneous improvements of contaminant-repelling and light-scattering features. Comparative evaluations of the contaminant-repelling and light-scattering performance were conducted for SNAs with different dimensions to maximize the merits of employing a SNA. In detail, the SNAs with precisely controlled dimensions and periodicities provided (i) strong water- and oil-repelling properties and (ii) light-scattering features to poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) polymer substrates without any notable loss in optical transparency. By reinforcing the advantage of a highly transparent, conductive electrode in the form of a minimally oxidized Ag ultrathin film embedded between thin ZnO films (denoted as OMO) on the underside of the SNA-coated PET substrates, flexible OSCs fabricated on the PET substrates facilitated strongly enhanced power conversion efficiencies and anti-contaminant performances compared to those of an OSC on a pristine PET substrate.
Experimental
Fabrication
The transparent light-scattering and contaminant-repelling coating consisting of a silica nanoparticle array was fabricated on 125 μm PET (Panac Co.) substrates using a custom-built PECVD system using a capacitively coupled radio frequency discharge of 13.56 MHz. Details of the PECVD system are provided elsewhere.35,36 First, progressive formation of nanoscopic polymer protrusions was induced on the PET surface by an Ar plasma discharge process that was conducted for different time periods at a radio frequency (RF) power of 1.1 W cm−2 and a working pressure of 220 mTorr. Subsequently, the silica nanoparticle array with an O:Si atomic ratio of 1.9–2.0 was coated on the PET surface at the same power and working pressure via plasma polymerization of vaporized hexamethyldisiloxane (HMDSO, Sigma-Aldrich, 98% purity) mixed with Ar and O2 gases at a flow rate of HMDSO:O2:Ar = 1.8:10:100 sccm. Plasma treatment and silica coating processes were conducted at a temperature less than 100 °C to prevent any thermal damage of PET. To modify the surface energy of the SNA, a layer of evaporated trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluoro-octyl)silane (PFOTS, Sigma-Aldrich, 97% purity) was coated on the silica nanoparticles to manipulate their surface energy. The transparent OMO electrode was deposited on the underside of the SNA-coated PET substrates by sequential deposition processes of ZnO, Ag(O), and ZnO multilayers using a room-temperature multi-gun magnetron sputtering system (A-tech System Co, Ltd, Flexlab System 100), described in detail elsewhere.37 The bottom and top layers of 40 nm ZnO were deposited from a 4-in ZnO target at an RF power of 200 W and a working pressure of 3.0 mTorr in an Ar gas environment, whereas the embedded 7 nm Ag(O) layer, predominantly metallic Ag with a small amount of oxygen dose (∼3 at%), was deposited from a pure 4-in Ag target using a direct current (DC) power of 50 W and a working pressure of 3.0 mTorr in a gas mixture (an inlet Ar:O2 flow rate of 45:4 sccm) environment.
OSCs were fabricated with a 100 nm photoactive layer of poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7, 1-material Chemscitech Inc.) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM, Solenne BV). The two components were mixed at a ratio of 8:12 mg in chlorobenzene (1 ml) and further mixed with 1,8-diiodooctane (Sigma Aldrich) at a volume ratio of 3%. After stirring at 70 °C for 12 h, the mixture of PTB7:PC71BM was filtered using a 0.2 mm poly(tetra-fluoroethylene) syringe filter and spin-coated on the OMO electrode at 1000 rpm for 40 s. A 5 nm hole-extraction layer was spin-coated and dried on the PTB7:PC71BM layer by using a solution mixture of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios P, VP AI 4083) and isopropyl alcohol at a volume ratio of 1:10. A 100 nm Ag layer was deposited as the top electrode of the OSC with a device area of 0.38 cm2.
Characterization
The top and cross-sectional morphological images of polymer protrusions and SNAs were captured using a high-resolution field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (Hitachi, SU-8230) and an ultra-high-resolution (UHR) FE-SEM (Hitachi, S-5500) at the Jeonju center of the Korea Basic Science Institute. The contact angles of water and ethylene glycol were measured by contact angle goniometry (Femtofab, SDLAB-200TEZ) using a droplet size of 5–10 μl. Each contact angle was averaged from five different measurements. The actual size of the SNAs was difficult to determine precisely because no clear distinction could be drawn between the SNAs and polymer protrusions in cross-sectional FE-SEM images. Instead, the nominal deposition thickness of silica was used as the criterion for evaluating the dimension of the SNAs. The nominal thicknesses were determined by surface profiler (Bruker, Dektak XT) measurements for silica planar films deposited on Si wafers, instead of three-dimensional silica nanoparticles deposited on polymer protrusions. The surface area of the silica nanoparticles was determined by Image-Pro Plus (Media Cybernetics, Inc.) for calculating the contact angle. The size of the silica nanoparticles and the distance between adjacent silica nanoparticles were determined from FE-SEM surface images. The transmittance and reflectance spectra were recorded in the wavelength range of 350–800 nm using an ultraviolet-visible (UV) spectrophotometer (Agilent Technology, Cary 5000). The percent transmittance haze (H) was calculated from a simple equation, H(%) = TD/TT × 100, where TD and TT are diffusive and total transmittances, respectively. The diffusive transmittance was calculated by subtracting the measured specular transmittance from the measured total transmittance. The J–V characteristic of the OSCs was measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under the air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) condition and with the light intensity of 100 mW cm2. The incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded on a quantum efficiency measurement system (Oriel IQE-200). The results were averaged from at least five specimens for each measurement condition. The mechanical bending tests of the OSCs were carried out using a two-point bending system by applying different degrees of compressive stresses to the devices by bending the PET substrates.
Results and discussion
The purpose of this study was to fabricate an effective polymer substrate exhibiting multifunctional features for flexible OSCs, including high contaminant-repelling and light-harvesting abilities. To implement the multifunctional features on PETs, a unique fabrication method leading to a maskless direct growth and self-assembly of SNAs on PETs was accomplished by simple vapor deposition without the need for any nanopatterning by the state-of-the-art lithography. The growth of the SNA layer on PET consisted of three sequential stages: (i) formation of nanoscopic polymer protrusions by Ar plasma treatment of the PET surface, (ii) subsequent growth of silica nanoparticles on the polymer protrusions by PECVD, and (iii) passivation of the silica nanoparticle surface by coating a PFOTS monolayer (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the sequential fabrication of an SNA layer on a PET surface for imparting strong contaminant-repelling and light-harvesting features to it. The fabrication process involved (a) the introduction of a pristine PET substrate into a PECVD system, (b) formation of polymer protrusions by exposing the PET surface to Ar plasma irradiation, (c) subsequent deposition of an SNA layer on polymer protrusions by the PECVD process, and (d) termination of the SNA-coated PET surface with a monolayer of PFOTS to enhance the hydrophobicity and oleophobicity of the substrate. 
The development of a polymer protrusion array on the PET surface during Ar plasma treatment was presumed to be a prerequisite for the formation of SNAs because the growth of silica nanoparticles was initiated on top of the polymer protrusions.4,35 Since the morphological modification of the polymer surface has been routinely accomplished by exposing to plasma treatment, the formation of nanoscopic and microscopic polymer protrusions itself is not new and can be readily explained by etching, migration, redeposition, and recombination of the polymer surface.35,36 Notably, when the growth of the polymer protrusions was controlled by the plasma-treatment time, between 10 min and 60 min, the evolution of the polymer protrusions with increasing plasma-treatment time was accompanied by a reduction in the density of the protrusions (Fig. S1†), as a result of the coalescence of neighboring protrusions under plasma irradiation.38,39
Plane and cross-sectional FE-SEM images show that different plasma-treatment times provide an opportunity to control the morphological features of silica nanoparticles, relevant to their shape, size, and density (Fig. 2). The SNA readily developed on the polymer protrusions according to the preferential growth mode of globular silica particles on them, which has been demonstrated elsewhere.35 However, detailed morphological features of the SNAs significantly changed with increased plasma-treatment time. With respect to the growth of SNAs at a nominal thickness of 240 nm, the SNA evolved on a 10 min-pretreated PET surface consisted of a densely packed, single-layered array of small globular-shaped silica nanoparticles, whereas the SNA evolved on a 30 min-pretreated PET surface consisted of a sparsely packed array of relatively large silica nanoparticles. The morphological irregularities of the polymer protrusions, which were developed in the case of a prolonged treatment time of 60 min, caused a relatively irregular, columnar geometry of the SNA by promoting agglomeration between the silica nanoparticles. This simple but precise control over the morphologies of the SNA facilitated by the treatment time provided an excellent opportunity to implement the contaminant-repelling and optical-harvesting features into a single SNA layer.
 Fig. 2  Controlling the morphological features of SNAs. Plane (a, c, e) and cross-sectional (b, d, f) FE-SEM images of SNAs fabricated on PET substrates plasma-treated for different periods: (a and b) 10 min, (c and d) 30 min, and (e and f) 60 min. The nominal deposition thickness of the SNA layer was fixed at 240 nm. 
The modification of the morphological features of SNAs, induced by plasma treatment, led to strongly enhanced contaminant-repelling performances via simultaneous improvements in their hydrophobicity and oleophobicity, as schematically demonstrated in Fig. 3a. The hydrophobicity and oleophobicity of PFOTS-coated SNAs were estimated by measuring the contact angles of water and ethylene glycol (EG) droplets with surface tensions of 72.1 and 48 mN m−1, respectively. The contribution of the SNA to the enhancement of the contaminant-repelling properties of the polymer was evaluated by measuring the contact angles of the same solvent droplets on a PFOTS-coated PET surface without an SNA layer. From the experimentally determined contact angle data, we determined that the super-hydrophobicity and oleophobicity of the PET substrate could be attained with a 240 nm-thick SNA layer fabricated after plasma treatment for 30 min (Fig. 3b). The SNA exhibited necessary and sufficient conditions for the self-cleaning of PET substrates,5,6,40 with a high contact angle of 169° and a low sliding angle of 2° for water droplets (Fig. S2†). The contact angle was measured to be 134° and 126° for the droplets of EG and hexadecane, respectively, because of their lower surface tensions compared to that of water (Fig. 3b and S3†). As the contact angle values monotonically increased with a further increase in the plasma-treatment time, the contact angle could eventually be increased to an optimal value, ensuring the simultaneous implementation of super-hydrophobicity and super-oleophobicity, upon increasing the treatment time to 60 min.
 Fig. 3  Contaminant-repelling properties of SNA-coated PET substrates. (a) (i) Schematic diagram and (ii) optical photograph illustrating water (transparent) and ethylene glycol (blue) droplets on PET substrates. The contact angle measurements were performed for (iii) water and (v) ethylene glycol droplets on a PFOTS-coated SNA layer fabricated on a PET surface plasma-treated for 30 min versus (iv) water and (vi) ethylene glycol droplets on a PFOTS-terminated PET surface without an SNA layer. (b) Changes in the contact angles of water and ethylene glycol droplets as a function of the plasma-treatment time of the PET substrates prior to SNA coating. The experimentally measured contact angles are compared to the values predicted by the Cassie–Baxter model. (c) Change in the droplet-SNA contact area with increasing plasma-treatment time from 30 to 60 min. The contact area was determined by using image processing software (right column) with plane FE-SEM images (left column) of SNAs fabricated on PET surfaces plasma-treated for 30 and 60 min. 
The morphological influence of the SNA on the wetting behaviors of water and EG was numerically determined by using the Cassie–Baxter model,41 which is a derivative form of the Wenzel model.42 It is well accepted that the Cassie–Baxter model, which is more suitable for heterogeneous surfaces, produces more accurate prediction of the contact angle of liquid droplets on textured surfaces in the presence of air pockets. The Cassie–Baxter model can be expressed by the formula,cosθ′ = −1 + f(1 + cosθ),where θ′ is the actual contact angle of a liquid droplet on a rough surface, θ is the Young contact angle on an ideal smooth surface, and f is the fraction of the contact area of the liquid over the total area of a given rough surface. For the f value approximated from the topmost surface area of silica nanoparticles by manipulating the plane-view of the FE-SEM images of the SNAs (Fig. 3c), a steady reduction in f from 0.44 to 0.24 was detected during the increase of the plasma-treatment time from 30 to 60 min. This can be attributed to the changes in the size and density of the silica nanoparticles with increases in the plasma-treatment time as a result of particle evolution. The transition from densely packed, small silica nanoparticles to sparsely packed, large silica nanoparticles promoted the reduction in the contact area of the silica nanoparticles with the liquid droplets. This result could be rationalized by the increase in the volume of air pockets at the liquid–solid interface. The Cassie–Baxter model based on the f values predicted very similar wetting behaviors of the SNAs for water and EG. The contact angles were predicted to be 132.4° and 120.7° for the droplets of water and EG, respectively, on SNAs at the f value of 0.44, whereas the predicted contact angles were further increased to 146° and 137.7° for the droplets of water and EG, respectively, at the f value of 0.24. Furthermore, notable quantitative differences were also observed between the experimental and numerical results (Fig. 3b). The quantitative differences can be ascribed to the unique globular shape of the silica nanoparticles. Although such a shape was not taken into account in the numerical calculation using the Cassie–Baxter model, the globular-shape of the silica nanoparticles undoubtedly contributed to a further reduction in the wetting area of the liquid droplets, and thus enhancement in the contact angles in reality, because significant changes in the wetting behavior of liquids have been previously reported for similar geometrical features such as spherical and T-shaped microscopic structures.43–45
The present study further illustrates that the structural features of the SNA required for contaminant-repelling and light-scattering properties are very similar, and thus, precisely controlling the structural features facilitated a highly efficient flexible transparent polymer substrate with both super-hydrophobic/super-oleophobic and light-scattering features. Since the objective of achieving enhanced scattering of incident light is to improve the light-harvesting performance of flexible optoelectronic devices, the light-scattering features were examined for a SNA-coated PET substrate with a transparent OMO electrode on the opposite side of the SNA, as illustrated in the photograph and schematic images (Fig. 4a and b). The transparent electrode coated on the PET substrate without an SNA exhibited an average total transmittance of 83.8% over the visible spectral range of 400–800 nm and a sheet resistance of 10.2 Ω sq−1 (Fig. 4c). The excellent optoelectronic properties of the transparent electrode are attributed to the completely continuous film morphology of Ag(O) at a relatively small thickness of 7 nm owing to oxygen doping (Fig. S4†). Recent studies have confirmed that a minimal dose of gas additives in coinage metals such as Ag and Cu led to a notable improvement in the film morphology by alleviating the three-dimensional growth behaviors caused by vigorous coalescences between the nanoscopic clusters during the very early growth stages.37,46–48 Researchers have ascribed the morphological improvement as a result of the reduction of the surface free energy of the metal clusters, and thus, a reduction in the driving force for cluster coalescence.49
 Fig. 4  Optical characteristics of PET substrates coated with a contaminant-repelling SNA layer and a transparent OMO electrode. (a) Optical photograph of a highly flexible, optically transparent, electrically conductive PET substrate (10 × 10 cm2) with SNA and OMO coatings. (b) Schematic illustration of the PET substrate with supplementary cross-sectional FE-SEM images of SNA and OMO coatings. (c) Variation in the total transmittance of the PET substrate with an OMO electrode as a function of the plasma-treatment time used for SNA growth. The PET substrate coated only by the OMO electrode without applying an SNA layer is shown as the “No SNA condition”. (d) Corresponding transmittance haze of the PET substrates plasma-treated for different periods before SNA growth. Inset shows the photographs of PET substrates after plasma-treatment for different times: no SNA, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 min from top left to bottom right. 
UV-vis measurements confirmed that the haze transmittance, a criterion of light-scattering, was strongly enhanced upon increasing the plasma-treatment time to more than 30 min (Fig. 4d and its inset). The haze transmittance eventually increased to 96% (at a wavelength of 500 nm) as the plasma-treatment time was increased to 60 min. The change in the haze transmittance is a result of a strong increase in the diffusive transmittance with increasing plasma-treatment time, due to Mie scattering (Fig. S5a†). However, the increase in the haze transmittance was also accompanied by a reduction in the total (specular + diffusive) transmittance of the PET substrates coated with SNA and OMO layers (Fig. 4c). The reduction became significant as the plasma-treatment time was increased. As a result, the average total transmittance eventually decreased to 77.3% with a prolonged plasma-treatment time of 60 min. Such undesirable reduction in the total transmittance was a result of the loss of incident light mainly due to uncontrollable increase in the reflection due to the SNA layer (Fig. S5b†); no reduction in the transmittance was caused by the PFOTS coating layer. Therefore, the optimization of the morphological structure of the SNA layer is extremely critical to improve the efficiencies of the OSCs by manipulating the deleterious trade-off between the total transmittance and light-scattering.
OSCs were fabricated on flexible PET substrates coated with SNA and OMO layers with the configuration of PFOTS-terminated SNA/PET/OMO/PTB7:PC71BM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag (Fig. 5a). The photoactive layer was composed of a mixture of PTB7 and PC71BM serving as an electron donor and an electron acceptor, respectively. A PEDOT:PSS layer was chosen as the hole-extraction material by matching its work function with that of PTB7 (Fig. 5b). To evaluate the influences of the morphology of SNAs on the performance of OSCs, the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics (Fig. 5c) and IPCE spectra (Fig. 5d) of OSCs were determined for PET substrates with SNAs that were prepared with PET substrates plasma-treated for different plasma-treatment times (10, 30, and 60 min) as well as for the PET substrate without an SNA layer. Table 1 lists the key performance parameters, short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF), as well as the corresponding PCE values that were determined from the J–V characteristics. The PET substrate employing the SNA layer fabricated with a plasma-treatment time of 30 min provided the highest PCE of 7.32% for an OSC, which indicated an improvement in PCE of 13.3% compared to that of the PET substrate without an SNA layer. This result may be ascribed to the enhanced light absorbance from a balance between increased light-scattering and reduced total transmittance, which was verified with the IPCE spectra and Jsc of OSCs. The high IPCE and Jsc value (15.93 mA cm−2) directly contributed to the highest photoconversion efficiency of the OSC using the optimal SNA layer (Fig. 5d). The light scattering by an SNA layer is readily expected to be a type of random scattering with large oblique-angle propagation of the scattered lights. Therefore, the increase of the light scattering by applying SNAs accompanies the enhancement of the propagation of the lights in the photoactive layer with highly tilted angles. However, the excessive increase in the large oblique-angle light scattering via a deviation from the optimal processing conditions, which occurred during the increase in the plasma-treatment time from 30 min to 60 min in this study, may reduce the chances of complete penetration of the lights into the photoactive layer as a result of a serious reduction of the penetration depth of the incident lights in the through-thickness of the photoactive layer. This may promote the preferential absorbance of photons at shallower depths of the photoactive layer, whereas the photoconversion efficiency of the overall photoactive layer is reduced by the limitation of photons available at the far beneath areas of the photoactive layer. A more detailed discussion of this subject has been presented in the literature, which provides experimental evidence of the change in the light absorption as a function of the thickness of the photoactive layer.4
 Fig. 5  A flexible OSC utilizing a multifunctional PET substrate coated with SNA and OMO layers. (a) Schematic of the structural architecture of an OSC fabricated on a PET substrate. (b) Energy diagram of the electronic structures of the OSC. (c) Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics and (d) incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the OSC as a function of the plasma-treatment time. The inset shows a photograph of the flexible OSC fabricated on the PET substrate. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance parameters of OSCs as a function of the plasma-treatment time used before coating SNA layers onto PET




Treatment time [min]

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]




0
15.05 ± 0.12
0.72 ± 0.01
59.81 ± 0.23
6.46 ± 0.03


10
15.71 ± 0.11
0.72 ± 0.02
62.28 ± 0.16
7.09 ± 0.02


30
15.93 ± 0.08
0.75 ± 0.01
61.07 ± 0.12
7.32 ± 0.10


60
14.87 ± 0.15
0.75 ± 0.01
55.17 ± 0.13
6.23 ± 0.16




Because the use of OSCs based on flexible polymer substrates is often employed in mechanically deformed geometries, the stability of the performance of OSCs employing the SNA and OMO layers was tested against mechanical deformation using irreversible bending tests (Fig. 6). The OSCs were exposed to compressive stresses induced by reducing the bending radius of the PET substrates. Changes in the performance parameters, including Voc, Jsc, and FF, normalized to their initial values were monitored as a function of the bending radius (Fig. 6a–c). The normalized parameters were maintained at reasonably good performance levels without any noticeable reduction, indicating negligible structural failure of the SNA and OMO layers coated on the PET substrates upon bending as low as 8 mm. Furthermore, the parameters still maintained more than 90% of their initial values until the OSCs were almost folded to a bending radius of 2 mm, in which case non-negligible structural delamination and cracks might have been developed in the SNA and OMO layers. However, it is worth noting that the SNA layer exhibited a poor abrasion resistance against any mechanical contact, whereas the OMO layer exhibited a strong abrasion resistance after a reciprocating rubbing test.
 Fig. 6  Changes in (a) Voc, (b) FF, and (c) Jsc of OSCs as a function of the bending radius. The OSCs were fabricated on PET substrates with different SNA layers. (d) Long-term stability of the OSCs evaluated by the change in their PCE values as a function of time. 
Furthermore, the chemical and structural stabilities against corrosion were tested in an ambient environment to verify whether the performance of OSCs could be limited by the long-term stabilities of SNA and OMO layers (Fig. 6d). There were no differences between the OSCs employing different SNAs, and all the samples maintained over 90% of their initial PCE values after 20 days. The stabilities of the OSCs are comparable to the previously reported stability of an OSC employing a conventional ITO single-layer electrode without an SNA layer.47
Conclusions
A simultaneous enhancement in the light scattering and contaminant-repelling features is in strong demand for polymer substrates applied in flexible OSCs to improve the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency and to prevent any potential reduction in the intensity of the incident light due to adsorption of contaminants, represented by water and oil droplets, on the surface of polymer substrates. In this study, we fabricated and optimized multifunctional SNA-coated PET substrates, facilitating enhancements in the light scattering and contaminant-repelling properties, and deposited a highly transparent, conductive OMO electrode on each side of their surface. The tasks were achieved by a sequence of simple plasma-assisted dry coating processes, polymer pretreatment and multistage direct deposition, without applying any conventional solution or nanopatterning methods. By simply controlling the plasma-treatment times of PET substrates prior to the deposition of the SNA layer, the geometrical features of the SNA layer were exquisitely controlled for simultaneously enhancing the light scattering and contaminant-repelling features. Such manipulation of the optical properties of PET substrates with the SNA layer led to a noticeable improvement (∼13%) in the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of OSCs fabricated on these PET substrates compared to that on a PET substrate without the SNA layer. This methodology provides a potential solution for improving and maintaining the performance of flexible OSCs against contaminants even after exposure to an ambient environment.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No. 20173030014370) and by the Fundamental Research Program of the Korea Institute of Materials Science.
Notes and references
Q. D. Ou, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600123 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dou, J. You, Z. Hong, Z. Xu, G. Li, R. A. Street and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6642–6671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qiao, W. Huang, Y. Liu, X. Li, L. Chen and J. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10353–10380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, W. Wang, S. M. Kim, T. S. Bae, S. Lee, D. Kim, G. H. Lee, H.-S. Lee and M. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 932–940 CAS .
Q. Xu, Q. Zhao, X. Zhu, L. Cheng, S. Bai, Z. Wang, L. Meng and Y. Qin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17747–17751 RSC .
K. Fukuda, S. Nishizawa and S. Shiratori, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 103516 CrossRef .
H. Khonkar, A. Alyahya, M. Aljuwaied, M. Halawani, A. Al Saferan, F. Al-Khaldi, F. Alhadlaq and B. A. Wacaser, Sol. Energy, 2014, 110, 268–275 CrossRef .
F. A. Mejia and J. Kleissl, Sol. Energy, 2013, 95, 357–363 CrossRef .
S. Mekhilef, R. Saidur and M. Kamali Sarvestani, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 2920–2925 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, M. Paliy, X. Wang, B. Kobe, W. M. Lau and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10988–10992 CAS .
M. Im, H. Im, J. H. Lee, J. B. Yoon and Y. K. Choi, Soft Matter, 2016, 6, 1401–1404 RSC .
P. Mazumder, Y. Jiang, D. Baker, A. Carrilero, D. Tulli, D. Infante, A. T. Hunt and V. Pruneri, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4677–4681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Golovin, D. H. Lee, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13007–13011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. H. Lee and D. G. Choi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8070–8075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Gwon, Y. Park, C. W. Moon, S. Nahm, S.-J. Yoon, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 670–678 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mie, Ann. Phys., 1908, 25, 377–445 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Andoshe, S. Choi, Y.-S. Shim, S. H. Lee, Y. Kim, C. W. Moon, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, T. Kim, H. K. Park, M. G. Lee, J.-M. Jeon, K. T. Nam, M. Kim, J. K. Kim, J. Oh and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9477–9485 CAS .
H. J. Choi, S. Y. Choo, J. H. Shin, K. I. Kim and H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24354–24359 CAS .
K. Ellinas, S. P. Pujari, D. A. Dragatogiannis, C. A. Charitidis, A. Tserepi, H. Zulhof and E. Gogolides, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6510–6524 CAS .
K. Ellinas, M. Chatzipetrou, I. Zergioti, A. Tserepi and E. Gogolides, Adv. Mater., 2015, 300, 2231–2235 CrossRef PubMed .
R. T. R. Kumar, K. B. Mogensen and P. Bøggild, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2936–2940 CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhao, H. Wang, W. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 4610–4613 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and B. Bhushan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 743–755 CAS .
C. T. Hsieh, F. L. Wu and W. Y. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Raut, V. A. Ganesh, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3779–3804 CAS .
J. Ham, W. J. Dong, G. H. Jung and J. L. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5990–5997 CAS .
K. Nakata, M. Sakai, T. Ochiai, T. Murakami, K. Takagi and A. Fujishima, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3275–3278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Tsui, Q. Lin, H. Chou, Q. Zhang, H. Fu, P. Qi and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2805–2811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, K. H. Tsui, Q. Zhang, J. He, Y. Yao, D. Li and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10287–10295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Leem, B. Dudem and J. S. Yu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 79755–79762 RSC .
J. W. Leem, M. K. Choi, B. Dudem and J. S. Yu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55159–55166 RSC .
S. M. Kang, N. Ahn, J. W. Lee, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20017–20021 CAS .
S. Guldin, P. Kohn, M. Stefik, J. Song, G. Divitini, F. Ecarla, C. Ducati, U. Wiesner and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5329–5335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Choi and S. Y. Huh, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, T. S. Bae, J. D. Kwon, S. H. Lee and G. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7221–7230 RSC .
J. Yun, S. Lee, T. S. Bae, Y. Yun, S. Lee, J. D. Kwon and G. H. Lee, Plasma Processes Polym., 2011, 8, 815–831 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, M. Song, T. S. Bae, Y. H. Park, Y. C. Kang, S. G. Lee, S. Y. Kim, D. G. Kim, S. Lee, G. Min, G. H. Lee, J. W. Kang and J. Yun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1551–1561 CrossRef CAS .
F. Palumbo, R. D. Mundo, D. Cappelluti and R. d'Agostino, Plasma Processes Polym., 2011, 8, 118–126 CAS .
V. Zaporojtchenko, J. Zekonyte and F. Faupel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 265, 139–145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Park, H. Im, M. S. Im and Y. K. Choi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 633–636 RSC .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kang, C. Lee, H. N. Kim, B. J. Lee, J. E. Lee, M. K. Kwak and K. Y. Suh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5756–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu and Y. Suzuki, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 156, 401–409 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tuteja, W. Choi, M. Ma, J. M. Mabry, S. A. Mazzella, G. C. Rutledge, G. H. Mckinley and R. E. Cohen, Science, 2007, 318, 1618–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, W. Wang, T. S. Bae, Y. H. Park, Y.-C. Kang, D.-H. Kim, S. Lee, G.-H. Lee, M. Song and J.-W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9933–9941 CAS .
G. Zhao, W. Wang, T.-S. Bae, S.-G. Lee, C. W. Mun, S. Lee, H. Yu, G.-H. Lee, M. Song and J. Yun, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, S. M. Kim, S.-G. Lee, T.-S. Bae, C. W. Mun, S. Lee, H. Yu, G.-H. Lee, H.-S. Lee, M. Song and J. Yun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4180–4191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606641 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FE-SEM images of polymer protrusions and Ag films, sliding angles of water and ethylene glycol on PFOTS-coated SNA layers, photographs and contact angles of hexadecane droplets on PFOTS-coated SNA layers, and transmittance and reflectance spectra of PET substrates with SNA and OMO layers. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta09351a‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the sequential fabrication of an SNA layer on a PET surface for imparting strong contaminant-repelling and light-harvesting features to it. The fabrication process involved (a) the introduction of a pristine PET substrate into a PECVD system, (b) formation of polymer protrusions by exposing the PET surface to Ar plasma irradiation, (c) subsequent deposition of an SNA layer on polymer protrusions by the PECVD process, and (d) termination of the SNA-coated PET surface with a monolayer of PFOTS to enhance the hydrophobicity and oleophobicity of the substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  Controlling the morphological features of SNAs. Plane (a, c, e) and cross-sectional (b, d, f) FE-SEM images of SNAs fabricated on PET substrates plasma-treated for different periods: (a and b) 10 min, (c and d) 30 min, and (e and f) 60 min. The nominal deposition thickness of the SNA layer was fixed at 240 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Contaminant-repelling properties of SNA-coated PET substrates. (a) (i) Schematic diagram and (ii) optical photograph illustrating water (transparent) and ethylene glycol (blue) droplets on PET substrates. The contact angle measurements were performed for (iii) water and (v) ethylene glycol droplets on a PFOTS-coated SNA layer fabricated on a PET surface plasma-treated for 30 min versus (iv) water and (vi) ethylene glycol droplets on a PFOTS-terminated PET surface without an SNA layer. (b) Changes in the contact angles of water and ethylene glycol droplets as a function of the plasma-treatment time of the PET substrates prior to SNA coating. The experimentally measured contact angles are compared to the values predicted by the Cassie–Baxter model. (c) Change in the droplet-SNA contact area with increasing plasma-treatment time from 30 to 60 min. The contact area was determined by using image processing software (right column) with plane FE-SEM images (left column) of SNAs fabricated on PET surfaces plasma-treated for 30 and 60 min.	 
cosθ′ = −1 + f(1 + cosθ),

 	Fig. 4  Optical characteristics of PET substrates coated with a contaminant-repelling SNA layer and a transparent OMO electrode. (a) Optical photograph of a highly flexible, optically transparent, electrically conductive PET substrate (10 × 10 cm2) with SNA and OMO coatings. (b) Schematic illustration of the PET substrate with supplementary cross-sectional FE-SEM images of SNA and OMO coatings. (c) Variation in the total transmittance of the PET substrate with an OMO electrode as a function of the plasma-treatment time used for SNA growth. The PET substrate coated only by the OMO electrode without applying an SNA layer is shown as the “No SNA condition”. (d) Corresponding transmittance haze of the PET substrates plasma-treated for different periods before SNA growth. Inset shows the photographs of PET substrates after plasma-treatment for different times: no SNA, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 min from top left to bottom right.	 

 	Fig. 5  A flexible OSC utilizing a multifunctional PET substrate coated with SNA and OMO layers. (a) Schematic of the structural architecture of an OSC fabricated on a PET substrate. (b) Energy diagram of the electronic structures of the OSC. (c) Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics and (d) incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the OSC as a function of the plasma-treatment time. The inset shows a photograph of the flexible OSC fabricated on the PET substrate.	 

0	15.05 ± 0.12	0.72 ± 0.01	59.81 ± 0.23	6.46 ± 0.03
10	15.71 ± 0.11	0.72 ± 0.02	62.28 ± 0.16	7.09 ± 0.02
30	15.93 ± 0.08	0.75 ± 0.01	61.07 ± 0.12	7.32 ± 0.10
60	14.87 ± 0.15	0.75 ± 0.01	55.17 ± 0.13	6.23 ± 0.16

 	Fig. 6  Changes in (a) Voc, (b) FF, and (c) Jsc of OSCs as a function of the bending radius. The OSCs were fabricated on PET substrates with different SNA layers. (d) Long-term stability of the OSCs evaluated by the change in their PCE values as a function of time.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FE-SEM images of polymer protrusions and Ag films, sliding angles of water and ethylene glycol on PFOTS-coated SNA layers, photographs and contact angles of hexadecane droplets on PFOTS-coated SNA layers, and transmittance and reflectance spectra of PET substrates with SNA and OMO layers. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta09351a
‡ These authors equally contributed to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
