Recent progress on van der Waals heterojunctions applied in photocatalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA00500J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA00500J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7604-7625Recent progress on van der Waals heterojunctions applied in photocatalysis

        
          
            Xin 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei-guo 
            Pan
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Rui-tang 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xing 
            Hu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhe-xu 
            Bi
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Juan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a
aCollege of Energy Source and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai 200090, People's Republic of China. E-mail: pweiguo@163.com; grta@zju.edu.cn
bShanghai Engineering Research Center of Power Generation Environment Protection, Shanghai 200090, People's Republic of China
Received 
      19th January 2022
    , Accepted 11th March 2022First published on 16th March 2022AbstractIn recent years, heterojunction materials bonded by interlayer van der Waals forces have grown into a very large family. These van der Waals heterostructures have promising applications in photocatalysis due to their suitable energy band structures and optical properties. In this paper, the latest research progress on van der Waals heterojunction materials in photocatalytic systems is reviewed, including the photocatalytic theories and the basic principles of heterojunctions in photocatalysis. The construction, design, and photocatalytic properties and applications of van der Waals heterostructures are described in detail. The prospects and challenges of van der Waals heterojunctions in photocatalytic applications in the future are also presented. This review is intended to offer enlightening guidance for the efficient use of solar energy systems, efficient photocatalysis and early industrialization in the future.Xin ChenXin Chen obtained her B.S. degree from Inner Mongolia Agricultural University in 2020, and now she is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. Her current research interests focus on photocatalytic technology in CO2 reduction.Wei-guo PanProf. Wei-guo Pan earned his PhD in 1997 from Zhejiang University, he is currently a group leader at school of energy and mechanical engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power. His current research interests include clean and efficient utilization of energy and photocatalytic process for energy conversion and environmental protection.Rui-tang GuoRui-tang Guo received his B.S., and PhD from Zhejiang University. In 2015, he worked as a professor of energy science in Shanghai University of Electric Power. His current research interest focuses on the preparation and performance study of SCR catalysts and photocatalysts used in CO2 reduction, H2 evolution and degradation of organic pollutants.Xing HuXing Hu received her B.S. degree from Southwest Petroleum University in 2019, and now she is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. Her current research interests focus on photocatalytic CO2 reduction.Zhe-xu BiZhe-xu Bi received his B.S. degree from Shenyang Institute of Engineering in 2020, and now he is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. His current research interests focus on photocatalytic reduction of CO2.Juan WangJuan Wang received her B.S. degree from Nanjing Institute of Technology in 2020, and now she is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. Her current research interests focus on photocatalytic degradation.
1 Introduction
Energy consumption and environmental pollution are becoming more and more prominent, and the realization of sustainable development is becoming a common choice for the development of countries all over the world.1,2 The semiconductor photocatalysis technology based on the chemical conversion and storage of solar energy provides us with a relatively ideal new idea to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, energy utilization and pollution control.3 Therefore, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, H2O decomposition and pollutant degradation reductions have received continuous attention and extensive research. To date, although researchers have done a great deal of work in the preparation of different photocatalysts, there are still some disadvantages, such as the speedy recombination of charges and the limited absorption of sunlight, which hinder the process of industrialization. To meet the requirements of new energy development and environmental treatment in the future, it is still necessary to design a new type of photocatalyst system to improve the efficiency of photocatalysis. In the past few decades, researchers have adopted a variety of strategies to develop new photocatalysts to improve the efficiency of photocatalysis. For example, higher photocatalytic efficiency can be achieved through appropriate texture design, doping techniques4,5 and modification by combining semiconductors with metals,6,7 nonmetals,8,9 or other semiconductors to form heterojunction materials.10–13 Among them, the construction of semiconductor heterostructures has attracted much attention because of their excellent effects in improving photocatalytic activity. In recent decades, numerous important achievements have been made in the research of semiconductor heterojunction photocatalysts. The discovery of van der Waals heterojunctions (vdWHs) has led to an explosion of research. It is worth mentioning that vdWHs have made many important breakthroughs in recent years.
In 2004, when physicists Geim and Novoselov stripped graphene from graphite for the first time using “Tape” mechanical stripping, the whole material science community was deeply shocked.14 This kind of material, which has been predicted by theorists to be impossible, can exist stably and also possesses extremely high mechanical strength and electrical conductivity. As such, it has been seen for the first time that a material as thick as a single atom can be so tough that it can be dangled in place without breaking. Over the past decade, along this path, people have successfully found atomically thick metals, semiconductors, insulators and so on.15–18 Since then, people can break through the serious restrictions on the types of materials by traditional methods such as directional doping and single-crystal epitaxy. By simply stacking these materials like building walls, a large number of vdWHs with different functions can be easily obtained.
The discovery of vdWHs has enriched the variety of materials and also affords a novel method for adjusting the properties of materials. In particular, various vdWHs based on MoS2,19 MoSe2,20 g-C3N4 (ref. 21) and MoTe2 (ref. 22) materials have been successfully designed for applications in field-effect transistors (FETs),23,24 solar cells,25,26 photodetectors27,28 and other optoelectronic devices.29 vdWHs have also demonstrated unprecedented performance and ability in the field of photocatalysis, and have broad application prospects. At present, several articles on the research progress of vdWHs have been published. Shim et al.30 discussed the latest developments of electronic and optoelectronic devices based on vdWHs. Hu et al.31 introduced the transfer technique for the formation of vdW heterostructures and the structural, electrical and optical properties of two-dimensional vdWHs studied by density functional theory calculations. Cao et al.32 reviewed the advanced machining technologies, from the stripping and stacking of vdWHs, to mechanical characterization techniques, and analyzed the principles, advantages and disadvantages of these methods in detail.
Various vdWHs have been successfully synthesized and used in the photocatalytic process.33–35 However, few reviews have summarized these applications. Therefore, this review has been prepared to facilitate the future material design of photocatalysts with high efficiency. Herein, the construction and classification of van der Waals (vdW) heterojunction structures are explored (Section 2), the common synthesis techniques, characterization methods and theoretical calculation methods used to explore vdW heterojunction structures are introduced, and the excellent characteristics of vdWHs are discussed (Section 3). Then, we focus on the research progress and related mechanisms of photocatalytic applications based on vdWHs (Section 4). Finally, the future challenges and development prospects of vdWHs in the photocatalytic field are discussed.
2 Theoretical basis and establishment of vdWHs
2.1 The theory of photocatalysis and the basic principles of photocatalytic heterojunction
Since the discovery of photocatalytic technology based on semiconductor materials in the last century, it has been used as a popular solution to energy depletion and environmental pollution,36–38 and it is also an ideal pathway for helping to achieve carbon-peak and carbon-neutralization targets in the future. Photocatalytic technology can utilize solar energy to split water into green energy, namely hydrogen and oxygen.39 Carbon dioxide can be reduced to useable organic matter by photocatalytic technology, which can alleviate or partially solve the energy crisis.40 This technology can also be used to reduce heavy metal ions, degrade organic pollutants, and so on.41,42 It can also protect soil and water sources, and effectively improve our environment. Generally speaking, the photocatalytic process can be simplified into the following steps. (1) The photocatalyst absorbs solar energy under light irradiation and converts the solar energy into energy stored in the excitons through the excitation of electron–hole pairs. When the incident light energy (hv) is not less than the forbidden band width (Eg), the electrons (e−) in the valence band absorption incoming photons transition to the conduction band, leaving the corresponding holes (h+) on the valence band. (2) The generated e− and h+ migrate to the surface of the semiconductor, respectively, under the action of the electric field or diffusion. Meanwhile, some photogenerated e− and h+ recombine during the migration process. (3) The photocatalyst adsorbs the reactants on its surface. (4) The reductive e− and oxidizing h+ react with the materials adsorbed on the semiconductor surface, and the products are desorbed from the surface of photocatalysts. For example, in the process of the photocatalytic decomposition of water, the generated holes are trapped by H2O at the oxidation site to produce H+ and O2, and H+, then combine with an electron to form H2. In the process of CO2 photoreduction, after the photogenerated electrons and holes migrate to the surface, the holes are trapped by H2O to produce H+ and O2. H+ reacts with CO2 in the presence of electrons to form CO, CH4, HCOOH, CH3OH or other hydrocarbons. In the process of pollutant photodegradation, the electrons and holes produced may be directly captured and decomposed by organic pollutants. They may also be captured separately by dissolved oxygen and water and subsequently, form reactive oxygen species that could rapidly degrade various pollutants. Fig. 1 shows the basic principle of the photocatalytic reaction.43
 Fig. 1  Photocatalytic reaction mechanism: (a) water splitting, (b) CO2 conversion, and (c) pollution degradation. Reproduced from ref. 43. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Unfortunately, the second step encounters a competitive process, which seriously affects the efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction. Photogenerated electrons with strong reduction ability and photogenerated holes with strong oxidation ability can migrate to different positions on the surface of semiconductors and participate in redox reactions with the substances adsorbed on the surface. At the same time, photogenerated electrons and holes can also disappear in pairs at impurities or defects in the semiconductors, reducing the carrier lifetime. However, most of them tend to recombine and dissipate as light or heat, rather than migrate to the surface and participate in the redox reaction. The recombination of electron–hole pairs is the main barrier to the enhancement of photocatalytic activity, so in order to obtain higher photocatalytic performance, electron–hole pairs should be effectively separated and the recombination should be suppressed by rapid surface/interface charge transfer. The usual approach is to construct heterojunction structures.44
Semiconductor heterostructures are generally composed of two or more kinds of semiconductor materials. Due to the discrepancy of the Fermi level potential, when two kinds of semiconductor materials with diverse ingredients are in contact, the Fermi levels will move towards each other and eventually settle in the same position. At the same time, the exchange of electrons and holes will occur at the two-phase interface, forming a space-charge region, namely the depletion layer and enrichment layer. Photogenerated electrons and holes, generated by incident light excitation in semiconductor heterojunction materials, can separate quickly and efficiently, assisted by an electric field that forms in a region of space charge, to realize the objective of enhancing the photocatalytic performance of photocatalytic materials.45 This effectively improves the shortcomings of a semiconductor photocatalyst, such as narrow photoresponse range, low quantum efficiency and too few active centers.46–48 Therefore, the construction of heterojunction structures is an excellent strategy for improving the efficiency of photocatalysis.
2.2 The construction of vdWHs
Since 2004 when Geim and Novoselov and their collaborators successfully used tape, which is now known as micromechanical stripping, to remove graphene from graphite, a variety of theoretical and applied studies have been carried out on graphene.14 Its unique physical, electronic, optical and chemical properties have led to its extensive research and application in the fields of mobile equipment, aerospace and new energy batteries and other fields.49–51 Furthermore, graphene is considered as one of the key components of many vdWHs due to its high carrier mobility of 2 × 105 cm V−1 s−1, the good thermal conductivity of 5.5 × 103 W m−1 K−1 and adjustable work function.52,53
Nowadays, other graphene-like materials have also been developed, such as molybdenum disulfide (MoS2),54,55 molybdenum diselenide (MoSe2),56,57 tin selenide (SnSe),58–60 bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3),61 tungsten diselenide (WSe2),62 black phosphene (BP)63,64 and hexagonal boron nitride (HBN).65 The atoms in each layer (in-plane) of these vdW materials are held together by covalent bonds, while the atomic layers (out-of-plane) without hanging bonds are held together by weak vdW interactions. Several vdW materials are shown (Fig. 2b–f)66 that have similar structures to those of graphene but different compositions (Fig. 2a),66 thus displaying a wealth of properties.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of prototypical vdW materials (a) graphene, (b) HBN, (c) SnSe, (d) black phosphorous, (e) MoS2, (f) Bi2Te3. Reproduced from ref. 66. Copyright 2017 Wiley. 
Although vdW materials have many outstanding advantages, they have some defects when used alone, for example, the famous zero band gap problem of graphene; hexagonal boron nitride has a large band gap of 5.8 eV; monolayer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has a suitable band gap but its carrier mobility is lower than that of graphene at room temperature; two-dimensional phosphene has a high carrier mobility but is easily degraded in oxygen-containing and humid environments.67 These shortcomings of vdW materials limit their applications in photocatalysis. Therefore, it is very important to find a solution, and the construction of heterojunction is a promising solution. The vdW material library (Fig. 3)68 also provides new ideas for designing new heterostructures through unique band gap combinations.
 Fig. 3  Calculated band alignments for vdW materials. Reproduced from ref. 68. Copyright 2016 AIP. 
2.3 Advantages of vdWHs
Traditionally, heterojunctions can be obtained by doping homogenous materials, such as p–n junctions of semiconductors, and epitaxial growth on lattice-matched substrates. However, the restrictions on the heterojunction materials obtained by these traditional methods are really serious, and severe dislocations and defects will be formed at the interface if it is careless, and atomic penetration is inevitable, thus affecting the quality of the heterojunctions. However, there is no such problem with vdW materials. The use of van der Waals forces allows the bond-free strategy to integrate a variety of materials, including zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, one-dimensional (1D) nanowires, two-dimensional (2D) nanowires and three-dimensional (3D) bulk materials, beyond the scope of conventional heterostructures, creating a general-purpose artificial vdW heterostructure that can modulate the chemical composition and electronic structure almost arbitrarily through design. Several vdW integration structure diagrams are shown in Fig. 4.69 Compared with traditional semiconductor heterostructures, vdWHs do not depend on chemical bonds and are not limited by the lattice compatibility of the materials. VdWHs are physically assembled by relatively weak van der Waals interaction forces.70 The interaction strength is generally of the order of 0.1–10 kJ mol−1, which is 2–3 orders of magnitude less than that of ionic or covalent bonds (about 100–1000 kJ mol−1).69 The heterostructure based on vdW material has the unique advantages of tight interface and suitable energy band structure, which can realize interlayer interface charge transfer and separation under the action of vdW forces. The heterostructure can be formed on the unbonded surface, and because of the excellent optical, electrical, thermal and magnetic effects of vdWHs formed by the stacking of vdW materials, vdWHs can be widely applied in the fields of electronics, optoelectronic devices, semiconductors, photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.71–74Table 1 summarizes and compares some characteristics of vdWHs and traditional heterojunctions. The versatility of different material stacks and relatively weak vdW interactions help us to explore more inherent physical properties of vdWHs systems and develop new materials.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of vdW integration beyond materials. Reproduced from ref. 69. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
Table 1 The advantages of the vdW structure over conventional heterostructures




Characteristic
Traditional heterojunction
Photocatalytic application
Ref.




Size
Wafer-scale
μm-cm level

75 and 76


Thickness
Micron order
Atomic-scale


Structure
Body/body
Layer/layer

77



Integration dimension
Monotonous and restricted
1D/1D, 0D/2D, 1D/2D, 2D/2D, 2D/3D and 3D–3D

69



Quality
Interfacial stress, defects and atomic penetration are unavoidable
The interface structure tends to be perfect

78



Interfacial contact
Dangling-bond, limited by the type of material
vdW interaction, no covalent bond between layers, not limited by lattice matching and material type

79



Interaction
Strong
Weak

80



Band structure
Unchanged
Tunable

81





2.4 Classification of vdWHs
The semiconductor heterojunction structure promotes the separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs through the difference of space potentials formed by each other, thus effectively improving the shortcomings of a single semiconductor photocatalyst, such as narrow photoresponse range, low carrier mobility, and so on.82–84 Therefore, the construction of vdW heterojunction catalysts has aroused great research interest. These vdWHs can be classified according to their band arrangement: straddling gap (type-I), staggered gap (type-II) and fracture gap (type-III) (Fig. 5),85 of which type-II is the most suitable for photocatalysis. In type-I heterojunctions, the band gap of one semiconductor is completely contained in the band gap of another semiconductor (Fig. 5a).85 Under sunlight, photoinduced electrons and holes can be transferred from the CB of semiconductor B to A and the VB of semiconductor B to A. Since both electrons and holes accumulate on the same semiconductor A, the recombination rates of the carriers are still not restrained, which does not dramatically boost the performance of the photocatalytic system. In type II heterojunctions, the band gap of one semiconductor partially overlaps the band gap of another semiconductor (Fig. 5b).85 Different from the first kind of heterojunctions, the formation of the type-II heterojunctions will boost the rational distribution of electron holes in A and B. In addition, the potential difference between A and B will generate the establishment of an electric field at the interface, which will become the driving force for the valid separation of photocarriers, ultimately resulting in the transfer of electrons from B to A, while the holes formed on A are transferred to B. Therefore, the type-II heterojunction is a valid strategy for improving the performance of composite catalysts. In type-III heterojunctions, because the band gaps do not overlap and the electron–hole pairs do not separate, such heterojunctions are rarely reported (Fig. 5c).85
 Fig. 5  The positions of the conduction band and valence band of (a) type-I, (b) type-II, (c) type-III vdWHs. (d) A schematic illustration of the charge transfer in Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism systems. Reproduced from ref. 85. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Researchers also developed a Z-type vdWH photocatalytic reaction system. The energy band structure of the Z-type heterojunction greatly resembles that of the type II heterojunction but the direction of charge transfer is opposite (Fig. 5d).85 Under the irradiation of sunlight, the electrons in the CB of semiconductor B recombine with the holes in the VB of semiconductor A, while the strong oxidizing holes in the VB of semiconductor B and the strong reducing electrons in the CB of semiconductor A participate in the redox reaction.86 The results indicate that the Z-type heterojunction can ameliorate the efficiency of charge separation and also retains a strong redox ability.
In 2019, a new notion for S-scheme heterojunction was proposed.87 Its full name is the step-scheme heterojunction. This heterojunction is constructed by the staggered configuration of the reduced semiconductor photocatalyst with a smaller work function and higher Fermi energy level, and the oxidized semiconductor photocatalyst with a larger work function and lower Fermi energy level, which can effectively realize the separation of electron–hole pairs with strong redox ability.88 From the structural diagram (Fig. 6),89 it is similar to the type-II heterojunction. However, in the typical type-II heterojunction, the photogenerated electrons and holes accumulate in the conductive and valence bands of PR and OP, respectively, resulting in the weakening of redox ability. In the S-scheme heterojunction, the effective electrons and holes are preserved, and the meaningless photogenerated carriers are reassembled. The schematic diagram of electron transfer is similar to the steps, hence the name.
 Fig. 6  Band structure configuration and charge-transfer route of (a) type-II heterojunction and (b) S-scheme heterojunction. Reproduced from ref. 89. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Generally speaking, at present, the designs and applications of the type-II and Z-type vdWHs in photocatalytic systems are quite extensive. Some examples are given in Table 2.
Table 2 Different types of typical vdWH photocatalysts




Photocatalysts
Classification type
Photocatalytic application
Photocatalytic activity
Ref.




g-C3N4 (NH)/COF
S-scheme
CO2 reduction
The photocatalytic CO evolution rate for the heterojunction shows 45 and 15 times higher than that of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/COF, respectively

90



TiO2/C3N4
S-scheme
CO2 reduction
The yield of CO of the optimized TiO2/C3N4 composite increased to 3.14 μmol g−1 h−1, which was more than twice that of TiO2 and C3N4. CH4 production also drastically increased

91



CuNP/rGO
Type-II
CO2 reduction
—

92



BiO2−x/BiOCl
Type-I
Cr(VI) reduction and rhodamine B (RhB) degradation
The BiO2−x/BiOCl porous nanosheets exhibited the superior removal efficiency of toxic Cr(VI) (87%) within 120 min when employing the LED as a simulated solar light resource

93



g-C3N4/BiLuWO6
Z-scheme
Rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue (MB) degradation and hydrogen production
Degradation efficiencies of rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue (MB) were 93 and 85% under mercury lamp irradiation, respectively. The values were higher than 50 and 64% for g-C3N4 as well as 14 and 8% for BiLuWO6. The H2 evolution rate of the heterojunction was 289.08 μmol g−1 h−1 using xenon lamp irradiation, which was higher than 161.08 μmol g−1 h−1 of g-C3N4 and 13.13 μmol g−1 h−1 of BiLuWO6

94



MoS2/ZnS
Type-I
OTC degradation
The prepared using 0.25 g of the zinc acetate precursor (denoted MoS2/ZnS-0.25) showed the highest photocatalytic activity: 81% OTC degradation in 180 min

95



TNF/SCN TNS/SCN TNTs/SCN
S-scheme
Tetracycline hydrochloride (TC-HCl) degradation
The photoactivity of TNF/SCN with a suitable face–face contact represented a rate constant as high as 0.1642 min−1, which was 1.58 and 2.65 times of what on TNS/SCN (0.1036 min−1) and TNTs/SCN (0.0619 min−1), respectively

96



WO3H2O/g-C3N4
Z-scheme
Hydrogen production
Due to the suitable band edge potentials for H2, O2 evolution, and remarkable charge transfer, the direct WO3H2O/g-C3N4 Z-scheme system exhibited prominent photocatalytic activity for both H2 and O2 production under visible-light illumination, the H2, O2 production rate up to 482 and 232 μmol g−1 h−1 respectively

97



RP/CN
Type-II
Hydrogen production
The hydrogen production activity was 367.0 μmol g−1 h−1 under full arc illustration and 239.8 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation

98



MoTe2/XS2 (X = Hf, Sn, Zr)
Z-scheme
Hydrogen production
—

34



MoO3−xSx/MoS2
Type-II
Hydrogen production
—

99



MoXY/g-C3N4
Type-I
Hydrogen production
The maximum solar-to-hydrogen efficiency using the entire solar spectrum reached up to 16.5% in these heterostructures

100



g-C3N4/InSe
Type-II
Hydrogen production
—

101



MoS2/WSe2
Type-II
Hydrogen production
—

102





3 The design of vdWHs
3.1 Preparation, characterization and calculation of vdWHs
At present, some progress has been made in the preparation strategy and exploration of the physical properties of vdWHs of vdW materials. Many methods have been designed to prepare vdWHs, such as chemical vapor deposition growth (CVD),103,104 physical vapor deposition/transport growth (PVD),105,106 mechanical exfoliation and directional transfer.107,108 For electronics, optoelectronic devices and other applications, high-quality plates are required. Therefore, top-down mechanical stripping and bottom-up chemical vapor deposition (CVD) are usually used for the preparation of vdWHs.30 However, for catalysis, defects are often beneficial and a large number of defects are required. The method for synthesizing vdWHs in photocatalysis is relatively simple. Generally, the heterostructure is synthesized by the hydrothermal method,109 mechanical mixing method,98 interface self-assembly method,91 solvothermal method,110 microwave synthesis method,111 liquid-phase stripping method,112 solid-phase synthesis method,113 and so on (Fig. 7).91,98,112,114,115
 Fig. 7  Several preparation methods of vdWH photocatalysts. (a) The interface self-assembly method. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2019 MDPI. (b) Ultrasonic method. Reproduced from ref. 114. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) The mechanical mixing method. Reproduced from ref. 98. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) The liquid phase stripping method. Reproduced from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 MDPI. (e) The electrochemical-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation method. Reproduced from ref. 112. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Since the vdW materials obtained by different preparation methods may have disparate architectural features, such as diverse physical, chemical, electronic and surface properties, it is important to characterize the materials in-depth. The determination of the geometrical appearance, accurate size of the catalyst, the phase composition and chemical characteristics, crystal phase and the situation of doping, defects, fluorescence lifetime, oxygen vacancy, electronic, optical absorption properties, and strain state and surface chemical states helps with exploring and understanding the relationship between the structural characteristics and properties of the prepared vdWHs. Therefore, a series of advanced techniques have been used to characterize these materials, such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Raman spectra, ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-vis), photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL), and so on.
Xu et al.116 successfully constructed a vdW heterostructure between layered Bi3O4Cl and g-C3N4 for CO2 photoreduction. Through some characterization methods, they had an in-depth understanding of the prepared catalysts. To analyze the phase component of the composites, XRD analysis was carried out (Fig. 8a).116 All the diffraction peaks could be commendably marked to the Bi3O4Cl monoclinic system, but the diffraction peaks of g-C3N4 could not be viewed. This might be a reflection of the lattice distortion caused by macroscopic residual stress, which might cause lattice anisotropic contraction and shift of diffraction peaks. This indicated that the vanishing of the g-C3N4 peak in the vdW heterojunction may be on account of the formation of vdWHs between Bi3O4Cl and g-C3N4. The vdW force might induce the shift of the g-C3N4 peak and overlap with the Bi3O4Cl peak.110 XPS can be used to analyze the surface chemical state and chemical composition of materials. Through observation and analysis, it could be seen that the complex principally consisted of Bi, O and Cl elements, accompanied by weak peaks of C and N elements (Fig. 8b).116 At the same time, no other impurity peaks were found in the XPS spectra, showing that the synthesis of the heterojunction was relatively pure. Furthermore, no chemical bond between g-C3N4 and Bi3O4Cl was viewed from the XPS spectra of the elements (no picture is shown here), indicating that the two-dimensional Bi3O4Cl and g-C3N4 nanowires were connected by vdW forces. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was used to study the chemical bond characteristics of the materials, which further gave the proof for the vdW force formation (Fig. 8c).116 Compared with pure Bi3O4Cl and g-C3N4, the peak shape and position of the compounds in the XPS and FT-IR spectra were almost unchanged. This showed that Bi3O4Cl and g-C3N4 maintained a complete and independent molecular structure after the formation of the heterojunction, which proved the existence of the vdW heterojunction in Bi3O4Cl/20% g-C3N4. Information on the phase structure of the material was obtained by TEM. This image confirmed the implementation of the vdW heterostructure in close contact between g-C3N4 and Bi3O4Cl (Fig. 8d).116 The high efficiency and wide-spectrum light absorption performance of semiconductor photocatalytic materials was a key condition to ensure photocatalytic activity. The optical absorption properties and optical absorption range of the photocatalytic materials could be obtained by UV-vis diffuse reflection spectra. The optical absorption ranges of Bi3O4Cl, g-C3N4 and the complex were obtained by testing (Fig. 8e).116 After analysis, the effect of the vdW heterojunction on the light absorption of the photocatalyst was determined. In addition, the slope of the Mott–Schottky diagram reflected the donor density of n-type semiconductors (Fig. 8f).116 The smaller slope of the original g-C3N4 corresponded to a higher donor density, manifesting that it had a direction to migrate electrons to Bi3O4Cl. To verify the dissociation characteristics of photogenerated electrons and holes, a series of tests were carried out. In the photocurrent-time measurement (Fig. 8g),116 the photocurrent response intensity of Bi3O4Cl/20% g-C3N4 was much higher than that of Bi3O4Cl and g-C3N4, which indicated that the photoelectron–hole pair separation efficiency was higher after constructing the vdW heterojunction.117 Meanwhile, Bi3O4Cl/20% g-C3N4 showed a smaller arc radius on the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) Nyquist diagram (Fig. 8h).116 The results showed that the composite materials had lower electron transfer resistance so that the photogenerated carriers could transfer to the surface reaction center more quickly and participate in the reaction.118 In PL (Fig. 8i),116 the fluorescence intensity of the complex was weaker than that of the two monomers, indicating that the electron–hole recombination rate was lower.119 Through the above tests, the researchers could draw the conclusion that the vdW heterojunction was successfully synthesized between Bi3O4Cl and g-C3N4, and the vdW force could expedite the migration and separation of electron–hole pairs, which could improve the photocatalytic activity of Bi3O4Cl/20% g-C3N4. This work provides a valid reference for vdW heterojunction photocatalytic systems.
 Fig. 8  Several methods used for photocatalytic characterization. (a) XRD patterns, (b) XPS spectra, (c) FT-IR spectra, (d) TEM images, (e) UV-vis DRS spectra, (f) Mott–Schottky plots, (g) transient photocurrent responses, (h) electrochemical impedance plots, (i) PL spectra. Reproduced from ref. 116. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
There have been various experimental reports on the synthesis of vdWHs but much of the published work is devoted to theoretical studies on the mechanism of photoexcited carrier separation of vdWHs on the atomic scale. Thanks to the numerous computational methods and density functional theory developed over the last half-century,120 it is now possible to calculate the energy of a multi-electron system accurately and efficiently using either the first-principles method or the ab initio method. Through the theoretical calculations at the electronic or atomic level, some microelectronic structures and phenomena that cannot be achieved by experimental characterization techniques can be obtained with accuracy that cannot be achieved by many current in situ observation instruments. Hence, the underlying internal physical mechanism of photocatalytic reactions can be analyzed. Because the photocatalytic properties of vdWHs are affected not only by the structural and electronic characteristics but also by experimental interface engineering, many researchers have used first-principles calculations to predict and analyze the new properties, performance-enhancing mechanisms and potential applications of vdWHs in the field of photocatalysis.
Researchers have used DFT computing to construct various vdWHs, such as BiVO4/WO3,121 InSe/XS2 (X = Mo, W),122 In2Se3/MoS2/In2Se3,123 BiOI/BiOX (X = F, Cl, Br),124 GeC/GaN,125 CdTe/MoS2,126 MoTe2/Mo1−xWxSe2,127 MoSe2/HfS2,128 GeC-MSSe (M = Mo, W).129 Different methods, such as the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) method,130 DFT-D2 corrections of Grimme,131 and norm-conserving pseudopotential132 are used to optimize and correct the model. The calculated lattice parameters, electronic band structure, absorption coefficient (α), dielectric function ε(ω), refractive index (n), energy loss function, work function and other data are used to study their crystal structure, electronic structure, and optical properties. The effects of band arrangement and the charge transfer with different interface interactions, from van der Waals to bonding, on photocatalytic properties were also investigated.
Wang et al.133 systematically studied the electrical and optical properties of GaSe/g-C3N4 bilayer heterostructures by using the HSE06 hybrid functional. First of all, the most stable configuration was obtained by calculation and modification (Fig. 9a).133 By calculating the energy band structure of the heterojunction, it turned out that the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterojunction was a semiconductor with an indirect band gap, which kept the indirect band gap characteristic similar to the GaSe monolayer (Fig. 9b).133 Therefore, GaSe/g-C3N4 could be used in the field of photocatalytic decomposition of water. In addition, previous studies have discovered that stress engineering can effectively adjust the electrical properties of vdW heterojunctions.134,135 Therefore, the stress effect of heterojunctions was also studied (Fig. 9c).133 When the tensile strain was 6%, the band gap of the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterojunction went down to 2.31 eV, which was beneficial to the utilization of visible light and maintained a high redox capacity, and its band edge position was suitable for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Simultaneously, the electrostatic potential distribution near the interface of the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterojunction was studied (Fig. 9d).133 The results showed that the potential difference between the GaSe layer and the g-C3N4 layer was 9.54 V, which indicated that electrons could easily migrate from the GaSe layer to the g-C3N4 layer, and a strong internal electric field could be formed at the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterojunction interface. The strong built-in electric field might have a significant positive effect on the separation of photogenerated carriers. It is well known that the optical absorption intensity and absorption range of the heterojunction are normally much larger than that of monomers on account of the increase in the overlap between the heterojunction absorption spectrum and the solar spectrum.136 Compared with Gase and g-C3N4 monolayers, the absorption intensity of the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterojunction in the visible light and ultraviolet regions increased (Fig. 9e).133 Therefore, the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterojunction could make full use of solar energy and raise the activity of the photocatalytic decomposition of water. Finally, the density of states (DOS) can reveal the inherent mechanism and photocatalytic ability of orbital reconstruction in heterojunctions. The calculations showed that the VBM (valence band maximum) and CBM (conduction band minimum) of the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterostructures were located in different layers, which was beneficial for the separation of hydrogen and oxygen and the fast separation of photoinduced carriers, thus enhancing the photocatalytic performance (Fig. 9f).133 Therefore, the GaSe/g-C3N4 heterojunction has broad application prospects as a photocatalyst for hydrogen production.
 Fig. 9  (a) The optimized geometric structure of GaSe/g-C3N4. (b) The band structures of GaSe/g-C3N4. (c) Charge density differences for the GaSe/g-C3N4. (d) The averaged electrostatic potential profile around the interface of the GaSe/g-C3N4. (e) Optical absorption spectra of GaSe/g-C3N4 and related monolayers. (f) The TDOS and PDOS for the GaSe/g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 133. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
These studies provide theoretical insights into the internal mechanism and interface engineering of vdWHs and the micro-mechanism of enhanced photocatalytic efficiency, and they also provide estimable models for the design of more vdWHs. This paves the way for the further exploration of new heterostructured structural materials.
3.2 Photocatalytic performance of vdWHs
According to the principle of elementary reaction, the activity of the photocatalyst is affected by the intrinsic characteristics of the photocatalyst, such as the absorption wavelength of light, the absorption efficiency of light, the excitation efficiency of excitons and the translocation and migration efficiency of photogenerated carriers. The improvement of these factors by different methods can improve the photocatalytic activity. A large number of reports have shown that the weak vdW interlayer interaction in two-dimensional vdWHs can induce new properties and phenomena. The electronic transfer process and band gap regulation of vdW heterostructure composites are analyzed by optical and electronic characterization or DFT calculation. It can be concluded that the construction of vdW heterostructure has the following two excellent characteristics, which significantly improve the photocatalytic effect. One is to control the band gap energy of the material so that it can be excited by light in the desired wavelength range. The other is to significantly enhance the separation efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
By reducing the band gap width of the semiconductor photocatalyst, the wavelength of absorbed light can be increased and the utilization rate of light can be improved. Wang et al.137 systematically analyzed the optical properties of the InSe/C2N vdW heterojunctions by using the HSE06 hybrid functional. It was found that the band gaps of the related heterojunctions were reduced to a moderate extent as compared with the isolated InSe and C2N monolayers. Thus, the light absorption intensity of the InSe/C2N system in the range of UV-vis light was significantly higher than that of independent InSe or C2N monolayers. Wang et al.138 systematically studied the optical properties and charge transfer properties of Cu/N-doped TiO2/MoS2 heterostructures based on the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE06) hybrid density functional theory. The interface interaction between the surface of anatase TiO2 (101) and MoS2 showed that TiO2 and MoS2 formed the vdWHs. The results of the density of states indicated that the band gap of TiO2/MoS2 was 1.38 eV, which was distinctly smaller than that of the pure anatase TiO2 (101) surface (2.90 eV), which led to the decrease of the photon excitation energy and the growth of the light absorption ability.
Secondly, the built-in electric field generated in the surface space charge layer of the photocatalyst can improve the separation and migration efficiency of photogenerated carriers and improve the optical absorption properties. In this regard, Fu et al.56 did a great deal of work. Through the first-principles calculations, they verified that the two-dimensional vdW heterostructures of MoSe2/SnSe2, MoSe2/SnS2, MoTe2/SnS2, MoSe2/CrS2, MoTe2/CrS2 and MoTe2/SnSe2 were candidates for direct Z-type photocatalysts. In these two-dimensional vdW heterojunctions, the redistribution of interface charge led to the generation of an additional electric field in the vertical direction, which improved the utility ratio of solar energy. This induced electric field significantly enhanced the profitable interlayer carrier migration and suppressed the meaningless interlayer carrier migration. Chen et al.139 studied the effects of g-C3N4/SnS2 coupling on the electronic structure and optical absorption of g-C3N4/SnS2 heterostructures through a large number of hybrid functional calculations. The theoretical results clearly showed that the g-C3N4 monolayer was weakly coupled with the SnS2 sheet, forming a typical vdW heterojunction. The predicted band gap, band edge positions and light absorption indicated that the g-C3N4/SnS2 heterojunction could effectively capture visible light, and both the VBM and CBM were located in favorable energy positions for water oxidation and reduction reactions. It is noteworthy that on account of the charge transfer from the g-C3N4 monolayer to the SnS2 monolayer, the interfacial polarization electric field built in the interface region was required for photogenerated carrier separation. The interfacial polarization electric field and good band edge arrangement showed that g-C3N4/SnS2 was a kind of water cracking photocatalyst with good performance. Therefore, on account of the generation of the built-in electric field in the vdW heterojunction, the separation and migration of carriers are effectively promoted, and the light absorption range is well improved.
vdWHs are more favorable for photocatalytic reactions than building unit material in terms of band gap modulation, intensification of light absorption and changes in the properties of photogenerated carrier migration. Therefore, by constructing vdWHs, the solar efficiency and photocatalytic efficiency will be enhanced significantly.
4 Photocatalytic applications of vdWHs
VdW heterostructures can show unique properties that a single-layered material does not have by combining the advantages of the semiconductor structures and improving their electronic and optical properties. This idea has inspired abundant experimental and theoretical studies, making it a hot spot in the photocatalytic research field, especially in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. Next, the applications of vdWHs in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, photoreduction of carbon dioxide and photocatalytic pollutants degradation will be described.
4.1 Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
Since 1972, when Fujishima and Honda discovered the water decomposition on the TiO2 electrode,140 the ability to use photocatalytic water decomposition to generate renewable energy (hydrogen fuel) to avoid fossil fuel consumption and consequent environmental pollution has attracted increasing attention.141–143 When photons with certain energy irradiate the semiconductor surface, the semiconductor photocatalyst will produce electrons and holes (carriers) when excited. The photoexcited carriers migrate to the active sites on the surface of the semiconductor, and then the photogenerated electrons and holes reduce and oxidize the hydrogen protons and water molecules to H2 and O2, respectively. However, the photoinduced electron–hole pairs in many single-component materials are prone to recombination, resulting in the low photocatalytic hydrogen production efficiency of photocatalysts, which cannot be applied to industrial production. To improve the efficiency of converting solar energy into hydrogen energy, many approaches have been taken to explore photocatalysts that can effectively use sunlight to split water and separate photocarriers. Among them, the two-dimensional/two-dimensional vdW heterojunction has received extensive attention because the composite with this structure has an enormous specific surface area, it can adjust the band gap energy of the material, promote the segregation and migration of interfacial charge, and provide a large number of reaction centers. Therefore, the photolysis of aquatic hydrogen presents significant advantages. Researchers have designed several vdWHs materials for the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (Table 3).
Table 3 Typical vdW heterojunction photocatalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen production




Photocatalysts
Research methods
Light range
Classification type
Photocatalytic activity
Ref.




Carbon nitride/C doped BN
Experimentally synthesized
Visible light
Z-type
The H2 production rate was 3357.1 μmol h−1 g−1

110



BiVO4/WO3
First-principles investigation
Visible and ultraviolet light
II-type
—

121



Phosphorene/g-C3N4
Experimentally synthesized
Visible light
I-type
The phosphorene/g-C3N4 nanocomposite shows an enhanced visible-light photocatalytic H2 production activity of 571 μmol h−1 g−1 in 18 v% lactic acid aqueous solution

36



ZnSe/ZnSe(ea)x
Experimentally synthesized
Visible light
Z-type
The hydrogen evolution was 2875 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light irradiation (≥420 nm) and a notable quantum yield of 64.5% at 450 nm

144



WS2/GCN
Hybrid density functional method
Visible light
II-type
—

145



CdS/g-C3N4
Hybrid density functional study
Visible light
II-type
—

146



MoSe2/Ti2CO2
First-principles calculations
Near-infrared, visible and ultraviolet light
Direct Z-scheme
—

147



MoSe2/SnS2
Hybrid functional calculations
Visible light
Direct Z-scheme



148



PtSe2/SiH
First-principles calculations
Visible light
II-type
—

149



1D/2D carbon nanotube (CNT)/phosphorene (BP)
Density functional theory (DFT) computation
Near-infrared and visible light
II-type
—

150



α-CSe/β-CSe
First-principles method
—
II-type
—

151





Ju et al.152 theoretically investigated the electronic structure and relevant nature of two-dimensional vdW GeS/WX2 (X = O, S, Se, Te) heterojunctions by means of DFT calculations. The results showed that GeS/WX2 could not form direct Z-scheme systems because of their inappropriate electronic structure, while the GeS/WS2 heterojunction could photocatalytically decompose water to produce hydrogen (Fig. 10a–d).152 GeS and WS2 monolayers were used as photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution, respectively. Electron transfer was observed in the interface region between the two monolayers and an internal electric field from GeS to WS2 was induced (Fig. 10e).152 This built-in electric field effectively promoted the directional separation of carriers on the interface. It was also noteworthy that the design of vdWHs improved the reduction ability of GeS and the oxidation ability of WS2 (Fig. 10f–h),152 reduced the band gap of two-layer monolayers, and significantly improved the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 10  The calculated electronic structure of GeS/WO2 (a), GeS/WS2 (b), GeS/WSe2 (c), and GeS/WTe2 (d) vdW heterojunctions. (e) The plane-integrated electron density difference along the vertical direction for the GeS/WS2 heterojunction. (f) The partitioned band edge positions of GeS and WS2. The redox potentials of H+/H2 and H2O/O2 are presented with a black line; (g) and (h) are enlarged partial drawings for the redox potentials of H+/H2 and H2O/O2 of GeS and WS2 marked in (f) with the dashed circles, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Enlightened by the vdW heterostructure and the homotypic g-C3N4 heterojunction, Li et al.153 successfully synthesized the homotypic g-CNNS/g-CNNF vdW heterojunction (Fig. 11a),153 which was called the mixed-dimensional auto-coupled g-C3N4 vdW heterojunction for the photocatalytic hydrolysis of hydrogen production. They thought that compared with two monomers, the improvement of the photocatalytic activity of the formed vdW heterojunction was mainly due to its carrier diffusion distance being shortened and spontaneous electron movement was promoted. This could actively suppress the recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs (Fig. 11b and c),153 effectively solve the inherent defect of rapid charge recombination of the original g-C3N4, and thus increase the carrier lifetime (Fig. 11d)153 and further raise the photocatalytic reaction efficiency. The photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate of the heterojunction was 1375.9 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light, which was 3 times higher than that of the original g-CNNS. This study provided a new idea for the design and development of charge transfer regulation of two-dimensional photocatalytic materials.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic band structure alignment of g-CNNS/g-CNNF. (b) Room-temperature PL spectra, (c) photocurrent transient responses of g-CNNS, g-CNNF, and complexes (3:1), and (d) time-resolved PL. Reproduced from ref. 153. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Qin et al.147 synthesized ZnIn2S4/g-C3N4 2D/2D vdW heterostructures with plentiful exposed sulfur vacancies by the in situ growth of ultra-thin ZnIn2S4 on g-C3N4 nanosheets by a combination of calcination and hydrothermal methods. The vdWHs significantly enhanced the segregation and migration of interfacial charge by provoking the photogenerated charge dynamics. On the other hand, the sulfur vacancy could improve the utilization rate of light energy, increase the diffusion length of carriers and prolong their lifetime. The synergism between vdWHs and sulfur vacancy resulted in the excellent photocatalytic hydrolysis properties of the ZnIn2S4/g-C3N4 vdW heterojunction. The hydrogen evolution rate over the vdW heterojunction was 6095.1 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 11.6 times and 6.7 times higher than that of g-C3N4 and ZnIn2S4, respectively.
4.2 Photocatalytic reduction of CO2
The US Energy Information Administration recently conducted an appraisal report of the outlook for the global energy market. The report pointed out that global energy expenditure will grow by nearly 50%, and CO2 emissions by 19.2% from 2018 to 2050.154 Inspired by artificial photosynthesis, the use of photocatalytic technology to convert carbon dioxide and water into hydrocarbon fuels has become a rapidly developing sustainable method, which is considered as the potential solution to mitigate fossil energy depletion and greenhouse gas accumulation.155–157 Similar to the principle of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, the photoreduction process of carbon dioxide is also a reductive reaction of photogenerated electrons. The H2 produced is released in the form of gas, while most of the products produced by CO2 are a mixture of gas and liquid products, such as CH4, CO, CH3OH and so on. However, the selectivity and efficiency of CO2 photoreduction are often unsatisfactory, which are mainly limited by the multi-electron transfer and reaction center in the reaction process. Therefore, to overcome these limitations, researchers used vdW/Coulomb forces to design new vdW heterostructured photocatalysts, providing a new way to reduce carbon dioxide and produce valuable products. Although vdWHs have not been widely used in CO2 photoreduction, they have been shown to enhance the performance of the photoreduction of carbon dioxide because of the large interface area, strong interactions, wide light response and accelerated interface charge separation.
Song et al.158 prepared an all-organic vdW heterojunction photocatalyst (CN-COF) (Fig. 12a)158 using two-dimensional CN and triazinyl covalent organic framework (COF-TD) as raw materials to effectively improve the catalytic performance of two-dimensional CN. They thought that the heterojunction was caused by the strong vdW force interactions at the interface between the two-dimensional CN and COF-TD molecules. The close contact at the interface of vdWHs reduced the band gap and significantly increased the visible light response region of the sample (Fig. 12b).158 At the same time, the recombination of charge carriers decreased on account of the vdWH formation (Fig. 12c).158 The CO exhalation rate over CN-COF was 3.3 and 9.2 times higher than that of COF-TD and CN, respectively (Fig. 12d).158 The reaction was carried out without the use of any solvents or sacrificial agents, which conformed to the concept of green development.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM images of CN-COF. (b) UV-vis DRS spectra of different catalysts. (c) Catalytic activities of different catalysts. (d) Photoluminescence. Reproduced from ref. 158. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Based on the first-principles calculations, Fan et al.159 synthesized a novel vdW heterostructure composite material for photocatalytic CO2 reduction by combining g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies and TP-TTA COF (Fig. 13a–d).159 The calculated results showed that the C2N/aza-CMP HBL exhibited a more effective light response and wider absorption spectrum than the isolated individuals (Fig. 13e).159 Due to the uneven distribution of electrons at the interface, a built-in electric field was formed from the C2N layer to the aza-CMP layer. Under sunlight, this built-in electric field accelerated the recombination of photogenerated electrons in the Aza-CMP monolayer and holes in the C2N monolayer (Fig. 13f).159 The calculated energy band structure and the charge density of energy band decomposition of C2N/aza-CMP HBL showed that the carrier transfer path of the two materials was Z-type (Fig. 13g).159 This work provided useful inspiration for the design of direct Z-type heterojunction photocatalysts.
 Fig. 13  Top views of the (a) C2N monolayer and (b) aza-CMP monolayer. (c) Top and (d) side views of the C2N/aza-CMP HBL. (e) The calculated absorption coefficients of the C2N/aza-CMP HBL. (f) The averaged differential electron density along the z-direction of C2N/aza-CMP HBL. (g) The electronic band structure of the C2N/aza-CMP HBL projected onto C2N (red) and aza-CMP (blue) monolayers, and the CBM and VBM charge densities of band decomposition are presented in the right column. Reproduced from ref. 159. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
These studies provide new and simple strategies for the design and manufacture of high-efficiency photoreduction catalysts for the reduction of carbon dioxide to fuel, and also serve as references for other researchers for the design of vdWHs.
4.3 Photocatalytic degradation of pollutants
Due to the development of modern industry, the world is faced with more and more serious environmental problems. Organic pollutants (including organic pesticides, VOCs, toxic azo dyes, antibiotics, carcinogens (such as aflatoxins and benzopyrene) and environmental endocrine disruptors) and inorganic pollutants (such as U(VI), Pb(II), Hg(II), Cd(II) and Cr(VI))160–162 contaminate the underground water, atmosphere and soil, causing disturbances and threats to humans and the entire biosphere. The traditional methods of removing pollutants (membrane separation,163 physical adsorption,164 biodegradation,165 and so on) often have high energy consumption and even secondary pollution. On the contrary, photocatalytic technology has the advantages of no secondary pollution, fast reaction speed and high degradation efficiency, so it is considered as a “green” means to deal with the degradation of pollutants.166,167 The main mechanism of the photodegradation of pollutants is that the catalyst is irradiated by light, absorbs light energy, undergoes electron transition, forms electron–hole pairs, facilitates redox reactions of the pollutants adsorbed on the surface directly, or oxidizes the hydroxyl (−OH) groups adsorbed on the surface to form strongly oxidizing hydroxide free radicals (˙OH) that oxidize the pollutants.168 However, the photodegradation performance is often affected by optical absorption and charge separation. The construction of vdWHs is a promising approach to obtaining good properties. VdW heterostructures used in pollutant photodegradation are mainly on account of the existence of the vdW heterojunction interface, which makes the photoelectron–hole pairs separate effectively, thus increasing the probability of forming O2− and ˙OH. At the same time, the adsorption capacity and degradation efficiency of pollutants can be enhanced by the larger specific surface area and the full exposure of active sites of vdW materials. Hence, the researchers have designed some vdWHs materials (such as 2D/2D Ti3C2/SnNb2O6,33 2D/2D Ti3C2/porous g-C3N4,169 BiOCl nanosheet/graphene,170 CQDs-modified 2D–2D ZnIn2S4/BiOCl,171 g-C3N4/Zn-Ti,172 2D/2D Mo2C/g-C3N4 (ref. 173)) for the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants.
Sun et al.159 prepared mesoporous g-C3N4/Zn-Ti LDH laminated vdW nanosheets by a one-step in situ hydrothermal method. The heterojunction had a narrow 2.41 eV band gap (Fig. 14a),172 which extended the light response to the visible region (Fig. 14b)172 and could generate more photocatalytic carriers for the subsequent photocatalytic reactions, thus improving the photocatalytic performance. The results showed that the removal rate of ceftriaxone sodium was as high as 97% (Fig. 14c)172 and the composite had high stability (Fig. 14d).172 They suggested that this excellent catalytic performance might be explained by the layered vdWHs formation, which allowed the photocatalyst to have large specific surface areas and strong adsorption capacity for target molecules, facilitating charge separation and the absorption of visible light.
 Fig. 14  (a) The corresponding calculated band gaps. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance absorption spectra. (c) Evaluation of the photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation for the photocatalytic degradation of ceftriaxone sodium. (d) Cycling test for photocatalytic degradation. Reproduced from ref. 172. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Jiang et al.171 prepared a novel two-dimensional ZnIn2S4/BiOCl vdW heterostructure modified by full-spectrum optically driven carbon quantum dots (CQDs) via a hydrothermal method. As can be seen from the TEM images (Fig. 15a–d),171 the square BiOCl nanosheets were inserted into the layered chrysanthemum morphology of ZnIn2S4, and the morphology of ZnIn2S4 was not destroyed. By observing the close interface between ZnIn2S4 and BiOCl, they thought that the ZnIn2S4/BiOCl composites were likely composed of interlayer vdW interactions rather than physical mixtures. Some smaller CQDs appeared on the surface of ZnIn2S4/BiOCl composites, which further indicated that the CQDs-modified ZnIn2S4/BiOCl composites were successfully synthesized. The results of activity tests and various characterizations showed that the composite had a significant degradation effect on various antibiotics (tetracycline (TC), ciprofloxacin (CIP) and oxytetracycline (OTC)) under vis-NIR light (Fig. 15e and f).171 They considered the 2D–2D vdW heterostructure and CQD as effective electrons collectors, improving the carrier separation efficiency and expanding the light absorption capacity (Fig. 15g),171 thus improving the photocatalytic activity (Fig. 15h).171 This study provided a new method for the photoactive full-spectrum photodegradation of organic pollutants by vdW heterojunctions.
 Fig. 15  TEM images of (a) bare BiOCl, (b) ZnIn2S4, (c) 10% ZnIn2S4/BiOCl. (d) HRTEM images of the 1 wt% CQDs-10% ZnIn2S4/BiOCl composites. (e) and (f) Photocatalytic degradation of TC with various samples. (g) Dynamic curves of the photodegradation of TC under NIR light irradiation. (h) The photocatalytic degradation properties of the 1 wt% CQDs-10% ZnIn2S4/BiOCl under visible and full-spectrum light irradiation. (i) TOC removal ratio of TC over different photocatalysts under visible light. Reproduced from ref. 171. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
5 Conclusions and future perspectives
In recent years, vdWHs constructed by two-dimensional layered materials through van der Waals forces have been used in the photocatalytic field. The vdW heterostructure combines two or more two-dimensional materials with different properties so that the problem of band gap width is solved. Meanwhile, the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs is effectively suppressed on account of the existence of the vdWH interface, and the photocatalytic performance is enhanced. In this paper, the research progress of vdWHs in the field of solar-driven photocatalysis is reviewed, including the basic principle of the heterojunction, and the construction and classification of vdWHs. Various methods used to study vdWHs, including synthesis techniques, characterization and theoretical calculations, are discussed. There are also excellent characteristics of vdWHs used in the photocatalytic field. The latest progress of vdWHs in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, the photoreduction of carbon dioxide, and photocatalytic pollutant degradation, are introduced. Despite the great interest in vdWHs, their properties are still poorly understood and utilized, and their application potential remains largely untapped. van der Waals heterostructures still face many challenges that need to be overcome in the photocatalytic field, including the following.
(1) Since the discovery of the monoatomic thickness of graphene, researchers have paid much attention to its unique properties and excellent properties. Other graphene-like materials have also been developed. It is hoped that more excellent novel materials such as graphene will be explored for “green” photocatalysis in the future.
(2) At present, most of the vdWHs fabricated so far are based on the construction of two-dimensional and two-dimensional materials. In principle, they can be formed between different dimensional materials (0D/2D, 1D/2D, 3D/2D, 3D/3D). The preparation of mixed van der Waals heterostructure needs to be further studied.
(3) Most of the vdWHs are type-II heterostructures and Z-scheme heterojunctions. In previous years, with the introduction of S-scheme heterojunction, several applications of S-scheme vdWHs have been described, including the photoreduction of carbon dioxide and pollutant degradation. However, as a new heterojunction system, the S-scheme Johannes Diderik van der Waals heterostructures still need to be further explored.
(4) The vast majority of the vdW heterojunction photocatalysts have been designed to respond to visible light, while more than 50% of the solar spectrum is infrared. Therefore, broadening the spectral response range of vdWHs and constructing vdW heterojunction materials with full spectral response have become crucial and ambitious problems for high-efficiency photocatalysts.
(5) In the field of photocatalysis, the designed vdWHs are widely used in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution but there are few studies on the photoreduction of carbon dioxide and degradation of pollutants. Research on the diversity of applications of vdWHs is worth considering.
(6) vdWHs have some advantages over single materials but there is still has a low efficiency of electron–hole separation. When it comes to characterization, there is also photogenerated electron–hole separation in a single photocatalyst. Some current characterization techniques are difficult to tell whether the electron transfer is caused by a single catalyst or heterojunction. Therefore, the development of its characterization techniques needs to be further explored.
(7) Most of the studies on vdW heterojunction photocatalysts are based on DFT theoretical calculation or experimental synthesis; both research methods have their limitations. Therefore, it is best to combine theory with experiment. Only by combining the results of DFT calculations with experiments can they play their due roles.
In summary, the unique structure and excellent properties of vdW heterojunction materials indicate that vdW composites are also a potential development direction. To promote the large-scale application of vdWHs in the photocatalytic field, further exploration and research are necessary.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0605002) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21546014).
References
G. S. Shanker, A. Biswas and S. Ogale, JPhys Energy, 2021, 3, 022003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chai, X. Lin and D. Wang, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mishra and R. Acharya, Mater. Today: Proc., 2021, 35, 164–169 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Wang and J. Yu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 59998–60006 RSC .
S. Zhao, J. Xu, M. Mao, L. Li and X. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 583, 435–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-f. Hong, R.-t. Guo, Y. Yuan, X.-y. Ji, Z.-s. Li, Z.-d. Lin and W.-g. Pan, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 100521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, R.-t. Guo, L.-f. Hong, X.-y. Ji, Z.-s. Li, Z.-d. Lin and W.-g. Pan, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 611, 125836 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Y. Jiao, J. Qin, Z. Li and J. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 541, 148558 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, Z. Wang, Y. Li, S. Peng and B. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118828 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, R.-t. Guo, L.-f. Hong, X. y. Ji and W.-g. Pan, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 10854–10871 CrossRef CAS .
L.-f. Hong, R.-t. Guo, Y. Yuan, X.-y. Ji, Z.-d. Lin, X.-f. Yin and W.-g. Pan, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 639, 128358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, R.-t. Guo, L.-f. Hong, X.-y. Ji, Z.-d. Lin, Z.-s. Li and W.-g. Pan, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 21, 100829 CrossRef CAS .
L.-f. Hong, R.-t. Guo, Z.-w. Zhang, Y. Yuan, X.-y. Ji, Z.-d. Lin and W.-g. Pan, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 51, 101650 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kano, D. G. Kvashnin, S. Sakai, L. A. Chernozatonskii, P. B. Sorokin, A. Hashimoto and M. Takeguchi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3980–3985 RSC .
K. Wu, J. Chen, H. Ma, L. Wan, W. Hu and J. Yang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 740–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Q. Xiong and K. Chang, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 4421–4426 RSC .
Y. Wang, Z.-L. Deng, D. Hu, J. Yuan, Q. Ou, F. Qin, Y. Zhang, X. Ouyang, Y. Li, B. Peng, Y. Cao, B. Guan, Y. Zhang, J. He, C.-W. Qiu, Q. Bao and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 7811–7818 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, X. Yan, X. Song, W. Bao, S. Ding, D. W. Zhang and P. Zhou, Nanotechnol., 2017, 28, 415201 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Cavassilas, D. Logoteta, Y. Lee, F. Michelini, M. Lannoo, M. Bescond and M. Luisier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 28545–28549 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, H. Ma, C. Zheng, S. Lennon, W. Wu, L. Wu and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 529, 147122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Shan, Q. Wang, J. Zhu and R. Liu, Nanotechnol., 2020, 31, 295201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hassan, P. K. Srivastava, B. Singh, M. S. Abbas, F. Ali, W. J. Yoo and C. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14119–14124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oliva, J. Backman, L. Capua, M. Cavalieri, M. Luisier and A. M. Ionescu, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2020, 4, 5 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Ren, C. Zhang, M. Zhou, C. He, J. Li, T. Ouyang, C. Tang and J. Zhong, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 405101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Feng, Q. Sun, Y. Ma, Y. Tang and X. Dai, Results Phys., 2021, 23, 104010 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, G. Huang, J. Shen, S. Gong, P. Zhou, L. Yin, R. Zhao, G. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Ma and Y. Jiang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 7425–7429 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Yang, H. Li, S. Li, Y. Zhi, Z. Yan, X. Huang, X. Wei, W. Tang and Z. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47714–47720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Yao, J.-Z. Sun, J.-Y. Chen, Y.-L. Guo, B. Wu and Y.-Q. Liu, Acta Phys. Sin., 2021, 70, 027901 CrossRef .
J. Shim, D.-H. Kang, Y. Kim, H. Kum, W. Kong, S.-H. Bae, I. Almansouri, K. Lee, J.-H. Park and J. Kim, Carbon, 2018, 133, 78–89 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu and J. Yang, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 112, 518–526 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, C. Jiang, D. Tan, Q. Li, S. Bi and J. Song, J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2021, 6, 135–152 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Yu, Y. Zhao, X. Zhan and H. Shi, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 265, 118516 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Wang, P. Wang, A. Kuang, T. Zhou, H. Yuan and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 544, 148842 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Z. Zeng, M. Huang and P. Chen, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 6, 100059 CrossRef .
J. Ran, W. Guo, H. Wang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800128 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Jiang, Z. Wang and G. Zhan, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2021, 37, 2009102 Search PubMed .
T. Wang, P. D. Dissanayake, M. Sun, Z. Tao, W. Han, N. An, Q. Gu, D. Xia, B. Tian, Y. S. Ok and J. Shang, Environ. Res., 2021, 197, 111026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Li and L. Sun, Chemosphere, 2021, 276, 130201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, P. Raizada, V. K. Thakur, V. Saini, A. A. P. Khan, N. Singh and P. Singh, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 230, 116219 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and J. Wu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 129, 108619 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shoneye, J. S. Chang, M. N. Chong and J. Tang, Int. Mater. Rev., 2022, 67, 47–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, N. Ma, W. Wu and Q. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 393, 124719 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates Jr, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Huo, X. Wang, Y. Xia, A. Zhang and L. Gao, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 14218–14234 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Shende, T. Bhoyar, D. Vidyasagar, J. Singh, P. T. Kosankar and S. S. Umare, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, H. Chen, D. Cui, Z. Fan and C. Xue, Energy Technol., 2021, 9, 2000973 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bohm, A. Ingle, H. L. M. Bohm, B. Fenech-Salerno, S. Wu and F. Torrisi, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2021, 379, 20200293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Zhao, W. Wu, X. Ji, Y. Lu and L. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 415, 129054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, F. Xing and Q. Gao, Molecules, 2021, 26, 2507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Woszczyna, A. Winter, M. Grothe, A. Willunat, S. Wundrack, R. Stosch, T. Weimann, F. Ahlers and A. Turchanin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4831–4837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Ma and M. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16801–16822 RSC .
A. Singh, M. Jain and S. Bhattacharya, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 2837–2845 RSC .
Y. Yuan, R.-t. Guo, L.-f. Hong, X.-y. Ji, Z.-s. Li, Z.-d. Lin and W.-g. Pan, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 611, 125836 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Fu, R. Zhang, Q. Luo, X. Li and J. Yang, J. Comput. Chem., 2019, 40, 980–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, S. Shi, Q. Li, X. Zhang and X. Cui, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 720–728 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, L. Li, Y.-H. Lin and C.-W. Nan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17530–17537 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Y. Guo, J. Liu, F. Q. Wang, X. Li and Q. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13767–13772 RSC .
Y. Fan, J. Wang and M. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14836–14843 RSC .
L. Cheng, H. J. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Wei, J. H. Liang, J. Shi and X. F. Tang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 085118 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu, L. Tao, H. Ye, X. Li and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7104–7113 RSC .
W. X. Zhang, W. H. He, J. W. Zhao and C. He, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 265, 257–265 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Liu, Y. Shi, H. Yin and C.-L. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 063901 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Zeng, Q. Li, L. Xia, X. Luo, Z. Ma, B. Peng, S. X. Xiong, Z. Li, L.-L. Wang and Y. Lei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 547, 149207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Wang, N. Xu, D. Y. Li and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 17 Search PubMed .
A. Du, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2016, 6, 551–570 CAS .
Y. Guo and J. Robertson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 233104 CrossRef .
P.-Q. Wang, C.-C. Jia, Y. Huang and X.-F. Duan, Matter, 2021, 4, 552–581 CrossRef CAS .
A. Di Bartolomeo, Nanomater, 2020, 10, 233104 Search PubMed .
W. Xia, L. Dai, P. Yu, X. Tong, W. Song, G. Zhang and Z. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4324–4365 RSC .
X. Yu, X. Wang, F. Zhou, J. Qu and J. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104260 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, L.-J. Li, Y. Cheng and W. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800270 CrossRef .
Z. Li, J. Hou, B. Zhang, S. Cao, Y. Wu, Z. Gao, X. Nie and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 537–544 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Ma, G. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Gong, S. Lei, X. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Yu, K. P. Hackenberg, A. Babakhani, J.-C. Idrobo, R. Vajtai, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 119–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Shim, K. Yoo, S. B. Seo, J. Shin, D. Y. Jung, I. S. Kang, C. W. Ahn, B. J. Cho and S. Y. Choi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6655–6662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1996–2003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature, 2019, 567, 323–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. C. Kim, R. J. Wu, J. Martinez, X. Song, J. Yang, F. Zhao, K. A. Mkhoyan, H. Y. Jeong and M. Chhowalla, Nature, 2019, 568, 70–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bjorkman, A. Gulans, A. V. Krasheninnikov and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 235502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Jin, P. C. Yeh, N. Zaki, D. Chenet, G. Arefe, Y. F. Hao, A. Sala, T. O. Mentes, J. I. Dadap, A. Locatelli, J. Hone and R. M. Osgood, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 201409 CrossRef .
H. Yang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2021, 142, 111406 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Z. Wang and J. Wu, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 4359–4389 RSC .
S. Goktas and A. Goktas, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 863, 158734 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Wen, C.-H. Shen, Z.-H. Fei, D. Fang, Z.-T. Liu, J.-T. Dai and C.-G. Niu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123083 CrossRef CAS .
R.-t. Guo, X.-y. Liu, H. Qin, Z.-y. Wang, X. Shi, W.-g. Pan, Z.-g. Fu, J.-y. Tang, P.-y. Jia, Y.-f. Miao and J.-w. Gu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 500, 144059 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, Q. Xu, J. Low, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 556–565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, R.-t. Guo, L.-f. Hong, Z.-d. Lin, X.-y. Ji and W.-G. Pan, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 132241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng, J. Fan and J. Yu, Chem, 2020, 6, 1543–1559 CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yu, J. Cui, X. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Yu and J. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 301, 120814 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu, W. Ho and W. Macyk, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119006 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Shen, Y. Ma, S. Wu and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4791–4799 RSC .
Z. Wu, Z. Li, M. Wu, J. Shen, W. Feng, X. Li, D. Xu, S. Zhang and N. Ma, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2021, 128, 105781 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jia, B. Ding, X. Qian, Y. Yang, L. Mao, X. Cai, S. Guo and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 19763–19772 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gusain, N. Kumar, F. Opoku, P. P. Govender and S. S. Ray, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 4721–4734 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kang, L. Xu, Z. Han, H. Yu, Q. Wu, M. Wu, Z. He, L. Wang and H. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Qiu, L. Li, Y. Pi, G. Yan and L. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800148 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Z. Qin, Z. Diao, R. Li, J. Zhong, D. Ma and Y. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 13459–13466 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shahrokhi, P. Raybaud and T. Le Bahers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 36465–36474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arra, R. Barbar and M. Kabir, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 095402 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, W. Zhao, G. Wang and Y. S. Ang, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2021, 15, 2100171 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, Y. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Chen, P. Shan, X. Bai, Q. Jiang, X. Zhao, Z. Li, X. Li, F. Chen, T. Xiao, Y. Han, R. Feng, Q. Kang and H. Yuan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 26768–26779 RSC .
W. Zheng, Y. Xu, L. Zheng, C. Yang, N. Pinna, X. Liu and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000435 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Z. Li and C. Yan, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 23662–23667 RSC .
T.-J. Dai, Y.-Q. Chen, Z.-Y. Zhou, J. Sun, X.-S. Peng and X.-Z. Liu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 755, 137762 CrossRef CAS .
C. Muratore, A. A. Voevodin and N. R. Glavin, Thin Solid Films, 2019, 688, 137500 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, B. J. Jeong, S. Oh, S. Chae, K. H. Choi, T. Nasir, S. H. Lee, H. K. Lim, I. J. Choi, M.-K. Hong, H. K. Yu, J.-H. Lee and J.-Y. Choi, Materials, 2019, 12, 2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Onodera, S. Masubuchi, R. Moriya and T. Machida, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 59, 010101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, Y. Zhang, S. Yan, K. Sun, G. Wang, Y. Bu and G. Xie, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701325 CrossRef .
H. Dong, S. Hong, P. Zhang, S. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Yuan, H. Li, J. Sun, G. Chen and C. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125150 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krishnan and P. Kannan, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 1150a3 CrossRef .
C. Lu, C. Quan, K. Si, X. Xu, C. He, Q. Zhao, Y. Zhan and X. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 479, 1161–1168 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, J. Yan, P. Li and S. F. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10436–10444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, B. Huang, Q. Guo, S. Guo, Z. Peng, J. Liu, Q. Tian, Y. Yang, Q. Xu, Z. Liu and B. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119733 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, J. Li, M. Chen, H. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Xiao, B. Tian and X. Zhang, Materials, 2019, 12, 2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, X. Jin, T. Ge, H. Xie, R. Sun, F. Su, X. Li and L. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 409, 128178 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, P. Jin, S. Duan, J. Huang, H. She, Q. Wang and T. An, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 2652–2661 RSC .
L. Shang, B. Tong, H. Yu, G. I. N. Waterhouse, C. Zhou, Y. Zhao, M. Tahir, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501241 CrossRef .
J. Di, C. Zhu, M. Ji, M. Duan, R. Long, C. Yan, K. Gu, J. Xiong, Y. She, J. Xia, H. Li and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14847–14851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133–A1138 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, G.-J. Zhao, J.-X. Zhang, F.-Q. Bai and H.-X. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 549, 149309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ni, M. Quintana, F. Jia and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12509–12515 RSC .
D. Wijethunge, L. Zhang, C. Tang and A. Du, Front. Phys., 2020, 15, 63504 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Guo, J. Zhang, X. Wei and F. Ma, J. Solid State Chem., 2020, 284, 121181 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lou and J. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14289–14297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Z. Deng, J.-R. Zhang, Y.-Q. Zhao, Z.-L. Yu, J.-L. Yang and M.-Q. Cai, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2020, 32, 065004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. Pan, W. Zhou, A. Li and F. Ouyang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 505302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Wang, P. Wang, T. Yang, H. Yuan, G. Wang and H. Chen, Nanomater, 2019, 9, 1706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. U. Din, M. Idrees, A. Albar, M. Shafiq, I. Ahmad, C. V. Nguyen and B. Amin, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 100, 165425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sivasamy, F. Quero, K. Paredes-Gil, K. M. Batoo, M. Hadi and E. H. Raslam, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2021, 131, 105861 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Li, X.-H. Cui, C.-H. Xing, H.-L. Cui and R.-Z. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 548, 149249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahmood, G. Shi, X. Wang, X. Xie and J. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119310 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, G. Wang, H. Yuan, A. Kuang, J. Chang, Y. Huang and H. Chen, Phys. E, 2020, 118, 113896 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, A. Kuang, X. Luo, G. Wang, H. Yuan and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 374–379 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Meng, D. Rao, Y. Wang, Q. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Wu, K. Deng, H. Liu and R. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 841–849 RSC .
Q. Peng, Z. Guo, B. Sa, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 15995–16004 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, H. Yuan, J. Chang, X. Chen and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 485, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
G.-S. Wang, Y.-M. Lin, Y.-L. Zhao, Z.-Y. Jiang and X.-D. Zhang, Acta Phys. Sin., 2018, 67, 1000–3290 Search PubMed .
S.-h. Chen, J.-j. Wang, J. Huang and Q.-x. Li, Chin. J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 30, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, R.-t. Guo, L.-j. Wu, W.-h. Wang, W.-g. Pan, Z.-k. Yuan, S.-n. Nie and Y.-h. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 542, 148707 CrossRef CAS .
J.-y. Tang, R.-t. Guo, W.-g. Pan, W.-g. Zhou and C.-y. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467, 206–212 CrossRef .
L.-f. Hong, R.-t. Guo, Y. Yuan, X.-y. Ji, Z.-d. Lin, Z.-s. Li and W.-g. Pan, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 539–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, Y. Yang, Z. Li, M. Huang, J. Yu and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17718–17724 RSC .
J. Liu and E. Hua, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 5260–5267 RSC .
G. Wang, F. Zhou, B. Yuan, S. Xiao, A. Kuang, M. Zhong, S. Dang, X. Long and W. Zhang, Nanomater., 2019, 9, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, H. Li, J. Lu, Y. Feng, F. Meng, C. Ma, Y. Yan and M. Meng, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119254 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Wang, H. Yuan, T. Zhou, J. Chang and H. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 2785–2793 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, Y. Li and Z. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 17145–17151 RSC .
Z. Zhang, M.-Q. Cheng, Q. Chen, H.-Y. Wu, W. Hu, P. Peng, G.-F. Huang and W.-Q. Huang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 233 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. Feng, X. Chen, W. Zhang, L. Wu and Y. Wang, Nanomater, 2019, 9, 598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ju, Y. Dai, W. Wei, M. Li and B. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 434, 365–374 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. Tian, X. Wang, M. Pi, S. Wei, H. Zhu, D. Zhang and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4692–4699 CrossRef CAS .

          U.S. Energy Information Adminstration, International Energy Outlook 2021, https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/, accessed May 27, 2020 Search PubMed.
J.-y. Tang, W.-g. Zhou, R.-t. Guo, C.-y. Huang and W.-g. Pan, Catal. Commun., 2018, 107, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-f. Miao, R.-t. Guo, J.-w. Gu, Y.-z. Liu, G.-l. Wu, C.-p. Duan, X.-d. Zhang and W.-g. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 527, 146792 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, R.-t. Guo, L.-f. Hong, Y. Yuan and W.-g. Pan, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 19920–19942 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, Y. Wu, X. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Zhu, C. Ma, Y. Yan, P. Huo and G. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127292 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, D. Chi, Z. Yang, Z. Xing, J. Yin, Z. Li, Q. Zhu and W. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 16348–16358 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Hu, Y.-N. Sun, Z.-W. Feng, F.-O. Wang and Y.-k. Lv, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Tang, J. Zhong, J. Li, M. Li and T. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 578, 152122 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stelo, N. Kublik, S. Ullah and H. Wender, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 829, 154591 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Tong, W. Pei, W. Liu, F. Shi, Y. Li and Y. Huo, Chemosphere, 2021, 270, 129424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, S. Jia, J. Liu, Z. Sun, X. Yang and D. Tang, J. Mater. Res., 2021, 36, 1538–1548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Chen, X. Tian, L. Lin, R. Ding, W. Yan and F. Zhao, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 784, 147049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Manikandan, S. Harish, J. Archana and M. Navaneethan, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 132050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, M. Song, X. Xie, Y. Wen, Z. Wang, B. Wei and Z. Wang, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 132192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-T. Guo, J. Wang, Z.-X. Bi, X. Chen, X. Hu and W.-G. Pan, Chemosphere, 2022, 295, 133834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, N. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, Chemosphere, 2020, 246, 125760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guan, X. Zhang, J. Bao and X. Gong, Nanotechnol., 2020, 31, 085706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, D. Wu, G. Lu, Z. Yan and J. Liu, Chemosphere, 2019, 227, 82–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, D. Chi, Z. Yang, Z. Xing, J. Yin, Z. Li, Q. Zhu and W. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 16348–16358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. Zhang, D. Huang, W. Wang, Y. Zhai, Q. Liang, Y. Yang, S. Tian, H. Luo and D. Qin, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 301, 120749 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Xin Chen	Xin Chen obtained her B.S. degree from Inner Mongolia Agricultural University in 2020, and now she is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. Her current research interests focus on photocatalytic technology in CO2 reduction.
Wei-guo Pan	Prof. Wei-guo Pan earned his PhD in 1997 from Zhejiang University, he is currently a group leader at school of energy and mechanical engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power. His current research interests include clean and efficient utilization of energy and photocatalytic process for energy conversion and environmental protection.
Rui-tang Guo	Rui-tang Guo received his B.S., and PhD from Zhejiang University. In 2015, he worked as a professor of energy science in Shanghai University of Electric Power. His current research interest focuses on the preparation and performance study of SCR catalysts and photocatalysts used in CO2 reduction, H2 evolution and degradation of organic pollutants.
Xing Hu	Xing Hu received her B.S. degree from Southwest Petroleum University in 2019, and now she is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. Her current research interests focus on photocatalytic CO2 reduction.
Zhe-xu Bi	Zhe-xu Bi received his B.S. degree from Shenyang Institute of Engineering in 2020, and now he is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. His current research interests focus on photocatalytic reduction of CO2.
Juan Wang	Juan Wang received her B.S. degree from Nanjing Institute of Technology in 2020, and now she is pursuing her Master's degree at the College of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, P. R. China. Her current research interests focus on photocatalytic degradation.

 	Fig. 1  Photocatalytic reaction mechanism: (a) water splitting, (b) CO2 conversion, and (c) pollution degradation. Reproduced from ref. 43. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of prototypical vdW materials (a) graphene, (b) HBN, (c) SnSe, (d) black phosphorous, (e) MoS2, (f) Bi2Te3. Reproduced from ref. 66. Copyright 2017 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  Calculated band alignments for vdW materials. Reproduced from ref. 68. Copyright 2016 AIP.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations of vdW integration beyond materials. Reproduced from ref. 69. Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

Size	Wafer-scale	μm-cm level	
75 and 76
Thickness	Micron order	Atomic-scale
Structure	Body/body	Layer/layer	
77

Integration dimension	Monotonous and restricted	1D/1D, 0D/2D, 1D/2D, 2D/2D, 2D/3D and 3D–3D	
69

Quality	Interfacial stress, defects and atomic penetration are unavoidable	The interface structure tends to be perfect	
78

Interfacial contact	Dangling-bond, limited by the type of material	vdW interaction, no covalent bond between layers, not limited by lattice matching and material type	
79

Interaction	Strong	Weak	
80

Band structure	Unchanged	Tunable	
81


 	Fig. 5  The positions of the conduction band and valence band of (a) type-I, (b) type-II, (c) type-III vdWHs. (d) A schematic illustration of the charge transfer in Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism systems. Reproduced from ref. 85. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Band structure configuration and charge-transfer route of (a) type-II heterojunction and (b) S-scheme heterojunction. Reproduced from ref. 89. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

g-C3N4 (NH)/COF	S-scheme	CO2 reduction	The photocatalytic CO evolution rate for the heterojunction shows 45 and 15 times higher than that of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/COF, respectively	
90

TiO2/C3N4	S-scheme	CO2 reduction	The yield of CO of the optimized TiO2/C3N4 composite increased to 3.14 μmol g−1 h−1, which was more than twice that of TiO2 and C3N4. CH4 production also drastically increased	
91

CuNP/rGO	Type-II	CO2 reduction	—	
92

BiO2−x/BiOCl	Type-I	Cr(VI) reduction and rhodamine B (RhB) degradation	The BiO2−x/BiOCl porous nanosheets exhibited the superior removal efficiency of toxic Cr(VI) (87%) within 120 min when employing the LED as a simulated solar light resource	
93

g-C3N4/BiLuWO6	Z-scheme	Rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue (MB) degradation and hydrogen production	Degradation efficiencies of rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue (MB) were 93 and 85% under mercury lamp irradiation, respectively. The values were higher than 50 and 64% for g-C3N4 as well as 14 and 8% for BiLuWO6. The H2 evolution rate of the heterojunction was 289.08 μmol g−1 h−1 using xenon lamp irradiation, which was higher than 161.08 μmol g−1 h−1 of g-C3N4 and 13.13 μmol g−1 h−1 of BiLuWO6	
94

MoS2/ZnS	Type-I	OTC degradation	The prepared using 0.25 g of the zinc acetate precursor (denoted MoS2/ZnS-0.25) showed the highest photocatalytic activity: 81% OTC degradation in 180 min	
95

TNF/SCN TNS/SCN TNTs/SCN	S-scheme	Tetracycline hydrochloride (TC-HCl) degradation	The photoactivity of TNF/SCN with a suitable face–face contact represented a rate constant as high as 0.1642 min−1, which was 1.58 and 2.65 times of what on TNS/SCN (0.1036 min−1) and TNTs/SCN (0.0619 min−1), respectively	
96

WO3H2O/g-C3N4	Z-scheme	Hydrogen production	Due to the suitable band edge potentials for H2, O2 evolution, and remarkable charge transfer, the direct WO3H2O/g-C3N4 Z-scheme system exhibited prominent photocatalytic activity for both H2 and O2 production under visible-light illumination, the H2, O2 production rate up to 482 and 232 μmol g−1 h−1 respectively	
97

RP/CN	Type-II	Hydrogen production	The hydrogen production activity was 367.0 μmol g−1 h−1 under full arc illustration and 239.8 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation	
98

MoTe2/XS2 (X = Hf, Sn, Zr)	Z-scheme	Hydrogen production	—	
34

MoO3−xSx/MoS2	Type-II	Hydrogen production	—	
99

MoXY/g-C3N4	Type-I	Hydrogen production	The maximum solar-to-hydrogen efficiency using the entire solar spectrum reached up to 16.5% in these heterostructures	
100

g-C3N4/InSe	Type-II	Hydrogen production	—	
101

MoS2/WSe2	Type-II	Hydrogen production	—	
102


 	Fig. 7  Several preparation methods of vdWH photocatalysts. (a) The interface self-assembly method. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2019 MDPI. (b) Ultrasonic method. Reproduced from ref. 114. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (c) The mechanical mixing method. Reproduced from ref. 98. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) The liquid phase stripping method. Reproduced from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 MDPI. (e) The electrochemical-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation method. Reproduced from ref. 112. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Several methods used for photocatalytic characterization. (a) XRD patterns, (b) XPS spectra, (c) FT-IR spectra, (d) TEM images, (e) UV-vis DRS spectra, (f) Mott–Schottky plots, (g) transient photocurrent responses, (h) electrochemical impedance plots, (i) PL spectra. Reproduced from ref. 116. Copyright 2021 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The optimized geometric structure of GaSe/g-C3N4. (b) The band structures of GaSe/g-C3N4. (c) Charge density differences for the GaSe/g-C3N4. (d) The averaged electrostatic potential profile around the interface of the GaSe/g-C3N4. (e) Optical absorption spectra of GaSe/g-C3N4 and related monolayers. (f) The TDOS and PDOS for the GaSe/g-C3N4. Reproduced from ref. 133. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

Carbon nitride/C doped BN	Experimentally synthesized	Visible light	Z-type	The H2 production rate was 3357.1 μmol h−1 g−1	
110

BiVO4/WO3	First-principles investigation	Visible and ultraviolet light	II-type	—	
121

Phosphorene/g-C3N4	Experimentally synthesized	Visible light	I-type	The phosphorene/g-C3N4 nanocomposite shows an enhanced visible-light photocatalytic H2 production activity of 571 μmol h−1 g−1 in 18 v% lactic acid aqueous solution	
36

ZnSe/ZnSe(ea)x	Experimentally synthesized	Visible light	Z-type	The hydrogen evolution was 2875 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light irradiation (≥420 nm) and a notable quantum yield of 64.5% at 450 nm	
144

WS2/GCN	Hybrid density functional method	Visible light	II-type	—	
145

CdS/g-C3N4	Hybrid density functional study	Visible light	II-type	—	
146

MoSe2/Ti2CO2	First-principles calculations	Near-infrared, visible and ultraviolet light	Direct Z-scheme	—	
147

MoSe2/SnS2	Hybrid functional calculations	Visible light	Direct Z-scheme	
	
148

PtSe2/SiH	First-principles calculations	Visible light	II-type	—	
149

1D/2D carbon nanotube (CNT)/phosphorene (BP)	Density functional theory (DFT) computation	Near-infrared and visible light	II-type	—	
150

α-CSe/β-CSe	First-principles method	—	II-type	—	
151


 	Fig. 10  The calculated electronic structure of GeS/WO2 (a), GeS/WS2 (b), GeS/WSe2 (c), and GeS/WTe2 (d) vdW heterojunctions. (e) The plane-integrated electron density difference along the vertical direction for the GeS/WS2 heterojunction. (f) The partitioned band edge positions of GeS and WS2. The redox potentials of H+/H2 and H2O/O2 are presented with a black line; (g) and (h) are enlarged partial drawings for the redox potentials of H+/H2 and H2O/O2 of GeS and WS2 marked in (f) with the dashed circles, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic band structure alignment of g-CNNS/g-CNNF. (b) Room-temperature PL spectra, (c) photocurrent transient responses of g-CNNS, g-CNNF, and complexes (3:1), and (d) time-resolved PL. Reproduced from ref. 153. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM images of CN-COF. (b) UV-vis DRS spectra of different catalysts. (c) Catalytic activities of different catalysts. (d) Photoluminescence. Reproduced from ref. 158. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Top views of the (a) C2N monolayer and (b) aza-CMP monolayer. (c) Top and (d) side views of the C2N/aza-CMP HBL. (e) The calculated absorption coefficients of the C2N/aza-CMP HBL. (f) The averaged differential electron density along the z-direction of C2N/aza-CMP HBL. (g) The electronic band structure of the C2N/aza-CMP HBL projected onto C2N (red) and aza-CMP (blue) monolayers, and the CBM and VBM charge densities of band decomposition are presented in the right column. Reproduced from ref. 159. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The corresponding calculated band gaps. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance absorption spectra. (c) Evaluation of the photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation for the photocatalytic degradation of ceftriaxone sodium. (d) Cycling test for photocatalytic degradation. Reproduced from ref. 172. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM images of (a) bare BiOCl, (b) ZnIn2S4, (c) 10% ZnIn2S4/BiOCl. (d) HRTEM images of the 1 wt% CQDs-10% ZnIn2S4/BiOCl composites. (e) and (f) Photocatalytic degradation of TC with various samples. (g) Dynamic curves of the photodegradation of TC under NIR light irradiation. (h) The photocatalytic degradation properties of the 1 wt% CQDs-10% ZnIn2S4/BiOCl under visible and full-spectrum light irradiation. (i) TOC removal ratio of TC over different photocatalysts under visible light. Reproduced from ref. 171. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
