The optical properties of dumbbell-type nanorods for solar photothermal conversion  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP04287H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP04287H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 27949-27956The optical properties of dumbbell-type nanorods for solar photothermal conversion

        
          
            Chunlei 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Caiyan 
            Qin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Zou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haotuo 
            Liu
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xiaohu 
            Wu
          
        
      *c
aCollege of Electromechanical Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266061, China. E-mail: zb-sh@163.com
bSchool of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China
cShandong Institute of Advanced Technology, Jinan, 250100, China. E-mail: xiaohu.wu@iat.cn
dSchool of Energy Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, China
Received 
      14th September 2022
    , Accepted 24th October 2022First published on 25th October 2022AbstractDue to localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), plasmonic nanoparticles have exciting potential for improving solar photothermal conversion performance and have been extensively studied. However, in addition to enhanced solar absorption, scattering is also enhanced with the occurrence of LSPR, which is detrimental to the direct absorption of solar energy. The nanoparticles that can excite magnetic resonance can alleviate the above problem but have rarely been studied. In this work, we propose a dumbbell-type nanorod that can excite both electrical resonance and magnetic resonance. The analysis of its optical properties reveals that the dumbbell-type nanorod can excite multiple absorption peaks to enhance absorption while reducing scattering. The mechanism is the coupling between electrical resonance and magnetic resonance. Furthermore, the analysis with the slotted position of the dumbbell-type nanorod shows that the slotting should not occur at the two ends of the nanorod. It is also shown that the optical properties of the dumbbell-type nanorod can be effectively tuned by adjusting the geometric parameters of the slot. The dumbbell-type nanorods are promising for solar photothermal conversion and can be a candidate material for direct absorption solar collectors (DASCs).
1. Introduction
Numerous scholars believe that burning fossil fuels, which emits large amounts of CO2 is the main cause of the rapid increase in CO2 concentration in the atmosphere.1–3 The continued growth of CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions will lead to global warming, triggering a series of natural phenomena such as a global redistribution of precipitation, melting glaciers and permafrost, and rising sea levels. This will further endanger the balance of natural ecosystems and the living environment of human beings. Therefore, searching for clean and harmless alternative energy sources has become an urgent task for scientists in related fields. As one of the most promising renewable and clean energy sources, solar energy has been widely studied in recent years.4,5 The current common ways of utilizing solar energy are photovoltaic and solar thermal utilization technologies. Solar thermal utilization is one of the most efficient, technically mature, and economically efficient solar energy utilization technologies. It can be widely used in solar collectors,6 solar distillation,7 solar agriculture,8 photothermal catalytic hydrogen production,9 photothermal power generation,10 and so on.11–13
Solar collectors play a pivotal role in solar thermal utilization and can be divided into various forms. Direct absorption solar collectors (DASCs) are highly valued by researchers because of their simplicity of fabrication, uniform working fluid distribution, low cost, and low heat loss.14,15 It works on the principle that the working fluid directly absorbs solar radiation to convert it into thermal energy to meet the demand of the load. It reduces the collector surface temperature, potentially reducing the energy loss to the surrounding environment. Furthermore, nanofluids have received much attention from researchers in DASC applications due to their good thermophysical properties and a relatively uniform temperature distribution. For instance, Wang et al.16 synthesized an ultra-stable Ti3C2Tx–H2O nanofluid as a working fluid for DASCs. The thin-layered Ti3C2Tx nanofluid achieved a photothermal conversion of up to 91.9% at a mass fraction of 0.02 wt%. Li et al.17 prepared monolayer graphene (SLG) and graphene oxide (GO)-based nanofluids, which improved the photothermal conversion efficiencies by about 189% and 172%, respectively, compared to pure water in the DASC mode.
In general, nanoparticles are defined as particles smaller than 100 nm. Their size, structure, and material have a major impact on the optical properties of nanofluids.18,19 With the progress of nanotechnology, the requirements for the size and structure of nanoparticles have gradually increased. The wet chemical method is one of the most commonly used bottom-up methods to adjust the size or shape of metal nanoparticles. By introducing additives, various nanoparticle shapes can be obtained, such as cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) for nanorods20 and sodium citrate or trisodium citrate for spheres.21 Photolithography is a commonly used top-down method for preparing nanoparticles. This technique can be applied to prepare plasma nanoparticles with arbitrary two-dimensional shapes.22 The above methods offer the possibility of preparing specially structured nanoparticles.
Techniques based on surface plasmon resonance (SPR) allow breaking the limits of conventional optical diffraction and therefore have potential applications in the field of integrated optics.23,24 This phenomenon has the property of causing a local enhancement of electromagnetic waves, which can greatly improve the absorption efficiency of solar energy.25 The advantage of plasma nanoparticles with induced resonance absorption is the main reason for improving the photothermal conversion performance of nanofluids. That is, when the photon energy matches the vibrational frequency of the free electrons on the surface of the plasma nanoparticles, a strong local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is excited on the surface of the particles, which can substantially increase the absorption efficiency of the nanoparticles at the resonance wavelength.26,27 Chen et al.28 designed Cu@C core–shell nanoparticles to greatly improve the solar absorption performance of the nanoparticles by exploiting the coupling effect between the LSPR of the Cu core and the strong intrinsic absorption of the C shell. Seo et al.29 studied the spectral absorption coefficients of plasma nanofluids using a modern design method of genetic algorithm (GA). They obtained the best combination of hybrid nanofluids with the ideal spectral distribution of absorption coefficients. Luo et al.30 prepared reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-containing plasmonic nanofluids with titanium nitride (TiN) nanoparticles as modifiers. Based on the synergy between the LSPR effect of TiN and the high thermal conductivity of rGO, the maximum photothermal conversion efficiency of the plasma nanofluid at a concentration of 40 ppm is 66.74%, which is about 23% higher than that of pure water. Table 1 Summarizes some previous research studies on plasma nanoparticles. Besides the application in nanofluidic photothermal conversion, SPR-based technology can also be used in solar cells31 and metamaterial solar absorbers.32
Table 1 Comparison of studies based on plasma nanoparticles




Ref.
Nanoparticles
Results
Disadvantages





28

Cu@C core/shell
The solar energy absorption efficiency is 95.6% at a nanofluid volume fraction fv = 100 ppm and a height h = 3 mm.
High cost, many consumables and complex structure.



30

TiN@rGO
At a concentration of 40 ppm, the conversion efficiency is approximately 23% higher than that of pure water.
High cost, many consumables and complex structure.



33

Au/WO3−x heterostructures
With 61.8% solar thermal conversion efficiency
Complex structure and high cost.



34

Ag dimer
Three absorption peaks can be excited to expand the solar energy absorption range.
High consumables and limited improvement in absorption performance



35

Au thorn
The solar absorption efficiency of Au thorns is approximately 47.5% higher than that of Au spheres.
Complex structure and high cost.



36

Ag nanoparticles with sharp edges
At the same volume fraction, the solar weighted absorption coefficients of tetragonal nanoparticles are 35% and 20% higher than those of nanospheres and nanorods, respectively.
Hard control of sharp edge synthesis




However, the presence of LSPR also leads to enhanced scattering, which can cause solar energy to scatter out of the collector to the detriment of solar energy absorption. In a study by Gerislioglu et al.37, it was found that the surface lattice resonance due to LSPR diffraction coupling causes a narrowing of the resonance line width. To control the scattering efficiency of nanoparticles to achieve effective solar energy absorption, Qin et al.38 proposed an Ag–SiO2–Ag nanodisk structure of nanoparticles, which can excite not only LSPR peaks but also magnetic resonance peaks, in which the scattering efficiency is significantly reduced. This helps in avoiding sunlight being dispersed out of the solar collector. So far, little attention has been paid to nanoparticles that can induce magnetic resonance.
In this work, we propose a dumbbell-type nanorod for solar photothermal conversion, which is obtained by slotting based on the ordinary Ag nanorod. The optical properties of the proposed dumbbell-type nanorods are investigated based on the finite element method (FEM). The dumbbell-type nanorods can excite more absorption peaks to enhance the absorption of solar energy compared with ordinary Ag nanorods. The mechanism of its enhanced solar absorption is investigated by analyzing the electromagnetic field distribution at the resonance wavelength. The dumbbell-type nanorod exhibits not only LSPR excitation, but also good magnetic resonance excitation. In addition, the effect of different slotting positions on the dumbbell-type nanorod is also analyzed. The tunability of its optical properties is demonstrated by changing the geometric parameters. The proposed dumbbell-type nanorods that combine electrical resonance and magnetic resonance promote the efficient absorption of solar energy.
2. Methods and modeling
The dumbbell-type nanorod proposed in this work is shown in Fig. 1. The material of the dumbbell-type nanorod is chosen for Ag because it has a smaller loss factor in the visible spectrum than other metals.39 The surrounding basic working fluid is water, and the refractive index is set to 1.33. The optical constants of Ag and water are taken from ref. 40. Specifically, the Wave Optics Module in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.5 is applied. In the modeling, a perfectly matched layer is added around the nanoparticles to absorb the electromagnetic waves completely. The cross-sectional area of a sphere with the same volume as the dumbbell-type nanorod is adopted to calculate the absorption and scattering efficiency. The size type for the grid cells is selected as superfin. Besides the material and structure, the geometrical parameters of the nanoparticles can also have a critical impact on their optical properties. The geometrical parameters of the dumbbell-type nanorod are initially set as follows: diameter D = 30 nm, length L = 60 nm, slot depth a = 5 nm, and slot width t = 5 nm. These dimensions are fixed in this study until further explanation.
 Fig. 1  Structure diagram of the dumbbell-type nanorod. The diameter is D, the length of the dumbbell-type nanorod is L, the slot depth is a, and the slot width is t. 
The optical properties of a single NP are obtained using the COMSOL Multiphysics simulation software, based on the FEM to solve the Helmholtz vector equations:41 ∇ × (μr−1∇ × E) − k20εrE = 0(1)where μr is the relative magnetic permeability, E is the electric field, k0 is the wave number, and εr = (n − ik)2 is the dielectric function. n and k are the refractive index and extinction coefficient, respectively.
According to the electromagnetic field distribution, the heat power density can be written as follows:42 (2)where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ω is the frequency of the incidence light, and ε′′ is the imaginary part of the material permittivity. The absorption cross-section represents the ratio of the total absorption intensity to the incidence light intensity, and its calculation formula is43 (3)and the scattered power can be obtained from the Poynting vector. Finally, the scattering cross-section is obtained as follows: (4)where I0 is the intensity of the incidence light, V is the volume of the NP, n is the incidence normal vector, Ssca is the scattered intensity vector, and S is the surface area of the NP.
The dimensionless absorption efficiency and scattering efficiency can be used to characterize the optical response of NPs as44 (5) (6)where σ is the projected area of the NP. It is worth noting that FEM has limitations and the random distribution of nanoparticles in water. Therefore, the absorption and scattering efficiency need to be calculated when the light is incidence polarized in different directions to take the average value.45 Considering the symmetry of the dumbbell-type nanorod, the average of the three directional components (i.e., x-incidence with z-polarization, x-incidence with y-polarization, and z-incidence with x-polarization) is studied here.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Resonance modes of the dumbbell-type nanorod
To show the advantages of the proposed dumbbell-type nanorod for solar energy absorption, Ag nanorods of the same diameter and length are compared. Fig. 2 shows the comparison of the average absorption efficiency and scattering albedo of the dumbbell-type nanorods with ordinary Ag nanorods in three directions along a wavelength range of 300–1300 nm. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the four absorption peaks of the dumbbell-type nanorods are located near the wavelengths of 395 nm, 475 nm, 535 nm and 790 nm, respectively. The three absorption peaks of the ordinary Ag nanorods are located near the wavelengths of 385 nm, 475 nm and 645 nm, respectively. It is obvious that the dumbbell-type nanorod excites one more absorption peak than the normal nanorods. This is beneficial for enhancing the absorption of solar energy. The scattering albedo in Fig. 2(b) is the ratio of the scattering efficiency to the extinction efficiency, where the extinction efficiency is the sum of absorption and the scattering efficiency.46 It can be found that the dumbbell-type nanorod has lower scattering, which means that less solar energy is scattered from the collector in actual use. This facilitates the effective absorption of solar energy. It is important to note that the final results of the comparison here are the average values. Subsequently, the resonance peaks excited when plane waves are incident in different directions will be discussed from the perspective of enhanced solar absorption mechanisms. A comparison of the solar absorption spectra of the two nanoparticle suspensions at 20 mm thickness and 10 ppm volume fraction is shown in Fig. 3(c). The absorption of dumbbell-shaped nanorods is reduced between the 600 and 700 nm bands. However, the absorption in the near-infrared spectral region is enhanced. The calculations show that the solar spectral absorption efficiency of the dumbbell-type nanorod suspension is 83.8%, compared with that of ordinary nanorods of 77.5%, an improvement of 6.3%. In addition, if two types of nanoparticles can be mixed, the absorption efficiency of solar energy can be further improved by combining the absorption advantages of both in different wavelength bands. We will explore it in future research.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of the average (a) absorption efficiency, (b) scattering albedo, and (c) absorption spectra of the dumbbell-type nanorod with an ordinary Ag nanorod. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Plane wave incident and polarization directions. (b) Absorption efficiency and scattering albedo for x-incidence with z-polarization and the time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field at (c and d) λ = 410 nm, (e and f) λ = 535 nm, and (g and h) λ = 790 nm, respectively. 
To understand the resonance mechanism of dumbbell-type nanorods, the optical properties when light is incident in different directions are discussed separately by the electromagnetic field distribution at the resonance peak. Fig. 3(a) shows the incidence and polarization directions of plane waves on dumbbell-type nanorods. And, Fig. 3(b) shows the absorption efficiency and scattering albedo for x-incidence with z-polarization. There are two insignificant absorption peaks located at λ = 350 nm and λ = 410 nm. However, there are two distinct absorption peaks located at λ = 535 nm and λ = 790 nm. Furthermore, the scattering occurs significantly lower between the third and fourth absorption peaks, which is very favorable for the effective absorption of solar energy.

Fig. 3(c, e and g) show the electric field distribution corresponding to the second, third and fourth absorption peaks of the absorption curve. Fig. 3(d, f, and h) show the corresponding magnetic field distributions. The arrows indicate the electric field vector when the phase = 0 degree. In Fig. 3(c), the electric field at the 410 nm absorption peak is significantly enhanced at the slotted area and the corner part of the nanorod. Fig. 3(d) shows that the magnetic field is symmetrically distributed along the plane wave incident direction, but the intensity is weaker. The direction of the electric vector is aligned with the direction of the incidence electric field, which is consistent with the characteristics of electric resonance.47 The electromagnetic field distribution of the 410 nm absorption peak indicates that the resonance peak is caused by the LSPR.38 In Fig. 3(e), the electric field enhancement at the 535 nm resonance peak occurs mainly near the corners and slotted areas. The electric field is symmetrically distributed along the direction of incidence. The electric vectors form clockwise and counterclockwise vortices in the positive and negative directions of the x-axis at the slot, respectively. Moreover, the magnetic field is symmetrically distributed along the plane wave incident direction, as shown in Fig. 3(f). The left half and a small part on the right side are significantly enhanced. The distributions of the electric and magnetic fields indicate that the resonance mode of the absorption peak generated at 535 nm is the magnetic resonance.48 However, the significant enhancement of the electric field near the slot tip is due to the lightning rod effect at the slot tip.49 It can be seen from Fig. 3(g) that the electric field enhancement at the 790 nm resonance peak occurs mainly near the slot. The electric vectors formed clockwise and counterclockwise vortices in the positive and negative directions of the x-axis, respectively. The magnetic field distribution is similar to that at the 535 nm resonance peak, but with a higher intensity, as shown in Fig. 3(h). The distribution of the electric and magnetic fields suggests that the absorption peak at 790 nm is also due to the magnetic resonance. The combined Fig. 3(b) shows that the excitation of the magnetic resonance at 535 nm and 790 nm leads to much lower scattering, which is beneficial for solar energy absorption.

Fig. 4 shows the absorption efficiency and scattering albedo for plane wave z-incidence with x-polarization, and the electromagnetic field distribution at each absorption peak. From Fig. 4(b), it can be seen that the plane wave incident in this direction can excite two distinct absorption peaks and a small absorption peak sandwiched in between, where scattering is not significantly reduced. Fig. 4(c and d) show the electric and magnetic field distributions of the absorption peak at λ = 395 nm, respectively. The electric field enhancement occurs only at the corners of the dumbbell-type nanorod. The direction of the electric vector is consistent with the direction of the incidence electric field, which is consistent with the characteristics of the electric resonance. The magnetic field is partially symmetrical and gradually decreases along the plane wave incident direction. Since the enhanced electric field is limited to the interface angle, this electric resonance can be attributed to the LSPR.38,47 In Fig. 4(e and f), the electromagnetic field distribution at the λ = 475 nm resonance peak is similar to that at λ = 395 nm and can still be attributed to the LSPR.
 Fig. 4  (a) Plane wave incident and polarization directions. (b) Absorption efficiency and scattering albedo for z-incidence with x-polarization and the time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field at (c and d) λ = 395 nm, and (e and f) λ = 475 nm, respectively. 
The absorption and scattering curves of the plane wave for x-incidence with y-polarization coincide with z-incidence with x-polarization. This phenomenon is caused by the absorption of the NPs from the polarization direction of the incidence light.49 The resonance modes of the excited resonance peaks are also the same, and we will not dwell on them here. One can see that not only the LSPR but also the magnetic resonance can be excited in the dumbbell-type nanorods to enhance the absorption of solar energy. The absorption summit generated by magnetic resonance excitation leads to smaller scattering and is more conducive to the effective solar energy absorption.
3.2 Effect of the slot location
It is well known that the structure of nanoparticles can have an important effect on their optical properties. Here, we consider the effect of the dumbbell-type nanorod slot position on its solar absorption performance. Fig. 5(a) shows the comparison of the absorption efficiencies when slotted in the middle, top, and ¼ part of the nanorod. It is obvious that the top slotting case will excite one less absorption peak near the 700–800 nm band than the other two cases. In addition, Fig. 5(b) shows that its scattering is higher than the other two cases. The previous analysis initially determined that this phenomenon is caused by the top slotting without the excitation of the magnetic resonance.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of (a) absorption efficiency and (b) scattering albedo at different slot locations. The absorption efficiencies of the (c) top slotting case and (d) the ¼ part slotting case when the plane waves incident in different directions. 

Fig. 5(c) shows the absorption efficiency of the top slotting case when the plane wave is incidence in different directions. In contrast to Fig. 3(a), the top slotting nanorod less excited absorption peak is the case of the plane wave for x-incidence with z-polarization. As shown in Fig. 5(d), while the case of slotting at ¼ of the nanorod excites absorption peaks similar to the case of slotting in the middle. Thus, the top slotting case is at a disadvantage in terms of solar absorption compared to the other two cases. In the following, we further elucidate the solar absorption performance based on the electromagnetic field distribution at the typical resonance peak.

Fig. 6(a–f) show the electric and magnetic field distributions of the top slotting case for x-incidence with z-polarization at the 625 nm absorption peak, for x-incidence with y-polarization at the 470 nm absorption peak, and for z-incidence with x-polarization at the 385 nm absorption peak, respectively. The arrows indicate the electric field vector when the phase = 0 degree. The direction of the electric vector for x-incidence with z-polarization at the 625 nm resonance peak coincides with the direction of the incidence electric field, which is consistent with the characteristics of the electrical resonance. The electric field is significantly enhanced at the corners of the dumbbell-type nanorod, and the electric field in the longitudinal section of the nanorods is also relatively strong. The magnetic field is significantly enhanced in the left part of the nanorods and in a small part on the right side. Its resonance mode can be attributed to propagating surface plasmon resonance (PSPR),14 which is generated by the same mechanism as the LSPR and often occurs on the surface of metal nanorods.50 The electromagnetic field distribution for x-incidence with y-polarization at the 470 nm resonance peak and the direction of the electric vector indicate that the resonance mode is still typical of LSPR. And, the electric field enhancement for z-incidence with x-polarization at 385 nm resonance peaks occurs mainly at the corners. Both the electric and magnetic fields are symmetrically distributed along the plane wave incident direction. The direction of the electric vector coincides with the direction of the incidence electric field. The resonance peak here can be attributed to the LSPR.38,47
 Fig. 6  Time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field for (a and b) x-incidence with z-polarization at λ = 625 nm, (c and d) x-incidence with y-polarization at λ = 470 nm, and (e and f) z-incidence with x-polarization at λ = 385 nm. 
In the following, the effect of the slotted position is illustrated by analyzing the slotted condition at 1/4 of the nanorod. Fig. 7(a–d) show the electromagnetic field distributions at the 560 nm and 770 nm resonance peaks for the plane wave x-incidence with z-polarization. The distribution of the electromagnetic field at these two locations has a common feature: the electric vector forms a clockwise or counterclockwise vortex around the slot. It indicates that both resonance peaks are excited by the magnetic resonance.48 Also, the electric fields in the vicinity of the slots are all significantly enhanced. The magnetic field is significantly enhanced on the left and a small part of the right side of the nanorods. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the excitation of the magnetic resonance at these two sites resulted in a reduction of the scattering in the 500–800 nm band range. Fig. 7(e and f) show the electromagnetic field distribution at 385 nm for x-incidence with y-polarization. Similar to Fig. 6(c and d), it is attributed to the LSPR in the electrical resonance. Fig. 7(g and h) show the electromagnetic field distribution at 480 nm for z-incidence with x-polarization. The electromagnetic field is symmetrically distributed along the plane wave incident direction, and the electric field is enhanced mainly at the corners of the slot and the nanorod. The absorption peak is considered to be excited by the LSPR.38,47
 Fig. 7  Time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field for (a and b) x-incidence with z-polarization at λ = 560 nm, (c and d) λ = 770 nm, (e and f) x-incidence with y-polarization at λ = 385 nm, and (g and h) z-incidence with x-polarization at λ = 480 nm. 
In summary, it can be found that there is no excitation of magnetic resonance when the top of the nanorods is slotted. It makes slot at the top of the nanorods less effective than slotting in the middle and other locations of the nanorods to improve solar energy absorption. This should be avoided as much as possible in the future synthesis process.
3.3 Effects of geometrical parameters and materials
Besides the structure of the nanoparticles, their geometrical parameters and materials also have an important impact on the optical properties.18,38 We investigate the tunability of the absorption peak by varying the size of the dumbbell-type nanorod slot width t and slot depth a. When one parameter is changed, the other parameters remain unchanged. Fig. 8 shows the absorption efficiency and scattering albedo of the dumbbell-type nanorod when the width and depth of the slot are varied. As shown in Fig. 8(a), the first absorption peak does not change significantly with the increasing slot width t. The intensity of the second absorption peak increases, while the third absorption peak undergoes a slight blue-shift. A slight increase in the intensity of the fourth absorption peak occurred. With the increasing width t, the scattering in Fig. 8(b) does not change significantly. As shown in Fig. 8(c), the first and second absorption peaks do not change significantly as the slot depth a increases. The third absorption peak increases in the intensity and is slightly red-shifted. The intensity of the fourth absorption peak is slightly reduced but red-shifted, which is favorable to broaden the absorption spectrum of solar energy. In addition, the scattering of the dumbbell-type nanorod decreases overall as depth a increases, as shown in Fig. 8(d). The above analysis shows that the resonance peaks of dumbbell-type nanorods can be effectively tuned by adjusting the binding parameters of the slot. This tunability helps the broadband effective absorption to be achieved by mixing dumbbell-type nanorods with different geometrical parameters in applications such as DASCs.
 Fig. 8  The effect of the slot width on (a) absorption efficiency and (b) scattering albedo, and the effect of the slot depth on (c) absorption efficiency and (d) scattering albedo. 
Furthermore, we analyze the solar absorption properties of dumbbell-type nanorods with different materials. As shown in Fig. 9, we compare the absorption efficiency and scattering albedo of common metallic materials (Ag, Au, and Cu). The spectral absorption efficiencies of the nanoparticles with different metallic materials in Fig. 9(a) are clearly different. In the band range we calculate, Ag can excite more absorption peaks compared to Au and Cu. However, Ag does have the strongest scattering, as shown in Fig. 9(b). The similar conclusions have been made in ref. 51. The material selection of nanoparticles is subject to comprehensive consideration. In the practical application of DASCs, combining nanoparticles with different materials is expected to achieve the broadband solar absorption.
 Fig. 9  Comparison of the (a) absorption efficiency and (b) scattering albedo with different metallic materials. 
In practical applications, dumbbell-shaped nanorods can be prepared using photolithography and classical wet chemical method phases.52–54 Although there are challenges in fabricating dumbbell-shaped nanorods, it is clear from the above calculations that the effect of fabrication errors on their solar absorption performance is within a manageable range. Therefore, it is feasible to fabricate the dumbbell-shaped nanorods described in this study using nanotechnology.
4. Conclusions
In this work, we present and numerically simulate the optical properties of dumbbell-type nanorods for solar thermal conversion. The results show that plane waves can excite different absorption peaks at different incident directions. The electric and magnetic field analysis of the dumbbell-type nanorod shows that these absorption peaks are caused by electrical resonance and magnetic resonance. Compared to the electrical resonance, the excitation of the magnetic resonance allows for smaller scattering, which facilitates the effective absorption of solar energy. We also analyze the effect of the slot position on the optical properties of dumbbell-type nanorods. It is found that the solar energy absorption performance is weaker when the top of the nanorod is slotted than the other cases. This is due to the absence of excitation by the magnetic resonance in the top slotting. In addition, the study of the geometrical parameters of dumbbell-type nanorods shows that the size and position of the absorption peaks as well as the corresponding scattering albedo are highly tunable. Nanoparticles with different materials can be applied to hybrid nanofluidic systems to achieve the broadband solar absorption. The above work demonstrates the superiority of dumbbell-type nanorods, which can simultaneously excite the electrical resonance and magnetic resonance in enhancing solar energy absorption and reducing scattering. We believe that the dumbbell-type nanorods have a promising application in solar thermal applications.
Author contributions
Funding acquisition: X. H. Wu; methodology: C. L. Sun and Y. Zou; supervision: C. Y. Qin, B. Zhang and X. H. Wu; writing – original draft: C. L. Sun, Y. Zou and H. T. Liu; writing – review and editing: C. L. Sun, C. Y. Qin, B. Zhang and X. H. Wu. All the authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52106099) and the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2020LLZ004).
References
C. C. Cormos, Fuel, 2021, 298, 120794 CrossRef CAS .
U. K. Rout, K. Akimoto, F. Sano, J. Oda, T. Homma and T. Tomoda, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 3477–3484 CrossRef .
E. Billig, M. Decker, W. Benzinger, F. Ketelsen, P. Pfeifer, R. Peters and D. Stolten, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 30, 130–141 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Gao, T. H. Kwan, Y. N. Dabwan, M. B. Hu, Y. Hao, T. Zhang and G. Pei, Appl. Energy, 2022, 322, 119500 CrossRef .
C. Hachem-Vermette, Sol. Energy Adv., 2022, 100018 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y. R. Wang, S. J. You, Z. X. Wu, M. Fan, L. W. Wang and S. Wei, Sol. Energy, 2021, 227, 224–235 CrossRef .
W. Huang, P. W. Su, Y. Cao, C. C. Li, D. L. Chen, X. L. Tian, Y. Q. Su, B. Qiao, J. C. Tu and X. H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104465 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Shen, R. N. Lou, Y. Park, Y. N. Guo, E. J. Stallknecht, Y. Z. Xiao, D. Rieder, R. G. Yang, E. S. Runkle and X. B. Yin, Nat. Food, 2021, 2, 434–441 CrossRef .
J. H. Li, M. Hatami, Y. L. Huang, B. Luo, D. W. Jing and L. J. Ma, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.05.027 .
L. Y. Yuan, Q. Z. Zhu, T. Zhang, R. Duan and H. T. Zhu, Renewable Energy, 2021, 169, 1121–1133 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, A. K. Pandey, M. Samykano, B. Aljafari, Z. J. Ma, S. Bhattacharyya, V. Goel, L. Ali, R. Kothari and V. V. Tyagi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2022, 165, 112611 CrossRef .
K. F. Fong, C. K. Lee and Z. Lin, Renewable Energy, 2019, 131, 413–421 CrossRef .
A. T. Naikwadi, A. B. Samui and P. A. Mahanwar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 215, 110676 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, M. J. Chen, H. J. Yan, P. Zhou and X. Y. Chen, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2020, 178, 115561 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Balakin, M. Stava and A. Kosinska, Sol. Energy, 2022, 239, 33–39 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Wang, Y. X. Fang, W. Yu, L. L. Wang, H. Q. Xie and Y. N. Yue, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 220, 110850 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Li, A. K. Kan, K. X. Wang, Y. He, N. Zheng and W. Yu, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2022, 203, 117948 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Sun, Y. Zou, C. Y. Qin, M. J. Chen, X. K. Li, B. Zhang and X. H. Wu, Renewable Energy, 2022, 189, 402–411 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pu, C. Shen, S. X. Yang, C. X. Zhang, D. Chwieduk and S. A. Kalogirou, Energy, 2022, 245, 123289 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Daniel and D. Astruc, ChemInform, 2004, 35, 293–346 CrossRef .
M. J. Chen, Y. R. He, J. Huang and J. Q. Zhu, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 108, 1894–1900 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gonçalves, T. Makaryan, F. Enderle, S. Wiedemann, A. Plettl, O. Marti and P. Ziemann, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 448–458 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Deng, G. T. Cao, H. Yang, X. Q. Zhou and Y. W. Wu, Plasmonics, 2018, 13, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, G. T. Cao, Y. W. Wu, X. Q. Zhou and W. H. Liao, Plasmonics, 2015, 10, 1537–1543 CrossRef .
H. Chen, Z. H. Chen, H. Yang, L. H. Wen, Z. Yi, Z. G. Zhou, B. Dai, J. G. Zhang, X. W. Wu and P. H. Wu, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 7821–7829 RSC .
P. K. Jain, X. H. Huang, L. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gonome, T. Hirai, B. J. Lee and M. Kashiwagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 119, 133903 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chen, D. L. Wu, P. Zhou, M. J. Chen and H. J. Yan, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 56(2), 13659–13672 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Seo, C. Y. Qin, J. Lee and B. J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 8891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Q. Luo, Y. R. Han, T. T. Yang, J. Y. Li, H. Wang, W. J. Chen and X. K. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 630, 127549 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, J. C. Lin, Z. H. Lei, Z. Yi, F. Qin, J. G. Zhang, L. Liu, X. W. Wu, W. X. Yang and P. H. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 4871–4880 RSC .
F. Q. Zhou, F. Qin, Z. Yi, W. T. Yao, Z. M. Liu, X. W. Wu and P. H. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 17041–17048 RSC .
Y. M. Ren, D. S. Feng, C. Feng, X. X. Dong and Z. H. Chen, Mater. Today Commun., 2022, 31, 103631 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Sun, C. Y. Qin, H. Zhai, B. Zhang and X. H. Wu, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Chen, X. Z. Wang, Y. W. Hu and Y. R. He, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2020, 250, 107029 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Qin, J. B. Kim, H. Gonome and B. J. Lee, Renewable Energy, 2020, 145, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gerislioglu, L. L. Dong, A. Ahmadivand, H. T. Hu, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2087–2093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Qin, Y. M. Guo, J. Seo, Y. Shuai, J. Lee and B. J. Lee, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 15731–15743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Cai and V. M. Shalaev, In Optical Metamaterials, Springer: New York, NY, USA,  2010 Search PubMed .

          E. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, Academic Press, Cambridge, MA, USA,  1998 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, A. O. Pinchuk, J. M. Mcmahon, S. Li, L. K. Ausman, A. L. Atkinson and G. C. Schatz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1710–1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Loudon, J. Phys. A: Gen. Phys., 1970, 3, 233–245 CrossRef .
X. J. Wang, Y. Q. Wang, X. X. Yang and Y. Cao, Sol. Energy, 2019, 181, 439–451 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chehaidar and M. Hadded, Opt. Mater., 2019, 95, 109207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, N. Chander, V. K. Gupta and R. Kukreja, Sol. Energy, 2021, 227, 365–425 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang and X. X. Li, Int. J. Numer. Methods Heat Fluid Flow, 2014, 24, 1762–1768 CrossRef .
L. Cui, M. Y. Huang, Y. M. You, Y. J. Zhang, G. M. Li, S. L. Liu and C. K. Liu, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 1480–1487 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Jia, Y. Shuai, S. D. Xu and H. P. Tan, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A1096–A1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qin, J. B. Kim, H. Gonome and B. J. Lee, Renewable Energy, 2020, 145, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Cheng and M. T. Sun, Opt. Commun., 2021, 499, 127277 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wen, X. K. Li, W. J. Chen and J. H. Liu, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 624, 126837 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sharma, R. Rathi, J. Misharwal, B. Sinhmar, S. Kumari, J. Dalal and A. Kumar, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 2754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, T. Wu, M. Aldeghi, T. C. Wu, A. Aspuru-Guzik and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 701–716 CrossRef .
P. P. Kumar, M. L. D. Bhatlu, K. Sukanya, S. Karthikeyan and N. Jayan, Mater. Today Proc., 2021, 37, 3028–3030 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:


28
	Cu@C core/shell	The solar energy absorption efficiency is 95.6% at a nanofluid volume fraction fv = 100 ppm and a height h = 3 mm.	High cost, many consumables and complex structure.

30
	TiN@rGO	At a concentration of 40 ppm, the conversion efficiency is approximately 23% higher than that of pure water.	High cost, many consumables and complex structure.

33
	Au/WO3−x heterostructures	With 61.8% solar thermal conversion efficiency	Complex structure and high cost.

34
	Ag dimer	Three absorption peaks can be excited to expand the solar energy absorption range.	High consumables and limited improvement in absorption performance

35
	Au thorn	The solar absorption efficiency of Au thorns is approximately 47.5% higher than that of Au spheres.	Complex structure and high cost.

36
	Ag nanoparticles with sharp edges	At the same volume fraction, the solar weighted absorption coefficients of tetragonal nanoparticles are 35% and 20% higher than those of nanospheres and nanorods, respectively.	Hard control of sharp edge synthesis

 	Fig. 1  Structure diagram of the dumbbell-type nanorod. The diameter is D, the length of the dumbbell-type nanorod is L, the slot depth is a, and the slot width is t.	 
∇ × (μr−1∇ × E) − k20εrE = 0	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of the average (a) absorption efficiency, (b) scattering albedo, and (c) absorption spectra of the dumbbell-type nanorod with an ordinary Ag nanorod.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Plane wave incident and polarization directions. (b) Absorption efficiency and scattering albedo for x-incidence with z-polarization and the time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field at (c and d) λ = 410 nm, (e and f) λ = 535 nm, and (g and h) λ = 790 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Plane wave incident and polarization directions. (b) Absorption efficiency and scattering albedo for z-incidence with x-polarization and the time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field at (c and d) λ = 395 nm, and (e and f) λ = 475 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of (a) absorption efficiency and (b) scattering albedo at different slot locations. The absorption efficiencies of the (c) top slotting case and (d) the ¼ part slotting case when the plane waves incident in different directions.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field for (a and b) x-incidence with z-polarization at λ = 625 nm, (c and d) x-incidence with y-polarization at λ = 470 nm, and (e and f) z-incidence with x-polarization at λ = 385 nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  Time-averaged square of the electric field and magnetic field for (a and b) x-incidence with z-polarization at λ = 560 nm, (c and d) λ = 770 nm, (e and f) x-incidence with y-polarization at λ = 385 nm, and (g and h) z-incidence with x-polarization at λ = 480 nm.	 

 	Fig. 8  The effect of the slot width on (a) absorption efficiency and (b) scattering albedo, and the effect of the slot depth on (c) absorption efficiency and (d) scattering albedo.	 

 	Fig. 9  Comparison of the (a) absorption efficiency and (b) scattering albedo with different metallic materials.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
