A novel wrap-around metal contact optimized for radial p–n junction Si wire solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE24494F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24494F
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1756-1760A novel wrap-around metal contact optimized for radial p–n junction Si wire solar cells†Sun-Mi Shin, Jin-Young Jung, Kwang-Tae Park, Han-Don Um, Sang-Won Jee, Yoon-Ho Nam and Jung-Ho Lee*Department of Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791, Korea. E-mail: jungho@hanyang.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 31 419 7203;   Tel: +82 31 400 5278Received 26th December 2012, Accepted 27th March 2013First published on 27th March 2013AbstractWe demonstrate wrap-around top metal contacts for radial junction silicon wire solar cells. A thin Ag sheet surrounds the silicon wires close to the planar bottom contacts. A fill factor of 65.4% was obtained, which is higher than that of conventional top contacts made using transparent conductive oxides and metal grids.Broader contextThe crystalline silicon photovoltaic industry has continually strived to reduce Si wafer thickness in order to lower production cost while improving cell efficiency. Decreasing the wafer thickness below 100 μm, however, is challenging due to the absence of cost-efficient methods. Recently, radial junction Si microwire solar cells have emerged as a promising new route that can provide a dramatic reduction in Si consumption. Despite the many benefits to photovoltaic systems, such as superior light absorptance and efficient carrier collection, the development of robust metal wiring for the emitter contact has been a serious hurdle in realizing this technology. Conventional emitter contacts, which use a transparent conducting oxide that electrically connects the top ends of the wires to the metal grids, have been limited in their ability to overcome the topological complexity. Here we suggest a novel wrap-around design for top metal wiring that utilizes a thin Ag layer surrounding the bottoms of a radial p–n junction silicon wire array. This wire solar cell demonstrated a high fill factor of 65.4% by greatly reducing the series resistances via wrap-around front contacts.Si wire solar cells have received a great deal of attention for their potential use in next-generation photovoltaics due to their superior optical absorptance and lower silicon requirements. Although optimization of the structural parameters such as the areal wire density and the wire length have mostly focused on enhancing the light absorptance via optical impedance matching using subwavelength nanostructures,1–5 reliable electrical characterizations of the photovoltaic performances of wire solar cells have been constrained due to the difficulties in forming the top electrodes. Robust Ohmic contacts need to be integrated between the top ends of the wires and transparent conducting oxide (TCO), but some studies have reported relatively low cell efficiencies compared to conventional thin film solar cells due to serious degradation of the photovoltaic fill factor (FF).6,7 High fill factors were obtained from a single-wire solar cell (81%)8 or from very small sized cells integrated in either ITO (69.4%)4 or Indium (57%)9 without bus/finger bars. Most recent studies regarding commercially favorable wiring of top metal have commonly used TCO for Ohmic integration and metal grids as the emitter contact. These studies have reported low experimental FF values; e.g., 28% for metallization using bus bars and TCO6 and 30% for metal grids only without TCO.7In a wire geometry, it is possible to decrease the contact area by only contacting a small region on the wires. Contact resistances normally increase at the interface between Si and the TCO since the TCO only connects the tops of the wires to the metal grids. In addition, due to their narrow line width, metal grids effectively diminish the loss of sunlight due to shading, but they also result in a higher metal sheet resistance due to there being insufficient area for the charge carriers to transport without electrical loss. Moreover, the increased resistances by narrow metal grids also intensify the instability of FF values, typical in lab-scale samples, depending critically upon the sample size as well as the pattern design of metal grids in a conventional top-contact approach (ESI Fig. S1a†).To resolve this issue, here, we demonstrate a novel wrap-around design for top-metal wiring in which a thin Ag sheet fully surrounds silicon wires at a height close to the planar bottom contact [see Fig. 1(a) and (b)]. Finger/bus bars with TCO are not necessary in our contact design employing cell sizes of 1 × 1 cm2. A robust, reliable collection of charge carriers is realized with stable FF characteristics which are irrespective of varying the cell sizes (ESI Fig. S1b†). Charge carriers can be photogenerated only from the exposed Si wires, and the Ag sheet prevents incident light from transmitting into the substrate. More sunlight can be absorbed by radial junction wires exposed to air because both the intrinsic absorption loss due to the TCO and the shading loss due to the metal grids are eliminated. Applying a top metal sheet close to the bottom side of a wire array also enhances the total path lengths of the incident light due to the reflector effect of the metal sheet. In fact, we observed that the light absorptance of a wire array integrated with Ag exhibited a much better absorptance of ∼80% as compared with a wire array without Ag, which showed ∼20% absorptance due to a high transmittance (∼75%; see Fig. 1(c)).10,11 Fig. 1  (a) Conceptual schematic showing the wrap-around design for top-metal contacts in a radial p–n junction wire solar cell. Note that the Ag sheet for top-metal contacts surrounds the wires close to the bottom. (b) SEM image showing the wrap-around contact near the wire bottoms. (c) Light absorptance spectra of Si microwire thin films embedded in PDMS with and without Ag wrap-around contacts. Two peaks observed at short (∼350 nm) and long (∼1200 nm) wavelengths resulted from the intrinsic absorption of PDMS. Due to intrinsic (Drude) light absorption by a metal sheet,12 the onset of interband absorption is generally associated with electron transitions from the Fermi surface to the next higher empty band or with transitions from a lower-lying filled band to the Fermi surface. For regions in which the interband transitions dominate, the dielectric constants, which consist of real (ε1) and imaginary (ε2) components, are expected to exhibit a structure that is qualitatively similar to semiconductors, in which light absorption is characterized by large values of the energy loss function (−Imε−1 = ε2/(ε12 + ε22)). This feature reveals a very sharp peak just below 4.0 eV (λ = ∼310 nm), with ε2 showing drastic fall-off behavior at lower photon energies. In particular, the ε2 values of Ag approach zero for wavelengths greater than 350 nm,12,13 which shows a light reflectance of ∼100% without absorption loss. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the light absorptance of ∼80% for wavelengths larger than 350 nm is due to the use of silicon wires (Fig. 1(c)).A periodic array of silicon microwires (∼2 μm in diameter, ∼60 μm in length, and ∼7 μm in pitch) was prepared using lithographic patterning followed by plasma etching onto an n-type Si(100) wafer (650 μm in thickness, 5 Ω cm in resistivity).10 The spin-on dopant (SOD) method was used to dope wires for fabrication of p–n junctions in a tube furnace using a mixed atmosphere of N2 and O2 at 900 °C for 5 min.14 The doping concentration of p+ emitter was 2 × 1020 cm−3, and a junction depth was ∼400 nm. Doped wires were then embedded in a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) polymer matrix before deposition of silver. The PDMS base was mixed with a curing agent in a 10:1 w/w ratio. This solution was spin-coated on the wire arrays at 4000 rpm for 480 s. After spin-coating, the samples were cured at 80 °C for 8 h. The PDMS was then removed by etching using a solution of tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF) mixed with dimethyl fluoride (DMF) in a 1:1 volume ratio.The height of the PDMS was fixed at ∼10 μm. Ag emitter contacts were formed using Ag thermally evaporated onto a frontside of the microwires. Ag was selectively removed after fixing the height of the PDMS. The detailed process sequences for fabricating the wrap-around Ag contacts are shown in ESI Fig. S4 and S5.† Our PDMS coating and etchback processes for adjusting contact heights almost identically followed previous experimental work attempted by Putnam et al.4 Finally, a bottom electrode was deposited onto a back side of the solar cell.The total series resistance (Rs) was plotted as a function of the thickness of the metal sheet (see Fig. 2(a)). In our work, Rs was extracted by comparing the I–V curves obtained from two different measurements made using a Suns-Voc (Sinton Instruments Suns-Voc) and a solar simulator (Peccel PEC-L11) at AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). The Suns-Voc provides an ideal I–V curve that excludes the effect of Rs while measuring the open-circuit voltages as a function of light intensity.15,16 The junction characteristics of the solar cell can be characterized without interference from the metal electrode or the contacts as the measurement is done prior to the metallization process. Rs is calculated using the relation Rs = ΔV/Jmpp, where Jmpp is the current density at the maximum power point on a one-sun I–V curve as measured by a solar simulator. ΔV is the difference between the voltages intercepted in two different I–V curves at a Jmpp value given in Fig. 2(b), where the Rs-excluded I–V curve is obtained using the Suns-Voc, and the solar-simulator result shows the real (Rs-included) I–V curve at the one-sun condition. Fig. 2  (a) Rs (sum of all series resistances) and Re (sum of metal sheet and contact resistances) are shown as a function of metal thickness, in which the Ro = Rs − Re = constant (∼36) irrespective of metal thicknesses. (b) I–V curves measured by a solar simulator and a Suns-Voc. ΔV was recorded at Jmpp by comparing two different I–V curves at a metal thickness of 400 nm. Rs is the sum of the resistances of the metal electrode, the contacts, the emitter, and the base.17–19 We can ignore the influence of the emitter and base resistances, since it is assumed that they do not change with the thickness of the front electrode. Hence, Rs = Ro + Re = Ro + Rc + Rm, where Ro is the sum of the emitter and base resistances, and Re is the sum of the Si/Ag contact resistances (Rc) and the metal sheet resistance (Rm). This allowed us to extract Rs because Rc and Rm are the only variables (see ESI Fig. S9†). As shown in Fig. 2(a), Rs decreases as the thickness of the metal sheet increases because Rm and Rc decrease. We attempted to separate the effects of Rm and Rc on Rs for comparison with a conventional metal contacts design.A typical microwire contact structure is depicted in Fig. 3(a), in which the contact width (W) is the circumference (2πr) of the wire, and the length (L) is the contact height of the Si/Ag. Rc was extracted using the relation ρc/WL where ρc is a contact resistivity. It is plausible that the contact length can be replaced by the transfer length, , generally denoting the practical contact length over which the carrier injections take place because the distance the current travels from the emitter layer into the electrodes is not necessarily equal to L. R□ is the sheet resistance of the emitter (70 Ω □−1) used in this work. When L becomes much greater than LT, Rc, which is independent of L, can be represented by ρc/WLT.18,19Rc for contact current crowding at the contact edges can be calculated quantitatively using17 (1)which enables the estimation of the contact resistances for different L values. Fig. 3  (a) Schematic showing the current flow behavior from the emitter (green) to the metal electrode (gray) via wrap-around contacts. (b) Plot of resistances measured by varying the pitches of the grid lines in order to extract the contact resistance. (c) Plot of Rc as a function of contact height of wrap-around Ag/Si contacts. A dashed black line stands for Rc values of wrap-around ITO contact which surrounds top-regions of microwires. (d) Plot of Rmvs. metal thickness. Inset (left) shows the unit cell divided into three regions for extracting the equivalent circuit shown in inset (right). Ro is the resistance for regions 1 and 3. Region 2 consists of two current paths separated in parallel in which the resistance for each path is Rp, which is higher than that of Ro (Ro ≈ 0.45Rp). The transmission line model (TLM),20 which is a classical approach for determining the sheet and contact resistances, is applied to extract ρcvia a resistance plot extrapolated linearly to the zero-point of the grid pitches. As shown in Fig. 3(b), we measured the resistances by adjusting the number of pitches between two metal grids. At the zero-point (Γ = 0) of the grid pitches, the resistance value arises only from the two grid contacts (2 × Rc) without the influence of the emitter as the current flows only through two contacts. In our work, the ρc of Si/Ag was ∼2.99 mΩ cm2 since the measured Rc was 0.62 Ω at the 4.79 × 10−3 cm2 contact area. This contact resistivity is low in contrast to the typical ρc value of ∼71.43 mΩ cm2 for Si/ITO.21Another advantage of the wrap-around design is that the contact area can be easily extended by controlling L. In conventional designs using high aspect ratio (e.g., 25:1) microwires, only ∼1% of the total area is utilized for the metal contact because the top ends of the wires are only connected to the top electrode. This feature results in a high Rc of 7 Ω cm2 due to a high ρc with a much smaller contact area. Fig. 3(c) shows Rc as a function of contact height for a wrap-around design in which the black dot at a contact height of 500 nm represents a typical Rc value for conventional contacts using ITO and SiNW. When the contact height of Ag/Si is 500 nm, the contact area (πr2, r: wire radius) of a conventional design is equal to the contact area (2πrL) of the wrap-around design. Due to the lower ρc, the Rc of ∼0.2 Ω cm2 for our contact design was found to be much lower than the ∼7 Ω cm2 of conventional contacts. The contact resistances of ITO/SiNW could also be decreased when the wire sidewalls were allowed for contact with ITO (see a dashed black line in Fig. 3(c)); however, their Rc values were still higher than those of Ag/Si contacts. Moreover, this three-dimensional ITO application would not be recommendable for a practical wiring process because it is mechanically more vulnerable to crack formation than a planar ITO contact.Using a metal sheet design might also decrease the metal sheet resistance. In general, the electrical power losses associated with the fingers/bus bars of one-dimensional line grid c-Si solar cells are known to contribute ∼80% of the total power loss.14 The tradeoff between the metal resistance (electrical) and the shading loss (optical) makes it difficult to further reduce the power loss due to the metal grids. On the other hand, our contact design reduces Rm without the influence of metal grids. Fig. 3(d) shows the calculated (Rm = ρmLm/Am) and measured Rm values. ρm is the resistivity (8.79 × 10−4 Ω cm), Lm is the length, and Am is the cross-section of the Ag thin film. The measured data were compared with the calculated data to validate the accuracy of the experimental results, wherein we assumed that Ro is constant.To calculate the Rm of the Ag film that surrounds the silicon wires, we divided the unit cell into three regions and modeled the corresponding equivalent circuit as shown in the inset of Fig. 3(d). Note that regions 1, 2, and 3 are serially connected, but that, internally, region 2 consists of two narrow parallel metal regions that are separated by Si wires. Ro is the resistance in regions 1 and 3. Rp is the resistance in region 2, which is higher than Ro (≈0.45Rp) due to the narrower transport area. Rm was extracted using the relation Rm = Re − Rc. Our previous assumption that Ro was constant appeared reasonable because the calculated results were overall in accordance with the measured Rm data. Previously described conventional grids fabricated using metal with a thickness of 10 μm reported a Rm of 0.8 Ω cm2.16 The same resistance is recorded in our design using only 1 μm thick metal, as shown in Fig. 3(d). If we further increase the contact height to more than 1 μm, Rm can be reduced to less than 0.8 Ω cm2 without light shadowing loss, and the ratio of Rm over Rs is lowered to ≤2%, so that the effect of Rm on the photovoltaic performances of the wire solar cells can be neglected.An improved fill factor (FF) resulted from the decrease in the electrical resistance of the wire solar cells. The degradation of fill factor (ΔF) is defined by22 ΔF = −(Jsc/Voc) × Rs × PF = PF − FF(2)where PF is a pseudo fill factor denoting the ultimate FF value measured using the Suns-Voc technique without the influence of Rs, i.e., Rs = 0. The shunt resistance was not necessary to consider for explaining the relation between Rs and FF because it was measured to be very high (>1000 Ω cm2) in our contact design. If Rs decreases with increasing metal thicknesses, ΔF also decreases because Rs is proportional to ΔF, as described by eqn (2). In our work, PF was measured to be 74.7%; moreover, we could decrease the value of ΔF to 10% by utilizing a wrap-around contact structure. As shown in Fig. 4, a champion FF value of 65.4% was recorded at a metal thickness of 1 μm and with a cell size of 1 × 1 cm2. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest experimentally determined FF value for radial p–n junction Si wire solar cells reported in centimeter-scaled cell sizes.6,7 The FF in our work saturates with further increases in metal thickness because the impact of the front metal resistances on the total Rs decreases to less than 2%. Fig. 4  Plots of FF and ΔF (=PF − FF) as a function of metal thicknesses, in which the champion FF values of each condition are adopted to calculate the ΔF. The PF value of 74.7% was measured using a Suns-Voc technique. The open-circuit voltage (400 mV) and a FF (65.4%) were experimentally measured despite a poor Jsc value (∼4 mA cm−2). The degradation in Jsc is originated from the low external quantum efficiency (EQE) of ∼35% at their maximum (see ESI Fig. S3†), in contrast to a thin-film counterpart showing at least ∼78%. In our work, microwires notably increased the surface-to-volume ratio; however, no surface passivation treatments were applied in one-dimensional wire-absorbers, resulting in a very low EQE performance. We also employed a radial junction wire structure which was fully covered with a very thick (400 nm), degenerately doped (∼1020 cm−3) emitter shell because our work focused only on how to effectively collect charge carriers photogenerated in radial junction wire cells. This explains the reason why our radial junction solar cells report low cell conversion efficiencies (∼1%) in spite of a high fill factor of 65.4%. To further improve conversion efficiency, we need to effectively decrease the total amount of emitter surface area while making the junction depth shallower. Plasma doping23 would be effective for making ultrashallow junctions underneath a degenerately doped thin emitter layer. In addition, the advanced selective emitter process currently we are pursuing (ESI Fig. S6 and S7†) is necessary for radial junction wire cells because this allows for reducing the emitter surface area causing a high Auger recombination. This selective emitter concept adopting plasma doping and wrap-around contacts can further improve cell conversion efficiencies reported to date in radial junction wire cells.In this study, we attempted to retain the outstanding performance of radial junction wire solar cells while resolving the metallization issue, which severely decreases the photovoltaic fill factor. We designed a novel wrap-around metal contact that does not require a TCO film; consequently, the ρc of the wrap-around Si/Ag contacts was drastically decreased in comparison with conventional Si/ITO contacts. In addition, we were able to adjust the contact area during the fabrication process in order to vary Rc. Using the top metal contacts wrap-around design resulted in a high fill factor of ∼65.4%.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (2011-0028604) and the Pioneer Research Center Program (2012-0001022) through the NRF funded by the Korea government (MEST). This work was also supported by the New & Renewable Energy of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant (20123010010160) funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy.Notes and referencesE. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS .L. Hu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249–3252 CrossRef CAS .Z. Huang, H. Fang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 744–748 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, J. M. Spurgeon, E. L. Warren, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1037–1041 Search PubMed .K. Zhou, S.-W. Jee, Z. Guo, S. Liu and J.-H. Lee, Appl. Opt., 2011, 50, G63–G68 CrossRef CAS .L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima and J. Rand, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233117 CrossRef .O. Gunawan and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1388–1393 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, R. M. Briggs, J. Y. Baek, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 866–871 CAS .C. E. Kendrick, H. P. Yoon, Y. A. Yuwen, G. D. Barber, H. Shen, T. E. Mallouk, E. C. Dickey, T. S. Mayer and J. M. Redwing, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143108 CrossRef .K.-T. Park, Z. Guo, H.-D. Um, J.-Y. Jung, J. M. Yang, S. K. Lim, Y. S. Kim and J.-H. Lee, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A41–A50 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–245 CrossRef CAS .H. G. Liljenvall and A. G. Mathewson, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1970, 3, S341–S347 CrossRef .H. Ehrenreich and H. R. Philipp, Phys. Rev., 1962, 128, 1622–1629 CrossRef CAS .J.-Y. Jung, Z. Guo, S.-W. Jee, H.-D. Um, K.-T. Park, M. S. Hyun, J. M. Yang and J.-H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 445303 CrossRef .R. A. Sinton and A. Cuevas, 16th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Glasgow, Scotland,  2000 Search PubMed .D. Pysch, A. Mette and S. W. Glunz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1698–1706 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Aberle, S. R. Wenham and M. A. Green, A New Method for Accurate Measurements of the Lumped Series Resistance of Solar Cells, Conference Record of the 23rd IEEE PVSC,  1993 Search PubMed .D. K. Schroder and D. L. Meier, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1984, ED-31, 637–647 CrossRef CAS .P. N. Vinod, Evaluation of the Ohmic Properties of the Silver Metal Contacts of an Improved Sintering Process on the Multicrystalline Silicon Solar Cells, International Workshop on the Physics of Semiconductor Devices,  2007 Search PubMed .G. K. Reeves and H. B. Harrison, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 1982, EDL-3, 111–113 CrossRef .G. Cesare, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2012, 33, 327–329 CrossRef .D. L. Meier, E. A. Good, R. A. Garcia. B. L. Bingham, S. Yamanaka, V. Chandrasekaran and C. Bucher, Determining Components of Series Resistance from Measurements on Finished Cell, Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE 4th World Conference, Waikoloa, Hi,  2006 Search PubMed .P. K. Chu, S. Qin, C. Chan, N. W. Cheung and L. A. Larson, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 1996, 17, 207–280 CrossRef .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fabrication procedures, absorption spectrum of PDMS, EQE (External Quantum Efficiency) data and calculation process. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24494fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Broader contextThe crystalline silicon photovoltaic industry has continually strived to reduce Si wafer thickness in order to lower production cost while improving cell efficiency. Decreasing the wafer thickness below 100 μm, however, is challenging due to the absence of cost-efficient methods. Recently, radial junction Si microwire solar cells have emerged as a promising new route that can provide a dramatic reduction in Si consumption. Despite the many benefits to photovoltaic systems, such as superior light absorptance and efficient carrier collection, the development of robust metal wiring for the emitter contact has been a serious hurdle in realizing this technology. Conventional emitter contacts, which use a transparent conducting oxide that electrically connects the top ends of the wires to the metal grids, have been limited in their ability to overcome the topological complexity. Here we suggest a novel wrap-around design for top metal wiring that utilizes a thin Ag layer surrounding the bottoms of a radial p–n junction silicon wire array. This wire solar cell demonstrated a high fill factor of 65.4% by greatly reducing the series resistances via wrap-around front contacts.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Conceptual schematic showing the wrap-around design for top-metal contacts in a radial p–n junction wire solar cell. Note that the Ag sheet for top-metal contacts surrounds the wires close to the bottom. (b) SEM image showing the wrap-around contact near the wire bottoms. (c) Light absorptance spectra of Si microwire thin films embedded in PDMS with and without Ag wrap-around contacts. Two peaks observed at short (∼350 nm) and long (∼1200 nm) wavelengths resulted from the intrinsic absorption of PDMS.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Rs (sum of all series resistances) and Re (sum of metal sheet and contact resistances) are shown as a function of metal thickness, in which the Ro = Rs − Re = constant (∼36) irrespective of metal thicknesses. (b) I–V curves measured by a solar simulator and a Suns-Voc. ΔV was recorded at Jmpp by comparing two different I–V curves at a metal thickness of 400 nm.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic showing the current flow behavior from the emitter (green) to the metal electrode (gray) via wrap-around contacts. (b) Plot of resistances measured by varying the pitches of the grid lines in order to extract the contact resistance. (c) Plot of Rc as a function of contact height of wrap-around Ag/Si contacts. A dashed black line stands for Rc values of wrap-around ITO contact which surrounds top-regions of microwires. (d) Plot of Rmvs. metal thickness. Inset (left) shows the unit cell divided into three regions for extracting the equivalent circuit shown in inset (right). Ro is the resistance for regions 1 and 3. Region 2 consists of two current paths separated in parallel in which the resistance for each path is Rp, which is higher than that of Ro (Ro ≈ 0.45Rp).	 
ΔF = −(Jsc/Voc) × Rs × PF = PF − FF	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Plots of FF and ΔF (=PF − FF) as a function of metal thicknesses, in which the champion FF values of each condition are adopted to calculate the ΔF. The PF value of 74.7% was measured using a Suns-Voc technique.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fabrication procedures, absorption spectrum of PDMS, EQE (External Quantum Efficiency) data and calculation process. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24494f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
