The effect of dimensionality on the charge carrier mobility of halide perovskites  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA03749H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA03749H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21551-21575The effect of dimensionality on the charge carrier mobility of halide perovskites

        
          
            Naveen Kumar 
            Tailor
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yukta†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Rahul 
            Ranjan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sudhir 
            Ranjan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tejasvini 
            Sharma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anand 
            Singh
          
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Ashish 
            Garg
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Kanwar Singh 
            Nalwa
          
          
        
      ce, 
      
        
          
            Raju Kumar 
            Gupta
          
          
        
      bef and 

        
          
            Soumitra 
            Satapathi
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Haridwar, Uttarakhand 247667, India. E-mail: soumitra.satapathi@ph.iitr.ac.in
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India
dDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India
eDepartment of Sustainable Energy Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India
fCenter for Environmental Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, Uttar Pradesh, India
Received 
      4th May 2021
    , Accepted 13th August 2021First published on 13th August 2021AbstractMetal halide perovskites (MHPs) have recently emerged as an ideal semiconductor for photovoltaic applications. Most of the advantageous properties of perovskites are dominated by their large charge carrier mobility (μ), which is a key parameter to gauge the photovoltaic performance and stability of MHPs. Simultaneously, the rich structural variation, form and crystallinity of perovskites underpin their carrier mobility. In this review article, we focus on the quantification of carrier mobility in perovskites with dimensional transformation and crystallinity. Furthermore, we have critically analyzed the variation in mobility values as probed by different analytical techniques. We also discuss the fundamental mobility limiting factors that hinder efficient charge transport in these materials and present the recent advancement with a special focus on the dimensionalities including reduced dimensional perovskites and single crystal systems. In addition, the present challenges and possible pathways for mobility enhancement are also discussed in detail.Anand SinghAnand Singh is currently an Associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, USA in 2009. His research interests include perovskite solar cells and synthesis of organic molecules.Ashish GargAshish Garg is currently a Professor in the Department of Sustainable Energy Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Cambridge, UK in 2002. His research interests include organic and inorganic photovoltaics, energy harvesting materials and magnetoelectric materials and composites.Kanwar Singh NalwaKanwar Singh Nalwa is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He received his PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from Iowa State University, USA in 2011 and B.Tech. degree from IIT Kanpur in 2007. His research interests include perovskite and organic solar cells, energy storage devices and multifunctional biochemical sensors.Raju Kumar GuptaRaju Kumar Gupta is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He received his PhD degree in 2010 from the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the National University of Singapore and B.Tech in Chemical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India, in 2005. His current research interests are photocatalysis for water remediation and CO2 capture & conversion to fuels, surface chemistry, green synthesis, hybrid perovskite solar cells, supercapacitors, and nanostructured materials for energy and environmental applications.Soumitra SatapathiSoumitra Satapathi is actively involved in Materials Science Research at IIT Roorkee, where his main focus is next generation optoelectronic devices including high efficiency perovskite solar cells and photophysical studies in solar cells. Prof. Satapathi has graduated with PhD and MS in Physics from the University of Massachusetts, USA. He has published more than 55 high impact journal papers and received numerous national and international awards. His research was featured in all leading national and international print and electronic media including Nature Asia, PTI, BBC, Quartz, USA Today, and Times of India to name a few.
1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a tremendous amount of research worldwide on metal halide perovskites (MHPs), which have shown immense promise for photovoltaic devices. MHPs have a wide optical absorption range, low exciton binding energy, tunable bandgap, longer carrier diffusion length and high mobility of charge carriers, which make them suitable for high-performance optoelectronic devices.1–9 The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has peaked at 25.6% in 202110 within a decade of the first report in 2009 and is currently tantalizingly close to the maximum PCE of top-performing crystalline silicon solar cells.11–16 Researchers attribute this astonishing trajectory in the performance of MHPs to their extraordinary semiconducting properties: long charge-carrier diffusion lengths, L, of up to 175 μm and carrier lifetimes, τ, in the order of ∼μs.17 Despite the noteworthy advancements in the photovoltaic efficiency of 3D organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs, the intrinsic instability of 3-dimensional (3D) PSCs against heat, moisture, and light is still a critical barrier in their commercial realization.18–21 This has promoted researchers to explore other materials, and recently, two-dimensional (2D) perovskites have gained substantial research attention due to their superior ambient stability.22–25 One can easily tailor the bandgap and absorption spectrum of 2D perovskites by changing the bulky organic spacers and the number of layers. The bulky organic spacer moieties impart the much-needed hydrophobic character to the 2D perovskite absorbers, leading to improved stability.26–28 2D-perovskite-based PSCs exhibit low photoconversion efficiencies limited by the poor charge transport between inorganic layers separated by the bulky organic spacer ligands. Fig. 1 shows the directions of allowed and restricted charge carrier transport with respect to the orientation of inorganic octahedral sheets of different dimensionality perovskites (2D and 3D). Additionally, the wide optical bandgap of 2D perovskites limits the absorption of the solar spectrum.26,29–31 Hence, materials with intermediate dimensionality between 2D and 3D, quasi-3D/2D hybrid perovskites, can be considered possible candidates to provide simultaneously high performance and long-term stability.32–35 In quasi-3D/2D perovskites, the 3D perovskite structure facilitates the charge transport, while the bulky organic cations in the 2D perovskite function as moisture shields.36–39 Therefore, a 2D/3D mixed perovskite structure seems to be the most viable pathway towards improving the charge carrier mobility and hence the power conversion efficiency, without sacrificing the environmental stability.
 Fig. 1  (a) Carrier transport and crystal structure of a (a) 3D perovskite. (b) Structural derivation of a 2D perovskite with different n values highlighting the direction of restricted charge transport. (c) Schematic illustration of a quasi-2D/3D mixed perovskite. 
Despite the tremendous progress in efficiency and stability performance, an important issue of considerable discussion in the community is carrier dynamics, especially the high charge-carrier mobility of these perovskites. The charge transport in a perovskite material and through transport layers has gained a lot of research attention. Even though several research groups have utilized ultrafast spectroscopy techniques to study charge transport in these MHPs, a fundamental understanding of this topic is still lacking. While there appears to be reasonable agreement on the photophysical parameters of MHPs such as exciton binding energy, exciton diffusion length, and absorption coefficient, the investigation of the charge transport phenomenon to quantify charge carrier mobility still requires substantial research efforts. The latter is essential because carrier mobility is a key parameter to gauge the photovoltaic performance of MHPs.40 The charge carrier mobility is proportional to the scattering time and is inversely proportional to the effective mass. The effective mass of carriers in MHPs is similar to that of inorganic semiconductors. Therefore, the mobility in MHPs must be limited by carrier scattering. Room temperature measurements have shown a long charge carrier lifetime and inverse power dependence on temperature, which suggested negligible carrier scattering at room temperature in MHPs.41 This phenomenon is also consistent with slow hot carrier relaxation at room temperature.42–46 Around room temperature, MHPs exhibit dynamic disorder and structural fluctuations. Theoretical studies have demonstrated that these structural fluctuations cause changes in the electronic band structure, directly affecting mobility in MHPs.47,48 Therefore, understanding the underlying mechanism of charge carrier transport in MHPs is vital for the advancement of photovoltaic, light-emitting diode, and photodetector devices based on these materials. Among a few review articles published on charge transport in perovskite films and devices, Herz discussed the fundamental mechanisms and limitations of charge-carrier transport in MHPs.49 Peng et al. reviewed different techniques to measure the charge carrier mobility in perovskite films and devices.50 However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no reviews on how the factors such as the electronic structure, dimensionality, presence of defects and grain boundaries, and bulky organic ligands (in 2D perovskites) affect the charge carrier mobility of MHPs. Moreover, the aforementioned factors play a critical role in determining charge carrier dynamics and need attention to comprehend the challenges and opportunities for mobility improvement, which is key to developing efficient and stable PSCs.
This review article aims to provide an up-to-date account of the investigation and quantification of charge carrier mobility in MHPs including the effects of structural confinement of different dimensionality perovskites (3D, 2D, and mixed 3D/2D), and crystallinity variation from polycrystalline to single-crystalline. Additionally, we compare the charge carrier mobility of MHPs probed using various measurement techniques. We show that there can be substantial variations in the mobility values even for the same sample depending on the measurement technique employed. Furthermore, we discuss the challenges in achieving high charge-carrier mobility in low dimensional MHPs and multi-crystalline MHPs, and recent progress made on improving the carrier mobility in these systems. We also present an assessment of how one can tailor the composition, crystallinity, and structural ordering of MHPs to fabricate devices with higher carrier mobility.
2. Mobility measurement techniques
Carrier mobility is one of the most important parameters of any semiconductor material, determining its appropriateness for application in optoelectronic devices. The carrier mobility determines how fast a carrier (electron and hole) can move in a solid material in the presence of an electric field. Carrier mobility depends on two factors: its effective mass and scattering time, i.e., the average time spent between momentum-randomizing events, due to, e.g., electron–phonon scattering. The mobility can be expressed as: (1)where e is the charge of an electron, τ is the charge carrier scattering time and m* is the effective mass of the electron or hole. Experimental investigations and empirical models have primarily shaped the understanding of carrier mobilities. Recently, it has been possible to study advances in electronic structure methods for real materials with predictive accuracy.
The measurement of all the material parameters except charge carrier mobility in perovskite materials is quite straightforward using standard spectroscopy techniques. Besides, quantifying charge carrier mobility in perovskites is challenging due to the presence of mobile ions within the bulk and at the grain boundaries together with mobile charge carriers (electrons and holes). Carrier mobility in perovskites has been investigated using various techniques based on (a) electrical and (b) optical probe measurements. Fig. 2 presents the schematic representation of the mobility measurement techniques for perovskite materials. Electrical probes include the time of flight (TOF),51,52 space charge limited current (SCLC)53–56 and hall measurement techniques.52,57,58 In contrast, optical probes operate in a non-contact mode, which includes transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy,59–61 photo-induced absorption (PIA),62,63 optical pump terahertz probe (OPTP) spectroscopy,64,65 time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC),66,67 and time-resolved or quantum yield of photoluminescence (TRPL).59,68
 Fig. 2  Schematics representing the mobility measurement technique for perovskite materials. 
Before discussing the challenges associated with lower carrier mobility in MHPs, we will present a brief overview of different mobility measurement techniques.
2.1. Electrical probe measurement (steady-state contact mode)

SCLC. 
The SCLC technique is one of the most widely used and simplest steady-state contact mode methods, which can be used to determine electron and hole mobility in perovskite films. This technique involves recording dark J–V curves to extract the mobility. The major challenge associated with the SCLC method is that it can accurately measure mobilities in films having a low intrinsic charge density of ∼1014 cm−3, whereas perovskite films exhibit charge densities of 1015 to 1017 cm−3.69 Moreover, this technique cannot distinguish between the charge carriers.69


CELIV. 
The ‘charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage (CELIV)’ method is another such contact probe technique used to measure charge carrier mobility and investigate the recombination kinetics in solar cells. However, this technique's main drawback is that it cannot distinguish the type of charge carrier, i.e. hole or electron. To separately measure the individual electron and hole mobility of perovskite films, a modified CELIV method has been used by inserting a 100 nm thick MoO3 layer in front of the selective contacts for blocking the transport of undesirable charge carriers.70


TOF. 
TOF is another electrical contact probe method that measures the mobility of holes and electrons when negative or positive biases are applied across electrodes.69 A uniqueness of this method over other methods is that it can be utilized to determine the concertation of trap states within the device. However, a major challenge in the accurate determination of mobility by TOF measurement is the need for light illumination and that the film thickness must be greater than 500 nm to allow transverse movement of charges through the depletion region. Maynard et al. used the canonical photocarrier TOF technique to distinguish between electron and hole mobilities in 3D perovskite films with values in the range 0.06–1.4 cm2 V−1 s−1.71 The authors also showed that both drift mobilities are dispersive (time-dependent) in MAPbI3 (methyl ammonium lead iodide) films implying that drift mobility decays with time since photogeneration increases.71 Temperature-dependent TOF measurements revealed that the dispersion in mobility is a result of the confinement of photocarriers to a fractal-like path within nanoseconds of photogeneration,71 suggesting a correlation between the dispersion parameter and the structural parameters in perovskites.


FET. 
The field-effect transistor (FET) method measures the in-plane mobilities of charge carriers, unlike other methods that determine the out-of-plane mobility in perovskite films.69 Furthermore, the FET technique also offers the advantage of quickly determining whether the perovskite film is p-type or n-type. While this measurement technique does not require a blocking layer, a high-quality perovskite film is highly desirable for accurate measurement of charge carrier dynamics to observe the field effects. To accurately measure the mobilities of charge carriers in MAPbI3 films, low temperature (78–198 K) FET studies are performed to eliminate the screening effect due to ionic motion within the perovskite films61 and below 200 K, both electron and hole mobilities increased by two orders of magnitude. One of the biggest challenges that restrict the application of this technique is that under dark conditions MAPbI3 FETs result in low mobilities (10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). To make this technique employable even under dark conditions, Ji et al. treated MAPbI3 films with methylamine gas, which enabled an enlarged grain size leading to a two-fold improvement in the FET mobility to 22.75 cm2 V−1 s−1.61 Other complexities in the application of this method are factors such as the operating temperature, interfacial morphology and grain size. In practice, the actual mobility evaluation using this technique is limited by the low conductivity of perovskite films.


Hall measurement. 
The Hall effect technique is another steady-state contact mode technique that is commonly used to probe bulk mobility in perovskite films but differs from other techniques (TOF, CELIV, and FET) as it measures mobility in a fixed direction.69 However, Hall measurement provides information only about the majority carriers. Therefore, a combination of multiple characterization techniques is required to extract minority carrier information.72–74 Gunawan et al. utilized the carrier-resolved photo-Hall measurement technique to extract both the majority and minority carrier mobilities and found that the key problem in photo-Hall measurement is the evaluation of three unknowns i.e. photogenerated carrier densities, the sign of the hall coefficient, and longitudinal electron and hole mobility under given illumination.75 Moreover, Hall measurements suffer from very noisy Hall signals due to low mobility (<1 cm2 V−1 s−1) and high resistance (R > 10 GΩ) in perovskite films. The use of a parallel dipole line (PDL) ac field Hall system with the decomposition of the Fourier spectrum and visual lock-in detection can help optimize the uniformity of the field and obtain clean signals. Such a setup produces a unidirectional and single harmonic field at the center where the sample is placed, thus providing a basis for a feasible and accurate photo-Hall experiment. Dark Hall measurement of (FA,MA)Pb(I,Br)3 (FA = formamidinium) perovskite films yielded majority carrier mobility, μp = (17 ± 4) cm2 V−1 s−1, while photo-Hall measurement resulted in average mobility: μp = (20 ± 8) cm2 V−1 s−1 and μn = (17 ± 10) cm2 V−1 s−1.

2.2. Optical probe measurement (contact-free mode)
Since contact mode measurements are performed in different charge density regimes, the accurate determination of mobility becomes much more complex using contact mode methods. As compared to contact methods, contact-free measurement techniques are the most sought-after for measuring mobility. These do not involve the application of a voltage across the sample. Therefore, one can avoid the problems related to voltage-induced ion migration and the electrode–film interface in contact-free measurements. However, most contact-free optical methods measure intragrain mobility parallel to the film surface, which makes these mobility measurements less relevant for practical applications.76–78

TA. 
Transient absorption (TA) is a well-established non-contact technique used to monitor the ultrafast dynamics of photo-induced phenomena in semiconductor or molecular systems. TA measurements are mainly used to determine mobility parallel to the film surface, but variation in actual values is affected by surface effects.79 Carrier mobility in the direction perpendicular to the film surface is of more significance. Its magnitude lies somewhere between the mobility values within the grain and over multiple grain boundaries, where the mobility value in these regions (grain and grain boundaries) differs by an order of magnitude.80 In the case of the TA measurement technique, since the time scales measured in this technique lie in the range of 10−13 to 10−14 seconds, it is sensitive to the photogenerated species in perovskite films. So, it becomes extremely challenging to distinguish the individual contributions of these species when spectral features overlap.69 However, distinguishing individual contribution is possible when the perovskite films are trap-free. However, in the event of multiple photo-physical processes and complex morphologies, techniques other than TA are also required to construct a unique model. TA measurements coupled with transient reflectance (TR) have been used to determine mobility parallel to the film surface but variation in actual values is affected by surface effects.79 Transient absorption and reflectance signals obtained from FAMAC perovskite thin films reveal that the near-infrared photoinduced transmittance change is influenced by a change in the refractive index, which relies on the whole film as well as the air–film interface.81 Recently, Pasanen et al. employed a non-invasive standard TA method in reflectance and transmittance modes at a sub-bandgap wavelength to measure perpendicular mobility in a 500 nm thick perovskite film with triple cations (FA, MA, and Cs). In this work, the transient response was evaluated from the deviation in the refractive index, which ultimately resulted in the non-homogeneous distribution of photogenerated charge carriers across the film thickness but carrier concentration gradually became uniform in a few picoseconds due to diffusion and finally, a mobility of 60 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained.82


TRPL. 
Next, we move to the most commonly used TRPL technique, which measures the perpendicular mobility of polycrystalline films. TRPL spectroscopy measures the PL intensity as a function of time obtained by exciting samples with a pulsed light source. The mobilities of minority carriers have been determined to be 10−1 to 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 using TRPL.83 However, this technique suffers from non-radiative recombination kinetics due to the presence of defects in perovskite films, mostly surface/interface defects that cannot be detected by TRPL. This limits the use of this technique in accurately extracting the mobility in perovskite films.


TRTS. 
Time-resolved terahertz absorption spectroscopy (TRTS) is a non-contact characterization technique that employs a terahertz (THz) wave with photon energy in the range of 1–100 meV.84 This technique measures the deviation in the mobility, arising from the presence of impurities and varying concentrations of crystal boundaries in perovskite films of different quality. THz waves excite photo-generated charges with a low energy stimulus. The TRTS technique is immensely suitable for photovoltaic applications because of its ability to selectively monitor the photoinduced free charge carriers and simultaneously measure the mobility.85 TRTS can investigate photo-induced charge carrier dynamics in semiconducting materials by extracting transient alternating current (AC) conductivities using THz absorption.85 Primarily photo-induced species are the dominant mobile carriers in the semiconductor and the corresponding AC photoconductivity spectrum is defined by the Drude model. Charge carrier mobility was measured immediately after photoexcitation using THz measurement and including the Drude model in perovskite films spanned over a range of 1–100 cm2 V−1 s−1 but mobility values were strongly influenced by the sample.86 Inter-carrier scattering due to the varying carrier density makes mobility measurement challenging in perovskite thin films. Increased carrier density reduces carrier mobility.85 Furthermore, care should be taken while applying the theoretical model to this technique for extracting charge mobilities in perovskite films. A Drude-like model is applicable in the bulk region of perovskites, while mathematical models for TRTS signals are used to determine mobilities in nanostructured perovskite films.


TRMC. 
The TRMC method is similar to the TRTS technique, which requires the implementation of a low frequency and longer apparatus response time, resulting in significantly longer time scales of charge-carrier dynamics (ns to ms) as compared to the TRTS technique, thus making this technique suitable for studying charge carrier dynamics in perovskite films. However, evaluating mobility values using both these techniques is challenging due to indirect photoconductivity measurement, which requires a theoretical model.69 The time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) method is yet another mobility measurement method similar to the TRTS technique, which traces the photoconductivity measurement with time once the sample is photoexcited. Similar to the TRTS technique, TRMC is also a sample dependent technique. The frequency and time resolution differentiate TRMC from TRTS methods. Utilizing TRTS and TRMC methods in a complementary way leads to charge carrier dynamics on much broader time scales.
Although non-contact mode measurements are the most accurate method to determine the carrier mobility in MHP films, these measurement techniques are limited to the short-range conductivity of MHPs within the crystalline domains. Therefore, these non-contact mode measurement techniques result in higher mobility within the crystalline domains (bulk) of the perovskite films. These non-contact measurement techniques are expected to be least affected by long-range scattering phenomena and charge trapping at the grain boundary defects within the perovskite films. Therefore, they are less relevant as far as the optimization of PSC devices is concerned as the length scale for charge transport is in microns. Although long-range lateral charge transport is of more concern in polycrystalline MHP film-based PSCs, ionic conduction can result in ambiguities in mobility evaluation.80 The problem of ion migration (conduction) from grain boundaries and the bulk of the perovskite can be understood using quasi-steady-state photo-conductivity measurements (electrical probe) coupled with photo-induced transmission and reflection measurements (optical probe). They are used to simultaneously evaluate the long-range lateral charge carrier mobility and charge carrier density in polycrystalline solution-processed as well as vapor phase deposited MHP films.80 The coupled technique revealed mobility values in the range of 0.47–2.22 cm2 V−1 s−1 for MAPbI3 perovskite films made using acetonitrile antisolvent (MA-ACN). In contrast, the mobility values measured using non-contact THz and microwave measurements were significantly higher i.e., 20–40 cm2 V−1 s−1. THz and microwave measurements probe the short-range transport in perovskite films, whereas the coupled technique includes the charge transport dynamic effect from both grain boundaries and within grains. Therefore, the coupled technique leads to the lower estimation of mobility values and gives a more accurate picture of long-range charge transport in MHPs.
Overall, both contact and non-contact modes of mobility measurement techniques can be utilized in measuring the mobility of perovskite films; however, both modes of these techniques have their advantages and disadvantages associated with them. The electrical contact mode of mobility measurement is very simple to use owing to the ease of sample preparation and making electrical contacts where voltage is applied across the samples. However, measurements made using this technique are performed in different charge regimes, which makes an accurate determination of mobility values much more complex and cumbersome. On the other hand, contact-free mobility measurement techniques being devoid of the voltage applied across the samples is a more widely applicable technique over its counterpart. This mitigates the voltage-induced ion migration and problems of the defective interface encountered while making contacts in the contact mode of mobility measurement. On the other hand, the contact-free measurement technique evaluates the mobility within the perovskite grains parallel to the film surface which is of less importance from the aspect of practical applications such as solar cell devices and LEDs. Moreover, the surface effects lead to ambiguity in the measurement of the mobility values. Although the non-contact mode of mobility measurement is a superior and accurate technique to measure the carrier mobility values, short-range conductivity in perovskites limits the accurate evaluation of mobility values. As a result, this technique provides higher mobility values within the bulk of the perovskite films. Furthermore, these techniques are least affected by the charge trapping and scattering at the grain boundaries, which makes them less suitable for mobility measurement in PSCs. Considering the advantages and disadvantages associated with both the techniques it becomes very important to have in-depth knowledge of these techniques due to the complexities involved in these techniques prior to using them for the accurate determination of mobility values in perovskites.

3. Mobility in 3D perovskites
The use of 3-dimensional (3D) MHPs as an active absorber in PSCs has resulted in a remarkable certified PCE of over 25.5% within 10 years of its inception.87 Critical MHP parameters that govern the PSCs' performance include light-absorbing capability, charge carrier lifetime, bandgap, and charge carrier mobility. Among all these parameters, one of the most crucial ones is the photogenerated charge carrier mobility. High minority carrier mobility can enable a thicker active layer leading to enhanced light harvesting by the active layer and, consequently, higher photocurrent. On the other hand, higher carrier mobility also improves the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the device by reducing non-radiative recombination at grain boundaries.88,89 MAPbI3 perovskite single crystals have an excellent hole drift mobility of more than 100 cm2 V−1 s−1.76 In contrast, mobility measurements on polycrystalline MAPbI3 thin films using numerous techniques have yielded a vast range of values from 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 10 cm2 V−1 s−1.60,77,90,91 In this section, we review the charge carrier mobilities in 3D perovskites including polycrystalline films, large single crystals and single crystalline films.
3.1. Polycrystalline films
Despite well-established measurement techniques, there are various intrinsic and extrinsic factors associated with 3D MHP thin films, which lead to ambiguity in the estimation of mobility values. The intrinsic factors are related to the unavoidable charge carrier interactions with the lattice, while extrinsic factors are due to the grain boundary defects, vacancies, and impurities introduced during perovskite thin-film processing and energetic disorder.49 Identification and distinction between these factors and devising ways to address them can help improve charge transport in MHPs. Moreover, ion (Pb2+ and I−) migration from grain boundaries takes place in MHP thin films under an external electric field, which severely restricts the usage of well-established techniques such as SCLC,76,92 CELIV, TOF76,93 and hall measurements94 for quantifying mobility.
The benign defect chemistry of MAPbI3 allows easy fabrication of crystalline thin films, and hence exploring the limitations of charge carrier mobilities in MHPs has focused mainly on MAPbI3 thin films.95,96 Early investigations have revealed that lower charge carrier mobility in MAPbI3 can be attributed to significantly higher electron-phonon coupling. Electron-phonon coupling in MAPbI3 requires the correct estimation of both Frohlich interaction with longitudinal optical (LO) phonon and acoustic-phonon deformation potential (ADP) scattering. Theoretical and experimental studies have revealed that ADP scattering is not the dominant factor responsible for the low charge carrier mobility of MAPbI3 films at room temperature. Recent calculations showed that the low charge carrier mobility in 3D MHP thin films is due to LO scattering. The polaron radius is of the order of 40–50 Å for MHPs, which is much larger than the lattice constant and thus restricts the motion of electrons leading to a decrease in mobility and an increase in the effective mass,97,98 also supported by experimental studies.99–101 These results are in agreement with the work carried out by Feynman,102,103 which showed that the charge-carrier mobility increased with decreasing temperature for materials such as GaAs, MAPbI3 and Bi12SiO20.104–107
Although electron–phonon coupling (intrinsic factor) sets an upper limit for achieving the maximum charge-carrier mobility in MHPs, experimentally reported values are far lower for thin films. Grain size remains one of the crucial factors which limits the charge carrier mobilities in 3D MHPs. This is supported by the fact that long-range and short-range mobilities as well as diffusion lengths were improved by an order of magnitude in MAPbCl3−xIx compared to those in MAPbI3, attributed to reduced grain boundaries and enhanced crystallinity of MAPbCl3−xIx.108–110 On similar grounds, large grains in FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.2I0.8)3 films resulted in a two-fold enhancement in the charge-carrier mobility compared to that in MAPbI3 films once the grain size exceeded the limit (2.5 μm) after which scattering from the boundaries became negligible.111,112 Researchers have adopted various approaches to obtain large grains in perovskite films. One such method is to engineer the surface energy of the underlying substrates. Huang and co-workers demonstrated that instead of using the wetting surface of PEDOT:PSS, the use of the relatively non-wetting surface of N4,N4′-bis(4-(6-((3-ethyloxetan-3-yl) methoxy)hexyl)phenyl)-N4,N4′-diphenylbiphenyl-4,4′-diamine (c-OTPD) suppresses the heterogeneous nucleation and leads to the formation of large grains responsible for higher mobility.113 The hot-casting technique is another commonly employed method to obtain large perovskite grains, which can yield perovskite grain sizes of up to 180 μm, resulting in improved charge carrier mobility of the films.114 Another widely adopted technique to obtain higher mobility in perovskite films is the passivation of ionic defects at the perovskite layer's grain boundaries and the surface via the use of the Lewis acid and Lewis base approach. Under-coordinated Pb2+ ions at the grain boundaries act as traps and hinder the charge carrier transport. They can be passivated by the use of electron-rich molecules (Lewis base) by forming bonds with Pb2+ ions. Similar effects are seen after incorporating small molecules such as phenyl ethyl ammonium iodide, guanidinium, alkylamine carboxyl derivatives and trioctylphosphine oxide in the perovskite precursor solution.115–118 Researchers have recently employed organic π-conjugated small molecules with carboxyl groups and thiophene groups such as IDIC, ITIC, and DTA to improve mobility in perovskite films.119–121 The post-passivation treatment of the perovskite crystal surface with Lewis base molecules (such as pyridine, thiophene, thiourea, IT-M, TDZDT, DR3T, 2-pyridylthiourea, etc.) could be an excellent strategy to reduce defect induced electron trap states at the perovskite surface by passivating under-coordinated Pb atoms, consequently leading to improved mobility.120–132 Another approach to suppress the defects in perovskite films for improving mobility is synchronized usage of a Lewis acid and Lewis base. Zhang et al. utilized Lewis acid bis-PCBM in antisolvent and Lewis base N-(4-bromophenyl) thiourea (BrPh-Thr) in the perovskite precursor solution causing the passivation of defects in the absorber layer resulting in increased crystallinity and this improved the mobility of the perovskite films by nearly two times.133 In addition to control of the grain size and trap states to improve mobility, researchers have also tried to engineer the crystallinity and crystal orientation in perovskites to examine their effect on mobility e.g. via compositional engineering in FA1−xMAxPbI2.87Br0.13 mixed-cation perovskites.134
Furthermore, the density as well as the type of defect levels present at the perovskite and transport layer interface can be reduced effectively by using the molecular passivation strategy. For instance, Akman et al. used poly(N,N′-bis-4-butylphenyl-N,N′-bisphenyl)benzidine (polyTPD) molecules for treating the perovskite and hole transport layer interface.135 The polyTPD treated devices demonstrated a hole mobility of ≈4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is significantly higher than that of dopant-free spiro-OMeTAD (≈2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and most other dopant-free hole transport materials. Additionally, the combined passivation of bulk traps in the perovskite layer and interfacial traps at the perovskite/transport layer interface can be an effective strategy for substantially enhancing the carrier mobility.136
Doping and impurities play a major role in limiting mobilities in 3D MHP films. In tin-based perovskites, oxidation from a Sn2+ to a Sn4+ oxidation state results in hole doping leading to higher carrier densities.94,137,138 Hole dopant sites act as negatively charged centers and cause charge carrier scattering and thus reduce charge carrier mobility, akin to what is commonly observed in inorganic semiconductors such as GaAs.139,140 A widely adopted approach to mitigate the doping-induced reduction of charge carrier mobility in tin-based perovskites is treatment with SnF2, which lowers the background carrier density.141,142 Furthermore, the doping of FeCl2 in CsPbI2Br films has been shown to lower the density of traps states and reduce the undesired charge-carrier recombination, which led to an enhancement in the carrier mobility.143
Apart from scattering due to charge impurities in MHPs, another major factor limiting the charge carrier mobility is the severely disordered energy landscape. Subsequently, energetic disorder limits the charge-carrier mobility in MHP alloys that are outside the stable crystallographic range. In commonly investigated perovskite systems [(Cs/FA/MA)Pb(Br/I)3], the existence of regions of structural instability can be ascribed to the incompatibility of effective ionic radii with the Goldschmidt tolerance factor144–146 or transition in the structure with progress in the alloying fraction.147 For instance, significantly higher energetic disorder has been reported in thin films of FAPb(BrxI1−x)3 and MAPb(BrxI1−x)3 for the bromide fraction in the range of 0.3 to 0.5,147–150 which has been attributed to the change in the crystal structure within this region. Additionally, for the same bromide fraction, lower crystallinity due to higher energetic disorder in FAPb(BrxI1−x)3 leads to a severe “mobility gap” where the values are below 1 cm2 V−1 s−1.148 To eliminate this mobility gap,151 cesium (Cs) was added in a small quantity, which led to an increment in charge carrier mobility due to increased electron-phonon coupling.152 Cs addition also stabilized the perovskite phase of FAPbX3 owing to its smaller effective ionic radii than FA, which enabled a structure within the Goldschmidt tolerance range.144–146,151 This strategy also made material stable against photoinduced halide segregation, a common degradation problem associated with bromide–iodide lead-based perovskites.148,150,153
Although perovskites exhibit superior tolerance towards trap states still shallow traps limit the charge transport in PSCs. Mobility measurement techniques such as TOF and CELIV confirm the existence of shallow traps, responsible for trap-assisted recombination in both planar and mesoporous MAPbI3 devices. These techniques revealed a direct shallow trap filling process along with improved electron and hole mobilities upon light soaking (Fig. 3) in PSCs.154 Subsequently, PCBM has proved to be an excellent candidate for interfacial trap state passivation in perovskites. PCBM assists in faster charge extraction together with suppressed interfacial recombination, thus leading to enhanced mobility. This has been further supported by Hall effect measurements, which validate the passivation of trap states in bilayer PCBM/MAPbI3 cells resulting in reduced intrinsic hole concentration and a 3 fold improvement in Hall mobility.151
 Fig. 3  Illustrative charge transport process in perovskite solar cells influenced by (a) light soaking and (b) phase transition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, phase transition in perovskites plays a critical role in determining the mobility in perovskites and ultimately the performance of PSCs. This has been attributed to the ease of phase transition upon increasing the temperature. Moreover, it is widely known that each perovskite phase is associated with distinct charge transport properties owing to different crystal structures. The phase transition process results in an abrupt change in the charge carrier mobility in perovskites. This rapid change in both electron and hole mobilities of MAPbI3/PCBM bilayer PSCs was observed by temperature-dependent TOF and was correlated with the phase transition from a tetragonal to a cubic structure. Ultimately, higher mobility was obtained during phase transition occurring at 310–330 K leading to higher PCE.154 FAPbI3 perovskites convert immediately to a yellow phase when exposed to moisture which is detrimental to the device performance. Cruz et al. added RbI to FAPbI3 and observed the suppression of the yellow phase of FAPbI3, thereby enhancing the device stability significantly.155 The incorporation of RbI in FAPbI3 also improved the charge carrier mobility by 25% compared to that of pure FAPbI3. This enhancement in carrier mobility was attributed to the increased grain size of the perovskite material.
In summary, findings from theoretical and experimental studies indicate that charge carrier mobilities in MHPs at room temperature are limited by the Fröhlich interaction occurring between charge carriers and electric fields related to LO phonon modes in the ionic lattice. This means that incorporating smaller halides in lead halide perovskite films will result in lower charge carrier mobilities, while on the other hand replacing the heavier metal such as Pb with a lighter one will increase the mobility.156,157 In a nutshell, varying the A-site cation is expected to manipulate the intrinsic charge carrier mobility limit given the conditions that LO phonons are related to ionic-metal halide sublattice oscillations.156–161 The deuteration of formamidinium based perovskites leads to enhanced carrier mobility because of the weakening of Fröhlich coupling and a reduction in the LO phonon frequency.162 The deuteration of FAPbI3 enhances the distortion of the PbI6 octahedra cage, which reduces the scattering of charge carriers and thus enhances mobility. Furthermore, Myung et al. proposed a design principle of choosing A-site cations, which demonstrates higher carrier mobility.158 The key point is the coordination of organic cations to halide atoms. Additionally, Gong et al. revealed the isotope effects of MA cations on the charge carrier mobility in CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3ND3PbI3 perovskite thin films and found similar carrier mobility in both films.163 Besides, Caselli et al. found that the slow rotation of MA cations doesn't affect the charge carrier mobility.164 Along with the A-site cation effect, the anionic variation also alters the carrier mobility. Mixing of the BF4 anion in MAPbI3 leads to a change in the mobile carriers from the n-type to the p-type carrier.165 In pure MAPbI3, mobile carriers are n-type with an electron mobility of 66 cm2 V−1 s−1 and in MAPbI2.95(BF4)0.05, mobile carriers are p-type with a hole mobility of 3.4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The authors observed that by BF4 substitution, n-type MAPbI3 perovskite is converted into p-type MAPbI2.95(BF4)0.05 perovskite. MAPbI2.95(BF4)0.05 showed increased conductivity and decreased density of defect states, which led to increased device performance. Moreover, methods such as the reduction in the grain boundaries, improvements in the crystallinity, reduction in the background carrier density and energetic disorder, control of phase transition temperature and adoption of trap passivation strategies in 3D perovskite films can lead to improved mobility in them.
3.2. Single crystals
Although PSCs based on polycrystalline films made excellent progress, polycrystalline films suffer from stability issues. The stability issues mainly emanate from the energetic disorder due to defects and grain boundaries leading to thermal and moisture-induced degradation under ambient conditions. Recent advances in perovskite single crystals have shown pathways to mitigate the stability issues in the presence of heat, light and moisture.166–173 The absence of grain boundaries and a lower density of structural defects in perovskite single crystals not only make them apt for efficient and stable devices but make them well suited for the investigation of the intrinsic mobility of charge carriers.174,175 The carrier mobility of single crystals should be larger due to less scattering during charge transportation.
To investigate the mobility in perovskite single crystals, several techniques have been used, e.g. SCLC, ToF, THz spectroscopy, Hall-effect and FET-based methods.176,177 Saidaminov et al. investigated the charge carrier mobility in MAPbX3 crystals through the SCLC method.178 The carrier mobility was estimated to be 24.0 cm2 V−1 s−1 for MAPbBr3 crystals, as well as 67.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for MAPbI3 crystals (Fig. 4a and b). Changing the A-cation in the perovskite material leads to a small change in the bandgap, the crystal structure and the symmetry, hence affecting the charge carrier mobility also.175 Replacing the MA with FA, the hole mobilities for FAPbX3 (X = I, Br) single crystals were measured to be 62 cm2 V−1 s−1 for FAPbBr3 and 35 cm2 V−1 s−1 for FAPbI3 (Fig. 4c and d).179 The value of mobility in these single crystals is higher in comparison to the best mobilities achieved in polycrystalline thin films of the same composition (14 cm2 V−1 s−1 for FAPbBr3 and 27 cm2 V−1 s−1 for FAPbI3). These results support that generally, single crystals have higher mobility than their polycrystalline counterpart. The instability of the FAPbI3 material and poor metal–perovskite interface quality lower the mobility in the FAPbI3 single crystal. The Bakr group synthesized MAPbX3 (X = Br or I) crack-free single crystals and investigated mobility using the ToF method.180 The bulk hole mobility of MAPbBr3 single crystals was determined to be 115 cm2 V−1 s−1, while Huang et al. demonstrated a mobility of 24.0 cm2 V−1 s−1 in solution grown MAPbI3 single crystals using the ToF method.17 The primary reason for high mobility in perovskite single crystals is the long-range order of crystallinity and the absence of grain boundary. Transient multi-THz spectroscopy has also been applied to quantify the charge carrier mobility of perovskite single crystals. In MAPbI3 single crystals, Chávez et al. observed a ∼20% decrease in the carrier mobility on a sub-picosecond time scale and attributed it to the charging of trap states or charge mediated phonon scattering.85
 Fig. 4  The I–V characteristics of (a) MAPbBr3 and (b) MAPbI3 single crystals exhibiting the different regions obtained from the logI versus logV plots. The region marked as n = 1 is ohmic, n > 3 is TFL and n = 2 is Child's regime. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. The I–V characteristics of (c) FAPbBr3 and (d) FAPbI3 single crystals exhibiting different regions (I ∝ Vn): linear ohmic region, n = 1, red lines at low bias, a trap filling region starting at VTFL, n > 3, blue lines, and a Child's regime at high bias, n = 2, green lines. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, Deng et al. investigated the carrier mobility in a centimeter-sized MAPbBr3 single-crystalline film.181 They found that the carrier mobility (60 cm2 V−1 s−1) is orders of magnitude higher than that of MAPbBr3 polycrystalline films fabricated by spin coating methods. Mobility quantification in single crystals and polycrystalline films reveals that single crystals possess higher mobility. One of the mechanisms behind lower mobility values in polycrystalline semiconductors is “exponential band-tail trapping”. In this mechanism, photocarriers are captured and released by localized electronic states lying close to the band-edge. Band-tails are a consequence of disorder in chemical bonding and are prominent in polycrystalline and non-crystalline solids. Furthermore, in single crystal perovskites, structural fluctuations and dynamic disorder are less prevalent because of long-range crystalline order resulting in higher mobility values.
It was also observed that there is a large deviation in the mobility value for single crystals with the same perovskite composition but fabricated by different methods and measured using different techniques. The hole mobility in MAPbI3 single crystals was measured to be 164 ± 25 cm2 V−1 s−1 (grown by the TSSG method and mobility measured by the ToF method)17 and 2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (grown by the ASVSC method and mobility measured by the SCLC method). Therefore, it is challenging to isolate the discrepancies in the mobility values of single crystals caused by differences in the fabrication method and measurement technique.
The thickness of a single crystal and its surface layers can cause a variation in the charge carrier mobility.182 A report demonstrated that the value of trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) enhances gradually as MAPbBr3 single crystals become thicker. With increasing thickness of the crystal from 1.47 μm to 10.55 μm, the surface layer thickness expands from 12 nm to 31 nm and the carrier mobility is reduced from 97 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 57 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 5). The authors explained that with the enhancing crystal thickness, the surface layer thickness also enhances, and thus the mobility reduces. These results suggest that perovskite single crystalline films with controlled thickness will be ideal for improving the charge carrier mobility, providing better charge collection efficiency in photovoltaic devices.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of a MPB SCTF device. (b) The JD–V characteristic of MPB SCs with the variation of thickness. (c) The trap density and trap-free carrier mobility of MPB SCs with the variation of thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd. 
Although perovskite single crystals possess fewer defects and no grain boundaries, the charge carrier collection efficiency is low. Because the charge transport in single crystals is limited by their large thickness, the charge carrier mobility is also affected. Developing perovskite single crystalline films with controlled thickness can result in reduced recombination and enhanced charge carrier transport. One can expect to improve the charge carrier mobility in thin single crystalline perovskite films because of less scattering and reduced trapping of charge carriers. In a report, Yang et al. estimated the carrier mobility in a MAPbBr3 single-crystalline thin film to be 60 cm2 V−1 s−1.183 This value is higher than that in MAPbBr3 polycrystalline films made by spin-coating methods and comparable to that of large single crystals. Furthermore, Chen et al. demonstrated a high mobility value in cesium lead bromide (CsPbBr3) single-crystalline thin films fabricated by vapor-phase epitaxial (VPE) growth.184 The estimated electron mobility 518 cm2 V−1 s−1 was higher than that for solution-grown large CsPbBr3 single crystals and polycrystalline CsPbBr3 thin films because of the smoothness and single crystallographic orientation of VPE grown CsPbBr3 single-crystalline thin films.
While it is well established that charge carrier mobility in perovskite single crystals is higher than that in polycrystalline materials, the existence of trap states on the single-crystal surface can be detrimental to mobility. Therefore, researchers have suggested the use of surface treatment strategies to enhance the carrier mobility in perovskite single crystals.185–188 Song et al. showed an improvement in carrier mobility from 0.60 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 16 cm2 V−1 s−1 in MAPbI3 single crystals after surface treatment with methyl ammonium iodide (MAI).189 Besides, surface treatment with MAI resulted in a significant reduction in the surface trap density from 6.67 × 109 cm−2 to 4.51 × 109 cm−2. The passivation of surface traps in single-crystalline perovskites can dramatically enhance the charge carrier mobility leading to improved photovoltaic performance of PSCs. It has been suggested that reducing the surface defect density is more beneficial than reducing the bulk defect density in single crystals.190
However, although significant progress has been achieved in perovskite-based devices, ionic conduction within the semiconductor is still a puzzle that can have a significant impact on all metal halide perovskite-based optoelectronic devices because of its influence upon electronic and optoelectronic processes. As discussed above, several techniques have been employed to investigate carrier mobility, but the influence of mobile ions upon these measurements is yet to be understood.191 Recently Duijnstee et al. demonstrated the effect of mobile ions upon electronic conductivity during space-charge limited current measurements of MAPbBr3 single crystals.54 The Vons (onset voltage) shows different values, by an order of magnitude, in forward and reverse bias. This hysteresis can be attributed to the applied electric field in SCLC measurement, which affects the mobile ions. These mobile ions show a dramatic effect on electronic mobility. Therefore, it is necessary to quantify the mobility with accuracy and considering the role of mobile ions. We suggest that the effect of mobile ions should be considered in all mobility measurement techniques for perovskite materials.
4. Mobility in 2D perovskites
Despite the outstanding optoelectronic properties and power conversion efficiencies, the water sensitivity and intrinsic instability are the reasons that hinder the widespread commercialization of the MHP based PSC technology. Developing two-dimensional (2D) or quasi-2D perovskites is currently one of the most effective and widely adopted methods to address the chemical and intrinsic instability issues in 3D perovskites. The general formula for popular RP phase 2D perovskites is A2(B)n−1MnX3n+1, where the A cite cation represents a bulky monovalent aliphatic/aromatic alkyl ammonium organic spacer, B is a smaller organic cation, M represents a divalent metal cation, X is a halide anion, and n denotes the thickness of two-dimensional inorganic octahedral layers.192,193 The electronic energy level offset between insulating bulky organic cations and semiconducting lead halide layers and the mismatch of their dielectric constants (εorganic ≈ 4 and εinorganic ≈ 7.3) lead to the formation of conducting quantum wells and consecutive insulating barrier type geometry in 2D perovskites.194 Owing to their hydrophobic nature, the organic cations prohibit water molecules from entering the perovskite lattice and thus increase its moisture stability. In contrast, these insulating organic cations hinder the transport of charge carriers. Despite superb improvements in stability, the device performance has been compromised due to the reduced charge carrier mobilities and carrier transport between the inorganic layers.195,196
4.1. Polycrystalline films
The primary factors responsible for limiting charge-carrier mobilities in polycrystalline 2D perovskite films are summarized below:
• High exciton binding energies originated due to the charge screening effect that limits the mobility and diffusion of charge carriers in 2D perovskites to around 100 nm only. In 2D perovskites, exciton binding energy increases from ∼10 meV in 3D perovskites to >150 meV in 2D perovskites for n = 1 (pure 2D perovskites).197,198
• The parallel alignment of inorganic octahedral layers in a 2D perovskite structure also influences its charge carrier mobility. Previous studies showed that in 2D perovskites, the inorganic layers can be stacked either parallel or perpendicular to the surface of the substrate. The stacking of inorganic perovskite layers parallel to the substrate surface leads to in-plane dielectric confinement of charge carriers, thus creating anisotropy in the mobility of charge carriers. Moreover, charge transport is further hindered by bulky organic spacers separating the inorganic layers resulting in a barrier to carrier motion perpendicular to the substrate.199
• The choice of different organic molecules in 2D perovskites produces a large range of structural motifs with diverse properties. However, factors such as the insulating nature of these organic spacer molecules,200 long chain length, stacking orientation of spacer molecules,201 and concentration of organic barrier molecules202 severely affect the movement of charge carriers in 2D perovskites.
• 2D perovskites consist of mixtures of different phases with a random distribution of multiple quantum wells with distinct widths. Despite appropriate stoichiometry, variations in the formation energy of QWs lead to the creation of QWs with different widths. This further lowers the charge carrier mobilities in 2D perovskites as low 〈n〉 dimensional QWs have higher exciton binding energies. Hence, their presence hampers the overall charge carrier mobilities.203,204
Several methods have been adopted so far to improve charge carrier mobilities in 2D perovskites. For example, one can use the hot casting method to address the parallel alignment issue of inorganic perovskite layers. This technique significantly helps to create the preferential perpendicular or out-of-plane orientation of inorganic perovskite QWs. Tsai et al. reported hot-cast highly crystalline and perpendicularly oriented (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 2D films and estimated the charge carrier mobility to be 0.011 cm2 V−1 s−1 using the dark-CELIV method. This was significantly higher in comparison to that of the room-temperature cast device having a mobility value of 0.0015 cm2 V−1 s−1.205 This improvement was attributed to the formation of a perpendicular out of plane orientation of {(MA)nPbnI3n+1}2− 2D inorganic slabs in the hot-cast samples forming continuous charge transport channels of these inorganic layers between the device electrodes. Another approach that facilitates the preferred out of plane growth of 2D perovskites is the use of additives such as NH4Cl, NH4SCN and MACl in 2D perovskite precursors that resulted in quasi-2D perovskite films with a vertical orientation, excellent crystallinity, and enhanced mobilities.206,207 Furthermore, the MACl additive was used in different concentrations to tune the crystallinity of phenylethylamine (PEA) based (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10−xClx quasi-2D perovskite films.208 It was claimed that the optimum concentration (20 mol) of the MACl additive in (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10−xClx perovskite films leads to a significant increase in electron and hole mobilities. For (MACl-20), electron and hole mobilities were estimated to be 1.66 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, while pristine 2D perovskite devices (MACl-0) having electron and hole mobilities of 2.9 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 5.9 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively as presented in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Characteristic J–V curves for mobility measurement of (a) hole-only and (b) electron-only devices of quasi-2D perovskites with and without the MACl additive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
Various strategies can be adopted to mitigate the low carrier mobility and charge transport issues originating from insulating organic spacers. One approach is to alter the chain length of the organic spacer cation. Liang et al. demonstrated this by inserting branched isobutylamine (isoBA) in place of linear butyl amine between inorganic slabs of [PbI6], followed by hot casting of (isoBA)2(MA)3Pb4I3 films. This resulted in a remarkable increase in out-of-plane carrier mobility (1.35 cm2 V−1 s−1) in comparison to room temperature cast long-chain butyl amine (BA) based- RT(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films (<0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1), as measured by TRTS.24 As out-of-plane mobility measurement is critical in 2D perovskites, the angle-resolved TRTS method was therefore used to discriminate between the different spatial components of charge carrier mobility. Both in-plane and out-of-plane mobility values in 2D perovskite films were estimated by tilting the samples at different angles with respect to THz fields (Fig. 7a and b). Similarly, Shuji et al. have also calculated the carrier mobility for a series of 2D perovskites by varying the chain length n of the organic spacer [CH3(CH2)n−1NH3] using the OPTPS technique.209 In this work, the influence of the chemical structure and the chain length of the organic spacer was systematically investigated on the series of 2D perovskite films bearing large organic spacers [(CH3(CH2)n−1NH3), from n = 4 to n = 18 ] synthesized using a common procedure. The study revealed that the carrier mobility (both in-plane and out-of-plane) increased initially till n ≤ 6, followed by a decrease with the spacer chain length increasing beyond n = 6 (n ≥ 6). The HA2PbI4 perovskite having a hexyl amine (n = 6) spacer demonstrated the highest in-plane and out-of-plane mobilities. It was concluded from the study that the local chain distortion of the organic cation and gauche defects are the reasons behind reduced in-plane mobility, while the out-of-plane mobility is coequally regulated by the conformation order of the organic spacers and corresponding interplanar distance. The second approach for enhancing mobility is reducing the number of bulky organic cations intercalated into the 2D perovskite lattice.210 For example, upon varying the ratio of the bulky organic cations in the precursor solution, the number of inorganic layers (n value) in a phenylethylamine (PEA) based (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 quasi-2D perovskite system can be conveniently altered from 1 to ∞. Herz et al. followed this strategy and by incorporating 50% PEA, the charge carrier mobility is enhanced to 11 cm2 V−1 s−1 from 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 of pure 2D (PEA)2PbBr4 perovskite films.211 Another method used a chemical modification of the structure of organic spacer molecules for preferred orientation and charge transport. For example, fluorine substitution at the para position of PEA improved the charge carrier mobility in (F-PEA)2PbI4 films to seven times greater than those of pristine (PEA)2PbI4 films, as calculated by the microwave method (Fig. 7c).212 The reason for carrier mobility improvement here is the increased orbital interactions between the inorganic layers owing to decreased average ring centroid-to-centroid distances in the organic layer.212 Other strategies are the use of shorter organic spacer ligands,213 and the incorporation of FA+ and Cs+ at the cationic position, which also improve the charge carrier mobilities up to 18 cm2 V−1 s−1 in 2D perovskites with a record enhancement in power conversion efficiencies up to 13.7%.214
 Fig. 7  (a) TRTS photoconductivity measurements for room temperature cast (nBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and hot cast (isoBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films at an excitation wavelength of 400 nm. The samples are kept at θ = 0° (parallel) and θ = 30° (tilted) orientations to the incident THz field. (b) Carrier mobility detection for RT (nBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and HT (isoBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13samples (placed at different tilting angles θ) by the TRTS method (by varying the incident angles of the THz probe pulse). Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) In-plane and out-of-plane charge transport measurement for n = 1 fluorinated and pristine (PEA)2PbI4 2D perovskite thin films with the microwave conductivity measurement technique. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The use of organic diamines as spacer molecules in 2D perovskites has emerged as another successful approach to achieve a thinner insulating interlayer and enhanced thin-film crystallinity. The use of bulky diamine molecules gives rise to the Dian Jacobson (DJ) phase in 2D perovskites.22 In DJ 2D perovskites, two adjacent inorganic perovskite layers are connected to organic moieties (bulky organic cation) via hydrogen bonding. Consequently, increased π–π stacking within hydrophobic layers minimizes the insulating gap between inorganic interlayers. Niu et al. have used 1,4-butane diamine iodide (BDAI2) to fabricate layered (BDA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 quasi-2D perovskite films (n = 5). The authors measured electron and hole mobilities using the SCLC method to be 1.14 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.67 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively and compared to the electron and hole mobilities of 1.21 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.41 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively for butyl amine based films (Fig. 8).215 Similarly, Li et al. reported an electron mobility of 8.7 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 for n = 3 layered 2D perovskites by using 1,4-phenylene dimethyl ammonium diamine as the organic spacer molecule. Therefore, the charge carrier mobilities of DJ 2D perovskites with diamine organic molecules exhibit a significant enhancement and are almost comparable to the values reported for hot cast samples (11 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1).216 Also, Song et al. fabricated BEA0.5MAnPbnI3n+1 perovskite films containing 1–4 butane diamine (BEA) and methyl ammonium (MA) as alternative cations in the interlayer spacing and fabricated a mixed perovskite structure exhibiting the characteristics of both the D–J phase and alternative cation interface (ACI) phases.217 The BEA0.5MA3Pb3I10 perovskite films with B-ACI resulted in a narrow distribution of inorganic quantum well widths that further led to an efficient carrier transport pathway. Here the electron mobility measured using the TRPL technique was calculated to be 9.1 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the pristine RP phase BEA2MA2Pb3I10 perovskite, and improved by almost an order of magnitude to 8.6 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the mixed-phase (B-ACI) BEA0.5MA3Pb3I10 perovskite devices.
 Fig. 8  
J–V characteristics for mobility measurement in (a) hole-only BDA-RD (butane diamine), (b) electron-only BDA-RD, (c) hole-only BA-RD (butylamine), and (d) electron-only BA-RD devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
To address the low carrier mobility issue in 2D perovskites due to polydisperse QWs, proper selection of the organic spacer is important. The unique chemical structure of these organic spacers not only enhances the intermolecular interaction between QWs but also promotes the formation of monodisperse QWs (closer to the original designated stoichiometric ratio) in the system. Sargent et al. investigated three organic spacer groups, ALA (allyl ammonium), BTA (butyl ammonium) and PEA, for the fabrication of n = 10 layered quasi-2D perovskite films. All of these alkyl ammonium spacers led to the creation of a continuous flat energy landscape resulting in 1.9- and 1.4-times longer carrier diffusion lengths. The electron mobilities for BTA, PEA and ALA spacer-based quasi-2D films were 8.9 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, 5.7 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively measured using transient PL quenching methods. This technique utilizes parameters such as the carrier lifetime, film thickness, and electron and hole quenching lifetimes to estimate the carrier diffusion lengths and mobilities.218
The above considerations highlight the low charge carrier mobility issues in 2D perovskite thin films and possible methods for improvement. TA spectroscopy, TMRC, terahertz absorption, electrical transient methods such as CELIV, steady-state electrical methods such as SCLC are the major techniques utilized to elucidate carrier mobility measurements in 2D perovskites.
4.2. Single crystals
The above-described solutions represent major advances that have been achieved in improving the carrier mobility for 2D perovskite thin films. Still, the excess surface defect states and unavoidable phase impurity in 2D perovskite polycrystalline thin films are a deterrent to achieving higher mobility values. Conventional spin coating techniques are used in the fabrication of 2D perovskite polycrystalline thin films through which the control of phase purity and surface defects is very challenging. Phase pure 2D perovskite single crystals can be successfully synthesized with various fabrication techniques and the resulting pure phase 2D single crystals are less prone to surface defects. Due to the presence of fewer defects and phase purity (for lower n phases, n < 4) in 2D perovskite single crystals, charge carrier mobilities tend to be higher in comparison to those in polycrystalline thin films.219–222
There are various ways to prepare 2D single crystals. The solution process is generally used for the preparation of organic–inorganic lead halide 2D perovskite single crystals. The peripheral crystallization method uses edge evaporation to form seed crystals. Also, there are a few other fabrication techniques such as the constant temperature/controlled-evaporation method using slow evaporation and surface-tension-controlled crystallization.223 It is well established that considerable phase purity is attained with these fabrication techniques for two-dimensional perovskite single crystals, but still the mobility measured perpendicular to the sheets is inferior compared to the measurement along the plane of the inorganic sheet. The main reason behind the mobility anisotropy is the presence of various potential barriers such as defects, vacancies and disordered states that might have come into existence in the organic layer during crystal growth and fabrication. This leads to the formation of carrier scattering centers, which reduce the mobility of the carriers and increase the intrinsic resistivity in the perpendicular direction. Most recently, Shen et al. synthesized a centimeter-sized  type perovskite, BDAPbI4 (BDA = NH3C4H8NH3), as a single crystal by the cooling HI based precursor solutions/acid precipitation method and investigated its charge-transport properties.224 The SCLC method was used to measure mobility for the crystal with a device structure of Au/(BDA)PbI4/Au. The hole mobility of the (BDA)PbI4 crystal was found to be 17 cm2 V−1 s−1 using the Mott–Gurney law. A planar device was constructed; along the (00l) surface there is good charge transport in the I–Pb–I interlayer as compared to the perpendicular direction due to the long organic spacer along the (h00) orientation. The possible reason for the low mobility in the perpendicular direction is the presence of defects, vacancies and disordered states introduced into the organic spacer layer during the crystal growth.168 Similarly, Liu et al. used the surface-tension-controlled crystallization method to get inch-sized 2D (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 ((PEA)2PbI4) perovskite single crystals. Employing SCLC for mobility measurement, they found that the devices fabricated in-plane (001) showed much better performance compared to out-of-planes (010), due to higher mobility along the plane as has been discussed above.225 Here the device formed on the (001) plane shows a μτ product of 2.52 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the (010) plane gives a μτ product of 1.72 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, 1465 times smaller than that of the (001) plane device.
For 2D-single crystals, not only does the orientation of inorganic layers dictate mobility but the charge-transport properties also show dependence on the n value. For example, Wang et al. used surface-tension-controlled crystallization to synthesize quasi-2D (C4H9NH3)n(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, and ∞) at the solution–air interface.226 The hole-only device structure was made as shown in Fig. 9a and b and the SCLC method was used to study in and out-of-plane charge transport. Fig. 9c shows the in-plane and out-of-plane mobilities vs. quantum well thickness and both mobilities are found to increase with thickness. The electrical conductance also follows the same trend (Fig. 9d). As expected for n = ∞, the structure becomes a 3D perovskite structure and thus the highest mobility ∼33 cm2 V−1 s−1 was achieved. For a minimal quantum well thickness of 6.28 Å (n = 1), out-of-plane mobility was measured to be over one order of magnitude lower (4.7× 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) than the in-plane mobility (8.2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1).
 Fig. 9  Schematics of (a) lateral in-plane device and (b) vertical out-of-plane device used for the transport measurements. In-plane and out-of-plane comparison of (c) mobility and (d) electrical conductance for different n values for the quasi-2D perovskite (C4H9NH3)n(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
As discussed earlier in detail, the choice of different organic spacer molecules also affects the charge carrier transport characteristics in 2D perovskites. Zhang et al. has used the “aqueous cooling crystallization method” to fabricate a series of 2D perovskite single crystals with different organic spacer cations (butylamine, phenylethylamine, and allylamine) and investigated their charge carrier mobilities.227 They found a difference of magnitude of approximately 3 orders between the out-of-plane mobility (μop, about 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and in-plane mobility (μip, about 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1) for all three single crystals, which mainly arise due to the strong vertical blocking and scattering effect of the organic barrier on charge carriers. In particular, n − 3 layered phenyl ethyl amine-based (PEA2MA2Pb3I10) single crystals had the highest in-plane mobility μip 4.4 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 but the smallest out-of-plane mobility μop 1.2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the vertical direction.
Also, the effective mobility for all the 2D organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites might have been misjudged due to an apparent contact barrier. Li et al. tried to calculate actual mobilities using field-effect transistors (FETs). They prepared using the constant temperature solution growth technique a 2D hybrid Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 single crystal, where n = 1, 2, and 3. The calculated mobility for n = 1, 2, and 3 was 1.1 × 10−3, 7 × 10−2, and 9.5 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, at 77 K. The Y function method (YFM) was used to find the intrinsic mobility, and neglects the effect of contact barriers. After YFM correction, the intrinsic mobility for n = 3 at 77 K was corrected to 1.25 cm2 V−1 s−1, while the values for n = 1 and 2 were 2 × 10−3 and 8.3 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K, respectively.219
Similar to 2D perovskite thin films, in single crystals, the mobility measured perpendicular to the inorganic sheets is inferior to that measured along the plane of the sheet. Here the charge-transport properties also show dependency on the n value. Furthermore, there are various charge transport impediments such as vacancies, defects, and disordered states that may form in the organic spacer layer during crystal formation. They can act as a carrier scattering center, thus reducing the mobility of the carriers and hence increasing intrinsic resistivity in the perpendicular direction.
5. Mobility in 2D/3D mixed perovskites
The exceptional optoelectronic properties and improved stability in 2D/quasi-2D perovskites are overshadowed by the wider electronic bandgap, decreased interplanar interaction between inorganic QWs, insulating nature of the organic spacer and high exciton binding energy that decreases the charge carrier mobilities and affects the power conversion efficiency (PCE) in photovoltaic devices. Nevertheless, the expectations from 2D perovskites are flourishing continuously and the disadvantages of these low-dimensional perovskites can be reduced by combining 2D perovskites with traditional 3D perovskites. These mixed dimensional 2D/3D perovskite films have an increased grain size and enhanced crystallinity, which further contributes to increased carrier mobilities and consequently longer carrier diffusion lengths. 2D/3D engineering to create mixed perovskites can combine the higher photovoltaic efficiencies of 3D with the enhanced stability of 2D MHPs.228,229
In 2D perovskites, higher n phase members, i.e. n > 4, are often considered as 2D/3D mixed perovskites. These 2D/3D mixed perovskites were synthesized by varying the incorporation percentage of organic spacer molecules into a 2D perovskite lattice. Sargent et al. probed the charge carrier mobilities in higher phase members of (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 mixed dimensional perovskites with phases n = 6, 10, 40, 60 and ∞. They confirmed that structural transformation in phases from pure 2D perovskites to higher n members leads to a gradual increase in the charge carrier mobilities with a maximum value of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 for n = 60 composition.230 In 2D perovskites, phase pure higher n members are thermodynamically unstable and difficult to obtain due to the fast and kinetically controlled self-assembly process during film fabrication. Hence, higher n order perovskites are often defined by the molar percentage of organic spacer molecules instead of n values. Hertz and coworkers investigated charge carrier mobilities for PEA-MA mixed lead halide perovskites using TRTS and found that the charge carrier mobilities are maximum (25 cm2 V−1 s−1) for the MAPbI3 film (PEA-0%) and decreased to 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 for pure 2D perovskites (PEA)2PbBr4 (PEA-100%). But when films were fabricated with 50% PEA, the mobility was enhanced to 11 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is almost comparable to bulk halide perovskite values211 and is the result of the enhanced perpendicular orientation of inorganic layers in comparison to complete alignment parallel to the substrate in the 〈001〉 direction for the 100% PEA film.
2D/3D mixed perovskites can also be fabricated by the blending of 2D spacer molecules with 3D precursor solutions. The organic spacer molecules slice the MAPbX3 domains via migration into the grain boundaries of 3D perovskites to form hydrophobic organic layers with induced π–π interactions, which further leads to the formation of mixed 2D/3D perovskites. Additionally, these molecules enhance moisture stability by passivating the surface of the perovskite. Following a similar approach, Herz et al. incorporated a bromobenzyl ammonium organic cation as a spacer into the MAPbI3 perovskite lattice and fabricated graded quasi-2D/3D perovskite structure films. The graded structure results in 17.4 ± 0.9 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 23.9 ± 0.9 cm2 V−1 s−1 mobilities in respective 2D/3D and 3D domains measured using optical pump terahertz probe spectroscopy.231 Similarly, Chen and coworkers incorporated 2-thiophene methyl ammonium into a conventional MA/FA based 3D perovskite system, which leads to the formation of a mixed 2D/3D perovskite, in which the crystallographic planes of [(MAxFA1−x)n−1PbnI3n+1]2− 2D inorganic slabs get favorably aligned perpendicular to the substrate and further promote efficient charge transport. From SCLC measurement methods, the electron and hole mobilities measured in 2D/3D devices are of the order of 2.14 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.09 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which are significantly higher than the electron and hole mobilities of 1.28 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6.86 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 of the control 3D device.232 More recently, Song et al. incorporated 2,2-(ethylenedioxy)bis(ethylammonium) [EDBE] phase pure 2D microcrystals into MAPbI3 precursor solution, which resulted in phase isolated vertical heterojunctions of mixed 2D/3D perovskites. Remarkably, here the 2D phases appear to converge between highly oriented 3D perovskite grains detected by the formation of flake-like 2D structures at the 3D grain boundaries, which further resulted in the passivation of carrier trapping defect states. The electron and hole mobilities measured with the SCLC technique are calculated to be (2.55 ± 1.1) × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and (2.05 ± 1.8) × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for 3D perovskites, and improved by almost an order of magnitude to (1.18 ± 1.3) × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 and (9.22 ± 1.1) × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for 2D/3D mixed devices (x = 0.03), respectively (Fig. 10). Therefore, the above findings further established that the charge-carrier transport has been enhanced by adding an appropriate number of hydrophobic organic cations into the 3D perovskite lattice to form 2D/3D heterojunctions.233
 Fig. 10  Characteristic J–V curves for mobility measurement of (a) hole-only MAPbI3, (b) hole-only EDBE doped (3%) MAPbI3, (c) electron-only MAPbI3 and (d) electron-only EDBE doped (3%) MAPbI3 perovskite devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The 2D/3D mixed perovskite structure, therefore, tends to be the most feasible avenue for significantly enhancing the charge carrier mobilities in a 2D perovskite system without sacrificing its eminent moisture stability and power conversion efficiencies.
6. Challenges and prospects
The last few years have witnessed significant progress in the performance of perovskite devices. With a fundamental understanding of transport physics and the development of intricate mobility engineering strategies, the mobility values of MHPs have surged rather rapidly. Although the charge carrier mobility of perovskites is high, it is still relatively much lower compared to conventional inorganic semiconductors (such as GaAs). Therefore, efforts are still needed to improve the charge carrier mobility of 2D, 3D and 2D/3D mixed MHPs in both polycrystalline films and single crystals.
(1) Although the above-discussed techniques are all self-consistent in elucidating the charge carrier mobility in perovskite materials individually, a comparison among those techniques exhibits a large deviation. The values of carrier mobilities as measured using different techniques cover a wide range spanning 8 orders of magnitude as summarized in Table 1. Therefore, an urgent need is to establish the most accurate measurement techniques for different dimensionality perovskites in single crystal and polycrystalline forms.
Table 1 Charge carrier mobility quantifications in MHPs




MHP
Dimension
Architecture
Technique
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Ref.




MAPbI3
3D
TF
Hall effect

μ
h = 13.7–36.0

75



MAPbI3
3D
TF
Hall effect

μ
e = 66

77



MAPbI3
3D
TF
FET
22.75

234



FAPbI3
3D
TF
THz
27

148



FAPbBr3
3D
TF
THz
14

148



(iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13
2D
TF
TRTS
1.35

24



(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13
2D
TF
SCLC

μ
e = 4.1 × 10−4

205




μ
h = 3.56 × 10−4


(PEA)2MA3Pb4I13
2D
TF
SCLC

μ
h = 7.20 × 10−3

211




μ
e = 3.56 × 10−3


(PEA)2MA4Pb5I16
2D
TF
SCLC

μ
h = (2.71 ± 1.5) × 10−3

211




μ
e = (2.28 ± 0.56) × 10−3


F-PEA2MA2Pb3I10
2D
TF
SCLC

μ
h = 3.02 × 10−4

212




μ
e = 2.84 × 10−4


F-PEA2MA4Pb5I16
2D/3D
TF
SCLC

μ
e = (8.0 ± 3.1) × 10−3

212




μ
h = (5.2 ± 2.0) × 10−3


BA2(MA0.19FA0.76Cs0.05)3Pb4I13
2D
TF
SCLC

μ
h = 8.0 ± 0.01

214




μ
e = 0.75 ± 0.02


MAPbI3
3D
SC
SCLC
67.2

178



MAPbBr3
3D
SC
SCLC
24.0

178



FAPbI3
3D
SC
SCLC

μ
h = 35

179



FAPbBr3
3D
SC
SCLC

μ
h =62

179



MAPbBr3
3D
SC
ToF

μ
h = 115

180



MAPbI3
3D
SC
ToF
24.0

17



MAPbI3
3D
SC
ToF

μ
h = 164 ± 25

17



MAPbBr3
3D
SC
SCLC
97

182



MAPbBr3
3D
SCTF
Hall-effect
60

183



CsPbBr3
3D
SCTF
SCLC

μ
e = 518

184



BDAPbI4
2D
SC
SCLC

μ
h = 17

224



(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1
2D
SC
FET



226



(n = 1)
1.1 × 10−3


(n = 2)
7 × 10−2


(n = 3)
9.5 × 10−1




(2) The unstable organic phase of several perovskites, mostly FA and MA-based perovskites, also hinders the charge carrier mobility. Further research should be directed towards the stabilization of the perovskite phases.
(3) Low dimensional perovskites have higher environmental stability but suffer from poor device performance, which has been suggested to be due to limited out-of-plane charge carrier mobility resulting from the scattering of carriers by bulky cation layers and the large binding energy of charge carriers. The vertical orientation of inorganic layers in low dimensional perovskites can enhance out-of-plane mobility. Therefore, more research is required on tailoring the orientation of perovskite crystals and inorganic layers in low-dimensional perovskites.
(4) Furthermore, in 2D perovskites, efficient organic spacers, fine-tuning of their chemical structures, preferential use of diamine molecules and modeling of different organic cations for their role as scattering centers are also required to develop reliable 2D perovskite thin films with higher carrier mobility. Existing solutions such as the hot casting deposition technique can also help achieve higher charge carrier mobilities, but some of these strategies may still suffer from a lack of reproducibility and difficulties in upscaling to modules. Therefore, it is important to establish reliable, reproducible and scalable methods to address the poor charge transport issue in these low dimensional perovskites.
(5) In 2D/3D mixed perovskites, it is highly difficult to control the exact n phase values; it is more likely for mixed perovskites to exhibit a random distribution of 2D and 3D phases. Hence, inevitable morphological randomness in 2D/3D mixed perovskites leads to random phase distribution and mismatched band alignment that hinders the charge carrier transport in these devices. Therefore, more studies need to be conducted to theoretically and experimentally determine the appropriate doping percentage/number of organic spacers into conventional 3D perovskites to reduce the confinement effects and improve the carrier transport.
(6) In bulk perovskite single crystals, various kinds of traps and defects are present such as surface traps, vacancy defects, and interstitial defects. Robust surface passivation strategies need to be developed to reduce the density of surface charge traps. The doping of appropriate metal and halide ions in perovskite single crystals can help reduce the bulk traps or defects. By reducing the defects and traps, carrier scattering can be reduced, the mean free path can be increased and hence mobility will be enhanced. Another reason for low mobility is the poor crystal quality and inadequate metal–perovskite interface. Therefore, more research should be focused on improving the single-crystal quality and engineering of the interface between perovskite single crystals and metal contacts.
(7) For low dimensional perovskites following issues/challenges need to be addressed in order to improve the charge carrier mobilities in perovskite materials. Alteration in the chain length of organic spacer cations, reducing the amount of intercalated organic spacer, chemical substitution or doping in the organic spacer for reducing the dielectric constant as well as lowering the potential barrier, use of diammonium organic moieties in order to obtain increased π–π stacking within hydrophobic layers and use of NH4Cl, NH4SCN, MASCN and MACl molecules for additive engineering are few of the elegant approaches suggested in order to control the out of plane crystallinity and increase carrier mobility in 2D perovskites. Furthermore, in 2D/3D mixed perovskites, detailed theoretical and experimental studies are necessary to determine the appropriate doping percentage/number of organic spacers in conventional 3D perovskites. This will help mitigate the morphological randomness and enable the design of 2D/3D perovskites with optimized phase distribution required for efficient carrier transport. Also, theoretical calculations leading to the prediction of new organic cations for 2D and 2D/3D perovskites, the development of novel ETMs and HTMs having appropriate energy band alignment with 2D/3D mixed perovskites and the use of dual additive engineering (using two complementary additives to simultaneously overcome the defect density, energetic disorder and poor crystallinity problems) can be the prominent forthcoming approaches to improve the low carrier mobility and therefore the low power conversion efficiency in mixed 2D/3D perovskite devices.
7. Conclusions
In this review, we have systematically summarized charge carrier mobility studies in perovskite semiconductors and discussed how mobility is dependent on the perovskite dimensionality, form and crystallinity. The quantification of mobility was performed through different analytical techniques, including ultrafast spectroscopies (TA, TRPL, TRTS, and TRMC), transient electrical measurements (CELIV and TOF), and steady-state methods (FET, Hall effect, and SCLC). It is evident that different measurement techniques exhibit a large variation in mobility values due to intrinsic differences in experimental processes and data acquisition. Therefore, careful measurements with different techniques are required for reporting the mobility value. Additionally, the effect of ionic contribution on carrier mobility needs to be studied in depth. The rich structural variety and crystallinity of perovskites are also needed to be considered for a better understanding of the extraordinarily large mobility of this semiconductor. Finally, all this critical understanding as discussed in this review can potentially lead to performance optimization and futuristic photovoltaic device design.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
SS acknowledges the ISRO grant (STC-1563-PHY). NKT acknowledges the UGC fellowship. Yukta acknowledges the Department of Science and Technology for the INSPIRE fellowship (IF170678). TS acknowledges the CSIR fellowship. AG, KSN, and RKG acknowledge the financial support from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India through grant no. DST/TMD/CERI/C140(G) under Clean Energy Research Initiative, the UKRI Global Challenge Research Fund project, SUNRISE (EP/P032591/1) and Newton-APEX (British Council, UK). RKG acknowledges financial assistance from DST India, through the INSPIRE Faculty Award (Project No. IFA-13 ENG-57).
References
M. Kumar Chini, S. Goverapet Srinivasan, N. K. Tailor, Yukta, D. Salahub and S. Satapathi, Chem. Phys., 2020, 529, 110547 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raghav, S. Singh, D. Moghe, S. Sharma, D. Kabra and S. Satapathi, Chem. Phys., 2019, 526, 110408 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raghav, S. Singh, S. K. Sharma, D. Kabra, M. Bag and S. Satapathi, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2017, 12, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
P. Srivastava, A. P. Parhi, R. Ranjan, S. Satapathi and M. Bag, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4420–4425 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Tailor, M. Abdi-Jalebi, V. Gupta, H. L. Hu, M. I. Dar, G. Li and S. Satapathi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21356–21386 RSC .
J. K. Wenderott, A. Raghav, M. Shtein, P. F. Green and S. Satapathi, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 7647–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Tailor, S. P. Senanayak, M. Abdi-Jalebi and S. Satapathi, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 386, 138430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kadian, N. K. Tailor, N. Chaulagain, K. Shankar, S. Satapathi and G. Manik, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 17406–17417 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Tailor, S. Mishra, T. Sharma, A. K. De and S. Satapathi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 9891–9898 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Gratzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. M. Lim, D. Giovanni, M. Righetto, M. Feng, S. G. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2743–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Prakash, A. Singh, G. Sathiyan, R. Ranjan, A. Singh, A. Garg and R. K. Gupta, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 440–486 CrossRef .
R. Ranjan, A. Prakash, A. Singh, A. Singh, A. Garg and R. K. Gupta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1037–1047 RSC .
R. Ranjan, B. Usmani, S. Pali, S. Ranjan, A. Singh, A. Garg and R. K. Gupta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 207, 110335 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ranjan, B. Usmani, S. Ranjan, H. C. Weerasinghe, A. Singh, A. Garg and R. K. Gupta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 202, 110130 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sathiyan, R. Ranjan, S. Ranjan, A. Garg, R. K. Gupta and A. Singh, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7609–7618 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, K. Xu and F. Wei, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2020, 11, 51–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, X. Tang, B. Huang, T. Hu, L. Tan, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700387 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Kim, A. Hagfeldt and N. G. Park, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1192–1200 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Poddar, L. Shu, Y. Fu and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, P. Fu, S. Yu, Q. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. Guo and C. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 794–806 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Chen, Y. Sun, J. J. Peng, W. Zhang, X. J. Su, K. B. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Q. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700162 CrossRef .
K. Zheng and T. Pullerits, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5881–5885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lan, Z. Y. Zhou, R. J. Wei and J. C. Ho, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 11, 61–82 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Li, M. Y. Liao, C. H. Chen and C. C. Chueh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4294–4302 RSC .
C. Ma, D. Shen, T. W. Ng, M. F. Lo and C. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800710 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Guo, X. Wu, T. Zhu, X. Zhu and L. Huang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9992–9998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. Solanki, M. Manjappa, S. Ramesh, Y. K. Srivastava, P. Agarwal, T. C. Sum and R. Singh, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaax8821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Chong, K. Thirumal, D. Giovanni, T. W. Goh, X. Liu, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14701–14708 RSC .
Y. Y. Cho, A. M. Soufiani, J. S. Yun, J. C. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. Seidel, X. F. Deng, M. A. Green, S. J. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703392 CrossRef .
W. C. Huang, T. L. Bu, F. Z. Huang and Y. B. Cheng, Joule, 2020, 4, 975–979 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. S. Kim, J. M. Heo, M. Pei, I. H. Park, Z. Liu, H. J. Yun, M. H. Park, S. H. Jeong, Y. H. Kim, J. W. Park, E. Oveisi, S. Nagane, A. Sadhanala, L. Zhang, J. J. Kweon, S. K. Lee, H. Yang, H. M. Jang, R. H. Friend, K. P. Loh, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park and T. W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3378 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, Y. Pan, J. Hu, S. Qiu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, S. Chen, X. Liu, C. J. Brabec, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. Mai and F. Guo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1386–1395 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Sun, W. L. Tan, J. Lu, T. R. Gengenbach, C. R. McNeill, Z. Ge, Y. B. Cheng and U. Bach, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1240–1251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Sun, N. Chandrasekaran, C. Liu, A. D. Scully, W. P. Yin, C. K. Ng and J. J. Jasieniak, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 8205–8215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Teale, A. H. Proppe, E. H. Jung, A. Johnston, D. H. Parmar, B. Chen, Y. Hou, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5115–5119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim and K. Zhu, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 11, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi and S. Sanvito, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, A. M. Rappe, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, M. E. Messing, K. Zheng and T. Pullerits, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3532–3540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chung, S. I. Jung, H. J. Kim, W. Cha, E. Sim, D. Kim, W. K. Koh and J. Kim, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 4160–4164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Q. Xu, G. Han, B. Wu, C. H. A. Huan, M. L. Leek and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1300 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Hopper, A. Gorodetsky, A. Jeong, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. Maimaris, M. Chaplain, T. J. Macdonald, X. Huang, R. Lovrincic, M. V. Kovalenko and A. A. Bakulin, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2271–2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Righetto, S. S. Lim, D. Giovanni, J. W. M. Lim, Q. Zhang, S. Ramesh, Y. K. E. Tay and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang and L. W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3875–3880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yaffe, Y. Guo, L. Z. Tan, D. A. Egger, T. Hull, C. C. Stoumpos, F. Zheng, T. F. Heinz, L. Kronik, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. S. Owen, A. M. Rappe, M. A. Pimenta and L. E. Brus, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 136001 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, Y. Chen, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5714–5729 RSC .
E. Lebedev, T. Dittrich, V. PetrovaKoch, S. Karg and W. Brutting, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 2686–2688 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tiwari and N. C. Greenham, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2009, 41, 69–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dacuna and A. Salleo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 195209 CrossRef .
E. A. Duijnstee, J. M. Ball, V. M. Le Corre, L. J. A. Koster, H. J. Snaith and J. Lim, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 376–384 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Montero, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, E. M. Barea and H. J. Bolink, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zhang and S. T. Pantelides, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 266602 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Bruevich, H. H. Choi and V. Podzorov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006178 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Tedesco, B. L. VanMil, R. L. Myers-Ward, J. M. McCrate, S. A. Kitt, P. M. Campbell, G. G. Jernigan, J. C. Culbertson, C. R. Eddy and D. K. Gaskill, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 122102 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-C. Wang, J.-Y. Jeng, P.-S. Shen, Y.-C. Chang, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-H. Tsai, T.-Y. Chao, H.-C. Hsu, P.-Y. Lin, P. Chen, T.-F. Guo and T.-C. Wen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4756 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tiwana, P. Parkinson, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1365–1371 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2269–2275 RSC .
H. Oga, A. Saeki, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and S. Seki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13818–13825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Labram, N. R. Venkatesan, C. J. Takacs, H. A. Evans, E. E. Perry, F. Wudl and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5930–5938 RSC .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, Y. Chen, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5714–5729 RSC .
M. Petrović, T. Ye, C. Vijila and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602610 CrossRef .
B. Maynard, Q. Long, E. A. Schiff, M. Yang, K. Zhu, R. Kottokkaran, H. Abbas and V. L. Dalal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 173505 CrossRef .
K. v. Klitzing, G. Dorda and M. Pepper, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1980, 45, 494–497 CrossRef .
D. C. Tsui, H. L. Stormer and A. C. Gossard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 48, 1559–1562 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gokmen, O. Gunawan and D. B. Mitzi, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 114511 CrossRef .

          O. Gunawan, S. R. Pae, D. M. Bishop, Y. S. Lee, Y. Virgus, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, X. Shao, T. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07910,  2018.
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lim, M. T. Hörantner, N. Sakai, J. M. Ball, S. Mahesh, N. K. Noel, Y.-H. Lin, J. B. Patel, D. P. McMeekin, M. B. Johnston, B. Wenger and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 169–176 RSC .
H. P. Pasanen, P. Vivo, L. Canil, A. Abate and N. Tkachenko, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 14663–14670 RSC .
H. P. Pasanen, P. Vivo, L. Canil, H. Hempel, T. Unold, A. Abate and N. V. Tkachenko, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 445–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Blancon, W. Nie, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, S. Tretiak, L. Cognet, A. D. Mohite and J. J. Crochet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4283–4292 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qin, C. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Front. Energy Res., 2021, 9, 139 Search PubMed .
D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. S. Ponseca, C. C. Stoumpos, A. Yartsev, M. G. Kanatzidis, V. Sundström and D. G. Cooke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3700–3707 RSC .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Hopper, A. Gorodetsky, J. M. Frost, C. Muller, R. Lovrincic and A. A. Bakulin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2199–2205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Abbott, R. A. Bardos, T. Trupke, K. C. Fisher and E. Pink, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 044502 CrossRef .
D. R. Wight, I. D. Blenkinsop, W. Harding and B. Hamilton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 23, 5495–5510 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Peng, D. Su, X. Chen and Z. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interface., 2015, 7, 4471–4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abulikemu, S. Ould-Chikh, X. Miao, E. Alarousu, B. Murali, G. O. Ngongang Ndjawa, J. Barbé, A. El Labban, A. Amassian and S. Del Gobbo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12504–12515 RSC .
T. Leijtens, E. T. Hoke, G. Grancini, D. J. Slotcavage, G. E. Eperon, J. M. Ball, M. De Bastiani, A. R. Bowring, N. Martino, K. Wojciechowski, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500962 CrossRef .
Y. Takahashi, H. Hasegawa, Y. Takahashi and T. Inabe, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 205, 39–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K. H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
M. Sendner, P. K. Nayak, D. A. Egger, S. Beck, C. Muller, B. Epding, W. Kowalsky, L. Kronik, H. J. Snaith, A. Pucci and R. Lovrincic, Mater. Horizon., 2016, 3, 613–620 RSC .
Z. G. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3078–3083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Brivio, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and M. van Schilfgaarde, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. T. W. Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962–970 RSC .
Y. H. Chang, C. H. Park and K. Matsuishi, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2004, 44, 889–893 CAS .
R. P. Feynman, R. W. Hellwarth, C. K. Iddings and P. M. Platzman, Phys. Rev., 1962, 127, 1004 CrossRef .
R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev., 1955, 97, 660 CrossRef CAS .
G.
E. Stillman, C. M. Wolfe and J. O. Dimmock, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1970, 31, 1199 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oga, A. Saeki, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and S. Seki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13818–13825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Karakus, S. A. Jensen, F. D'Angelo, D. Turchinovich, M. Bonn and E. Canovas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4991–4996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218–6227 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, A. Henning, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, Y. Rosenwaks, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1000–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, W. Rehman, F. Pulvirenti, J. B. Patel, N. K. Noel, M. B. Johnston, S. R. Marder, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607039 CrossRef PubMed .
O. G. Reid, M. J. Yang, N. Kopidakis, K. Zhu and G. Rumbles, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 561–565 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, I. H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef PubMed .
G. G. Huang, C. L. Wang, H. Zhang, S. H. Xu, Q. Y. Xu and Y. P. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2449–2455 RSC .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Z. Yang, P. N. Rudd, Y. Shao, X. Dai, H. Wei, J. Zhao, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, Y. Feng and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, J. Wu, Y. Wang, Q. Guo, Q. Chen, T. Cao, X. Guo, Y. Zhou, N. Chen, M. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21140–21148 RSC .
Y. Lin, L. Shen, J. Dai, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Wei, W. Ma, X. C. Zeng, X. Zhan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604545 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Niu, J. Lu, R. Munir, J. Li, D. Barrit, X. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706576 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, S. X. Dai, F. Q. Meng, J. J. Shi, Y. S. Li, J. H. Wu, Q. B. Meng and X. W. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21414–21421 RSC .
M. C. Qin, J. Cao, T. K. Zhang, J. Q. Mai, T. K. Lau, S. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. Y. Wang, Y. J. Hsu, N. Zhao, J. B. Xu, X. W. Zhan and X. H. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703399 CrossRef .
C. B. Fei, B. Li, R. Zhang, H. Y. Fu, J. J. Tian and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602017 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Li, G. Zheng, K. Liu, M. Qin, H. Zhou and X. Zhan, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700025 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Zhu, Y. Z. Xu, P. P. Zhang, J. J. Shi, Y. H. Zhao, H. Y. Zhang, J. H. Wu, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li and Q. B. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20874–20881 RSC .
J. W. Lee, H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, P. L. Qin, G. J. Fang and G. Li, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800055 CrossRef .
F. Q. Meng, K. Liu, S. X. Dai, J. J. Shi, H. Y. Zhang, X. Xu, D. M. Li and X. W. Zhan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1079–1086 RSC .
H. W. Zhu, F. Zhang, Y. Xiao, S. R. Wang and X. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4971–4980 RSC .
M. N. Sun, F. Zhang, H. L. Liu, X. G. Li, Y. Xiao and S. R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13448–13456 RSC .
F. Zhang, D. Q. Bi, N. Pellet, C. X. Xiao, Z. Li, J. J. Berry, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3480–3490 RSC .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, N. Li, G. Tang, G. Zheng, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Li, N. Zhou, J. Hong, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900390 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Akman and S. Akin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2006087 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y. K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J. P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulovic, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, T. Green, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4178–4184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Boland, S. Conesa-Boj, P. Parkinson, G. Tutuncuoglu, F. Matteini, D. Ruffer, A. Casadei, F. Amaduzzi, F. Jabeen, C. L. Davies, H. J. Joyce, L. M. Herz, A. Fontcuberta i Morral and M. B. Johnston, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1336–1342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Störmer, R. Dingle, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann and M. D. Sturge, Solid State Commun., 1979, 29, 705–709 CrossRef .
S. J. Lee, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn, J. H. Noh, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3974–3977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Baikie, C. Shi, H. Ding, R. Ramesh, M. Asta, M. Graetzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ozturk, E. Akman, A. E. Shalan and S. Akin, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J.-S. Park, S.-H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 284–292 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, T. H. Thomas, S. E. Dutton, K. C. Goedel, F. C. Hanusch, M. L. Lai, U. Steiner, T. Bein, P. Docampo, D. Cahen and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2501–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
W. Rehman, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 361–369 RSC .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Perez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Yoon, S. Draguta, J. S. Manser, O. Sharia, W. F. Schneider, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Peng, Y. Sun, Y. N. Chen, Y. Yao and Z. Q. Liang, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1000–1006 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Turren-Cruz, M. Saliba, M. T. Mayer, H. Juárez-Santiesteban, X. Mathew, L. Nienhaus, W. Tress, M. P. Erodici, M.-J. Sher, M. G. Bawendi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 78–86 RSC .
M. Pazoki and T. Edvinsson, Sustain. Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1430–1445 RSC .
T. Ye, S. Ma, X. Jiang, L. Wei, C. Vijila and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606545 CrossRef .
C. W. Myung, J. Yun, G. Lee and K. S. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702898 CrossRef .
F. Bella, P. Renzi, C. Cavallo and C. Gerbaldi, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 12183–12205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ye, M. Petrovic, S. Peng, J. L. Yoong, C. Vijila and S. Ramakrishna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2358–2368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma and L. W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3646–3654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Solanki, M. M. Tavakoli, Q. Xu, S. S. H. Dintakurti, S. S. Lim, A. Bagui, J. V. Hanna, J. Kong and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1907864 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gong, M. Yang, X. Ma, R. D. Schaller, G. Liu, L. Kong, Y. Yang, M. C. Beard, M. Lesslie, Y. Dai, B. Huang, K. Zhu and T. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2879–2887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Caselli, M. Fischer, D. Meggiolaro, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis, S. D. Stranks, A. Baumann, V. Dyakonov, E. M. Hutter and T. J. Savenije, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5128–5134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Rong, A. Mei, Y. Xiong, T. Liu, Y. Sheng, P. Jiang, L. Hong, Y. Guan, X. Zhu, X. Hou, M. Duan, J. Zhao, X. Li and H. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1702898 Search PubMed .
X. Cheng, S. Yang, B. Q. Cao, X. T. Tao and Z. L. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1905021 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Li, C. Zhang, J. J. Song, X. H. Xie, J. Q. Meng and S. J. Xu, Crystals, 2018, 8, 220 CrossRef .
B. Murali, H. K. Kolli, J. Yin, R. Ketavath, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 2, 184–214 CrossRef .
N. K. Tailor and S. Satapathi, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2020, 9, 7149–7157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arya, P. Mahajan, R. Gupta, R. Srivastava, N. k. Tailor, S. Satapathi, R. R. Sumathi, R. Datt and V. Gupta, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 60, 100286 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Tailor, P. Maity, M. I. Saidaminov, N. Pradhan and S. Satapathi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 2286–2292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Tailor and S. Satapathi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 5243–5250 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Tailor and S. Satapathi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 11732–11740 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Shao and Q. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3218–3227 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Tailor, S. Kar, P. Mishra, A. These, C. Kupfer, H. Hu, M. Awais, M. Saidaminov, M. I. Dar, C. Brabec and S. Satapathi, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 1025–1080 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. P. Senanayak, J. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Shi, Z. Li, C. Zhang, B. Yang, L. Jiang, D. Di, A. V. Ievlev, O. S. Ovchinnikova, T. Ding, H. Deng, L. Tang, Y. Guo, J. Wang, K. Xiao, D. Venkateshvaran, L. Jiang, D. Zhu and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902618 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yu, F. Li, L. Yu, M. R. Niazi, Y. Zou, D. Corzo, A. Basu, C. Ma, S. Dey, M. L. Tietze, U. Buttner, X. Wang, Z. Wang, M. N. Hedhili, C. Guo, T. Wu and A. Amassian, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, E. Alarousu, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, X.-H. Miao, A. L. Abdelhady, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Deng, Z. Q. Yang and R. M. Ma, Nano Convergence, 2020, 7, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, J. Ma, Y. Zhou, C. Fang, J. Wang, J. Li, X. Wen and D. Li, J. Phys.: Photonics, 2020, 2, 014008 CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Deng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Chen, S. Yang, J. Khurgin, N. X. Fang, X. Zhang and R. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704333 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, D. J. Morrow, Y. Fu, W. Zheng, Y. Zhao, L. Dang, M. J. Stolt, D. D. Kohler, X. Wang, K. J. Czech, M. P. Hautzinger, S. Shen, L. Guo, A. Pan, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13525–13532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Kirmani, A. E. Mansour, C. Yang, R. Munir, A. M. El-Zohry, O. F. Mohammed and A. Amassian, PloS One, 2020, 15, e0230540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ju, T. Zhao, D. Yangyang, G. Zhang, X. Hu, D. Cui and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21919–21925 RSC .
Y. Yamada, M. Hoyano, R. Akashi, K. Oto and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5798–5803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, H. H. Fang, H. Wang, R. Meng, H. Zhou, M. A. Loi and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35580–35588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, W. Bi, A. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Kang and Q. Dong, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Turedi, V. Yeddu, X. Zheng, D. Y. Kim, O. M. Bakr and M. I. Saidaminov, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 631–642 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Le Corre, E. A. Duijnstee, O. El Tambouli, J. M. Ball, H. J. Snaith, J. Lim and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1087–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-E. Cohen, M. Wierzbowska and L. Etgar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604733 CrossRef .
D. B. Straus and C. R. Kagan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1434–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Mohamed, C. C. Lee, A. F. M. EL-Mahdy, J. Luder, M. H. Yu, Z. Li, Z. L. Zhu, C. C. Chueh and S. W. Kuo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11448–11459 RSC .
S. Chen, N. Shen, L. Z. Zhang, W. G. Kong, L. H. Zhang, C. Cheng and B. M. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9542–9549 RSC .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, D. P. Ostrowski, R. M. France, K. Zhu, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 10, 53–59 CrossRef .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ortiz-Cervantes, P. I. Roman-Roman, J. Vazquez-Chavez, M. Hernandez-Rodriguez and D. Solis-Ibarra, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 13882–13886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, I. W. H. Oswald, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, N. Zhou, O. F. Williams, Z. Guo, L. Yan, H. Hu, Z. Chen, X. Xiao, Y. Lin, Z. Yang, J. Huang, A. M. Moran, H. Ade, J. R. Neilson and W. You, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1276 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Yan, W. M. Qiu, G. Wu, P. Heremans and H. Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11063–11077 RSC .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Fu, J. Wang, L. J. Zuo, K. Gao, F. Liu, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2086–2093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, W. Fu, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Yang, W. Qiu, G. Wu, F. Liu, P. Heremans and H. Chen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 121–128 RSC .
L. Deng, H. Yang, Z. Liu, X. Yang, Z. Huang, H. Yu, K. Wang and J. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 2856–2863 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Yang, F. Su, J. Tan, Y. Luo and S. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. V. Buizza, T. W. Crothers, Z. Wang, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902656 CrossRef .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. Lu, J. S. Park, B. W. Larson, J. Hu, L. Gao, C. Xiao, O. G. Reid, X. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. F. Ndione, J. J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, H. Liu, X. Shi, L. Zuo, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900221 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Ren, B. Liu, R. Munir, X. Zhu, D. Yang, J. Li, Y. Liu, D.-M. Smilgies, R. Li, Z. Yang, T. Niu, X. Wang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2095–2102 RSC .
T. Niu, H. Ren, B. Wu, Y. Xia, X. Xie, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Chen and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2349–2356 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. V. Milic, A. Ummadisingu, J. Y. Seo, J. H. Im, H. S. Kim, Y. Liu, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 150–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, C. Liang, X. L. Liu, F. Li, Y. Zhang, X. T. Liu, H. Gu, X. Hu, G. Xing, X. Tao and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901966 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Proppe, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, O. Voznyy, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2890–2896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Chen, R. Kealhofer, H. Liu, Z. Yuan, L. Jiang, J. Suh, J. Park, C. Ko, H. S. Choe, J. Avila, M. Zhong, Z. Wei, J. Li, S. Li, H. Gao, Y. Liu, J. Analytis, Q. Xia, M. C. Asensio and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800754 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Peng, J. Yin, K. T. Ho, O. Ouellette, M. De Bastiani, B. Murali, O. El Tall, C. Shen, X. Miao, J. Pan, E. Alarousu, J. H. He, B. S. Ooi, O. F. Mohammed, E. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4759–4767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tan, Y. Wu, H. Hong, J. Yin, J. Zhang, L. Lin, M. Wang, X. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Liu and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16612–16615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Zhiyun Xu, Y. Li, X. Liu, T. Yang, C. Ji, S. Han, Y. Xu, J. Luo and Z. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 15757–15761 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Di, J. Chang and S. Liu, EcoMat, 2020, 2, e12036 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Y. Liu, H. Ye, Y. Zheng, Q. Wei, Y. Xia, Y. Chen, K. Zhao, W. Huang and S. F. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 14896–14902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Ye, Y. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. Yuan, H. Wu, G. Zhao, Z. Yang, J. Tang, Z. Xu and S. Liu, Matter, 2019, 1, 465–480 CrossRef .
K. Wang, C. Wu, D. Yang, Y. Jiang and S. Priya, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4919–4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Sun, N. Zhou, B. Huang and H. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7610–7616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lai, D. Lu, Z. Xu, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2001470 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lian, H. Wu, L. Zuo, G. Zhou, X. Wen, Y. Zhang, G. Wu, Z. Xie, H. Zhu and H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 48, 2004188 CrossRef .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Motti, T. Crothers, R. Yang, Y. Cao, R. Li, M. B. Johnston, J. Wang and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3953–3960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, H. Lai, T. Liu, D. Lu, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901242 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Liang, G. Xing, X. Liu, F. Li, X. Liu, X. Hu, G. Shao and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1805323 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Zhang, N. Wang, S. P. Pang, Q. Lv, C. S. Huang, Z. M. Zhou and F. X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31413–31418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Both these authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Anand Singh	Anand Singh is currently an Associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry from Vanderbilt University, USA in 2009. His research interests include perovskite solar cells and synthesis of organic molecules.
Ashish Garg	Ashish Garg is currently a Professor in the Department of Sustainable Energy Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He obtained his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Cambridge, UK in 2002. His research interests include organic and inorganic photovoltaics, energy harvesting materials and magnetoelectric materials and composites.
Kanwar Singh Nalwa	Kanwar Singh Nalwa is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He received his PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from Iowa State University, USA in 2011 and B.Tech. degree from IIT Kanpur in 2007. His research interests include perovskite and organic solar cells, energy storage devices and multifunctional biochemical sensors.
Raju Kumar Gupta	Raju Kumar Gupta is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India. He received his PhD degree in 2010 from the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the National University of Singapore and B.Tech in Chemical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India, in 2005. His current research interests are photocatalysis for water remediation and CO2 capture & conversion to fuels, surface chemistry, green synthesis, hybrid perovskite solar cells, supercapacitors, and nanostructured materials for energy and environmental applications.
Soumitra Satapathi	Soumitra Satapathi is actively involved in Materials Science Research at IIT Roorkee, where his main focus is next generation optoelectronic devices including high efficiency perovskite solar cells and photophysical studies in solar cells. Prof. Satapathi has graduated with PhD and MS in Physics from the University of Massachusetts, USA. He has published more than 55 high impact journal papers and received numerous national and international awards. His research was featured in all leading national and international print and electronic media including Nature Asia, PTI, BBC, Quartz, USA Today, and Times of India to name a few.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Carrier transport and crystal structure of a (a) 3D perovskite. (b) Structural derivation of a 2D perovskite with different n values highlighting the direction of restricted charge transport. (c) Schematic illustration of a quasi-2D/3D mixed perovskite.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Schematics representing the mobility measurement technique for perovskite materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustrative charge transport process in perovskite solar cells influenced by (a) light soaking and (b) phase transition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The I–V characteristics of (a) MAPbBr3 and (b) MAPbI3 single crystals exhibiting the different regions obtained from the logI versus logV plots. The region marked as n = 1 is ohmic, n > 3 is TFL and n = 2 is Child's regime. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. The I–V characteristics of (c) FAPbBr3 and (d) FAPbI3 single crystals exhibiting different regions (I ∝ Vn): linear ohmic region, n = 1, red lines at low bias, a trap filling region starting at VTFL, n > 3, blue lines, and a Child's regime at high bias, n = 2, green lines. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of a MPB SCTF device. (b) The JD–V characteristic of MPB SCs with the variation of thickness. (c) The trap density and trap-free carrier mobility of MPB SCs with the variation of thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  Characteristic J–V curves for mobility measurement of (a) hole-only and (b) electron-only devices of quasi-2D perovskites with and without the MACl additive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TRTS photoconductivity measurements for room temperature cast (nBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and hot cast (isoBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films at an excitation wavelength of 400 nm. The samples are kept at θ = 0° (parallel) and θ = 30° (tilted) orientations to the incident THz field. (b) Carrier mobility detection for RT (nBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and HT (isoBA)2(MA)3Pb4I13samples (placed at different tilting angles θ) by the TRTS method (by varying the incident angles of the THz probe pulse). Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) In-plane and out-of-plane charge transport measurement for n = 1 fluorinated and pristine (PEA)2PbI4 2D perovskite thin films with the microwave conductivity measurement technique. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  
J–V characteristics for mobility measurement in (a) hole-only BDA-RD (butane diamine), (b) electron-only BDA-RD, (c) hole-only BA-RD (butylamine), and (d) electron-only BA-RD devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematics of (a) lateral in-plane device and (b) vertical out-of-plane device used for the transport measurements. In-plane and out-of-plane comparison of (c) mobility and (d) electrical conductance for different n values for the quasi-2D perovskite (C4H9NH3)n(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Characteristic J–V curves for mobility measurement of (a) hole-only MAPbI3, (b) hole-only EDBE doped (3%) MAPbI3, (c) electron-only MAPbI3 and (d) electron-only EDBE doped (3%) MAPbI3 perovskite devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

MAPbI3	3D	TF	Hall effect	
μ
h = 13.7–36.0	
75

MAPbI3	3D	TF	Hall effect	
μ
e = 66	
77

MAPbI3	3D	TF	FET	22.75	
234

FAPbI3	3D	TF	THz	27	
148

FAPbBr3	3D	TF	THz	14	
148

(iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13	2D	TF	TRTS	1.35	
24

(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13	2D	TF	SCLC	
μ
e = 4.1 × 10−4	
205


μ
h = 3.56 × 10−4
(PEA)2MA3Pb4I13	2D	TF	SCLC	
μ
h = 7.20 × 10−3	
211


μ
e = 3.56 × 10−3
(PEA)2MA4Pb5I16	2D	TF	SCLC	
μ
h = (2.71 ± 1.5) × 10−3	
211


μ
e = (2.28 ± 0.56) × 10−3
F-PEA2MA2Pb3I10	2D	TF	SCLC	
μ
h = 3.02 × 10−4	
212


μ
e = 2.84 × 10−4
F-PEA2MA4Pb5I16	2D/3D	TF	SCLC	
μ
e = (8.0 ± 3.1) × 10−3	
212


μ
h = (5.2 ± 2.0) × 10−3
BA2(MA0.19FA0.76Cs0.05)3Pb4I13	2D	TF	SCLC	
μ
h = 8.0 ± 0.01	
214


μ
e = 0.75 ± 0.02
MAPbI3	3D	SC	SCLC	67.2	
178

MAPbBr3	3D	SC	SCLC	24.0	
178

FAPbI3	3D	SC	SCLC	
μ
h = 35	
179

FAPbBr3	3D	SC	SCLC	
μ
h =62	
179

MAPbBr3	3D	SC	ToF	
μ
h = 115	
180

MAPbI3	3D	SC	ToF	24.0	
17

MAPbI3	3D	SC	ToF	
μ
h = 164 ± 25	
17

MAPbBr3	3D	SC	SCLC	97	
182

MAPbBr3	3D	SCTF	Hall-effect	60	
183

CsPbBr3	3D	SCTF	SCLC	
μ
e = 518	
184

BDAPbI4	2D	SC	SCLC	
μ
h = 17	
224

(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1	2D	SC	FET	
	
226

(n = 1)	1.1 × 10−3
(n = 2)	7 × 10−2
(n = 3)	9.5 × 10−1
Footnote
† Both these authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
