Isolating and quantifying the impact of domain purity on the performance of bulk heterojunction solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE01387F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE01387F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1843-1853Isolating and quantifying the impact of domain purity on the performance of bulk heterojunction solar cells†

        
          
            Wenchao 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eliot 
            Gann‡
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Naresh 
            Chandrasekaran
          
        
      acd, 
      
        
          
            Lars 
            Thomsen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shyamal K. K. 
            Prasad
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Justin M. 
            Hodgkiss
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Dinesh 
            Kabra
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yi-Bing 
            Cheng
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Christopher R. 
            McNeill
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. E-mail: christopher.mcneill@monash.edu
bAustralian Synchrotron, 800 Blackburn Road, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia
cIITB-Monash Research Academy, IIT Bombay, Mumbai – 400076, India
dDepartment of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, 400076, India
eMacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, and School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
Received 
      19th May 2017
    , Accepted 19th July 2017First published on 19th July 2017AbstractIn solution-processed organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells, the purity of the phase-separated domains is known to play an important role in determining device function. While the effects of domain purity have been investigated by tuning of the BHJ morphology, such tuning typically results in several parameters (for example domain size and crystallinity) being varied at once. Here we show that by varying the time between spin-coating and the application of an anti-solvent treatment, the domain purity of the polymer-rich phase in PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends can be tuned while keeping other morphological parameters constant. This unique approach enables the effect of domain purity on device function to be isolated and quantified. Over the purity range explored, solar cell power conversion efficiency is observed to monotonically increase from 7.2% to 9.6% with increasing domain purity, with the cell fill factor most affected by changes in domain purity. Employing transient photovoltage measurements we find that purer phases result in a reduction in the rate constant of bimolecular recombination. A more thorough treatment is also presented on the relationship between the total scattering intensity (derived from resonant soft X-ray scattering measurements) and domain purity. In particular it is shown that domain purity does not scale linearly with total scattering intensity requiring an initial estimate of absolute domain composition.

Broader context
Polymer solar cells have the potential to be manufactured at low cost on flexible substrates using high-throughput reel-to-reel processing. The power conversion efficiency of such solar cells continues to increase, largely on the back of the development of new materials. Since the active layer in a polymer solar cell is processed from solution and is based on a blend of donor and acceptor materials, it is microstructurally complex with the blend typically frozen in a non-equilibrium morphology. The purity of the donor and acceptor phases is known to be an important parameter, but its effect on cell performance has been difficult to experimentally isolate. This difficulty in being able to control domain purity is further complicated by the difficulty in experimentally characterising domain purity. Resonant soft X-ray scattering is an increasingly common tool used for characterising domain purity, but is a relatively new technique. This contribution presents a method to directly control domain purity in polymer solar cells and outlines the requirements for the proper assessment of domain purity from resonant soft X-ray scattering experiments.

Introduction
Solar cells based on organic semiconductors, in particular conjugated polymers, have attracted a great deal of interest over the past two decades due to their low cost and rapid energy payback time.1–4 Due to the low dielectric constant of organic semiconductors and strong electron–phonon coupling, the primary photoexcited state of an organic semiconductor is a tightly bound exciton. A donor/acceptor interface is required to efficiently dissociate excitons with the energy difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor, providing the ‘driving force’ to facilitate exciton dissociation. The bulk heterojunction (BHJ) architecture where electron donating and accepting components are blended within an active layer significantly increases the interfacial area between donor and acceptor facilitating exciton dissociation.5,6 Since exciton diffusion lengths of organic semiconductors are typically 5–20 nm,7,8 a BHJ morphology structured on the 10–20 nm length scale has been regarded as necessary for efficient device operation.9,10 Thus the morphology of a polymer/fullerene blend (which encompasses crystallinity, domain size, domain purity, molecular orientation, interface roughness, etc.) is critically important for ensuring optimum solar cell performance.
To date, fullerene molecules such as [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) and [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) have been most widely employed as the electron acceptor in solution-processed BHJ solar cells. In particular, power conversion efficiencies of over 10% have recently been achieved for polymer/fullerene solar cells11–13 with similar efficiencies achieved for cells employing a small molecule donor14,15 or non-fullerene acceptor.16 The partial miscibility of such fullerene derivatives in the donor matrix has recently been appreciated as having significant implications for the morphology and device operation of BHJ solar cells.17–22 Instead of forming a two-phase bicontinuous morphology of relatively pure phases, the solution processing of polymer/fullerene or small molecule/fullerene blends will generally lead to (at least) three phases: a relatively pure crystalline donor phase, a relatively pure fullerene acceptor phase and a mixed-amorphous phase.22,23 The superior structural order of the ‘pure’ phases is thought to establish an electronic landscape that promotes the ‘sweeping out’ of charges from the mixed phase.24 Mixing of donor and acceptor molecules within the mixed phase is also regarded as being important in promoting efficient exciton dissociation, especially in the case where the domain sizes are greater than 20 nm.18 However domains that are too impure may lead to unnecessary recombination.25 The topic of what degree of mixing within the mixed phase is beneficial to solar cell performance has therefore been a topic of contemporary research.23,26
Key to assessing the impact of domain purity on solar cell performance is the ability to tune and quantify domain purity. Experimental measurement of domain purity itself is challenging, relying on advanced characterization techniques. Resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) in particular has emerged as an important technique for assessing domain purity, providing a relative measure of average domain purity via the quantification of the total scattering intensity (TSI).18 On the other hand quantitative microscopies such as energy filtered transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM) and scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) can provide a local measurement of domain purity provided that domains are sufficiently coarse and there is sufficient contrast between donor and acceptor materials.27,28
Experimental variation of domain purity has been achieved either by varying the materials used29,30 or the processing conditions employed.26,31–36 For example, fluorination of the donor polymer PBnDT-DTBT was found to improve cell performance which was attributed in part to reduced bimolecular recombination associated with an increase in domain purity.30 Similarly the superior performance of the donor polymer PBDT-DTBT over the chemically similar PBDT-DTNT was attributed to purer domains in PBDT-DTBT:PCBM blends compared to PBDT-DTNT:PCBM blends.29 With regard to variation of processing parameters, thermal annealing,33 solvent additive content,32 different solvent mixtures,31,35 variation of donor/acceptor blend ratio37 and solvent vapour annealing time34 have all been observed to impact domain purity with the associated impact on solar cell performance inferred. From these studies it is generally recognised that purer domains should lead to higher cell performance since purer domains inhibit bimolecular and geminate recombination, provided that small enough domains can be realised.32,33 However where domains larger than the exciton diffusion length are present, a sufficient mixing of donor and acceptor is required to promote exciton dissociation and transport of charge out of the mixed phase.18
A key issue with establishing the relative importance of domain purity has been the general inability to tune domain purity without affecting other microstructural parameters such as domain structure and molecular ordering. Indeed, change in domain purity is invariably associated with a change in the length scale of phase separation when employing treatments such as thermal annealing, solvent annealing and solvent additives.32–34 Therefore, it remains a challenge to separate the effect of domain purity on device action from the effect of domain structure, crystallinity and other parameters that typically vary when turning domain purity.
In this paper, we demonstrate unprecedented control of domain purity using an anti-solvent treatment (AST) approach. By varying the time taken between spin-coating of the active layer and treatment of the active layer with isopropyl alcohol (IPA), domain purity can be systematically tuned without significant variation in domain structure or polymer crystallinity. As a model system we study blends of the donor polymer poly[[2,6′-4,8-di(5-ethylhexylthienyl)benzo[1,2-b;3,3-b]dithiophene]3-fluoro-2[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl] (PBDTTT-EFT, also called PTB7-Th) with PC71BM which can achieve efficiencies of ∼10%.38 The active layer blend is deposited from a chlorobenzene solution containing 3 vol% of the solvent additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO). As described previously, due to its high boiling point, residual DIO remains trapped in the active layer after spin-coating.39 By applying an anti-solvent treatment – whereby neat IPA is applied onto the active layer and then spun off – the majority of residual DIO is promptly removed.40 Although it is difficult to conclude whether this approach fully removes all of the trapped DIO or not, the improved stability and reproducibility of device performance that results indicates that the most of trapped DIO has been successfully removed. Since residual DIO can remain in the film for up to 24 hours, the thin film morphology continues to evolve during this time. The AST thus freezes the morphology into a non-thermodynamic-equilibrium state by quickly removing the trapped DIO. Through a combination of microstructural, photophysical and device measurements we are able to clearly investigate the impact of domain purity in this high performance organic photovoltaic system. As well as presenting a novel experimental methodology to tune domain purity, we also present a more robust treatment of the analysis of R-SoXS data for extracting more reliable values for domain purity.
Results and discussion
Determination of domain purity
R-SoXS was performed to investigate the impact of the delay between spin-coating of the active layer and AST on the morphology of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM films, as shown in Fig. 1. The Lorentz-corrected R-SoXS profiles are shown in Fig. 1(a) as a function of AST delay, which were collected at an X-ray energy of 284.0 eV that provides the maximum scattering contrast between polymer PBDTTT-EFT and fullerene (see Fig. S1 in the ESI† for calculation of the scattering contrast functions). Strikingly, all scattering profiles have the same shape, only differing in scattering intensity. This similarity indicates that local domain structure for all samples in the nanometre range (d = 2π/qpeak) is unchanged. The Lorentz-corrected peak locations are summarized in Fig. 1(b) confirming that there is negligible change, with all samples having peaks corresponding to an average feature size of 30.5 ± 0.5 nm. Based on previous results of the similar PTB7:PC71BM system,25 we can regard this system – on the measured size scale – to essentially consist of two phases: largely pure PC71BM domains embedded within a mixed phase consisting of amorphous PBDTTT-EFT chains, molecularly dispersed PC71BM molecules and small (on the edge of the size scale measured) PBDTTT-EFT crystallites.41 In other words, due to the relatively low crystallinity of PBDTTT-EFT and the small size of PBDTTT-EFT crystallites we treat the pure-crystalline polymer phase to be part of the mixed-amorphous phase.42 Since all films have the same thickness and possess the same overall PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blend ratio, the variation in scattering intensity reflects changes in the amount of fullerene in the mixed phase vs. the pure domains. The degree of purity within the mixed phase can be explored quantitatively by calculating the total scattering intensity (TSI) via integration of the scattering intensity.18Fig. 1(c) shows the calculated TSI values which systematically increase with increasing delay time. Because we see no change in domain structure, as would be evident in a change in the shape of the scattering pattern, the excess fullerene in the purer phases must be accounted for. If the scattering shape largely reflects domain size (the form factor) then the excess fullerene must be changing the nucleation density, effectively creating more fullerene domains of the same general shape. If, however, the scattering is dominated by the domain spacing, (the structure factor) then existing domains grow or shrink as different amounts of fullerene is taken up by the mixed phase. This then would lead to a change in domain size, however the likely variations in absolute purity (see below) would correspond to a change in domain size of only ∼10%. Because the system is far from the dilute limit, the separation of form factor and structure factor is difficult to make, and it is most likely that the scattering observed reflects a combination of form factor and structure factor effects. In any case, we can clearly say that the nano-scale domain structure is essentially unchanged, and the change in scattering intensity is governed by the purity of the mixed phase and the corresponding change in domain volumes. To support the conclusion from the R-SoXS data that the length scale of phase separation is not significantly changing with AST, transmission electron microscopy measurements have been performed, see Fig. S2 (ESI†), which show little change in the visual morphology of the films.
 Fig. 1  R-SoXS results of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends as a function of the delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment: (a) Lorentz-corrected R-SoXS profiles of the PBDTTT-EFT/PC71BM blends, (b) long period, and (c) relative total scattering intensity extracted from the scattering profiles in (a). In (c), the total scattering intensity was normalized by the anti-solvent treated blend with a delay time of 24 h. 
The total scattering invariant (TSI) within a system of two domains can be shown to be TSI ∝ Cv1v2(1)where C is the contrast between domain 1 and 2 and νi is the relative volume of domain i. For a system consisting of two materials with each domain having a certain domain purity, we will define domain 1 to be rich in (i.e. contain the higher relative mass fraction of) material 1, and domain 2 to be rich in material 2. If we maintain a constant mass fraction between components, and just alter the relative purity of domains and commensurate volume changes, we obtain: (2)For simplicity we have defined the ratio of mass densities of the materials (ρ1,ρ2) as: (3)Here, m1 is the mass fraction of material 1 in the system and P21 is the fraction of material 2 in domains rich in material 1. For a derivation of eqn (2) please see the ESI.†
Note that when the densities of the components are nearly equal, (ρr → 0) a much simpler relationship is obtained: TSIp→0 ∝ (m1 − P12)(1 − m1 − P21)(4)
Using this formalism in our case, we set material 1 to be PC71BM and material 2 to be PBDTTT-EFT, in a mass ratio of 1:1.5, with densities of 1.6 g cm−3 and 1.15 g cm−3 respectively. Based on previous morphological studies18,43 we use P21 = 1 (the PC71BM domains are essentially pure) leaving P12 (the composition of the mixed phase) as the only undetermined variable. (5)Because this relationship is not linear, it is inappropriate to relate the TSI directly to a relative domain purity as has been done previously.18 Fig. S3 in the ESI† graphically shows how contrast, TSI and phase volume vary as a function of the concentration of PC71BM in the mixed phase. In order to relate a relative TSI measurement to a purity of the mixed phase (even a relative purity), we must first have a measure or guess of the absolute purity, for which we use NEXAFS spectroscopy.
NEXAFS spectroscopy measures the X-ray absorption spectrum of a polymer close to a particular absorption edge, corresponding to electron excitation from the core shell orbital to unoccupied molecular orbitals. Because of their differing chemical structure, different materials have distinct NEXAFS spectra. Seemingly minor difference in the backbone or side-chain chemistry can lead to the significant changes in the observed NEXAFS spectrum.44 These characteristic NEXAFS spectra can be used as a fingerprint of the material, enabling quantitative determination of the chemical composition of a polymer blend through fitting of the blend spectrum with a linear combination of neat spectra. Fig. 2(a) shows the carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectra of blends with different delay times, with the fitted chemical compositions as a function of AST delay time plotted in Fig. 2(b). NEXAFS spectra were acquired using total electron yield (TEY) mode which has a surface sensitivity of 3–5 nm. Because fullerene aggregates are covered with a continuous skin layer of the mixed phase on the top of the film,45 this surface sensitivity enables measurement of the chemical composition of the mixed phase. The NEXAFS results reveal that the fullerene concentration monotonically decreases with the delay time (increasing domain purity). The fullerene concentration rapidly decreases from ∼43 wt% at 1 min delay to ∼40.5 wt% at 10 min delay, followed by a steady decrease at longer delay time, approaching a value of ∼38.5 wt% in the sample without anti-solvent treatment. (For reference the overall blend ratio of the blend is 1:1.5 polymer:fullerene by weight giving a fullerene concentration of 60 wt% for a homogenous blend.) The trend of decreasing fullerene concentration observed by NEXAFS spectroscopy agrees in general with the R-SoXS measurement of increasing purity, and is attributed to the existence of residual DIO providing sufficient kinetic energy for fullerene molecules to diffuse out of the mixed phase region towards a thermodynamic equilibrium state. The fullerene chemical composition shows very slight change at longer delay times (>1 h), because the decreasing amount of solvent additive freezes free diffusion of fullerene molecules through of polymer chains. This indicates that the residual DIO is almost fully gone after 24 h storage in an inert environment.
Although TEY NEXAFS is an absolute measurement, the surface-sensitive nature of the measurement may mean that it could be influenced by interfacial segregation effects as observed previously for PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM46 and indeed for other systems.42,47,48 In polymer/fullerene blends a polymer-rich surface layer is often observed due to the lower surface energy of the polymer compared to PCBM,49 with polymer chains expected to be attracted to the film/air interface during processing.50 When using the more surface sensitive partial electron yield (PEY) mode, composition values of 26.2 wt% (1 minute delay) to 19.0 wt% (no AST) are measured. The more polymer-rich PEY measurement is consistent with previous ToF-SIMS measurement of the vertical segregation of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends where a thin polymer-rich layer was observed.46 Thus the larger probing depth of the TEY measurement results in a measurement that is more reflective of the ‘bulk’ composition of the mixed phase, without sampling too deep into the film that would risk sampling of the buried fullerene clusters. For comparison, a domain purity of ∼30 wt% fullerene was measured for the similar PTB7:PC71BM system using scanning transmission X-ray microscopy18 which is closer to the equivalent value (no AST) obtained from the TEY measurement (38.5 wt%) than obtained from the PEY measurement (19.0 wt%). Note thought that we only need a rough ‘guess’ at the absolute domain purity in order to start relating relative changes in domain purity as discussed below. It should also be noted that transmission R-SoXS is insensitive to gradients along the surface normal. In the present system such gradients are however only expected to be present at the near-surface region (as indicated by ToF-SIMS measurement46). Grazing incidence R-SoXS however does provide the potential to also probe composition fluctuations normal to the surface but has not been widely employed to date to study bulk heterojunction films.51–53
 Fig. 2  NEXAFS results of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends as a function of the delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment. (a) TEY carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectra of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends. (b) Determination of fullerene weight concentration by fitting blend spectra with linear combinations of neat spectra. 
Using the measurement from TEY NEXAFS as an absolute measure of P12, we can then relate the two measurements more quantitatively. For a value of P12 ≅ 0.4, the observed relative change in TSI of 60% corresponds to an absolute change in domain purity of 0.4 to 0.48, corresponding to a relative change in purity of 20%. This change in absolute domain purity is similar (but not identical) to that observed by TEY NEXAFS, however the NEXAFS measurement may have been influenced by surface effects as noted above. If we assume that the composition measured by TEY NEXAFS spectroscopy is lower than the actual composition of the mixed phase due to polymer enrichment of the surface, then a value of P12 ≅ 0.5 might be taken as being reasonable. (A value of P12 ∼ 0.4 determined from TEY NEXAFS spectroscopy is already quite near the maximum miscibility of P12 = 0.6 at which point there are no fullerene domains.) Taking P12 ≅ 0.5, a relative change of TSI of 60% then corresponds to an absolute change in purity from 0.5 to 0.54, a mere 8% relative change. On the other hand, if TEY NEXAFS measurement were sampling too deep – sampling PC71BM rich domains – a value of P12 ≅ 0.3 consistent with previous absolute measurement of domain purity for the PTB7:PC71BM system and closer to the PEY value could be considered. Then, the 60% change in TSI would correspond to a change in domain purity from 0.3 to 0.42 relative change in purity of 40%. Our goal here is not necessarily to obtain a robust measurement of the change in absolute domain purity with AST, but rather to demonstrate how the relative change in TSI cannot be directly related to relative changes in domain purity without some knowledge of absolute purity. However the intermediate value of P12 ≅ 0.4 is taken as being more likely, with the 60% change in TSI corresponding to a change in domain purity of about 20%.
GIWAXS has been employed to measure the crystalline properties of the film. 1D scattering line profiles along both out of plane (OOP) and in plane (IP) directions extracted from 2D scattering images are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). Scattering from PC71BM aggregates results in an isotropic ring at q = 1.35 Å−1 which is clearly seen in both OOP and IP scattering profiles. A weak π–π stacking peak of the polymer is seen at qz = 1.59 Å−1 in the OOP trace, while a prominent (100) lamellar stacking peak is seen at qxy = 0.30 Å−1 in the IP trace. Consistent with previous reports, the orientation of these scattering peaks indicates that the polymer is predominantly exhibiting a “face-on” configuration. The d-spacing of the (010) and (100) crystalline axes are 0.40 nm and 2.09 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Grazing-incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurement of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends as a function of delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment. (a) Out-of-plane (OOP) line scattering profiles and (b) in-plane (IP) line scattering profiles. (c) Plot of the d-spacing of the IP (100) peak as a function of delay time. (d) Plot of the coherence length of the IP (100) peak as a function of delay time. 
In order to monitor any changes in polymer crystallinity, the d-spacing and coherence length of the (100) peak are plotted in Fig. 3(c) and (d) as a function of delay time. From the 1D scattering profiles, there is no shift in peak positions of (100) peak. The d-spacing of the (100) peak remains constant at 2.09 nm, while the coherence length of the (100) crystallites changes only slightly from 8.2 nm in the sample with a 1 minute delay time to 8.9 nm in the blend without any anti-solvent treatment. Thus from the GIWAXS results there is very little change in the crystallinity of the films with AST.
Photoluminescence quenching experiments were also performed to assess any changes in exciton dissociation efficiency with changing AST delay time, with the data presented in the ESI† (Fig. S4). No systematic change in PL quenching efficiency with changing AST time is found, with all samples exhibiting PL quenching efficiencies of 99.3 ± 0.1%. The fact that all samples retain very high PL quenching efficiencies indicates that there cannot be any significant change in domain structure, consistent with the R-SoXS results presented above. Furthermore, variation in domain purity values of between 0.40 to 0.48 (as presented above) is not likely to cause a change in PL quenching efficiency.
Device performance
After having examined the evolution of morphology with AST, device performance as a function of AST delay time is now discussed. An inverted structure of ITO/ZnO/polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE)/PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag, was used, schematically shown in Fig. 4(a). Current density–voltage (J–V) curves acquired under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G irradiation are shown in Fig. 4(b) as a function of AST delay time. Fig. 4(c) plots the average short-circuit current (JSC) and open circuit voltage (VOC) as a function of AST delay time, with Fig. 4(d) plotting the evolution of efficiency and fill factor (FF). As shown in Fig. 4(c), the open-circuit voltage of the devices remains constant, while the short circuit current exhibits a slight increase as a function of delay time. For the device with a delay time of 1 minute, a JSC of 17.8 mA cm−2 is measured which increases to a value of 18.5 mA cm−2 with a delay time of 10 minutes. The most significant change is seen in the effect of AST delay time on cell fill factor, which increases from ∼0.51 for a delay of 1 minute to 0.66 for no AST. Mainly as a result of these changes in FF, the average power conversion efficiency steadily increases from 7.2% with 1 minute delay to 9.4% with 24 hour delay, with the cell without anti-solvent treatment exhibiting an average efficiency of 9.6%.
 Fig. 4  Device structure and device performance of solar cells as a function of the delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment. (a) Schematic illustration of device structure. (b) J–V curves as a function of delay time, measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G simulated sunlight. (c) JSC and VOC plotted as a function of delay time. (d) Efficiency and fill factor as a function of delay time. 
Device physics
To explore the device physics underlying these changes in device performance, transient photovoltage decay measurements have been performed to investigate the charge carrier lifetime (τ) and bimolecular recombination rate (k). Three devices referred to as ‘low purity’ (delay time of 1 minute), ‘medium purity’ (delay time of 10 minutes) and ‘high purity’ (delay time of 24 h) are compared. In the transient photovoltage decay measurement, a steady white-light background is applied to maintain a certain VOC, and the transient voltage response of the cell to a small perturbation (a short pulse from a second source) is measured. The decay of the VOC in response to the transient pulse can be related to the decay of the perturbed charge carriers (Δn), see the ESI† for more details. The decay of Δn was fitted using the mono-exponential equation (6)where Δn0 is the perturbed charge carrier density at time t = 0 and τΔn is the lifetime of the transient charges. The exponential fitting and the raw data is shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†). The charge carrier density (n) stored in the device was calculated using the differential charging method.54Fig. 5(a) shows the charge carrier lifetime of perturbed charges as a function of charge carrier density. It is apparent that for any given carrier density, the carrier lifetime τΔn substantially increases going from the low purity device to high purity device. This observation indicates that charges are able to live longer in the device with higher domain purity. τΔn shows a power law dependence on carrier density, τΔn ∝ n−λ. Two intensity regimes can be discerned: at low light intensities (<0.3 Sun) relatively high values of λ are obtained (∼5 to 6) with lower values (∼2.5 to 3) observed at high light intensities (>0.3 Sun). Large values of λ are common in thin solar cell devices (<100 nm) because of the spatial distribution of charge carrier density and due to energetic disorder in the active medium.55 When comparing cells of constant thickness, differences in the values of λ can provide information about the degree of non-germinate recombination occurring in the device.56 The λ values obtained at low charge carrier intensities are too high to be reflecting bimolecular recombination, with recombination in the low intensity regime likely to be due to trap-assisted recombination.57 On the other hand at high light intensities (>0.3 Sun) the slope of the τΔnvs. n curve is reduced to ∼2.5–3. The bimolecular recombination process is considered to be the dominating loss mechanism in the high intensity regime.56 The fact that λ is still greater than the expected value of λ = 2 for bimolecular recombination is attributed to the density dependence of carrier mobility. The total lifetime of the charge carriers in the device is then calculated from the transient charge carrier lifetime τΔn: τ = τΔn(λ + 1)(7)The decay of the number of charge carriers inside the device is described by the bimolecular recombination kinetic equation as (8)where k(n) is the bimolecular recombination rate constant which is dependent on n. This dependency on n is because of the presence of traps with an exponential density of states. At higher light intensities these deep traps become filled which results in an increase in the mobility of the free charge carriers which is embodied in the bimolecular recombination rate constant.56k(n) is obtained from the total charge carrier lifetime τ and n in the device using: (9)
 Fig. 5  Device photophysics with different domain purities: low purity (delay time of 1 min), medium purity (delay time of 10 min) and high purity (delay time of 24 h). (a) Small perturbed charge carrier lifetime as function of total charge carrier density (n) in the device obtained from transient photovoltage measurement. The dotted and solid line represent a fit using the equation τΔn ∝ n−λ. (b) Bimolecular recombination rate constant (k) vs. charge carrier density (n) at light intensities higher than 0.3 Sun. 

Fig. 5(b) shows k as a function of n for the three devices. The bimolecular recombination rate constant is thus found to significantly decrease from ∼10−11 cm−3 s−1 for the low purity device to ∼6 × 10−12 cm−3 s−1 for the high purity device at solar intensities.
Discussion
The combination of R-SoXS, GIWAXS and PL quenching measurements have shown that by varying the time between spin-coating and the application of an anti-solvent treatment, thin film samples can be produced where domain purity is selectively varied without affecting other morphological parameters such as domain structure and crystallinity. This approach thus enables the effect of domain purity on device performance to be isolated. Furthermore, our treatment of the interpretation of R-SoXS data has shown that relative domain purity simply cannot be assumed to scale linearly with total scattering intensity. By combining our R-SoXS data with NEXAFS measurement of the chemical composition of the mixed phase, the observed 60% increase in TSI have been interpreted as reflecting a relatively modest increase in domain purity of 0.40 to 0.48, a change of 20%.
With these seemingly small changes in domain purity, pronounced differences are observed in the corresponding solar cell performance, with devices having lower domain purities exhibiting an average power conversion efficiency of 7.2% compared to an efficiency of 9.6% for devices with the highest measured domain purities. The main effect of domain purity on cell performance is on the fill factor of the device, with short circuit current less affected and open circuit voltage remaining constant. Since the observed variations in domain purity are not enough to bring about any change in exciton dissociation efficiency (as confirmed by PL quenching measurements), variation in domain purity affects cell performance though changes in the rates of recombination subsequent to charge generation. As variations in domain purity most strongly influence cell performance close to the maximum power point, it is argued that domain purity is most strongly affecting the recombination of separated charges rather than geminate recombination. Transient photovoltage results have been presented that indeed show a substantial reduction in the bimolecular recombination rate constant with the improvement in domain purity.
Over the purity range investigated, device performance was positively correlated with domain purity. Further increases in domain purity however could bring about a reduction in cell efficiency, particularly if the fullerene concentration falls below the percolation threshold in the mixed phase.58 In systems such as the PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM system, the transport of charge through the mixed phase seems to be an especially sensitive step in the photocurrent generation process. Although relatively pure fullerene clusters promote extended charge separation, the lack of percolating pathways of fullerene-rich clusters mean that electrons must traverse the mixed phase to be collected. Given that the PL quenching efficiency has not changed over the range of samples investigated, and given that FF has been observed to steadily increase with AST delay time, it seems reasonable to expect that higher efficiency cells could be achieved with even higher domain purities.
This study has shown that while fullerene miscibility has been identified as an important parameter,23 the actual domain purity that results in a sample will be sensitive the amount of time afforded for fullerene diffusion to occur, with the structures produced in spin-coated samples being non-equilibrium morphologies. The AST approach enables differing degrees of morphology evolution by varying the time that residual DIO is allowed to remain in the film. Further evolution in domain purity could be afforded by employing a solvent additive with lower volatility (or through exposure to solvent vapour provided it doesn’t promote coarsening of phase separation) however from a manufacturing perspective it is not practical to wait for 24 hours for the BHJ to evolve. Therefore tuning of the chemical structures of the donor and acceptor to tune the strength of interaction (parameterised by the Flory interaction parameter, for example) could help to realise higher domain purities.
Finally, it is worth noting that the interpretation of domain purity from R-SoXS data is non-trivial, even for the case of the PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM system here which can be considered as a quasi-two phase system. The analysis presented here is valid only for a 2 phase system, and more complicated systems – particularly those with highly crystalline phases for which the degree of crystallinity can easily vary with processing conditions – will require more exacting treatment. There is a worrying trend to simply equate TSI with domain purity even in more complicated systems including ternary blends59 where it is unclear which domain the TSI is being used to relate domain purity to.
Conclusions
In this study we have presented a unique approach that has enabled the tuning of domain purity while keeping other morphological parameters constant. By varying the time taken between spin-coating and the application of an anti-solvent treatment, the effect of domain purity on device performance was isolated. With AST delay times varying between 1 minute and 24 hours, a 60% increase in the total scattering intensity was seen, which corresponds to a 20% increase in domain purity based on TEY NEXAFS measurement of the absolute purity of the mixed phase. This increase in domain purity corresponded to an increase in power conversion efficiency from 7.2% to 9.4%, with changes in domain purity most dramatically affecting cell fill factor. Transient photovoltage measurements confirmed a significant change in the recombination kinetics of charges, with purer phases exhibiting substantially reduced bimolecular recombination rate constants.
Experimental section
Materials
PBDTTT-EFT (also called PTB7-Th and PCE-10) and PC71BM were purchased from 1-Material Inc. and Nano-C, respectively. Polyethylenimine, 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) and zinc acetate dehydrate were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Device fabrication and characterization
Inverted devices were based on the structure of ITO/ZnO/PEIE/active layer/MoO3/Ag. The ZnO layer was prepared from 0.1 M ZnO precursor solution by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 1 min, followed by baking at 200 °C for 1 h. The PEIE interfacial layer was spin-coated on ZnO at 5000 rpm from the solution of methoxyethanol (0.4 wt%), and was then thermal-annealed at 100 °C for 5 min.41 PBDTTT-EFT and PC71BM were dissolved in a co-solvent of chlorobenzene (97 vol%) and DIO (3 vol%) at a concentration of 8 mg ml−1 for PBDTTT-EFT and 12 mg ml−1 for PC71BM. The blend solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 2 min before 200 μl of the anti-solvent isopropanol (IPA) was dropped on the film. The delay time between the start of spin-coating and the drop of anti-solvent was 1 min (during spin-coating), 120 s (spin-coating process stoped immediately), 10 min, 1 h and 24 h. After storing device in the glove box for 2 days, active layers were moved to the thermal evaporation. The “no AST” sample therefore corresponds to a sample that was spin-coated and left in the glove box for 48 hours without any AST before being introduced into the vacuum chamber for electrode deposition. The composite electrode of molybdenum oxide (15 nm) and silver (100 nm) was thermally evaporated atop the active layer through a mask with a defined active area of 0.045 cm2. Devices were encapsulated by epoxy resin before being removed from the glove box.
Device performance was measured using a Photo Emission Tech. Model SS50AAA solar simulator with the J–V curves measured with a Keithley 2635 source meter. The intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated by using a calibrated silicon reference cell with a KG3 glass filter (PV measurements Inc.).
Microstructural characterization
Resonant soft X-ray scattering (R-SoXS) was performed at beamline 11.0.1.2 of the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.60 Films were floated off from sodium polystyrene sulfonate (NaPSS) coated glass substrate, followed by transferring floated films onto 100 nm thick SiN2 windows (Norcada). Horizontally polarized X-rays were incident normal to the film surface. The X-ray energy was chosen at 284.0 eV, providing the maximum scattering contrast between PBDTTT-EFT and PC71BM. Scattered photons were collected by a Princeton PI-MTE in-vacuum CCD detector. Two scattering patterns of 100 s exposure time were collected at 30 mm and 150 mm sample to detector distances. Two scattering patterns were then combined together in software.
Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was collected at SAXS/WAXS beamline at Australian Synchrotron.61 X-ray incident beam was monochromatic with 9 keV photons. 2D scattering patterns were collected by using a Dectris Pilatus 1 M detector with an exposure time of 3 s. An X-ray incidence angle of 0.18° was used. The GIWAXS results were analysed using an altered version of the NIKA analysis package62 implemented in IgorPro.
Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy was performed at the soft X-ray beamline at the Australian Synchrotron.63 A nearly perfectly linearly polarized X-ray beam was used, with a fresh spot was used for each scan to avoid the beam damage. Total electron yield (TEY) signal was measured by recording the drain current flowing to the sample under X-ray illumination. The recorded signal was normalized by the “stable monitor method”, with the spectra normalized by setting the pre-edge to 0 and the intensity at 320 eV to 1.64
Photoluminescence quenching measurements were acquired using a Horiba Jobin Yvon Fluorolog spectrofluorometer.
Transient photovoltage measurement
Transient photovoltage measurements were performed by illuminating devices with a constant background intensity high power white LED (Thorlabs MWWHL3). A small light perturbation was provided by a Kingbright L-7104VGC-H green LED with a wavelength of 525 nm, driven by a function generator Agilent 33533A. A 500 nm width pulse was used for the small perturbation with the rise and fall time of the LED less than 100 ns, measured with a Thorlabs DET10A/M Si photodetector. The transient response was recorded on an Agilent Technologies Infiniivision DSO-X 3032A digital oscilloscope (DOSC). For transient photovoltage measurements cells were connected to the DOSC with a termination of 1 MΩ to achieve an open-circuit condition and 50 Ω termination was used to measure transient photocurrent response of the device. The intensity of the Thorlab white LED was changed to achieve different VOC condition of the device in transient photovoltage measurement.
Acknowledgements
Part of this research was performed at soft X-ray and SAXS/WAXS beamlines at Australian Synchrotron, part of ANSTO. The authors thank Dr Nigel Kirby for GIWAXS beamline setup. R-SoXS experiments were conducted at beamline 11.0.1.2 of the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The authors thank Cheng Wang at the ALS for assistance with R-SoXS measurements. The Advanced Light Source is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. Support from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) and the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics (ACAP) is acknowledged. The authors acknowledge use of facilities within the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy and thank Chao Wang and Dr Amelia Liu for assistance with TEM specimen preparation and measurement. C. R. M. acknowledges support from the Australian Research Council (FT100100275) and veski. J. M. H. and S. K. K. P. acknowledge support from a Rutherford Discovery Fellowship to J. M. H.
Notes and references
L. Dou, J. You, Z. Hong, Z. Xu, G. Li, R. A. Street and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. An, F. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Tang, Z. Deng and B. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 281 Search PubMed .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391 CAS .
S. B. Darling and F. You, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17633 RSC .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, S. Westenhoff, C. Groves, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19153 CAS .
B. P. Lyons, N. Clarke and C. Groves, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7657 CAS .
J.-D. Chen, C. Cui, Y.-Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q.-D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Jagadamma, M. Al-Senani, A. El-Labban, I. Gereige, G. O. Ngongang Ndjawa, J. C. D. Faria, T. Kim, K. Zhao, F. Cruciani, D. H. Anjum, M. A. McLachlan, P. M. Beaujuge and A. Amassian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500204 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, Z. Xiao, S. Lu, W. Zajaczkowski, W. Pisula, E. Hanssen, J. M. White, R. M. Williamson, J. Subbiah, J. Ouyang, A. B. Holmes, W. W. H. Wong and D. J. Jones, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, B. Kan, F. Liu, G. Long, X. Wan, X. Chen, Y. Zuo, W. Ni, H. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Hu, F. Huang, Y. Cao, Z. Liang, M. Zhang, T. P. Russell and Y. Chen, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Collins, E. Gann, L. Guignard, X. He, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3160 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Collins, Z. Li, J. R. Tumbleston, E. Gann, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 65 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653 CAS .
J. T. Bloking, T. Giovenzana, A. T. Higgs, A. J. Ponec, E. T. Hoke, K. Vandewal, S. Ko, Z. Bao, A. Sellinger and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 201301426 Search PubMed .
W. Huang, E. Gann, N. Chandrasekaran, S. K. K. Prasad, S.-Y. Chang, L. Thomsen, D. Kabra, J. M. Hodgkiss, Y.-B. Cheng, Y. Yang and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602197 CrossRef .
W. Chen, T. Xu, F. He, W. Wang, C. Wang, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. Chen, K. Hong, L. Yu and S. B. Darling, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3135 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Burke and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Jamieson, E. B. Domingo, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, N. Stingelin and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 485 RSC .
S. Venkatesan, N. Adhikari, J. Chen, E. C. Ngo, A. Dubey, D. W. Galipeau and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1011 RSC .
K. Vakhshouri, S. V. Kesava, D. R. Kozub and E. D. Gomez, Mater. Lett., 2013, 90, 97 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 187 RSC .
W. Ma, J. R. Tumbleston, M. Wang, E. Gann, F. Huang and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 864 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Stuart, J. R. Tumbleston, H. Zhou, W. Li, S. Liu, H. Ade and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, S. Zhang, W. Ma, B. Fan, X. Guo, Y. Huang, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, C. M. Proctor, J. R. Tumbleston, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, C. M. Proctor, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500877 CrossRef .
J. Min, X. Jiao, I. Ata, A. Osvet, T. Ameri, P. Bäuerle, H. Ade and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502579 CrossRef .
W. Ma, J. R. Tumbleston, L. Ye, C. Wang, J. Hou and H. Ade, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Love, S. D. Collins, I. Nagao, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kesava, Z. Fei, A. D. Rimshaw, C. Wang, A. Hexemer, J. B. Asbury, M. Heeney and E. D. Gomez, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400116 CrossRef .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Jing, X. Guo, H. Sun, S. Zhang, M. Zhang, L. Huo and J. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 14920 CAS .
W. Huang, E. Gann, Z.-Q. Xu, L. Thomsen, Y.-B. Cheng and C. R. McNeill, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16313 CAS .
W. Huang, E. Gann, L. Thomsen, C. Dong, Y.-B. Cheng and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401259 CrossRef .
S. Guo, W. Wang, E. M. Herzig, A. Naumann, G. Tainter, J. Perlich and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3740 CAS .
C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, W. J. Belcher, A. K. D. Kilcoyne, N. C. Greenham and P. C. Dastoor, Small, 2006, 2, 1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Nahid, E. Gann, L. Thomsen and C. R. McNeill, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 81, 532 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Hedley, A. J. Ward, A. Alekseev, C. T. Howells, E. R. Martins, L. A. Serrano, G. Cooke, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2867 Search PubMed .
J. Kong, I.-W. Hwang and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H.-Y. Chiang, V. Körstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, L. M. Chen, G. W. Yang, C. H. Huang, J. H. Hou, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. S. Hsu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, J. Liu, X. Cao, Q. Zhao, X. Yu, S. Zheng and Y. Han, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17913 RSC .
C. M. Björström, A. Bernasik, J. Rysz, A. Budkowski, S. Nilsson, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson, K. O. Magnusson and E. Moons, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, L529 CrossRef .
M. A. Ruderer, C. Wang, E. Schaible, A. Hexemer, T. Xu and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 4491 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gann, A. Watson, J. R. Tumbleston, J. Cochran, H. Yan, C. Wang, J. Seok, M. Chabinyc and H. Ade, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 245421 CrossRef .
C. J. Schaffer, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Polymer, 2016, 105, 357 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O’Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, J. D. Mello and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093311 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 165201 CrossRef .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O’Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 113201 CrossRef .
Z. Li, G. Lakhwani, N. C. Greenham and C. R. McNeill, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 034502 CrossRef .
W. Huang, N. Chandrasekaran, S. K. K. Prasad, E. Gann, L. Thomsen, D. Kabra, J. M. Hodgkiss, Y.-B. Cheng and C. R. McNeill, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29608 CAS .
F. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, G. He, J. Zhang, L. Jiang, T. Wang, Z. Wei, W. Ma, B. Li, A. Xia, Y. Li and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602552 CrossRef .
E. Gann, A. T. Young, B. A. Collins, H. Yan, J. Nasiatka, H. A. Padmore, H. Ade, A. Hexemer and C. Wang, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83, 045110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Kirby, S. T. Mudie, A. M. Hawley, D. J. Cookson, H. D. T. Mertens, N. Cowieson and V. Samardzic-Boban, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2013, 46, 1670 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ilavsky, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2012, 45, 324 CrossRef .
B. C. C. Cowie, A. Tadich and L. Thomsen, AIP Conf. Proc., 2010, 1234, 307 CrossRef .
E. Gann, C. R. McNeill, A. Tadich, B. C. C. Cowie and L. Thomsen, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2016, 23, 374 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01387f‡ Current address: Materials Science and Engineering Division National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA. E-mail: eliot.gann@nist.govThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Polymer solar cells have the potential to be manufactured at low cost on flexible substrates using high-throughput reel-to-reel processing. The power conversion efficiency of such solar cells continues to increase, largely on the back of the development of new materials. Since the active layer in a polymer solar cell is processed from solution and is based on a blend of donor and acceptor materials, it is microstructurally complex with the blend typically frozen in a non-equilibrium morphology. The purity of the donor and acceptor phases is known to be an important parameter, but its effect on cell performance has been difficult to experimentally isolate. This difficulty in being able to control domain purity is further complicated by the difficulty in experimentally characterising domain purity. Resonant soft X-ray scattering is an increasingly common tool used for characterising domain purity, but is a relatively new technique. This contribution presents a method to directly control domain purity in polymer solar cells and outlines the requirements for the proper assessment of domain purity from resonant soft X-ray scattering experiments.


 	Fig. 1  R-SoXS results of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends as a function of the delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment: (a) Lorentz-corrected R-SoXS profiles of the PBDTTT-EFT/PC71BM blends, (b) long period, and (c) relative total scattering intensity extracted from the scattering profiles in (a). In (c), the total scattering intensity was normalized by the anti-solvent treated blend with a delay time of 24 h.	 
TSI ∝ Cv1v2	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
TSIp→0 ∝ (m1 − P12)(1 − m1 − P21)	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  NEXAFS results of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends as a function of the delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment. (a) TEY carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectra of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends. (b) Determination of fullerene weight concentration by fitting blend spectra with linear combinations of neat spectra.	 

 	Fig. 3  Grazing-incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurement of PBDTTT-EFT:PC71BM blends as a function of delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment. (a) Out-of-plane (OOP) line scattering profiles and (b) in-plane (IP) line scattering profiles. (c) Plot of the d-spacing of the IP (100) peak as a function of delay time. (d) Plot of the coherence length of the IP (100) peak as a function of delay time.	 

 	Fig. 4  Device structure and device performance of solar cells as a function of the delay time between spin-coating and anti-solvent treatment. (a) Schematic illustration of device structure. (b) J–V curves as a function of delay time, measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G simulated sunlight. (c) JSC and VOC plotted as a function of delay time. (d) Efficiency and fill factor as a function of delay time.	 
	(6)
τ = τΔn(λ + 1)	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 5  Device photophysics with different domain purities: low purity (delay time of 1 min), medium purity (delay time of 10 min) and high purity (delay time of 24 h). (a) Small perturbed charge carrier lifetime as function of total charge carrier density (n) in the device obtained from transient photovoltage measurement. The dotted and solid line represent a fit using the equation τΔn ∝ n−λ. (b) Bimolecular recombination rate constant (k) vs. charge carrier density (n) at light intensities higher than 0.3 Sun.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01387f
‡ Current address: Materials Science and Engineering Division National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA. E-mail: eliot.gann@nist.gov

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
