Recent progress on lanthanide-based long persistent phosphors: an overview  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC05243A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC05243A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 8649-8687Recent progress on lanthanide-based long persistent phosphors: an overview

        
          
            Sivakumar 
            Vaidyanathan
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad Kandi, Sangareddy-502285, Telangana, India. E-mail: vsiva@chy.iith.ac.in
Received 
      9th December 2022
    , Accepted 21st March 2023First published on 4th April 2023AbstractPersistent phosphors are highly explored materials due to their diverse applications (including anti-counterfeiting, information and data storage, photocatalysis, sensing, and bioimaging). Lanthanide activation offers effortless tuning of colour in several host lattices based on previously established theories such as the Dorenbos model. In this review, we present a compilation of some long persistent phosphors including various crystal structures exhibiting a variety of colours with varying host lattices and activating lanthanide ions. The understanding of various mechanisms of persistent luminescence (PersL) is refined, detailed and divided into various models, mainly the electron trapping–detrapping and hole trapping–detrapping models. These mechanisms involve various processes such as tunnelling between energy states to achieve PersL. Several phosphors have been commercially used and are integrated in everyday life, primarily in display applications. Continuous research has improved the properties and widened the future scope for these long persistent phosphors. This review deals with only a few examples in this well-established field, focusing on the past decade, separated by the crystal structure of phosphor materials and denoting the colour and time of their persistent afterglow. This comprehensive review presents guidance for the design and synthesis of new persistent phosphors and their versatile applications together with their structure–composition–property–relationship.
Sivakumar Vaidyanathan
Prof. Sivakumar Vaidyanathan received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees in Chemistry from Muthurangam Government Arts College, Vellore (affiliated with the University of Madras), and his PhD in Solid-State Chemistry (2007) from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, with Prof. U. V. Varadaraju. Then, he moved to Prof. Duk Young Jeon's group at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea, as a Brain Korea 21 Post-doctoral Research Fellow (2007–2009). He also worked for a year as a Post-doctoral Fellow at the Commissariat à l'Énergie Atomique (CEA), Saclay, France. After spending a decade at NIT Rourkela as a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry, he moved to the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. His research focuses on lanthanide photochemistry and photophysics, molecular materials (including deep blue) for organic-light emitting diodes (OLEDs), pure organic room temperature materials, phosphors for LEDs (solid-state lighting), and organic fluorophores for diverse applications.
Introduction
Long persistent luminescence is an astonishing phenomenon in which the emission from a phosphor is maintained for a while after removing the excitation source, often referred to as afterglow. The time of uninterrupted emission may vary from a few milliseconds to several hours and sometimes even days, depending on different phosphors. The primary reason for this is the accumulation of excitation energy in phosphors by absorbing ultraviolet or visible light, which is gradually released in the form of light (visible or infrared) over a long period depending on the thermal disturbance in the phosphor system.1–3 The first known afterglow phenomenon dates over thousands of years, but perhaps not in the same way as known today. The first scientific report with an explanation goes back to the sixteenth century.4 Long persistent phosphors (LPPs) are applied in different fields, including chemistry, physics and materials science being. However, the current research interest in LPPs is extending their application in many other fields including bio-imaging and medicine.5 The interest in LPPs was boosted last two decades ago after the discovery of the important LPP SrAl2O4 in 1997, although the active research on LPPs dates back more than half a century ago.6,7
The extensive research in the field of persistent phosphors has led to the development of hundreds of persistent phosphors; however, only a few have been commercialised to date. Many LPPs in the form of polymer and organic-based LPPs are also known and studied.8,9 Inorganic LPPs possess inorganic crystals as their matrix and their luminescence results from the introduced dopants, mainly main group or/and transition metal ions. However, in recent studies, the attention has shifted to the utility of lanthanides for the same purpose due to their characteristics and comparatively broad transition range, versatility and high efficiency. Long persistent phosphors have widely found applications in signalling, including optical displays, sensing, military applications, emergency signs, and anti-counterfeiting.5,10–13 However, their application has been extended to the fields of optical storage14 and bio-imaging due to their peculiar energy ranges, which are in the biologically transparent window, i.e., the infrared region.1 Previously, sulphur-based hosts were widely used, but recently their interest has depleted due to their shortcomings, mainly chemical instability. The consideration is shifting towards silicate-based host matrixes together with exploring phosphate and transition metal-based lattices over aluminate and other hosts.15 Also, the conventionally utilised transition metal doping for the induction of afterglow has recently decreased due to the more promising effects of lanthanide ions for the stimulation of long persistent phosphorescence. Lanthanides are especially useful in cases of high-lying 5 d orbitals. Lanthanide ions offer a wide range of trap energy levels when incorporated as a trap, while the innumerable excited energy levels of lanthanide ions provide a broad range of transitions compared to main group elements and transition metals.16 Some lattices offer better results in the simultaneous activation of activators (lanthanides) and sensitizers (lanthanide ions or transition metal ions). Sensitizers mediate and enhance the intensity or duration of PersL.
Although countless LPPs are used globally, this review focuses on host lattice (different mineral based such as garnets, silicates, aluminates, borates, and perovskites)-based LPPs with an Ln activator/co-activator, considering mainly the last decade of research and development in the lanthanide activated long persistent phosphors, which are sorted based on colour for convenience. Fig. 1 presents a summary of the variety of LPPs based on their lifetime.
 Fig. 1  Overview of the lifetime of the different compounds that exhibit persistent luminescence. The radial axis shows the different matrices and the semi-circular axis shows the afterglow times ranging from minutes to several hours after excitation was stopped mostly by ultraviolet light. Inside the chart, there are data points related to the chemical elements that are used to dope the matrix (host). 
Mechanism
The emitted radiation from LPPs falls in the range of UV to near IR including the visible region. All these regions have been extensively utilised for wide-ranging applications. Phosphorescence is no longer limited to inorganic solids but has recently been extended to even organic molecules including polyurethanes, phosphors, and metal coordination polymers.8,17,18 However, although there have been extensive discussions and debates over decades regarding their mechanism, few models have been formulated to simplify their explanation, discussion, and understanding for further study. In this case, although many aspects are still unknown or not followed for some special cases, these models generalise the phenomenon of LPPs.19 The most important characteristics of these phosphors are the colour of their emission and the time in which their glow persists, which are determined by the energy of excitation and trap depth, respectively.
Requisites of long persistent phosphorescence
The requirement of long persistent phosphorescence materials are as follows:20 (1) inorganic matrix (host), (2) activated doping ions (activator/emission centre), (3) traps (trap centres), and (4) excitation source.
The activators include lanthanide ions (e.g., Ce3+, Eu2+, Nd3+, and Er3+)[5d → 4f or 4f → 4f transitions]; transition metal ions (e.g., Cr3+, Mn2+, Mn4+, and Ni2+)[d → d transition]; and main group elements (e.g., Pb2+ and Bi3+) [p → s transition]. The traps centres include lattice/intrinsic defects such as oxygen vacancy, F-centres, anti-site defects; impurities such as Cu2+, Co2+, and Ti3+ in different host matrices; and intentionally introduced co-dopants, e.g., Dy3+, in SrAl2O4:Eu2+ and Nd3+ in CaAl2O4:Eu2+.
Models
Several models can be employed to explain the PersL phenomenon in long persistent phosphors developed by various researchers over time,4,21 which include the electron trapping–detrapping model (and conduction band engineering), hole trapping–detrapping model (and valence band engineering), self-electron/hole trapping–detrapping model (and band gap engineering), quantum tunnelling model, and oxygen vacancy model.
Mechanism overview
Although the mechanism and attributes of the emission in phosphors, including the trap nature, type, depth, energy levels of bands and traps can vary to a certain extent, they may be considered to follow the same mechanism according to conventional definitions, where the overall mechanism can be generalised in the following steps:4,19,20
1. Excitation of an electron to the conduction band
2. Trapping of electrons/holes in traps
3. De-trapping of electrons/holes from traps
4. Recombination of electrons and holes.
Nevertheless, it is crucial to note that new specific mechanisms have been formulated, and many former mechanisms have been modified and/or discarded simultaneously based on the recent advancements in research for specific crystal structures.
The energy provided for excitation determines the transition energy levels. Given that the difference in dissimilar energy states is different, the emission energy also is variable, changing the colour. The energy levels of the traps between the energy levels may also change the emission wavelength and can also be utilised in tuning the emission. The variation in trap depth determines the time of LPPs, where very shallow traps result in a very short emission time, and subsequently an increase in the trap depth increases the persistence of afterglow. The delay in emission is determined by the depth of the trap. The depth of traps is related to the energy levels of the dopants. If the traps are accessible at high temperatures, the emission will be attained only at subsequent high temperatures and if the traps are very shallow, then the afterglow is lost instantly even at room temperature. By carefully monitoring the reaction condition and reactants, we can tune the phosphorescence according to the requirement. The afterglow can be introduced easily via doping or introduction of impurities. The exact mechanism involves simple electron inducing charge carriers to complex ionic entities, trapping or relaying the charge carriers. Slow de-trapping is maintained by the high trapping capacity, which usually requires a higher temperature than room temperature. The energy level of traps should be comparable to that of the conduction band or valence band for better PersL.

(1) Electron trapping–detrapping model. 
This model focuses on the trapping of electrons. The electrons are excited from the valence band of the host/matrix to its conduction band and the electron traps are located lower than the conduction band. These traps take up the electron and retain it for some time, varying according to the depth. The electrons are detrapped only on acquiring the appropriate amount of thermal energy. The subsequent delayed release of electrons results in delayed phosphorescence.22,23 The electron trapping–detrapping model is illustrated in Fig. 2, where the electrons are represented by a small blue circle and their movement can be traced by the arrows, starting from the excitation from the valence band, leading to the appropriate trap. Their subsequent release by a tunnelling process leads to delayed emission, and hence PersL.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the electron trapping–detrapping model in the case of (a) high energy band-to-band excitation and (b) low energy UV or visible light excitation only pumping the emission ions. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 


(2) Hole trapping–detrapping model. 
The excitation of an electron to the conduction band creates a hole in the valence band behind it, which is free to be relayed within the valence band. This model focuses on the trapping of the hole created by the excited electron. The hole traps are located above the valence band. The hole traps capture the holes by providing an electron to the valence band and creating a hole in the dopant itself. This process leads to the temporary unavailability of any electron acceptor. The electrons in the valence band are taken up by the traps to enable the hole to obtain an electron, generally by thermal agitation. The recombination of the de-trapped hole and excited electron results in an emission after some delay.24,25 This hole trapping–detrapping model is summarized diagrammatically in Fig. 3, where the hole is represented by a small white circle, created and trapped upon the excitation of an electron by a hole trap. The delayed release of this hole leads to delayed and persistent emission.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the hole trapping–detrapping model in the case of (a) high energy band-to-band excitation and (b) low energy UV or visible light excitation only pumping the emission ions. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
The PersL duration and efficiency are determined by the trap depth and the trap density distribution for both the electron traps and hole traps. The traps are selected based on the band gap of the host, which is the difference between the conduction band and the valence band. Various theoretical studies on these parameters helped to determine the correct host nature and the activating lanthanide ions to be doped.26
Thermoluminescence (TL) measurement is usually considered a powerful tool for calculating the trap level positions. The trap depth and nature are studied by complementing the TL properties with the following theoretical formula:I(T) = Aexp(−ET/kT)where I(T) is TL intensity, K denotes the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (K) of the peaks observed and ET is the trap depth. In TL studies, the plot of ln(IT) vs. 1/T gives the trap depth (ET) as the slope of the fitted straight line.26,27a The calculated data from the TL peak corresponds to the trap level positions.


(3) Quantum tunnelling model. 
Quantum tunnelling refers to the quantum mechanical phenomenon where a particle tunnels through a barrier that it classically cannot and this process may occur between the traps and near activator excited state levels. In contrast to the CB–VB model, this model does not require physical proximity to the trap level and the CB/VB. This model has been used to explain the afterglow mechanism related to deep traps. In the early days (1958), the existence of quantum tunnelling in sulfide phosphors was proposed by Hoogeustraten et al.27b Later, a similar model related to SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ LPPs was also proposed by Tanabe et al.27c by measuring the photocurrent excitation spectra, and it was found that the divalent europium 5d level at the divalent Sr site with a weak crystal field were located in the conduction band. They concluded that the effective path for trapping and de-trapping is accomplished by the quantum tunnelling path not through the conduction or valence band.


(4) Oxygen vacancy model. 
The oxygen vacancy model was proposed to account for the trapping and de-trapping progress by evaluating the EPR spectra. The oxygen vacancy model requires oxygen vacancies as electron traps to capture electrons, which is appropriate for analyzing the afterglow mechanism of oxide-based LPPs. This model was built based on the identification and confirmation of trap types, besides the CB/VB and quantum tunnelling models.

Different types of synthesis methods used for LPP synthesis
Conventionally, solid-state materials are synthesized via the high-temperature method. However, although they are still prevalent, several alternative synthesis methods have been developed to enhance and diversify the synthesis and the properties of the materials. Some of the contemporary methods are described below.
High-temperature solid-state reactions
High-temperature reactions are performed in silica and quartz crucibles. Annealing in the form of compressed pellets is also prevalent for better contact -with the starting materials during the synthesis process. Generally, high temperatures ranging from 200–1600 °C are required depending on the nature of the desired materials. For example, 900 °C for Ca2BO3Cl: Eu2+,Dy3+;28 and 1100–1250 °C for Ba5Si8O21:Eu2+,Dy3+.29 These high temperatures are attained in muffle furnaces and tube furnaces. Some of these furnaces, especially tube furnaces, coupled with appropriate control systems and gas (hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen) connections are equipped to control the reaction conditions when an inert, reducing or oxidising atmosphere is needed.
A reducing atmosphere is needed when the dopants or any reactants are readily oxidizable and the synthesis is targeted to attain ions with lower valences, such as Eu2+ in (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+;30 and Ca2BO3Cl:Eu2+,Dy3+.28 The oxidising atmosphere is also coupled with a reducing atmosphere depending on the desired materials, such as Na3ScSi3O9:Ce3+,Dy3+.31 Inert conditions are needed when the ions may be unstable during the synthesis reactions such as CaAlSiN3:Eu2+.32
Hydrothermal/solvothermal
As its name suggests, this method involves the synthesis route via solvents, one of the most common being water. Solvothermal synthesis involves the dispersion of materials in the reaction solvent reacting at high temperature in closed reactors/autoclaves, which generates some pressure for the reaction. The solvothermal method is best suited for reactions involving pH control by acids such as acetic acid or bases such as sodium hydroxide and sodium hydrate to form the desired final product at comparatively lower temperatures.33–36 β-NaYF4:Tb3+,37 Y2O2S:Eu3+,M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), Ti4+ are a few phosphors that can be synthesized by the hydrothermal method.38
Combustion method
This is an exothermic synthesis process, which involves the use of an oxidiser such as metal aluminates and fuels, most commonly, urea. In combustion synthesis, stoichiometric ratios of the starting materials are employed and oxidiser and fuel are added to them. Since the latter components are hygroscopic, a paste is formed. This paste is taken in a China dish or any other heat- and fire-resistant material and heated to flame temperature or ignition temperature, at which the prepared paste catches fire, which ceases in a few seconds. This method removes most of the impurities, and generally produces smaller particles compared to other synthesis routes.39–41
Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb;26 Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Eu3+ and Ca4EuO(BO3)342 are some of the lanthanide-activated long persistent phosphors discussed in this review, which are synthesized by the combustion method.
Sol–gel synthesis
Sol–gel synthesis results in the formation of solid-formed xerogels. These xerogels are formed using a stoichiometric ratio of the starting materials, including the dopants, in acid, which are later neutralised and the reaction pH is adjusted to around 7 using basic solutions. Different acids such as HNO3, HCl, and citric acid are utilised depending on the reaction requirements, where generally ammonia solution is used to neutralise the reaction pH. The initial acidic reactant solution is heated at a temperature of around 60–80 °C to initially form wet gels, which convert to xerogels at a comparatively higher temperature of around 120 °C. The formed xerogels can later be sintered at higher temperatures of 500–1200 °C, depending on the desired material to form the phosphors.43–46 CaMgSi2O6:Eu2+,Mn2+,Pr3+,47 and Sr2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+48 are some of the lanthanide-activated long persistent phosphors that are synthesized via sol–gel synthesis.49
Co-precipitation process
As hinted by its name, this method involves the precipitation of the desired phosphor after interaction. This synthesis route primarily involves the preparation of a separate aqueous metal salt solution (most commonly metal nitrates), where HNO3 is used for formation of nitrates of metal oxides. These separate solutions are mixed, forming a solid precipitate. Generally, this process is facilitated by some precipitating reagents or high temperatures in some cases. Additionally, this process can be combined with other methods such as hydrothermal, sintering or even microwave heating to obtain the desired phosphor.50–52 LaAlO3:Cr3+,Sm3+,53 Y3Al2Ga3O12:Ce3+,Cr3+,Nd3+ are a few afterglow phosphors synthesized using the sol–gel method.54
Czochralski method (growing single crystals)
This method was named after Polish scientist Jan Czochralski, who discovered it in 1915. The Czochralski method is applied to form single crystals of different materials. This method involves heating finely ground starting materials in a platinum crucible at a temperature slightly higher than their melting point, forming a melt of the desired product. The single crystal are formed in the desired orientation by the introduction of the seed particle of the same target material in the melt at high temperature. The crystallisation is uniform under controlled and consistent rate of cooling of the reaction melt. Subsequently, the obtained large crystal can be cut into the desired shape based on the requirements.55,56 This method has been successfully utilised for the preparation of phosphors such as LiNbO3:Mg2+,Pr3+.57
Applications of long persistent phosphors
Long persistent phosphors (LPP) have been used for different applications, such as lighting, signalling, optical data storage, military applications, bio-imaging, anti-counterfeiting, and lasers (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Applications of various LPPs. 
Lightning
Generally, solid-state phosphors are widely used in commercial lighting applications. The afterglow property of certain phosphors offers an enhancement in lightning applications. Subsequently, the afterglow property can be tuned to conserve energy, given that these materials can show a long afterglow compared to the initial charging irradiation periods. In display screens the wide variety of colours accessible in afterglow phosphors offers a range for selection and leads to display screens with not only different colours but also different afterglow times, offering visual delight together with the target purpose. Y3Al2Ga3O12:Ce3+,Cr3+,58 SrSi2AlO2N3:Eu2+,Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er, and Tm),59 and Y3Sc2Ga3−xAlxO12:Ce3+ can be potentially used for lightning and display applications.60 The afterglow spectacle is applied in the production of afterglow toys, which seem to catch the attention of children.
Signalling
Long persistent phosphors, especially those that can be charged by sunlight irradiation or have a short irradiation charging time are utilised for signalling in the dark. They are commonly observed as background screens on watches, as road markings, making an effort towards safe travelling, etc. The signalling application is modified for additional use in emergency signalling, which is most commonly used for signalling any danger. Afterglow signalling is successfully used for safety signalling given that it can be utilised without any additional power consumption. Long persistent phosphors such as BaZrSi3O9:Eu2+,Pr3+,61 and CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ + Y3Al5O12:Ce3+ can be potentially used for signalling applications.62
Optical data storage/military applications
Afterglow phosphors have been successfully utilised for optical data storage due to their characteristic property. This application is greatly used for secret coded message transfer in the military. Phosphors can also be utilised in ballistic and thermal imaging such as SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+,63,64 Ba2SiO4:Eu2+,Ho3+,65,66 and Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb.26
Bio-imaging applications
Many near infra-red (NIR) after glowing phosphors have attracted attention for their utility in bio-imaging. Given that the NIR glowing regions can be uninterrupted by any visible tissues surrounding them, this range offers an advancement in bio-medical applications. Phosphors such as CaMgSi2O6:Eu2+,Mn2+,Pr3+,47,49 and LaAlO3:Cr3+,Sm3+ have been utilised for the same purpose.53
Anti-counterfeiting
The use of phosphor materials for the successful detection of counterfeiting currency is one of the recent applications of lanthanide based phosphor materials. Given that the emission of lanthanide is very sharp, coupling it with tuned excitation requirements, it can be applied as for counterfeiting detection. The phosphors used for these applications do not emit by visible range energy. Often, the use of some laser excitation reveals different patterns on the currency. Some of the phosphors that can be utilised are BaTiO3:Er3+,Er3+–Ho3+,Yb3+–Tm3+;12 and SrBi4Ti4O15:Er3+ (SBTO:Er3+).67a Among the available techniques, the luminescent printing practice has gained much attention due to its distinctions of easy and scalable production, simple operation, and most importantly tuneable and customizable optical performance. Indeed, luminescent inks excitable by ultraviolet (UV) light have been widely used as anti-counterfeiting marks on banknotes and medicine packaging.
Encouraged by the multi-color long afterglow feature, the NaCa2GeO4F:Tb3+ (NCGOF:Tb3+) phosphor67b can be used for anti-counterfeiting applications. The banknote value ‘100’ was printed (Fig. 5) by screen printing, and afterwards the banknote value ‘100’ of the loaded phosphor (with different Tb3+ concentrations) was placed under a UV lamp for 10 s, and the true color was not displayed due to interference from the background fluorescence (Fig. 5c). Nevertheless, a multi-color afterglow response was encountered in the absence of a UV lamp. Furthermore, the letters “LZU” and a smiley face were also printed by mixing three different phosphor concentrations. The two images showed dissimilar colors, indicating that the currently studied phosphor (NCGOF:Tb3+) has good potential for anti-counterfeiting (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  Typical anti-counterfeiting designs on banknotes. (a) Schematic illustration of the multi-color response. (b) Image of the banknote value ‘100’ under 254 nm UV light. (c) PL and PersL images of the NCGOF:Tb3+ phosphors on banknotes under an ultraviolet lamp switched on and off. (d) Images of the comprehensive application of the three phosphors.67b Reproduced from67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021. 
The dynamic optical anti-counterfeiting strategy based on Na2CaGe2O6:Tb3+/Tb3+,Yb3+ phosphors combined with time-evolving dynamic multi-color PL and bi-temporal luminescent performance was explored (Fig. 6).67c Firstly, the dynamic variation rate of luminescent color changed with the different contents of Tb3+ ions, which could be applied for the dynamic optical anti-counterfeiting (Fig. 6a). The ‘WIFI’ pattern contained four parts made of NCG:xTb3+ (x = 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, and 0.20) phosphors, respectively. During irradiation with a portable UV lamp (254 nm), the PL color of ‘WIFI’ gradually changed from red to green, and the different parts of the pattern had obviously different discoloration rates. Thus, this application with dynamic PL color is hard to be faked and can enhance the security of information.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of the WIFI pattern at different irradiation times, where the pattern is made of Na2CaGe2O6:xTb3+ (x = 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20) phosphors. (b) Persistent luminescence photographs of pattern after 254 nm pre-irradiation for 5 min and (c) demonstration of bi-temporal anticounterfeiting model (composed of Na2CaGe2O6:0.20 Tb3+, Na2CaGe2O6:0.03 Tb3+,0.05 Yb3+). Reproduced from67 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022. 
By co-doping the trivalent Yb ions, the PersL duration difference was detected between the NCG:Tb3+ and NCG:Tb3+,Yb3+, utilized for dynamic optical anti-counterfeiting (Fig. 6b). By using the NCG:0.03Tb3+,0.05Yb3+ phosphor composition, the pattern of ‘2021’ was made and the rest of the pattern was composed of NCG:0.03Tb3+. Under 254 nm excitation, the pattern displayed the color green ‘8888’. Due to the discrepancy of PersL duration between NCG:0.03Tb3+,0.05Yb3+ and NCG:0.03Tb3+, the pattern of ‘2021’ gradually appeared after switching off the UV light. Hence, the number of ‘2021’ disappeared under the irradiation of a UV lamp. Only when removing the UV lamp, the image of ‘2021’ could be discovered. Consequently, these phosphors can be used for optical anti-counterfeiting, and also potentially applied in optical information encryption.
Quintuple luminescence modes of PL was observed in the Zn3Ga2GeO8:Cr3+,Yb3+,Er3+ phosphors, persistent luminescence (PersL), photo-stimulated luminescence (PSL), photo-stimulated persistent luminescence (PSPL) and UCL with ironic emission colours, while the Zn1.6Li0.4GeO4:Mn2+ phosphors hold quadruple luminescence modes of PL, PersL, PSL and PSPL with a long perceptible green afterglow.67d Schematic illustration of multi-mode luminescence and anti-counterfeiting design of red ZGGO:Cr,Yb,Er and green ZLGO:Mn persistent phosphors is shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of multi-mode luminescence and anti-counterfeiting design of red ZGGO:Cr,Yb,Er and green ZLGO:Mn persistent phosphors. (a) Schematic diagram and (b) variable emission colours, multi-mode luminescence (UCL, PL, PersL, PSL and PSPL), and dynamic evolution of the PersL emission brightness and colours under different excitation conditions for multi-level anti-counterfeiting applications. Reproduced from67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021. 
Lasers
Laser devices have found many applications in various fields such as displays, projection, data storage, communications, and biomedical field. The phosphors applied in lasers need to be stable, have different emission wavelengths, high intensity, longer emission time, etc. Some of the phosphor materials that can be employed as lasers include BaMgAl10O17:Eu2+;68 and Y3Al5O12:Ce3+.69
Lanthanide-activated inorganic LPPs
Lanthanides are a series of elements generally represented as [Xe] 4f0–14, having remarkable optical properties.70 The filling of electrons in the 4f orbitals of lanthanides can be represented as 4f0→14: from 4f0 (La) to 4f14 (Lu). Due to their compact energy levels, resembling a hierarchy, lanthanides can generate a continuous emission in the UV-visible to NIR region.5,58,71 The luminescence effects of the lanthanides are specifically caused by the electron redistribution in their 4f orbitals, given that the influences of the ligand field are essentially minimized by the shielding effects of the 6s and 5p orbitals.
The Laporte selection rule forbids electronic transitions in different levels of 4f orbitals, and thus the radiant states of lanthanides are occupied in the presence of energy transfer from a sensitizing host.72,73 Thus, the lanthanide emission centres and host materials are both highly significant and directly affect and regulate the emission of doped nanocrystals. Intersystem crossing and energy transfer processes between the host lattice and lanthanides are the infrequently observed phenomenon of long-lived luminescence in lanthanide-doped compounds. August 1996 marked a breakthrough for LPPs, shifting the focus to a previously overlooked area, as a result of the published works of the research and development (R&D) of the Nemoto group. The discovery of the after-glowing properties of SrAl2O4 attracts attention from many researchers in this field, even after two decades since its first registration.74 The alkaline earth metals in the host lattice show considerate afterglow properties. Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ was first reported back in 1996, and since then it has been studied and improved extensively.75–77 Some of the other silicate-, phosphate- and aluminate-based blue LPPs are Lu2SiO5:Ce;78 Sr3Al10SiO20:Eu2+;79 Ca9Bi(PO4)7:Ce3+,Tb3+,Mn2+;80 and CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+.81 Red long persistent phosphors are rare compared to blue and green and are attracting research focus due to their unparalleled application fields of red display and biomedical applications in the near IR region by tuning some transitions. Initially, Eu2+/3+ was highly explored for red phosphors, but recently other lanthanides, especially Sm3+ have also been gaining focus for red emissions. Some of the prominent red phosphors are CaS:Eu2+,Dy3+;82 Ca2SnO4:Sm3+;83 SrCaSi5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+84 and Y2O2S:Eu3+,Mg2+,Ti4+.85 Warm colour emitting phosphors are uncommon and rarely activated by sunlight, which is currently limiting but emphasizing enhancement in this range of emission. Warm colours are more important in emergency signalling due to their higher emission wavelength and lower scattering. Phosphates are exceptionally compatible with persistent afterglow. Some other yellow LPPs are Ca2ZnS2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+86 and Gd3Al2Ga3O12:Ce3+.87
Although theoretically all colours can be available by controlling the emission and mixing of blue, green, yellow and red emissions of different phosphors, it is generally not observed in applications and only some primary colours are commercialised to date. This has increased the interest of researchers in controlling the emissions of other colours such as white, orange, and cyan, which can be applied in various other fields. White light is seldom investigated due to the involvement of simultaneous multiple emissions required for mixing and its generation, due to chances of non-uniformity and requirement of significant levels of lattice defects. Some of the reported white afterglow phosphors are CdSiO3:Dy3+88 and CaxMgSi2O5+x:Dy3+ (x = 1, 2, 3).89
The emissions of some phosphors can be controlled at a larger wavelength difference by varying the concentration and nature of the activating ions, which may also affect the duration significantly. LPP has been utilised in many fields, where among them bio-imaging is a crucial and emerging field. Many phosphors have been tested, and subsequently improved over the years for bio-imaging as nano-probes (more suitable due to small size).47,49
Examples of long persistent phosphors

Garnet-based long persistent phosphors. 
Garnets, belonging to the nesosilicate group of materials, generally occur as minerals in metamorphic rocks. Most often due to its myriad of colours, this mineral is used as a gemstone. Furthermore, given that its crystal structure, X3Y2Z3O12, is highly stable, it has found applications in lasers and phosphors.90 Several garnets with Ce-activation show green emissions.60,91 This section deals with some garnet structures, comprised mainly of gallium and germanium in the host matrix.
A garnet type green-emitting phosphor, Ce3+-activated Y3Sc2Ga3−xAlxO12 garnet, was prepared via the traditional solid-state synthesis method involving high temperature and monitored atmosphere.60 It can be potentially used in LED devices. This garnet phosphor crystallised in a cubic structure with cell parameters of a = b = c = 12.4801 Å and belong to Iad. It was established from the crystallographic analysis that Ga exists in two dissimilar sites with 4 and 6 coordination sites and speculated to create defects that are responsible for promoting afterglow, as shown in Fig. 8(a). It can be inferred from the PLE and PE spectra of varying concentrations that for Y3−xSc2Ga3O12:xCe3+, x = 0.04 has the maximum intensity, after which concentration quenching occurs. The excitation occurs from the ground energy level of Ce3+ to the two d excited levels, resulting in two excitation peaks, obtained by the deconvolution of the observed emission spectra. The emission is theoretically estimated to be from the 2F7/2 and 2F5/2 levels of Ce3+. The PLE and PL spectra of the phosphor changed with varying concentrations of Ce3+ as well as the ratio of Ga and Al. Further, substitution of Ga with Al in the crystal lattice led to a slight red shift in the spectra, which is ascribed to the change in the crystal environment energy variation of the 5d–4f transition of Ce3+. The smaller radius of Al changes the Ce3+ surrounding on complete substitution of the Ga sites in the structure. The afterglow spectra correspond to the PL spectra at 495 nm (Fig. 8(b)), but the atmosphere affects the spectra to a great extent in this phosphor, given that it affects the generation of defects. The comparison of the emission spectra in different environments led to further studies in an O2 environment due to the notable results (Fig. 8(c)). Temperature-dependent emission studies revealed the presence of various shallow and deep traps together. The decay curves at variable temperatures and Al concentration denoted that the matrix affected the spectra, increasing the high-temperature band for high Al. In the lattice, different defects may act as electron and hole traps. Defects such as antisite defects act as hole traps and the oxygen vacancy defects act as electron trap centres. Here, Ce3+ is both the activator and trap source. The host acts as a carrier and transfers energy to Ce3+ from the traps after the excitation source has ceased to obtain afterglow. The increased amount of Al in the lattice increased the crystal field strength and the bandgap and high concentrations of Al can eventually reduce the generation of traps and afterglow.60
 Fig. 8  (a) Crystal structure of Y3Sc2Ga3O12.60 (b) Afterglow emission spectra of Y2.96Sc2Ga3O12:0.04Ce3+ sample after removal of the excitation source60 and (c) the comparison of the afterglow spectra of Y2.96Sc2Ga3O12:0.04Ce3+ under air and H2/O2 atmosphere.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (d) Unit-cell structure of the YAGG crystal, where green spheres represent Y3+ at the dodecahedral site, and brown and white ones represent Al3+/Ga3+ at the octahedral and tetrahedral sites, respectively.91 Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2006 (e) Crystal unit cell model of Ba2Ga2GeO7:0.03 Pr3+ in the direction of the a axis.92 (f) PLE and PL spectra of BGGO:0.03Pr3+ phosphor, λex = 255 nm and λem = 491 nm.92 (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
Another green-emitting garnet phosphor, Ce3+- and Cr3+-doped Y3Al2Ga3O12, was identified as a transparent phosphor-in-glass to be twice as efficient as a solid powder for this garnet proportion.91 Similar garnets have also been studied in the form of transparent ceramics by S. Tanabe et al.93–95 The phosphor-in-glass showed improved afterglow characteristics due to reduced scattering. The single-phased phosphor was synthesized via conventional solid-state reactions. The compound crystallized in a cubic crystal structure,91 with cell parameters of a = b = c = 12.1829 Å. (The phosphor-in-glass phosphors were synthesized via the low-temperature co-sintering technique.) The cubic lattice consisted of a 4-fold, 6-fold coordination around Al3+, Ga3+ and 8-fold coordination around Y3+ ions, as illustrated in Fig. 8(d). The Cr3+ dopant occupied the octahedral sites of Al3+ or Ga3+, while Ce3+ preferred the sites occupied by Y3+ due to their similarity in size. The PLE spectra showed the presence of two excitation bands, estimated to arise from the 4f–5d transition of Ce3+ (activator). Concentration quenching was observed at concentrations above 0.5% mol of Ce3+. The emissions in the co-doped samples became more independent due to the separation in energy levels due to the presence of Cr3+. The introduction of Cr3+ in the lattice also opens an avenue of persistence due to its ability to trap charge carriers. Successful green afterglow was achieved upon irradiation with blue light. The emission was observed for up to 50 min from some of the prepared compositions. Persistent luminescence was found to be significantly dependent on the excitation wavelength, attaining a peak at nearly 435 nm. The traps were located uniformly at a depth in the range of 0.71 to 1.02 eV, which was verified due to the shift in the TL spectra with time. Some deep traps were also present, which released electrons at high temperature. According to the mechanism, UV and blue radiation excited the 4f electrons in Ce3+ to the conduction band via the 5d levels, from where electrons were captured by a series of traps. The presence of Cr3+ increased the number of traps and also provided a tunnel between the shallow and deep traps. The recombination of free electrons and conduction bands led to green emissions. The release of electrons from the deep traps could also be stimulated by NIR radiation. Due to its excitation lying in the blue emission range, it can potentially be used in display applications.
In 2019, Huimin Li et al. reported the synthesis of a Pr3+-activated Ba2Ga2GeO7 long persistent white phosphor.92 The synthesized phosphor was crystallised in the tetragonal lattice with cell parameters of a = b (Å) = 8.21766, c (Å) = 5.65548, α = β = γ (°) = 90. Three types of coordination polyhedra existed in the system including dodecahedral BaO8 and tetrahedral GaO4 and GeO4 (Fig. 8(d)). Pr3+ has multiple low-lying (compared to other frequently used activators) 4f energy levels, which can contribute to multiple excitations theoretically and verified experimentally for varying intense multiple emissions in a specific lattice environment. The 4f–4f transitions of Pr3+ are the reason for the long persisting phosphorescence. The PL and PLE spectra of the Pr3+-activated Ba2Ga2GeO7 phosphors, as illustrated in Fig. 8(f), indicated that the absorption intensity increased with an increase in Pr3+ concentration. The bands at 491 nm (blue) and 650 nm (red) are generated from the 3P0 → 3H4 and 3P0 → 3F2 transitions, respectively. Pr3+ exhibited its characteristic f–f transitions given that its d-levels are higher and cannot take electrons from low-lying traps. The persistent luminescence, observed by the naked eyes, by irradiation for 5 min under a 254 nm UV lamp, lasted for 3 h.
A novel Sm3+-doped Na2CaSn2Ge3O12, having a garnet-like structure was established for its reddish-orange emission (due to 4G7/2 → 6H5/2 and 4G5/2 → 6H7/2 emissions).96 Stannate-based lattices were selected as the host mainly due to their chemical stability and versatility compared to sulphides, oxides, etc.97,98 The garnet crystallised in a cubic lattice (space group Iad) with cell parameters of a = b = c = 1.537 Å. The tetrahedral GeO4 and octahedral SnO6 surround each other in all the phases given that all the corners are shared, forming the skeleton (Fig. 9(a)). The PLE spectra of Na2CaSn2Ge3O12:Sm3+ denote the broad excitation of the host in the range of 230 to 300 nm, confirming the energy transfer between the host and Sm3+. The excitation spectra also have narrow peaks between 340 to 500 nm, arising from the 4f–4f transition of Sm3+. In the PL spectra, four sets of transitions were recorded, occurring from de-excitation to lower energy levels in the range of 550–720 nm, as depicted in Fig. 9(b), owing to the reddish-orange emissions, which had the CIE colour coordinates of (0.55, 0.40). Na2CaSn2Ge3O12 showed different colours on activation by different lanthanides. The Dy3+-activated white phosphor Na2CaSn2Ge3O12 was studied for its afterglow properties, which can - potentially be applied in optical storage applications.99 Na+ and Ca2+ form octahedral coordination, which are possibly replaced by the Dy3+ dopants, causing vacancy defects to neutralise the overall lattice. The PL excitation spectra of Na2CaSn2Ge3O12:Dy3+ show a broad charge transfer band for stannate (230–290 nm) and sharp weak 4f–4f peaks (290–400 nm).
 Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structure of Na2CaSn2Ge3O12, Na coordination.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) PLE (λem = 566 nm) and PL (λex = 255 nm) spectra of Na2Ca1−xSn2Ge3O12:0.8Sm3+ phosphor.96 Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (c) PLE (λem = 580 nm) spectrum and PL (λex = 248 nm) spectrum of Dy3+.99 Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (d) Crystal structure of La3GaGe5O16 from b, c-projected plane.101 Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. (e) Emission spectra of La3−xGaGe5O16:xPr3+ (x = 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.04 and 0.06); inset: (b) integrated intensity of Pr3+ as a function of its doping concentration.102 Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (f) View of the NaCa2GeO4F structure down the a axis showing the chains of isolated GeO4 tetrahedra.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2001. (g) Emission spectra of NaCa2GeO4F:0.2%Mn2+, x%Yb3+:1.5 ≤ x ≤ 4.5. (h) CIE coordinate and digital photo of NaCa2GeO4F:0.2%Mn2+, x%Yb3+ (x = 0.4, 4.5) under 254 nm UV lamp irradiation.104 Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. 
The PL emission spectra showed sharp characteristic peaks in the range of 400–700 nm, which can be group into 450–500 nm, 575–600 nm and 650–700 nm (Fig. 9(c)), indicating crystal field splitting, simultaneous emission leading to white colour. Dy3+ did not affect the shape but enhanced the intensity of the emission peaks. The persistent emission for this Dy3+-doped garnet was observed for more than 7.8 h after the initial UV irradiation. The TL studies revealed the presence of four traps. The traps at 0.28 and 0.40 eV were assigned to internal defects (Na+, Ca2+ vacancy) and acted as hole capture centres. The other two traps at 0.98 and 0.65 eV were assigned to foreign defects (Dy3+ replacing Na+, Ca2+) and acted as electron trapping centres. The mechanism for afterglow in this white phosphor involved the above-mentioned traps after UV excitation for trapping the charge carriers and observing delayed emission after deferred recombination of released electrons and holes.
Pr3+-activated pink gallogermanate, La3GaGe5O16, crystallises in a triclinic structure with the parameters of a = 4.827 Å, b = 8.090 Å, c = 15.707 Å, α = 90.76°, β = 94.01°, and γ = 90.01°.102,105 The structure of the phosphor is composed of a [GeO6] octahedra, [GeO4] tetrahedra and [GaO4] tetrahedra. Each [GeO6] octahedron is attached to six tetrahedra via common corners and each tetrahedron bridges two octahedral (Fig. 9(d)). Self-trapping vacancies were formed during the synthesis process involving GeO2. The PLE spectra showed an intense band for the 4f–5d transition compared to the weak 4f–4f transitions. The PL spectra were structured by two sets of transitions in the range of 470–510 nm and 580–620 nm, as demonstrated in Fig. 9(e). With a variation in the concentration of dopant, the usual trend was observed with concentration quenching after 0.02. The persistent afterglow in La3GaGe5O16:Pr3+ was observed for 3 min. The theoretical studies suggest the fitting of two Gaussian curves in the TL spectra, representing the trap depths at 0.71 and 0.78 eV.
There could be intrinsic defects related to O and Ge vacancies. The Pr in the mixed-valent in the lattice, present as Pr3+ and Pr4+, generates additional defects such as oxygen vacancies, which can act as hole traps in the host lattice. The excitation leads to the separation of electrons and holes in the conduction and valence band. The electrons can now directly radiate or be trapped in either shallow or deep traps, recombining after some delay. The characteristic emission is from 3P0 to 3F2 and 3H. The deep-lying traps are responsible for the slow afterglow.
Mn2+, Yb3+-doped NaCa2GeO4F, crystallizing in a garnet structure, was synthesized by the traditional high-temperature solid-state methods, in which successful colour tuning was achieved by adjusting the sites of Mn2+ emitters and speculated to have potential for optical storage applications.104 NaCa2GeO4F:Mn2+,Yb3+ conformed in a single-phase orthorhombic arrangement with cell parameters of a = 5.3540(1) Å, b = 7.2861(0) Å, c = 12.63511(3) Å, α = β = γ = 90°. Two separate octahedral sites for Na+ and Ca2+ were observed with a tetrahedral site for Ge4+, as illustrated in Fig. 9(f). Based on the chemical behaviour of Mn2+ and Yb3+, they tend to occupy the octahedral sites over the tetrahedral sites. The lowest band gap between the conduction and valence band was observed to be 4.95 eV. The vacancies and co-dopants act as a trap in the lattice, possibly enhancing the luminescence and PersL.
The PL spectra of NaCa2GeO4F:Mn2+ showed a clear emission in the red region. Upon the incorporation of Yb3+ in the phosphor composition and evaluation of different concentrations, it was observed that at low concentration, the spectral intensity varied with a fixed position, while at higher concentration, an evident blue shift of up to 50 nm was observed from red to green–yellow region, as depicted in Fig. 9(g). The green colour was estimated to arise from Mn2+ occupying the tetrahedral sites of Ge4+, which occurred at a higher concentration of Yb3+ to maintain the charge neutrality and subsequent generation of vacancies in the lattice. The afterglow decay spectra denoted the initial rapid phase, followed by slow decay, with the process lasting for a maximum of 13 h when charged by a UV excitation source and 5 h when charged by natural sunlight for the specific proportion of NaCa2GeO4F:0.2%Mn2+,0.4%Yb3+. The colour-tuned green–yellow was a weak persistent phosphor. The TL study showed that the traps greatly depended on the temperature. The shift in the spectra was ascribed to the continuous and broad trap distribution and localisation of electrons in deeper traps with an increase in temperature (Fig. 9(h)). The decrease in intensity is a result of shallow traps, easily releasing the charge carriers at high temperature. The estimate of trap depth was in the range of 0.52 to 1.15 eV. However, the actual trap description was unexplored here.


Silicate-based long persistent phosphors. 
Silicate-based materials are generally comprised of a tetrahedral coordination of silicon and oxygen. The stable structure can provide a stable host matrix for feasible applications.106 A remarkable green phosphor, Eu2+, Ho3+-activated orthosilicate, Ba2SiO4, was developed by Chuanlong Wang et al., which may have possible application in the field of optical information storage.65 The designed phosphor could continuously radiate green afterglow for more than 24 h. The Eu2+, Ho3+-doped barium ortho-silicate was synthesized via the traditional solid-state technique and a film was formed with silica gel. The phosphor crystallised in an orthorhombic structure and the crystal structure is illustrated in Fig. 10(a). The experimental bandgap for the host lattice was determined to be 5.481 eV. Theoretically, the bandgap was optimum for Eu2+ to act as an activator and for Ho3+ to act as a trap. Eu2+ most likely substitutes Ba2+ at the lattice site due to their similar size. The broad PLE spectra (peaking at 350 nm) were attained due to the 4f–5d transition of Eu2+. The PL spectra illustrated a peak in the range of 430–650 nm. The nature of the PLE and PL spectra remained unaffected with the addition of Ho3+, denoting its role as a trap centre, which also decreased the initial emission intensity due to unequal substitution in the lattice. Fig. 10(b) depicts the PerL decay curves at varying concentrations and optical images of Ba2SiO4:0.005Eu2+,0.01Ho3+ emission up to 24 h. The TL spectra of the Ho3+-doped and undoped samples were very different, signifying its role in trap generation. The positive traps generated by Ho3+ were speculated by charge non-equivalence with Ba2+. In the generated multi-layered traps, the deep traps were filled before the shallow traps. The trap depth was continuous in the range of 0.71 to 0.86 eV. The stimulation after a few hours after the first excitation led to the redistribution of the trapped carriers from deep to shallow traps, enhancing the emission intensity. The stimulated release from deep traps of by Ba2SiO4:Eu2+,Ho3+ could be utilised for optical information storage, which in turn has many applications.
 Fig. 10  (a) Crystal cell structure of Ba2SiO4, coordination of Ba-1 and coordination of Ba-2.107 Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) LPL decay curves of Ba2SiO4:0.005Eu2+,yHo3+ (y = 0.002–0.03). (Inset) Images of the Ba2SiO4:0.005Eu2+,0.01Ho3+ phosphor taken with the decay times increasing from 1 min to 24 h.65 Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (c) Crystal structure of (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7.30 (d) Time-gated luminescence imaging acquired with a smartphone-based biosensing platform and intensity profile scan of (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ and (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+. The blue line represents the blue channel intensity and the green line is the green channel intensity.30 (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (e) Crystal structure of the BaLu2Si3O10 host. Coordination of Ba and Lu.66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (f) Excitation and emission spectra of BaLu2Si3O10:0.008Eu2+. (Inset) CIE chromaticity diagram and photographs of the BaLu2Si3O10:0.008Eu2+,0.008Nd3+ phosphor excited at 325 nm.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 
Alkaline earth metals such as magnesium and barium in the host lattice show considerable afterglow properties.109 Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ was first reported in 1996, and since then studied and improved extensively over time.75–77 Erin Finley et al. optimised the long-time luminescence of the Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ blue phosphor for use in point-of-care diagnostics.30 It was synthesized via the convention solid-state method, attaining a phosphor with an unidentified impurity and tetragonal system with the cell parameters of a = b = 8.0071 Å, c = 5.1674 Å and Rietveld refinement parameters of Rp = 0.0829, Rwp = 0.1179 and χ2 = 4.453. The unit cell is formed of alternating tetrahedral of SiO4 and MgO4, forming polyhedral sheets incorporating Sr2+ between them, as shown in Fig. 10(c). Sr only has one distinct position in the crystal lattice, making the emission of phosphor narrow. This is a disilicate producing blue–green emission at 450–475 nm. (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ and SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ were explored for the enhancement of LFA (lateral flow assay) for time-gated imaging using smartphones. The substitution of Eu2+ is at the site of Sr/Ba in the lattice as the emission centre for the luminescent properties. Replacement of the 1S0 valent Sr by Ba in the lattice resulted in a blue shift due the increase in the resultant radius of the unit cell, which affected the luminescence properties due to the decrease in the crystal field splitting and greater separation of the energy levels. Blue emission was observed in (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ samples, which showed long persistence for up to 9 min after the excitation ceased. The afterglow characteristic was further boosted by the introduction of Dy3+ co-dopant in the lattice. Fig. 10(d) illustrates the time-gated luminescence imaging and intensity profile scan of (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ and (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+. Dy3+ prolonged the emission lifetime by ∼3 min compared to the samples doped with only Eu2+. The TL spectra confirmed the presence of traps states in all the phosphor phases in the range of 240 K to 371 K. The trap depths generated here were 0.40 and 0.89 eV, which are in the optimum range for LPP to occur at RT. Some other traps were also present, resulting in a slight variation in the intensity and range of the emission. Blue and green emissions were observed on excitation by a smartphone flashlight. It is also worth noting that the green constituent was dominated by blue emission.
Bluish–green Eu2+, Nd3+-doped BaLu2Si3O10 silicate phosphors were synthesized via high-temperature solid-state reaction and studied for their optical properties by Jie Liu et al. The synthesized phosphor crystallised in a monoclinic crystal.108 The structural analysis revealed that the lattice consists of Ba2+ in 8 coordination and Lu3+ in 6 coordination and Si in the tetrahedral (SiO4) site in the crystal structure, as shown in Fig. 10(e). The bandgap was theoretically estimated to be 4.843 eV. Further, according to the Brillouin zone study, the bandgap of the crystal was in the appropriate range to use Eu2+ as the emission centre and Nd3+ as the trap centre. Broad excitation (λex = 426 nm) was observed from 250 to 400 nm. This range contained the excitation peaks of Eu2+, which on introduction in the lattice occupies the Ba2+ and Lu3+ sites. The emission peaks centred at 430 and 507 nm, obtained from emission from two different types of sites (430 nm from Ba centre and 507 nm from Lu centre) resulted in the blue colour of the phosphor, as shown in Fig. 10(f). The BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+,Nd3+ phosphor acted as a single doped crystal, given that Nd3+ had little or no interference with the emission wavelength and increased only the intensity of the peaks. The phosphorescence colour of BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+,Nd3+ was bluish-green, owing to the 5d–4f transitions of Eu2+. Eu2+ in the Lu sites had a greater impact on the long persistence, making the phosphorescence appear green. The introduction of Nd3+ (occupying Ba centres) introduced many defects in the lattice due to the asymmetry, which can act as traps. These traps increase the persistence of phosphorescence from 60 s for BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+ to over 6 h for BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+,Nd3+, which can be used for several applications. According to the thermo-luminescence study, it was speculated that the emission was enhanced by the Nd3+ centres, which is likely to be due to the defects introduced. In the case of BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+,Nd3+, its colour changed from blue to bluish–green during phosphorescence. In its structure, Eu2+ occupies the Ba and Lu centres, whereas Nd3+ occupies the Ba sites and it acts as an effective trapping centre. On providing excitation energy, Eu2+ is excited from 4f7 to 4f6d1. A part of the Eu2+ present in the Ba sites emits blue-coloured luminescence. The excited electrons in the conduction band are mainly formed by the Lu ion and are captured by some shallow or deep Nd3+ traps. Upon the thermal release of electrons from the traps, the electrons revert to the conduction band by quantum tunnelling, and ultimately show emission from the Eu2+ in the Lu3+ sites.
N. S. M. Viswanath et al. studied another silicate-based phosphor for tuning the afterglow by adding various co-dopants to Ce3+-doped Na3ScSi3O4 (NSSO).31 Na3ScSi3O4 formed an orthorhombic crystal system, falling in P212121. Upon doping Ce3+, slight variations were observed when its concentration was 10%. ScO6 forms octahedra at the corners of the unit cell, sharing the SiO4 tetrahedra. Na has three distinctive coordinating environments with 4, 5 and 6 coordinating sites. Fig. 11(a) and (b) represent the crystal structure of NSSO and different crystallographic sites of Na. The introduction of dopants and co-dopants did not lead to the introduction of impure phases. On doping Ce3+, it goes to the site of Na+, Dy3+ and Tb3+ go to the Na+ site, while Mn2+ occupies the Sc3+ sites due to their similar size. The PL excitation spectra of Na3ScSi3O4:Ce3+ showed a broad band in the range of 260 to 380 nm, with a peak at 350 nm, which was attributed to the 5d transitions of Ce3+. The PL emission band showed an asymmetric band peaking at 450 nm, which was ascribed to the 5d–4f transitions. The broad emission profile indicates the occupancy of Ce3+ at different crystallographic sites. Upon the further addition of Dy3+, Tb3+ or Mn2+ co-dopants, the emission peak at 450 nm with some additional characteristic peaks in Dy3+ and Tb3+. NSSO:Ce3+,Dy3+/Tb3+/Mn2+ showed emission in the blue region. NSSO:Ce3+ showed afterglow for approximately 4 h, while the introduction of Dy3+ and Tb3+ led to the extended afterglow of 17 h and 12 h, respectively. Mn2+ co-activated NSSO led to only a slight increase of up to 5–6 h. These results indicate the introduction of traps upon Dy3+,Tb3+ co-activation. To analyse the trap nature, a TL study was conducted, revealing the presence of shallow traps at 260 K and 293 K and deeper traps at 450, 530 and 630 K, corresponding to the range of 0.90–1.55 eV. The deeper traps were from the lanthanides and Mn2+ ions. The deeper electron traps were responsible for the super-long afterglow observed for Dy3+, Tb3+ co-doped NSSO.
 Fig. 11  (a) Crystal structure of NSSO:xCe3+, where blue, green, orange and navy spheres represent oxygen, silicon forming SiO4 tetrahedron units, scandium forming the ScO6 octahedron units and Na ion, respectively. (b) Illustration of crystallographic distinct sites of Na represented by different colours for 4-fold, 5-fold, and 6-fold coordination in NSSO:xCe3+.31 Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Crystal structure of Sr3SiO5.26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (d) Photographs of ‘‘Pisces’’ patterns for different SA/SS (SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+/Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb5+) ratios (denoted by numbers 1–5) under natural light (NL), 254 nm UV excitation, and 5 s after shutting down the UV light (PersL).26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (e) Unit cell structure of BaZrSi3O9 and the coordination environment of Ba, Zr, and Si.61 (f) PLE (λem = 515 nm) and PL (λex = 350 nm) spectra of S1–S6 samples. The insets show the CIE coordinates of the S5 sample and a digital photo under UV light irradiation. (S1: x = 0.01, y = 0; S2: x = 0.005, y = 0.005; S3: x = 0.01, y = 0.005; S4: x = 0.005, y = 0.01; S5: x = 0.01, y = 0.01; S6: x = 0.02, y = 0.02; for BaZrSi3O9:xEu2+,yPr3+).61 (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. 
Zhizhen Wang et al. explored the effects of enhanced afterglow properties by incorporating transition metals in the Eu2+-activated silicate–phosphor Sr3SiO5 to obtain exceptional yellow afterglow.26 Sr3SiO5 crystallised as a tetragonal lattice belonging to the P4/ncc space group, containing two different 6-coordinated Sr crystallographic sites and one 4-coordinating Si site, as shown in Fig. 11(c). The introduction of various transition metals Sc3+, Hf4+, Zr4+, Ti4+, and Nb5+ replaced Si4+ in the lattice due to the larger deviation in ionic radius with Sr2+. Among the metals, Nb5+ showed the best results. The transition metals improved the afterglow of the phosphors from 0.5 h to more than 14 h in the Nb5+ co-activated phosphors due to the highest electron trap concentrations. Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb5+ could be activated by natural sunlight, which resulted in afterglow for more than 7 h, increasing the range of its applications. The excitation and emission spectra remained unchanged on the incorporation of different transition metals, showing their negligible effect in emission and signifying their role in the trapping mechanism. The excitation band incorporated the 5d–4f transitions and the emission band in the range 500–700 nm peaked at 580 nm, exhibiting yellow emissions. Co-doping with transition metal ions introduced the oxygen valency to compensate for the charge imbalance created in the phosphor. These impurities created a sequence of electron traps, which helped in the persistence of emission, especially for Nb5+. The trap depth in Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb5+ was in the range of 0.67–1.19 eV, which is in the appropriate range of persistent afterglow. Fig. 11(d) represents the emission under UV excitation and afterglow for different proportions of SA/SS (SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+/Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb5+) ratios. These conclusions were inferred by various theoretical and experimental studies such as DFT, EPR, and TLE. Zhizhen Wang et al. investigated the cation replacement approach of Ba/Sr to obtain Eu2+, Nb5+-activated (Sr1−xBax)3SiO5 having warm orange–yellow afterglow observed for over 20 h.110 The introduction of Ba in Sr3SiO5 led to no impure phase generation and crystallised similar to Sr3SiO5 phases, which was verified by XRD studies. Ba substitution in the lattice initially resulted in a red shift in the emission peaks until the concentration x = 0.18, above which a blue shift was observed. The inclusion of Ba in the lattice also resulted in an increase in electron trap depth near the conduction band, which enhanced the duration of the afterglow.111 Thus, Ba plays a dual role in shifting the emission range by increasing the observed time of afterglow. The mechanism is the same as that of Sr3SiO5, which was further verified by some theoretical studies.
Haijie Guo et al. reported the synthesis of a cyan colour-emitting silicate phosphor, BaZrSi3O9:Eu2+,Pr3+, attaining persistent luminescence for over 15 h.61 The silicate host lattice provided stability over the aluminate host. Eu2+ is an established activator for hosts in the whole region. The persistence was speculated to be enhanced by the introduction of trivalent lanthanide ions (RE3+), according to the observations of Clabau.112 Samples with variable concentrations of Eu2+ and Pr3+ were prepared via the solid-state method and they crystallised in a hexagonal structure. The BaO6 and ZrO6 distorted octahedra share an edge, forming an alternating arrangement, while SiO4 forms tetrahedra, with shared corners with BaO6 and ZrO6, as illustrated in Fig. 11(e).113 Due to their similar radius, both Eu2+ and Pr3+ are speculated to substitute Ba2+ over Zr4+ (although the C. N. for both Ba2+ and Zr4+ is 6). The band gap between the conduction band, comprised of 5d levels of Ba and 4d levels of Zr and valence band, primarily formed by 2p state of O was found to be 5.057 eV. The excitation profile coincides with the radiation of the sun, implying its probable activation by solar radiation. The PL spectrum is comparatively sharp, peaking at 478 nm, and producing a distinctive cyan colour, as shown in Fig. 11(f). The emission corresponds to the 5d–4f transitions and the lack of distinguishing peaks of Pr3+ shows its inability to act as an emission centre. The afterglow process can be separated into two phases, an initial fast decay process, followed by delayed slow decay.
The combination of both processes led to delayed emissions, which were observed for up to 15 h. Pr3+ successfully forms sharp-shallow and continuous deep traps. Eu2+, acting as an activator, is excited to the 5d level from the ground 4f orbital. The excited energy levels lie in proximity with the conduction band for easy exchange of electrons. The traps can capture carriers easily from the conduction band. The deep and shallow traps are linked and exchange by the tunnelling effect. After a delayed time on thermal stimulation, the traps get empty and release carriers, which recombine with emission centres to produce the characteristic cyan emission. White-light-emitting long-lasting phosphorescence in SrSiO3:Dy3+ has also been reported.114
Jumpei Ueda et al. devised and synthesized a novel orange silicate phosphor, Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+,Sm3+/Tm3+ based on the vacuum referred binding energy (VRBE) diagram.115 Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+ was discovered by Toda et al., but the problem lies with its persistence, given that there were no effective traps present in the crystal.116 The host Ca3Si2O7 (rankinite mineral) with a monoclinic crystal structure (Fig. 12(a)) was synthesized via the conventional solid-state method. On doping with Eu2+, it replaced Ca2+ in its site due to their similar size. The PLE spectrum of Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+ showed 4f–5d transitions, while for Eu3+, 4f–4f transitions appeared, and these transitions showed a clear dependence on the electronic configuration. A broad charge transfer band was also observed in the range of 200–300 nm for the Eu3+-doped sample. The host lattice band gap was predicted to be 7.32 eV. The Dorenbos model predicted that effective co-dopants are Tm3+ and Sm3+ based on VRBE given that the bandgap between the conduction band and co-dopants was 0.49 and 0.96 eV, respectively. The Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+ sample showed no persistent afterglow, but the same sample co-doped with Tm3+ and Sm3+ show the same emission pattern of afterglow to the luminescence of Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+. The identical emission for PL and PersL confirmed that the mechanism of both are the same, and the role of co-dopants was trapping. The detectable afterglow was observed for up to 50 min for Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+,Tm3+, as illustrated in Fig. 12(b). The TL spectra were analysed for the trap estimation. The TL spectra of Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+ co-doped with Tm3+ and Sm3+ were different in position and nature. The two peaks for the co-doped samples were due to the traps and their depth was found to be 0.60 and 0.81 eV for Tm3+, while that for Sm3+ was 1.08 and 1.34 eV, respectively. Ca2+ has three non-equivalent sites in the lattice. The two TL peaks were speculated to be a result of substitution at the different sites by Tm3+ and Sm3+. Sm3+ formed a deeper trap than Tm3+ and de-trapped very slowly. The excitation of electrons occurs from the 4f orbital of Eu2+ to the conduction band. Then, the electrons from the band are trapped by Tm3+ or Sm3+, which delays the emission due to electron capture, and after subsequent thermal stimulation, the electrons are finally released to the excited levels of Eu3+, from which they return to the ground state, attaining afterglow. Given that the energy gap here corresponded to the same emission range of orange colour, orange afterglow was attained.
 Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structure of Ca3Si2O7 represented by blue (Si1, Si2), red (Ca1), yellow (Ca2), and pink (Ca3) spheres and polyhedron [AMCSD-CIF file]. (b) Photograph of photoluminescence and persistent luminescence of CSO:Eu3+, CSO:Eu3+,Tm3+ and CSO:Eu3+,Sm3+.115 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (c) 3D unit cell representation of crystal structure of CaMgSi2O6. [AMSCD-CIF file]. (e) Decay of the persistent luminescence of CZMSO:Eu,Dy, CZMSO:Eu,Pr, CMSO:Eu,Dy, and CMSO:Eu,Pr compounds recorded after 5 min UV excitation (6 W lamp, 254 nm) with a Biospace Photon-Imager (for each composition, we used 10 mg of powder).47 Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. 
Thomas Maldiney et al. reported the preparation of a novel silicate-based nano-phosphor CaMgSi2O6:Eu2+,Mn2+,Pr3+ suitable for bio-imaging applications.47Fig. 12(c) depicts the crystal structure of CaMgSi2O6 and coordination of Ca and Mg in the formed crystal structure.117 The phosphor had characteristic red emission due to Mn2+ (4T1 → 6A1). Co-doping with lanthanides led to major intense emissions in the near-infrared region (generally utilised region for biological studies). The samples without Eu2+ were excited only by X-rays, and thus to make the phosphor appropriate for use, Eu2+ was introduced, which made UV excitation feasible. The CaMgSi2O6:Eu2+,Mn2+,Ln3+ (Ln = Dy3+, Pr3+, Ce3+ and Nd3+) nano-phosphor was prepared via the sol–gel method, forming a monoclinic diopside structure. The PLE spectra showed the 4f–5d transition of Eu2+ in the range of 270–420 nm (broad peak). The PL spectra showed two major emission bands, peaking at 580 and 685 nm. These emissions arise due to Mn2+, where Mn2+ present at the Mg2+ site gives an emission at 685 nm, while Mn2+ at the Ca2+ crystallographic site leads to the 580 nm emission peak. The afterglow emission is solely from the Mn2+ substituting the Mg2+ sites (at 685 nm). The emission and afterglow spectral analysis showed that Ln3+ only acted as electron traps. The trap depth and afterglow emission intensity varied depending on the differently doped lanthanides, as shown by the afterglow decay curve of CaMgSi2O6:Eu2+,Mn2+,Ln3+ (Ln = Dy3+, Pr3+, Ce3+ and Nd3+) in Fig. 12(d). The remarkable afterglow for Ln3+ = Pr3+ further verified in TL spectra was speculated from the formation of optimum trap depth for the phosphor. The TL for the Pr3+-doped samples moderated the trap depth, while for Nd3+ and Dy3+, deep traps were formed, and for Ce3+ doping, shallow traps were observed. CZMSO:Eu2+,Dy3+ and CMSO:Eu2+,Pr3+ were comparatively studied for application in bio-imaging in mice, with the latter showing improved results in terms of intensity and duration.
The luminescence images were acquired from a photon-counting system after 15 min acquisition, as well as photographs of the imaged mice (Fig. 13). Both phosphor compositions had the same biodistribution (PLNP almost instantly concentrated in the liver). The notable observation has been found between CZMSO:Eu,Dy- and CMSO:Eu,Pr-injected mice. Firstly, the new composition lightened some of the main pectoral limb circulation routes, which were indistinguishable in the CZMSO-injected mouse. Then, closer look at the luminescence signals revealed a significant change in the surface delimited by equal intensities around the liver. Indeed, after adjustment of the threshold and appropriate binarization treatment, image analysis of the liver from mice A and B in the bottom indicated that the ROI surface calculated from the PLNP signal in the liver significantly increased from mouse A (injected with CZMSO:Eu,Dy) to mouse B (injected with CMSO:Eu,Pr). This result, which was obviously dependent on the photon scattering by tissues, indicates that praseodymium-doped diopside (CMSO:Eu,Pr) returns additional information on PLNP in vivo local distribution in the liver, allowing the more sensitive detection of the probe through living tissues.
 Fig. 13  
In vivo imaging of different CZMSO and CMSO diopside PLNPs under a photon-counting system. (A) CZMSO:Eu,Dy and (B) CMSO:Eu,Pr. The signal was recorded for 15 min following systemic injection of the probes (100 μg, excited 5 min under a 6 W UV lamp at 254 nm before injection). Luminescence intensity is expressed in false color units (1 unit = 2800 photons per s·cm2·steradians). For both compositions (A and B), the left picture represents the luminescence signal from PLNP, and the right picture represents the photograph of the imaged mouse.47 Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. 

Nitride-based long persistent phosphors
Nitride phosphors are thermally stable, and accordingly explored in light-emitting diodes.118 A sequence of Eu2+-doped CaAlSiN3 phosphors was synthesized by Jin Wang et al. to study the effect of UV and NIR simultaneous excitation.32 CaAlSiN3:Eu2+ offered exceptional stability and proficiency as a host matrix. Ca vacancy and oxygen impurities were probable traps, similar to other nitride phosphors. Single-phase CaAlSiN3:Eu2+ was synthesized via the conventional solid-state reaction method to obtain an orthorhombic crystal structure. The Al/Si and Ca form tetrahedral with N at vertices, as illustrated in Fig. 14(a). The larger dopant Eu2+ is likely to substitute the smaller Ca2+ ions, gradually increasing the size with concentration. The PLE spectra consisted of three bands at a lower wavelength due to the transition from the valence to the conduction band and bands at 330 and 450 nm due to the excitation of Eu2+ to higher energy levels. The orbitals of Eu2+ split due to the unsymmetrical environment. The symmetrical emission spectrum was speculated to be due to one type of site substituted by Eu2+, given that there was only one crystallographic site of Ca2+. However, the emission peak could be fitted by two Gaussian peaks due to the similar concentration of Al and Si. An increase in the concentration of Eu2+ as a dopant shifted the emission band towards a higher wavelength (red shift), which was inferred to be from the greater interaction between Eu2+. The afterglow emission is identical to the usual emission spectrum, indicating the 5d–4f transition during the radiative relaxation, as observed in Fig. 14(b). The oxygen contamination was unavoidable due to the starting materials, but O2− replaced N3− in the lattice, forming efficient hole traps and inducing persistent afterglow to a great extent. In the study of various phosphors with variable concentrations of Eu2+, the afterglow was acquired for up to 45 min.
 Fig. 14  (a) Projection of the crystal structure of CaAlSiN3:Ce,Li, and the local coordination polyhedron of (Ca, Ce, Li)N5 viewed along the [001] direction.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008. (b) PLE, PL and afterglow emission spectra of CaAlSiN3:0.05% Eu2+ phosphor. The lower inset is the photographs of the sample in daylight under 365 nm UV excitation and in the dark, respectively.32 Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (c) PLE and PL spectra of the SSAON:Eu sample. The PLE spectra were fitted by Gaussian functions, as shown by dot curves. 5di (i = 1–5) and Eex refer to 4f–5di (i = 1−5) transitions and host band–band transition, respectively. (d) Photographs of SSAON:Eu (left) and SSAON:Eu, Ho (right) under natural light, under 395 nm UV light, and 10 min after UV irradiation. The exposure time of the digital camera was 1/500, 1/500, and 2 s for parts c–e, respectively.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (e) Persistent luminescence decay curves of SSAON:Eu and SSAON:Eu,Ln (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er and Tm) samples. Commercial persistent phosphors SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy were also measured as a ref. 59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. 
Green-emitting oxynitride phosphors activated with trivalent lanthanide ions, SrSi2AlO2N3:Eu2+,Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er, and Tm), denoted as (SSAON:Eu,Ln), were studied for LPP properties. The host referred binding energy (HRBE) and vacuum referred binding energy (VRBE) schemes were utilised for the selection of the dopants and co-dopants in the host oxynitride matrix.59,120,121 A series of single-phase samples were prepared for each Ln3+ by conventional solid-state reactions to obtain an orthorhombic crystal structure. The lanthanide dopants and co-dopants were speculated to replace Sr2+ in its crystallographic site. The bandgap was predicted to be 5.70 eV for the host based on the Tauc plot for the absorption threshold assessment. The PL spectra illustrated an emission in the green radiation region of 480–520 nm (Fig. 14(c)). On the introduction of various Ln3+, the nature of the emission remained unchanged, with all the samples emitting 500 nm. However, the quantum yield was affected due to the possible generation of traps due to the non-equivalence charge substitution by various Ln3+ of Sr2+ sites. The effect was visible in the form of afterglow on the addition of Ho3+ in the sample, as observed in Fig. 14(d). The trap depths for various co-dopants was found to be Nd = 0.68 ± 0.01; Dy = 0.70 ± 0.01; Ho = 0.60 ± 0.01; Er = 0.50 ± 0.01; Tm = >1.12. The difference in the 4f ground energy level and conduction band was determined from the VRBE and HRBE schemes. The persistent decay curves indicated less afterglow in the case of Tm3+, which was reasoned to be due to the deep traps, from which de-trapping was possible only at a higher temperature. Alternatively, in the case of Nd, Dy, Ho, and Er, persistent luminescence was observed for up to 120 min, as depicted in Fig. 14(e). Here, the trap centres were formed by trivalent Ln3+ due to the substitution of the divalent Sr2+ in the matrix and formation of vacancies in the host. SSAON:Eu,Ln marks the selection of dopants based on the HRBE scheme and displays afterglow for over 120 min, showing decent agreement between estimation and observation. This HRBE based co-doped phosphor design can be applied in the future construction of phosphor systems based on the required trap depths.
Phosphate-based long persistent phosphors
Phosphate systems form flexible crystal structures, which may provide space for slight distortion and lead to the allowance of some forbidden transitions, and hence these systems are explored for emission spectroscopy studies.122 Guifang Ju et al. synthesised and reported Eu2+-doped persistent luminescence after removal of the excitation source for a few seconds in the Ca3Mg3(PO4)4 phosphate phosphor.123 Ca3Mg3(PO4)4 was previously reported to crystallise in the monoclinic orientation. A series of single-phase Ca3−xMg3(PO4)4:xEu2+ was prepared by solid-state reactions, where Eu2+ replaced Ca2+ in the lattice due to their compatible radii. Here, 6, 7 and 8 coordination sites were present, where 7 and 8 (3 types) were solely occupied by Ca2+, while Mg2+ and Ca2+ both occupied the octahedral sites, as shown in Fig. 15(a). The bandgap between the conduction and valence band was determined to be 3.6 eV. The PL spectrum had the optimum proportion, where Ca2.99Mg3(PO4)4:0.01Eu2+ showed a broad peak centring at around 433 nm and the broadness signified the emission from multiple types of sites. The emission occurred due to the 5d–4f transitions. The PLE spectra showed peaks in the region of 250–400 nm, exciting the 4f electrons to 5d orbitals, as illustrated in Fig. 15(b). The afterglow spectrum was consistent with the photoemission spectra, where concentrations above 0.01% increased the emission spectra, but decreased the persistence duration, causing concentration quenching. The 4f7 configuration of Eu2+ was excited to 4f65d1 on UV irradiation. The latter levels lie close to the conduction band, creating an electron escape route. The trapping of charge carriers from the conduction bands occurs together with the usual emission. Once the traps are saturated and the excitation ceased, the traps can release the carriers on thermal stimulation or agitation, causing emission after a delayed time and producing afterglow mediated by the trapping of electrons. The traps were studied using the TL curve (Fig. 15(c)). There is a probability for ionisation of Eu2+ to form Eu3+.
 Fig. 15  (a) Crystal structure of Ca3Mg3(PO4)4:0.01Eu2+.123 (b) PLE and PL spectra of Ca2.99Mg3(PO4)4:0.01Eu2+.123 (c) TL curve of the Ca2.99Mg3(PO4)4:0.01Eu2+ sample and the Gaussian deconvolution of the curve.123 (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013. (d) Crystal structure of YPO4 (tetragonal) and polyhedral representations of PO4 (tetrahedron) and YO8 (dodecahedron) linkage along the a-axis.124 Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012. (e) Persistent luminescence at TPL = 293 K measured at 612 nm of the YPO4:Pr3+,Ln3+ compounds after 10 min of X-ray irradiation.125 Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from IOP Publishing, Copyright 2010. 
A. Lecointre et al. designed a red colour-emitting phosphate phosphor, YPO4, and explored thermally stimulated luminescence of lanthanide-activated yttrium phosphates, YPO4:Pr3+,Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Er, Ho, Dy).126 The synthesized phosphor crystallised in a tetragonal crystal system,124,127 as shown in Fig. 15(d). Red-infrared phosphors have gained interest since they were used as biomarkers. Recent advances indicate that lanthanide-activated phosphors can transfer charge. The Dorenbos model was used to estimate the traps and was implicated in the study. Photoluminescence studies of YPO4:Ce3+ (by Bos et al.) showed an emission at 357 nm, and four excitation peaks in the range of 220 nm to 330 nm were obtained due to the splitting of the d orbital and 4f–5d transitions. The emission spectra showed two peaks due to the 5d–4f transition. The PL spectra of YPO4:Pr3+ showed excitation peaks in the range of 450–490 nm due to the 4f–4f transitions of Pr3+. The emission spectra also presented f–f transitions. The 1D2 → 3H4, 3P0 → 3H6 and 3P0 → 3F2 transitions led to emissions in the orange to red region. The comparison with the previous works by Bos et al. on YPO4:Ce3+,Ln3+ showed that Pr3+ acted similarly to Ce3+ as a hole trap centre and recombination centre for Ln3+.125 YPO4:Pr3+,Ln3+ radiated significant emission intensity for as much as 30 min. YPO4:Pr3+,Ho3+ showed the most intense afterglow, followed by YPO4:Pr3+,Dy3+ (Fig. 15(e)). The initial high intensity can be a result of the tunnelling recombination, as suggested by the thermally stimulated luminescence (TSL) studies. The recombination de-traps the emission centre. The co-dopants were chosen according to the Dorenbos model and were able to trap electrons from the crystal system. The Ln3+ ion accepts an electron and generates a hole, which is trapped by excited states of Pr3+. Recombination can occur due to the excited states of Pr3+, emitting red afterglow. Tunnelling is also possible in this lattice between the electron centre and recombination centre for trapping.
Meihua Wu et al. reported the sensitizing effect of Nd3+ on the Tb3+-doped phosphate-based phosphor, ZrP2O7.128 ZrP2O7 crystallised as orthorhombic belonging to the P21 space group (crystal structure depicted in Fig. 16(a) and (b)) by the conventional solid-state synthesis in a reducing atmosphere.129 On doping, Tb3+ and Nd3+ replaced the Zr4+ ions, which reduced the bond lengths with oxygen atoms, stabilising the doped phosphors. The inequivalent dopant charge led to oxygen vacancy defects and Zr3+ ions to neutralise the overall charge of the phosphor. The emission spectra of the co-doped phosphor showed an incomparable increase in emission intensity compared to only Tb3+ activation, emphasising the sensitization obtained on Nd3+ addition. Based on the thermoluminescence studies, the trap depth was determined to be 0.72 eV due to Nd3+, Tb3+, with some additional traps created by oxygen vacancy defects, which lies in an appropriate range for afterglow operation (0.696 and 0.826 eV). Zr0.97P2O7:0.018Tb3+,0.012Nd3+ showed the yellow–green afterglow phenomenon for more than 10 min. ZrP2O7 follows the usual electron trapping mechanism for the afterglow. Initially, normal emission was observed from the untrapped electrons going through luminescence. The electron traps near the conduction band developed primarily due to oxygen valency traps and after some delay de-trapped electrons due to thermal agitation to obtain delayed emission for some time after the excitation ceased.
 Fig. 16  (a) Crystal structure of ZrP2O7 shown in projection along the c-axis. (b) Figure on the right shows only the P2O74− part of the structure.129 Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2006. (c) Schematic crystal structure of Zn2P2O7.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015. (d) Phosphorescence chromaticity coordinates of ZPOT:2xM with (a) x = 0, (b) x = 0.0001, (c) x = 0.001, (d) x = 0.005, (e) x = 0.01 and (f) x = 0.05 in the CIE1931 diagram and their LLP photographs.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014. 
Rang Pan et al. synthesized a sequence of Tm3+-doped and Tm3+, Mn2+ co-doped zinc pyrophosphates, via the usual high-temperature solid-state preparation methods to study the colour of the phosphor and predict the tunability due to Mn2+.131,132 The Zn2P2O7:Tm3+ phosphor crystallised in a single-phase monoclinic symmetry and the crystal structure is illustrated in Fig. 16(c). The cell volume of Zn2P2O7 changed on doping with Tm3+ or Mn2+. Zn was present in two different sites in the Zn2P2O7 lattice. The excitation of ZnP2O7:Tm3+ occurred in the UV region. The three emission peaks (at excitation 227 nm) lie in the region 365–480 nm resulting from the Tm3+ transitions. Given that the emission was centred at 400 nm, the colour of the luminescence was blue. The long persistence spectra of the phosphor did not show a variation in shape, only in intensity. The initial decay was fast, which was followed by the slow decay of afterglow, following the usual mechanism of trapping of Tm3+ ions by carriers in the lattice.
ZnP2O7:Tm3+,Mn2+: the introduction of Mn3+ in the lattice shifted the wavelength of the emission to the red region, hence making the colour tunable. The d-orbitals of Mn2+ are the emission centre. The change in the emission spectra arose due to Tm3+. In ZnP2O7:Tm3+,Mn2+, both Tm3+, Mn2+ behaved as emission centres for the afterglow. In a considerable amount of these two emission centres, both blue and red radiation was emitted, yielding a pink afterglow with a lower concentration of Mn2+. At a high concentration of Mn2+, the red emission was dominant. The variations in the observed colours with a change in Mn2+ concentration in ZnP2O7:Tm3+,Mn2+ are illustrated by Fig. 16(d). The thermal study showed that the emission centres were created given that the temperature is related to the ease of electron/hole release from the traps. ZnP2O7:Tm3+,Mn2+ at 340 K and 403 K showed afterglow (deep trap). The energy of Mn2+ comes from tunnelling from . The tunnelling will not be efficient but in presence of thermal stimulation, the escape of electrons becomes easy from the Tm traps to Mn2+.
The Eu2+-activated orthophosphate Sr5(PO4)3Cl emits in the blue region.133,134 Single-phase Eu2+-doped chloride phosphate was synthesized via the established high-temperature solid-state method to form a crystallised hexagonal arrangement. The crystal study suggested the presence of two types of crystallographic sites for Sr2+ including one, 7-coordinated site consisting of 5O2− and 2Cl− and a 6-coordinated site with 6O2−, as illustrated in Fig. 17(a). The similarity in the charge and radius led to the occupancy of the Sr2+ sites by the Eu2+ ion. The excitation range lies in the range of the solar radiation, and hence this phosphor has to be modified accordingly before its application due to the chance of its unnecessary activation by the sun. The PL spectra illustrated emission in the blue region of 400–550 nm. The broad PL peak could be resolved into two peaks centred at 426 and 467 nm. These peaks were estimated to arise from the 5d → 4f transitions of Eu2+. The PLE spectra showed a broad absorption in the range of 240–430 nm. The LPP emission spectra widely differed from the emission spectra. The presence of only one peak signified afterglow from only substituted site by Eu2+, i.e., the Sr2+ site surrounded by 6O2−, as observed in Fig. 17(b). Moreover, the intensity decreased with time, and hence shifted towards the light-blue region. Persistent afterglow was observed for up to 1040 s (around 17 min). The TL spectra confirmed the presence of at least three types of traps in the phosphor, releasing at 340 K, 382 K and 500 K. The Eu3+ formed during the transitions was captured by anionic vacancies in the lattice. No traps were formed due to Eu3+, rather the most probable traps were the oxygen vacancies and other lattice defects stimulated during the synthesis of the phosphor. The three traps were independent of filling orders. The trap at 340 K was only responsible for the visible emissions, while the other two were considerably understood to be deep traps due to the lack of proper assessment. It is worth noting that this phosphor has considerable shortcomings, ranging from duration, the possibility of re-trapping process and deep traps. These issues can be overcome by co-doping with Ln3+ to induce some anionic defects.
 Fig. 17  (a) Crystal structure and spheres for Sr2+ ions in the Sr5(PO4)3Cl crystal.133 (b) PL emission and LPP spectrum ((b) λex = 254 nm) of the typical Sr5(PO4)3Cl:0.1 mol%Eu2+ sample.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014. (c) Crystal structure of Ca6BaP4O17:0.02Eu2+ and (b–d) cationic sites made with balls–sticks.135 Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (d) Excitation and emission spectra of Ca6BaP4O17:0.02Eu2+,0.015Ho3+. Inset: CIE chromaticity diagram of the Ca6BaP4O17:0.02Eu2+,0.015Ho3+ phosphor excited at 370 nm.136 Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. 
Haijie Guo, et al. extensively described the effect of changing the trivalent lanthanide ions in the Ca6BaP4O17 lattice to obtain yellow emission. Ca6BaP4O17 was synthesized via conventional solid-state methods.135,137 Ce-doped Ca6BaP4O17 displayed blue–green emission under excitation in the near-ultraviolet (UV) region and its luminescence intensities could be greatly improved by co-doping with Si.138 The Ca6BaP4O17 phosphor crystallized as a monoclinic structure. Ca2+ occupies two different sites in the lattice, one with 7 coordination sites, while other has 8 coordination sites, and Ba has 12 coordination sites, as illustrated in Fig. 17(c). The direct bandgap was 4.081 eV, which was calculated theoretically by local density approximation. The bandgap is appropriate for Eu2+ to act as an emission centre and it is expected to replace Ca2+ in the lattice. The broad excitation can be due to the allowed transition of Eu2+ from the 4f to 5d excited state. The two Gaussian-type curves in the emission spectra (Fig. 17(d)) can be explained by the presence of two non-equivalent crystal sites for Eu2+ given that there are two different Ca2+ sites. The introduction of another trivalent lanthanide ion, such as Ho3+, enhanced the emission time, as estimated by the supposed asymmetric effect leading to more defects. Ho3+ as a co-dopant increased the decay time of the afterglow. These trivalent co-dopants often act as trap centres. Depending on the energy levels of these ions, the depth of the traps varies, varying the time and thermal properties of the afterglow. Ca6BaP4O17:Eu2+,R3+ showed yellow emission ranging from 19 h for R3+ = Gd3+ and as long as 47 h for R3+ = Ho3+.136
Borate-based long persistent phosphors
A large proportion of borate systems are transparent in the visible region, and therefore significant in optoelectronic applications. Doped borates have been highly explored for applications such as lasers, displays, and dosimeters.139–141 Zhen Chen et al. reported the synthesis of a colour-tunable, borate-based host phosphor,142a Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Eu3+, where its colour could be tuned on increasing the level of the Eu3+ dopant and was independent of concentration quenching (forming Ca4EuO(BO3)3).142b The phosphor was synthesized via the combustion method, producing a pure single-phase monoclinic lattice belonging to the C1m1 space group. The crystal structure of Ca4LaO(BO3)3 is depicted in Fig. 18(a). The host lattice exhibits a broad absorption peak from 200 nm to 400 nm and the bandgap of the matrix was assessed to be 5.63 eV. On doping with Eu2+, a charge transfer absorption band appeared at 270 nm due to the Eu3+ and O2− interaction. Also, sharp peaks between 380–470 nm arising from the 4f–4f transitions of Eu3+ were observed. The intensity and position of the peaks of the emission spectra were critically dependent on the excitation wavelength. The excitation wavelength could alter the colour of emission amongst yellow, orange and red, as elucidated by the CIE chromaticity coordinates in Fig. 18(b).
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic elucidation of Ca4LaO(BO3)3 (redrawn using Diamond). (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates of CLBO:0.2%Eu3+ (excited at 266, 331, 395, 462, and 610 nm, respectively).142a Reproduced from142 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (c) Crystal structure of Ca2BO3Cl host, Ca coordination.28 (d) Excitation and emission spectra of (Ca1.998Eu0.002)BO3Cl and (d) emission spectra of (Ca1.998Eu0.002)BO3Cl and (Ca1.996Eu0.002Dy0.002)BO3Cl and phosphorescence spectra of (Ca1.996Eu0.002Dy0.002)BO3Cl.28 (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2013. (e) Crystal structure of Zn4B6O13.143 Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (f) Host referred binding energy and vacuum referred binding energy diagram of Zn4B6O13:Ln2+/Ln3+.140 Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022. 
The emission colour and spectral attributes were also dependent on the Eu3+ concentration. Some transitions in the orange–red region intensified at a high concentration, while some in the green region decreased. The increase in dopant concentration adversely affected the decay curve due to the energy transfer between the emission centres. A colour shift was observed from yellow to red. On complete substitution of La by Eu, a charge transfer band and 4f–4f transitions were observed. This decreased the decay time at different wavelengths, while an increase in luminescence was observed, which resulted from the interaction among the Eu3+ ions themselves. The difference in the two phosphors was overall speculated to be due to the difference in size of La and Eu. The efficiency and duration of the emission could be further enhanced by introducing co-dopants in the lattice, such as Dy3+ and Er3+. The electrons in the valence band were excited to the conduction band, where they were captured by various electron traps in the lattice. Upon ceasing excitation, the traps released the electrons, and after subsequent delay, reached the excited levels of Eu3+. The electrons from there returned to the ground levels to recombine with the holes generated in the host lattice, emitting the radiation in the red, yellow or orange region, depending on the concentration of Eu3+. The red emission of Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Eu3+ was observed for up to 2 h.
An exceptional novel yellow borate-based Eu2+, Dy3+-activated phosphor, Ca2BO3Cl, was designed and synthesized by Wei Zeng et. al., which showed persistent afterglow for up to 48 h.28 Single-phase Eu2+, Dy3+-doped Ca2BO3Cl was synthesized via traditional high-temperature synthesis and it crystallized as a monoclinic crystal structure. Two non-equivalent sites for Ca2+ were present each with 7 coordination number, where one type was enveloped by 4O2− and 3Cl−, while the other type was encircled by 5O2− and 2Cl−. These two non-equivalent Ca2+ sites are bridged by a O2− (Fig. 18(c)). Based on the ionic radius, both dopants (Eu2+ and Dy3+) were substituted at the site occupied by Ca2+. Dy3+ replaced Ca2+ at both the sites, while Eu2+ primarily replaced the site having longer bond lengths for Ca2+. The bandgap between the conduction and valence band was estimated to be 5.1 eV. The co-doped phosphors (Eu2+ and Dy3+) showed greater absorption than the single-doped (Eu2+) samples. Pure yellow emission is often relatively difficult to achieve due to its narrow emission range. Broad excitation peaks were obtained in the range of 280–500 nm, peaking at nearly 295 and 395 nm, which were expected to emerge due to the 4f–5d transitions. The broad emission spectral peaks near 580 nm produced yellow colour, and these 5d–4f emissions were greatly directed by the host lattice. The absorption band resolved into two bands, arising from two dissimilar sites of Ca2+ in the lattice. The broad excitation and deconvoluted emission bands are shown in Fig. 18(d). The PL of Ca2BO3Cl:Eu2+ and afterglow spectra of Ca2BO3Cl:Eu2+,Dy3+ had similar features, indicating a similar emission pathway and the major role of Dy3+ as a trap. The traps were enhanced with an increase in the duration of excitation, reaching up to 48 h of persistent emission after 5 h of UV excitation. The concentration quenching occurred upon the introduction of 1.0 mol% of dopant in the lattice. The comparative study of Eu2+ and Eu2+, Dy3+ co-doped phosphors suggested the effective role of Dy3+ as a trap and in the persistent emission. The traps were speculated to arise from the non-equivalence charge substitution and subsequent vacancies generated in the lattice. Both positive and negative defects are expected to behave as traps for the charge carriers. The best results were obtained for the (Ca1.998Eu0.002Dy0.002)BO3Cl sample and a long-time excitation/exposure was needed to fill the traps, prior to persistent emission.28
Xue Li et al. reported the synthesis of a green-emitting Mn2+ and Ln3+ (Ln = Sm, Yb, and Eu)-doped borate-based phosphor, Zn4B6O13, via a high-temperature solid-state method.140 Zn4B6O13 crystallised in a cubic crystal phase, having three tetrahedral coordination sites of Zn2+ with O2− (crystal structure illustrated in Fig. 18(e)). On doping, Mn2+ occupies the sites of tetravalent Zn2+, while Ln3+ was most probably present with six coordination number, incorporated as a solid solution in the phase-pure Zn4B6O13. The selection of Sm, Yb, and Eu trivalent lanthanide ions was based on the vacuum referred binding energy (VRBE) diagrams, matching the appropriate depth for acting as trap centres, as observed in Fig. 18(f). Zn4B6O13:Mn2+,Ln3+ (Ln = Sm, Yb, Eu) exhibited prominent emissions at 435 nm, 450 nm and 540 nm, producing a green emission on UV excitation. The afterglow lasted for 1200 s, which could be extended for up to 1800 s with Yb3+ as the co-dopant. Mn2+ was the only emission centre in Zn4B6O13:Mn2+, and Ln3+ phosphors, while Ln3+ acted as electron traps to enhance the afterglow emissions. The Eu3+ traps were very deep for efficient electron release.
Perovskite-based long persistent phosphors
Perovskite semiconductors are highly applied materials in solar panels and have been explored in various other fields. Layered, double perovskite and lead-free perovskites are several types of perovskites explored in optoelectronic applications.144–148 In 2019, ChangRan Zheng et al. synthesized lutetium-doped calcium stannate (CaSnO3:Lu3+), which exhibited cyan coloured-persistent phosphorescence.149 Lu3+-doped CaSnO3 was synthesized via traditional solid-state synthesis reactions and it crystallised in an orthorhombic crystal structure, forming a perovskite configuration. The crystal structure of the formed CaSnO3 is depicted in Fig. 19(a and b).150 It was not experimentally verified but speculated that Lu3+ acts as the trap carriers. The crystal lattice after doping contained both Sn2+ and Sn4+. The excitation peak at 267 nm (UV region) is due to the transition of Sn2+ (S0 →S1). The broad emission band is centred at 496 nm (in the visible region). The broad emission peak was observed due to the T1 → S0 transition. Upon irradiation and removal of UV radiation, bright cyan colour was observed from the phosphor. The intensity decreased with time, but persistent stable cyan emission was observed after some time. The theoretical thermoluminescence study of CaSnO3:Lu3+ showed that decent efficiency can be attained when trap depth is 0.55 eV, which is in accordance with the experimentally obtained highest efficiency at 353 K, with the trap depth of 0.58 eV. The possible mechanism can be represented as (Ca replaced by Lu) (V-vacancy).  The defects in the lattice are caused by Sn2+ and  may act as hole-trapping centres, while  works as electron trapping centres. Electron transfer is achieved by Sn2+. Detrapping is attained by thermal agitation.
 Fig. 19  (a and b) Orthorhombic CaSnO3 crystal [AMCSD-CIF file]. (c) Crystal structure of LiNbO3. (d) Persistent luminescence decay curves for MPCLN and PCLN excited by a UV LED in the region of 365–370 nm for 60 s, with photographs of MPCLN in a dark room shown in the inset.57 Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (e) Cubic perovskite crystal structure of LaAlO3 (LAO) viewed as alternating planes of LaO and AlO2 along the [001] direction. The lattice vectors for a 2 × 1 unit cell of the LAO (001) surface are indicated on the top surface.151 Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from IOP publishing, Copyright 2014. (f) Photoluminescence excitation (PLE) (λem = 735 nm) (black line) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra (λex = 579 nm) (red line) of LaAlO3:Cr3+,Sm3+ nanoparticles.53 Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018. 
A novel red lithium niobate phosphor, LiNbO3:Mg2+,Pr3+, was reported and the niobate matrix offered optical, electronic and stability advantages.57 Perovskite-like single crystals of LiNbO3:Mg2+,Pr3+ were synthesized via the solid-state method, followed by the Czochralski method. The crystal structure of the formed LiNbO3 perovskite is elucidated in Fig. 19(c).152 The PLE spectrum was considerably broadened on the addition of Mg2+ in LiNbO3:Pr3+. Also, Mg2+ is the key to achieving persistent luminescence in this case. Mg2+ has no significant effect on the outline of the PL spectra, unlike the increased intensity. Thus, the PL peaks were speculated to be a result of the 5d–4f transitions of Pr3+ in the region of 600–650 nm, where the most prominent peak was observed at 619 nm. The PersL decay curve validated the presence of Mg2+ and the PersL decay curve with the optical images at different intervals is represented by Fig. 19(d). The traps in the lattice were adapted by the lithium vacancy model, indicating that the Li+ was replaced by a higher valence ion, creating Li+ vacant sites. This model explained the optical features of the lattice. The major defects of the crystal arose from the substitution arising from the non-equivalent charged ions, creating subsequent vacant sites. Mg2+ after initial replacement of Nb4+ in the anti-site position, replaces Li+ and normal Nb4+. According to the TL studies, the trap gaps were estimated to be 0.677 eV and 0.842 eV. The peak at 65 °C was responsible for the afterglow.
The previously reported Cr3+–Sm3+-doped red phosphor LaAlO3 was replicated in the form of nano-particles by M. Pellerin et al. for the investigation of its bio-imaging applications.53,153 This LaAlO3 perovskite was synthesized as nanoparticles via co-precipitation and high-temperature reactions. Furthermore, the nanoparticles were notably treated for stability in suspension form. The LaAlO3 host lattice crystallises in a cubic crystal structure (Fig. 19(e)).151 The PL and PLE spectra of the nano-phosphors were similar to micrometre phosphors. The excitation peaks arising in the region of 200–600 nm PLE spectra were due to the characteristic transitions of Cr3+. The emission peak at 735 nm was due to the 2E (2G) → 4A2 transition of Cr3+. The phosphor was characterised for the charging efficiency determination, resulting in peaks in the region of 220–300 nm. Fig. 19(f) displays the PL and PLE spectra of LaAlO3. The TL spectra confirmed the fact that all the emissions in the phosphor are from Cr3+, while the role of Sm3+ was trapping of emission for the afterglow. Sm3+ acts as electron trapping centres, having traps depths of 0.91 eV (deep traps). The introduction of Sm3+ in the perovskite led to an enhancement in the persistence by nearly 35 times that of the undoped phosphor. A significant emission intensity was recorded up to 100 min after the removal of the excitation source. The mechanism for the afterglow in LaAlO3 follows the electron trap model.53
Fluoride-based long persistent phosphors
Recently, Mn-activated fluoride phosphors have been widely explored for their excellent red luminescence, establishing the prominent role of fluoride-based hosts, which are now explored for various phenomena such as afterglow, in accordance with lanthanide doping.154 Yue Hu et al. recently reported an X-ray-excited green afterglow in Tb3+-activated hexagonal fluoride phosphor, β-NaYF4.37 Superlong afterglow phosphors can be potentially used for in vivo imaging, making β-NaYF4:Tb3+ a suitable candidate for further exploration due to its persistent emission for around 120 h. The Tb3+-doped phosphor was synthesized via the conventional hydrothermal method to prepare pure hexagonal phase β-NaYF4. The formed hexagonal crystal structure is elucidated in Fig. 20(a).155,156 After excitation via X-rays, the luminescence emission had a similar profile to that from normal excitation at 543 nm with some additional peaks in the range of 350–500 nm and 570–630 nm. These emission peaks were speculated to result from the 5D3 and 5D4 to the lower 7FJ levels. The afterglow spectra resembled the emission spectra, showing an excellent duration of green afterglow, as observed in Fig. 20(b). The thermal and photo-stimulated luminescence study revealed the presence of three shallow traps, corresponding to 353, 446 and 557 K, and several deep traps, questioning the persistent emission at room temperature. Further studies confirmed the occurrence of a tunnelling process. In this mechanism, the deep traps are F-centres, with the F vacancy trapping one electron and the shallow traps are F’ centres, trapping two electrons. The excited electrons from the valence band go to the conduction band, from where it falls into different traps below the band, which are created as F-vacancies due to X-ray excitation. Tb3+ loses an electron to stabilise its configuration and form a hole (Tb3+ + h). When the energy of trapped electrons is exhausted, they return to the conduction band and are trapped by F-vacancies to form F-centres. The F-centres and holes (from Tb3+ + h) recombine through the Auger effect and energy if translated to excited Tb3+, which leads to emission from the 4f → 4f transition. The electrons trapped in the F centre to F vacancy via tunnelling form new F centres, mediating between the deep and shallow traps, which can explain the long persistent afterglow. Fig. 20(c) illustrates the PersL images of the X-ray-excited sample disks at varying excitation times and recovery of the original intensity by heating even after 24 h. This work offers great room for development for use in photodynamic therapy to make its use safe and efficient.
 Fig. 20  (a) Crystal structure of β-NaYF4.156 Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2013. (b) X-ray-excited luminescence spectra (black) and afterglow spectra (red) of the phosphors. (c) Images of four sample discs taken at different afterglow times (5 min to 240 h) after irradiation with X-rays for 1 to 15 min. The discs were placed on a black plate surface for imaging in a dark room.37 Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 
Tb3+-doped nano NaLuF4 (crystal structure of NaLuF4 formed through probable displacements of F− during excitation) was synthesized via the co-precipitation method in the presence of surfactants for probable application as scintillators.157 These nanoscintillators were activated by X-ray radiation. The core–shell fluorides were formed with the composition NaLuF4:Tb@NaYF4via the epitaxial growth method. The Tb3+-activated fluoride and core–shell phosphors emitted persistent green afterglow for more than 2 h. The comparative effect of variable lanthanide doping including Nd3+, Tm3+, Dy3+, Tb3+, Er3+, Ho3+, Sm3+ and Pr3+ in the host NaLuF4 asserted the role of lanthanide ions as emission centres, given that different emission colours were observed for different lanthanides. It was speculated that the excitation by X-rays led to anion Frenkel defects due to the dislocation of F− ions, which was supported by density functional theory (DFT). The defects pairs were formed by excited F− ions at high temperatures and combined after relaxation. The emission and corresponding CIE chromaticity coordinates of NaLuF4:Ln3+ were elucidated,157 and for varying Ln3+ are as follows: Nd3+ – purple, Tm3+ – blue, Dy3+ – cyan, Tb3+, Er3+, Ho3+ – green, Sm3+ – orange/red and Pr3+ – pink.
Transition metal oxide-based long persistent phosphors
Transition metal oxides such as tungstates, molybdates, and vanadates form highly stable crystal systems and a variety of phases. These systems have been widely explored in luminescence studies for lanthanide activation such as La2Mo3O12:Yb; Gd2B2WO9:Eu3+,Tb3+; NaLa(MoO4)2:Yb3+,Er3+; La2Mo2O9:Yb3+; BiVO4:Er3+/Tm3+,Yb3+/Er3+, and Yb3+/Tm3+; and Sr3Bi(VO4)3:Y3+, Bi2MoO6:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+.158–164 The coloured emission was explored for afterglow phenomenon.
A tungstate-based Eu3+-activated transition metal oxide, CaWO4, was analysed for its photocatalytic properties. CaWO4:Eu3+ was synthesized via a co-precipitation synthesis route, yielding polycrystalline aggregates, which rearranged to form organised surface structures by calcination.165 The formed tungstate formed a scheelite-type crystal structure (Fig. 21(a)), belonging to the I41/a point group.166 The latter calcination led to Eu3+ placement in the inner lattice sites, which induced the property of afterglow in the host lattice. Eu3+ replaced Ca2+ with the probable generation of trap centres. The relocation of Eu3+ at the surface led to enhanced photocatalytic activities. The emission of Eu3+-doped CaWO4 coincided with the characteristic emission peaks of Eu3+, creating a red emission. The afterglow in this surface-enhanced tungstate was observed over 1 min. CaWO4 has been widely explored due to its stable crystal structure and extended to various morphological control to potentially be applied in solid-state lighting applications.167
 Fig. 21  (a) Crystal structure of CaWO4. (b) Crystal structure of SrSc2O4.168 Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022. 
Alkaline earth scandates form a pronounced class as luminescent hosts. SrSc2O4 activated by Pr3+ exhibited prominent yellow afterglow over 3 h.168 The host scandate crystallised as an orthorhombic structure, belonging to the Pnam space group. Two ScO6 octahedra linked to form a double octahedron in the unit cell. Sr2+ has a coordination number of 8 and binds with O− to form a trigonal prism, as illustrated in Fig. 21(b). Due to the similarity in the ionic radius of Sr2+ (0.126 nm) and Pr3+ (0.1126 nm), the dopant Pr3+ tended to replace Sc2+ and create a charge disparity, promoting defects, which can act as traps for the afterglow effect. By prominent UV excitation at 270 nm, 4d–5f charge transfer occurred, leading to the characteristic emissions of Pr3+, 495, 545, 621, 630 and 657 nm, which were due to the 3P0 → 3H4, 3P0 → 3H5, 1D2 → 3H4, 3P0 → 3H6 and 3P0 → 3F2 transitions of Pr3+, respectively. The afterglow emission was similar to the emission spectra, emitting yellow colour. The trap depths induced in the host were estimated to be 0.61, 0.69 and 0.78 eV, acting to trap the electrons, creating yellow afterglow emissions.
Some other oxide and oxysulphide-based LPPs
Recently, Xinquan Zhou et al. developed a novel red Sm3+-activated phosphor, BaGa2O4, which showed enhanced properties when Sr2+ was introduced partially in place Ba2+ to observe afterglow for up to 2 h.27 The phosphor crystallised in a hexagonal unit cell belonging to the P63 point group. The formula Ba1−xSrxGa2O4 represents a double oxide composition with Ba or Sr as divalent forming two types of coordination spheres, one consisting of nine bonded oxygen atoms and the other bonded with seven or eight oxygen atoms and trivalent Ga, forming GaO4 tetrahedra, as elucidated in Fig. 22(a). Based on their similar ionic radii, Sm3+ on doping replaces Ba2+ in the host matrix, which causes charge imbalance, leading to the formation of oxygen vacancies to neutralise the overall crystal system. Sr2+ and Sm3+ doping caused no impurity as verified by slight changes in the XRD peaks. The PL excitation spectra of Sm3+-doped BaGa2O4 showed a band in the UV region with the characteristic peak of Sm3+ at 404 nm. The emission spectra revealed the three emission peaks of Sm3+ at 565, 602 and 656 nm. The introduction of Sr2+ enhanced the emission and peaked at 6% substitution. The presence of defects in the host is the main reason for the persistent afterglow and the source of traps. The thermoluminescence spectra revealed a trap depth in the range of 0.77 eV, which is the prevalent range for the afterglow. Further theoretical studies revealed the energy variation in the range of 0.45 to 0.84 eV during the two hours in which the afterglow was observed, indicating the involvement of continuous trap distribution in the host. The possible mechanism is that Sm3+ substitutes at two different sites of Ba2+. The traps in the host capture the charge carriers, i.e., the hole and electrons, which recombine to produce the delayed emission. After UV excitation, the electrons move to the valence band, creating holes in the conduction band. The electrons and holes are captured by traps in their proximity. After the excitation is ceased, the traps eventually release the charge carriers via tunnelling induced by thermal or photo-stimulation. The persistence afterglow is the resultant emission from only one of the Sm3+ crystallographic sites, which can be verified by the difference in the PL emission and persistent emission spectra (Fig. 22(b)). The other Sm3+ remains non-emissive due to the large distance, leading to ineffective tunnelling. The most prominent composition, Ba0.94Sr0.06Ga2O4:0.01Sm3+, offered bright red afterglow for more than 2 h, which can be referenced for further enhancement and applications in various fields.
 Fig. 22  (a) Crystal structure of BaGa2O4. (b) PLE (λem = 602 nm) and PL (λex = 404 nm) spectra of BGO phosphor, the PL and PersL of Sm3+.27 Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Crystal structure of Y2O2S (redrawn using Diamond and the parameters used from Ref. 169. (d) SEM images of Y(OH)3:Eu3+,Mg2+,Ti4+ (nanotube precursor) and (a2) Y2O2S:Eu3+,Mg2+,Ti4+ (nanotube phosphor).38 Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014. (e) Crystal structure of Lu2O3.170 Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (f) Static X-ray images of the test-pattern plate under different X-ray doses using the P15L20 composite film as an imaging plate. (g) Time-dependent X-ray images of a watch with a moving second hand using the P15L20 composite film as an imaging plate.171 Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022. 
An already established red phosphor, Y2O2S, was synthesized in the form of nanotubes, mediated by the prior formation of nanotube precursors of Y(OH)3 by the hydrothermal method.38 Y2O2S crystallised in a hexagonal structure,169,172 as shown in Fig. 22(c), which remained virtually unaffected by external doping. The nanotubes formed are in the order of micrometres, as represented in the SEM image (Fig. 22(d)). On the introduction of Eu3+, Ti4+ and M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), it occupied the crystallographic site of Y3+. The PLE spectra were similar in shape and position with varying M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba). The two constituents of the intense peak at 260 and 325 nm were attributed to the charge transfer bands (overlapping and mediated via Ti4+) of O2−, Eu3+and S2−, Eu3+, respectively. The weak transitions are a result of the forbidden 4f–4f transitions. The PL spectra of the different samples were similar for the characteristic emissions of Eu3+ at 617 nm, intense 627 nm peaks and several less intense peaks in the range of 450–750 nm. The resemblance of the excitation and emission spectra confirmed that there was no significant effect of M2+ and Ti4+ in the emissions.
However, there was a crucial role of M2+ in defining the afterglow time for the phosphor. The afterglow decay curve of the doped-Y2O2S nanotube had initial fast decay, followed by slow continuous emissions. The maximum afterglow was attained for Y2O2S:Eu3+,Mg2+,Ti4+ for 1065 s. This variation signified the dependence of the afterglow on the radii of varying M2+. The radius of different divalent dopants used are: Mg2+ (r = 0.072 nm), Ca2+ (r = 0.10 nm), Sr2+ (r = 0.118 nm) and Ba2+ (r = 0.135 nm); and Y3+ (r = 0.090 nm). M2+ was inclined to form traps and it was speculated that smaller Mg2+ substitutes Y3+, together with Ti4+ to balance the charge as other M2+ are not as efficient as Mg2+ due to incomparable radii. The TL spectral studies revealed peaks for all the samples in the range of 323–383 K, which were significant for the afterglow. The trap depth for M2+ decreased in the order Mg2+, Sr2+, Ca2+ and Ba2+. The trap depth and density were maximum for Mg2+ (1.32 eV). The trap depth here was in the optimum range of afterglow emissions, and hence the emission time closely decreased with a decrease in trap depth.
The introduction of M2+ and Ti4+ caused charge disparity on substituting Y3+ (balanced by substitution by overall unequal number of atoms) in the crystallographic site, forming several defects. M2+ formed hole traps, while Ti4+ led to the formation of electron traps. M2+ and Ti4+ acted as donor entities and Eu3+ acted as an acceptor for the energy under UV irradiation. A co-precipitated and calcined Eu3+-doped oxide, Lu2O3, demonstrated probable applications as scintillators. This lutetium oxide formed nanoparticles of 225 nm, which crystallised in a cubic system, having the space group Ia (crystal structure of Lu2O3 illustrated in Fig. 22(e)).171 Lu2O3:Ln3+,R (Ln = Pr, Eu, Tb), (R = Hf3+, Ca2+) have been previously reported as tunable colour-emitting persistent phosphors. The use of different dopants, Pr3+–Hf3+, Eu3+ or Tb3+–Ca2+, led to emission in different regions, creating an emission of red, reddish-orange and green, respectively and an afterglow lasting for over 6 min. The use of H3BO3 flux during microwave reaction synthesis tends to change the phase of Lu2O3 to a hexagonal phase. The persistent afterglow Ln3+ phosphors can be applied for bio-imaging and solar cell sensitizer.170 Further recent studies also reflected the emission of red afterglow at lower concentrations via the tunnelling effect. The phosphor as a composite film with PMMA has potential application in high-resolution and dynamic digital radiographic imaging. Fig. 22(f and g) display emission after X-ray excitation of a sample composite film of the red-emitting phosphor, Lu2O3.
Aluminate-based LPPs
Aluminates such as SrAl2O4 and CaAl2O4 are some of the initially studied phosphor materials and have been sequentially modulated to other aluminates activated by lanthanides such as Y3Al5O12:Gd3+,Ce3+,Eu3+ and/or Tb3+.6,74,173 Arun Kumar, et al. investigated the application aspects of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+, a well-known and highly explored phosphor.64 The synthesis was done via a high-temperature solid-state synthesis procedure. The crystal is packed in the monoclinic P21 space group (Fig. 23(a)). Eu2+, Dy3+ integrates into the crystal, replacing Sr2+ in the lattice. Here, the Dy3+ dopant acts as traps in this lattice. There are some disagreement in the trap states, originating from the involvement of oxygen vacancies. The synthesized phosphor was yellowish under daylight. The excitation of the phosphor lies in the visible region available by sunlight, as observed from the PLE spectrum depicted in Fig. 23(b). The emission is described as 4f6 5d1 → 4f7 and lies in the green emission range, as illustrated from the PL spectrum in Fig. 23(c). The SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ phosphor also shows thermoluminescence and a rare known phenomenon of mechano-luminescence. The long phosphorescence is made possible due to the presence of Dy3+. Matsuzawa et al. described the trap depth to be 0.65 eV. The Eu, Dy-doped strontium aluminate showed afterglow for hours. This phosphor can be potentially used as a commercial phosphor for optical displays and military applications predominantly due to its sunlight activation and is currently being explored by many researchers. Afterwards, Paul C. Stanish et al. conducted an undergraduate-level study on SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy involving thermoluminescence and mechanoluminescence.63 This study led to the realization that the earlier discovered phosphors are still gaining substantial attention for improvement and better applications. The proposed mechanism suggests that the co-dopant Dy3+ traps the holes from the valence band, releasing only in case of thermal activation and Eu2+ enables electron relaxation. The Eu2+ creates shallow traps, while Dy3+ traps are deeper and the presence of Dy3+ is responsible for the prolonged delay in emission for more than 5 h. The photoconductivity from the valence band suggests the conversion of Eu2+ to Eu+ to generate a hole and Dy3+ is converted to Dy4+ due to hole capture. Then hole is released on thermal agitation after excitation ceases and goes back to the ground state Eu2+ and leads to delayed emission. The trap depth of Dy3+ is 0.65 eV.63 Lately, SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ has been explored for various optical display applications due to the flexibility of the phosphorescence layer and long emission time. Gen Li et al. reported an unusual lanthanide-activated, gadolinium containing aluminium-garnet phosphor, GdSr2AlO5.174 The phosphor was synthesized via solid-state reactions to obtain a sequence of lanthanide-doped phosphors, RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+). The formed garnet phosphor crystallised in a tetragonal system, as elucidated in Fig. 23(d), with cell parameters a = b = 6.6435 Å and c = 10.7901 Å. For GdSr2AlO5:Pr3+, the sharp 4f–4f transition peak signifies the occupancy of low-symmetry sites in the lattice. The PL study of GdSr2AlO5:Dy3+ concluded the presence of Dy3+ in low symmetry sites due to the stronger emission of the band at 491 nm (4F9/2–6H15/2). Usually, the long-wavelength emission results in short persistence. However, GdSr2AlO5 acts as an exceptional host, which extended the emission to the infra-red region. The emission of GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+) lasted for a few minutes (Fig. 23(e)). This study further suggested that the traps could be oxygen vacancies produced at high temperatures, which affected the afterglow. The magnetic properties of GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ were examined for the first time. The magnetic properties could be easily estimated due to the presence of the paramagnetic Gd3+ in the lattice. The variation in R3+ showed almost no change in its magnetic behaviour with an applied field, which verified Curie's law, as displayed in Fig. 23(f).
 Fig. 23  (a) Crystal arrangement of SrAl2O4.175 Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (b) Excitation spectrum of the Sr0.7Al2O4:Eu0.12+/Dy0.23+ phosphor at 528 nm emission wavelength. (c) Emission spectrum of the Sr0.7Al2O4:Eu0.12+/Dy0.23+ phosphor at 528 nm emission wavelength.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (d) Crystallographic unit cell of GdSr2Al2O5:Eu3+.176 Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016. (e) Afterglow decay curves of GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+).174 (f) Magnetization as a function of applied field for GdSr2AlO5 and GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+) at room temperature.174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. 
Hybrid/composite material-based LPPs
Occasionally, multiple systems are simultaneously employed for upgraded emissions. These systems can be achieved by mechanical forces or core–shell type hybrid structures such as NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+@CaF2:Eu3+.177 CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ is one of the phosphors explored very early, receiving continuous attention ever since.6,62 CaAl2O4 formed a monoclinic structure.178 The persistent afterglow was speculated to arise due to the effective trapping of holes and the persistent luminescence generated amid Eu3+ transitions. Nd3+ improved the afterglow due to enhanced energy transfer and the introduction of an appropriate trap depth. Wenbo Chen et al. reported the colour tuning of CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ (CA) on the addition of a yellow phosphor, Y3Al5O12:Ce3+ (YAG).62 The different samples were synthesized by varying the concentrations of the two components, CA and YAG. The excitation spectra of YAG and persistence luminescence spectra of CA are in the same region, and hence energy transfer was speculated between them for enhanced results. The persistent luminescence spectra of the CA/YAG ratio showed increased emission in the yellow region, as observed in Fig. 24(a and b), and hence the overall colour of the phosphor was light blue compared to the intense blue of CA. The persistence emission of CA was impressive but more intensified with the addition of YAG. The intensity and the duration of the afterglow increased to above 2-folds on complementing CA with YAG. Based on the established results that YAG does not show afterglow, here it could be inferred that the YAG centres only emit, while CA accounted for both the trap and emission centres. The TL spectra also verified the presence of some deep traps due to CA, which lowered on external stimulation. The addition of YAG decreased the intensity of the CA spectrum, further validating its role in the emission. The trap depths lie in the range of 0.63 to 0.79 eV. The LPP mechanism was described for the CA doped with Eu2+ (Eu2+ is the emission centres), as the electrons of Eu2+ get excited on UV-irradiation to 5d, and finally to the conduction bands. The electrons here were prone to photoluminescence and trapping. The electrons were widely trapped by the oxygen vacancy sites and defects created by Nd3+. The emission of delayed luminescence overlapped with the excitation profile of YAG, which gets excited during the delayed emission, producing a yellow emission band together with blue emission and shifting the intensity to light blue colour, produced by blue–yellow mixing. The persistent luminescence is mediated by the host lattice and can effectively be enhanced in nanoparticles with a controlled particle size and morphology. The CaF2:Dy @NaYF4 core–shell hybrid nanoparticle, with tunable morphology presented a model example of an afterglow mechanism dependent on nanoparticles. The inner core–shell CaF2:Dy was prepared via colloidal synthesis and later incubated for the growth of the outer shell, NaYF4. Both materials have a similar crystal structure. Different shell growth morphologies were achieved by changing the shells to LiYF4, NaYF4:Ca,NaGdF4 and NaYbF4, as schematically depicted in Fig. 25. The formed CaF2:Dy@NaYF4 could by excited by UV and X-ray radiation. This morphology-controlled material has potential application in the bio-medical and catalysis field.179
 Fig. 24  (a) Normalized LPL spectra of the composites with various weight ratios of CA/YAG, referred to here as the blue:yellow (B:Y) ratio. (b) Photographs of the persistent luminescence composites with various B:Y compositions, taken 5 min after exposure to UV light.62 Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 25  Control the epitaxial growth of NaREF4 shell on CaF2:Dy core to produce CaF2:Dy@NaREF4 core–shell nanoparticles with various morphologies. (a) Calcium doping in NaYF4 shell precursor induces the shell layer to spherically coat on the core. (b) NaGdF4 isotropically grew on the faces of the core cube and (c) NaYbF4 preferred the anisotropic growth along the c-axis. (d) LiYF4 possesses a tetragonal crystal lattice and grew a rhomboid shell on the core. The scale bar is 50 nm.179 Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
A few of the countless examples of lanthanide-activated phosphors are discussed here. These examples were selected to show the divergence in the crystal structures, lanthanide activators/co-activators, colour emission and afterglow time. Significantly, this variety stresses on the potential applications of PersL materials in solid-state lighting, LED devices, and other display screens. Simultaneously, it also provides an outlook on the other potential applications of lanthanide-activated phosphors such as scintillators, bio-imaging, and sensors. The briefly discussed examples of lanthanide-activated phosphors in this review are summarised based on the color of PersL in the Tables 1–3.
Table 1 Examples of lanthanide-activated phosphors reported in the available literature, colours (green, blue, cyan), crystal structures, time of PersL and illustrating prospective applications in lighting and bio-medical fields




S. No.
Phosphor
Ln
Colour
Time of afterglow
Synthesis
Crystal structure
Application
Ref.




1
SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+
Eu2+, Dy3+
Green
More than 5 h
Annealed in reducing atmosphere
Aluminate
In ballistics and thermal imaging, optical display and defence

63,64



2
Y3Sc2Ga3−xAlxO12:Ce3+
Ce3+
Green
0.033 h
Annealed in controlled reducing or oxidising atmosphere
Garnet
Potentially in LEDs

60



3
Y3Al2Ga3O12:Ce3+,Cr3+
Ce3+
Green
More than 0.833 h
Sintered in reducing atmosphere
Garnet
Potentially in display and solid-state lightning

91



4
SrSi2AlO2N3:Eu2+,Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er, and Tm)
Eu2+, Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er, and Tm)
Green
2 hours
High temperature under reducing atmosphere
Oxynitride
Potentially in display

59



5
Ba2SiO4:Eu2+,Ho3+
Eu2+, Ho3+
Green
Up to 24 h
Calcined under reducing atmosphere
Silicate
Optical information storage

121



6
β-NaYF4:Tb3+
Tb3+
Green
Up to 240 h
Hydrothermal method
Fluoride
Potentially in medical therapy

37



7
Zn4B6O13:Ln3+ (Ln = Sm, Yb, Eu)
Ln3+ (Ln = Sm, Yb, Eu)
Green
Up to 0.5 h
High-temperature
Borate



140



8
CaF2:Dy@NaYF4:Dy3+
Dy
Green
0.070 h
Colloidal and incubation
Hybrid/mixed
Potentially biomedical and catalysis

179



9
(Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+
Eu2+, Dy3+
Blue
0.2 h
Annealed in reducing atmosphere
Silicate
Smartphone-based biosensing application

30



10
Ca3Mg3(PO4)4:Eu2+
Eu2+
Blue
Few second-minutes
Sintered in reducing atmosphere
Phosphate



123



11
Sr5(PO4)3Cl:Eu2+
Eu2+
Blue
2.89 × 10−5–2.89 h
Sintered in reducing atmosphere
Phosphate
Potentially optical storage material

133



12
BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+,Nd3+
Eu2+, Nd3+
Bluish-green
Over 6 h
Sintered in reducing atmosphere
Silicate
Potentially extensive applications

108



13
CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ + Y3Al5O12:Ce3+ [blue]
Eu2+, Nd3+, Ce3+
Blue
More than 45 h
High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere
Hybrid/mixed
Potentially in emergency signalling

62



14
Na3ScSi3O9:Ce3+,Dy3+
Ce3+, Dy3+
Blue
17 h
High temperature solid-state reaction under oxidising atmosphere, followed by reducing atmosphere
Silicate
Potentially optical storage

178



15
BaZrSi3O9:Eu2+,Pr3+
Eu2+, Pr3+
Cyan
15 h
High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere
Silicate
Potentially in night-vision illuminators and indicators

61



16
CaSnO3:Lu3+
Lu3+
Cyan
0.03–0.05 h
High temperature sintering as compressed tablets
Perovskite



149





Table 2 Examples of lanthanide-activated phosphors reported in the literature colors (red, yellow, orange, white), crystal structures, time of PersL, and illustrating prospective applications in lighting and bio-medical fields




S. No.
Phosphor
Ln
Colour
Time of afterglow
Synthesis
Crystal structure
Application
Ref.




1.15
YPO4:Pr3+, Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Er, Ho, Dy)
Pr3+, Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Er, Ho, Dy)
Red
0.5 h
Calcined at high temperature
Phosphate
Potentially in in vivo imaging or charge storage material

126



2.16
Na2CaSn2Ge3O12:Sm3+
Sm3+
Reddish-orange
More than 4.8 h
High-temperature solid-state reaction
Garnet
Potentially storage

96



3.


Dy3+
White
7.8 h
High-temperature sintering


Potential applications

99



4.17
CaAlSiN3:Eu2+
Eu2+
Red
0.75 h
Sintered under inert conditions
Nitride
Potentially as optical energy storage materials

32



5.18
GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+)
Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+
Red
2–6 h (depending on the RE)
Calcined at high temperature under reductive atmosphere
Al-garnet
Potentially in bio-medical applications

174



6.19
LiNbO3:Mg2+, Pr3+ (single crystals)
Pr3+
Red
0.033 h
Czochralski method
Perovskite
Potential multifunctional applications

57



7.20
Ba1−xSrxGa2O4:Sm3+
Sm3+
Red
2 h
High temperature solid-state reaction in air
Oxide
Potential applications

27



8.21
CaWO4:Eu3+
Eu3+
Red
0.033 h
Co-precipitation
Transition metal oxide
Potentially in solid-state lighting

165



9.22
Lu2O3:Eu3+
Eu3+
Red
0.1 h
Co-precipitation
Oxide
Potentially scintillators

171



10.23
Ca2BO3Cl:Eu2+,Dy3+
Eu2+, Dy3+
Yellow
Up to 48 h
High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere
Borate
Potential applications

28



11.24
Ca6BaP4O17:Eu2+,R3+ (R = Dy, Tb, Ce, Gd, Nd, Ho)
Eu2+, R3+ (R = Dy, Tb, Ce, Gd, Nd, Ho)
Yellow
1–47 h (depending on R)
High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere
Orthophosphate
Potential applications

135,137



12.25
Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb
Eu2+, Nb
Yellow
>14 h
Combustion followed by calcination at high temperature in reducing atmosphere
Silicate
Optical data storage-read out

26



13.
(Sr1−xBax)3SiO5
Eu2+, Nb
Yellow–orange
>20 h
Combustion followed by calcination at high temperature in reducing atmosphere


Optical information storage

110



14.26
SrSc2O4:Pr3+
Pr3+
Yellow
3 h
High temperature solid state
Transition metal oxide
Potentially afterglow materials

168



15.27
ZrP2O7:Tb3+,Nb3+
Tb3+, Nb3+
Yellow–green
>0.17 h
High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere
Phosphate



128



16.28
Ba2Ga2GeO7:Pr3+
Pr3+
White
3 h
High temperature sintering in normal atmospheric conditions
Garnet
Potential applications

92



17.31
Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+,Sm3+/Tm3+
Eu2+, Sm3+/Tm3+
Orange
0.83 h (Eu3+, Sm3+)
High temperature sintering as compressed pellets in oxidising or reducing atmosphere
Silicate



115





Table 3 Examples of lanthanide-activated phosphors reported in the known literature, tunable colours (pink, blue to red), crystal structures, time of PersL and illustrating prospective applications in lighting and bio-medical fields




S. No.
Phosphor
Ln
Colour
Time of afterglow
Synthesis
Crystal structure
Application
Ref.




Note: most of the structures were redrawn using the CIF (crystallographic information file/parameters) in the diamond software.




1.32
La3GaGe5O16:Pr3+
Pr3+
Pink
0.05 h
High temperature sintering
Garnet
Potential applications

102



2.33
Zn2P2O7:Tm3+ [blue]/Tm3+,Mn2+
Tm3+
Blue/blue to red – tunable
0.33 h
High temperature sintering in ambient conditions
Phosphate



131



3.34
Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Eu3+ and Ca4EuO(BO3)3
Eu3+
Yellow to red – tunable
Red-up to 2 h
Combustion method followed by high temperature sintering.
Borate



42



4.35
NaCa2GeO4F:Mn2+,Yb3+
Yb3+
Red to yellow/green – tunable
13 h (red)
High temperature sintering in reducing conditions
Garnet
Potential application in optical storage

104



5.36
NaLuF4:Tb3+
Tb3+
Green–red–blue (tunable)
2 h (green)
Co-Precipitation
Fluoride
Nano scintillators

157



6.37
CaMgSi2O6:Eu2+,Mn2+,Pr3+
Eu2+, Pr3+
Red and NIR-nanophosphor
>0.25 h
Sol–gel synthesis under acidic conditions
Silicate

In vivo imaging

47,49



7.38
Y2O2S:Eu3+,M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), Ti4+ [Red nanotubes]
Eu3+
Red-nanotubes
0.30 h
Hydrothermal method combined with post-calcination process
Oxysulfide



38



8.39
LaAlO3:Cr3+,Sm3+
Sm3+
Red nanophosphor
∼1.67 h
Co-Precipitation followed by sintering
Perovskite

In vivo bio-imaging

53





Conclusion and future perspectives
In this review, we summarized lanthanide-based long persistent phosphors and their detailed mechanisms in different host lattices based on their colour emission over the last decade and presented insights for - further research and development of new long persistent phosphors and discovery of their out-of-box applications. It can be clearly observed that the wide range of host lattices and various lanthanides involved in the emissions span the entire visible range and NIR spectral range. The studies also suggest fine tuning based on the involvement of various emissive sites as co-dopants as well as physical mixing. Thus, it can be concluded that long persistent phosphors have been indisputably researched and have been successfully applied in several fields and still offer potential to be explored. According to the -thorough literature study, it is worth noting that there is ample space for the further research and development of LPPs, as follows: (i) it is a big challenge to identify new activators, co-activators, and host lattices to explore new LPPs with desirable performances, (ii) an in-depth understanding of the generalized mechanism is required, (iii) spectral window tuning (absorption and emission) of wavelengths based on applications is also a challenging task, (iv) search for long afterglow (phosphorescent) material (host structural design and activator combination) using a combination of high-throughput evaluation and machine learning needs to be encouraged180 and (v) more attention to synthetic methods (for example nano-sized LPPs need to be explored).
Although this field gained significant attention and substantial growth, there is still room to improve the efficiency of LPPs and explore numerous host lattices for finding new LPPs. Specifically, a brilliant prospect and vast products can be anticipated in the near future with advanced engineering on the new discoveries of long-persistent phosphors. Therefore, it is evident that introducing new technology or advancing the current state of the art will have an enormous impact on these sectors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
VS acknowledges the Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India (SG/IITH/F324/2022-23/SG-138) for financial support and Ms Savita P for her help.
References
Q. Ye, Y. Wang, H. Guo, X. Zhou, P. Feng and S. Ding, Designing a Novel Red to Near-Infrared Persistent Phosphor CaMgGe2O6:Mn2+,Sm3+ Based on a Vacuum Referred Binding Energy Diagram, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48(29), 11052–11062,  10.1039/C9DT01384A .
Y. Wang and H. Guo, Research Advances on Human-Eye-Sensitive Long Persistent Luminescence Materials, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 654347,  DOI:10.3389/fchem.2021.654347 .
C. Shi, X. Hou, X. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Li, Z. Pang, M. Ge and M. Abolhasani, Multiresponsive Luminescence Materials: Richer Color Than Chameleon Materials, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8(12), 2000007,  DOI:10.1002/adom.202000007 .
J. Xu and S. Tanabe, Persistent Luminescence Instead of Phosphorescence: History, Mechanism, and Perspective, J. Lumin., 2019, 205, 581–620,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2018.09.047 .
L. Liang, N. Chen, Y. Jia, Q. Ma, J. Wang, Q. Yuan and W. Tan, Recent Progress in Engineering Near-Infrared Persistent Luminescence Nanoprobes for Time-Resolved Biosensing/Bioimaging, Nano Res., 2019, 12(6), 1279–1292,  DOI:10.1007/s12274-019-2343-6 .
H. Yamamoto and T. Matsuzawa, Mechanism of Long Phosphorescence of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ and CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+, J. Lumin., 1997, 72–74, 287–289,  DOI:10.1016/S0022-2313(97)00012-4 .
R. E. Rojas-Hernandez, F. Rubio-Marcos, M. Á. Rodriguez and J. F. Fernandez, Long Lasting Phosphors: SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy as the Most Studied Material, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 2759–2770,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2017.06.081 .
X. Zhen, Y. Tao, Z. An, P. Chen, C. Xu, R. Chen, W. Huang and K. Pu, Ultralong Phosphorescence of Water-Soluble Organic Nanoparticles for In Vivo Afterglow Imaging, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(33), 1606665,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201606665 .
O. Pajuelo-Corral, A. Rodríguez-Diéguez, G. Beobide, S. Pérez-Yáñez, J. A. García, E. San Sebastian, J. M. Seco and J. Cepeda, Alkaline-Earth and Aminonicotinate Based Coordination Polymers with Combined Fluorescence/Long-Lasting Phosphorescence and Metal Ion Sensing Response, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(23), 6997–7012,  10.1039/C9TC01300H .
H. Li, R. Pang, W. Sun, H. Li, T. Ma, Y. Jia, D. Li, L. Jiang, S. Zhang and C. Li, Sr1.7Zn0.3CeO4F0.2:Eu3+: Novel Dual-Emission Temperature Sensors for Remote, Noncontact Thermometric Application, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(16), 9645–9652,  10.1039/C6RA25092K .
D. Poelman, Van der Heggen, D. Du, E. Cosaert and P. F. Smet, Persistent Phosphors for the Future: Fit for the Right Application, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128(24), 240903 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, T. Li, W. Liang, C. Zhu, L. Guo and N. I. R. Triple, Light Excited Up-Conversion Luminescence in Lanthanide-Doped BaTiO3 Phosphors for Anti-Counterfeiting, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2021, 104(11), 5826–5836,  DOI:10.1111/jace.17974 .
I. Gupta, S. Singh, S. Bhagwan and D. Singh, Rare Earth (RE) Doped Phosphors and Their Emerging Applications: A Review, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47(14), 19282–19303,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2021.03.308 .
Y. Zhuang, Y. Lv, L. Wang, W. Chen, T.-L. Zhou, T. Takeda, N. Hirosaki and R.-J. Xie, Trap Depth Engineering of SrSi2O2N2:Ln2+,Ln3+ (Ln2+ = Yb, Eu; Ln3+ = Dy, Ho, Er) Persistent Luminescence Materials for Information Storage Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(2), 1854–1864,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b17271 .
W. E. I. Zeng, Y. Wang, X. Xu and Y. U. Gong, A novel green long-lasting phosphor Ca2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2011, 04(03), 289–293,  DOI:10.1142/S1793604711002093 .
D. Hou, C. Liu, X. Ding, X. Kuang, H. Liang, S. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Tao, A High Efficiency Blue Phosphor BaCa2MgSi2O8:Eu2+ under VUV and UV Excitation, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1(3), 493–499,  10.1039/C2TC00129B .
S. M. A. Fateminia, Z. Mao, S. Xu, Z. Yang, Z. Chi and B. Liu, Organic Nanocrystals with Bright Red Persistent Room-Temperature Phosphorescence for Biological Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(40), 12160–12164,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201705945 .
Y. Yang, K.-Z. Wang and D. Yan, Ultralong Persistent Room Temperature Phosphorescence of Metal Coordination Polymers Exhibiting Reversible PH-Responsive Emission, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(24), 15489–15496,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b03956 .
V. Shanker, D. Haranath and G. Swati, Persistence Mechanisms and Applications of Long Afterglow Phosphors, Defect Diffus. Forum, 2015, 361, 69–94,  DOI:10.4028/www.scientific.net/DDF.361.69 .
Y. Li, M. Gecevicius and J. Qiu, Long Persistent Phosphors—from Fundamentals to Applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45(8), 2090–2136,  10.1039/C5CS00582E .
L. Li, T. Li, Y. Hu, C. Cai, Y. Li, X. Zhang, B. Liang, Y. Yang and J. Qiu, Mechanism of the Trivalent Lanthanides’ Persistent Luminescence in Wide Bandgap Materials, Light: Sci. Appl., 2022, 11(1), 51,  DOI:10.1038/s41377-022-00736-5 .
P. Avouris and T. N. Morgan, A Tunneling Model for the Decay of Luminescence in Inorganic Phosphors: The Case of Zn2SiO4:Mn, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 74(8), 4347–4355 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. R. Burbano, E. M. Rodríguez, P. Dorenbos, M. Bettinelli and J. A. Capobianco, The Near-IR Photo-Stimulated Luminescence of CaS:Eu2+/Dy3+ Nanophosphors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(2), 228–231 RSC .
P. Leblans, D. Vandenbroucke and P. Willems, Storage Phosphors for Medical Imaging, Materials, 2011, 1034–1086,  DOI:10.3390/ma4061034 .
N. Dubey, V. Dubey, J. Saji and J. Kaur, Thermoluminescence Glow Curve Analysis and Trap Parameters Calculation of UV-Induced La2Zr2O7 Phosphor Doped with Gadolinium, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31(3), 1936–1944,  DOI:10.1007/s10854-019-02712-z .
Z. Wang, Z. Song, L. Ning and Q. Liu, Sunlight-Activated Yellow Long Persistent Luminescence from Nb-Doped Sr3SiO5:Eu2+ for Warm-Color Mark Applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8(3), 1143–1150,  10.1039/C9TC05880J .

  (a) X. Zhou, G. Ju, T. Dai, Y. Li, H. Wu, Y. Jin and Y. Hu, Strontium Substitution Enhancing a Novel Sm3+-Doped Barium Gallate Phosphor with Bright and Red Long Persistent Luminescence, J. Lumin., 2020, 218, 116820,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2019.116820 ; 
  (b) L. W. Hoogeustraten, Philips Res. Rep., 1958, 13, 515–693 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Tanabe, S. Watanabe, F. Saif and M. Matsuzawa, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2002, 65, 033420 CrossRef .
W. Zeng, Y. Wang, S. Han, W. Chen, G. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Wen, Design, Synthesis and Characterization of a Novel Yellow Long-Persistent Phosphor: Ca2BO3Cl:Eu2+,Dy3+, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1(17), 3004–3011,  10.1039/C3TC30182F .

  (a) P. Wang, X. Xu, D. Zhou, X. Yu and J. Qiu, Sunlight Activated Long-Lasting Luminescence from Ba5Si8O21:Eu2+,Dy3+ Phosphor, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54(4), 1690–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Silvestri, M. L. Ligabue, G. Malavasi and G. Lusvardi, Preparation and Luminescence Properties of Ba5Si8O21 Long Persistent Phosphors Doped with Rare-Earth Elements, Materials, 2019, 12(1), 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Finley, A. Cobb, A. Duke, A. Paterson and J. Brgoch, Optimizing Blue Persistent Luminescence in (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+ via Solid Solution for Use in Point-of-Care Diagnostics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(40), 26956–26963,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b10303 .
N. S. M. Viswanath, G. K. Grandhi, H. J. Kim, Y. Zhuang, R.-J. Xie and W. B. Im, A New Persistent Blue-Emitting Phosphor: Tailoring the Trap Density for Enhancing the Persistent Time, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 18, 100518 CrossRef .
J. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Lei, Z. Xia, H. Dong, Y. Liu, M. Zheng and Y. Xiao, Enhanced Photoluminescence and Phosphorescence Properties of Red CaAlSiN3:Eu2+ Phosphor via Simultaneous UV-NIR Stimulation, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(17), 4445–4451,  10.1039/C5TC00236B .
L. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Lu and K. Huang, Hydrothermal Synthesis and Characterization of ZnGa2O4 Phosphors, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 97(2–3), 247–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, M. Huang, J. Wang, F. Yu, G. Shang and J. Wu, Hydrothermal Synthesis and Luminescence Properties of GdVO4:Ln3+ (Ln = Eu, Sm, Dy) Phosphors, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 513, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, Y. Pan, S. Huang, X. Chen, J. Wang and G. Liu, Hydrothermal Synthesis and Photoluminescence Properties of Red Phosphor BaSiF6:Mn4+ for LED Applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(13), 2301–2306 RSC .
L. Chen, Y. Liu and K. Huang, Hydrothermal Synthesis and Characterization of YVO4-Based Phosphors Doped with Eu3+ Ion, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41(1), 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Li, Y. Li, T. Li and H. Zhang, X-Ray-Excited Super-Long Green Persistent Luminescence from Tb3+ Monodoped β-NaYF4, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(45), 24940–24948 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, C. Cui, P. Huang, L. Wang and G. Jiang, Luminescent Properties of Red Long-Lasting Phosphor Y2O2S:Eu3+,M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), Ti4+ Nanotubes via Hydrothermal Method, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 583, 530–534,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.08.196 .
J. G. Mahakhode, S. J. Dhoble, C. P. Joshi and S. V. Moharil, Combustion Synthesis of Phosphors for Plasma Display Panels, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 438(1–2), 293–297 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. K. Gupta, A. Muley, P. Yadav, C. P. Joshi and S. V. Moharil, Combustion Synthesis of YAG:Ce and Related Phosphors, Appl. Phys. B, 2011, 105(2), 479–484 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Pawade, H. C. Swart and S. J. Dhoble, Review of Rare Earth Activated Blue Emission Phosphors Prepared by Combustion Synthesis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 52, 596–612 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Pan, L. Xi, R. Pang, S. Huang and G. Liu, Tunable Yellow–Red Photoluminescence and Persistent Afterglow in Phosphors Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Eu3+ and Ca4EuO(BO3)3, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55(21), 11249–11257,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.6b01786 .
S. K. Hussain and J. S. Yu, Sol–Gel Synthesis of Eu3+/Bi3+ Ions Co-Doped BaLa2WO7 Phosphors for Red-LEDs under NUV Excitation and FEDs Applications, J. Lumin., 2017, 183, 39–47 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meroni, L. Porati, F. Demartin and D. Poelman, Sol–Gel Synthesis of CaTiO3:Pr3+ Red Phosphors: Tailoring the Synthetic Parameters for Luminescent and Afterglow Applications, ACS Omega, 2017, 2(8), 4972–4981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Bandi, B. K. Grandhe, K. Jang, H.-S. Lee, D.-S. Shin, S.-S. Yi and J.-H. Jeong, Citric Based Sol–Gel Synthesis and Luminescence Characteristics of CaLa2ZnO5:Eu3+ Phosphors for Blue LED Excited White LEDs, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 512(1), 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qu, L. Cao, W. Liu, G. Su, P. Wang and I. Schultz, Sol–Gel Synthesis of Long-Lasting Phosphors CdSiO3:Mn2+,RE3+ (RE = Tb, Eu, Nd) and Luminescence Mechanism Research, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47(6), 1598–1603 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maldiney, A. Lecointre, B. Viana, A. Bessière, M. Bessodes, D. Gourier, C. Richard and D. Scherman, Controlling Electron Trap Depth To Enhance Optical Properties of Persistent Luminescence Nanoparticles for In Vivo Imaging, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(30), 11810–11815,  DOI:10.1021/ja204504w .
L. Jiang, C. Chang, D. Mao and B. Zhang, A New Long Persistent Blue-Emitting Sr2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+ Prepared by Sol–Gel Method, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58(12–13), 1825–1829 CrossRef CAS .
Q. le Masne de Chermont, C. Chanéac, J. Seguin, F. Pellé, S. Maîtrejean, J.-P. Jolivet, D. Gourier, M. Bessodes and D. Scherman, Nanoprobes with Near-Infrared Persistent Luminescence for “Em” in Vivo “Em” Imaging, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104(22), 9266 LP–9271,  DOI:10.1073/pnas.0702427104 .
Y. E. Sishi, J. Yu, W. Yundong and F. E. I. Weiyang, Recovery of Rare Earths from Spent FCC Catalysts by Solvent Extraction Using Saponified 2-Ethylhexyl Phosphoric Acid-2-Ethylhexyl Ester (EHEHPA), J. Rare Earths, 2017, 35(7), 716–722 CrossRef .
V. Boiko, Z. Dai, M. Markowska, C. Leonelli, C. Mortalò, F. Armetta, F. Ursi, G. Nasillo, M. L. Saladino and D. Hreniak, Particle Size-Related Limitations of Persistent Phosphors Based on the Doped Y3Al2Ga3O12 System, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11(1), 141,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-020-80335-9 .
S.-H. Yang, H.-Y. Lee, P.-C. Tseng and M.-H. Lee, Photoelectric Properties of Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ Phosphors Produced by Co-Precipitation Method, J. Lumin., 2021, 231, 117787 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pellerin, E. Glais, T. Lecuyer, J. Xu, J. Seguin, S. Tanabe, C. Chanéac, B. Viana and C. Richard, LaAlO3:Cr3+,Sm3+: Nano-Perovskite with Persistent Luminescence for in Vivo Optical Imaging, J. Lumin., 2018, 202, 83–88,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2018.05.024 .
V. Boiko, M. Markowska, L. Consentino, M. L. Saladino and D. Hreniak, Effect of Ce3+ Concentration on Persistent Luminescence of YAGG:Ce3+,Cr3+,Nd3+ Nanophosphors Obtained by the Co-Precipitation Method, Opt. Mater., 2020, 107, 109956 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azorin, Preparation Methods of Thermoluminescent Materials for Dosimetric Applications: An Overview, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2014, 83, 187–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang and G. Wang, Growth and Optical Characteristics of Er3+:LiLa (MoO4)2 Crystal, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 475(1–2), 693–697 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, C. Xiong, D. Ma, H. Li, S. Long and B. Wang, Persistent Luminescence Found in Mg2+ and Pr3+ Co-Doped LiNbO3 Single Crystal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(37), 10067–10072,  10.1039/C8TC03783C .
K. Binnemans, Lanthanide-Based Luminescent Hybrid Materials, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109(9), 4283–4374,  DOI:10.1021/cr8003983 .
Y. Zhuang, Y. Lv, Y. Li, T. Zhou, J. Xu, J. Ueda, S. Tanabe and R.-J. Xie, Study on Trap Levels in SrSi2AlO2N3:Eu2+,Ln3+ Persistent Phosphors Based on Host-Referred Binding Energy Scheme and Thermoluminescence Analysis, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55(22), 11890–11897,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.6b01971 .
Y. Luo and Z. Xia, Effect of Al/Ga Substitution on Photoluminescence and Phosphorescence Properties of Garnet-Type Y3Sc2Ga3−XAlxO12:Ce3+ Phosphor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(40), 23297–23305,  DOI:10.1021/jp507695n .
H. Guo, Y. Wang, G. Li, J. Liu, P. Feng and D. Liu, Cyan Emissive Super-Persistent Luminescence and Thermoluminescence in BaZrSi3O9:Eu2+,Pr3+ Phosphors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(11), 2844–2851,  10.1039/C7TC00133A .
W. Chen, Y. Wang, W. Zeng, S. Han, G. Li, H. Guo, Y. Li and Q. Qiang, Long Persistent Composite Phosphor CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+/Y3Al5O12:Ce3+: A Novel Strategy to Tune the Colors of Persistent Luminescence, New J. Chem., 2016, 40(1), 485–491,  10.1039/C5NJ02438B .
P. C. Stanish, H. Siu and P. V. Radovanovic, Inorganic Phosphors for Teaching a Holistic Approach to Functional Materials Investigation: From Synthesis and Characterization to Applications of Thermo- and Mechanoluminescence, J. Chem. Educ., 2019, 96(5), 1008–1014,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jchemed.8b00933 .
A. Kumar, G. Kedawat, P. Kumar, J. Dwivedi and B. K. Gupta, Sunlight-Activated Eu2+/Dy3+ Doped SrAl2O4 Water Resistant Phosphorescent Layer for Optical Displays and Defence Applications, New J. Chem., 2015, 39(5), 3380–3387,  10.1039/C4NJ02333A .
C. Wang, Y. Jin, Y. Lv, G. Ju, D. Liu, L. Chen, Z. Li and Y. Hu, Trap Distribution Tailoring Guided Design of Super-Long-Persistent Phosphor Ba2SiO4:Eu2+,Ho3+ and Photostimulable Luminescence for Optical Information Storage, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(22), 6058–6067,  10.1039/C8TC01722K .
J. Brgoch, K. Hasz, K. A. Denault, C. K. H. Borg, A. A. Mikhailovsky and R. Seshadri, Data-Driven Discovery of Energy Materials: Efficient BaM2Si3O10:Eu2+ (M = Sc, Lu) Phosphors for Application in Solid State White Lighting, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 333–347,  10.1039/C4FD00125G .

  (a) Y. Wu, X. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Xiang, H. Suo and C. Guo, Dual-Mode Dichromatic SrBi4Ti4O15:Er3+ Emitting Phosphor for Anti-Counterfeiting Application, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47(11), 15067–15072 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Pei, P. DuanMu, B. Wang, X. Miao, C. Zhang and W. Liu, An advanced color tunable persistent luminescent NaCa2GeO4F:Tb3+ phosphor for multicolor anti-counterfeiting, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 3193–3200 RSC ; 
  (c) X. Y. Jin, Z. Y. Wang, H. Y. Xu, M. C. Jia and Z. L. Fu, Combining time-evolving multicolor luminescence with intense afterglow of Na2CaGe2O6:Tb3+/Tb3+,Yb3+ phosphors for dynamic anticounterfeiting, Mater. Today Chem., 2022, 24, 100771 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Gao, J. Gao, F. Gao, Q. Kuang, Y. Pan, Y. Chen and Z. Pan, Quintuple-mode dynamic anti-counterfeiting using multi-mode persistent phosphors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 16634–16644 RSC .
C. Cozzan, M. J. Brady, N. O’Dea, E. E. Levin, S. Nakamura, S. P. DenBaars and R. Seshadri, Monolithic Translucent BaMgAl10O17:Eu2+ Phosphors for Laser-Driven Solid State Lighting, Aip Adv., 2016, 6(10), 105005 CrossRef .
P. Hu, Y. Liu, P. Sun, Q. Yao, Z. Liu, Z. Luo, K. Chao, H. Jiang, J. Jiang and Y. A. G. Tunable, Ce3+ Ceramic Phosphors for White Laser-Diode Lighting in Transmissive/Reflective Models, Mater. Res. Bull., 2021, 140, 111297 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. G. Bünzli and C. Piguet, Taking Advantage of Luminescent Lanthanide Ions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34(12), 1048–1077,  10.1039/B406082M .
J.-C. G. Bünzli, Benefiting from the Unique Properties of Lanthanide Ions, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39(1), 53–61,  DOI:10.1021/ar0400894 .
X. Zhu, Q. Su, W. Feng and F. Li, Anti-Stokes Shift Luminescent Materials for Bio-Applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(4), 1025–1039,  10.1039/C6CS00415F .
F. Wang and X. Liu, Multicolor Tuning of Lanthanide-Doped Nanoparticles by Single Wavelength Excitation, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47(4), 1378–1385,  DOI:10.1021/ar5000067 .
T. Matsuzawa, Y. Aoki, N. Takeuchi and Y. Murayama, A New Long Phosphorescent Phosphor with High Brightness, SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143(8), 2670–2673,  DOI:10.1149/1.1837067 .
S. H. M. Poort, H. M. Reijnhoudt, H. O. T. van der Kuip and G. Blasse, Luminescence of Eu2+ in Silicate Host Lattices with Alkaline Earth Ions in a Row, J. Alloys Compd., 1996, 241(1), 75–81,  DOI:10.1016/0925-8388(96)02324-9 .
Z. Qi, C. Shi, M. Liu, D. Zhou, X. Luo, J. Zhang and Y. Xie, The Valence of Rare Earth Ions in R2MgSi2O7:Eu, Dy (R = Ca, Sr) Long-Afterglow Phosphors, Phys. Status Solidi, 2004, 201(14), 3109–3112,  DOI:10.1002/pssa.200406873 .
P. Dorenbos, Mechanism of Persistent Luminescence in Sr2MgSi2O7:Eu2+;Dy3+, Phys. Status Solidi, 2005, 242(1), R7–R9,  DOI:10.1002/pssb.200409080 .
M. Yamaga, Y. Ohsumi, T. Nakayama and T. P. J. Han, Persistent Phosphorescence in Ce-Doped Lu2SiO5, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2(4), 413–419,  DOI:10.1364/OME.2.000413 .
J. Y. Kuang, Y. L. Liu and J. X. Zhang, Effects of RE3+ as a Co-Dopant in Blue-Emitting Long-Lasting Phosphors, Sr3Al10SiO20:Eu2+, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41(17), 5500–5503,  DOI:10.1007/s10853-006-0244-z .
K. Li, M. Shang, Y. Zhang, J. Fan, H. Lian and J. Lin, Photoluminescence Properties of Single-Component White-Emitting Ca9Bi(PO4)7:Ce3+,Tb3+,Mn2+ Phosphors for UV LEDs, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(27), 7096–7104,  10.1039/C5TC00927H .
C. Chang, J. Xu, L. Jiang, D. Mao and W. Ying, Luminescence of Long-Lasting CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ Phosphor by Co-Precipitation Method, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 98(2), 509–513,  DOI:10.1016/j.matchemphys.2005.09.069 .
J. Du and D. Poelman, Red-Light-Activated Red-Emitting Persistent Luminescence for Multicycle Bioimaging: A Case Study of CaS:Eu2+,Dy3+, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(30), 16586–16595,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c04875 .
Z.-H. Ju, S.-H. Zhang, X.-P. Gao, X.-L. Tang and W.-S. Liu, Reddish Orange Long Afterglow Phosphor Ca2SnO4:Sm3+ prepared by Sol–Gel Method, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509(31), 8082–8087,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2011.05.050 .
J. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Lei, H. Dong, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, N. Lai, Y. Fang and Z. Chen, Red Persistent and Photo-Stimulated Luminescence Properties of SrCaSi5N8:Eu2+,Tm3+ Solid Solution, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36(11), 1855–1858,  DOI:10.1016/j.optmat.2014.04.048 .
W. Li, Y. Liu and P. Ai, Synthesis and Luminescence Properties of Red Long-Lasting Phosphor Y2O2S:Eu3+,Mg2+, Ti4+ Nanoparticles, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 119(1), 52–56,  DOI:10.1016/j.matchemphys.2009.07.037 .
L. Jiang, S. Xiao, X. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Zhou and X. Jin, Preparation and Luminescence Properties of Yellow Long-Lasting Phosphor Ca2ZnSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2013, 178(2), 123–126,  DOI:10.1016/j.mseb.2012.10.022 .
P. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Cui, L. Wang, J. Qiao, P. Huang, Q. Shi, Y. Tian, H. Jiang and J. Jiang, Enhanced Luminescence and Afterglow by Heat-Treatment in Reducing Atmosphere to Synthesize the Gd3Al2Ga3O12:Ce3+ Persistent Phosphor for AC-LEDs, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 731, 389–396,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2017.10.037 .
Y. Liu, B. Lei and C. Shi, Luminescent Properties of a White Afterglow Phosphor CdSiO3:Dy3+, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(8), 2108–2113,  DOI:10.1021/cm0496422 .
Y. Chen, X. Cheng, M. Liu, Z. Qi and C. Shi, Comparison Study of the Luminescent Properties of the White-Light Long Afterglow Phosphors: CaxMgSi2O5 + x:Dy3+ (X = 1, 2, 3), J. Lumin., 2009, 129(5), 531–535,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2008.12.008 .
E. F. Baxter, M. J. Caddick and J. J. Ague, Garnet: Common Mineral, Uncommonly Useful, Elements, 2013, 9(6), 415–419,  DOI:10.2113/gselements.9.6.415 .
D. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Zhong and P. Huang, Persistent and Photo-Stimulated Luminescence in Ce3+/Cr3+ Activated Y3Al2Ga3O12 Phosphors and Transparent Phosphor-in-Glass, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(48), 11457–11464,  10.1039/C6TC04140J .
H. Li, R. Pang, Y. Luo, H. Wu, S. Zhang, L. Jiang, D. Li, C. Li, J. Feng and H. Zhang, Commendable Pr3+-Activated Ba2Ga2GeO7 Phosphor with High-Brightness White Long-Persistent Luminescence, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(22), 6698–6705,  10.1039/C9TC01735F .
J. Ueda, K. Kuroishi and S. Tanabe, Bright Persistent Ceramic Phosphors of Ce3+–Cr3+-Codoped Garnet Able to Store by Blue Light, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104(10), 101904,  DOI:10.1063/1.4868138 .
J. Xu, S. Tanabe, A. D. Sontakke and J. Ueda, Near-Infrared Multi-Wavelengths Long Persistent Luminescence of Nd3+ Ion through Persistent Energy Transfer in Ce3+, Cr3+ Co-Doped Y3Al2Ga3O12 for the First and Second Bio-Imaging Windows, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107(8), 81903,  DOI:10.1063/1.4929495 .
J. Ueda, P. Dorenbos, A. J. J. Bos, K. Kuroishi and S. Tanabe, Control of Electron Transfer between Ce3+ and Cr3+ in the Y3Al5−xGaxO12 Host via Conduction Band Engineering, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(22), 5642–5651,  10.1039/C5TC00546A .
J. Xu, Z. Ju, X. Gao, Y. An, X. Tang and W. Liu, Na2CaSn2Ge3O12: A Novel Host Lattice for Sm3+-Doped Long-Persistent Phosphorescence Materials Emitting Reddish Orange Light, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52(24), 13875–13881,  DOI:10.1021/ic401262w .
D. Zhang, M. Shi, Y. Sun, Y. Guo and C. Chang, Long Afterglow Property of Er3+ Doped Ca2SnO4 Phosphor, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 667, 235–239,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.01.081 .
J. Zhang, B. Chen, Z. Liang, X. Li, J. Sun, L. Cheng and H. Zhong, Optical Transition and Thermal Quenching Mechanism in CaSnO3:Eu3+ Phosphors, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 612, 204–209,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2014.05.188 .
Z. Wang, J. Xu, Z. Ju, S. Zhao, P. Pei, X. Ma and W. Liu, Novel White-Emitting Afterglow Phosphor Na2CaSn2Ge3O12:Dy3+: Preparation, Photoluminescence, and Phosphorescence Properties, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 856, 157230,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.157230 .
J. Xu, Z. Ju, X. Yang, X. Tang and W. Liu, Considerable Improvement of Na2CaSn2Ge3O12:Eu3+ Reddish Orange Long-Persistent Phosphorescence with Co-Doping of Dy3+, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 162, 951–958,  DOI:10.1016/j.dyepig.2018.03.018 .
H. Duan, Y. Z. Dong, Y. Huang, Y. H. Hu, X. Zhang, H. F. Dong and X. S. Chen, Computational Study of Inferior Persistent Performance of La3GaGe5O16 Phosphor, Phys. Lett. A, 2017, 381(27), 2188–2194,  DOI:10.1016/j.physleta.2017.05.001 .
S. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Chen, G. Ju, T. Wang and Z. Wang, Luminescence Properties of the Pink Emitting Persistent Phosphor Pr3+-Doped La3GaGe5O16, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(47), 37172–37179,  10.1039/C5RA05116A .
L. F. Schneemeyer, L. Guterman, T. Siegrist and G. R. Kowach, Synthesis and Structure of a New Germanate Fluoride: NaCa2GeO4F, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 160(1), 33–38,  DOI:10.1006/jssc.2001.9153 .
Z. Wang, W. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Zhang, S. Peng, Z. Zhao and Y. Wang, Superlong and Color-Tunable Red Persistent Luminescence and Photostimulated Luminescence Properties of NaCa2GeO4F:Mn2+,Yb3+ Phosphor, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55(24), 12822–12831,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.6b02136 .
G. Adiwidjaja, M. Bröker, C. Claus, K. Friese, K.-H. Klaska, O. Jarchow, M. Ruks and I. Wozniak, Structure of the Compounds La3AlGe5O16, La3GaGe5O16 and Ce3GaGe5O16, Zeitschrift fur Krist., 1998, 213, 223–227,  DOI:10.1524/zkri.1998.213.4.223 .

          F. Liebau
          Structural Chemistry of Silicates: Structure, Bonding, and Classification, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Sun, H. Lin, D. Zhang, R. Hong, C. Tao and Z. Han, Green Emitting Spinel/Ba2SiO4:Eu2+/Spinel Sandwich Structure Robust Ceramic Phosphor Prepared by Spark Plasma Sintering, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(17, Part B), 23643–23650,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.08.076 .
J. Liu, G. Li, H. Guo, D. Liu, P. Feng and Y. Wang, Design, Synthesis and Characterization of a Novel Bluish-Green Long-Lasting Phosphorescence Phosphor BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+,Nd3+, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(19), 10246–10254,  10.1039/C8RA00842F .
Y. Wang, G. Wang, H. Wang, C. Liang, W. Cai and L. Zhang, Chemical-template Synthesis of Micro/Nanoscale Magnesium Silicate Hollow Spheres for Waste-water Treatment, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16(11), 3497–3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Song and Q. Liu, Orange Super-Long Persistent Luminescent Materials: (Sr1−xBax)3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb5+, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5(1), 333–340,  10.1039/D0QM00488J .
K. A. Denault, J. Brgoch, S. D. Kloß, M. W. Gaultois, J. Siewenie, K. Page and R. Seshadri, Average and Local Structure, Debye Temperature, and Structural Rigidity in Some Oxide Compounds Related to Phosphor Hosts, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(13), 7264–7272,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.5b00445 .
F. Clabau, X. Rocquefelte, S. Jobic, P. Deniard, M.-H. Whangbo, A. Garcia and T. Le Mercier, Mechanism of Phosphorescence Appropriate for the Long-Lasting Phosphors Eu2+-Doped SrAl2O4 with Codopants Dy3+ and B3+, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(15), 3904–3912,  DOI:10.1021/cm050763r .
D.-Y. Wang, C.-H. Huang, Y.-C. Wu and T.-M. Chen, BaZrSi3O9:Eu2+: A Cyan-Emitting Phosphor with High Quantum Efficiency for White Light-Emitting Diodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(29), 10818–10822,  10.1039/C1JM00080B .
J. Kuang, Y. Liu and J. Zhang, White-Light-Emitting Long-Lasting Phosphorescence in Dy3+-Doped SrSiO3, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179(1), 266–269,  DOI:10.1016/j.jssc.2005.10.025 .
J. Ueda, R. Maki and S. Tanabe, Vacuum Referred Binding Energy (VRBE)-Guided Design of Orange Persistent Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+ Phosphors, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56(17), 10353–10360,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.7b01214 .
K. Toda, Y. Kawakami, S. Kousaka, Y. Ito, A. Komeno, K. Uematsu and M. Sato, New Silicate Phosphors for a White LED, IEICE Trans. Electron., 2006, E89–C(10), 1406–1412,  DOI:10.1093/ietele/e89-c.10.1406 .
J. Ha, E. Novitskaya, A. G. Hirata, C. Zhou, E. R. Ridley, A. O. Graeve and J. McKittrick, A Facile Method Using a Flux to Improve Quantum Efficiency of Submicron Particle Sized Phosphors for Solid-State Lighting Applications, Ceramics, 2018, 1(1), 38–53,  DOI:10.3390/ceramics1010005 .
J. Tian and W. Zhuang, Thermal Stability of Nitride Phosphors for Light-Emitting Diodes, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8(22), 4933–4954 RSC .
Y. Q. Li, N. Hirosaki, R. J. Xie, T. Takeda and M. Mitomo, Yellow-Orange-Emitting CaAlSiN3:Ce3+ Phosphor: Structure, Photoluminescence, and Application in White LEDs, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(21), 6704–6714,  DOI:10.1021/cm801669x .
P. Dorenbos, Ce3+ 5d-Centroid Shift and Vacuum Referred 4f-Electron Binding Energies of All Lanthanide Impurities in 150 Different Compounds, J. Lumin., 2013, 135, 93–104,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2012.09.034 .
P. Dorenbos, Determining Binding Energies of Valence-Band Electrons in Insulators and Semiconductors via Lanthanide Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87(3), 35118,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.87.035118 .
J. Zhong, C. Li, W. Zhao, S. You and J. Brgoch, Accessing High-Power near-Infrared Spectroscopy Using Cr3+-Substituted Metal Phosphate Phosphors, Chem. Mater., 2021, 34(1), 337–344 CrossRef .
G. Ju, Y. Hu, L. Chen, X. Wang and Z. Mu, Blue Persistent Luminescence in Eu2+ Doped Ca3Mg3(PO4)4, Opt. Mater., 2014, 36(7), 1183–1188 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Parchur and R. S. Ningthoujam, Preparation, Microstructure and Crystal Structure Studies of Li+ Co-Doped YPO4:Eu3+, RSC Adv., 2012, 2(29), 10854–10858,  10.1039/C2RA20763J .
N. R. J. Poolton, A. J. J. Bos, G. O. Jones and P. Dorenbos, Probing Electron Transfer Processes in Y PO4:Ce, Sm by Combined Synchrotron–Laser Excitation Spectroscopy, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22(18), 185403,  DOI:10.1088/0953-8984/22/18/185403 .
A. Lecointre, A. Bessière, A. J. J. Bos, P. Dorenbos, B. Viana and S. Jacquart, Designing a Red Persistent Luminescence Phosphor: The Example of YPO4:Pr3+,Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Er, Ho, Dy), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(10), 4217–4227,  DOI:10.1021/jp108038v .
Y. Ni, J. M. Hughes and A. N. Mariano, Crystal Chemistry of the Monazite and Xenotime Structures, Am. Mineral., 1995, 80(1–2), 21–26,  DOI:10.2138/am-1995-1-203 .
M. Wu, W. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Sun, L. Huang, G. Chen and Z. Zheng, Sensitizing Effect of Nd3+ on Tb3+ Activated ZrP2O7 Long Persistent Phosphor Materials, J. Rare Earths, 2021, 39(7), 757–764,  DOI:10.1016/j.jre.2020.10.007 .
H. Birkedal, A. M. Krogh Andersen, A. Arakcheeva, G. Chapuis, P. Norby and P. Pattison, The Room-Temperature Superstructure of ZrP2O7 Is Orthorhombic: There Are No Unusual 180° P–O–P Bond Angles, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45(11), 4346–4351,  DOI:10.1021/ic0600174 .
M. Xu, L. Wang, D. Jia and F. Le, Luminescence Properties and Energy Transfer Investigations of Zn2P2O7:Ce3+,Tb3+ Phosphor, J. Lumin., 2015, 158, 125–129,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2014.09.040 .
R. Pang, Y. Jia, R. Zhao, H. Li, J. Fu, W. Sun, L. Jiang, S. Zhang, C. Li and Q. Su, Tunable Long Lasting Phosphorescence Due to the Selective Energy Transfer from Defects to Luminescent Centres via Tunnelling in Mn2+ and Tm3+ Co-Doped Zinc Pyrophosphate, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43(25), 9661–9668,  10.1039/C4DT00223G .
R. Pang, C. Li, L. Jiang and Q. Su, Blue Long Lasting Phosphorescence of Tm3+ in Zinc Pyrophosphate Phosphor, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 471(1), 364–367,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2008.03.104 .
C. Wu, J. Zhang, P. Feng, Y. Duan, Z. Zhang and Y. Wang, Blue Photoluminescence and Long Lasting Phosphorescence Properties of a Novel Chloride Phosphate Phosphor: Sr5(PO4)3Cl:Eu2+, J. Lumin., 2014, 147, 229–234,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2013.11.055 .
J. Chen, Y. Liang, Y. Zhu, S. Liu, H. Li and W. Lei, Abnormal Reduction of Eu3+ to Eu2+ in Sr5(PO4)3Cl:Eu Phosphor and Its Enhanced Red Emission by the Charge Compensation, J. Lumin., 2019, 214, 116569,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2019.116569 .
H. Guo, Y. Wang, W. Chen, W. Zeng, G. Li and Y. Li, Ca6BaP4O17:Eu2+,Gd3+: A Yellow Emitting Long-Lasting Phosphor with High Brightness and Long Afterglow Duration, New J. Chem., 2016, 40(1), 613–618,  10.1039/C5NJ02575C .
H. Guo, W. Chen, W. Zeng, G. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Li and X. Ding, Structure and Luminescence Properties of a Novel Yellow Super Long-Lasting Phosphate Phosphor Ca6BaP4O17:Eu2+,Ho3+, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(22), 5844–5850,  10.1039/C5TC00810G .
H. Guo, Y. Wang, W. Chen, W. Zeng, S. Han, G. Li and Y. Li, Controlling and Revealing the Trap Distributions of Ca6BaP4O17:Eu2+,R3+ (R = Dy, Tb, Ce, Gd, Nd) by Codoping Different Trivalent Lanthanides, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(42), 11212–11218,  10.1039/C5TC02283E .
L. Ning, X. Huang, J. Sun, S. Huang, M. Chen, Z. Xia and Y. Huang, Effects of Si Codoping on Optical Properties of Ce-Doped Ca6BaP4O17: Insights from First-Principles Calculations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(7), 3999–4006,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b11659 .
D. S. Thakare, S. K. Omanwar, S. V. Moharil, S. M. Dhopte, P. L. Muthal and V. K. Kondawar, Combustion Synthesis of Borate Phosphors, Opt. Mater., 2007, 29(12), 1731–1735 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Wang, Y. Ye, P. Che and Y. Zhao, Design, Synthesis and Mechanism of Green Afterglow Phosphors Zn4B6O13:Mn2+ Doped with Ln3+ (Ln = Sm, Yb, Eu) Guided by VRBE, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 906, 164268 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Chen, S. Huang and Y. Pan, A Novel Tunable Green-to-Red Emitting Phosphor Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Tb,Eu via Energy Transfer with High Quantum Yield, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42(12), 13476–13484,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2016.05.139 .

  (a) Z. Chen, Y. Pan, L. Xi, R. Pang, S. Huang and G. Liu, Tunable Yellow-Red Photoluminescence and Persistent Afterglow in Phosphors Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Eu3+ and Ca4EuO(BO3)3, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 11249–11257 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Norrestam, M. Nygren and J. O. Bovin, Structural Investigations of New Calcium – Rare Earth (R) Oxyborates with the Composition Ca4RO(BO3)3, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4(3), 737–743,  DOI:10.1021/cm00021a044 .
X. Jiang, M. S. Molokeev, P. Gong, Y. Yang, W. Wang, S. Wang, S. Wu, Y. Wang, R. Huang and L. Li, Near-zero Thermal Expansion and High Ultraviolet Transparency in a Borate Crystal of Zn4B6O13, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(36), 7936–7940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, M. Hu, G. Niu and J. Tang, Lead-Free Halide Perovskites and Perovskite Variants as Phosphors toward Light-Emitting Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(35), 31575–31584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, L. Yang, C. Ji, D. Xu, C. Zhang, H. Bu, X. Tan, X. Yun and J. Sun, Studies on Luminescence Properties of Double Perovskite Deep Red Phosphor La2ZnTiO6:Mn4+ for Indoor Plant Growth LED Applications, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 802, 628–635 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Sun, Q. Liu, N. Ding, H. Yang, L. Wang and Q. Zhang, Novel Layered Perovskite Sr3Ti2O7:Eu3+ Phosphor with High-Efficiency Luminescence Enhanced by Charge Compensation, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 657, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huo, B. Cai, Z. Yuan, B. Ma and H. Zeng, Two-dimensional Metal Halide Perovskites: Theory, Synthesis, and Optoelectronics, Small Methods, 2017, 1(3), 1600018 CrossRef .
S. K. Karunakaran, G. M. Arumugam, W. Yang, S. Ge, S. N. Khan, X. Lin and G. Yang, Research Progress on the Application of Lanthanide-Ion-Doped Phosphor Materials in Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(3), 1035–1060 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng and Q. Liu, Luminescent Properties of a New Cyan Long Afterglow Phosphor CaSnO3:Lu3+, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(58), 33596–33601,  10.1039/C9RA07107E .
J. M. Henriques, E. W. S. Caetano, V. N. Freire, J. A. P. Costa and E. L. da; Albuquerque, Structural, Electronic, and Optical Absorption Properties of Orthorhombic CaSnO3 through ab Initio calculations, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19(10), 106214,  DOI:10.1088/0953-8984/19/10/106214 .
K. Krishnaswamy, C. E. Dreyer, A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Structure and Energetics of LaAlO3(001) Surfaces, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90(23), 235436,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.90.235436 .
Y.-Y. Li, H.-L. Chen, G.-J. Chen, C.-L. Kuo, P.-H. Hsieh and W.-S. Hwang, Investigation of the Defect Structure of Congruent and Fe-Doped LiNbO3 Powders Synthesized by the Combustion Method, Materials, 2017, 10(4) DOI:10.3390/ma10040380 .
Y. Katayama, H. Kobayashi, J. Ueda, B. Viana and S. Tanabe, Persistent Luminescence Properties of Cr3+–Sm3+ Activated LaAlO3 Perovskite, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6(5), 1500–1505,  DOI:10.1364/OME.6.001500 .
Y. H. Kim, J. Ha and W. B. Im, Towards Green Synthesis of Mn4+-Doped Fluoride Phosphors: A Review, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2021, 11, 181–195,  DOI:10.1016/j.jmrt.2021.01.011 .
V. Kale, T. Soukka, J. Hölsä and M. Lastusaari, Enhancement of Blue Upconversion Luminescence in Hexagonal NaYF4:Yb,Tm by Using K and Sc Ions, J. Nanoparticle Res., 2013, 15(8), 1850,  DOI:10.1007/s11051-013-1850-8 .
D. Tu, Y. Liu, H. Zhu, R. Li, L. Liu and X. Chen, Breakdown of Crystallographic Site Symmetry in Lanthanide-Doped NaYF4 Crystals, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(4), 1128–1133,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201208218 .
X. Ou, X. Qin, B. Huang, J. Zan, Q. Wu, Z. Hong, L. Xie, H. Bian, Z. Yi, X. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Song, J. Li, Q. Chen, H. Yang and X. Liu, High-Resolution X-Ray Luminescence Extension Imaging, Nature, 2021, 590(7846), 410–415,  DOI:10.1038/s41586-021-03251-6 .
K. He, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Xu, L. Chen and G. Bai, Lanthanide Ions Doped Nonhygroscopic La2Mo3O12 Microcrystals Based on Multimode Luminescence for Optical Thermometry, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 890, 161918 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xing, Y. Sun, C. Hu, D. Wei, Y. Wang, J. Hao, W. Li, X. Gao, W. Wang and H. Li, Lanthanide Ions-Activated Gd2B2WO9: Multicolor Tunable Phosphors under Single-Wavelength Excitation, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 867, 159026 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Suo, D. He and C. Guo, Highly Sensitive Up-Conversion Optical Thermometry Based on Yb3+–Er3+ Co-Doped NaLa (MoO4)2 Green Phosphors, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 106, 14–18 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiao, X. Dong, X. Yin, H. Wang, H. Zhong, K. Liu, B. Dong and X. Luo, Promising Yb3+-Sensitized La2Mo2O9 Phosphors for Multi-Color up-Conversion Luminescence and Optical Temperature Sensing, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 895, 162686 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Meng, H. Wang, J. Jiao, M. Xing, Y. Peng, X. Luo and Y. Tian, Promising Lanthanide-Doped BiVO4 Phosphors for Highly Efficient Upconversion Luminescence and Temperature Sensing, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50(3), 960–969 RSC .
T. S. Sreena, P. P. Rao, T. R. A. Thara and A. K. V. Raj, New Lanthanide-free Self-activated Full-color Emission Phosphor in Y3+ Doped Sr3Bi(VO4)3 System for White Light Emitting Diode Applications, Luminescence, 2021, 36(3), 819–825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zheng, M. Runowski, N. Stopikowska, M. Skwierczyńska, S. Lis, P. Du and L. Luo, Dual-Center Thermochromic Bi2MoO6:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+ Phosphors for Ultrasensitive Luminescence Thermometry, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 890, 161830 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, J. Peng, H. Sun, Q. Ruan, H. Dong, Y. Jin, Z. Sun and Y. Hu, Surface Activation of Calcium Tungstate by Europium Doping for Improving Photocatalytic Performance: Towards Lanthanide Site Photocatalysis, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 432, 134339 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Sivakumar, PhD thesis, IIT Madras,  2007 .
L. X. Lovisa, J. M. P. Da Silva, A. A. G. Santiago, M. S. Li, E. Longo, C. A. Paskocimas, M. R. D. Bomio and F. V. Motta, Red-Emitting CaWO4:Eu3+,Tm3+ Phosphor for Solid-State Lighting: Luminescent Properties and Morphology Evolution, J. Rare Earths, 2022, 40(2), 226–233 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, S. Zheng, Y. Meng, W. Sun and H. Zhang, Long Afterglow Yellow Luminescence from Pr3+ Doped SrSc2O4, J. Rare Earths, 2022, 40(4), 567–571 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Chou, S. Mylswamy, R. S. Liu and S. Z. Chuang, Eu Substitution and Particle Size Control of Y2O2S for the Excitation by UV Light Emitting Diodes, Solid State Commun., 2005, 136(4), 205–209,  DOI:10.1016/j.ssc.2005.07.032 .
C. C. S. Pedroso, J. M. Carvalho, L. C. V. Rodrigues, J. Hölsä and H. F. Brito, Rapid and Energy-Saving Microwave-Assisted Solid-State Synthesis of Pr3+-, Eu3+-, or Tb3+-Doped Lu2O3 Persistent Luminescence Materials, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(30), 19593–19604,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.6b04683 .
M. Wang, Y. Meng, Y. Zhu, J. Song, J. Yang, C. Liu, H. Zhu, D. Yan, C. Xu and Y. Liu, Afterglow-Suppressed Lu2O3:Eu3+ Nanoscintillators for High-Resolution and Dynamic Digital Radiographic Imaging, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61(29), 11293–11305,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.2c01417 .
T. Harazono, R. Adachi, Y. Shimomura and T. Watanabe, Firing Temperature Dependence of Eu Diffusion in Eu-Y2O2S Studied by 89Y MAS NMR, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3(14), 2943–2948,  10.1039/B101813M .
L. E. Muresan, E. J. Popovici, I. Perhaita, E. Indrea, J. Oro and N. Casan Pastor, Rare Earth Activated Yttrium Aluminate Phosphors with Modulated Luminescence, Luminescence, 2016, 31(4), 929–936,  DOI:10.1002/bio.3051 .
G. Li, Y. Wang, W. Zeng, W. Chen, S. Han and H. Guo, Luminescent and Magnetic Properties of the Afterglow Phosphors GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+), RSC Adv., 2015, 5(27), 20884–20889,  10.1039/C4RA17019A .
S. Singh, V. Tanwar, A. P. Simantilleke and D. Singh, Structural and Photoluminescent Investigations of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,RE3+ Improved Nanophosphors for Solar Cells, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2020, 21, 100427,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoso.2020.100427 .
J. Y. Park, J. S. Joo, K. S. Shim and H. K. Yang, Photoluminescent Properties of Novel Red-Emitting GdSr2AlO5:Eu3+ Phosphors, Optik, 2016, 127(22), 10614–10620,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijleo.2016.08.080 .
M. Sengar and A. K. Narula, Lanthanide Doped Luminescent NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+@CaF2:Eu3+ Nanoparticles for Dual-Mode (Visible and NIR) Luminescence, J. Solid State Chem., 2021, 295, 121913,  DOI:10.1016/j.jssc.2020.121913 .
A. H. Wako, B. F. Dejene and H. C. Swart, Roles of Doping Ions in Afterglow Properties of Blue CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ Phosphors, Phys. B, 2014, 439, 153–159,  DOI:10.1016/j.physb.2013.11.023 .
K. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Li, N. Yu, X. Gao, L. Huang, S. F. Lim and G. Han, Three-Dimensional Colloidal Controlled Growth of Core–Shell Heterostructured Persistent Luminescence Nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2021, 21(12), 4903–4910,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.0c04940 .
H. Hazama, S. Sobue, S. Tajima and R. Asahi, Phosphorescent Material Search Using a Combination of High-Throughput Evaluation and Machine Learning, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58(16), 10936–10943,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01370 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Sivakumar Vaidyanathan
	Prof. Sivakumar Vaidyanathan received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees in Chemistry from Muthurangam Government Arts College, Vellore (affiliated with the University of Madras), and his PhD in Solid-State Chemistry (2007) from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, with Prof. U. V. Varadaraju. Then, he moved to Prof. Duk Young Jeon's group at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea, as a Brain Korea 21 Post-doctoral Research Fellow (2007–2009). He also worked for a year as a Post-doctoral Fellow at the Commissariat à l'Énergie Atomique (CEA), Saclay, France. After spending a decade at NIT Rourkela as a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry, he moved to the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad. His research focuses on lanthanide photochemistry and photophysics, molecular materials (including deep blue) for organic-light emitting diodes (OLEDs), pure organic room temperature materials, phosphors for LEDs (solid-state lighting), and organic fluorophores for diverse applications.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the lifetime of the different compounds that exhibit persistent luminescence. The radial axis shows the different matrices and the semi-circular axis shows the afterglow times ranging from minutes to several hours after excitation was stopped mostly by ultraviolet light. Inside the chart, there are data points related to the chemical elements that are used to dope the matrix (host).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the electron trapping–detrapping model in the case of (a) high energy band-to-band excitation and (b) low energy UV or visible light excitation only pumping the emission ions. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the hole trapping–detrapping model in the case of (a) high energy band-to-band excitation and (b) low energy UV or visible light excitation only pumping the emission ions. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 
I(T) = Aexp(−ET/kT)

 	Fig. 4  Applications of various LPPs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Typical anti-counterfeiting designs on banknotes. (a) Schematic illustration of the multi-color response. (b) Image of the banknote value ‘100’ under 254 nm UV light. (c) PL and PersL images of the NCGOF:Tb3+ phosphors on banknotes under an ultraviolet lamp switched on and off. (d) Images of the comprehensive application of the three phosphors.67b Reproduced from67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of the WIFI pattern at different irradiation times, where the pattern is made of Na2CaGe2O6:xTb3+ (x = 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20) phosphors. (b) Persistent luminescence photographs of pattern after 254 nm pre-irradiation for 5 min and (c) demonstration of bi-temporal anticounterfeiting model (composed of Na2CaGe2O6:0.20 Tb3+, Na2CaGe2O6:0.03 Tb3+,0.05 Yb3+). Reproduced from67 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of multi-mode luminescence and anti-counterfeiting design of red ZGGO:Cr,Yb,Er and green ZLGO:Mn persistent phosphors. (a) Schematic diagram and (b) variable emission colours, multi-mode luminescence (UCL, PL, PersL, PSL and PSPL), and dynamic evolution of the PersL emission brightness and colours under different excitation conditions for multi-level anti-counterfeiting applications. Reproduced from67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Crystal structure of Y3Sc2Ga3O12.60 (b) Afterglow emission spectra of Y2.96Sc2Ga3O12:0.04Ce3+ sample after removal of the excitation source60 and (c) the comparison of the afterglow spectra of Y2.96Sc2Ga3O12:0.04Ce3+ under air and H2/O2 atmosphere.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. (d) Unit-cell structure of the YAGG crystal, where green spheres represent Y3+ at the dodecahedral site, and brown and white ones represent Al3+/Ga3+ at the octahedral and tetrahedral sites, respectively.91 Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2006 (e) Crystal unit cell model of Ba2Ga2GeO7:0.03 Pr3+ in the direction of the a axis.92 (f) PLE and PL spectra of BGGO:0.03Pr3+ phosphor, λex = 255 nm and λem = 491 nm.92 (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structure of Na2CaSn2Ge3O12, Na coordination.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) PLE (λem = 566 nm) and PL (λex = 255 nm) spectra of Na2Ca1−xSn2Ge3O12:0.8Sm3+ phosphor.96 Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2013. (c) PLE (λem = 580 nm) spectrum and PL (λex = 248 nm) spectrum of Dy3+.99 Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (d) Crystal structure of La3GaGe5O16 from b, c-projected plane.101 Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. (e) Emission spectra of La3−xGaGe5O16:xPr3+ (x = 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.04 and 0.06); inset: (b) integrated intensity of Pr3+ as a function of its doping concentration.102 Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (f) View of the NaCa2GeO4F structure down the a axis showing the chains of isolated GeO4 tetrahedra.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2001. (g) Emission spectra of NaCa2GeO4F:0.2%Mn2+, x%Yb3+:1.5 ≤ x ≤ 4.5. (h) CIE coordinate and digital photo of NaCa2GeO4F:0.2%Mn2+, x%Yb3+ (x = 0.4, 4.5) under 254 nm UV lamp irradiation.104 Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Crystal cell structure of Ba2SiO4, coordination of Ba-1 and coordination of Ba-2.107 Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) LPL decay curves of Ba2SiO4:0.005Eu2+,yHo3+ (y = 0.002–0.03). (Inset) Images of the Ba2SiO4:0.005Eu2+,0.01Ho3+ phosphor taken with the decay times increasing from 1 min to 24 h.65 Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (c) Crystal structure of (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7.30 (d) Time-gated luminescence imaging acquired with a smartphone-based biosensing platform and intensity profile scan of (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+ and (Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+. The blue line represents the blue channel intensity and the green line is the green channel intensity.30 (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (e) Crystal structure of the BaLu2Si3O10 host. Coordination of Ba and Lu.66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (f) Excitation and emission spectra of BaLu2Si3O10:0.008Eu2+. (Inset) CIE chromaticity diagram and photographs of the BaLu2Si3O10:0.008Eu2+,0.008Nd3+ phosphor excited at 325 nm.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Crystal structure of NSSO:xCe3+, where blue, green, orange and navy spheres represent oxygen, silicon forming SiO4 tetrahedron units, scandium forming the ScO6 octahedron units and Na ion, respectively. (b) Illustration of crystallographic distinct sites of Na represented by different colours for 4-fold, 5-fold, and 6-fold coordination in NSSO:xCe3+.31 Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Crystal structure of Sr3SiO5.26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (d) Photographs of ‘‘Pisces’’ patterns for different SA/SS (SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+/Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb5+) ratios (denoted by numbers 1–5) under natural light (NL), 254 nm UV excitation, and 5 s after shutting down the UV light (PersL).26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (e) Unit cell structure of BaZrSi3O9 and the coordination environment of Ba, Zr, and Si.61 (f) PLE (λem = 515 nm) and PL (λex = 350 nm) spectra of S1–S6 samples. The insets show the CIE coordinates of the S5 sample and a digital photo under UV light irradiation. (S1: x = 0.01, y = 0; S2: x = 0.005, y = 0.005; S3: x = 0.01, y = 0.005; S4: x = 0.005, y = 0.01; S5: x = 0.01, y = 0.01; S6: x = 0.02, y = 0.02; for BaZrSi3O9:xEu2+,yPr3+).61 (e and f) Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structure of Ca3Si2O7 represented by blue (Si1, Si2), red (Ca1), yellow (Ca2), and pink (Ca3) spheres and polyhedron [AMCSD-CIF file]. (b) Photograph of photoluminescence and persistent luminescence of CSO:Eu3+, CSO:Eu3+,Tm3+ and CSO:Eu3+,Sm3+.115 Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (c) 3D unit cell representation of crystal structure of CaMgSi2O6. [AMSCD-CIF file]. (e) Decay of the persistent luminescence of CZMSO:Eu,Dy, CZMSO:Eu,Pr, CMSO:Eu,Dy, and CMSO:Eu,Pr compounds recorded after 5 min UV excitation (6 W lamp, 254 nm) with a Biospace Photon-Imager (for each composition, we used 10 mg of powder).47 Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 13  
In vivo imaging of different CZMSO and CMSO diopside PLNPs under a photon-counting system. (A) CZMSO:Eu,Dy and (B) CMSO:Eu,Pr. The signal was recorded for 15 min following systemic injection of the probes (100 μg, excited 5 min under a 6 W UV lamp at 254 nm before injection). Luminescence intensity is expressed in false color units (1 unit = 2800 photons per s·cm2·steradians). For both compositions (A and B), the left picture represents the luminescence signal from PLNP, and the right picture represents the photograph of the imaged mouse.47 Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Projection of the crystal structure of CaAlSiN3:Ce,Li, and the local coordination polyhedron of (Ca, Ce, Li)N5 viewed along the [001] direction.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008. (b) PLE, PL and afterglow emission spectra of CaAlSiN3:0.05% Eu2+ phosphor. The lower inset is the photographs of the sample in daylight under 365 nm UV excitation and in the dark, respectively.32 Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (c) PLE and PL spectra of the SSAON:Eu sample. The PLE spectra were fitted by Gaussian functions, as shown by dot curves. 5di (i = 1–5) and Eex refer to 4f–5di (i = 1−5) transitions and host band–band transition, respectively. (d) Photographs of SSAON:Eu (left) and SSAON:Eu, Ho (right) under natural light, under 395 nm UV light, and 10 min after UV irradiation. The exposure time of the digital camera was 1/500, 1/500, and 2 s for parts c–e, respectively.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (e) Persistent luminescence decay curves of SSAON:Eu and SSAON:Eu,Ln (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er and Tm) samples. Commercial persistent phosphors SrAl2O4:Eu,Dy were also measured as a ref. 59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Crystal structure of Ca3Mg3(PO4)4:0.01Eu2+.123 (b) PLE and PL spectra of Ca2.99Mg3(PO4)4:0.01Eu2+.123 (c) TL curve of the Ca2.99Mg3(PO4)4:0.01Eu2+ sample and the Gaussian deconvolution of the curve.123 (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013. (d) Crystal structure of YPO4 (tetragonal) and polyhedral representations of PO4 (tetrahedron) and YO8 (dodecahedron) linkage along the a-axis.124 Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012. (e) Persistent luminescence at TPL = 293 K measured at 612 nm of the YPO4:Pr3+,Ln3+ compounds after 10 min of X-ray irradiation.125 Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from IOP Publishing, Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Crystal structure of ZrP2O7 shown in projection along the c-axis. (b) Figure on the right shows only the P2O74− part of the structure.129 Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2006. (c) Schematic crystal structure of Zn2P2O7.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015. (d) Phosphorescence chromaticity coordinates of ZPOT:2xM with (a) x = 0, (b) x = 0.0001, (c) x = 0.001, (d) x = 0.005, (e) x = 0.01 and (f) x = 0.05 in the CIE1931 diagram and their LLP photographs.131 Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Crystal structure and spheres for Sr2+ ions in the Sr5(PO4)3Cl crystal.133 (b) PL emission and LPP spectrum ((b) λex = 254 nm) of the typical Sr5(PO4)3Cl:0.1 mol%Eu2+ sample.133 Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014. (c) Crystal structure of Ca6BaP4O17:0.02Eu2+ and (b–d) cationic sites made with balls–sticks.135 Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (d) Excitation and emission spectra of Ca6BaP4O17:0.02Eu2+,0.015Ho3+. Inset: CIE chromaticity diagram of the Ca6BaP4O17:0.02Eu2+,0.015Ho3+ phosphor excited at 370 nm.136 Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic elucidation of Ca4LaO(BO3)3 (redrawn using Diamond). (b) CIE chromaticity coordinates of CLBO:0.2%Eu3+ (excited at 266, 331, 395, 462, and 610 nm, respectively).142a Reproduced from142 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (c) Crystal structure of Ca2BO3Cl host, Ca coordination.28 (d) Excitation and emission spectra of (Ca1.998Eu0.002)BO3Cl and (d) emission spectra of (Ca1.998Eu0.002)BO3Cl and (Ca1.996Eu0.002Dy0.002)BO3Cl and phosphorescence spectra of (Ca1.996Eu0.002Dy0.002)BO3Cl.28 (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2013. (e) Crystal structure of Zn4B6O13.143 Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (f) Host referred binding energy and vacuum referred binding energy diagram of Zn4B6O13:Ln2+/Ln3+.140 Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 19  (a and b) Orthorhombic CaSnO3 crystal [AMCSD-CIF file]. (c) Crystal structure of LiNbO3. (d) Persistent luminescence decay curves for MPCLN and PCLN excited by a UV LED in the region of 365–370 nm for 60 s, with photographs of MPCLN in a dark room shown in the inset.57 Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (e) Cubic perovskite crystal structure of LaAlO3 (LAO) viewed as alternating planes of LaO and AlO2 along the [001] direction. The lattice vectors for a 2 × 1 unit cell of the LAO (001) surface are indicated on the top surface.151 Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from IOP publishing, Copyright 2014. (f) Photoluminescence excitation (PLE) (λem = 735 nm) (black line) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra (λex = 579 nm) (red line) of LaAlO3:Cr3+,Sm3+ nanoparticles.53 Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Crystal structure of β-NaYF4.156 Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2013. (b) X-ray-excited luminescence spectra (black) and afterglow spectra (red) of the phosphors. (c) Images of four sample discs taken at different afterglow times (5 min to 240 h) after irradiation with X-rays for 1 to 15 min. The discs were placed on a black plate surface for imaging in a dark room.37 Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Crystal structure of CaWO4. (b) Crystal structure of SrSc2O4.168 Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Crystal structure of BaGa2O4. (b) PLE (λem = 602 nm) and PL (λex = 404 nm) spectra of BGO phosphor, the PL and PersL of Sm3+.27 Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (c) Crystal structure of Y2O2S (redrawn using Diamond and the parameters used from Ref. 169. (d) SEM images of Y(OH)3:Eu3+,Mg2+,Ti4+ (nanotube precursor) and (a2) Y2O2S:Eu3+,Mg2+,Ti4+ (nanotube phosphor).38 Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2014. (e) Crystal structure of Lu2O3.170 Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. (f) Static X-ray images of the test-pattern plate under different X-ray doses using the P15L20 composite film as an imaging plate. (g) Time-dependent X-ray images of a watch with a moving second hand using the P15L20 composite film as an imaging plate.171 Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Crystal arrangement of SrAl2O4.175 Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (b) Excitation spectrum of the Sr0.7Al2O4:Eu0.12+/Dy0.23+ phosphor at 528 nm emission wavelength. (c) Emission spectrum of the Sr0.7Al2O4:Eu0.12+/Dy0.23+ phosphor at 528 nm emission wavelength.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015. (d) Crystallographic unit cell of GdSr2Al2O5:Eu3+.176 Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016. (e) Afterglow decay curves of GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+).174 (f) Magnetization as a function of applied field for GdSr2AlO5 and GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+) at room temperature.174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Normalized LPL spectra of the composites with various weight ratios of CA/YAG, referred to here as the blue:yellow (B:Y) ratio. (b) Photographs of the persistent luminescence composites with various B:Y compositions, taken 5 min after exposure to UV light.62 Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 25  Control the epitaxial growth of NaREF4 shell on CaF2:Dy core to produce CaF2:Dy@NaREF4 core–shell nanoparticles with various morphologies. (a) Calcium doping in NaYF4 shell precursor induces the shell layer to spherically coat on the core. (b) NaGdF4 isotropically grew on the faces of the core cube and (c) NaYbF4 preferred the anisotropic growth along the c-axis. (d) LiYF4 possesses a tetragonal crystal lattice and grew a rhomboid shell on the core. The scale bar is 50 nm.179 Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

1	SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+	Eu2+, Dy3+	Green	More than 5 h	Annealed in reducing atmosphere	Aluminate	In ballistics and thermal imaging, optical display and defence	
63,64

2	Y3Sc2Ga3−xAlxO12:Ce3+	Ce3+	Green	0.033 h	Annealed in controlled reducing or oxidising atmosphere	Garnet	Potentially in LEDs	
60

3	Y3Al2Ga3O12:Ce3+,Cr3+	Ce3+	Green	More than 0.833 h	Sintered in reducing atmosphere	Garnet	Potentially in display and solid-state lightning	
91

4	SrSi2AlO2N3:Eu2+,Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er, and Tm)	Eu2+, Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Dy, Ho, Er, and Tm)	Green	2 hours	High temperature under reducing atmosphere	Oxynitride	Potentially in display	
59

5	Ba2SiO4:Eu2+,Ho3+	Eu2+, Ho3+	Green	Up to 24 h	Calcined under reducing atmosphere	Silicate	Optical information storage	
121

6	β-NaYF4:Tb3+	Tb3+	Green	Up to 240 h	Hydrothermal method	Fluoride	Potentially in medical therapy	
37

7	Zn4B6O13:Ln3+ (Ln = Sm, Yb, Eu)	Ln3+ (Ln = Sm, Yb, Eu)	Green	Up to 0.5 h	High-temperature	Borate	
	
140

8	CaF2:Dy@NaYF4:Dy3+	Dy	Green	0.070 h	Colloidal and incubation	Hybrid/mixed	Potentially biomedical and catalysis	
179

9	(Sr1−δBaδ)2MgSi2O7:Eu2+,Dy3+	Eu2+, Dy3+	Blue	0.2 h	Annealed in reducing atmosphere	Silicate	Smartphone-based biosensing application	
30

10	Ca3Mg3(PO4)4:Eu2+	Eu2+	Blue	Few second-minutes	Sintered in reducing atmosphere	Phosphate	
	
123

11	Sr5(PO4)3Cl:Eu2+	Eu2+	Blue	2.89 × 10−5–2.89 h	Sintered in reducing atmosphere	Phosphate	Potentially optical storage material	
133

12	BaLu2Si3O10:Eu2+,Nd3+	Eu2+, Nd3+	Bluish-green	Over 6 h	Sintered in reducing atmosphere	Silicate	Potentially extensive applications	
108

13	CaAl2O4:Eu2+,Nd3+ + Y3Al5O12:Ce3+ [blue]	Eu2+, Nd3+, Ce3+	Blue	More than 45 h	High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere	Hybrid/mixed	Potentially in emergency signalling	
62

14	Na3ScSi3O9:Ce3+,Dy3+	Ce3+, Dy3+	Blue	17 h	High temperature solid-state reaction under oxidising atmosphere, followed by reducing atmosphere	Silicate	Potentially optical storage	
178

15	BaZrSi3O9:Eu2+,Pr3+	Eu2+, Pr3+	Cyan	15 h	High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere	Silicate	Potentially in night-vision illuminators and indicators	
61

16	CaSnO3:Lu3+	Lu3+	Cyan	0.03–0.05 h	High temperature sintering as compressed tablets	Perovskite	
	
149


1.15	YPO4:Pr3+, Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Er, Ho, Dy)	Pr3+, Ln3+ (Ln = Nd, Er, Ho, Dy)	Red	0.5 h	Calcined at high temperature	Phosphate	Potentially in in vivo imaging or charge storage material	
126

2.16	Na2CaSn2Ge3O12:Sm3+	Sm3+	Reddish-orange	More than 4.8 h	High-temperature solid-state reaction	Garnet	Potentially storage	
96

3.	
	Dy3+	White	7.8 h	High-temperature sintering	
	Potential applications	
99

4.17	CaAlSiN3:Eu2+	Eu2+	Red	0.75 h	Sintered under inert conditions	Nitride	Potentially as optical energy storage materials	
32

5.18	GdSr2AlO5:RE3+ (RE3+ = Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+)	Eu3+, Sm3+, Pr3+ and Dy3+	Red	2–6 h (depending on the RE)	Calcined at high temperature under reductive atmosphere	Al-garnet	Potentially in bio-medical applications	
174

6.19	LiNbO3:Mg2+, Pr3+ (single crystals)	Pr3+	Red	0.033 h	Czochralski method	Perovskite	Potential multifunctional applications	
57

7.20	Ba1−xSrxGa2O4:Sm3+	Sm3+	Red	2 h	High temperature solid-state reaction in air	Oxide	Potential applications	
27

8.21	CaWO4:Eu3+	Eu3+	Red	0.033 h	Co-precipitation	Transition metal oxide	Potentially in solid-state lighting	
165

9.22	Lu2O3:Eu3+	Eu3+	Red	0.1 h	Co-precipitation	Oxide	Potentially scintillators	
171

10.23	Ca2BO3Cl:Eu2+,Dy3+	Eu2+, Dy3+	Yellow	Up to 48 h	High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere	Borate	Potential applications	
28

11.24	Ca6BaP4O17:Eu2+,R3+ (R = Dy, Tb, Ce, Gd, Nd, Ho)	Eu2+, R3+ (R = Dy, Tb, Ce, Gd, Nd, Ho)	Yellow	1–47 h (depending on R)	High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere	Orthophosphate	Potential applications	
135,137

12.25	Sr3SiO5:Eu2+,Nb	Eu2+, Nb	Yellow	>14 h	Combustion followed by calcination at high temperature in reducing atmosphere	Silicate	Optical data storage-read out	
26

13.	(Sr1−xBax)3SiO5	Eu2+, Nb	Yellow–orange	>20 h	Combustion followed by calcination at high temperature in reducing atmosphere	
	Optical information storage	
110

14.26	SrSc2O4:Pr3+	Pr3+	Yellow	3 h	High temperature solid state	Transition metal oxide	Potentially afterglow materials	
168

15.27	ZrP2O7:Tb3+,Nb3+	Tb3+, Nb3+	Yellow–green	>0.17 h	High temperature reaction in reducing atmosphere	Phosphate	
	
128

16.28	Ba2Ga2GeO7:Pr3+	Pr3+	White	3 h	High temperature sintering in normal atmospheric conditions	Garnet	Potential applications	
92

17.31	Ca3Si2O7:Eu2+,Sm3+/Tm3+	Eu2+, Sm3+/Tm3+	Orange	0.83 h (Eu3+, Sm3+)	High temperature sintering as compressed pellets in oxidising or reducing atmosphere	Silicate	
	
115



1.32	La3GaGe5O16:Pr3+	Pr3+	Pink	0.05 h	High temperature sintering	Garnet	Potential applications	
102

2.33	Zn2P2O7:Tm3+ [blue]/Tm3+,Mn2+	Tm3+	Blue/blue to red – tunable	0.33 h	High temperature sintering in ambient conditions	Phosphate	
	
131

3.34	Ca4LaO(BO3)3:Eu3+ and Ca4EuO(BO3)3	Eu3+	Yellow to red – tunable	Red-up to 2 h	Combustion method followed by high temperature sintering.	Borate	
	
42

4.35	NaCa2GeO4F:Mn2+,Yb3+	Yb3+	Red to yellow/green – tunable	13 h (red)	High temperature sintering in reducing conditions	Garnet	Potential application in optical storage	
104

5.36	NaLuF4:Tb3+	Tb3+	Green–red–blue (tunable)	2 h (green)	Co-Precipitation	Fluoride	Nano scintillators	
157

6.37	CaMgSi2O6:Eu2+,Mn2+,Pr3+	Eu2+, Pr3+	Red and NIR-nanophosphor	>0.25 h	Sol–gel synthesis under acidic conditions	Silicate	
In vivo imaging	
47,49

7.38	Y2O2S:Eu3+,M2+ (M = Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), Ti4+ [Red nanotubes]	Eu3+	Red-nanotubes	0.30 h	Hydrothermal method combined with post-calcination process	Oxysulfide	
	
38

8.39	LaAlO3:Cr3+,Sm3+	Sm3+	Red nanophosphor	∼1.67 h	Co-Precipitation followed by sintering	Perovskite	
In vivo bio-imaging	
53


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
