Copper nanowires in recent electronic applications: progress and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC04744A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC04744A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 849-872Copper nanowires in recent electronic applications: progress and perspectives

        
          
            Xingsheng 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yumeng 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chengri 
            Yin
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Zhenxing 
            Yin
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Yanbian University, Yanji, Jilin 133002, China. E-mail: cryin@ybu.edu.cn; yinzx@ybu.edu.cn
Received 
      28th August 2019
    , Accepted 16th December 2019First published on 18th December 2019AbstractCopper nanowire (Cu NW)-based functional electrodes are one of the most important components in next-generation flexible and wearable electronics due to their superior electrical conductivity and remarkable mechanical flexibility. In the past decades, researchers have focused on the study of Cu NWs and have achieved many innovative results from synthesis to applications. Importantly, Cu NWs have immeasurable potential for extensive practical applications, especially in the field of electronic devices, due to their significantly lower price compared to other metal NWs. This review article emphasizes the recent progress of Cu NWs in electronic applications, including flexible transparent electrodes for optical devices, current collectors for lithium-ion batteries, and stretchable electrodes for wearable devices. Furthermore, various technical issues and personal perspectives are discussed that will help the researchers to solve some of the difficulties faced in the future. Finally, we put forward a brief outlook of Cu NWs in the above-mentioned electronics to promote better exploration and development of research for practical applications.
1 Introduction
Copper (Cu) as one of the most important industrial metals has received considerable attention and it is widely used in various fields, such as electronics, machinery, automobiles, military, and aerospace, due to its remarkable electrical conductivity, high thermal conductivity, and excellent mechanical properties.1–4 In particular, in the field of electronics, above 80% of the electronic devices use Cu as the wire material to ensure the rapid transmission of signals due to the high electron transfer speed.5–7 Although silver (Ag) has the most superior electrical conductivity, the high cost and insufficient resources limit its applications in fields requiring mass or large-scale production.8,9 Obviously, the great merit of Cu is that it has abundant sources when compared with Ag and gold (Au) while showing similar electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties due to its electronic configuration and crystal structure.10,11 According to incomplete statistics, the content of Cu in the earth's crust is approximately 0.005–0.007%, which is more than 700 times that of Ag. Also, Cu remains unbeatable in terms of the price-to-performance ratio, exhibiting similar electrical conductivity to that of Ag, and it is about 100 times cheaper.12,13 These reasons have promoted Cu to become an indispensable crucial material in various fields, realizing industrialization. Notably, the annual global output of Cu was approximately 20 million tons in 2016, which is over 740 times that of Ag, next only to iron (Fe) and aluminum (Al) in metals.14 There is no denying that Cu has gained numerous scientific and social interests over the past decades.
With the sizes of the device being micronized and even nano-sized, Cu nanomaterials have been extensively explored to meet the needs of this development. Compared with bulk materials, Cu nanomaterials exhibit unique thermal, optical, electronic, mechanical, and catalytic properties.15–17 Coincidently, next-generation devices require superior performance and some special features, which can adopt these nanomaterials. As cost-effective and highly conductive candidates, Cu nanomaterials are promising to solve the cost and scale issues for many future applications, which is impossible with Ag and Au. To date, various shapes of Cu nanomaterials have been successfully synthesized, including nanoparticles, nanorods, nanocubes, nanowires (NWs), nanorings, and nanoplates.8,10,18–20 Particularly, Cu NWs have been the subject of extensive investigation due to their special one-dimensional shape with a high aspect ratio, low annealing temperature, and highly efficient electron transfer speed.21,22 In spite of these advantages, the precise control of size with high uniformity in large scale preparation is still a big challenge.
In recent years, tremendous efforts for the study of Cu NWs have been made to develop potential applications in various fields, such as optical devices, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), sensors and catalysts.23–25 However, surface oxidation as a critical problem is considered to be a major limitation for their real applications.26,27 Additionally, the aggregation caused by poor dispersion, also a technical issue, is difficult to solve.17,28,29 The reason for these problems are mainly attributed to the high surface energy by their highly activated surface atoms. Therefore, effectively reducing the surface energy is a research focus without changing its physical and chemical properties.
This review paper outlines the latest advances in Cu NWs-based electronic applications, including flexible transparent electrode for optical devices, current collector for lithium-ion battery, and stretchable electrode for wearable devices (Fig. 1). According to our actual experimental experience, we also comprehensively introduce the problems encountered during the preparation process. Although several meaningful review papers have previously overviewed Cu NWs synthesis and applications, the actual challenges faced through the experiment have not been fully analyzed. In many research, various basic advantages of Cu NWs have been lost in order to solve some technical problems, to the best of our knowledge. We have not only elaborated the development and practical applications of Cu NWs but also discussed in detail the reasons for these problems that occurred during the experimental process. In addition, the characteristics and comparison of some technical strategies are introduced to provide more convenient use and effective improvement in future.
 Fig. 1  Application of Cu NWs in three different electronic devices, such as flexible transparent electrode for optical devices, current collector for lithium-ion battery, and stretchable electrode for wearable devices (adapted with permission from ref. 22, 90, 171 and 217, © Springer Nature Publishing AG 2013, © American Chemical Society 2014, © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2018, and © American Chemical Society 2014). 
2 Flexible transparent conductive electrode
With the development trend of flexible displays, transparent electrodes with highly flexible properties have been extensively explored in order to meet the market demands.30–32 Although indium tin oxide (ITO) has been widely used as transparent electrodes in various types of devices to date due to its high opto-electrical performance, the high brittleness due to oxide bonding has limited it to flat-panel devices.33–35 In addition, ITO is expensive and unstable owing to the scarcity and uneven distribution of indium on earth.36,37 The harsh engineering condition of the vapor-phase sputtering process is another critical factor in raising the ITO prices. Despite the fact that zinc-based metal oxides without indium have been tried for replacing ITO, such as zinc tin oxide (ZTO) and aluminium zinc oxide (AZO), both the opto-electrical performance and flexibility are not enough to achieve satisfactory results for next-generation displays.38–40 The promising alternatives can be roughly classified into four types: carbon materials, metal nanofilm, metal mesh/grid, and metal NWs.
For the carbon materials, graphene, single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT), and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) have been studied as transparent electrode materials. As is well known, the mechanical strength and flexibility of these carbon materials are vastly superior to commonly used ITO.41–43 In particular, graphene with a single-crystal structure has recently attracted tremendous attention because of its high transparency and excellent electrical conductivity.44–46 The graphene monolayer is only 0.34 nm in thickness, which exhibits approximately 97.7% transparency. Graphene is formed by sp2-hybridized monolayer carbon atoms, which contributes to the remaining electrons in the p orbital that make a large π bond.44,47 The free electrons in the π bond move directionally in the plane when the voltage is applied, resulting in excellent electrical conductivity.48 However, graphene is currently difficult to use in large-area practical applications because of its high production costs and low yield. Although SWCNT and RGO are more convenient than graphene in the film-making process, the high contact resistance at the junction parts seriously hinder the movement of electrons, then reduces the opto-electrical performance of the thin film.42,49–51 Therefore, the films made by SWCNT and RGO are also difficult to use in some optical devices, such as solar cells and OLED, which require high-performance transparent electrodes.
Normally, the two-dimensional metal nanofilm with excellent conductivity and high transparency is the most ideal structure for optical devices because metal can transfer electrons at a high speed and the two-dimensional structure can generate an electric field comprehensively and uniformly in the presence of voltage difference.52–54 Theoretically, metal nanofilms also exhibit the transparent property when the thickness is extremely thin. Unlike ITO, however, the metal has a low penetration depth, for example, that of Ag is only 23 nm.55 Therefore, the thickness of metal films must be less than 6 nm to achieve 80% transparency.56 During the nucleation process, unfortunately, the high surface tension and high surface energy of the metal hinder the nanocluster to form a two-dimensional plane structure with thickness below 5 nm, whether using deposition method or wet-chemical synthetic method.57,58 Moreover, the metal nanofilm with thickness below 5 nm is extremely unstable due to its highly active surface atoms, which easily cause deformation or deterioration. Therefore, the metal-based flexible transparent conductive electrodes (FTCEs) have been merely investigated in the form of mesh/grid and NW films.
As a promising candidate, the metal mesh/grid shows better opto-electrical performances than ITO.59–61 The metal mesh/grid is made of highly conductive metal materials and forms a specific pattern on a glass or plastic substrate. Due to the high ductility of the metal and the patterned structure, the metal mesh/grid exhibits a good bending resistance that is suitable for flexible devices.62,63 Furthermore, metal mesh/grid can be prepared by continuous engineering of roll-to-roll process, which is closer to meet the needs in practical production lines. However, the metal mesh/grid with line widths larger than 1 micron size is generally difficult to apply to next-generation high-pixel light-emitting devices owing to the influence of Moire interference and light reflection.64,65 In addition, large non-conductive holes and high surface roughness as two other critical issues strongly block the applications of metal mesh/grid in organic solar cells (OSCs) or organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). To date, many ways have been tried to prepare the metal mesh/grid with nano-sized width for high-pixel light-emitting devices. In addition to the traditional method of photolithography, various innovative methods, such as nanoimprint lithography, laser sintering, inkjet printing, and grain boundary growth have been explored in recent years.66–68 Unfortunately, the engineering costs typically decrease with line width and ultimately result in higher processing costs than that of ITO.
In comparison, the metal NW thin films have little influence on Moire interference because of the width of the NWs below 100 nm and random distribution, which can be more suitable as FTCEs for future high-pixel light-emitting devices. For the NW-based transparent electrodes, the basic principle of opto-electrical performance is based on the random network structure of the NW film like that of a spider web.69–73 Normally, the metal NWs are inherently opaque, regardless of their size. The high transparency of the film is caused by the uncovered areas of NWs, through which light can pass.74–76 Obviously, the connected NWs network can be used to transfer electrons quickly to provide the film with excellent electrical conductivity due to the inherent low resistivity of the metal.77,78 In addition, the metallic ductility and one-dimensional structure are advantageous to improve the mechanical properties of the FTCEs. Based on the solution-process synthesis and coating method, furthermore, the overall engineering price of metal NW thin film is much lower than that of other materials, which are made by vacuum sputtering process.79,80 Therefore, the metal NWs have received great attention for next-generation flexible devices.
As the top two highly conductive materials in the world, the synthesis of Ag and Cu NW is a hot research topic for application in FTCE.32,81–84 Among them, Ag NWs are preferentially researched for developing because Ag is more conductive. Also, the morphology of Ag NWs is relatively easy to control due to their low surface energy. With untiring efforts in research, the synthesis and coating technologies of Ag NWs have fully matured, and the FTCEs prepared with Ag NWs have achieved considerable performance that is beyond that of the ITO, which have been realized for the purpose of commercialization.85 However, the high cost due to the scarcity of Ag is the critical factor that limits their wide applications.21,85 As mentioned above, the price determined by earth resources is difficult to control.
Compared with Ag NWs, Cu NWs-based FTCEs have great shortcomings in terms of opto-electrical performance and manufacturing technologies, including synthesis, coating, and networking. Firstly, the instability of Cu seeds caused by the high surface energy makes the synthetic conditions of Cu NWs relatively harsh, which is the main reason why research was not active before 2010. Even if Cu NWs are successfully synthesized, the nanometer-size width causes them to aggregate in a steady state, resulting in increased difficulty in uniform coating with single NW. Finally, the active atoms on the Cu NWs surface promote the reaction with oxygen in air to form an oxide layer.86 This kind of oxide layer as a semiconductor or insulator hinders the movement path of electrons and therefore, mainly increases the resistance, which is very unfavourable for the opto-electrical performance of FTCE. These problems are not only related to the properties of the NWs but also have a significant impact on the subsequent processes. Obviously, the manoeuvrability of Cu-NWs is incomparable to that of Ag NWs. Also, the final performance of Cu NWs-based FTCE is slightly lower than that of Ag NWs.
Fortunately, the resources of Cu on earth are relatively abundant and are enough for a wide range of applications.87,88 This huge advantage has significant value with full attraction to overcome the above-mentioned disadvantages to study Cu NWs. Moreover, the relative atomic mass of copper is only about 60% of silver, which is very beneficial for the production of lightweight devices. Therefore, Cu NWs have received tremendous attention and turned into a research focus.
2.1 Cu NWs-based FTCE
One of the most important roles of Cu NWs is to prepare transparent electrodes for various opto-electrical devices, such as solar cells, touch screens, and OLED. Due to the flexibility of metal NWs, moreover, the transparent electrodes can exhibit good mechanical behaviors, such as compressive and tensile bending properties. Although Cu NWs have been successfully synthesized since 2003, Cu NWs were first applied to the field of FTCE in 2010, which was reported by Rathmell et al.9 Cu NWs with 90 nm width and 10 μm length were used to prepare films by filtration-transfer method and annealed at 175 °C with a condition of 95% N2 and 5% H2. The Cu NWs film not only exhibited an opto-electrical performance of Rsh = 15 Ω □−1 at 65% T but also showed no change in the conductivity even after one thousand bending. However, this performance has an obvious shortcoming in terms of transparency, which is mainly attributed to the length and dispersibility of NWs. Just one year later, this research group increased the transparency to above 85% (Fig. 2a–d).21 Both synthetic and coating methods were used to improve the high-performance FTCE. The synthetic method was modified to acquire thinner (<60 nm) and longer NWs (>20 μm); moreover, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as an additional capping agent was used for the prevention of Cu NW aggregation. Importantly, the coating method was changed to the meyer-rod coating to complete the NW deposition in a more direct and convenient way. Also, the ink formulation process for Cu NWs was investigated to apply this coating method. As a result, the Cu NWs film showed a high opto-electrical performance of Rsh = 30 Ω □−1 at 85% T, which is equivalent to the Ag NWs film. More interestingly, this Cu NWs-based FTCE was not only stable in air but also shows high bending property that flexed 1000 times without remarkable performance degradation.21 As the first FTCE successfully prepared with Cu NWs, these studies are particularly significant for the academic field of materials, which created a new research direction for follow-up researchers. For industrial production, the Cu NWs-based FTCEs are also worth looking forward to for application in the development of next-generation devices.
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Meyer rod coating of Cu NWs ink on the PET substrate. (c) Lighting of an LED using the Cu NWs-transparent electrode as an electrical circuit. (d) UV-Vis transmission spectrum of the ITO and various Cu NWs films with different densities (adapted with permission from ref. 21, © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 2011). (e) SEM image of ultra-long Cu NWs-based transparent electrodes with 91% transparency. (f) Comparison of the sheet resistances and transmittances of the electrodes made from the ultra-long Cu NWs with other works. (g) Photograph and corresponding UV-Vis transmission spectrum for 5 Ω □−1 of Cu NWs-based transparent electrode (adapted with permission from ref. 89, © American Chemical Society 2012). 
In 2012, this opto-electrical performance record of Cu NWs film was improved to 90 Ω □−1 at 90% T by Zhang et al. as shown in Fig. 2e–g.89 Different from aforementioned works, the ultra-long Cu NWs was prepared by using hexadecylamine and hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) with platinum (Pt) catalyst. Long NWs induce the reduction of contact resistance, when the films completely formed. To enhance the performance, the Cu NWs film was sintered at 300 °C for deep percolation. However, this temperature is difficult to apply to polymer-based flexible transparent substrates. Also, the expensive Pt catalyst that increases the overall manufacturing costs is not suitable for Cu NW preparation.
One year later, Guo et al. reported the synthesis of ultrathin Cu NWs with an appreciable length and application of FTCE with a high opto-electrical performance, which reached 51.5 Ω □−1 at 93.1% T (Fig. 3).22 The synthetic method was based on CuCl2 as the precursor and oleylamine as the solvent, surfactant, and reducing agent with Ni(acac)2 as the catalyst. The ultra-thin Cu NWs with a 16.2 nm diameter were prepared and exhibited high flexibility that endures nearly 180° bending. As a meaningful result, the Cu NWs percolated at a low temperature of 150 °C after the film-making process and the final films showed a superior opto-electrical performance. Moreover, the relationship between oxidation resistance, welding junction, and sintering temperature was comprehensively analysed. Notably, the Cu NWs films were first used as the top and bottom electrodes on a blue LED chip that was successfully turned on. However, these Cu NWs require 10 h of preparation time, which must be greatly improved for practical applications. Moreover, the relationship between welding conditions and oxidation stability still needs to be clarified and optimized.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM image of Cu NWs synthesized with an average diameter of 16.5 nm. (b) UV-Vis transmission spectrum of various Cu NWs-based transparent electrode. (c) Plot of transmittance vs. sheet resistance of various Cu NWs films with different densities. (d) Schematic illustration of the GaN-based LED structure together with Cu NW-based transparent electrodes on n- and p-type areas. (e and f) I–V curves of the contact of Cu NW-based transparent electrodes with n-GaN and p-GaN, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 22, © Springer Nature Publishing AG 2013). 
The Cu NWs-based transparent electrodes were successfully applied to organic solar cells by Sachse et al. in the same year (Fig. 4a–e).23 In addition, several issues in the above-mentioned works have been improved, involving synthesis, coating, and networking. Although various sizes of Cu NWs are available for the film-making process, the films made from 44.6 nm width of Cu NWs exhibited better electrode performance than that of thinner NWs. The experimental results demonstrate that the width of NWs less than 30 nm is extremely unstable and quickly oxidized on exposure to oxygen, resulting in fast degradation. The conductivity of narrow NWs is more affected by oxidation because the ratio of electron transfer path was more dramatically decreased with reduction in the conductive core parts of Cu NWs. In comparison, Cu NWs with 44.6 nm width exhibited excellent conductive performance with a high stability. After achieving sufficient opto-electrical performance (24 Ω □−1 at 88% T) of the transparent electrode using these Cu NWs, the organic solar cells were attempted to be prepared. However, the surface roughness of the NWs is a critical issue that has to be solved before deposition of the organic layers. The highly conductive PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH1000) were deposited on the electrode surface where NWs are not covered, thereby making a planarization layer to reduce the surface roughness of the NWs. Additionally, PEDOT:PSS acts as the current collector to generate a stable electric field in the organic solar cell. More importantly, the problems of contact degradation and unfavorable environment for Cu NWs during cell-making process were properly addressed so as to successfully apply to organic solar cells. Also, the importance of stability of Cu NWs in practical applications was experimentally demonstrated. As a result, the organic solar cell using Cu NWs-based transparent electrode exhibits 51.7% fill factor and 3% external quantum efficiency. Despite the performance of solar cell that is still not as good as that when using ITO, the Cu NW-based transparent electrode was successfully applied to solar cell for the first time, which is an exciting, encouraging, and meaningful challenge. Also, it looks forward to integration with actual industrial production after a substantial improvement.
 Fig. 4  (a) Cu NWs dispersion solution. (b) Cu NWs coated on glass substrate. (c) Corresponding SEM of Cu NWs. (d) Comparison of the opto-electrical performance of various transparent electrodes. (e) j–V curves and key parameters of solar cells on ITO and Cu NW electrode illuminated by a sun-simulator at 1 sun (adapted with permission from ref. 23, © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 2013). (f) A photograph of Cu NW network embedded on the base glass-fiber reinforced plastic film and (g) corresponding surface SEM image. (h) Schematic illustration of the flexible OLED structure using the Cu NWs-based transparent electrode and (i and j) photographs of the flexible OLED (adapted with permission from ref. 90, © American Chemical Society 2014). 
In just under a year, Im et al. reported that Cu NW films were monolithically embedded on a matrix of glass-fabric reinforced plastic film to fabricate a highly smooth transparent electrode for flexible OLED (Fig. 4f–j).90 Importantly, these composite structures not only show an excellent oxidation resistance but also have a low surface roughness with a high robustness. Firstly, the Cu NWs film was deposited on the surface-treated glass substrate through filtration-transfer method and percolation of the junctions took place at the condition of 20% H2 and 80% N2 at 200 °C. However, the intrinsic surface roughness by stacking of Cu NWs is the most critical problem that results in device failure because the condition of roughness is very harsh for the fabrication of OLED device. In order to reduce the surface roughness of Cu NWs, UV-curable resin on glass fabric as a transparent matrix was used for encasing of Cu NWs; thereby, the Cu NWs film was transferred to the resin matrix after UV-curing process. The resin matrix tightly encapsulated the Cu NWs with the exception of minimal exposure plane that was naturally formed by contact with a donor glass substrate, leading to an extremely smooth surface topography (Rrms < 2 nm and 16 nm of peak-to-peak value). The Cu NWs film embedded on the composite matrix exhibited a remarkable opto-electrical property of Rsh = 25 Ω □−1 at 82% T, which is the total transparency including the Cu NWs film and matrix. Furthermore, both superior mechanical stability and high oxidation stability are simultaneously reflected on the resulting FTCE because of the tight encapsulation of Cu NWs. Most excitingly, the FTCE using the Cu NWs as the main conductive material were successfully applied to flexible OLED device, which have a comparable performance with the usage of ITO. However, the advantages of the low price of Cu NWs have not been discussed in this work. The final price of Cu NWs-based FTCE may be no lower than that of Ag NWs owing to the use of expensive reagents during the experiment. In addition, the fabrication process is relatively complicated, which is not suitable for industrial production. Therefore, we expect that it may not only enhances the research value but also meets the industrial needs through later improvements.
To improve various drawbacks in engineering steps, Yin et al. reported a manufacturing method of FTCE with all-solution processes in 2015, involving synthesis, coating, and networking. Interestingly, the Cu NWs with a curved structure were prepared by a polyol co-reduction method.91 Also, these Cu NWs have a stable structure with the diameter of 50 nm and the length of 25–40 μm. Furthermore, the uniform Cu NWs film were coated on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate by meniscus-dragging deposition method, which precisely controls the transparency by various coating parameters. Finally, the solvent-dipped annealing method was used for networking of the Cu NWs with contact type. Although the opto-electrical performance (Rsh = 99.14 Ω □−1 at 86.62% T) of FTCE is not prominent compared to others, several methods with all-solution approach have abundant novelty that effectively solved various technical issues. However, the problem of roughness remains to be solved and the technologies still need to be improved for better performance.
Notably, some deficiencies have been properly addressed by Yin et al. in 2017 (Fig. 5).29 The synthetic method for curved Cu NWs has been improved to enhance the purity and reduce the aggregation phenomenon. In addition, the solvent selection was comprehensively considered for improvement of dispersibility of Cu NWs, which is more beneficial for uniform coating by meniscus-dragging deposition method. In order to be more suitable for practical application, the large-area coating of Cu NWs film with high uniformity was successfully applied by controlling several coating parameters. Also, the 20 μm line-space patterns on the Cu NWs film was produced by polyurethane-stamped patterning method. More importantly, the Cu NWs network was deeply percolated by solvent-dipped welding method, which is different from previous work, leading to the better conductive performance of the film. Finally, the Cu NWs films were transferred onto the PU matrix to acquire the end product of FTCE, which exhibits Rsh = 53.48 Ω □−1 at 85.71% T as opto-electrical performance with high mechanical properties. During this transfer process, the Cu NWs are partially embedded in the PU matrix to reduce the surface roughness (Rrms = 14.36 nm) by controlling various conditions. Despite the fact that the performance of FTCE needs to be improved for usage in solar cell and OLED, various innovative techniques with fully solution-processed approach is very meaningful for both research and industry. Taking into account the connectivity and harmony between various engineering steps, this study fully retains the advantage of cost performance of Cu NWs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Large-scale coating photograph and (b) SEM image of the curved Cu NWs on the PI substrate. (c) Opto-electrical performances for curved Cu NWs film on the PI substrate. (d) Optical microscopic image of the curved Cu NWs film with 20 μm line-spacing pattern. (e and f) The images of lighting of an LED connected by the Cu NWs-based flexible transparent electrode as an electrical circuit (adapted with permission from ref. 29, © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2017). 
In recent years, many Cu NWs-based FTCEs with high opto-electrical performances have been reported. As is well known, however, the transparent electrode performance is a combination of two contradictory properties of electrical conductivity and transparency, so it is important to find a suitable equilibrium performance state. Furthermore, due to the incorporation of Cu NWs, some new unprecedented properties are also achieved, such as flexibility and instability. Therefore, we consider that blind focus on and pursuit of one property is incorrect for practical applications. Each device requires a corresponding FTCE, which has suitable opto-electrical performance and mechanical properties. Also, the key meaning of Cu NWs usage must not be lost in the manufacturing process of the FTCE.
2.2 Oxidation and aggregation
Compared with noble metals, such as Au, Ag, and Pt, the surface atoms of Cu are relatively active and easily react with oxygen, then make an oxide layer.92,93 This phenomenon is particularly pronounced when Cu is nano-sized because of the surface effects and small size effects. Furthermore, the Cu NWs are especially unstable at less than 30 nm width because the highly active surface atoms react more easily with oxygen in air to form a stable oxide layer.23 These oxide layers act as an insulator to prevent the electron transfer, also known as contact resistance between NWs. Although a thin oxide layer does not have a great influence on the conductivity in bulk materials, it is a critical factor for electrical conductivity in nanomaterials, which directly affects the overall resistance of the films. In particular, the effect of thin oxide layer is more serious for the Cu NWs-based transparent electrode due to their low surface density.93
In wet-chemical synthesis, the reducing agent at a certain temperature can be used for the reduction of Cu+-ion precursor to prepare elemental Cu. However, the oxide film is rapidly formed on their surface when the reaction temperature decreased to lose the reducing ability. Normally, the oxidation of Cu NWs occurs all the time when exposed to air because of their high activity.28 Nevertheless, the Cu NWs are inevitably exposed to air during the cleaning, storage, and coating processes. Therefore, the films made by Cu NWs require a post-reduction or post-etching step to make up for this shortcoming, which is much different from Ag NWs. In general, the post-reduction and welding of NWs are carried out in the same step through heat treatment in a reducing environment. Unfortunately, the Cu NWs films are also naturally oxidized after the welding process unless specially stored in inert conditions. Different from the oxidation in dispersion state, however, the junction parts of the NWs are already percolated so as to be resistant to secondary oxidation.26,91 Therefore, the tendency of the film to decrease in electrical conductivity is significantly slower because the contact resistance is prevented from being generated.
In recent years, Kang et al. firstly presented an innovative method of laser-induced direct local reduction to reduce Cu oxide to pure Cu without the inert gas conditions.94 This method is based on the efficient absorption of the laser beam of CuxO with the protection of a reducing solvent, such as ethylene glycol, to prepare the highly conductive Cu electrode by an effective and simple one step method. After several years of exploration, Han et al. applied this technology with a significant improvement to the mutual conversion of Cu NWs and CuxO NWs to realize the nano-recycling process after oxidation of Cu NWs.95 In addition to reducing solvents, acids as etchants can also be used in laser-processing environments to remove oxide layers on the surface of Cu nanoparticles, although the mechanism of removing oxide is different.96 Obviously, these methods can effectively solve the waste problem of Cu NWs after oxidation and improve the recovery rate.
In order to reduce the negative impact of oxidation, moreover, several methods were attempted to be used for the preparation of passivation layers on Cu NWs surface, such as carbon, polymer, and other stable metals. Although the passivation layer can improve the oxidation resistance, generally, it also enhances the electrical resistance of the film owing to the contact resistance in inter-NW junctions.97–99 Even if Ag having a better conductivity is used as the shell, the contact resistance is generated due to the non-single crystal structure, resulting in the enhancement of the sheet resistance of films. Although the passivation layer is obviously a good way to improve the stability, the materials or processes making the passivation layer tend to increase the overall price of the FTCE, which is contrary to the motivation of the use of Cu.100,101 To date, no particularly good results for FTCE have been found that still retain the original opto-electrical property and cost performance while effectively increasing the oxidation stability.
Therefore, a stable protective film is often encapsulated on the Cu NWs network after a complete connection. Although there is a slight loss in the opto-electrical performance of FTCE, this method can effectively overcome the chemical instability of the Cu NWs network, which is induced by the penetration of oxygen and moisture. Kim et al. used UV-curable polyurethane acrylate resin as an encapsulation layer to effectively improve the chemical stability of Cu NWs-based FTCE.102 Hong et al. provided a semi-permanent Cu NWs network with an oxidation-proof multiple encapsulation layer that was made of a polyimide and SiOx thin film.103 Although the additional coatings complicate the engineering steps, this is undoubtedly an effective solution to the oxidation problem of the Cu NWs network.
Besides oxidation, aggregation is another critical issue to be solved, which is directly related to the coating quality.29 In general, the narrow width and large specific surface area of the Cu NWs increase their surface atom numbers. However, the high surface energy caused by insufficient atomic coordination makes these surface atoms extremely unstable.16 Furthermore, Cu has high elemental activity, which is determined by the electrons at the outermost layer of the atom and the atomic radius. Therefore, Cu NWs with high activity tend to reduce their surface energy and reach a steady state by aggregation or surface reaction. However, the synthesis of Cu NWs requires a strong reducing environment at high temperatures, which intensely enhances their activity. Under the reducing condition that limits the surface oxidation, the Cu NWs can only be aggregated with each other to reduce their surface energy during the synthetic process.28 Moreover, the aggregation phenomenon also occurs in the storage process. Cu NWs are easily and naturally sink by gravity and then aggregate due to their large weight.
Fortunately, the aggregation problem can be solved by various methods, which is different from the problem of oxidation. The usage of surfactants as a conventional method is widely used in synthetic methods. Generally, the surface of Cu NWs easily adsorbs some molecules of surfactants, thus effectively reducing the van der Waals force between each other to prevent aggregation. In addition, core–shell structure is another efficient method to improve the stability of Cu NWs, which is beneficial in reducing both oxidation and aggregation phenomenon.104 However, the contact resistance in the core and the shell reduces the conductivity of the FTCE. Hence, the design of the surface structure is critical for Cu NWs.105
2.3 Effects for structure of Cu NWs
As is well known, the surfactants play a key role in synthesis of Cu NWs.106 In micelle/reverse micelle method, the NW structure was strongly determined by the surfactants, which act as the soft mold.107 Furthermore, the various surfactants were directly coordinated with Cu+ ions to make a Cu+-ion based complex that effectively decreases the reduction potential for Cu NWs synthesis.3 In addition, the surfactants are often used as surface modifier to change the physical properties on the NW surface, which is capped on the surface of Cu NWs through chemical bonding or van der Waals forces. For example, halide ions as the directional shape-control etchant is generally used for Cu NW synthesis to make the decahedron shaped seed and further grow into NW shape.21,108 However, excessive halide ions can affect the role of surfactants because the halide ions also form chemical bonding with the NW surface. In addition, the motivation of low-cost Cu NW preparation is restricted by various types of expensive surfactants. Therefore, the selection of surfactants in the Cu NW synthetic system is more limited and more complicated than that of the general spherical shape. Although surfactants play a positive role in the processes of NW synthesis, dispersion, and storage, they have a negative effect on the conductivity after film formation. The selection of surfactant needs to comprehensively consider the impact on subsequent engineering process.
Moreover, the role of the reducing agent is also extremely critical. By controlling the type and concentration of reducing agent, the growth mechanism of the Cu nanocrystals can be determined. Although the actual growth process of the Cu NW is too rapid to be observed due to the high activity of copper seeds, when different reducing agents are applied, the Cu NWs with different shapes can be clearly found after the complete reaction, such as curved Cu NW and ultralong Cu NW. The influence of each shape on the performance of FTCE is obviously different. When made into FTCE, as an example, the ultra-long Cu NWs exhibit a special advantage in terms of opto-electrical performance because of their high aspect-ratio structure. In comparison, the curved Cu NWs are particularly beneficial for the mechanical properties of FTCE due to the high yield strength caused by their self-bendable structure.
2.4 Fabrication of Cu NWs film
Although the inherent conductivity of Cu is quite high, which is second only to Ag, the performance of a transparent electrode is represented by the sheet resistance, which is measured as the surface resistance. The surface density of Cu determines the surface resistance of the transparent electrode. Also, there are a lot of unoccupied sections in the entire surface due to high transparency. Therefore, the sheet resistance of the transparent electrode is much larger than the general metal surface such as the metal foil we know, which is completely opaque. In addition, the surface uniformity of the transparent electrode must be guaranteed for precise control of the device, especially in large-scale production.91 Typically, the NWs are made into a film by random distribution. In an ideal state, the random distribution of nano-sized particles can be considered as uniform distribution of the entire surface under macroscopic conditions. However, many factors influence the distribution process, thus hindering the random distribution of NWs, thereby affecting the quality of film, such as the dispersion of NWs and coating method.

2.4.1 Selection of solvent. 
Normally, the human eye can identify objects larger than 1 micron. A single NW with diameter less than 100 nm is considered to be transparent. However, the Cu NWs are prone to aggregation and agglomeration due to the high activity of Cu and surface effect of the nanoparticles. After the synthetic process, the NWs are generally dispersed and stored in solvent to be applied for coating. Obviously, the dispersion of Cu NW is an essential problem that needs to be solved, which is the most important factor in the coating of NW film. The poor dispersibility can lead to aggregation of NWs, resulting in the superposition of NWs and lose the advantage of individual NW. The aggregation of NWs may be perceived by the human eye and may also cause some optical effects in the transparent electrode, such as the haze phenomenon.88,109 Moreover, the dispersibility of NW is one of the most critical factor for good deposition on the target substrate, such as PET, polyimide (PI), and glass. Generally, colloidal dispersion is closely related to the surface property of materials, compatibility of the solvent, and materials, polarity, and viscosity of the solvent.17,110 In addition, each coating method requires a suitable solvent, and the volatility and toxicity of the solvent must be fully considered. In industrial production, toxic solvents are not available due to environmental restrictions. Therefore, the surface modification of nanomaterial and solvent selection are very important for real application.
Typically, a solvent with high polarity induces better dispersion of nanomaterials that are capped by polar surfactants. As is well known, polarity is closely related to the molecular formula of the solvent. This polar solvent must satisfy the same surface properties as the nanoparticles, such as hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. In addition, viscosity is another critical condition for the dispersion of nanoparticles.29 Basically, the viscosity of the solvent is due to the friction between the molecules of the solvent. The nanoparticles are strongly affected by these frictional forces, when dispersed in the solvent. Low viscosity solvents tend to induce agglomeration or sinking of nanoparticles due to their low friction force. Notably, a solvent with higher viscosity does not necessarily have a better effect on the dispersion of the nanoparticles. Although the frictional force inhibits the aggregation force to increase the dispersibility when the nanoparticles are completely dispersed, the frictional force also acts as a major hindrance when the nanoparticles are first-dispersed or re-dispersed in the solvent. Furthermore, the viscosity of the solvent has a great impact on the quality of the coating film.
Besides viscosity, the volatilization of solvent is also an important factor in various coating methods, especially for solvent-dragging coatings, such as wire-wound bar coating, spin coating, and meniscus dragging deposition. The concentration of NWs is decreased during the volatilization process, resulting in collision and aggregation of the NWs by Brownian motion. Therefore, solvent selection should take into account various factors, such as polarity, compatibility, viscosity, volatility, and toxicity, to be used for the coating process and further applications.


2.4.2 Coating process. 
The metal NW-based FTCE often requires a precise coating method to be prepared. In addition, the opto-electrical properties of the NW films are directly determined by the amount of deposition. The most important role of the coating is the uniform distribution that is no exception for Cu NWs. However, the Cu NWs are difficult to distribute uniformly due to sinking by gravity and the aggregation by van der Waals force, which is an important technical problem to be solved. When there is no problem in the compatibility between solvent, substrate, and NWs, the coating method and their parameters need to be controlled. To date, various coating methods have been tried to evenly deposit the Cu NWs on the substrate for the high-performance FTCE.
The wire-wound bar coating, as a traditional method, is commonly used in various studies, and is expected to be applied for industrial production.9,21 Many materials, including Cu NWs, are often used in this way to make the films. The greatest advantage of wire-wound bar coating is simple, convenience, continuous, and large-scale fabrication. Furthermore, the wire-wound structure with various sizes can control the thickness of the coating solution within a certain range. Although the ink formulation as an auxiliary factor assists the coating quality of the Cu NWs, the highly accurate control of transparency is still a difficult problem for current technology due to the irregular Brownian movement of Cu NWs and the concentration change by solvent volatilization. Moreover, the thickness of the solution is difficult to precisely control due to the one-time coating and insufficient controllable parameters.
The filtration-transfer method is usually used for the experiment due to their high accuracy.22,89 The Cu NWs were coated onto a transferable membrane by simple filtration method. Then, the Cu NWs film with random network were transferred onto a flexible transparent substrate to make the final FTCE. Compared with other methods, the solvent volatilization process is not required, resulting in minimization of influence of aggregation during the coating process. Therefore, the quality of the FTCE is relatively high, involving the accuracy of transparency and uniformity of the film. However, the filtration process is not applied to large-area fabrication owing to the limited size of the filter membrane. In addition, the filter membrane is very expensive to enhance the production costs, thus losing the important point of Cu NWs usage. Also, incomplete transfers or tearing problems need to be addressed in detail by peeling techniques.
As is well known, spray coating is commonly used for thin-film making process with various materials.23 When the equipment and conditions are complete, the high-quality and large-area films with continuous process can be fabricated by spray coating, which is suitable for industrial production. Also, the aggregation phenomenon is not obvious in spray coating due to splashing of the solution with a certain size, assuming a low concentration of the well-dispersed Cu NWs. As an inevitable problem, however, the nozzle in the spray gun is often blocked by the long Cu NWs, which are beneficial for high-performance FTCE. Furthermore, the waste of solvent as a problem to be solved is very serious due to the use of Cu NWs with low concentration. More importantly, the investment costs in the early stage are relatively high owing to the expensive equipment, involving spray coater, safety box, and controllable stage.
As a novel method in recent years, the meniscus-dragging deposition (MDD) method is expected to be applied to the preparation of Cu NWs film with a large size.29 Interestingly, this MDD method dragged the well-dispersed Cu NWs with meniscus shape to directly and uniformly deposit onto the target substrate, which is attributed to the effect of fluidic force and volatilization of solvent.111 In general, fluidic force can effectively restrain the aggregation of Cu NWs and the rapid evaporation of the solvent causes the uniform deposition of Cu NWs. Furthermore, the opto-electrical performance of the Cu NW films is preciously controlled by several coating parameters of the MDD method, such as deposition speed, deposition number, Cu NWs concentration, and number of coatings. Unlike other methods, the Cu NWs are efficiently aligned with the dragging direction by the shear gradient of the fluid in the dragged meniscus.112 However, this method has high requirement for compatibility between the solvent, Cu NWs surface property, and substrate. Also, the MDD method is still immature that needs to be improved in the future.


2.4.3 Post processing (networking). 
Normally, the Cu NW films exhibit a large sheet resistance after the coating process because contact resistance between the NWs is increased by the natural oxide layer on the NW surface, which as an insulator hinders the electron transport. Especially for the Cu NW-based FTCE, the influence of the oxide layer is relatively large due to the small amount of deposition. Therefore, a post-processing step is required to remove these oxide layers and connect the Cu NWs for enhancement of electrical conductivity. In general, the NWs connection can be divided into two types, which are contact type and percolation type.
Thermal welding, as a conventional method of percolation type, is commonly used for NWs connection.36,113 As is well known, the metal nanomaterials have a relatively low melting point compared with bulk materials due to their small size effect. In general, Cu NWs can be welded under reducing conditions at above 150 °C of sintering temperature. Although the source of energy is different, both plasmonic welding and electrothermal welding are based on the occurrence of heating phenomenon at the junction to achieve the welding of Cu NWs.77,114 For percolation type, sufficient energy increases the atomic activity on the NW surface, resulting in the formation of metallic bond between Cu NWs, which provides a direct route for electron transport. However, these methods generally need to be assisted by a reducing environment. The reducing condition not only removes the natural oxide layer on the NWs surface but also prevents the oxidation of NWs during the sintering process. Obviously, each method has its own characteristics. Therefore, the selection of a suitable welding method should be according to the needs.
Recently, the plasmonic welding method has attracted much attention due to selective patterning with high precision. According to the light source, plasmonic welding can be divided into two types. The first one is lamp nanowelding method in which CuxO are completely photoreduced and percolated to Cu NWs at abundant light energy radiation.115 The biggest advantage of this method is that it can realize large-area fabrication of FTCE by percolating connection of Cu NWs with cost-effective recovering process, which is very suitable for the roll to roll technology used in actual production. Furthermore, various Schottky barrier devices with monolithic integration can be easily fabricated by the use of a predefined photomask. The other method is laser nanowelding in which the patterned Cu electrodes are directly prepared by ultrafast reduction process by laser.116–118 Different from lamp nanowelding method, high-precision micron patterning with mask-less process can only be achieved by this laser nanowelding method, which can effectively reduce the production costs. Moreover, the laser nanowelding process ensures low sintering temperature and rapid radiation time without the reducing environmental protection, which is extremely suitable for plastic substrates with low-temperature glass transition temperature, such as PET. However, these plasmonic welding methods have a crucial limitation such that they cannot be applied to the opaque NW films with high thickness because the light can only shine on the surface of the films. Also, the plasmonic welding equipment is relatively expensive compared with other methods. Therefore, it is necessary to comprehensively consider various factors, such as production scale and preparation process, for the low-cost preparation of Cu NWs-based FTCE, which is the fundamental purpose.
Unlike the percolation type, the contact type is based on direct contact between the Cu NWs that only removes the natural oxide layers.26 The oxide layers are generally removed by chemical etching or reduction, which can be completed without a vacuum process. Notably, the contact type can improve the mechanical properties of the Cu NWs because the junctions are not fixed so that the NWs are freely mobile. Although the process is much simpler than that of percolation type, secondary oxidation often occurs in the junction parts, resulting in fast degradation in FTCE performance. Since the junction is just point–point contact without crystalline connection between the NWs, there is some contact resistance at the NWs junction point, which slightly affects the FTCE performance. In order to eliminate these adverse effects, a new approach of solvent-dipped welding method has been explored that not only retains the great merit of vacuum-free process of contact type but also completes the percolation to consolidate the NW junction parts.91 However, this method is still not perfect, so the research of Cu NWs connection has a large space that needs to be filled.

2.5 Surface roughness of FTCE
Although the Cu NWs are coated on the flexible transparent substrate to make a simple FTCE, it is still not applicable to specific optical devices, such as solar cells and OLED due to the natural surface roughness of the NWs and non-full planar conductivity of the thin films.90,119,120 The Cu NWs are generally deposited to several tens nanometers, even over one hundred nanometer, resulting in the short circuit of the solar cell or OLED. Furthermore, the high surface roughness leads to a larger haze factor, which is mainly attributed to the enhancement of light scattering of Cu NWs. However, this problem is common to all metal NWs. To overcome this shortcoming, tremendous efforts have been devoted into reducing the surface roughness of the Cu NWs. The most effective way is to fill the voids between NWs using other transparent materials, such as metal oxides or polymers.90,121,122 Particularly, a conductive polymer such as PEDOT:PSS is usually coated on the layer of the Cu NWs film. Generally, these fillers can be used as substrates or electron-transport layer that are fabricated by drop casting, vapor deposition, or other coating methods. Through this smoothing treatment, the surface roughness of Cu NWs can be decreased to several nanometers that is successfully used to fabricate solar cells and OLED devices with a considerable performance. In spite of an additional troublesome process, this step is necessary for the application of specific devices.
2.6 Outlook of Cu NWs-based FTCE
Along with the real applications, the performance of Cu NWs films not only consider the transparency and conductivity but also discuss the stability, uniformity, roughness, scalability, and processability. More importantly, the price advantage of Cu NWs must be retained during the manufacturing process, involving synthesis, coating, and networking. Although the opto-electrical performance of Cu NWs films has surpassed that of ITO in recent work, various technical problems caused by their intrinsic properties still form a barrier for industrial adoption. However, it is undeniable that the development of electronic devices still tends to be flexible, wearable, and stretchable. Moreover, the intrinsic characteristics and preparation processes of materials mainly determine the advantages of practical applications. Compared with other alternatives, hence, the Cu NWs are more suitable and more promising to replace the current transparent electrode of ITO due to its low cost, high electrical conductivity, and high mechanical properties. The actual application value of Cu NW-based FTCE is immeasurable for the next-generation optical devices.
3 Lithium-ion battery (LIB)
Since 1990s, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) as the most common energy storage device are often used in our lives.123–126 From small mobile phones to large electrical vehicles, the LIBs have become an indispensable device in many fields.127,128 With the rapid development of electronics, the requirements of charging time and energy storage for LIBs are gradually increasing to meet the demands of the markets. In order to accomplish this goal, many studies have conducted in-depth research on active materials, which have a high specific capacity.129–132 For cathode materials, various lithium (Li) metal oxides have attracted a great deal of attention due to their high operating voltage and high theoretical capacity.133–135 Also, extensive efforts have been dedicated to investigating the nanostructure to enhance their energy density and power density. After a long period of research and practice, LiCoO2, LiMnO2, LiNiO2, and LiFePO4 based active materials with various structures are commonly used in LIBs of modern equipment. However, the LIB technology of cathode has matured so much that it is difficult to achieve a breakthrough improvement in materials due to the limited theoretical capacity. Therefore, many recent studies on the cathode are focused on the enhancement of stability and addition of functionality.
In contrast, although the capacity range (∼4200) of the anode materials is extremely wide, graphite with low-capacity of 372 is still extensively used as an active materials for LIBs anode.136,137 With the ever-increasing requirements of energy storage efficiency, Si, Li, Sn, SnO2, and graphene have attracted tremendous attention and have been identified as the most promising candidates for replacing graphite as the LIB anode because of their high theoretical specific capacities.138–141 Moreover, these materials and their composites with nano-scale or micro-scale architecture have been intensively explored to enhance the energy density, power density, charging rate, and life time. Evidently, the difference in materials and structures can directly reflect the performance gap of LIB. Despite many excellent results that have been published, there is still a long way to go to achieve commercialization.
Besides gravimetric capacity, the volumetric capacity of active materials is also significantly important for practical applications.142,143 As is well known, large volume is a great obstacle towards portability, even though it represents a light weight. In addition to the specific capacity, moreover, the various parameters in LIB, such as working potential, loading mass, safety, cycle performance, and rate performance, are also critical, so they cannot be ignored. The theoretical value of these characteristics in LIB is mainly related to the physical and chemical properties of active materials, such as activity, conductivity, and crystal structure.144,145 For each material without a phase change, however, the original properties are a fixed value that are difficult to change unless there is extreme dimensional change. Therefore, the material selection has a great limitation that fully considers these parameters. In addition, various external factors also have a great relationship with these LIB performances, such as contact resistance and compatibility.146,147 In the current LIB technology, the conductive agents and binders, which occupy a lot of proportion in the electrode, are commonly used to improve the external factors. In practical applications, however, these additives as the “dead weights” reduce the energy density and volume density of LIBs although the positive effect is much greater.148,149 Most importantly, the manufacturing efficiency and production cost as the most serious barriers impede its use in real applications. For these reasons, graphite with only 372 mA h g−1 of theoretical capacity is still extensively used in commercial production, which has not been replaced by other high-capacity materials.
In an actual cell, reducing the amount of other substances in addition to active materials can effectively increase the real energy density of the LIBs.150 Furthermore, the actual output capacity of LIBs has a linear relationship with the loading mass. When making each LIB cell, it consumes a lot of parts, including the shell, separator, and other auxiliary materials. In case of guaranteeing the specific capacity of the active materials, therefore, the reduction of the “dead weights” and the increase of the loading mass will dramatically improve the actual output performance and cost performance of the LIB.
3.1 Resistance of electrode
One of the biggest obstacles for electrochemical performances in LIBs is resistance. The internal resistance of LIBs is mainly dependent on the intrinsic material resistance of each component and the contact resistance in several interfaces between two components.151,152 For a traditional LIB cell, the intrinsic resistance of the materials cannot be modified without the change in the material crystal structure. When the materials are fixed, therefore, the internal resistance of the LIBs strongly depends on the contact resistance that was commonly tuned by slurry composition.153,154 In general, the electrical conductivity of the active material is not particularly excellent, which is unsuitable to directly use often for the electrode without the assistance of conductive agents. As is well known, carbon black as a conductive agent is commonly used to improve the electrical conductivity of the electrode due to its high conductivity and low cost. However, it still has a big gap in conductivity compared with metals. Furthermore, the adhesion and contact area are also critical factors for contact resistance.155 Since the active material is not completely in direct contact with the current collector, the adhesion force is quite weak, which not only leads to the enhancement of contact resistance but also causes the peeling phenomenon by volume change and pulverization of active materials during the charging–discharging process.156–158 Therefore, the binders are needed to be used to improve the adhesion for better LIB performances in spite of the side effects that increase the weight and cost. The most effective method is direct, large-area, and close contact between the active materials and current collectors without the conductive agent and the binder, resulting in the formation of a direct path for fast electron movement.
3.2 Current collector in the LIB anode
Conventionally, the slurry homogeneously mixed with negative active materials, conductive agent, and binder needs to be uniformly coated on the current collector to make a negative electrode. After drying, rolling, and slicing, it is wound or laminated together with the separator material and the positive electrode in the presence of an electrolyte to form a complete LIB. In general, the LIBs require current collectors as the carrier of active materials. The main materials of current collectors in LIBs are metal foils, which collect the electrons generated from the active materials to form a large current output.159–161 Therefore, the conductivity of the current collectors and the contact with active materials are extremely crucial for LIB performances because the resistance can lead to the loss of transport electrons, further resulting in the degradation of LIB performances.
As is well known, the Cu foil is widely used as the current collector in the anode due to their excellent electrical conductivity, high mechanical properties, and suitable electric potential. Generally, Cu foils are mainly fabricated by the rolling–annealing and electro-deposition methods.162 For better industrial application in the field of LIB, these methods with extensive efforts have been investigated to control the quality and cost performance of Cu foils. In the rolling-annealing method, however, the 6 μm thickness of manufacturing limitation increases the production cost of the Cu foils, which is a critical issue that needs to be solved.163 Furthermore, the complicated manufacturing process, low surface uniformity, and low production efficiency are also the drawbacks of rolling–annealing method that rarely occur in the current technology for Cu foils. In comparison, the cost performance of Cu foil made by electro-deposition method is much higher than that fabricated by rolling–annealing method because of the high production efficiency and easy manufacturing process.162,163 However, the Cu foil made by electro-deposition method exhibits a relatively low mechanical strength due to its columnar crystal.
In order to ensure the full performance of the active materials, moreover, the Cu foil needs to be in direct and close contact with the negative active materials as much as possible to reduce the contact resistance. In addition, surface properties of the Cu foil, such as hydrophilicity, roughness, and density directly affect the contact and adhesion of active materials. With the enhancement of energy storage demand, the loading mass of active materials in each cell needs to be increased.164,165 Also, the active materials tend to be nanosized to enhance the specific capacities for better energy storage efficiency in each cell.166–168 For the conventional cell structure, however, the loading mass of active materials is strongly limited due to the planar structure of the current collector and large surface area of the active materials. Generally, the loading mass of the active materials can be increased by the controlling the electrode thickness. In spite of the assistance of conductive agents and binders, the active materials far from the Cu foil lose some of the electrons during the charging/discharging process due to their contact resistance. In addition, the amount of “dead weights” generally increases with the nanomaterialization of the active materials because of the greatly enhanced demand of conductive agents and binders.169 Therefore, the trend of structural changes in the current collectors is imperative, which can simultaneously satisfy the demands of high loading mass and direct contact of the active materials.
3.3 Cu NWs-based current collector
Recently, current collectors with various nanostructures have been explored to enhance the LIB performances. The advantages of these current collectors, which are mainly prepared from high-conductive metals and carbons, do not only include enhancement of the adhesion force and contact area of the active materials but also the increase in the electrolyte penetration for better ion diffusion.170,171 Among various nanomaterials, the Cu NW film has been studied as one of the most promising materials for next-generation current collectors for LIBs due to their low cost, excellent conductivity, high flexibility, solution processability, light weight, and three dimensional (3D) structure.28,171 Furthermore, the same ingredient with the conventional current collector of the LIB anode can avoid many unnecessary troubles for more efficient use.
Although the Cu NWs have been comprehensibly explored since 2010 for application to FTCE, the application of current collector using Cu NWs was first reported in 2015. For the first time, Lee et al. provided a 3D framework for an anode current collector made by Cu NWs to enhance the LIB performances that using Ge as the active material in the anode (Fig. 6).172 Firstly, Cu/C NWs with less than 100 nm width and with up to 7 μm length were prepared by a metal–organic chemical vapor deposition method. Then, the high-capacity Ge nanoarrays were directly anchored onto the Cu NWs through thermal evaporation and GeO2 removal process to make a special structure with a highly porous alignment. In this process, the carbon sheath was oxidized by the native oxide on Ge powder under the thermal evaporation conditions, resulting in detachment from the Cu NWs. After synthesis of the electrode, a Swagelok-type half-cell was assembled to examine the electrochemical performances. As a result, a superior capacity of 1623 mA h g−1 for this electrode was obtained at the rate of 1C. More excitingly, the Ge nanoarrays anchored Cu NWs still retained 1051 mA h g−1 of the discharge capacity with 99.7% of the Coulombic efficiency even after 300 cycle tests at 1C rate. Also, an excellent rate capability (935 mA h g−1 at 10C rate after 100 cycles) was demonstrated on this special porous structure of Ge nanoarrays anchored Cu NWs. Obviously, this research breaks through the traditional concept of current collectors and proposes a new promising Cu NWs-based current collector to tremendously improve the LIB performances. However, the system requires a harsh vacuum/gas condition and a high processing temperature for the fabrication of LIBs, which is particularly not conducive for the production efficiency and cost performance. In order to achieve the industrialization, the application of full-cell LIBs remains to be researched; also, the manufacturing process still needs to be greatly improved.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Cu/C NWs. (b and c) SEM and HR-TEM image of porous Ge nano arrays on Cu NWs. (d) Rate capability of the porous Ge nanoarrays on Cu NWs electrode. Cycling performance of the porous Ge nanoarrays on Cu NWs electrode at (e) 1C rate and (f) 10C rate (adapted with permission from ref. 172, © Elsevier Ltd 2015). 
Almost at the same time, Hwang et al. presented a 3D-network anode that is formed by the entanglement of Si NWs and Cu NWs to improve the LIB performances (Fig. 7).173 In this system, the Si NWs as the active material provide superior specific capacities and Cu NWs as the current collector quickly transport the electrons. Additionally, the junctions in physical entanglement with the NWs are penetrated with an external pressure to form the locking joints that enhance the adhesion and integrity between the Si NWs and the Cu NWs. Therefore, no binders are required in this system, which is much different from the conventional LIBs structure. More interestingly, the all-in-one architecture that is constructed by the anode directly filtered onto the polyethylene separator was assembled into coin-type half cells after drying and pressing processes to investigate their electrochemical properties. As an exciting result, the LIB performances of all-in-one 3D architecture without any binder proposed in this study is much higher than that of the conventional cell structure. By the inter-tangled structure of the Cu NWs and Si NWs with the locking joints, the all-in-one 3D architecture effectively addresses the problem of LIB performance deterioration induced by the volume change of Si during the lithiation/delithiation process owing to the control of the porous structure in electrode fabrication for accommodating the volume expansion of Si. Compared with the conventional cell structure that includes active materials, current collector, and other additives, the all-in-one 3D architecture not only significantly increased the real specific capacities of the anode but also drastically reduced the thickness of the anode due to the high loading mass of Si NWs and the usage of lightweight Cu NWs. The resulting higher specific and volumetric energy density with better rate capability and enhanced cycle performance fully prove the merits of the all-in-one architecture with 3D structure for the LIB anode, which is very meaningful for the development of LIBs in the future. Unlike the above-mentioned research, the harsh vacuum/gas condition and high processing temperature are not required in this work that ensures the cost performance of LIBs, which is more beneficial for real industrial production.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) SEM image and (c) photographic image of the inter-tangled NWs in separator–electrode–current collector assembly. (d) Rate capability and (e) cycling performance of the separator–electrode–current collector assembly with different compositions with lithiation rate of 0.2C and delithiation rate of 0.5C (adapted with permission from ref. 173, © Springer Nature Publishing AG 2015). 
In 2016, Lu et al. demonstrated that the 3D Cu NWs network can more effectively inhibit the dendrite growth of Li, which is especially important for the safety of Li-based batteries, such as Li–S, Li–air, and Li-ion batteries (Fig. 8).24 During repeated charging and discharging process, when the charging rate or Li content exceeds the tolerance of the active materials, Li+ ions that fail to react with the active materials combine with electrons from the negative electrode to form the atoms and are deposited on the anode surface to form a Li plating layer. With the development of Li plating, the sharp Li metal dendrites are eventually formed on the electrode surface due to the inhomogeneous spatial deposition. When the Li dendrite grows to a certain extent, these sharp Li dendrites may pierce through the separator and make direct contact with the cathode, resulting in internal short circuits of the LIBs, which is the main reason for battery explosion. In this work, the Li metal is initially deposited on the surface of the designed 3D Cu NWs architecture and fills the entire pores instead of forming the Li dendrites because the high surface area in this architecture significantly reduces the ion flux density and increases the homogeneity of Li+ ion flux distribution. As a result, the surface area of 1.1 cm2 in the Cu NWs network with high void space volume can accommodate 7.5 mA h of Li metal plating. Clearly, the nanostructural modification for the design of the current collector is a new promising method to efficiently suppress the Li dendrite growth. Compared with the Cu foil, therefore, the 3D Cu NWs current collectors with high porosity as a novel structure are more effective in solving the problem of this serious safety hazard caused by Li dendrites that lead to better cycling stability.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Li plating in the 3D Cu NWs network current collector at different statuses. (b) Voltage profile of Li plating/stripping at 1 mA cm−2 in the 3D Cu NW membrane (adapted with permission from ref. 24, © American Chemical Society 2016). 
Just one year later, Chu et al. reported ultra-thin, flexible, light-weight, and area-scalable Cu NWs film as the current collector and the commercial graphite as the active materials in the anode are assembled to the coin-type half cell and pouch-type full cell to investigate the electrochemical properties (Fig. 9).163 The focus on this research is the comparison of performances of LIBs that use Cu NWs film and conventional Cu foil, when the same graphite slurry is deposited on the surface of the current collector. The Cu NWs film that is used as the current collector in the LIB anode was prepared by the partial sintering and pressing of the Cu NWs fabrics, which are made by initially synthesizing Cu NWs. Interestingly, the interconnected structure and rough surface of the Cu NWs film with high porosity provide more void spaces to efficiently penetrate the slurry and the electrolyte, and the Cu NWs films with enhanced surface area as the carrier load more active materials. Furthermore, the interface adhesion of graphite and Cu NWs is much stronger than that of graphite and Cu foil that explains the high mechanical strength of the Cu NWs films, which can sufficiently withstand volume change of the active materials during the lithiation/delithiation process. Notably, the ultrathin Cu NWs film with 1.5 μm thickness were fabricated by the precious control of areal mass density, which is only 1.2 mg cm−2. In the case of guarantee of similar conductive characteristics, both the thickness and areal mass of the Cu NW film is much lower than that of commercial Cu foils, resulting in a higher energy density of the LIBs. Importantly, the facile fabrication process of the Cu NWs film ensures its high cost performance. As a result of the electrochemical properties, although the specific capacity of the active material has not much performance gap, the rate capability, volumetric capacity, and the energy density of the whole anode that uses the Cu NWs film as the current collector has shown more excellent results in comparison to that using the Cu foil. Obviously, this study is in line with the development trend of current collectors in LIBs. When the manufacturing process is improved to fully meet the needs of low-cost, large-scale, and continuous production, the Cu NWs film is expected to become a new type of current collector for the next-generation LIBs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the Cu NW foil fabrication process using a rolling press method. (b and c) SEM images of the Cu NW foil. (d) Comparison of the interfacial shear stress of graphite–Cu NW foil and graphite–Cu foil. (e) Photographs of the graphite–Cu NW foil and graphite–Cu foil after shear stress testing (adapted with permission from ref. 163, © Elsevier B.V. 2017). 
In the middle of 2017, Yin et al. proposed a new approach for the cell design of LIBs for fast charging LIBs (Fig. 10).171 The novel, light-weight, flexible all-NW anode was constructed of Cu NWs as the current collector and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as the active materials without any binder and conductive agent. Due to the excellent conductivity, large surface area, and high porosity, the composite anode with a free-standing structure provides a great merit for the both the electron and ion transport for rapid charging/discharging of LIBs. In addition, the use of Cu NWs with a stable structure effectively solves the critical problem of shrinkage and expansion of MWCNT during the film making process. Moreover, the thickness of the composite anode was controlled to above 600 μm, which is more beneficial for energy density and power density of the LIBs. Also, the fabrication process of the composite anode is very simple with a mild condition and is expected to achieve industrialization through process improvement. Although the MWCNTs are promising materials with excellent electrical conductivity and remarkable mechanical properties, the large voltage range between charging and discharging caused by their morphology and contact resistance limit their use as active materials for LIBs. Therefore, MWCNTs have generally been used as the current collector in many works. In this study, this limitation of MWCNT was first overcome by close entanglement with highly conductive Cu NWs, and both half cell and full cell using the composite anode were successfully operated with improved battery performances. As exciting results, the 3D conductive all-NW anode proposed in this work exhibited superior electrochemical characteristics that are finely tuned by the composite ratio, including high specific capacity, excellent rate capability, and stable cycle performance with high Coulombic efficiency. Furthermore, the flexible LIB was also successfully fabricated using this composite anode, showing high capacity retention even after 1000th bending. The proposed 3D conductive all-NW anode that uses Cu NWs as the current collector could be a potential way to improve the rapid charging system for next-generation LIBs and is expected to be an industrial production method that can meet the market needs of future electronic devices and electric vehicles.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the Cu NW–MWCNT composite electrode. (b) Schematic illustration of the conventional anode and the proposed Cu NW–MWCNT composite anode. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the half cells using the Cu NW–MWCNT composite and MWCNT as the anode. (d and e) Cycling retention of various half cells using the Cu NW–MWCNT composite and the MWCNT anodes. (f) LED powered by a flexible full-cell LIB using Cu NW–MWCNT composite as the anode (adapted with permission from ref. 171, © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2018). 
3.4 Outlook of Cu NWs as the current collector in the LIB anode
With the development of electronic devices and electric vehicles, the market needs a new type of LIB to satisfy the demands of rapid charging, high flexibility, high power density, and high energy density. Up to now, the high-capacity active materials have been widely studied and have achieved many excellent results, which is a critical parameter that is directly related to the gravimetric capacity. In practical application, moreover, the volumetric capacity and loading mass is also important for the power density and energy density. However, conventional Cu foil current collector of the anode has significant limitations on the loading mass of the active materials due to their planar structure. In order to load more active materials, therefore, the nanometerization of the current collector to increase the surface area is an inevitable development trend. From the structural point of view, the high porosity and high flexibility need to be reflected in a new type of current collector in order to be more effectively applied to next-generation LIBs. For better electrochemical performances, furthermore, both the intrinsic resistance of materials and the contact resistance between various interfaces should be decreased as much as possible to reduce the loss of electrons during the charging and discharging process. Comprehensively analyzing a variety of nanomaterials, the Cu NWs have a considerable potential in reducing the internal resistance and improve the electrochemical performance when used as the current collector in the LIB anode. Also, the Cu NWs have various advantages of low cost, high electrical conductivity, and high mechanical properties. When the Cu NWs are made into a film, the high porosity, high flexibility, low sheet resistance, and large surface area of the film are beneficial for improving the functions and performances of LIBs. Although the application of Cu NWs as current collector in the LIBs anode is still in the preliminary stage, it has a considerable possibility to replace the traditional current collector, viz., Cu foil for future flexible and high-performance LIBs through substantial improvements.
4 Stretchable electrodes
The future technological trend in next-generation electronics will be bendable, rollable, foldable, and stretchable so as to be convenient and comfortable for the consumer, which is directly related to the human quality of life.174–176 Since entering the electronic age, the size of portable devices has been fundamentally limited by the size of human hands. Generally, the portability and practicality as two conflicting properties are reflected in electronics.177,178 Although the actual usable area was gradually increased under the same panel size with the development of electrical products, currently, finding the most suitable trade-off point between these properties is still a main challenge to meet the needs of consumers for current electrical products. However, the development of a new-type electronics with high portability and high performance is inevitable with the demands of the market. Most recently, Samsung Electronics has fully demonstrated this future trend by releasing a new type of foldable mobile phone called “Samsung Galaxy Fold”. Obviously, this invention with a meaningful breakthrough is the starting point of the New Electronic Age and the end of this development direction is stretchable electronics, which has a tremendous potential for future wearable applications, such as e-skins and e-textiles.179,180
For stretchable electronics, one of the biggest challenges is the manufacture of stretchable components to withstand the tensile strain and compressive strain caused by the mechanical deformations, such as bending, folding, twisting, and stretching.181–183 As is well known, the current electronic devices are manufactured from a layer-by-layer structure of materials, which are deposited onto a printed circuit board, glass substrate, and Si wafer. These structurally fragile micro or nano-materials cause device failure due to collapse of the material structure by the bending or collision motion of devices.184 Owing to their complicated structure, furthermore, it is difficult for the devices to maintain a good performance and reliability when all the layers are stretched. In contrast, the stretching of the electrodes, which is used as the main conductive path, can be achieved by some special patterns or materials.185–187
So far, two effective methods have been used to prepare stretchable electrodes. The first method is based on the change in patterning of the conductive electrode to withstand the strains during the stretching process, such as “wavy”, “telephone line-like” and “snake-like” shapes.188–190 Although this method can provide a high stability, which maintains almost all of the original electrical conductivity during the stretching process, it requires a complicated patterning process to support.191 In addition, the dense structure is difficult to apply in miniaturized equipment due to the limitation of the manufacturing size of the conductive circuit. Most importantly, the long electron transfer path caused by complicated patterning leads to a delay phenomenon in the driving signal, which directly affects the sensitivity of the electrical devices. The second method is based on the inclusion of special conductive materials into the elastic polymer matrix, such as polyurethane (PU) and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS).192,193 To date, several conductive materials including CNT, graphene, liquid metal, and metal NWs have been suggested for the fabrication of stretchable electrodes.194–196 However, the real applications of CNT and graphene for stretchable electronics are mainly limited by their relatively low conductivity. In comparison, the liquid metal exhibited a superior conductivity at several times of the stretched lengths but the liquid metal leakage that seriously pollutes the environment is still an important issue to be solved before commercialization.197,198 Also, the high cost of resources is another critical problem that hinders the widespread use.
Recently, the metal NWs-based stretchable electrodes as the most suitable candidates received tremendous attention due to their excellent conductivity and remarkable stretchability.199–202 Moreover, easy solution processing that is applied for mass production with low cost fabrication is another great merit of the metal NW. Among various metal NWs, Cu NWs have been considered as the one of the most promising conductive materials for stretchable electronics due to their low price and high conductivity.203,204 Typically, Cu NWs are stacked into a random 3D structure and then the polymer elastomer wraps the Cu geometries to form a stretchable electrode. The randomly connected Cu NWs with a 3D unconventional structure as a conductive pathway quickly transfer the electrons and the polymer matrix as a stress buffer mainly releases the strain in all directions when subjected to various mechanical deformations.
4.1 Elastomeric polymer matrix
In general, the most important role of the electrode is to quickly transfer the electrons for high operating efficiency of the devices. The highly conductive materials are used as wires for electronic products to ensure the high performance of the devices. For this reason, the most commonly used wire material in the actual electrical product is Cu, which has excellent electrical conductivity and low price. Although Cu has relatively good ductility with high yield strain, it is not sufficient to be used as an elastomeric circuit. However, Cu can be structurally changed to NW shape that has a high structure deformability after forming the network and then combined with an elastomeric polymer matrix to make a composite material for the stretchable electrode.205,206 Notably, the surface of the electrode loses the electrical conductivity when the polymer matrix as the insulator completely encapsulates the Cu NWs, thereby, the electrons can only move inside the conductive path.
PDMS and PU that have often been investigated in the research of soft lithography are broadly used as the elastomeric polymer matrix for preparing the Cu NWs-based stretchable electrode due to their high stretchability, excellent durability, low cost, remarkable stability, and simple processability.207–209 The raw materials used in PDMS and PU are liquid materials that can be well embedded in the tiny holes between the stacked Cu NWs and then solidified to form a stable structure. Compared with the Cu NWs, the structural flexibility of PDMS and PU caused by the low Young's modulus mainly relieve the mechanical stress in the stretching of these composite electrodes.210,211 In addition, the surface properties of these materials, such as biocompatibility and hydrophobicity, need to be considered for further practical applications. Although the molding of PDMS is easy to control, the Cu NWs are simply detached from PDMS with an external force, which is unlike that of the PU substrate due to their weak adhesion. The enhancement in the adhesion force between PDMS and Cu NWs with a simple and cost-effective fabrication process is still a critical issue that needs to be solved. Hence, the choice of a suitable polymer matrix, which plays a crucial role in stretchable electrodes, is particularly important.
4.2 Surface density of Cu NWs
In addition to the property of elastomeric polymer matrix, the density of the conductive materials is another key factor determining the mechanical–electrical performances of the stretchable electrode. The stretchable electrodes can be classified as transparent and non-transparent types that depend on device requirements. Generally, the transparency of the film is reflected in the ultralow surface density of the NWs.212 However, this low density is extremely lethal to the stretchability of the NWs film. As is well known, the Cu NWs film is based on the point-to-point contact in the NWs junction, which plays a very important role for electron transport. For the low density Cu NW film, although the important physical property of optical transparency can be obtained, the contact junctions between Cu NWs are extremely rare and are easily broken with the strains during the stretching or pressing process, leading to a significant increase in the resistance.204,213 At the microscopic point of view, the pressure on a single contact junction is particularly high when subjected to external mechanical deformations, such as bending, folding, twisting, and stretching. Therefore, the resistance of Cu NWs-based stretchable electrodes with low density is extremely sensitive for mechanical deformations compared with that of a high-density film electrode.
Regardless of the transparency, obviously, the higher density of NWs within a certain critical value is more beneficial for the stretchability of the electrode, resulting in a high robustness with low resistance change for the mechanical stretching.214 However, the sensitivity of film resistance will be gradually decreased after exceeding the critical density value. The high density of the Cu NWs with a random overlapping structure causes a low resistance of the film and the more contact points lead to a higher probability of fracture that lose the key tunnel of the electron path.28 Hence, subtle structural changes can reflect a large rate of change in resistance. From a mechanical point of view, moreover, the thickness also has an important influence on the mechanical properties, especially for non-planar pressures caused by deformations of bending and twisting.
4.3 Cu NWs-based stretchable electrode
Since 2010, Ag NWs and polymer composite electrodes have been thoroughly studied and have achieved good results, even on OSCs and OLEDs.80,215 However, the stretchable electrodes based on Cu NWs are only recently being studied. Especially in the past 5 years, the transparent and non-transparent Cu NWs–polymer based composite electrodes with a high mechanical stretchability have been explored in depth to make up the vacancy of stretchable electrode for next-generation electronics.
In the early 2014, Hu et al. reported a stretchable transparent composite electrode based on Cu NWs and PU (Fig. 11a–c).119 Firstly, an ultrathin Cu NWs film with high transparency was uniformly coated on the glass substrate by filtration-transfer method. After coating process, the Cu NWs were annealed at 300 °C for 30 min under N2/H2 conditions for complete welding of the NWs. Importantly, the Cu NWs film was chemically treated with a 5 wt% 6-aminohexanoic acid aqueous solution under a nitrogen condition. 6-Aminohexanoic as a crucial adhesion promoter makes a strong coordinate bond with Cu NWs and the other side forms a hydrogen bond with PU to effectively enhance the bonding strength between the Cu NWs and the PU matrix, resulting in better stretchable performance of the composite electrode. Finally, the Cu NWs-PU composite electrodes were completely fabricated after the curing of PU. As a result, Cu NW–PU composite electrodes exhibited low sheet resistance with high transparency (56.2 Ω □−1 at 84.5% T; and 8.6 Ω □−1 at 68.7%). Also, these composite electrodes still maintain high surface conductance even at tensile strain up to 60% and over 200 cycles of repeated stretching tests. However, the post-treatments (welding and surface modification) of the Cu NWs film after the coating process require harsh environmental conditions, which is not in line with wide practical applications. In addition, it is difficult for these composite electrodes to withstand relatively high stretching speeds. This obvious shortcoming greatly limits the application area of the composite electrode. As the first Cu NWs-based stretchable electrode with high transparency, this work is especially meaningful for academic research of Cu NW–polymer composite materials and the development of stretchable electronics.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a Cu NW–PU composite electrode. (b) UV-Vis transmission spectra of various CuNW–PU composite electrodes and three representative photographs. (c) Normalized transient resistance of the Cu NW–PU composite electrode with the treatment of 6-aminohexanoic acid in 60% strain at the stretching speed of 1 mm s−1 (adapted with permission from ref. 119, © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014). (d) Photographs of Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrodes with varying sheet resistance. (e) SEM image of the Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrode of 15 Ω □−1. (f) Resistance change of the Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrode during repeated 10% strain (adapted with permission from ref. 216, © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014). 
After about half a year, Cheng et al. presented Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrodes for stretchable conductors (Fig. 11d–f).216 Although there are many differences in the synthetic method of Cu NWs and the type of matrix, the fabrication of the stretchable electrodes is very similar to the previous one. However, the composite electrodes in this work exhibited different mechanical–electrical properties with the previous one due to differences in the fabrication process and materials. The Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrodes showed more superior opto-electrical performances (220 Ω □−1 at 91.5% T; 72 Ω □−1 at 86.6% T; 15 Ω □−1 at 80% T; 5 Ω □−1 at 70.5% T) due to the synthesis of high-quality Cu NWs. However, the stretchability of these transparent electrodes is greatly limited by insufficient tensile properties of the poly(acrylate) matrix, resulting in only 15% of maximum stretchability.
Soon afterwards, Tang et al. reported a Cu NW-based stretchable conducting rubber with excellent mechanical properties (Fig. 12).217 Although the Cu NWs aerogels were investigated previously, their poor mechanical stability is the main obstacle for practically foldable and stretchable electrodes. However, the Cu NWs-based rubber ambers in this work fully overcome this obvious shortcoming. At first, the ultra-lightweight Cu NW–polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) composite aerogels was fabricated by a low-cost and simple freeze-drying process. The PVA as the nanoglue that plays an important role in this composite electrode mainly improves the connection between the Cu NWs to support their 3D unconventional structure, resulting in a substantial increase in the mechanical stability of the composite aerogels. Within the reducing change at 60% height, as a result, these composite aerogels showed good compressive and resilience properties with highly sensitive electrical resistance change, which are similar to that of a conductive sponge. After making the Cu NW–PVA composite aerogels, interestingly, the PDMS was filled into the gaps of their 3D porous structure to form completely integrated conductive rubber ambers. The rubber ambers exhibited high electrical conductivities without the need of prewiring, which are much different from other works, and could be cut into various complicated shapes, including 1D, 2D, and 3D objectives. Moreover, these Cu NWs-based conductive rubber ambers with low-cost fabrication showed great advantages in tensile-electrical performances, and, as one of the most potential stretchable conductors, are expected to open the stretchable electronics market.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Cu NW–PVA composite aerogels. (b) 1D, 2D, and 3D of Cu NW–PVA composite aerogels embedded on the PDMS matrix. (c) Resistance variation in the Cu NW–PVA–PDMS rubber amber due to strain change (up to 60%). (d) Relative resistance change of Cu NW–PVA–PDMS rubber amber during repeated stretching cycles (adapted with permission from ref. 217, © American Chemical Society 2014). 
At the same time, Han et al. realized a highly stretchable Cu NW conductor over 250% on ecoflex elastomer and demonstrated on the touch-screen panel.77 In order to minimize the oxidation problem, Cu NWs network was percolated by ultrafast plasmonic welding method using a circularly polarized laser under ambient conditions at room-temperature (Fig. 13a and b). Compared with the traditional bulk annealing method, the Cu NWs network that percolated by plasmonic welding method exhibited a significantly low resistance value with high mechanical stability. Although this kind of Cu NWs network is not embedded in the stretchable substrate, interestingly, it still shows good conductivity without substantial cracks even if stretched to 250% due to the high structural stability of the strong Cu NWs junction (Fig. 13c). This study fully illustrates the importance of not only the choice of a suitable stretchable substrate but also the junction connections between Cu NWs and their welding methods for the tensile properties of the final network.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic comparison of conventional bulk heating and plasmonic laser nanowelding of Cu NWs. (b) Optical and SEM images (insets) of the Cu NWs film before and after welding. (c) Optical images of Cu NWs on highly stretchable Eco-flex substrate with different strains (adapted with permission from ref. 77, © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 2014). 
Only four months later, Won et al. presented a Cu NW-based stretchable electrode with a helical structure (Fig. 14a and b).214 Firstly, the Cu NWs with a high aspect ratio were synthesized by an aqueous solvent in the presence of the reducing agent dextrose and the capping agent hexadecylamine, and was dispersed in IPA. The Cu NW suspension was treated with lactic acid to reduce the oxide layer on the surface. Then, the Cu NWs suspension filtered on the mixed cellulose ester membrane was filtered through the vacuum filtration method to form a complete Cu NWs film. In addition, the PDMS as a matrix was prepared on the screw, which acts as a template, to make a 3D helix structure like telephone cords. The stretchability of the PDMS matrix was enhanced by structural modification without undergoing tensile stress. Finally, the Cu NWs network was transferred onto the helical-structured PDMS matrix to make a stretchable conductor. These electrodes mainly improve their stretchability without affecting the conductivity by the morphological change from the spiral-shape of the PDMS matrix. In addition, the tensile stress can be withstood by the Cu NWs with a special one-dimensional structure after exceeding the limitation of the morphological change of PDMS, which is demonstrated in the planar Cu NWs–PDMS composite electrode. As a result, the relative resistance change of the suggested helix-shape electrodes was only 3.9 even when stretched to 700%, which far exceeds the results of other works. However, this helical structure with high stretchability must be completed by a reasonable 3D spatial distribution, which is greatly limited in practical applications.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photograph of the helical-structured Cu NWs–PDMS composite electrode, and its resistance variation by the strain change comparing with other structure. (b) Relative resistance change of the helical-structured Cu NWs–PDMS composite electrode during repeated stretching cycles (adapted with permission from ref. 214, © Nature Publishing Group 2014). (c) Photograph of the Cu NW-based transparent electrode with PDMS substrate. (d) Relative sheet resistance change of the Cu NW-based transparent electrode (4.17 Ω □−1) with the increase of strain. (e) Relative resistance change of Cu NW-based transparent electrode (4.1 Ω) during repeated 20% strain (adapted with permission from ref. 218, © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016). 
In 2016, Hwang et al. synthesized ultra-long Cu NWs with controllable size to successfully apply to stretchable transparent conducting electrodes (Fig. 14c–e).218 Interestingly, the ultra-long Cu NWs with 92.5 μm length were prepared by environment friendly water–alcohol co-solvent system. For application in low-temperature processable substrates, propionic acid was used to exchange the insulating and non-volatile oleylamine ligand on the Cu NWs surface after the synthetic process to drastically reduce the subsequent annealing temperature. Then, the Cu NWs were deposited on the glass or PDMS substrate by spray-coating method and annealed at 130 °C, which is the lowest temperature for welding Cu NWs by heat treatment, to obtain the desirable opto-electrical performances. Compared with other works, importantly, the welding process proposed in this study was carried out under mild conditions. As a result, the Cu NWs film showed high opto-electrical performance of 69 Ω □−1 at 91% T that is comparable to that of commercial ITO electrodes. Furthermore, the Cu NWs film spray-coated on the PDMS substrate with 4.1 Ω □−1 at 90% T exhibited excellent stretchability. After 20 cycles of 20% strain, the resistivity of Cu NWs film was stabilized to 5 times of the initial value. For a single stretch, the limit value of stretchability is 50%. Although the tensile properties need to be improved, the processing conditions of the Cu NWs film is relatively mild and are expected to be suitable for practical industrial production.
After less than a month, Ding et al. reported stretchable Cu NW conductors on PU (Fig. 15).219 Unlike other methods, after uniform deposition of Cu NWs on the PU substrate by spray coating method, the Cu NWs/PU composite conductor was simply fabricated by a photonic sintering technique to percolate the Cu NWs junctions for the enhancement of conductivity. Most importantly, the surface of the PU matrix was also induced to be gradually softened by this photonic sintering process due to the thermal phenomenon caused by photon energy, leading to partial embedding of Cu NWs film onto the PU matrix. As a result, the adhesion force between the Cu NWs and the PU matrix was significantly increased by strong physical bonding of the partial embedded structure, which promotes a positive effect on the stretchability of the Cu NWs/PU conductor. The resistance of the Cu NW/PU conductor only slightly increased after 1000 cycles of repeated stretching/releasing with 10% strain. Moreover, various motions of the fingers are clearly detected by the resistance change in the Cu NW/PU composite films with semi-transparent property. Based on the Joule heating principle, more interestingly, transparent heaters have also been developed using these Cu NW/PU composite conductors. The Cu NWs/PU composite electrodes proposed in this work are simple and time-saving to prepare, and applications of the sensor and heater are very innovative that provide great reference for next-generation wearable electronics’ development.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the Cu NW/PU composite conductor. (b) SEM image of the Cu NWs network partially embedded on the PU matrix. (c) Plot of transmittance vs. sheet resistance of the Cu NWs network. (d) Relative resistance response of the Cu NW/PU composite conductor to the bending and releasing of the finger. (e) Photograph and infrared images of the stretchable heater glove made by the Cu NW/PU composite conductor (adapted with permission from ref. 219, © American Chemical Society 2016). 
Almost at the same time, Wang et al. presented a stretchable conductor made by the Cu NWs/PDMS composite film (Fig. 16).220 Unlike previous similar composite materials, after the annealing process, the PTFE-filtered Cu NWs film without transparency are partially embedded into the quasi in situ polymerization of PDMS by the transfer method for better attachment of these materials. By controlling the pre-polymerization time of PDMS, the two key factors of stickiness and hardness of the PDMS can be precisely adjusted. When applied to appropriate pre-polymerization time, the Cu NWs were completely transferred into the PDMS matrix and made a partial embedded structure, resulting in strong adhesion, excellent conductivity, and remarkable stability of the composite electrode. As a result, the Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode exhibited high mechanical properties including stretchability and bendability. Even if stretched by 120%, these composite electrodes have sufficient conductivity to illuminate the LED. Moreover, a capacitive-type strain sensor was developed with the laminating process using these Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrodes. This capacitive-type strain sensor showed high sensitivity with approximately 1% of detection limit and excellent durability (over 1000 cycles of stretching/releasing with 20% strain). Although the embedding method and the final stretching sensor are very creative, the annealing condition (230 °C under a constant flow of hydrogen) proposed in this work is still harsh for actual manufacturing process. By improving the annealing process conditions, these composite electrodes can be applied to practical flexible and stretchable devices, which is expected to increase its commercial value.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite film. (b) Sheet resistance of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode with the prepolymerization time and their photographs after the adhesive strength tests. (c) Resistance variation of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode with tensile strain up to 20% in the first cycle. (d) Relative resistance change of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode during repeated 20% strain. (e) Schematic illustration of the structural change of Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode with stretching and release (adapted with permission from ref. 220, © American Chemical Society 2016). 
We believe that the future trend of stretchable and flexible electronic devices is towards the development of skin-mountable wearable electronics.221 As the results of the above study, the mechanical–electrical properties are obviously very important. However, the status of the actual operating environment of the devices cannot also be ignored. Obviously, the negative effects caused by the oxidation of the Cu NWs will be more pronounced in skin mountable electronics due to the effect of sweat and other factors. For maintaining excellent electromechanical properties of the Cu NWs network, it is necessary to develop a new facile method to effectively overcome environmental factors in order to increase the practical application value of the Cu NWs.
4.4 Outlook of the Cu NWs-based stretchable electrode
As wearable electronics are constantly being proposed as a necessity of future human life, stretchable electrodes as an essential integral part have attracted widespread attention and have been greatly investigated. For stretchable electrodes in real applications, the conductivity, stretchability, and cost are undoubtedly the three most important factors that are coincidently compliant with the properties of Cu NWs. Therefore, the Cu NWs are considered as one of the most promising way to drive the rapid development of next-generation electronics. However, the bending motion required for a flexible device can result in the collapse of the inorganic material structure. Almost no single material has both high electrical conductivity and excellent self-stretching property, and the Cu NWs are no exception. The stretchable electrode needs to be completed by a composite method that is a highly elastomeric polymer supported highly conductive material because of constraints of these physical properties. The connected Cu NWs network were embedded in the stretchable polymer matrix, such as PU and PDMS, to effectively improve its mechanical properties. Although there have been many encouraging developments regarding these Cu NWs-based stretchable electrodes, it still faces enormous challenges. Among these, the most important issue at present is that the stretchable electrodes based on Cu NWs exhibit unstable electrical properties under mechanical deformation, which is a problem confronted by all materials because it strongly affects the signal transmission that is critical for devices. To ensure the performances of the actual devices, the stabilization of the mechanical–electrical property is an important research direction for the development of Cu NWs-based stretchable electrodes in the forthcoming years.
5 Conclusions
We have reviewed in detail three advanced electronic applications of the Cu NWs, including flexible transparent electrode for optical devices, current collector for LIBs, and stretchable electrode for wearable devices. Compared with other shapes, the one-dimensional structure gives Cu NWs special mechanical and electrical properties, which are highlighted for these three components for future electronics. With the order of research time, the highlights and problems of the representative research results are discussed in the dynamic development process. The applications of Cu NWs are outlined by way of example to reflect their novelty and pertinence value in next-generation electronics.
The biggest advantage of Cu NWs is undoubtedly their low price, which is especially suitable for industrialized production. Despite breakthroughs in device performance by some special treatments of Cu NWs, abandoning the original advantage of the cost including materials and processes will lose the basic significance of Cu NWs research. Furthermore, the solution steps of several troublesome problems, such as aggregation and oxidation, that are caused by natural properties of Cu NWs should be considered in terms of applicability of the devices. Tremendous efforts need to be directed towards low-cost device preparation with high mechanical and electrical performances for the purpose of industrialization.
By controlling the structure and stacking of Cu NWs, optimizing the balance between the physical and chemical properties of their films is the key explored topic that is extremely valuable for future electronics. Although practical applications at the industrial scale still have various technical challenges, the market needs of Cu NWs-based next-generation electronics are excitingly enormous. The development of industrial core technologies of electronics based on Cu NWs is an inevitable trend in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21662038).
References
L. Lu, Y. Shen, X. Chen, L. Qian and K. Lu, Science, 2004, 304, 422–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yang, S. Y. He and H. Y. Tuan, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 602–610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ye, S. Y. Zhang, S. Liu and M. Y. Han, Chem. Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3074–3077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yong, B. C. Zhang, C. S. Seet, A. See, L. Chan, J. Sudijono, S. L. Liew, C. H. Tung and H. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12366–12368 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Gupta, Copper interconnect technology, Springer, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Harper, Electronic materials and processes handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
N. Kränzlin, S. Ellenbroek, D. Durán-Martín and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4743–4746 CrossRef PubMed .
B. K. Park, S. Jeong, D. Kim, J. Moon, S. Lim and J. S. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 311, 417–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Rathmell, S. M. Bergin, Y.-L. Hua, Z.-Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3558–3563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, J. Han, D. S. Lee, S. Bae, S. H. Lee, S. K. Lee, B. J. Moon, C. J. Choi, G. Wang and T. W. Kim, Small, 2017, 14, 1703312 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Ben Aissa, B. Tremblay, A. Andrieux-Ledier, E. Maisonhaute, N. Raouafi and A. Courty, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3189–3195 RSC .
A. Manikandan, L. Lee, Y.-C. Wang, C.-W. Chen, Y.-Z. Chen, H. Medina, J.-Y. Tseng, Z. M. Wang and Y.-L. Chueh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13320–13328 RSC .
S. Bhanushali, N. N. Jason, P. C. Ghosh, A. Ganesh, G. P. Simon and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18925–18935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Nam and D. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 47–63 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Yu, F. G. Zhao, W. Shao, C. W. Ge and W. S. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8811–8818 RSC .
S. Bhanushali, P. Ghosh, A. Ganesh and W. Cheng, Small, 2015, 11, 1232–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Y. Yang, Z. W. Hu and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3823–3834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu and Y. Bando, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 378, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yang, S. Y. He, H. L. Chen and H. Y. Tuan, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1785–1793 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, Y. Lu, C. Peng and J. Lou, J. Cryst. Growth, 2011, 325, 76–80 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Rathmell and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4798–4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Guo, N. Lin, Y. Z. Chen, Z. W. Wang, Q. S. Xie, T. C. Zheng, N. Gao, S. P. Li, J. Y. Kang, D. J. Cai and D.-L. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2323 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sachse, N. Weiß, N. Gaponik, L. Müller-Meskamp, A. Eychmüller and K. Leo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300737 CrossRef .
L. L. Lu, J. Ge, J. N. Yang, S. M. Chen, H. Yao, F. Zhou and S.-H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4431–4437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, R. Wang, P. Nie, Y. Cheng, X. Lu, L. Shi and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14273–14280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Won, A. Kim, D. Lee, W. Yang, K. Woo, S. Jeong and J. Moon, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ahn, Y. Jeong, D. Lee and Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3125–3133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, C. Lee, S. Cho, J. Yoo, Y. Piao and Y. S. Kim, Small, 2014, 10, 5047–5052 CAS .
Z. Yin, S. K. Song, S. Cho, D. J. You, J. Yoo, S. T. Chang and Y. S. Kim, Nano Res., 2017, 9, 3077–3091 CrossRef .
J. Jin, J. Lee, S. Jeong, S. Yang, J.-H. Ko, H.-G. Im, S.-W. Baek, J.-Y. Lee and B.-S. Bae, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1811–1817 RSC .
J. K. Wassei and R. B. Kaner, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gaynor, S. Hofmann, M. G. Christoforo, C. Sachse, S. Mehra, A. Salleo, M. D. McGehee, M. C. Gather, B. Lussem, L. Muller-Meskamp, P. Peumans and K. Leo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4006–4013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, A. R. Rathmell, Z. Chen, I. E. Stewart and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6670–6687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, P. Lee, H. B. Lee, S. K. Hong, I. Lee, J. Yeo, S. S. Lee, T. S. Kim, D. J. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4171–4176 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mayousse, C. Celle, A. Carella and J.-P. Simonato, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Chen, L. Huang and D. Pan, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 4440–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tokuno, M. Nogi, M. Karakawa, J. Jiu, T. T. Nge, Y. Aso and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1215–1222 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, F. L. Wong, M. K. Fung and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 1875–1877 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, C. M. Gilmore, J. S. Horwitz, A. Piqué, H. Murata, G. P. Kushto, R. Schlaf, Z. H. Kafafi and D. B. Chrisey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 259–261 CrossRef CAS .
T. Winkler, H. Schmidt, H. Flügge, F. Nikolayzik, I. Baumann, S. Schmale, T. Weimann, P. Hinze, H.-H. Johannes, T. Rabe, S. Hamwi, T. Riedl and W. Kowalsky, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1612–1618 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, D. W. Shin, V. G. Makotchenko, A. S. Nazarov, V. E. Fedorov, Y. H. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, J. M. Kim and J.-B. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4383–4387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, P. R. Brown, V. Buloyic and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 133–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Hwang, J. S. Park, D. S. Choi, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Lee, K. E. Lee, Y. H. Kim, M. H. Song, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 159–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. J. Kim, I. H. Lee, J. J. Bae, S. Lee, G. H. Han, S. J. Chae, F. Güneş, J. H. Choi, C. W. Baik, S. Kim, J. M. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3809–3814 CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Yin, A. Chun, J. Yoo, Y. S. Kim and Y. Piao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1733–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, Z.-T. Zhu, M. G. Lemaitre, M. Xia, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 113511 CrossRef .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Mahenderkar, Q. Chen, Y. C. Liu, A. R. Duchild, S. Hofheins, E. Chason and J. A. Switzer, Science, 2017, 355, 1203–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zilberberg and T. Riedl, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14481–14508 RSC .
J. Zou, C.-Z. Li, C.-Y. Chang, H.-L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3618–3623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Hatton, M. R. Willis, M. A. Chesters and D. Briggs, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 722–726 RSC .
N. Formica, D. Sundar Ghosh, T. L. Chen, C. Eickhoff, I. Bruder and V. Pruneri, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, N. Kinsey, L. Chen, C. Ji, M. Xu, M. Ferrera, X. Pan, V. M. Shalaev, A. Boltasseva and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605177 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xiong, Y. Liu, T. Ding, P. Chen and Y. Duan, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, J. Yeo, G. Kim, D. Kim, H. Lee, J. Kwon, H. Lee, P. Lee and S. H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5024–5031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Guo, T. Sun, Q. Liu, Z. Suo and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3121 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, W. Guo, L. Xie, C. Wei, J. Zhuang, W. Su and Z. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37048–37054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lordan, M. Burke, M. Manning, A. Martin, A. Amann, D. O’Connell, R. Murphy, C. Lyons and A. J. Quin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4932–4940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Huh, D. K. Lee, H. J. Jeon and C. W. Ahn, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 475302 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-K. Shin and J. Park, J. Disp. Technol., 2015, 11, 110–117 Search PubMed .
V. Saveljev and S.-K. Kim, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 2163–2177 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Woerle and H. Rost, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 789–793 CrossRef CAS .
M.-G. Kang and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1391–1396 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, B. Wang, B. Ding, J. K. Lee and P. W. Leu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2105–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Lee, K. Lee, S. Y. Kim, H. Lee, J. Park, K. H. Choi, H.-K. Kim, D.-G. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, S. Nam and J. U. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2814–2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sánchez-Iglesias, B. Rivas-Murias, M. Grzelczak, J. Pérez-Juste, L. M. Liz-Marzán, F. Rivadulla and M. A. Correa-Duarte, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6066–6070 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Akter and W. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1855–1859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Bergin, Y. Chen, A. R. Rathmell, P. Charbonneau, Z. Li and B. J. Wiley, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1996–2004 RSC .
R. Chen, S. R. Das, C. Jeong, M. R. Khan, D. B. Janes and M. A. Alam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5150–5158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, T. I. Ryu, K.-H. Ok, M.-G. Kwak, S. Park, N.-G. Park, C. J. Han, B. S. Kim, M. J. Ko, H. J. Son and J.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4580–4589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, D. S. You, K. Lim, S. Park, S. Jung, C. S. Kim, D.-H. Kim, D.-G. Kim, J.-K. Kim, J. Park, Y.-C. Kang, J. Heo, S.-H. Jin, J. H. Park and J.-W. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4177–4184 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ho, J. N. Tey, W. Liu, C. K. Cheng and J. Wei, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 044311 CrossRef .
S. Han, S. Hong, J. Ham, J. Yeo, J. Lee, B. Kang, P. Lee, J. Kwon, S. S. Lee, M.-Y. Yang and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5808–5814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Yu, W. Hu, C. H. Chang, Q. Chen and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5563–5567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1276–1279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Kang, H. Park, S. Ahn and J. L. Guo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1179–1184 CrossRef CAS .
V. Scardaci, R. Coull, P. E. Lyons, D. Rickard and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2011, 7, 2621–2628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, A. R. Rathmell, I. E. Stewart, Y. C. Ha, A. R. Wilson, Z. Chen and B. J. Wiley, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2562–2564 RSC .
M. Jin, G. He, H. Zhang, J. Zeng and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10560–10564 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nam, M. Song, D.-H. Kim, B. Cho, H. M. Lee, J.-D. Kwon, S.-G. Park, K.-S. Nam, Y. Jeong, S.-H. Kwon, Y. C. Park, S.-H. Jin, J.-W. Kang, S. Jo and C. S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4788 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Ye, A. R. Wilson, Y.-C. Ha and B. J. Wiley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1461–1467 RSC .
C. R. Chu, C. Lee, J. Koo and H. M. Lee, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2162–2173 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cui, Y. Yu, L. Dou, J. Sun, Q. Yang, C. Schildknecht, K. Schierle-Arndt and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7610–7615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, R. Wang, M. Wen, D. Weng, X. Cui, J. Sun, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14283–14286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Im, S.-H. Jung, J. Jin, D. Lee, J. Lee, D. Lee, J.-Y. Lee, I.-D. Kim and B.-S. Bae, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10973–10979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, S. K. Song, D.-J. You, Y. Ko, S. Cho, J. Yoo, S. Y. Park, Y. Piao, S. T. Chang and Y. S. Kim, Small, 2015, 11, 4576–4583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Luechinger, E. K. Athanassiou and W. J. Stark, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445201 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Ye, I. E. Stewart and B. J. Wiley, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9673–9679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kang, S. Han, J. Kim, S. Ko and M. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23664–23670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, S. Hong, J. Yeo, D. Kim, B. Kang, M.-Y. Yang and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6397–6403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, H. Cho, Y. D. Suh, J. Lee, H. Lee, J. Jung, D. Kim, D. Lee, S. Hong and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 2, 1600222 CrossRef .
X. Luo, G. A. Gelves, U. Sundararaj and J. L. Luo, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2012, 91, 630–637 CrossRef .
D. Deng, Y. Cheng, Y. Jin, T. Qi and F. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23989–23995 RSC .
P. C. Hsu, H. Wu, T. J. Carney, M. T. Mcdowell, Y. Yang, E. C. Garnett, M. Li, L. Hu and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5150–5156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kim, Y. Kim, K. Woo, E.-H. Ryu, K.-Y. Yon, G. Cao and J. Moon, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15169–15177 RSC .
S. Magdassi, M. Grouchko and A. Kamyshny, Materials, 2010, 3, 4626–4638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, J. Kwon, J. Jung, K. Kim, H. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong, S. Han and S. H. Ko, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800077 CrossRef .
I. Hong, Y. Roh, J.-S. Koh, S. Na, T. Kim, E. Lee, H. An, J. Kwon, J. Yeo, S. Hong, K.-T. Lee, D. Kang, S. H. Ko and S. Han, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800422 CrossRef .
A. R. Rathmell, M. Nguyen, M. Chi and B. J. Wiley, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3193–3199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Ang, T. S. A. Wee and W. S. Chin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11001–11010 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Liang, Z. Hu, S. Li, S. Peng and Y. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12658–12661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and Z. Yan, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 130–138 RSC .
R. Long, S. Zhou, B. J. Wiley and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6288–6310 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Dan, Y. Sun and F. Yan, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3899–3910 CrossRef CAS .
G. Christensen, H. Younes, H. P. Hong and P. Smith, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 214302 CrossRef .
Y. U. Ko, S.-R. Cho, K. S. Choi, Y. Park, S. T. Kim, N. H. Kim, S. Y. Kim and S. T. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3606–3613 RSC .
Y. Ko, S. K. Song, N. H. Kim and S. T. Chang, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 366–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, R. Wang, X. Wang and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32925–32933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Kwon and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4744–4751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, S. Han, D. Kim, B. K. You, D. J. Joe, S. Hong, J. Seo, J. Kwon, C. K. Jeong, H.-J. Park, T.-S. Kim, S. H. Ko and K. J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701138 CrossRef .
Y. D. Suh, J. Kwon, J. Lee, H. Lee, S. Jung, D. Kim, H. Cho, J. Yeo and S. H. Ko, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600277 CrossRef .
S. Hong, H. Lee, J. Yeo and S. H. Ko, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 547–564 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwon, H. Cho, H. Eom, H. Lee, Y. D. Suh, H. Moon, J. Shin, S. Hong and S. H. Ko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11575–11582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, R. Wang, Y. Lu and Q. Pei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1298–1305 RSC .
W. Gaynor, G. F. Burkhard, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chung, T.-B. Song, B. Bob, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 805–814 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kim, Y. Won, K. Woo, C.-H. Kim and J. Moon, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1081–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Taberna, S. Mitra, P. Poizot, P. Simon and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 567–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tan, F. Wu, Y. Yuan, R. Chen, T. Zhao, Y. Yao, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Lu and K. Amine, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11774 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, J. Li, X. Deng, C. He, E. Liu, F. He, C. Shi and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605017 CrossRef .
L. D. Burns, Nature, 2013, 497, 181–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Huang, X. Li, Y. Pei, S. Li, X. Cao, R. C. Massé and G. Cao, Small, 2016, 12, 1945–1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-F. Cao, J.-W. Deng, S. Xin, H.-X. Ji, O. G. Schmidt, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohri, B. Oschmann, N. Laszczynski, F. Mueller, J. V. Zamory, M. N. Tahir, S. Passerini, R. Zentel and W. Tremel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 612–619 RSC .
Y.-L. Ding, J. Xie, G.-S. Cao, T.-J. Zhu, H.-M. Yu and X.-B. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, J. Yang, W. Ren and F. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 331, 232–239 CrossRef .
X.-L. Wu, Y.-G. Guo, J. Su, J.-W. Xiong, Y.-L. Zhang and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1155–1160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xia, Q. Xia, B. Lin, J. Zhu, J. K. Seo and Y. S. Meng, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 475–482 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dang, X. Jia, X. Liu, H. Ma, H. Gao and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 427–435 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, P. Soares, C. Checkles, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3414–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xia, S. Wang, G. Liu, L. Ding, D. Li, H. Wang and S. Qiao, Small, 2015, 12, 853–859 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Cao, L. Geng and C. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3572–3579 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zheng, J. Zheng and X. Li, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1950–1958 CrossRef CAS .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, D. Wei and S. Passerini, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603421 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-K. Sun, S.-M. Oh, H.-K. Park and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5050–5054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Dörr, S. Fleischmann, M. Zeiger, I. Grobelsek, P. W. De Oliveira and V. Presser, Chem. Eur. J., 2018, 24, 6358–6363 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhao, L. Zhang, R. Xia, Y. Dong, W. Xu, C. Niu, L. He, M. Yan, L. Qu and L. Mai, Small, 2016, 12, 588–594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fang, Z. Tong, P. Nie, G. Liu and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18766–18773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Taheri, S. Hsieh and M. Bahrami, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6525–6533 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Oh, Y. J. Nam, K. H. Park, S. H. Jung, S.-J. Cho, Y. K. Kim, Y.-G. Lee, S.-Y. Lee and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500865 CrossRef .
Y. Chao, R. Jalili, Y. Ge, C. Wang, T. Zheng, K. Shu and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700234 CrossRef .
B. Ji, F. Zhang, M. Sheng, X. Tong and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604219 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Epur, M. Ramanathan, M. K. Datta, D. H. Hong, P. H. Jampani, B. Gattu and P. N. Kumta, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3504–3510 RSC .
Z. Zuo, T. Y. Kim, I. Kholmanov, H. Li, H. Chou and Y. Li, Small, 2015, 11, 4922–4930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, M. Sevilla, A. B. Fuertes, R. Mokaya and G. Yushin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 827–834 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu, D. Hong, H. W. Lee and S. Park, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3970–4002 CrossRef CAS .
A. Casimir, H. Zhang, O. Ogoke, J. C. Amine, J. Lu and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 359–376 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Higgins, S.-H. Park, P. J. King, C. Zhang, N. McEvoy, N. C. Berner, D. Daly, A. Shmeliov, U. Khan, G. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3702–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang, L. Hu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 310–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tian, Y. Tian, Z. Zhang, L. Yang and S.-I. Hirano, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Welna, L. Qu, B. E. Taylor, L. Dai and M. F. Durstock, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1455–1460 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Lu and C. P. Wong, Materials for advanced packaging, Springer, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .
H.-C. Chu and H.-Y. Tuan, J. Power Sources, 2017, 346, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, T. Wang, L. Kong, K. Yao, H. Fu, K. Li, L. Cao, J. Huang and Q. Zhang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2017, 34, 1600223 CrossRef .
H. Xue, J. Zhao, J. Tang, H. Gong, P. He, H. Zhou, Y. Yamauchi and J. He, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4915–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, D. Pan, L. Wang, Z. Zhang, Z. Lyu, W. Dong, X. Chen, D. Zhang, W. Chen and H. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19343–19351 RSC .
T. Jiang, F. Bu, X. Feng, I. Shakir, G. Hao and Y. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Peled, F. Patolsky, D. Golodnitsky, K. Freedman, G. Davidi and D. Schneier, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3907–3916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiong, Y. Yun and H. J. Jin, Materials, 2013, 6, 1138–1158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoon, S. Lee, S. Kim, K. W. Park, D. Cho and Y. Jeong, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 495–501 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, S. Cho, D.-J. You, Y.-K. Ahn, J. Yoo and Y. S. Kim, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 769–779 CrossRef CAS .
G.-H. Lee, H.-W. Shim and D.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 218–225 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hwang, T.-H. Kim, Y.-G. Cho, J. Kim and H.-K. Song, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8623 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, X. Niu, Z. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3989–3994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, M. Pasta, F. La Mantia, L. Cui, S. Jeong, H. D. Deshazer, J. W. Choi, S. M. Han and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 708–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Trung and N.-E. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2202–2222 RSC .
K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta and S. W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 139–160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, X. Chen, G. Li, N. Sun, H. Jiang, D. Bao, L. Xie, M. Peng, Y. Liu, Z. Wen and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7513–7519 RSC .
X. Huang, Y. Liu, K. Chen, W.-J. Shin, C.-J. Lu, G.-W. Kong, D. Patnaik, S.-H. Lee, J. F. Cortes and J. A. Rogers, Small, 2014, 10, 3083–3090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Roh, B.-U. Hwang, D. Kim, B.-Y. Kim and N.-E. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6252–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qi, Z. Liu, M. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Lv, Y. Li, J. Wei, B. Liedberg, Z. Yu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3145–3151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cherenack, C. Zysset, T. Kinkeldei, N. Münzenrieder and G. Tröster, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5178–5182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pang, G.-Y. Lee, T.-I. Kim, S. M. Kim, H. N. Kim, S.-H. Ahn and K.-Y. Suh, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 795–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, L. Li, D. Chen, T. Hajagos, Z. Ren, S. Y. Chou, W. Hu and Q. Pei, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, J. Park, W. Hyun, J. Kim, J. Kim, Y. B. Lee, C. Song, H. J. Hwang, J. H. Kim, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6626–6633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, H. Dong, B. Zhu, J. Li, H. H. Hng, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1058–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao and Y. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2345–2352 RSC .
M. Amjadi, A. Pichitpajongkit, S. Lee, S. Ryu and I. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5154–5163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, G. Shin, Y. J. Kang, W. Kim and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7975–7982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su, H. Zhang, H. Cheng, B. Lu, C. Yu, C. Chuang, T.-I. Kim, T. Song, K. Shigeta, S. Kang, C. Dagdeviren, I. Petrov, P. V. Braun, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1543 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, R. Nuñez-Flores, W. Jia and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3060–3065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani, Y. Noguchi, K. Hata, T. Fukushima, T. Aida and T. Someya, Science, 2008, 321, 1468–1472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Y. Chun, Y. Oh, J. Rho, J.-H. Ahn, Y.-J. Kim, H. R. Choi and S. Baik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 853–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng, A. Rydberg, K. Hjort and Z. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 144103 CrossRef .
S. Seo, M. Min, S. M. Lee and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1920 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhu, J.-H. So, R. Mays, S. Desai, W. R. Barnes, B. Pourdeyhimi and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2308–2314 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoon, S. Y. Hong, Y. Lim, S.-J. Lee, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6580–6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, J. Wang, X. Wang, W. Kang, M. Cui, C. Y. Foo and P. S. Lee, Adv.
Mater., 2014, 26, 943–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Zang, A. R. Rathmell, X. Zhao and B. J. Wiley, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2381–2386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, K. Tong and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5986–5996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, H.-B. Yao, X. Wang, Y.-D. Ye, J.-L. Wang, Z.-Y. Wu, J.-W. Liu, F.-J. Fan, H.-L. Gao, C.-L. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1654–1659 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Jason, S. J. Wang, S. Bhanushali and W. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16596–16605 RSC .
W. Huang, J. Li, S. Zhao, F. Han, G. Zhang, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 146, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, J. Li, J. Xu and H. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6298–6305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, H. Zhai, T. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Cheng, L. Shi and J. Sun, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2138–2148 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Jeong, D.-H. Baek, H. C. Jung, J. H. Song, I. Y. Kim and S. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 977 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ma, J. Lee, D. Choi, H. Moon and S. Baik, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1944–1951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huo, C. Wang, H. Ren, M. Johnson and M. Shen, Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 46, 1182–1184 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5117–5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Bernacca, B. O'Connor, D. F. Williams and D. J. Wheatley, Biomaterials, 2002, 23, 45–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Cheong, R. E. Triambulo, G.-H. Lee, I.-S. Yi and J.-W. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7846–7855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Chu, Y.-C. Chang, Y. Lin, S.-H. Chang, W.-C. Chang, G.-A. Li and H.-Y. Tuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13009–13017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Won, A. Kim, W. Yang, S. Jeong and J. Moon, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, L. Li, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, S. Wang, R. Wang, J. Sun and L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5309–5316 RSC .
Y. Tang, S. Gong, Y. Chen, L. W. Yap and W. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5707–5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hwang, J. An, B. D. Choi, K. Kim, S.-W. Jung, K.-J. Baeg, M.-G. Kim, K. M. Ok and J. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1441–1447 RSC .
S. Ding, J. Jiu, Y. Gao, Y. Tian, T. Araki, T. Sugahara, S. Nagao, M. Nogi, H. Koga, K. Suganuma and H. Uchida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6190–6199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Cheng and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9297–9304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hong, S. Lee, D. Kim, H. Cho, Y. Roh, H. An, S. Hong, S. H. Ko and S. Han, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 074001 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Application of Cu NWs in three different electronic devices, such as flexible transparent electrode for optical devices, current collector for lithium-ion battery, and stretchable electrode for wearable devices (adapted with permission from ref. 22, 90, 171 and 217, © Springer Nature Publishing AG 2013, © American Chemical Society 2014, © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2018, and © American Chemical Society 2014).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Meyer rod coating of Cu NWs ink on the PET substrate. (c) Lighting of an LED using the Cu NWs-transparent electrode as an electrical circuit. (d) UV-Vis transmission spectrum of the ITO and various Cu NWs films with different densities (adapted with permission from ref. 21, © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 2011). (e) SEM image of ultra-long Cu NWs-based transparent electrodes with 91% transparency. (f) Comparison of the sheet resistances and transmittances of the electrodes made from the ultra-long Cu NWs with other works. (g) Photograph and corresponding UV-Vis transmission spectrum for 5 Ω □−1 of Cu NWs-based transparent electrode (adapted with permission from ref. 89, © American Chemical Society 2012).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM image of Cu NWs synthesized with an average diameter of 16.5 nm. (b) UV-Vis transmission spectrum of various Cu NWs-based transparent electrode. (c) Plot of transmittance vs. sheet resistance of various Cu NWs films with different densities. (d) Schematic illustration of the GaN-based LED structure together with Cu NW-based transparent electrodes on n- and p-type areas. (e and f) I–V curves of the contact of Cu NW-based transparent electrodes with n-GaN and p-GaN, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 22, © Springer Nature Publishing AG 2013).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Cu NWs dispersion solution. (b) Cu NWs coated on glass substrate. (c) Corresponding SEM of Cu NWs. (d) Comparison of the opto-electrical performance of various transparent electrodes. (e) j–V curves and key parameters of solar cells on ITO and Cu NW electrode illuminated by a sun-simulator at 1 sun (adapted with permission from ref. 23, © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 2013). (f) A photograph of Cu NW network embedded on the base glass-fiber reinforced plastic film and (g) corresponding surface SEM image. (h) Schematic illustration of the flexible OLED structure using the Cu NWs-based transparent electrode and (i and j) photographs of the flexible OLED (adapted with permission from ref. 90, © American Chemical Society 2014).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Large-scale coating photograph and (b) SEM image of the curved Cu NWs on the PI substrate. (c) Opto-electrical performances for curved Cu NWs film on the PI substrate. (d) Optical microscopic image of the curved Cu NWs film with 20 μm line-spacing pattern. (e and f) The images of lighting of an LED connected by the Cu NWs-based flexible transparent electrode as an electrical circuit (adapted with permission from ref. 29, © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2017).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Cu/C NWs. (b and c) SEM and HR-TEM image of porous Ge nano arrays on Cu NWs. (d) Rate capability of the porous Ge nanoarrays on Cu NWs electrode. Cycling performance of the porous Ge nanoarrays on Cu NWs electrode at (e) 1C rate and (f) 10C rate (adapted with permission from ref. 172, © Elsevier Ltd 2015).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) SEM image and (c) photographic image of the inter-tangled NWs in separator–electrode–current collector assembly. (d) Rate capability and (e) cycling performance of the separator–electrode–current collector assembly with different compositions with lithiation rate of 0.2C and delithiation rate of 0.5C (adapted with permission from ref. 173, © Springer Nature Publishing AG 2015).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Li plating in the 3D Cu NWs network current collector at different statuses. (b) Voltage profile of Li plating/stripping at 1 mA cm−2 in the 3D Cu NW membrane (adapted with permission from ref. 24, © American Chemical Society 2016).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the Cu NW foil fabrication process using a rolling press method. (b and c) SEM images of the Cu NW foil. (d) Comparison of the interfacial shear stress of graphite–Cu NW foil and graphite–Cu foil. (e) Photographs of the graphite–Cu NW foil and graphite–Cu foil after shear stress testing (adapted with permission from ref. 163, © Elsevier B.V. 2017).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the Cu NW–MWCNT composite electrode. (b) Schematic illustration of the conventional anode and the proposed Cu NW–MWCNT composite anode. (c) Electrochemical impedance spectra of the half cells using the Cu NW–MWCNT composite and MWCNT as the anode. (d and e) Cycling retention of various half cells using the Cu NW–MWCNT composite and the MWCNT anodes. (f) LED powered by a flexible full-cell LIB using Cu NW–MWCNT composite as the anode (adapted with permission from ref. 171, © Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2018).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a Cu NW–PU composite electrode. (b) UV-Vis transmission spectra of various CuNW–PU composite electrodes and three representative photographs. (c) Normalized transient resistance of the Cu NW–PU composite electrode with the treatment of 6-aminohexanoic acid in 60% strain at the stretching speed of 1 mm s−1 (adapted with permission from ref. 119, © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014). (d) Photographs of Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrodes with varying sheet resistance. (e) SEM image of the Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrode of 15 Ω □−1. (f) Resistance change of the Cu NWs–poly(acrylate) composite electrode during repeated 10% strain (adapted with permission from ref. 216, © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Cu NW–PVA composite aerogels. (b) 1D, 2D, and 3D of Cu NW–PVA composite aerogels embedded on the PDMS matrix. (c) Resistance variation in the Cu NW–PVA–PDMS rubber amber due to strain change (up to 60%). (d) Relative resistance change of Cu NW–PVA–PDMS rubber amber during repeated stretching cycles (adapted with permission from ref. 217, © American Chemical Society 2014).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic comparison of conventional bulk heating and plasmonic laser nanowelding of Cu NWs. (b) Optical and SEM images (insets) of the Cu NWs film before and after welding. (c) Optical images of Cu NWs on highly stretchable Eco-flex substrate with different strains (adapted with permission from ref. 77, © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 2014).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photograph of the helical-structured Cu NWs–PDMS composite electrode, and its resistance variation by the strain change comparing with other structure. (b) Relative resistance change of the helical-structured Cu NWs–PDMS composite electrode during repeated stretching cycles (adapted with permission from ref. 214, © Nature Publishing Group 2014). (c) Photograph of the Cu NW-based transparent electrode with PDMS substrate. (d) Relative sheet resistance change of the Cu NW-based transparent electrode (4.17 Ω □−1) with the increase of strain. (e) Relative resistance change of Cu NW-based transparent electrode (4.1 Ω) during repeated 20% strain (adapted with permission from ref. 218, © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the Cu NW/PU composite conductor. (b) SEM image of the Cu NWs network partially embedded on the PU matrix. (c) Plot of transmittance vs. sheet resistance of the Cu NWs network. (d) Relative resistance response of the Cu NW/PU composite conductor to the bending and releasing of the finger. (e) Photograph and infrared images of the stretchable heater glove made by the Cu NW/PU composite conductor (adapted with permission from ref. 219, © American Chemical Society 2016).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite film. (b) Sheet resistance of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode with the prepolymerization time and their photographs after the adhesive strength tests. (c) Resistance variation of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode with tensile strain up to 20% in the first cycle. (d) Relative resistance change of the Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode during repeated 20% strain. (e) Schematic illustration of the structural change of Cu NWs/PDMS composite electrode with stretching and release (adapted with permission from ref. 220, © American Chemical Society 2016).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
