Stable perovskite solar cells with 22% efficiency enabled by inhibiting migration/loss of iodide ions   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP04422F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP04422F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 6955-6962Stable perovskite solar cells with 22% efficiency enabled by inhibiting migration/loss of iodide ions†

        
          
            Qingrui 
            Cai‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yao 
            Yao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yao 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mingliang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanqiu 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dandan 
            Song
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Xu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodan 
            Li
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Dong 
            Wei
          
        
      *a
aFujian Normal University, College of Physics and Energy, FuZhou, 350117, Fujian, P. R. China. E-mail: q397983012@126.com
bBeijing Jiaotong Univ, Key Lab Luminescence & Opt Informat, Minist Educ, Beijing, 100044, P. R. China
cXiamen Univ. Technol., Sch. Mat. Sci. & Engn., Fujian Prov. Key Lab Funct. Mat. & Applicat., Xiamen, 361024, Fujian, P. R. China
Received 
      22nd September 2022
    , Accepted 6th February 2023First published on 7th February 2023AbstractIodide ions (I− and I3−) in perovskites tend to migrate resulting in phase segregation and degradation of perovskite films and devices under illumination or operation conditions. In order to overcome this intrinsic difficulty, passivation and additive strategies have been developed in many studies. In this work, we introduced polyetheramine (PEA) into perovskite films to inhibit the migration and loss of iodides and suppress defects related to these migrated ions. The perovskite films with PEA barely suffered iodide loss even under long-term ultraviolet (UV) illumination and possessed a lower trap density than that of the pristine films before and after aging under UV illumination. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that PEA can form strong interactions with iodides and Pb2+ in perovskites via PbO and H–I bonds, and the iodide ions (I− and I3−) could be locked firmly by PEA, preventing them from migration or loss. Using this method, the efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) can be improved from 19.71% (without PEA) to 22.02% (with PEA). After 200 h of maximum power point (MPP) tracking, the efficiency of PSCs with PEA remained 89% of its initial value and that of PSCs without PEA fully degraded.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite materials have far-reaching prospects in the field of photovoltaic materials because of their adjustable band gap, long carrier diffusion length, long carrier lifetime, and high absorption coefficient.1–6 Through the development of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) over the past decade, its power conversion efficiency (PCE) has jumped from 3.8% to 25.7%.7–14 However, perovskite materials and devices still suffer from instability under illumination and moisture conditions. The A-position organic amine cation in perovskites easily combines with water molecules, thus dissociating from the lattice structure of perovskites.15 In addition, the iodide ions in perovskite films can migrate under illumination and makes I− incline to I2, causing degradation of perovskites.16,17
In order to improve the stability of perovskites, additives with various functional groups that can interact with perovskites have been studied to prevent cations and ions from migration. The alkoxy (–O–CH2) and hydroxyl (–OH) groups could form bonds with iodide ions in perovskites via hydrogen interactions and chemically immobilize these migrated ions to improve the stability of perovskites.18 Moreover, the carbonyl (CO) and fluoro groups (–F) served as anchors to interact with ions on the perovskite grain boundary via hydrogen bonding, restricting ion migration and inhibiting the formation of ion vacancies.19,20 In particular, the hydrogen bonding (N–H/I) between the amino group and the perovskite can also be utilized to restrict the movement of iodide ions on grain boundaries, inhibit the conversion of I− into I2, and eventually improve the photo-stability and water vapor stability of perovskites.21 In addition, π-conjugated materials have also been confirmed to be useful for the cation inhibition.22 Hence, many recent works have suggested that additives with functional groups can significantly inhibit the migration of ions and mitigate non-radiative recombination, leading to both improved stability and efficiency.23–28
In this work, we introduced polyetheramine (PEA) molecules into perovskite films to inhibit the migration and loss of iodide ions and improve the performance of perovskite films and devices. The amino group at the end of PEA can promote the nucleation and growth of perovskites and enhance the quality and morphology of perovskite films. Furthermore, by forming PbO and H–I bonds between PEA and perovskites, the iodide ions had been locked firmly via electrostatic interactions, avoiding the migration and loss of iodides in the film preparation and device operation process. In addition, the perovskite films with PEA exhibited hydrophobicity with good performance, and could effectively resist the erosion of moisture in air. Consequently, PSCs with PEA had excellent stability, and the efficiency of PSCs also improved to 22.02%.
Results and discussion
The composition of the perovskite film is FA0.6MA0.4PbI2.9Br0.1, which was produced by a one-step deposition method. The PEA with different concentrations of 0, 2, 5, and 8 μL mL−1 was doped into a perovskite precursor solution. A detailed description of the device fabrication process is presented in the Experimental section in ESI.† To detect the surface morphology of perovskite films with different PEA concentrations, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used, as shown in Fig. 1a–d. It is apparent that the introduced PEA molecules can promote the growth of perovskite grains.29 The average grain size increased from 600 nm to 800 nm, and the uniformity and compactness of perovskite films with PEA improved significantly. It is obvious that the grain size of perovskite films with PEA-5 is more intensively around 800 nm. Accordingly, it can be concluded that PEA molecules are conducive to the growth of perovskite grains with higher crystal quality, thereby boosting the uniformity of the as-prepared films.29,30 Moreover, to investigate the absorption characteristics of the as-prepared films, UV-vis measurement was performed, and the two-dimensional absorbance diagram with different PEA concentrations of perovskite films is displayed in Fig. 1e. It is clear that the perovskite film with PEA-5 showed the highest absorbance, especially in the visible spectrum (450–600 nm), which is relevant to the better grain quality, higher compactness and uniformity of these films.29,31 As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), we used cross-sectional SEM images to observe the internal morphology of the perovskite films at different PEA concentrations. It turned out that the perovskite grains grew significantly and the cross-section of the film was compact and flat after doping with PEA, especially when 5 μL of PEA was applied. From the XRD patterns shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the relative intensities of the (001) and (002) planes of the perovskite with PEA were enhanced compared to those of the control, especially when 5 μL of PEA was added. On the contrary, the peaks caused by PbI2 are greatly suppressed. This suggests that the incorporation of PEA into the perovskite could optimize the orientation of the perovskite grains and suppress the residual PbI2. In addition, the topography and roughness images of the pristine perovskite film and the perovskite film with PEA were acquired using an atomic force microscope (AFM). From Fig. S3 (ESI†), the root-mean-square roughness (Rq) of the perovskite film with PEA is about 12.3 nm, and that of the pristine perovskite is 13.8 nm. With this phenomenon, it is suggested that our method can promote the grain growth and suppress the surface roughness of the films, which can lead to more compact and smooth perovskite films. Furthermore, to verify the luminescent properties of perovskite films with different PEA concentrations, two-dimensional photoluminescence (PL) spectra are shown in Fig. 1f. It indicates that the PL peak positions of all samples were at 792 nm, and the PL peak of PEA-5 showed the highest intensity. This confirms that the non-radiative recombination was suppressed dramatically in the perovskite film with PEA-5.31,32
 Fig. 1  (a–d) Surface SEM images of perovskite films (a) without PEA; with PEA: (b) 2 μL; (c) 5 μL; and (d) 8 μL. The statistical histogram of relevant films are provided in the inset. (e) Absorption two-dimensional diagram for perovskite films with different densities of PEA. (f) Corresponding PL two-dimensional diagram for the as-prepared perovskite films. 
In order to investigate the effects of PEA molecules on the stability of perovskite films, a series of harsh measurements were carried under UV continuous illumination and dropping water. As shown in Fig. 2a, the photos of the perovskite films without and with PEA under continuous UV illumination are provided. After aging for 5 days under UV light illumination, it could be seen that the perovskite film without PEA had suffered serious degradation, while the perovskite film with PEA showed little changes. To further evaluate the enhancement of PEA molecules for the UV stability of perovskite films, Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy was performed as shown in Fig. 2b. Before the absorption measurement, we soaked the perovskite films into isopropanol (IPA) and irradiated these perovskite/IPA solutions under UV light for 120 h. The UV illumination can accelerate the degradation of perovskites, and the organic components and metallic iodide decomposed from the films would be dissolved into IPA.33 By comparing the absorbance curves of IPA solutions soaked with perovskite films without and with PEA, the degradation of perovskite films could be inspected more accurately. It can be found that the sample without PEA released large amounts of I2 molecules into the IPA solution, indicating that the pristine perovskite film was seriously decomposed after ageing under UV illumination. In contrast, for the sample with PEA, there is no obvious absorbance peak of I2, which indicates that PEA can significantly inhibit the formation of I2 molecules even under long UV illumination, thereby improving the stability of perovskite films and devices under long-term illumination.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photos of perovskite films without and with PEA before and after 5 days of continuous ultraviolet (UV) light illumination. (b) UV-vis absorbance spectra of the isopropanol (IPA) solution taken from the samples shown in inset photos. Inset: Photos of perovskite films without and with PEA immersed into IPA solution, taken after continuous UV illumination for 120 hours. (c) Steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films with PEA and the perovskite films after 20 and 40 hours of UV illumination. (d) Steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films with PEA and the perovskite films after 20 and 40 hours of UV illumination. (e) Photos of perovskite films without and with PEA added directly with 10 μL deionized water and held for 5 minutes. (f) Contact angles of perovskite films without and with PEA. 
The fluorescence characteristics of these films were also detected by the photoluminescence spectrum (PL spectrum). The excited light wavelength is 450 nm. As shown in Fig. 2c, the position of PL peak showed a red shift from 792 nm to 806 nm after 20 h of UV illumination, which indicates the phase segregation in the perovskite films originating from the migration of iodides.34 The peak intensity also decreased obviously revealing the increase in non-radiation recombination centers in the aged films.35 After further 20 h of UV illumination, the PL peak was quenched completely confirming the entire degradation of the pristine perovskite films. In comparison, the fluorescence property of the perovskite films with PEA was more stable. After 40 h of UV illumination, the intensity of the PL peak only decreased slightly without any position shift. This determined again that PEA plays an effective role in the stability improvement of perovskite films. In addition, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†), the PL peak position of the perovskite films with PEA has not changed, but the PL peak intensity increased significantly. This reveals the decrease in non-radiation recombination centers in the perovskite films with PEA. Besides, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed to evaluate the charge carrier dynamics for perovskite films with and without PEA. As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), the average lifetime increases from 108 ns to 211 ns after doping PEA, suggesting a significant decrease in defect density and defect-assisted recombination in the perovskite films with PEA, which agrees well with the steady-state PL measurements.
Furthermore, we also characterized the water stability of the above-mentioned two films. About 10 μL of deionized water was added directly onto the surface of these films, as shown in Fig. 2e. For the perovskite films without PEA, the boundary of water exhibited an extended trend; however, for the perovskite films with PEA, the water on the surface appeared hemispherical with a clear boundary. After 5 minutes, the film without PEA was eroded seriously by water, but the film with PEA showed some resistance ability to the erosion of water. To figure out the reason for this phenomenon, we conducted the water contact angle test of the as-prepared films, as shown in Fig. 2f. It is clear that the contact angle of the perovskite film with PEA was 71.8°, which is much greater than that of the perovskite film without PEA (20.4°). This indicates that the perovskite films with PEA exhibit hydrophobicity with good performance, and can effectively resist the erosion of moisture in air.
To reveal the fundamental mechanism of PEA on the stability of perovskite films, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed. The electrostatic potential (ESP) of PEA molecular is provided in Fig. S6 (ESI†). In Fig. 3a, the situation of the perovskite film with an I− ion on the surface was simulated. It can be found that there existed electrostatic interactions between I− and Pb2+ with the calculated binding energy of −1.762 eV, indicating that the I− ion requires the external energy to move, such as under illumination or bias conditions.36 However, after UV irradiation, there would be a large quantity of I2 in perovskites, which had been proved by the previous results and other reports.37 To simulate that situation, one iodine molecule (I2) had been added on the perovskite surface as shown in Fig. 3b. It is clear that I− possesses higher electronegativity, which enable it attract electrons from I2 to form I3−. The formation of I3− will result in electron loss of I−, which could weaken the bond between I− and Pb2+, making I3− more prone to separate from the perovskite surface. This would not only accelerate the migration and loss of I− ions, but also quicken the degradation of perovskites.
 Fig. 3  (a) I− ions adsorbed on the perovskite surface. (b) Charge density diagram for I2 adsorbed on the perovskite surface with I−. (c) Differential charge density diagram for the PEA adsorbed on perovskite with I3−. (d) Differential charge density equipotential curve. 
According to the up-provided experimental results, PEA could improve the stability of perovskite films and inhibit the loss of iodide. Sequentially, to elucidate the effect of PEA on the stability enhancement of perovskites, we further introduced PEA on the perovskite surface as shown in Fig. 3c. From the simulation, PEA could coordinate with Pb2+ through a PbO bond, and thus passivating defects related to I vacancies due to the migration and loss of I− ions. In addition, through hydrogen bond, PEA can also interact with I2, thereby restricting the migration of I3−. These interactions enable the PEA molecule to work as a molecular lock, which can lock I3− firmly on the perovskite surface, reducing their migration or loss. Furthermore, the strength of interactions between PEA and the perovskite was also qualified by the equipotential differential charge diagram, as shown in Fig. 3d. As shown in Fig. 3d, there appeared obvious differential charge fluctuations on the perovskite surface, which is associated with the formation of coordination bonds between PEA and the perovskite. At the position of 7.7 Å, there was a positive differential charge peak of 1.17 eV, and at the position of 10.27 Å, a negative potential of differential charge at −1.23 eV could be observed. This signified that the oxygen in PEA provides lone-pair electrons to form the coordinate bond (PbO bond) with Pb2+ in perovskites, which can tighten PEA and passivate the Pb2+ defects on the perovskite surface. At the position of −12.28 Å, an apparent negative differential charge potential of −2.95 eV could be surveyed, which indicates the strong interaction of –NH2 and I2 between PEA and metallic iodide. Therefore, PEA molecules not only passivate the defects caused by I− loss, but inhibit the migration of I3− as well, and thus, significantly improve the stability of the perovskite films.
To prove whether PEA is distributed inside the perovskite, we measured the content of oxygen elements at the perovskite with and without PEA by cross-sectional SEM-EDS because of the unique oxygen element for PEA in the perovskite layer. As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†), after doping the PEA, the content of oxygen in the perovskite layer is significantly increased. It demonstrates that the PEA exists in the perovskite films after annealing. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was also performed to further confirm the interaction between PEA and perovskites. As shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†), the pristine perovskite film displays a prospective binding energy of I 3d3/2 at 630.2 eV and I 3d5/2 at 618.6 eV, respectively. For comparison, the perovskite film with PEA showed two peaks at 630.0 and 618.4 eV, indicating that the binding energy was shifted by 0.2 eV to a lower level. The electrons of PEA are more inclined to I−, resulting in an increase in charge density around iodide ions. The enhanced charge density of iodide ions would reinforce the interaction between iodide ions and lead cations in perovskites, which can eliminate the movement of iodide ions. The Pb 4f core level of perovskite with PEA also showed a red shift compared with the pristine film, indicating the interaction between PEA and Pb2+. Hence, PEA could interact with iodide ions and lead cations and fasten the bond between I− (or I3−) and Pb2+ in perovskites. It is worth noting that such a result can well avoid the migration of iodide ions and be conducive to improve the performance and stability of the as-prepared films and devices.
Based on the above-mentioned analyses, the device performance of PSCs maybe improved due to the introduction of PEA. Fig. 4a shows the J–V curves of PSCs without and with PEA measured under the standard sunlight intensity of AM 1.5G, at a scanning rate of 100 mV s−1 and the delay time is 1 ms. All devices were measured under ambient conditions without encapsulation. The champion efficiency of PSCs without PEA was 19.71%, with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 23.84 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.09 V and a FF of 75.5%. In contrast, as shown in Table S1 (ESI†), we found that the device efficiency first increases and then decreases by adjusting the concentration of PEA. Among them, the device with 5 μL PEA has the highest efficiency of 22.02%, corresponding to JSC (mA cm−2) of 24.55, VOC (V) of 1.12 and FF (%) of 80.11. Furthermore, the hysteresis was also improved for PSCs with PEA, and the hysteresis factor decreased from 0.15 to 0.01, as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†). This could be attributed to the inhibition of iodide-migration-related defects by the electrostatic interaction between PEA and perovskites. We can see that the efficiency improvement is mainly due to VOC and FF, and this is related to the fact that the addition of PEA can effectively increase the crystal quality of perovskite, preventing the formation of metallic iodide and reducing defects at grain boundaries, as confirmed by the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurement shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†). In addition, we draw the statistical distribution plots as shown in Fig. 4b and study the reproducibility of JSC, VOC, FF and PCE from these PSCs. It was found that PSCs with PEA have a significant advantage over the control PSCs, and the short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage, filling factor and efficiency distribution are all more concentrated. This indicates that PSCs with PEA have better reproducibility, and the average efficiency is improved from 18.50% to 21.53%, as shown in Table S2 (ESI†). To further investigate the related recombination mechanism, VOCversus light intensity measurement was conducted by measuring VOC at different light intensities from 100 to 0.1 mW cm−2. As shown in Fig. 4c, VOC as a function of light intensity in semilogarithmic exhibits a linear relationship with a slope of kBT/q, where kB, T, and q are the Boltzmann constant, temperature in Kelvin, and the elementary charge, respectively. The slopes extracted from the curves are 1.24 and 1.77 for PSCs with and without PEA, respectively. As we know, when the additional trap-assisted recombination is involved, the slope of this plot is greater than kBT/q. Hence, the lower slope value indicates reduced density of defects and suppressed trap-assisted recombination. This is mainly due to the electrostatic interaction of PEA to increase the crystal quality of perovskites and decrease the defects induced by the formation and migration of metallic iodide. In order to determine the stability of as-prepared PSCs, we conducted a stability test by the max power point (MPP) tracking in a N2 atmosphere for 200 hours, as shown in Fig. 4d. It is obvious that the PCE of the PSCs with PEA decreased from 22.02% to 19.87%, which remains about 90.24% of the initial efficiency after the MPP tracking test, whereas the efficiency of control PSCs degraded to 0 under the same aging condition for 120 hours, which shows that PEA can improve the stability of the device significantly. Fig. S11 (ESI†) shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the champion PSCs with and without PEA. The device of perovskite films with PEA presents enhanced response in a broad wavelength range from 350 to 800 nm. A larger JSC value of 24.12 mA cm−2 is obtained by integrating the EQE curves compared with 22.93 mA cm−2 for control devices. This proves that the passivation of defects by PEA molecules improves carrier transport efficiency. This may be attributed to the interaction between PEA and perovskites, which makes perovskites have better morphology and crystallinity, inhibits the transition from I− to I2 and, therefore, improve the stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of PSCs based on perovskite without and with PEA. (b) Statistical distribution of device parameters of PSCs with and without PEA. (c) Vocvs. light intensity of PSCs without and with PEA. (d) Long-term stability of perovskite solar cells without and with PEA. All devices were measured in ambient air without any encapsulation. 
Conclusion
In summary, this work demonstrates an effective method to inhibit the loss and migration of iodides of perovskite films under harsh conditions by introducing polyetheramine (PEA) into perovskites. PEA molecules possess –NH2 and C–O functional groups, enabling it coordinate with I− ions and Pb2+ cations in perovskites through the H–I and PbO bonds. By this method, perovskite films with PEA have larger and more uniform grains with less non-radiative recombination sites. The iodides, regardless of I− or I3−, can be locked firmly through coordinate bonds between PEA and perovskites, preventing them from loss and migration under the illumination or moisture conditions. The density of relative defects is also suppressed significantly by PEA in both fresh and aged perovskite films. After the optimization, PSCs based on the perovskite with PEA exhibit superior performance with an average efficiency of 21.6% and the champion of 22.02%. The long-term stability of PSCs with PEA also appear much better than the control devices, as the efficiency remains 89% of its initial value for PSCs with PEA, and yet that degrades fully for the PSCs without PEA after 200 h of MPP tracking. This work provides a reliable way to inhibit loss and migration of iodide, decrease induced defects in perovskite films, and promote the stability and efficiency of PSCs.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported partially by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 52002070), Natural Science Foundation project of Fujian Province (No. 2020J01197), Educational Research Project of Young and Middle-Aged Teachers in Fujian Province (JAT190072).
References
Z. Lv, L. He, H. Jiang, X. Ma, F. Wang, L. Fan, M. Wei, J. Yang, L. Yang and N. Yang, Diluted-CdS Quantum Dot-assisted SnO2 Electron Transport Layer with Excellent Conductivity and Suitable Band Alignment for High-Performance Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16326–16335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hou, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Enhancing Efficiency and Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells via a Self-assembled Dopamine Interfacial Layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30607–30613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, M. Li, P. Siffalovic, G. Cao and J. Tian, From Scalable Solution Fabrication of Perovskite Films Towards Commercialization of Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 518–549 RSC .
W. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Unique Properties of Halide Perovskites as Possible Origins of The Superior Solar Cell Performance, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Bi, D. He, L. Bai, W. Wang, H. Yuan, Q. Song, P. Su, Z. Zang, T. Zhou and J. Chen, Interfacial Defect Passivation and Stress Release via Multi-Active-Site Ligand Anchoring Enables Efficient and Stable Methylammonium-Free Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2526–2538 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. Zakeeruddin, J. Correa-Baena, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Incorporation of Rubidium Cations into Perovskite Solar Cells Improves Photovoltaic Performance, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Natonal Renewable Energy Laboratory, Best Research-Cell Efficiences, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
C. Chen, Y. Lou, K. Wang, Z. Su, C. Dong, J. Chen, Y. Shi, X. Gao and Z. Wang, Ternary Two-Step Sequential Deposition Induced Perovskite Orientational Crystallization for High-Performance Photovoltaic Devices, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101538 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, J. Xue, K. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Fenning, G. Xu, S. Nuryyeva, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, J. Zhu, M. Wang, S. Tan, I. Yavuz, K. Houk and Y. Yang, Constructive Molecular Configurations for Surface-Defect Passivation of Perovskite Photovoltaics, Science, 2019, 366, 1509–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Li, Q. Zhuang, C. Gong, X. Hu, W. Cai, S. Zhao, J. Chen and Z. Zang, Simultaneous Passivation of Bulk and Interface Defects Through Synergistic Effect of Anion and Cation Toward Efficient and Stable Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .
N. Park and K. Zhu, Scalable Fabrication and Coating Methods for Perovskite Solar Cells and Solar Modules, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 333–350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shin, E. Yeom, W. Yang, S. Hur, M. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. Noh and S. Seok, Colloidally Prepared La-Doped BaSnO3 Electrodes for Efficient, Photostable Perovskite Solar Cells, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zuo, B. Kim, B. Liu, D. He, L. Bai, W. Wang, C. Xu, Q. Song, C. Jia, Z. Zang, D. Lee, X. Li and J. Chen, Passivating Buried Interface via Self-Assembled Novel Sulfonium Salt Toward Stable and Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133209 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, J. Azpiroz and F. De Angelis, Ab initio Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Degradation by Water, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4885–4892 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Chen, X. Guo, S. Tang, R. Zhang, Z. Xie, J. Wang, A. Gu, S. Lin and N. Wang, Fluorinated Black Phosphorene Nanosheets with Robust Ambient Stability for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2106779 CrossRef .
Y. Wei, Y. Zhao, C. Liu, Z. Wang, F. Jiang, Y. Liu, Q. Zhao, D. Yu and M. Hong, Constructing All-inorganic Perovskite/Fluoride Nanocomposites for Efficient and Ultra-Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2106386 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Ke, X. Feng, X. Zhao, W. Zhang and J. Fang, Enhancing The Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells through Cross-Linkable and Hydrogen Bonding Multifunctional Additives, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12684–12689 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Rakstys, K. Jack, H. Jin, J. Lai, H. Li, C. Ranasinghe, J. Saghaei, G. Zhang, P. Burn, I. Gentle and P. Shaw, Engineering Fluorinated-Cation Containing inverted Perovskite Solar Cells with An Efficiency of >21% and Improved Stability Towards Humidity, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, F. Li, Q. Wang, D. Liu, F. Lin, D. Shen, D. Lei, Y. Peng, Z. Zhu and A. Jen, Highly Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells Enabled by A Fluoro-Functionalized TiO2 Inorganic Interlayer, Matter, 2021, 4, 3301–3312 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Li, Y. Wu, J. Cao, Y. Tang and A. Reaction-and-Assembly, Approach Using Monoamine Zinc Porphyrin for Highly Stable Large-Area Perovskite Solar Cells, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 777–784 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, F. Ma, R. Wang, S. Dou, P. Cui, H. Huang, J. Ji, E. Jia, X. Jia, S. Sajid, A. Elseman, L. Chu, Y. Li, B. Jiang, J. Qiao, Y. Yuan and M. Li, Ion-Migration Inhibition by the Cation-Pi Interaction in Perovskite Materials for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1707583 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhu, S. Gu, X. Luo, Y. Gao, S. Li, J. Zhu and H. Tan, Simultaneous Contact and Grain-Boundary Passivation in Planar Perovskite Solar Cells Using SnO2-KCl Composite Electron Transport Layer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903083 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhuang, C. Zhang, C. Gong, H. Li, H. Li, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Chen and Z. Zang, Tailoring Multifunctional Anion Modifiers to Modulate Interfacial Chemical Interactions for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Nano Energy, 2022, 102, 107747 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, R. Li, Q. Zhuang, X. Yu, S. Gong, D. He, Q. Zhou, H. Yang, X. Chen, S. Lu, Z. Xu, Z. Zang and J. Chen, Bottom-Up Holistic Carrier Management Strategy Induced Synergistically by Multiple Chemical Bonds to Minimize Energy Losses for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Energy Chem., 2023, 76, 277–287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, P. Cui, Y. Chen, L. Yan, X. Yue, S. Qu, X. Wang, S. Du, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, Z. Lan, Y. Yang, J. Ji, X. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Wang, X. Ding and M. Li, 24.8%-Efficient Planar Perovskite Solar Cells via Ligand-Engineered TiO2 Deposition, Joule, 2022, 6, 2186–2202 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Z. Ren, K. Liu, M. Qin, W. Deng, H. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Liang, F. Ye, Q. Liang, H. Yin, Y. Chen, Y. Zhuang, S. Li, B. Gao, J. Wang, T. Shi, X. Wang, X. Lu, H. Wu, J. Hou, D. Lei, S. So, Y. Yang, G. Fang and G. Li, Stable and Low-Photovoltage-Loss Perovskite Solar Cells by Multifunctional Passivation, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 681–689 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bi, B. Liu, D. He, L. Bai, W. Wang, Z. Zang and J. Chen, Interfacial Defect Passivation and Stress Release by Multifunctional KPF6 Modification for Planar Perovskite Solar Cells with Enhanced Efficiency and Stability, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 418, 129375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ding, L. Sun, X. Chen, T. Luo, T. Ye, C. Zhao, W. Zhang and H. Chang, Air-Processed, Large Grain Perovskite Films with Low Trap Density from Perovskite Crystal Engineering for High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells with Improved Ambient Stability, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 12000–12011 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, X. Yi, J. Zhuang, Y. Wei, Y. Zhang, F. Wang, S. Cao, C. Li and J. Wang, An Efficient Trap Passivator for Perovskite Solar Cells: Poly (propylene glycol) Bis (2-aminopropyl ether), Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gan, O. Wang, K. Liu, X. Du, L. Guo and H. Liu, 2D Homologous Organic-inorganic Hybrids as Light-Absorbers for Planer and Nanorod-Based Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 162, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, M. Wang, Q. Cai and D. Wei, Inhibition of PbI2-Induced Defects by Doping MABr for High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 7203–7210 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Zhang, G. Xu, R. Xue, Y. Li, Y. Zhou, J. Hou and Y. Li, A Semitransparent inorganic Perovskite Film for Overcoming Ultraviolet Light Instability of Organic Solar Cells and Achieving 14.03% Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800855 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Kamat and M. Kuno, Halide Ion Migration in Perovskite Nanocrystals and Nanostructures, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 520–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ahmed, J. El-Demellawi, J. Yin, J. Pan, D. Velusamy, M. Hedhili, E. Alarousu, O. Bakr, H. Alshareef and O. Mohammed, Giant Photoluminescence Enhancement in CsPbCl3 Perovskite Nanocrystals by Simultaneous Dual-Surface Passivation, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2301–2307 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yun, J. Seidel, J. Kim, A. Soufiani, S. Huang, J. Lau, N. Jeon, S. Seok, M. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, Critical Role of Grain Boundaries for Ion Migration in Formamidinium and Methylammonium
Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600330 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, X. Zhou, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Quantification of Light-Enhanced Ionic Transport in Lead Iodide Perovskite Thin Films and Its Solar Cell Applications, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp04422f‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–d) Surface SEM images of perovskite films (a) without PEA; with PEA: (b) 2 μL; (c) 5 μL; and (d) 8 μL. The statistical histogram of relevant films are provided in the inset. (e) Absorption two-dimensional diagram for perovskite films with different densities of PEA. (f) Corresponding PL two-dimensional diagram for the as-prepared perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photos of perovskite films without and with PEA before and after 5 days of continuous ultraviolet (UV) light illumination. (b) UV-vis absorbance spectra of the isopropanol (IPA) solution taken from the samples shown in inset photos. Inset: Photos of perovskite films without and with PEA immersed into IPA solution, taken after continuous UV illumination for 120 hours. (c) Steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films with PEA and the perovskite films after 20 and 40 hours of UV illumination. (d) Steady-state PL spectra of perovskite films with PEA and the perovskite films after 20 and 40 hours of UV illumination. (e) Photos of perovskite films without and with PEA added directly with 10 μL deionized water and held for 5 minutes. (f) Contact angles of perovskite films without and with PEA.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) I− ions adsorbed on the perovskite surface. (b) Charge density diagram for I2 adsorbed on the perovskite surface with I−. (c) Differential charge density diagram for the PEA adsorbed on perovskite with I3−. (d) Differential charge density equipotential curve.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves of PSCs based on perovskite without and with PEA. (b) Statistical distribution of device parameters of PSCs with and without PEA. (c) Vocvs. light intensity of PSCs without and with PEA. (d) Long-term stability of perovskite solar cells without and with PEA. All devices were measured in ambient air without any encapsulation.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp04422f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
