Novel photocatalysts: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7FD90013A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7FD90013A
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 197, 533-546Novel photocatalysts: general discussion

        
          
            Graham 
            Hutchings
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Bowker
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Richard 
            Catlow
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thulani 
            Nyathi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ilyaas 
            Abdullah
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Claeys
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Neil 
            Coville
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alberto 
            Roldan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pieter 
            van Helden
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nico 
            Fischer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            van Steen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Linda 
            Jewell
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lerato 
            Mokoloko
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Detlef 
            Bahnemann
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Matthew 
            Neurock
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Freek 
            Kapteijn
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Enrique 
            Iglesia
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Philip 
            Gibson
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Katherine 
            Holt
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kazunari 
            Domen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Abhishek Kumar 
            Gupta
          
        
      
First published on 19th April 2017

Michael Bowker opened discussion of the paper by Kazunari Domen: You used a filter in the experiment in Fig. 2 (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00184J) to pass only light at >420 nm. So what happens when you don’t have the filter? If the rate is higher without the filter, why use it at all? And do you see opportunities to utilise single photon processes for pure water splitting?

Kazunari Domen replied: The filter is used because photocatalytic systems operable under visible light are studied. Even if a photocatalyst shows high apparent quantum yield under UV light, like Al-doped SrTiO3, it cannot be used for solar energy conversion effectively.
To answer your last question, yes. Such systems are simpler and less expensive. This advantage may outweigh the problem of low STH values. We will continue the development of one-step excitation systems with higher apparent quantum yields.

Freek Kapteijn noted: You produce in your beautiful cell a nice but tricky mixture of H2 and O2, so you have to solve a separation problem. Could you construct your cell in such a way to have separate locations for hydrogen/oxygen production? What would the impact of this be on the efficiency, and what needs to be improved to go in that direction?

Kazunari Domen responded: We have considered placing HEP and OEP on opposite sides. However, problems of mass transfer and solution resistance will be critical in such a configuration, especially when the sheet is extended to a large area. In addition, photocatalyst sheets will be opaque even if transparent conducting oxides are used as a conductor layer because of scattering. It is necessary to illuminate both sides of a film immersed in water. It seems to be difficult to build such systems inexpensively.

Eric van Steen said: The results of the effect of solvent and pressure seem to indicate that in the case of the parallel plate arrangement, diffusion of ions through the liquid phase might be limiting; this does not seem to be the case for the photocatalyst sheet. The photocatalytic sheet will produce a mixture of O2 and H2, which will require a separate separation process. Will the efficiency of the photocatalytic sheet outweigh the need for a H2/O2 separation unit in commercial applications?

Kazunari Domen answered: The separation of hydrogen and oxygen is indeed a critical problem in the photocatalyst sheet approach. Thermodynamically, the minimum energy loss associated with the separation of hydrogen and oxygen is 1.1%. Therefore, the energy loss can be reduced to an acceptable level if efficient gas separation processes are available, and we believe that the efficiency and scalability of sheets can outweigh the need for gas separation. Membranes for the separation of hydrogen and oxygen are studied by specialists in the ARPChem project of New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) funded by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). It is probably possible to prepare a membrane with sufficient selectivity and permeance in dry conditions. However, the performance of gas separation membranes is significantly influenced by the presence of water vapour, and appropriate solutions are under development. We believe that the photocatalyst sheet approach is feasible, but other approaches are also worthy of research because each system has its own advantages and problems. At present, nobody can tell which approach will become the most efficient as a whole in the future.

Neil Coville enquired: This looks to be a very complicated catalyst. Could you please explain how you came to the formulation historically and where you are going to go with it in the future?

Kazunari Domen explained: A one-step excitation water splitting system consists of (i) a particulate semiconductor photocatalyst that absorbs light and generates excited electrons and holes, and (ii) co-catalysts working as surface active sites for hydrogen and oxygen evolution. Sheets can be prepared simply by spreading and fixing such photocatalysts on certain substrates. In the case of sheets for Z-scheme water splitting, hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution occur on different photocatalysts and these two photocatalysts are electrically connected by an underlying conductive layer. The working mechanism is not very complicated. The activity of particulate photocatalysts was thought to be enhanced if hydrogen evolution sites and oxygen evolution sites could be formed asymmetrically.1 The particle transfer method was reported in 2012 as a process that enables rigid contact between particulate photocatalysts and conductive layers of arbitrary combinations.2 The first paper on photocatalyst sheets in the present form was published in 2015.3 Hydrogen evolution photocatalysts and oxygen evolution photocatalysts are embedded into conductive materials by particle transfer. Recently, the activity of the sheet at ambient pressure was found to be maintained when carbon was used as a conductor.4 Therefore, the problem of backward reactions at ambient pressure has been largely overcome. The application of narrow band gap photocatalysts to sheets, the development of inexpensive and scalable reactors accommodating the photocatalyst sheet, and integration of the reactor with gas separation units are the next important challenges.
1 T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 85, 647–655.
2 T. Minegishi, N. Nishimura, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1120–1124.
3 Q. Wang, Y. Li, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 308–315.
4 Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Suzuki, Z. Pan, J. Seo, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Takata, K. Seki, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1675–1683.

Neil Coville followed up: So the d-electron count is key to the catalyst?

Kazunari Domen answered: Yes. Empirically, photocatalysts that are active in overall water splitting are semiconductors consisting mainly of transition metal cations with the d0 electronic configuration and typical metal cations with the d10 electronic configuration. In some cases, doping transition metal cations with d-electrons makes photocatalysts active under visible light because they induce mid-gap states. In the case of Rh-doped SrTiO3, the valence state of Rh ions is an important factor. However, this is a very rare case.

Ilyaas Abdullah said: You mention that your photocatalyst sheet is operable in pure water regardless of pH; over what range did you determine that experimentally? Was corrosion of your photocatalyst sheets a problem at lower pH values? And have you considered having your OEP and HEP on opposite sides of the same film, to separate the evolution of oxygen and hydrogen?

Kazunari Domen replied: The pH values from 3 to 9 were examined for the system based on SrTiO3:La,Rh and BiVO4:Mo. Corrosion of BiVO4 is expected at lower and higher pH values. Therefore, the performance of the present sheet at such pH values was not studied. The choice of pH value will depend on the stability of photocatalyst, cocatalyst, and conductor materials. The activity of SrTiO3:La,Rh itself will improve at higher pH values.
We have considered placing HEP and OEP on opposite sides. However, problems of mass transfer and solution resistance will be critical in such a configuration, especially when the sheet is extended to a large area. In addition, a system that allows illumination of both sides of a film immersed in water will be very complicated and may not be built inexpensively.

Graham Hutchings asked: In chemical redox catalysis the surface area of the oxide can be an important design criteria; is this the case with your strontium titanate for example? In some cases we find that highly disordered or amorphous materials can be very effective. Is this the case with photocatalysis?

Kazunari Domen responded: The surface area may have an influence on the rate of reactions when adsorption of reactants is an important factor. However, we do not think that this is the case for water splitting using a photocatalyst sheet. The crystallinity is more important in most cases because photoexcited carriers have to migrate to surface active sites efficiently. We did not associate the disorder or amorphicity of SrTiO3:La,Rh with the activity because the H2 evolution site was the Ru species deposited on it.

Michael Bowker queried: I think you have worked on single photon excitation in the past, what is your maximum efficiency using single photon water splitting? How poor are they relative to these Z-scheme catalysts? And would you be happy to supply the photocatalytic community with some of your materials?

Kazunari Domen answered: The solar-to-hydrogen energy conversion efficiency (STH) of one-step excitation water splitting using (Ga1-xZnx)(N1-xOx) is 0.2%. Al-doped SrTiO3 shows a higher STH value of 0.5%. However, Al-doped SrTiO3 is active only under UV light (λ ≤ 380 nm) and not efficient for solar energy conversion. LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N is also active in overall water splitting under irradiation of up to approximately 600 nm, but the apparent quantum yield is in the order of 0.1% because of difficulty in the preparation of high-quality LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N. The apparent quantum efficiency tends to be low as the absorption edge wavelength of photocatalysts becomes longer. As a consequence, the STH of one-step excitation water splitting is lower than that of Z-scheme water splitting using sheets at present. Nevertheless, we will continue development of one-step excitation systems because they are simpler and less expensive. In addition, one-step excitation systems can achieve higher STH values than two-step excitation systems if the apparent quantum yield is improved to the same level.
To answer your final question: of course, yes. We have already provided our samples for and have received samples from different groups. The details should be discussed in advance, because nanoparticulate co-catalysts can be poisoned over time.

Michael Bowker opened discussion of Detlef Bahnemann’s paper: You are associating the black regions you see in SEM with rutile, but rutile is white, so why do you think your rutile regions are black?

Detlef Bahnemann answered: Most certainly, rutile is white. However, following illumination with UV(A) light, electron/hole pairs are formed. While the holes are trapped at surficial oxygen atoms thus generating oxygen vacancies, the remaining electrons reduce Ti(IV) ions in the TiO2 lattice. The Ti(III) ions formed in this process act as color centers and are responsible for the black color since they absorb light throughout the entire visible spectrum. Each of the “black” rutile nanoparticles contains several of these Ti(III) color centers. However, 4 to 5 Ti(III) ions in a particle with a diameter of 2 nm are sufficient to generate their dark coloration.

Michael Bowker continued: Do you see any evidence for a structural phase which is often characteristic of reduced titania? These are Magneli phases in which defects can cluster into planes of reduced material.

Detlef Bahnemann responded: We have not observed these phase changes, which might be due to the nanocrystalline nature of the material that has been studied in our work.

Michael Bowker commented: We should note, of course, that electron mobility is incredibly fast, while hole mobility is not.

Detlef Bahnemann replied: This is absolutely right, electrons in the conduction band of the rutile particles exhibit a very high mobility. Once they are trapped as Ti(III) ions, however, their mobility is drastically reduced. The hole mobility is low from the time of their generation.

Graham Hutchings said: During the discussion, quantum efficiency is highlighted and researchers are striving for the highest quantum yield. Why is quantum efficiency important and what would be a minimum quantum efficiency target?
Hydrogen peroxide was also mentioned as a valuable product. The hydrogen to oxygen ratio would still mean that hydrogen would be produced, but of course additional air could be added to provide the required oxygen. However, one would only make a few ppm hydrogen peroxide with current catalysts using ambient pressure hydrogen in water. Therefore the system would need to operate at high pressure and this would exacerbate the potential safety issues.

Detlef Bahnemann answered: The highest possible quantum efficiency (in the absence of any free radical chain reaction) will be unity (1.0); that is, each absorbed photon results in one chemical transformation. If we are thinking of a chemical plant that utilizes, for example, solar photons for the synthesis of fuels such as molecular hydrogen, the quantum efficiency of the overall process will determine the size of the required light absorbing unit and hence the investment costs for the factory. Currently, an overall solar energy to chemical fuel conversion efficiency of 10% is regarded as the required threshold which translates into a minimum quantum efficiency of at least 50% (0.5) over the entire visible part of the solar spectrum.
Hydrogen peroxide in a photoelectrochemical system is generated through the two-electron oxidation of water (rather than through a reductive process). Taking into account that the respective electrode is immersed in an aqueous electrolyte at ambient pressure is sufficient for its operation and therefore no special safety features will be required.

Enrique Iglesia enquired: The steps that you have discussed for the formation of dioxygen seem to lack details of the intermediate elementary steps required to accomplish the two two-electron reductions required for O2 evolution. Could you comment on this, especially in the context of what is known about the microscopic reverse of this reaction – the capping of non-vicinal vacancies by O2? Such steps require the sequence of the two-electron oxidations, via the formation of OOH species or H2O2 in order to avoid the need to form unstable vicinal vacancies that can accommodate the four electrons that must be transferred upon the dissociative activation of O2.

Detlef Bahnemann replied: Various scenarios are currently discussed to account for the photocatalytic formation of molecular oxygen from the oxidation of water molecules.1 Assuming that the photogenerated holes are trapped at different terminal surface hydroxide ions this would generate surface bound hydroxyl radicals readily yielding hydrogen peroxide as the first stable product provided that they are located at vicinal sites. Otherwise, a surface diffusion process of at least one of these surface hydroxyl radicals will be required. Alternatively, several research groups discuss the formation of O˙− radicals either at the surface or in the TiO2 lattice.1 Despite of their negative charge these oxygen radical anions may either also dimerize yielding a peroxo species or they may react with an electron trapped at a titanium site as a Ti3+ species effectively resulting in the recombination of one electron/hole pair thus evincing the micro reversibility of all free radical generation processes as you indicated. I think it is fair to assume that the subsequent two electron transfer steps finally leading to the formation of molecular oxygen are kinetically and thermodynamically relatively simple reactions as compared with the initial peroxide formation described before.
1 J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986.

Eric van Steen noted: The obtained black spots on the anatase are inhomogeneous. Would the inhomogeneous distribution of black spots also be obtained with well-defined, uniformly shaped anatase?

Detlef Bahnemann responded: Yes it would. The black particles are those which have first of all changed their phase from anatase to rutile since their surfaces are “protected” from a self-healing mechanism which usually fills the oxygen vacancies present at the particle surface through reactions with water molecules. Following the trapping of the electrons as Ti(III) ions, the black spots are generated which survive for a long time only when their re-oxidation by, for example, molecular oxygen is prevented. Hence, in such a well-defined system only the innermost particles will be formed and remain as black color centers.

Matthew Neurock asked: Can you please elaborate more on the formation of O2 and its removal on the surface? Perhaps I misunderstood, but it looked like you were considering both of the oxygens may be coming from the lattice. I would think that the O2 formation would more likely involve an oxygen in the lattice and a terminal bound OH* or H2O.

Detlef Bahnemann responded: Indeed, both of the oxygen atoms in a photocatalytically formed O2 molecule might originate from bridging oxygen atoms of the titania matrix.1 However, this does not rule out the mechanism you suggested. I am pretty sure that both of these mechanisms are operating together (side by side).
1 J. F. Montoya, D. W. Bahnemann, P. Salvador and J. Peral, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 902–910.

Nico Fischer enquired: Assuming there is an established hydrogen economy and space is available for effective photocatalytic H2O splitting (the separation challenge of O2 and H2 is also solved in this scenario), what technology do you foresee dominating for hydrogen storage? Currently compression competes with adsorption, metal hydrides and chemical carriers.

Detlef Bahnemann replied: My personal favourites are chemical carriers and metal hydrides, in particular for mobile applications. A tank cooled down and/or compressed to liquify its content is most certainly not something that I would want to “carry around” in my future car.

Matthew Neurock opened discussion of the paper by Katherine Holt: You indicated that you need to go to reducing conditions and that the active catalyst may be Cu(0). Based on other electrocatalytic systems, this would appear to the be the more likely site but I was a little confused as your last figure seemed to focus on Cu(I)O sites for CO2 adsorption. What is the known step(s) that controls the rate? Is it considered to be electron transfer to the CO2 to form the bent CO2 intermediate? Does this fall out of a Tafel slope analysis?

Katherine Holt responded: From our in situ experiments we are able to see which species are adsorbed to the electrode surface at different potentials and from the ex situ experiments we can observe which Cu oxidation states are present at these potentials. Taking both together it is clear that CO2 can absorb to the surface at -0.4 V (from IR) but that at this potential CuO is not reduced (still Cu(II) according to XPS and Raman). The final figure represents this situation at -0.4 V – i.e. the adsorbed species on the electrode, which is still CuO. However most catalytic studies are carried out at more negative potentials, with CO2 reduction products observed from about -0.8 V (vs. Ag / AgCl). So we start with the situation shown in the figure, but when we sweep the potential more negative the CuO is reduced and it is likely the surface is Cu(0). The rate controlling step for CO2 reduction is the first electron transfer step to form the bent radical anion intermediate and yes, this can be determined and analysed using Tafel plots. Hence if you activate the molecule by adsorbing in a bent configuration prior to reduction you should lower the activation energy and hence the overpotential required for reduction.

Alberto Roldan asked: At the surface, Cu atoms are less coordinated than in the bulk of Cu2O. Thus, which oxidation state are these atoms in? Also, as carbonate buffer solution may be responsible for the signals detected, have you tested, for instance by isotope labelling, that it is actually CO2?

Katherine Holt answered: We would need to look more closely at the surface structure of the particles to be sure, but from XPS, which is a surface sensitive technique we only see Cu(II) species in the starting material. However we did not look too closely for evidence of trace Cu(I) sites so I could not say for sure there are none present. As for using labelled species to distinguish between adsorbed species due to CO2 and those due to the electrolyte carbonate and bicarbonate species, that is an excellent suggestion that should be considered for future studies.

Richard Catlow noted: Reduced CuO will have a significant concentration of surface vacancies with trapped electrons (F-centres). We know for other systems, including ZnO and MgO1 that these species are effective at CO2 activation by electron donation and are likely to be playing a significant role here.
1 C. A. Downing, A. A. Sokol and C. R. A. Catlow, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 184–195.

Katherine Holt responded: This is a good point and actually one of the first papers that addressed electrochemical CO2 reduction at copper oxide1 proposed that the electronic properties of copper oxide and surface defect sites in particular played a significant role in CO2 activation.
1 K. W. Frese Jr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 3338–3344.

Enrique Iglesia said: The coupling of H2O electrolysis to form hydrogen and CO2 reduction seems to require some sort of kinetic synergy to justify the chemical complexity and the requirements for the concerted reaction. One way to achieve this is to use electrodes that do not carry out electrolysis of water because of a specific hurdle in the desorption of H2, since this causes a high “virtual pressure” of hydrogen at the surfaces. Is in fact the search for catalytic materials guided by the specific requirement that electrodes do not desorb H2? Are these reactions also routinely compared with those in which the hydrogen is present as a given pressure of H2 to test whether any synergies and much higher rates are indeed achieved and that we are not just activating CO2 electrochemically and using the H2 desorbed during H2O electrolysis?

Katherine Holt replied: Yes it is correct that the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) competes directly with CO2 reduction at many electrodes. All metal electrodes have been characterised in terms of the products of CO2 reduction, with a large number classified as producing hydrogen as the major product. Clearly it is desirable to identify an electrode material that can provide a source of hydrogen atoms that result in preferred products of CO2 reduction (formic acid, hydrocarbons) rather than evolving hydrogen. Most work in this area still relies somewhat on serendipity and the studies you describe (investigating effect of partial pressure of hydrogen) are not yet done as a matter of course.

Detlef Bahnemann questioned: Could you please comment on the products formed upon the reduction of carbon dioxide? I am particularly interested in the various organic reaction products formed.

Katherine Holt answered: The reported reaction products depend on the exact experimental conditions used and are a function of electrode preparation, applied potential and solution pH etc. The reported products will also depend on the analytical method used to determine the products e.g. whether gas phase or solution analysis is undertaken. For the material used in this study, analysis of the solution phase products showed that formic acid is the major product,1 but gas phase products were not determined. In studies using the most active catalysts, oxide derived copper (OD-Cu), a wide range of products including >C1 hydrocarbons are reported, which is why these electrode materials are favoured. Another reason why CuO is of interest is that methanol has been reported as a product; this is quite unusual for electrochemical CO2 reduction and why the oxide is proposed to play a role in product distribution.
1 K. Gupta, M. Bersani and J. A. Darr, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13786–13794.

Graham Hutchings commented: In your experiments you start with copper oxide and generate carbonate under steady state operation. What happens if you start with copper carbonate or predominantly carbonate?

Katherine Holt answered: The carbonate seems to form mainly when there is no CO2 present, as it seems that CO2 surface binding is a competitive process to bicarbonate and carbonate adsorption. It would be interesting to see if starting with copper carbonate has any influence on the CO2 reduction activity as one might expect that the surface binding of CO2 would be different than on copper oxides. If the activity was worse with the carbonate this would tell us that carbonate incorporation from the use of bicarbonate electrolytes deactivates electrode performance and should be avoided.

Thulani Nyathi communicated: Following up on your response to the question on which Cu oxidation state is the active species, you said if you were to do a time-resolved experiment your Cu2+ will eventually reduce to Cu(0) even in the presence of CO2. You also added that with time, the reaction rate will decline. So what would be the cause of the decline in activity assuming that the reduction from Cu2+ to Cu(0) is not the cause?

Katherine Holt communicated in response: A decline in CO2 reduction activity over time is noted for many electrode materials and is reported as a problem even if you start with a metallic copper electrode. One proposed reason is the presence of trace metal contaminants present in all electrolytes as many commercial sources contain some degree of trace metal content. Holding the electrode at negative potentials for a long period of time causes the reduced metal species to plate onto the electrode and deactivate it. The solution to this problem is to clean electrolytes prior to use with pre-electrolysis, which can be tedious. It has also been reported that black films, proposed as carbonaceous species have been observed to form on Cu after prolonged CO2 reduction, although I don’t think the coating has been identified and is not reproducible. It may also be that, as we observed, electrolyte species like carbonates can start to adsorb and irreversibly form surface films that may block catalytic activity. Finally, the rate of reaction becomes limited by how quickly adsorbed species and intermediates can be removed and it may be that the surface just becomes saturated with these species that don’t desorb.

Michael Bowker opened a general discussion of Kazunari Domen’s, Detlef Bahnemann’s and Katherine Holt’s papers: It has been mentioned by Prof Bahnemann regarding ways of storing H2, that it is likely that chemical storage is best. Methanol is one option for such storage. But how do we get the H2 back out of methanol if we need to recover it? Here, we could maybe use photocatalysis again with methanol as a hole scavenger to get the H2 out (CH3OH + H2O → 3H2 + CO2) and as a bonus, we get an extra mole of hydrogen from water. So this may be a possible future way of getting the stored hydrogen back.

Detlef Bahnemann noted: We always forget a technical problem, that is that we don’t always have temperatures of 20 °C and above. In particular, in the desert we can have temperatures below 0 °C and frozen water would break most reactors and seals. So technically, I am a bit sceptical that we should use liquid water in the system – maybe water vapour would be a better choice? Maybe, in the future we should focus on gas phase reactors rather than on liquid phase reactors.

Kazunari Domen responded: We have been developing reactors that accommodate photocatalyst sheets and a water layer 1 mm or less in thickness. We believe that volume expansion when water turns into ice does not cause critical problems if the thickness (volume) of water is thin (small) and a reactor is made of soft materials such as plastic, but it is necessary to confirm this experimentally. Water vapour splitting is an interesting approach. In fact, it has been studied using particulate photocatalysts since the 1980s, and proton exchange membrane electrolysers coupled with a PV cell recently by different groups.1–3
1 K. Domen, S. Naito, M. Soma, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 543–544.
2 F. Dionigi, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl, A. Xiong, K. Maeda, K. Domen and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2937–2942.
3 S. Kumari, R. Turner White, B. Kumar and J. M. Spurgeon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1725–1733.

Michael Claeys addressed Kazunari Domen: Photocatalytic water splitting yields hydrogen and oxygen, which need to be separated as discussed earlier on. We have also spoken about the potential necessity to find a “carrier” (e.g. an organic molecule) for easier storage and transport. What is your opinion regarding the best method for hydrogen storage?
Also, what are you doing with the oxygen which is formed in your process? Is it a target product that would be isolated and sold, or are there scenarios where this would not be economical and one would simply release the oxygen into the atmosphere? For example, photovoltaic water splitting plants which are located in remote “photon rich” areas?

Kazunari Domen replied: The toluene-methylcyclohexane (TL-MCH) system, liquid hydrogen, and methanol are possible hydrogen carriers. TL and MCH are liquids at ambient temperature and TL can be sequentially hydrogenated and dehydrogenated on a commercial level owing to recent progress in dehydrogenation catalysts. Liquid hydrogen can be transported by energy-efficient manners. Methanol can be used to produce lower olefins as raw materials of value-added chemicals. Ammonia is also very interesting as a hydrogen carrier because its oxidation products (nitrogen and water in ideal combustion) are environmentally benign and nitrogen as a raw material is available everywhere. Production of ammonia becomes energy-efficient if a large amount of renewable solar hydrogen and an ammonia synthesis catalyst operable at low temperature and pressure are available.

Michael Bowker commented: Going back to hydrogen storage molecules, it could indeed be that ammonia is used rather than methanol, though it can’t be the basis for carbon chemical production. Regarding photocatalysis in the liquid phase or gas phase, it is often the case that the gas phase reaction is faster. It’s not often reported that there can be a problem with the liquid phase in that agglomeration occurs for certain materials, including titania, to create agglomerates of ∼1 micron and higher. These then interact inefficiently with light compared with the fundamental particles which are often around 20–50 nm. The gas phase reactions don’t have that problem.

Detlef Bahnemann responded: In my opinion, we will see all kinds of fuels generated by photocatalytic systems including ammonia, molecular hydrogen, methane, and methanol. Personally, I favour the hydrogen “model” for the first step since this could utilize quite a bit of the energy infrastructure that currently already exists.
Indeed, gas phase reactions exhibit considerable advantages as compared with the condensed liquid phase. However, currently, the appropriate reactor engineering of optimal photocatalytic gas phase reactors is still lagging behind.

Freek Kapteijn addressed Kazunari Domen: What is your opinion about the preferred method of utilizing solar radiation? Either through direct photocatalytic water splitting with the cell you presented, but with the necessity to separate the H2/O2 mixture, or to do it indirectly using photovoltaics followed by electrolysis yielding separate H2 and O2. What is the best option in terms of efficiency at present and economics?

Kazunari Domen replied: It is difficult and probably unfruitful to tell which approach is the best at present. As is described in our recent introductory lecture paper,1 photovoltaic-assisted electrochemical approaches have achieved high STH values exceeding 10% but are too expensive to be cost-competitive with existing energy resources. Photocatalyst systems may be fabricated inexpensively, with the proviso that their solar-to-hydrogen energy conversion efficiency (STH) values lag behind those of the photovoltaic-powered systems at present. Photoelectrochemical approaches fall into an intermediate category. Overall, fundamental improvements in both STH values and cost are still needed. We believe that the photocatalyst sheet approach is feasible because the efficiency and scalability can probably outweigh the need for gas separation. Of course, other approaches are also worthy of research because each system has its own advantages and problems.
1 T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Faraday Discuss., 2017, DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00221H.

Lerato Mokoloko communicated: Can fluorescence spectroscopy be used to evaluate the properties of small carbon particles on a surface? This is a known technique to evaluate the size distribution of carbon dots (<10 nm) in solution.1
1 Y. Liu, N. Xiao, N. Gong, H. Wang, X. Shi, W. Gu and L. Ye, Carbon, 2014, 68, 258–264.

Abhishek Kumar Gupta communicated in response: Yes, fluorescence spectroscopy is a very effective tool for evaluating the properties of small carbon particles on a surface, since carbon dots are inhomogeneously broadened due to the slower relaxation of the solvent molecules around them. Time-resolved experiments show significant energy redistribution, relaxation among the emitting states, and spectral migration of fluorescence spectra on the nanosecond time scale. The excitation-dependent multicolor emission in time-integrated spectra is typically governed by the relative population of these emitting states.1
1 S. Khan, A. Gupta, N. C. Verma and C. K. Nandi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8300–8305.

Pieter van Helden opened general discussion of the Concluding Remarks by Philip Gibson: You mentioned the importance of Fischer–Tropsch research in South Africa, as well as the number of areas of research in Catalysis for Fuels which need to be addressed. What is your view on the current balance of research activities in this field in South Africa?

Philip Gibson responded: Catalysis research in South Africa has been and still is biased towards Fischer–Tropsch research. There are three main reasons for this: firstly, the role of the Fischer–Tropsch process in the context of the South African fuel supply (>30% is synthetic fuel); secondly, the size and role of Sasol as a South African-based company in terms of setting/proposing/funding research directions in a South African context; and thirdly, the relatively small size of the catalysis research community in South Africa.
Well-resourced catalysis research groups take a long time to set up and continued effort to have a real impact on their field. It is understandably difficult to change direction at the same fast pace as the regional and global demands in catalysis are changing. The “new” global oil price scenario and the future role of renewable energy in transportation are two important factors that are challenging the future application of Fischer–Tropsch processes. There will obviously be niche applications, some of which will be coupled to regional strategic drivers like energy security, associated and stranded gas resources etc.
Fischer–Tropsch technology per se is a mature technology. Research groups should continuously assess their value proposition to future FT processes against the value of applying their hard earned skill sets on a maybe more important catalysis challenge. Fundamental understanding of processes creates tremendous scientific satisfaction but it must always contribute to the design/prediction of better catalysts in a reasonably short time frame. That is the success criteria from an industrial perspective.
Given the diminishing role of Fischer–Tropsch in the next 20–30 years in a global context and the relative maturity of the technology I would propose that the size of the academic research effort in South Africa is probably adequate.

Graham Hutchings said: I would like to address the topic of alloys in the FT reaction. Alloys for H2O2 were briefly mentioned in the preceding discussion. In this case, Pd when alloyed with Au or Sn is a very effective catalyst for the synthesis of hydrogen peroxide. In particular, by designing the alloy you can tune the selectivity. At present in FT synthesis there is an emphasis on supported Fe, Co and Ru FT catalysts. The question is – have we missed using alloys? Or has it been tried and they don’t really work?

Philip Gibson responded: The use of alloys is an interesting concept and although not new, I believe it is coming into vogue due to our increased understanding and ability to use computational chemistry to predict experimental outcomes coupled to the fundamental understanding of metal surface structures and their dynamics. The exact role of metal promoters in the FT systems mentioned above are often overlooked. PGM metal additives are generally referred to as reduction promoters, Mn is accepted to be an olefin selectivity promoter, etc. I believe that the function of effective metal promoters should be explored in terms of their ability to form alloys with the base metal i.e. cobalt or iron. Once we understand these known examples, I am convinced we will identify further opportunities to design or influence FT catalyst selectivity through the use of non-conventional alloys. See my view in the closing remarks paper (DOI: 10.1039/C7FD00096K).

Enrique Iglesia said: Thank you for the thoughtful remarks and excellent summary of our “arguments” and discourse. This is more an observation than a comment, although I would hope that you could rebut the observation as inaccurate. As you mention risk in the context of technology development, I travelled back to my industry days and reminisced about why I left. The development of technology had become a cost instead of a benefit and a source of profit and advantage in the marketplace. The deployment of new technology had become a risk, one that was not reasonable especially for disruptive technologies. The outlets for discoveries were few in a short-sighted marketplace that valued companies quarterly and not over their history. The thinking “out-of-the-box” was fun but not profitable; why not do the thinking and the fun in a place that did not seek profits, such as academia? How much of these feelings about the past are no longer relevant, in South Africa and throughout the world?

Nico Fischer noted: You mention that the willingness to take risks with regard to implementing new developments in the industrial environment has decreased over the last decades. I am wondering, why is this? Is it really just that humanity is at a level of comfort that no significant external pressure is present as it was for example during the early 20th century when the ammonia synthesis was established in just 7 years starting from lab scale to a 600 tonnes per day plant? Surely the global economy is still/again under immense pressure? Global trends or drivers are regularly cited – still, even these do not seem to support “risky” business decisions.

Philip Gibson replied: My subjective view is that hard core technical people are no longer represented on the boards and/or decision making bodies of industrial companies to the same extent as in the previous decades. Experienced technical people developed a sixth sense, i.e. they developed a gut feel for technology risks and could influence decisions through their standing and “trust” in their respective organizations. Techno-economic considerations are also no longer the main drivers for the implementation of new technologies. Global markets, regional economics, environmental legacy, regional/global politics and well informed and demanding customers are all part of the decision criteria. It is very complex to get all of these right. It is getting increasingly difficult to address all the risk aspects in the available time, thus delaying decisions. Modern corporate governance also dictates that the consequences of wrong decisions are more dire than in the past.

Michael Claeys communicated: Biomass has been discussed at the meeting as an important source for future fuel production. Seeing that this is the first Faraday Discussion meeting on the African continent, I would be interested in your opinion regarding the use of biomass in a South African/African context? Issues of water scarcity and competition with food production come to mind, and may prohibit this technology or at least limit its importance in comparison to the use of fossil resources.

Philip Gibson communicated in response: There are very few regions suited for the cultivation of biomass on a sustainable basis in Southern Africa. The huge geographical area adds logistical challenges in addition to the default objection related to competition with food production. It is my understanding that a holistic energy balance simply does not make sense in a southern African context, i.e. relatively poor transport infrastructure and looming food insecurity. The use of biomass in niche opportunities i.e. corn fermentation, wood pulp into existing coal gasifiers etc., will continue to be evaluated and might make sense in opportunistic specific regional areas. The east coast of South Africa and Mozambique are, to my knowledge, some of the very few areas that can be considered for large scale biomass cultivation.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
