Band alignment and enhancement of the interface properties for heterojunction solar cells by employing amorphous–nanocrystalline hierarchical emitter  ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC04930C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC04930C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1751-1757Band alignment and enhancement of the interface properties for heterojunction solar cells by employing amorphous–nanocrystalline hierarchical emitter layers†

        
          
            Fengyou 
            Wang
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Rongchi 
            Du
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qianshang 
            Ren
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Changchun 
            Wei
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Zhao
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Xiaodan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *bc
aKey Laboratory of Functional Materials Physics and Chemistry of the Ministry of Education, Jilin Normal University, Siping 136000, China
bInstitute of Photo Electronics Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University, Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology, Tianjin 300071, P. R. China. E-mail: xdzhang@nankai.edu.cn
cCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
Received 
      12th November 2016
    , Accepted 6th January 2017First published on 6th January 2017AbstractExcellent electrical and passivation properties of p-type emitter layers are extremely important for high efficiency silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cells. The emitter layer should be embedded between the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) and the intrinsic amorphous silicon passivation layer, and thus the contact characteristics of p/TCO should also be carefully regulated to achieve better performance. Multifunctional p-type emitter layers combined with hydrogenated amorphous silicon/nanocrystalline silicon thin films were fabricated by the plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition process, to meet the requirements of high conductivity and shortening of the depletion region between the p layer and TCO. Also, the p-a-Si:H film of the hybrid structure can serve as a buffer-layer to compensate the p/i band offset and a protective-layer for the intrinsic passivation films. Finally, applying this hybrid film as an emitter layer for SHJ solar cells based on low-cost commercial Cz silicon wafers, a conversion efficiency improvement of 2.6% in the solar cell photovoltaic performance has been achieved.
1. Introduction
Silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cells combining p-type hydrogenate amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) thin films deposited on n-type crystalline silicon (c-Si) substrates have attracted great interest in the silicon based photovoltaic field since they combine very high performances with a large-scale low temperature process, and have been considered as a promising candidate for highly efficient photovoltaic applications.1–3 As the window layer of the SHJ solar cells, the bandgap of the p-type emitter layer (p layer) should be wide in order to enhance the light transmission, reduce parasitic absorption and improve the short wavelength response of the solar cells. On the other hand, it should also have high conductivity to increase the built-in electric potential and reduce the series resistance effects.4 For instance, Liu et al.5 have developed inverted structure SHJ solar cells with PEDOT:PSS as the emitter. Both the structure design and the multifunctional emitter were beneficial for the photovoltaic performance of the SHJ solar cells. Besides, to improve the carrier collection of SHJ solar cells, a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) layer, e.g., indium tin oxide (ITO),6 boron doped zinc oxide,7 or hydrogen doped indium oxide,8etc., is deposited on the emitter layer. However, as most of the TCO materials are n-type conductors and the work function of the TCO layer is lower than the p layer, a Schottky barrier between p and TCO layers will be formed which causes the emitter layer to be partially depleted.9 The depletion region of the p layer inevitably increases the series resistance, and critically affects the key device parameters of the device such as the open circuit voltage (Voc) and the fill factor (FF).
Several methods, mainly related to regulating the TCO work function, have been adopted including surface treatment in plasma environments,10 and optimizing the radio frequency powers11 and substrate temperatures12 of the ITO fabrication process. The results show that these processes could modify the work function of the TCO layer intentionally to balance the work function difference between TCO and p layers. Except regulating the properties of the TCO layer, another solution to resolve the interfacial problem should be stressed on adjusting the characteristics of the p-type emitter layers. Usually, heavily doped p-type silicon films with a lower Fermi level could be used due to their narrower depletion and enhanced tunnel transporting opportunities.13 Based on these ideas, Ji et al.14 fabricated a p+/p-a-Si:H emitter layer with multi-step deposition to promote the p/ITO contact properties of SHJ solar cells. Although the FF and Voc of the device have been clearly improved, the short wavelength response of the solar cells deteriorated due to the fact that the optical transmission of the p+-a-Si:H film was reduced by large doping concentrations. In order to meet the optical demands for the emitter layer of the solar cells, a material simultaneously with high conductivity and high transmission should be applied.
Hydrogenated nanocrystalline silicon (nc-Si:H) materials have recently been intensively investigated owing to their widespread industrial application in image sensors, thin film transistors, photodiodes and photovoltaic solar cells.15–17 nc-Si:H is a two-phase material containing nanometer sized crystallites surrounded by an amorphous matrix. It exhibits excellent photovoltaic and electronic properties, such as high conductivity, a wide optical bandgap, high doping efficiency and a more ordered structure compared with a-Si:H films. All these properties indicate that nc-Si:H could be an ideal material for solar cell applications. However, for solar cells with a superstrate architecture, directly deposited nc-Si:H films with high hydrogen dilution and power density processes are detrimental to the microstructure of the intrinsic a-Si:H (i-a-Si:H) passivation layer. In addition, the large valance band offset between p-nc-Si:H and i-a-Si:H will also impede carrier transportation, increasing the recombination at the p/i interface. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the electrical characteristics of the p-type emitter layer to achieve ideal contact properties without sacrificing optical transmission, bandgap alignment and passivation effects.
Accordingly, in this work, we introduced high conductivity and wide bandgap p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H films as emitter layers to reduce the Schottky barrier between p/TCO and to provide enough built-in electric potential for the SHJ solar cells. The low doped p-a-Si:H could provide a bandgap buffer between the p-nc-Si:H and i-a-Si:H passivation layers. Moreover, it also acts as a protective layer for the i-a-Si:H layer during the p-nc-Si:H film depositing procedure. Based on this work, SHJ solar cells were fabricated, and a significant improvement in the performance of SHJ solar cells was achieved.
2. Experimental section
Silicon thin films were deposited using a radio frequency plasma enhanced vapor deposition (RF-PECVD) process in an ultrahigh-vacuum, multi-chamber, cluster-tool system. Gaseous mixtures of SiH4, trimethylboron (TMB) and H2 were used for the fabrication of p-type Si thin films, with a working pressure of 2 Torr, and a substrate temperature of 180 °C. Eagle XG glass substrates were used for opto-electronic characterization of the Si thin films. Raman spectroscopy and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) were performed to investigate the structural characteristics of the emitter layers. The thicknesses of all the samples were set to ∼20 nm by controlling the deposition duration. The electrical properties of the p-type Si films were measured with co-planar conductivity using a Keithley 617 programmable electrometer. The p/ITO contact properties were investigated through a sandwich structure with an Al electrode on top of the samples and the other electrode on the substrates. The current flow is perpendicular to the substrate. The crystallographic phase of these ITO layers was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) at 40 kV. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was also performed to investigate the surface morphology of the ITO which was grown on different Si thin films.
SHJ solar cells were fabricated on n-type NaOH-pyramidal-textured 130 μm-thick commercial Cz silicon wafers. The cells were structured as follows: Ag grid/ITO/p-type emitter/i-a-Si:H/n-c-Si/i-a-Si:H/n-a-Si:H/Ag back electrode. The i-a-Si:H, p-type Si thin films, and n-a-Si:H thin films were prepared in three separate chambers of the RF-PECVD system to avoid cross contamination. The i-a-Si:H films were deposited with gaseous mixtures of SiH4 and H2. The n-a-Si:H films were prepared with gaseous mixtures of SiH4, phosphine (PH3), and H2. The thickness of the ITO layer, the Ag grid, and the Ag back electrode was set as ∼80 nm, ∼1 μm, and ∼1 μm respectively. Current–voltage characteristics and the spectral response were measured using a Wacom solar simulator (WXS-156S-L2, AM1.5GMM) and a quantum efficiency system (QEX10, PV measurement), respectively.
3. Results and discussion
In order to fulfill the wide bandgap requirements for p-type Si emitter layers, which also act as the window layers of solar cells, different p-type Si layers were fabricated by fine tuning the gas phase doping concentration ([TMB]% = [TMB]/[SiH4]), the hydrogen dilution ratio (RH = H2/SiH4), and the reaction RF power density. The dark conductivity and the bandgap of the samples prepared under various conditions are exhibited in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Samples fabricated with “low-power-density, low-RH regime (LpLRH)” conditions were named as sample A. In contrast, sample B was deposited with relatively high power density and high RH (HpHRH), which was conducive to the formation of crystalline grains within the films. Sample C was prepared by stacking samples A and B, i.e., ∼5 nm of sample A stacked with ∼15 nm of sample B to form a hierarchical structure.
The Raman spectra of these layers are shown in Fig. 1a. The spectra could be deconvoluted into three Gaussian components to quantitatively evaluate the total crystalline fraction (χc): the amorphous part I480 (480 cm−1), the crystalline part I520 (520 cm−1), and an intermediate interfacial part I500 (500 cm−1). χc was then calculated from χc = (I500 + I520)/(I480 + I500 + I520).18 Sample A shows a wide scattering band at around 480 cm−1 indicating a fully amorphous nature. For samples B and C, a remarkable crystalline peak at around 520 cm−1 can be observed which means that the crystal phase of the films was formed, and their χc values were ∼20% and ∼16%, respectively. HRTEM was performed to provide further clear information about the microstructure properties of these diphasic materials. As presented in Fig. 1b, the film deposited under low RH conditions (sample A) showed an entirely amorphous network, which is in agreement with the Raman results mentioned above. In contrast, Fig. 1c and d show that samples B (under high RH, high power density) and C turned into diphase structures, in which the Si nano-size crystals (SiNCs) were well dispersed with diameters from 3 to 8 nm in an amorphous matrix. Both the size and the density of the SiNCs are suitable to form a strong quantum size-confinement effect,19 which will widen the optical bandgap of the thin film materials.
 Fig. 1  (a) Raman spectra and (b, c, and d) HRTEM patterns of the p-type Si films prepared under various deposition conditions. The inset of (c) shows the size distribution of the SiNCs. 
To evaluate the optical bandgap of these materials, the optical absorption (α) spectra of different p layers were calculated from the reflectance transmittance results, as shown in Fig. 2. Here, we defined E04 (the energy at which the absorption coefficient reached 104 cm−1) as the value of the optical bandgap instead of using a Tauc’s plot because Tauc's plots are not strictly valid for mixed phase materials.20 One can see that the p-nc-Si:H thin film (sample B) reached the widest bandgap with a value of 2.11 eV, and the p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H (sample C) thin film had a bandgap of 2.02 eV. The fully amorphous phase material p-a-Si:H (sample A) has an optical bandgap of 1.94 eV. Compared with sample A, the wider bandgaps for samples B and C are attributed to SiNCs, which were embedded in the a-Si:H dielectric matrix, causing the quantum size-confinement effect and consequently widening the optical bandgap. Meanwhile, the difference in bandgap between samples B and C is related to the higher SiNC density of sample B (p-nc-Si:H thin films) compared with sample C (p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical thin films). Finally, all the process parameters, corresponding microstructures and optical-electrical characteristics of these materials have been summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 2  Optical absorption coefficient of the p-type Si films prepared under various deposition conditions. 
Table 1 Fabrication parameters, dark conductivity (σ), and bandgaps for various p layers




Sample
Type
[TMB] (%)

R
H


σ (S cm−1)

χ
c (%)

E
04 (eV)




A
p-a-Si:H
0.50
120
2.1 × 10−6
∼0
1.94


B
p-nc-Si:H
0.75
160
6.8 × 10−3
∼20%
2.11


C
p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H
0.50 (∼5 nm)
120 (∼5 nm)
4.2 × 10−4
∼16%
2.02


0.75 (∼15 nm)
160 (∼ 15 nm)




After understanding the opto-electronic and microstructural properties of these p-type Si thin films, we then applied the samples in SHJ solar cells while keeping other deposition conditions the same. The cells were structured as follows: Ag grid/ITO/p layer/i-a-Si:H/(pyramidal textured) n-c-Si/i-a-Si:H/n-a-Si:H/ITO/Ag back electrode, as shown in Fig. 3. Table 2 exhibits the corresponding photovoltaic parameters of the SHJ solar cells with different p layers. Compared with the device based on the p-a-Si:H emitter layer, the photovoltaic parameters of the devices based on samples B and C have been apparently enhanced. Firstly, the reduced parasitic absorption loss and enhanced conductivity in p-type emitter layers B and C may be a reason for this promotion.21 As shown in Table 2, the series resistance (Rs) has been reduced. Also, the shunt resistance (Rsh) of the devices after inducing p-nc-Si:H was decreased. This may originate from the nanocrystalline particles embedded in the amorphous matrix increasing the shunting possibilities within the p–n junction. In addition, in attempt to achieve a more comprehensive model for this improvement, the contact properties between the p and ITO layers as well as the passivation effect induced by the various p-type Si thin films were investigated.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of SHJ solar cells based on a pyramidal textured silicon wafer. 
Table 2 Performance of SHJ solar cells with different p-type emitter layers




Sample
Type

V
oc (V)
FF (%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
Efficiency (%)

R
s (Ω)

R
sh (Ω)




A
p-a-Si:H
0.653
71.6
35.3
16.5
3.9
1136


B
p-nc-Si:H
0.667
74.1
36.8
18.2
3.1
758


C
p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H
0.681
75.3
37.2
19.1
2.7
1061




The interface between the ITO layer and the neighboring p layer is a critical point to improve the performance of a SHJ solar cell. According to the Schottky theory, the work function difference between the p layer and ITO will cause an imperfect ohmic contact, which induces band bending and builds a potential barrier in the p layer.22 The width of the potential barrier strongly depends on the effective doping concentration in the p layer. Thus, as shown in Fig. 4a, the utilization of a highly conductive p-type thin film has reduced the width of the potential barrier which is advantageous to the hole tunneling transport and the reduction of the contact resistance.23 For sample A, a wide depletion region will be established within the p layer owing to the low effective doping density, creating a high resistivity section for carrier transportation and offsetting the built-in potential of the p–n junction. For samples B and C, the mixed-phase emitter layers possess a sufficiently high conductivity. The increase of conductivity would decrease the barrier width in the p layer, which facilitates holes passing through the p/ITO interface with a tunneling effect, thus improving the photovoltaic parameters of the solar cells. To examine the perpendicular contact properties between ITO and different p layers, a stainless steel (SS)/p layer/ITO/Al architecture was created and the corresponding J–V curves are shown in Fig. 4b. The diode characteristic was evidently observed when p-a-Si:H was adopted. In contrast, when the p layer was substituted by p-nc-Si:H or p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H, a well-behaved J–V curve was observed owing to the superior ohmic contact, which is also shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the bandgap when ITO was contacted with different p layers. L1 and L2 are the barrier widths of the different p layers. (b) J–V measurement results of the samples with a SS/p layer/ITO/Al architecture. 
In addition, considering that the p/ITO contact issues are created by two types of materials and ITO was grown on the p-type Si thin films, various p layers may also influence the quality of the ITO layers. We have examined the properties of the ITO thin films deposited on different p layers, and the sample structure was developed as Eagle XG glass/p layer/ITO, which is shown in Fig. 5a. Fig. 5b presents the XRD patterns of the ITO films deposited on different p layers A weak (222) peak can be observed for the ITO film grown on the p-a-Si:H layer. However, there are obvious (222) peaks with higher intensity after the p-nc-Si:H layer was incorporated (samples B and C), which means that the crystallinity of the ITO films was improved. Fig. 5c–d present the AFM images of the ITO films deposited on different p layers. For the ITO thin film grown on p-a-Si:H, the surface is relatively smooth with a root means square (RMS) roughness of 5.96 nm. The surface becomes rougher and more grain clusters appear when the ITO films are grown on p-nc-Si:H (RMS = 8.69 nm) and p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H (RMS = 6.60 nm) layers. This is in accordance with the above XRD results, indicating that the p-nc-Si:H layers are beneficial for improving the nucleation and orderly growth of the ITO films. Actually, when the target-films (ITO films in this case) were deposited on another material substrate (p-type thin films), the microstructure properties of the substrate including crystallinity, lattice distance, and bonding force always impact the microstructure of the target-films.24–26 In this case, the results show that the p-nc-Si:H substrates might be more beneficial for ITO thin films to form crystals on p-nc-Si:H compared with p-a-Si:H. Thus, except for the enhanced conductivity of the p layer mentioned above, the better quality of the ITO films after inducing the p-nc-Si:H layer was also another significant factor for the improved p/ITO contact properties.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure of the measurement samples. (b) XRD patterns and (c, d, and e) AFM images of the ITO films based on p-a-Si:H, p-nc-Si:H, and p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H thin films, respectively. 
The above illustrations have explained the fact that the introduced p-nc-Si:H contact layer could effectively improve the p/ITO contact characteristics. Nevertheless, as shown in Table 2, although the single p-nc-Si:H films (sample B) demonstrate higher conductivity and a wider bandgap than the p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical thin films (sample C), the maximum values of Voc and FF were simultaneously obtained when applying the p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H films (sample C) as emitter layers. Interestingly, this is contradictory to common recognition because the higher conductivity and a wider bandgap of the p-type emitter layers are always considered to be the significant factors to improve the Voc and FF values of devices.27 Here, we recognize two reasons for the inferior performance of the solar cells based on single p-nc-Si:H layers. Firstly, the bandgap of the i-a-Si:H passivation layer, which was located between the p layer and the c-Si wafer, was only 1.82 eV. When we adopted the p-nc-Si:H film with a bandgap of 2.11 eV as an emitter layer, the large bandgap discontinuity between the i-a-Si:H passivation layer and the p layer will create a valence band offset (as shown in Fig. 6a), which served as a potential barrier and a trap center for hole transportation.28 While inserting a p-a-Si:H film with thickness of ∼5 nm as the bandgap buffer to form a p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical emitter layer could facilitate holes collection more,29 thus reducing the carrier recombination at the p/i interface.
 Fig. 6  (a) Energy band diagrams of the p-type layer, the i-a-Si:H layer, and n-c-Si before equilibrium. (b) Minority carrier lifetime measurements performed in bifacial passivated c-Si wafer by i-a-Si:H and p layers. The inset shows a schematic of the passivated samples. 
Secondly, during the process of fabricating SHJ solar cells, emitter layers were achieved after 5 nm i-a-Si:H was deposited. The high power density and hydrogen dilution process for fabricating p-nc-Si:H emitter layers inevitably influence the characteristics of the i-a-Si:H layer. It has been reported that long duration hydrogen plasma treatment could provide an etching effect for the i-a-Si:H layer, and also make the bulk network matrix of the a-Si:H layers more disordered, which lowers the c-Si surface passivation effect.30,31Fig. 6b shows the minority carrier lifetime of the samples passivated with a sandwich structure of p layer/i-a-Si:H/n-c-Si/i-a-Si:H/p layer. Samples used to evaluate the passivation effect were deposited on n-type double-side polished 250 μm thick 1–3 Ω cm Cz silicon wafers. Sinton WCT-120 was used to measure the minority carrier lifetime of the passivation samples. One can see that after incorporating the low doped p-a-Si:H layer as a buffer layer between the p-nc-Si:H and i-a-Si:H layers, an obvious improvement of the minority carrier lifetime can be observed. This indicates that the p-a-Si:H film with lower power density and hydrogen dilution can serve as a protective layer for the i-a-Si:H passivation layer, avoiding the detrimental effect caused by subsequent processes. Therefore, owing to these two factors, the output performance of a solar cell with a p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical emitter layer was better than the one with a single p-nc-Si:H emitter layer. Finally, as shown in Fig. 7a, by further optimizing the substrate texturing processes, an efficiency of 20.54% could be achieved with the p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical emitter layer. Fig. 7b exhibits the EQE curve of the heterojunction solar cells with hierarchical emitter layers. Due to the excellent field effect passivation and optical properties, the spectrum response of the device could reach ∼70% at 400 nm and ∼99% at 600 nm, resulting in a Jsc value of 38.93 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 7  (a) Illuminated J–V curve and (b) EQE curve of a heterojunction solar cell with a p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical emitter layer. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, high conductivity and wide bandgap p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical films have been introduced into SHJ solar cells as emitter layers and consequently the light J–V characteristics of the solar cells have been improved. The high conductivity p-nc-Si:H films within the hybrid emitter could decrease the depletion region. Also, they provide the function of seed layers for the subsequently grown ITO films, making the ITO films more ordered and compact. Therefore, the p/ITO contact properties of the device could be improved via adopting the p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hybrid emitter. A 5 nm p-a-Si:H layer within the hybrid emitter could serve as a buffer layer to compensate the band offset between p-nc-Si:H and i-a-Si:H films, and as a protective layer for i-a-Si:H to avoid the detrimental effect caused by subsequent high hydrogen dilution and power density processes, thus improving the performance of the SHJ solar cells. Such a multifunctional emitter layer with excellent optical-electrical properties and p/ITO contact characteristics also opens up possibilities for the development of advanced device architectures such as nanostructured radical solar cells or back-contacted solar cells with heterostructure contacts.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from International Cooperation Project of the Ministry of Science and Technology (2014DFE60170), National Natural Science Foundation of China (61474065, 61674084), Tianjin Research Key Program of Application Foundation and Advanced Technology (15JCZDJC31300), Key Project in the Science & Technology Pillar Program of Jiangsu Province (BE2014147-3), and the 111 Project (B16027).
References
T. Mueller, J. Wong and A. G. Aberle, Energy Procedia, 2012, 15, 97 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, F. Wang, X. Zhang, N. Wang, Y. Jiang, Q. Hao and Y. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 619–624 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Jiang, C. Wei, J. Sun and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15098 CAS .
L. Mazzarella, S. Kirner, B. Stannowski, L. Korte, B. Rech and R. Schlatmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 023902 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, D. Yang, Z. Yang, X. Guo, B. Liu, X. Ren and S. F. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Jiang, C. Wei and Y. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 698–705 CrossRef CAS .
A. Favier, D. Muñoz, S. Martín de Nicolás and P. J. Ribeyron, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Holman, M. Filipič, A. Descoeudres, S. De Wolf, F. Smole, M. Topič and C. Ballif, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 013107 CrossRef .
R. Lachaume, W. Favre, P. Scheiblin, X. Garros, N. Nguyen, J. Coignus, D. Munoz and G. Reimbold, Energy Procedia, 2013, 38, 770 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shin, C. Kim, C. Bae, J.-S. Lee, J. Lee and S. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 8928 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, A. Tavakoliyaraki, Y. Wu, R. A. C. M. M. van Swaaij and M. Zeman, Energy Procedia, 2011, 8, 207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Hussain, S. Kim, S. Ahn, H. Park, A. H. T. Le, S. Lee, Y. Lee, J. H. Lee and J. Yi, Met. Mater. Int., 2014, 20, 565 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Oh, S. Q. Hussain, Y.-J. Lee, Y. Lee, S. Ahn and J. Yi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3032 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Ji, J. Choi, W. Choi, H. M. Lee and D. Kim, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Honolulu USA, 2010, 3190–3192.
L. Bagolini, A. Mattoni, R. T. Collins and M. T. Lusk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13417 CAS .
E. Fathi, Y. Vygranenko, M. Vieira and A. Sazonov, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 8901–8905 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Vygranenko, E. Fathi, A. Sazonov, M. Vieira and A. Nathan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1860–1863 CrossRef CAS .
S. Veprek, F. A. Sarott and Z. Iqbal, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 36, 3344–3350 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H.-B. Jiang, W.-C. Wang, J.-B. Zheng, F.-L. Zhang, P.-H. Hao, X.-Y. Hou and X. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 69, 3252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tauc, R. Grigorovici and A. Vancu, Phys. Status Solidi, 1966, 15, 627 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiao, X. Xie, Q. Hao, D. Wen, J. Xue and C. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 152 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bivour, S. Schröer and M. Hermle, Energy Procedia, 2013, 38, 658 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Ji, H. Syn, J. Choi, H.-M. Lee and D. Kim, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 10NA05 CrossRef .
S. Schubert, J. Meiss, L. Müller-Meskamp and K. Leo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 438 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gordon, S. Vallon, A. Mayolet, G. Beaucarne and J. Poortmans, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ko, M. Kim and J. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Wang, E. Iwaniczko, M. R. Page, D. H. Levi, Y. Yan, H. M. Branz and Q. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 50, 1284 Search PubMed .
S. De Wolf and G. Beaucarne, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 022104 CrossRef .
X. Han, G. Hou, X. Zhang, C. Wei, G. Li, J. Zhang, X. Chen, D. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Zhao and X. Geng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 254–257 CrossRef CAS .
A. Descoeudres, L. Barraud, S. De Wolf, B. Strahm, D. Lachenal, C. Guérin, Z. C. Holman, F. Zicarelli, B. Demaurex, J. Seif, J. Holovsky and C. Ballif, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 123506 CrossRef .
J. Geissbühler, S. De Wolf, B. N. D. Demaurex, J. P. Seif, D. T. L. Alexander, L. Barraud and C. Ballif, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 231604 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc04930cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Raman spectra and (b, c, and d) HRTEM patterns of the p-type Si films prepared under various deposition conditions. The inset of (c) shows the size distribution of the SiNCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical absorption coefficient of the p-type Si films prepared under various deposition conditions.	 

A	p-a-Si:H	0.50	120	2.1 × 10−6	∼0	1.94
B	p-nc-Si:H	0.75	160	6.8 × 10−3	∼20%	2.11
C	p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H	0.50 (∼5 nm)	120 (∼5 nm)	4.2 × 10−4	∼16%	2.02
0.75 (∼15 nm)	160 (∼ 15 nm)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of SHJ solar cells based on a pyramidal textured silicon wafer.	 

A	p-a-Si:H	0.653	71.6	35.3	16.5	3.9	1136
B	p-nc-Si:H	0.667	74.1	36.8	18.2	3.1	758
C	p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H	0.681	75.3	37.2	19.1	2.7	1061

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the bandgap when ITO was contacted with different p layers. L1 and L2 are the barrier widths of the different p layers. (b) J–V measurement results of the samples with a SS/p layer/ITO/Al architecture.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the structure of the measurement samples. (b) XRD patterns and (c, d, and e) AFM images of the ITO films based on p-a-Si:H, p-nc-Si:H, and p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H thin films, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Energy band diagrams of the p-type layer, the i-a-Si:H layer, and n-c-Si before equilibrium. (b) Minority carrier lifetime measurements performed in bifacial passivated c-Si wafer by i-a-Si:H and p layers. The inset shows a schematic of the passivated samples.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illuminated J–V curve and (b) EQE curve of a heterojunction solar cell with a p-a-Si:H/nc-Si:H hierarchical emitter layer.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc04930c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
