Electrochemical C–N coupling of CO 2 and nitrogenous small molecules for the electrosynthesis of organonitrogen compounds  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00381C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00381C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 2193-2237Electrochemical C–N coupling of CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules for the electrosynthesis of organonitrogen compounds

        
          
            Xianyun 
            Peng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Libin 
            Zeng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dashuai 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhibin 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Li
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Zhongjian 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lecheng 
            Lei
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Liming 
            Dai
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Hou
          
        
      *abc
aCollege of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mail: yhou@zju.edu.cn
bInstitute of Zhejiang University - Quzhou, Quzhou, 324000, China
cDonghai Laboratory, Zhoushan, China
dAustralian Carbon Materials Centre (A-CMC), School of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: l.dai@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      28th October 2022
    First published on 21st February 2023AbstractElectrochemical C–N coupling reactions based on abundant small molecules (such as CO2 and N2) have attracted increasing attention as a new “green synthetic strategy” for the synthesis of organonitrogen compounds, which have been widely used in organic synthesis, materials chemistry, and biochemistry. The traditional technology employed for the synthesis of organonitrogen compounds containing C–N bonds often requires the addition of metal reagents or oxidants under harsh conditions with high energy consumption and environmental concerns. By contrast, electrosynthesis avoids the use of other reducing agents or oxidants by utilizing “electrons”, which are the cleanest “reagent” and can reduce the generation of by-products, consistent with the atomic economy and green chemistry. In this study, we present a comprehensive review on the electrosynthesis of high value-added organonitrogens from the abundant CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) via the C–N coupling reaction. The associated fundamental concepts, theoretical models, emerging electrocatalysts, and value-added target products, together with the current challenges and future opportunities are discussed. This critical review will greatly increase the understanding of electrochemical C–N coupling reactions, and thus attract research interest in the fixation of carbon and nitrogen.
1. Introduction
The continuous combustion and utilization of natural fuels have resulted in numerous issues, including CO2 emission-induced global climate change, environmental destruction, and potential depletion of non-renewable resources. With the depletion of fossil energy and the increasing environmental issues, it is urgent to seek and develop clean, cheap, and efficient renewable energy sources. In this context, the direct transformation of earth-abundant small molecules, such as N2, CO2, and H2O, into high-value-added chemicals, fuels, and fertilizers has received extensive attention.1–3 However, the industrial synthesis of high-value-added chemicals from earth-abundant small molecules requires harsh conditions with high energy consumption, exacerbating the energy crisis and environmental problems.4 In this case, electrocatalysis powered by renewable electricity can lower the energy barrier of the reaction, enabling the highly efficient synthesis of valuable chemicals under milder conditions.5–9 Currently, the research on electrosynthesis focuses on the efficient resource utilization of abundant gaseous molecules through electrocatalytic activation and immobilization.10–13 For example, the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 into fuels or value-added chemical products provides a carbon-neutral cycle, which can mitigate the rapid consumption of fossil resources and reduce CO2 emissions.14–19
Based on the “carbon neutrality” policy, the capture, transformation, and utilization of CO2 have become a hot topic, which are also urgent problems to be solved. In particular, the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (ECRR) powered by renewable energy sources has attracted considerable interest, providing possibilities for energy storage and artificial closure of the carbon cycle under mild conditions.20–25 A large number of advantages have been envisioned for the wide and deep research on the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 into chemicals and fuels via C–O, C–N, and C–C bond formation.26–30
Compared to the pure ECRR technology, the combination of ECRR with the electrochemical N2 reduction reaction (ENRR) using earth-abundant and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) as a nitrogen source and renewable energy has been demonstrated as a promising approach for the sustainable production of valuable organonitrogen compounds, as displayed in Fig. 1.29–32 Considering that N2 (making up 80% of air) is an appealing nitrogen source, the ENRR driven by renewable electricity has been proposed as a promising alternative to the energy-intensive Haber–Bosch process for artificial N2 fixation to produce ammonia (NH3) by harnessing N2 and H2O feedstocks under mild conditions. However, its efficiency is severely limited by the intrinsic chemical inertness, low solubility of N2 (0.02 v/v, 298 K, 1 atm), and high dissociation energy of the NN triple bond (941 kJ mol−1).33,34
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the electrosynthesis of organonitrogen compounds via C–N coupling reaction of CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) driven by renewable electricity. The black, blue, red, and white balls represent C, N, O, and H atoms, respectively. 
Encouragingly, compared to the non-polar N2, its derivates (NO, NO2−, NO3−, etc.) have a relatively low dissociation energy (NO3−: 204 kJ mol−1 and NO2−: 207 kJ mol−1) and high water-solubility,35,36 which are more suitable nitrogen sources for the electrosynthesis of organonitrogen compounds via the C–N coupling reaction. Alternatively, pesticide and fertilizer residues and industrial wastewater contain large amounts of nitrogen pollutants (such as NO2− and NO3−), which enter the groundwater and human body, causing various diseases such as methemoglobinemia.37,38 The conventional way to remove nitrate from wastewater is to convert it to dinitrogen, which is known as “denitrification”.39 However, the electrochemical conversion strategy is more appealing, not only reducing the formation of acid rain, photochemical smog, and depletion of the ozone layer due to the presence of NO, but also avoiding the consumption of a reducing agent (NH3) during the selective catalytic reduction process, which is one of the state-of-the-art and widely commercialized technologies for abating nitrogen oxides in the flue gases from coal-fuelled power plants, automobiles, and industrial facilities.39,40 Therefore, coupling CO2 with nitrogenous small molecules (NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) is a promising alternative path from the standpoint of “turn waste into treasure” for cost-effective electrosynthesis and environmental remediation, especially when driven by renewable energy.
Although C–N coupling reaction experiments can yield high-value-added organic compounds containing carbon/nitrogen (urea, amide, amine, acetamide, ethylamine, formamide, glycine, methylamine, etc.), demonstrating potential as a sustainable strategy, CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) have mainly been studied as carbon or nitrogen sources for separate electrochemical reduction reactions thus far. Alternatively, the production of C–N bond-containing compounds can not only significantly improve the industrial value and the energy density of the target products for widespread applications in chemical synthesis, pharmaceutical chemistry, agriculture, and the aerospace industry, but also simultaneously decrease the need for the transportation of the products from simple ECRR and ENRR processes.
Currently, there are several high-quality review papers available in the literature on electrochemical C–N coupling reactions,26,29,30,41–44 outlining the related reaction mechanisms and potential design principles for advanced electrocatalysts and emphasizing the effects of different reactors on the coupling reactions, which can be beneficial to scientists specializing in this field by reinforcing their expertise. However, considering that readers who have no experience in chemistry, physics, materials, chemical engineering, environmental and energy technologies, and catalysis will also be interested in electrochemical C–N coupling reactions, it is necessary to systematically review the fundamentals, concepts, characteristics, classification, key evaluation indices, quantitative and qualitative analysis of electrochemical C–N coupling reactions, which are presented in this work and will be informative and inspiring for further contributions to this fascinating and rapidly changing area.
In this review, we provide a systematic and critical understanding of the roadmap toward electrochemical C–N coupling reactions using the earth-abundant CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) under environmentally benign conditions. The design and development of the electrocatalysts, theoretical calculations, and reaction mechanisms for the C–N bonding reactions are systematically discussed. Particularly, we focus on the analysis of the key factors influencing the high catalytic activity and selectivity toward specific target products of the catalysts utilized in the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction based on CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.). Finally, the research direction and opportunities for designing advanced electrocatalysts and electrolytic reactors, in situ characterization techniques for mechanistic understanding and product detection, and the prospects for C–N coupling reactions are proposed.
2. Fundamentals of electrosynthesis
Electrochemical C–N coupling reactions, as an important strategy for the efficient construction of organonitrogen compounds, have been widely used in the synthesis of drugs, natural products, ligands, and catalysts. As a new strategy for the electrosynthesis of organonitrogen compounds, the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction is based on the principle of electron gain and loss at the cathode and anode, respectively, to avoid or reduce the use of metal catalysts or quantitative oxidant in conventional methods, making the electrosynthesis system cleaner, greener and more economical. Electrosynthesis, as an emerging redox platform, is superior to traditional synthesis methods, but electrochemical reactions still have a few shortcomings, and thus further improvements are needed to fully realize the potential of electrically driven chemical reactions.
The factors that influence the electrosynthesis performance include the reaction temperature, concentration, and solvent, which need to be considered, similar to the traditional reaction. Additionally, the influence of the current density, electrode potential, electrode material, and electrolyte must be considered in electrosynthesis. The external power supply is usually a direct-current power supply, where constant current or constant potential electrolysis is realized by controlling the current or adding a reference electrode to control the potential of the working electrode. Thus, to better understand the underlying principle of the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction, initially, we introduce some basic concepts, characteristics, classifications, and key evaluation indices of electrosynthesis in this section.
2.1 Basic electrosynthesis concepts
As one of the most active and competitive fields in chemistry, electrosynthesis produces chemical compounds in an electrochemical cell under ambient conditions. Thus, by exploiting the cheapest and greenest source of electrons from electricity, electrolysis is an efficient and green approach to performing complex redox reactions under mild conditions. Presently, electrosynthesis is undergoing a resurgence, which will undoubtedly be one of the most efficient methods for activating small molecules. Indeed, a wide range of electrode materials has been exploited for the oxidation and reduction of various reactants for the electrosynthesis of organic and inorganic compounds by electrolysis.
In electrosynthesis, electricity is applied to replace complex redox regents for the activation and transformation of the reactants.45,46 Typically, two-electrode electrosynthesis setups are composed of an anode and cathode, which are immersed in an electrolyte solution. The oxidation or reduction reaction can occur by applying a potential difference between the cathode and anode through an external power source. In an electrosynthesis reaction, oxidation and reduction occur simultaneously in the electrolyte at the anode and cathode, respectively, which are driven by a constant current or constant potential technology in an undivided or divided electrocatalytic reactor.47,48 The purpose of electrosynthesis is to increase the electrochemical oxidation or reduction reaction rates through catalytic processes occurring at the electrode surface, where chemical bonds break and form as electron and ion transfer occurs. As the availability of renewable electricity increases, electrochemical devices can facilitate electrical–chemical conversion to enable the storage of electrical energy in chemical form or electricity-driven conversion to generate useful chemical compounds. In electrosynthesis devices, the use of highly reactive and/or toxic agents can be completely avoided (direct electrosynthesis) or produced in situ on the electrode surface in a controlled manner (mediated electrosynthesis). Efficient electrosynthesis processes are needed to facilitate electrical/chemical interconversions to enable renewable energy technologies and environmentally friendly processes, which are beneficial to realize a sustainable energy infrastructure.
Electrosynthesis occurs at the electrode/electrolyte interface and consists of the following main steps in series:49 (1) transfer of the reactants from the electrolyte towards the electrode surface; (2) transportation of the reactants on the electrode surface and in the adjacent electrolyte layer via surface adsorption or chemical reaction; (3) gain and loss of electrons at the interface between the electrode and the solution; (4) conversion of the reaction product at the electrode surface and in the nearby liquid layer via surface desorption or chemical reaction; and (5) transfer of the reaction product(s) from the electrode surface in the electrolyte. The whole electrosynthesis process includes pre-treatment, electrolysis, and post-treatment, among which electrolysis is the most important step. The pre-/post-treatments usually include purification, dehumidification, refining, and separation.
2.2 The characteristics of electrosynthesis
The development of electrosynthesis technology has high research significance and commercial value for renewable energy conversion and storage. Compared to ordinary redox reactions, electrosynthesis offers several economic, ecological, and practical advantages.49–51 The main advantages of electrosynthesis are as follows:
(1) Electrosynthesis does not require toxic or dangerous oxidants and reducing agents. The use of electricity instead of redox reagents reduces waste generation, thereby improving the sustainability and cost-efficiency. Moreover, the electrosynthesis products with fewer by-product(s) are easy to separate and refine with high product purity.
(2) The electrode potential as the driving force for electrochemical reactions powered by green renewable energy can be continuously varied and precisely adjusted to match the redox potential of a specific chemical compound in the electrolyte solution to enhance the selectivity.
(3) Electrosynthesis reactions are usually carried out at ambient temperature and pressure, with relatively mild reaction conditions, leading to low energy consumption, zero-emission, and reduced equipment cost.
(4) For electrosynthesis, different products can be synthesized by regulating the electrode potential for the reaction to be carried out to produce the predetermined targeted product(s) with high yield and selectivity by controlling the electrode potential.
(5) The well-controlled electrochemical reaction process facilitates the mechanistic understanding of the intrinsic relationship between the material structure and the catalytic performance of the catalyst, which are very important for the design and synthesis of high-performance next-generation electrocatalysts.
Alternatively, electrosynthesis technology is limited to oxidation and reduction reactions, leading to the simultaneous formation of oxidation and reduction products on the anode and cathode, respectively. Thus, to ensure the efficient diffusion and separation of the reactants and target products, specifically designed electrode materials, electrolytic cell structures, and diaphragm materials are often required, which greatly increases the complexity of the electrolyzer. Moreover, the existing theories and technologies for electrosynthesis, especially electrochemical reaction kinetics and reactant/product separation, need further improvement.
2.3 The electrosynthesis classification
For the classification of electrosynthesis, there are usually two classification methods, as follows:
(1) According to the synthesis method, electrosynthesis can be divided into two categories, i.e., direct electrosynthesis and indirect electrosynthesis. The former is directly completed on the surface of the electrocatalyst, while the latter is carried out by traditional chemical methods, but the oxidant (or reducing agent) is electrochemically regenerated.
(2) According to the types of reactions occurring on the electrocatalyst surface, electrosynthesis reactions can be divided into two categories, i.e., anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction processes. The oxidation reaction involves electron loss or an increase in the oxidation state, which is commonly employed for wastewater treatment.52 In contrast, the reduction process involves a gain of electrons or decrease in the oxidation state. In the anodic oxidation process, the active sites lose electrons on the anode and the reactants are converted into the corresponding products, were some possible reactions include: (1) the anions lose electrons on the electrode and are converted into products with lower negative charges, such as OH− in water electrolysis to precipitate O2 at the anode, CI− in brine is anodized to generate Cl2, and F− is anodized to F2 in oxygen-containing molten salt electrolyte; (2) the cations lose electrons on the electrode and are converted into a product with a higher positive charge; and (3) reaction with a change in oxygen content, such as water electrolysis to produce O2.
With the continuous development of electrosynthesis, cathode reduction has also received extensive attention. The main process for cathode reduction is that electrons transfer from the cathode to the discharge species to convert them into products. Usually, the following types of reactions occur: (1) the cation receives electrons on the electrode and is converted into product(s) with a lower positive charge. For example, in the electrolytic extraction of metals, the metal cation (M+) is deposited on the cathode as metal M. In water electrolysis, H+ can obtain electrons to produce H2; (2) the anion gains electrons on the electrode to convert it into a product with a higher negative charge; and (3) the reduction of neutral species to form anions, such as O2 on the cathode can be reduced to H2O2 and H2O through 2- and 4-electron pathway, respectively.
2.4 The key evaluation index for electrosynthesis
To evaluate and compare the catalytic performance for electrosynthesis, the key parameters that have been used as a gauge for evaluating the performance of an electrocatalyst include the following:

(1) Overpotential (η). 
Overpotential refers to the additional driving force required to drive a redox reaction at a specific rate. Specifically, the overpotential is the voltage difference between the thermodynamic reduction/oxidation potential and actual electrode reduction/oxidation potential, which can be calculated using the formula η = E0 − Ecat, where E0 is the standard electrode potential of a certain target product and Ecat is the potential applied to the working electrode. Under the same faradaic efficiency (FE) of a certain product, the smaller the overpotential, the better the catalytic performance of the electrocatalyst. When the current is small, the rate at which the electrode potential changes with the current is related to the limiting rate of charge crossing the phase boundary between the electrode and the electrolyte, which is called the charge transfer overpotential. At a certain overpotential, the charge transfer rate depends on the properties of the reactants, the electrolyte, and the electrode itself. At higher currents, the charge transfer rate is usually no longer the rate-determining step, where the reaction rate is determined by the relatively slow mass transfer rate of reactants from the electrolyte to the electrode or products from the electrode to electrolyte (called diffusion overpotential), or by a slow chemical reaction coupled with a charge transfer step (called reaction overpotential), including the adsorption–desorption process of the reacted species or the chemical reaction that occurs before and after the charge transfer reaction.


(2) Current density (j). 
The current density is used to measure the reaction efficiency of electrosynthesis, which is significant for evaluating whether an electrocatalyst or electrochemical reaction meets the requirements for large-scale production. The current density is usually expressed as the total current measured at a specific potential divided by the geometric area of the working electrode (geometric current density, jgeo, mA cm−2) or the mass of the loaded catalyst (mass current density, jcat., mA mg−1). The partial current density of a certain product corresponds to the total current density, which represents the current density of a single product among many products, which is also an important indicator for evaluating the electrocatalyst performance and calculating the Tafel slope. The current density depends on the number of active sites in the electrocatalyst, the mass transfer rate of the reaction process, and the impedance of the system (i.e., the resistance for electrons to be transferred to the reactant from the electrode surface).


(3) Faradaic efficiency (FE). 
The faradaic efficiency is used to express the percentage of electricity consumed to generate the target product in the total electricity consumed by the electrochemical reaction, which reflects the catalytic selectivity of an electrocatalyst for a certain product.53–56 The formula for its calculation is: FE = nzF/Q, where n is the molar amount of the product (mol); z is the number of electrons transferred to generate the target product molecule; F is the Faraday constant (F = 96485 C mol−1); and Q is the amount of charge consumed by the entire electrochemical reaction.


(4) Tafel slope. 
The Tafel slope is used to express the relationship between the overpotential and the logarithm of the current density, which is used to characterize the reaction rate and is closely related to the intrinsic properties of the electrocatalyst.57–60 The Tafel slope is given by the partial derivative of the overpotential with respect to the log of the current density as follows: η = a + b × log(j), where a is a constant usually associated with the structure of the electrolyte and the electrode surface, b is the Tafel slope, η is the overpotential and j is the partial current density of the target product. According to this formula, it can be seen that the a and b values can be obtained from the linear part of the Tafel plot, where the a value is the intercept of the y-axis and the b value is the slope of the linear region of the Tafel plot. The Tafel slope represents the potential difference required to increase or decrease the current density by a factor of 10. A smaller b indicates that less η is required to deliver the same current density increment, indicating a faster electron transport rate. A high-performance electrocatalyst should have a small b value. The Tafel slope can be applied to analyze the electrochemical reaction mechanism and kinetics.61–64 For example, it can be employed to infer the rate-determining step (RDS) and judge the mechanism of the reaction according to the magnitude of its slope. Specifically, a slope of −120 mV dec−1 implies that the RDS for the ECRR is the initial step of CO2*− generation, whereas the RDS is the chemical step following the fast one-electron pre-equilibrium when the Tafel slope is −60 mV dec−1.59,65


(5) Yield rate. 
The yield of electrosynthesis is expressed both in terms of chemical yield and current efficiency. The current efficiency is the ratio of Coulombs consumed in forming the products to the total number of Coulombs passed through the cell. Side reactions decrease the current efficiency. The yield rate is a measure of the reaction rate for the formation rate of target products. The yield rate for a certain product can be calculated using the following equation:r = (C × V)/(t × A)where C is the measured concentration of the product, V is the volume of the electrolyte, t is the reduction reaction time, and A is the geometric area, electrochemical-specific surface area, the weight of the catalyst, or the amount of active atoms.


(6) Turnover frequency (TOF). 
In electrosynthesis, the same metal nanoparticles are often loaded on supports with different specific surface areas. Consequently, their specific activities are different. However, although the catalytic activity of identical metal nanoparticles is initially the same, this is not reflected in their specific activity. Thus, the specific activity cannot reflect the real catalytic activity of the catalyst, which is mainly due to the specific activity being greatly influenced by the specific surface area of the support, the mass transfer, and the diffusion of the substrate. To exclude these effects, Michel Boudart first proposed in 1968 the TOF to evaluate the catalytic rate of a catalyst, that is, the number of molecules that undergo reaction per second per active site.
Recently, TOF has been redefined as the total number of molecules converted to the desired product per catalytically active site per unit time,66,67 which is expressed as TOF = (jproduct/NF)/(mcatw/M), where jproduct is the partial current for a certain product (A), N is the number of electrons transferred for product formation, mcat is the catalyst mass in the electrode (g), w is the metal loading in the catalyst, M is the atomic of the metal (g mol−1), and F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1).68–71 Therefore, the TOF calculation largely depends on determining the number of active sites. It can be assessed by various methods, including copper underpotential deposition,72 counting the number of molecules on the exposed surfaces of the catalyst,73,74 and cyclic voltammetry quantitative tests.75,76 However, for most solid-state catalysts, especially some emerging complex catalysts, it is not easy to obtain the TOF value precisely because not all surface atoms in the catalyst are catalytically active or equally available. Nevertheless, although the calculated TOF is relatively imprecise at the current stage, it still provides a useful way to compare the intrinsic catalytic activity among various catalysts.


(7) Stability. 
The stability of an electrocatalyst is an important parameter to evaluate its potential practical application. Generally, two methods are used for stability measurements, i.e., cyclic voltammetry (CV) or linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), and electrolysis with a constant current or constant potential. The CV and LSV methods are used to compare the changes in the overpotential before and after a certain cycle test by performing CV or LSV in a certain potential range. After certain repeated cycles, the smaller the change in the potential, the higher the stability of the electrocatalyst. The constant current or potential method monitors the potential or current density change as a function of the reaction time at a constant current density or potential. With an increase in the reaction time, the longer the duration with no potential or current density change, the better the electrocatalytic stability.

3. Electrocatalytic reactor
The electrochemical C–N coupling reaction is carried out in an electrocatalytic reactor driven by an electrochemical workstation with a two-/three-electrode system, which is different from the equipment used in traditional chemical reactions. The effect of the reactor on the electrochemical performances of the C–N coupling reaction is crucial, where its design and development mainly involve fluid mechanics, structural mechanics, chemical mass transfer, and electrical engineering. Overall, in electrochemical C–N coupling reaction systems, more research efforts are focused on the design of catalysts rather than engineering innovations in the electrocatalytic reactor. Therefore, the development of an electrocatalytic reactor is a relatively slow process.
In general, an electrolytic reactor is an electrochemical cell that utilizes an external source of electrical energy to drive a non-spontaneous redox reaction. Typically, an electrolytic reactor is composed of three components, including a cathode, anode, and electrolyte. When an external voltage is applied to the electrodes, the ions in the electrolyte will be driven to the electrode with the opposite charge. The commonly used three-electrode electrolytic cell consists of a working electrode, counter electrode, and reference electrode, forming one circuit between the working and reference electrodes for the electrochemical reaction process on the working electrode and another circuit between the working and counter electrodes to transmit electrons from the former to the latter for reaction on the counter electrode. In short, a closed loop circuit is created between the counter electrode and the working electrode, and the potential of the working electrode is related to the reference electrode. A typical three-electrode system consists of a measurement circuit (constituted by the working electrode and the reference electrode) and a polarization circuit (constituted by the working electrode and the counter electrode).
The design of electrochemical reactors is an important strategy for any type of efficient and practical electrosynthesis. Various reactor designs have been developed for electrosynthesis.24 Currently, there are three typical types of electrosynthesis reactors, including H-type cells, flow cells, and membrane electrode assembly (MEA) cells, which can be adapted for electrochemical C–N coupling reactions (vide infra). In this section, we briefly describe the setup of these three types of reactors and the associated experimental procedures for electrosynthesis. Furthermore, the advantages and disadvantages of each of the reactors will be discussed.
3.1 H-Type cell
The representative H-type cell is composed of a cathode compartment for the reduction reaction and an anode compartment for the oxidation reaction, which is the most widely used cell. Typically, the cathode chamber and the anode chamber are separated by a proton/ion-exchange membrane (Fig. 2) to enable ionic conductivity but prevent the crossover of gaseous and aqueous products.77 However, the H-type cell has two major drawbacks. Firstly, the gas mass transfer in the H-type cell is not substantial due, for example, to the extremely low solubility of CO2 in the electrolyte, thus resulting in slow ECRR reaction kinetics.78 Secondly, H-type cells can only use neutral electrolytes for the ECRR, while alkaline electrolytes cannot be used given that CO2 can react with hydroxide ions to form carbonates, while acidic electrolytes can cause severe hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) from water splitting.79,80 Despite the slow reaction kinetics and high energy consumption associated with the H-type cell, it has significantly contributed to the early research on ECRR and other electrolysis reactions. For the C–N coupling reaction in an H-type cell, a mixture of CO2 and N2 gas is continuously purged in the catholyte, and the dissolved CO2 and N2 molecules are adsorbed on the electrocatalyst surface and undergo subsequent reduction for C–N coupling. Thus, a flow cell is required.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of an H-type cell with a typical three-electrode system. (WE: working electrode, CE: counter electrode, and RE: reference electrode). 
3.2 Flow cell
In comparison to the conventional H-type cell, the flow cell (Fig. 3), which is composed of a gaseous cathode compartment, a catholyte cathode compartment, and an anode compartment,81–84 enables the ECRR to operate at much higher current densities by mitigating the mass-transport limitation.85 Typically, the catholyte and anolyte compartments are separated by a proton/ion exchange membrane. The working electrode, membrane, and counter electrode are positioned and clamped together using a polytetrafluoroethylene spacer, enabling the catholyte and anolyte to be pumped to the cathode and anode chamber, respectively, which are separated by a membrane.78,86
 Fig. 3  Schematic comparison of the conventional (a) and modified (b) flow cell measurement systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
CO2 and N2 flow through the gas flow channel at the back side of the gas diffusion layer to diffuse to the catholyte on the catalyst. A port is drilled in the polytetrafluoroethylene spacer, enabling the reference electrode to be positioned at a predetermined distance from the working electrode. The electrolyte is circulated through the electrochemical cell with a certain flow rate controlled by a peristaltic pump.
In a flow cell, the gas diffusion electrode (GDE) plays a crucial role, which serves as the place for the electrochemical reactions in the triple-phase boundary. A gas diffusion layer (GDL) is used to support the catalytic layer, transfer reaction gases and products, and conduct electrical current.87,88 The substrate is usually a porous conductive material (such as carbon paper and carbon cloth), and is hydrophobized with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) to facilitate the formation of gas channels. The GDL is located between the catalytic layer and the flow field/polar plate and plays a role in regulating the water and gas redistribution. Although the GDL does not directly participate in electrochemical reactions, it plays an important role in improving the electrode performance. An ideal GDL needs to have good electrical conductivity, high structural porosity, appropriate hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance, long-term chemical and thermal stability, and low cost.

Fig. 3a shows a typical flow electrochemical cell for the ECRR, together with the qualitative and quantitative product analysis units (i.e., nuclear magnetic resonance, NMR, and gas chromatography (GC)), peristaltic pump, and mass flowmeter (Fig. 3a).85 For a modified flow cell (Fig. 3b), the outlet gas in the system is first scrubbed by the catholyte, which is further mixed with potential gas products from the catholyte chamber, and then flows to the online GC for quantification analysis through a mass flowmeter. Consequently, the liquid products that evaporated into the outlet gas, as well as that dissolved in the catholyte can be collected and analyzed, respectively. The modified measurement protocol also enables the gas products to be fully collected and accurately assessed. For electrolyte crossing, a bipolar membrane (BPM) can be used instead of a traditional anion exchange membrane (AEM), which suppresses electromigration and electroosmotic resistance.
Compared with the conventional H-type cell, the significant difference in the flow cell is the GDE configuration, which allows the coexistence of the gas, liquid, and solid phases by exposing one side to the feeding gas and the other side to the electrolyte.89–93 However, the flow cell also has some drawbacks, as follows:24 (1) relatively high resistance due to the existence of two compartments; (2) GDE flooding, carbonate formation, and crossover issues; and (3) cost disadvantages due to the use of a large amount of electrolytes, especially alkaline electrolytes. These disadvantages lead to significant uncertainty for the industrial production of flow cells.
3.3 MEA cell
The MEA, also known as “fuel cell-type”, “zero-gap”, “catholyte-free”, or “gas-phase electrolysis”, is the core component of a fuel cell and plays a decisive role in its catalytic performance, which consists of a proton/ion exchange membrane, catalyst layers, and GDLs.94,95 The catalysts on each side of the MEA enable reactions and the middle membrane allows the passage of protons, while keeping the gases separate. Unlike the H-type cell and flow cell, the MEA cell is a two-electrode system. In the MEA cell, no catholyte electrolyte is needed for the cathode side and water is provided by the vapor phase or diffusion from the anolyte electrolyte.
The GDL is a key component in MEAs, which usually uses PTFE or proton conductors as a binder. The PTFE binder is prepared on the GDL after mixing the catalyst with a certain amount of PTFE by scraping, spraying, or rolling method. After calcination, the surfactant can be removed to ensure PTFE shows binding and hydrophobic effects. To complete the three-dimensional electrode architecture and form the GDE, a layer of low-concentration proton conductor solution is sprayed on the surface of the catalytic layer. Finally, the electrode and the proton exchange membrane (PEM) are hot-pressed to form the MEA. In the case of the proton conductor binder, the proton conductors (e.g. Nafion and perfluorosulfonic acid) contain both hydrophobic (C–F main chain) and hydrophilic groups (–SO3−). When some of the sulfonic acid groups of Nafion are lost by thermal decomposition, it will exhibit hydrophobic properties, while the remaining sulfonic acid groups are hydrophilic, thus forming a uniformly distributed hydrophilic and hydrophobic interpenetrated network in three-dimensional space. A typical preparation method is as follows:96 firstly, the catalyst is uniformly mixed with a certain amount of Nafion solution, and then coated on the GDL. Thereafter, it is calcined above 280 °C under the protection of inert gas, where some of the Nafion in the catalytic layer loses its sulfonic acid groups to act as a hydrophobic material in the electrode, similar to PTFE in the PTFE-bonded electrode. Therefore, the catalytic layer of the electrode not only ensures the sufficient contact of the catalytically active components with the proton conductors and electronic conductors but also provides sufficient gas and water channels to expand the three-dimensional reaction area of the cell, thereby improving the performance of the whole cell.
Recently, MEA cells have become an attractive design for various electrochemical reduction reactions due to their low ohmic loss and high energy efficiency.97–99 Numerous reports have demonstrated the feasibility of MEA-like cells for CO2 reduction with current densities of up to 100 mA cm−2, an order of magnitude higher than that achieved using typical aqueous architectures.100,101 In general, a proton exchange membrane is commonly applied as an electrolyte in MEA cells, and gaseous reactants can be fed directly and there is no aqueous electrolyte between the electrodes.102 MEA cells do not have a mainstream cathode electrolyte, but an electrolyte is required at the interface between the catalyst and the membrane to allow ion transport across the ion-exchange membrane. As shown in Fig. 4, the main advantageous structure of MEA cells is that GDE and ion exchange membrane are attached as a solid catholyte, in which the gas/liquid products are collected at the feed side, and the flow between the catalyst layer and ion exchange membrane can be eliminated by the catholyte. Therefore, this membrane-based fabrication technique can greatly reduce the ohmic resistance during the reaction, thereby increasing the current density.97
 Fig. 4  Schematic of MEA cell for CO2 and N2 electrocatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
Overall, the development of electrocatalytic reactors is crucial for electrosynthesis, which can lead to a switch from laboratory-scale processes to industrial-scale production. For electrochemical C–N bond formation from carbon and nitrogen sources, the MEA cell is an ideal choice, which can enable CO2 electrolysis to work at conditions relevant to the industrial electrolyzer. In this case, an ideal electrocatalytic reactor should not only efficiently facilitate electron transfer, ion transport, and controllable gas diffusion, but also prevent the mixing of the anolyte and catholyte. Electrochemical C–N coupling reactions have been performed under various reaction conditions, such as coupling at the cathode, generating intermediates at the cathode and anode, and through redox mediators. Based on the coupling method and the nature of the substrate, an electrosynthesis reactor can be specifically designed. The appropriate design of an electrosynthesis electrolyzer is crucial for achieving a high energy efficiency toward C–N coupling.
4. Quantitative and qualitative analysis
To properly evaluate the catalytic performances of electrosynthesis, some precise methods for the analysis of the products generated in the experiments are crucial, which must be extremely sensitive, reliable, precise, and reproducible. This is because many factors affect the accurate determination of the product, such as quantitative time and pH value of the solution, cleaning agent (such as methanol and propanol). In the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction system, both gas-phase products and liquid-phase products are generated, which will be discussed here.
4.1 Gas-phase products
Regarding gas-phase products, generally gas chromatography (GC) is applied for their quantitative and qualitative analysis. A GC is made of a narrow tube, known as the column, carrying a continuous flow of inert or nonreactive gas. GC is an experimental technique for separating a mixture into its components and is commonly used in the qualitative and quantitative determination of sample components. GC is a time-based separation technique, in which the components of a sample pass through the column at different rates depending on their chemical and physical properties and the resulting relationship with the column lining or packing (called stationary phase) interaction. The column is usually enclosed in a temperature-controlled oven. As chemicals exit the column, they are electronically detected and identified. The time at which the peak appears is called the retention time, which can be used to characterize each component, and the size of the peak (peak height or peak area) is a measure of the content of the component.
Commonly, a flame ionization detector (FID) and thermal conductivity detector (TCD) are applied for the detection of the gas products in the ECRR system. The FID is primarily sensitive to hydrocarbons and is more sensitive than the TCD. However, the FID cannot detect H2O or CO2, making it ideal for the analysis of environmental organic analytes. The TCD is a concentration-type detector, which responds to the difference in thermal conductivity between the measured component and the carrier gas. The TCD relies on the thermal conductivity of the substance when an electric current is passed through a thin wire of tungsten–rhenium. In this setup, helium (He) or N2 is used as the carrier gas because of their relatively high thermal conductivity, which keeps the filament cool and maintains a uniform resistivity and electrical efficiency in the filament. As analyte molecules elute from the column and mix with the carrier gas, the thermal conductivity decreases, while the filament temperature and resistivity increase, thus causing voltage fluctuations, which eventually cause the detector to respond. The detector sensitivity is directly proportional to the filament current and inversely proportional to the immediate ambient temperature of the detector and the carrier gas flow.
The FID is a typical destructive and mass detector, which is powered by a flame, which is generated by the combustion of hydrogen and air. When organic compounds enter the flame from hydrogen and oxygen combustion, chemical ionization occurs at high temperatures, and the ionization generation is several times higher than the base flow. An order of magnitude of ions, under the directional action of the high-voltage electric field, forms an ion flow, and the weak ion flow (10−12–10−8 A) is amplified by high resistance (106–1011 Ω) and becomes proportional to the amount of organic compounds entering the flame. The increase in the current is converted to a peak in the chromatogram, and thus the organic matter can be quantitatively analyzed according to the magnitude of the signal. The FID-compatible carrier gases include helium, hydrogen, nitrogen, and argon. In an FID, sometimes the flow path is modified before entering the detector. A mechanized system converts CO and CO2 into CH4 for detection. A different technology is the Polyarc, developed by Activated Research Inc., which converts all compounds to methane.
4.2 Liquid-phase products
The quantitative and qualitative analysis of the liquid-phase products in the electrochemical C–N reaction system is not as straightforward as other common gases such as N2, O2, H2, and CO, which are practically insoluble in water, and thus can be easily quantified using GC. Typical, NH3 is a polar small molecule, which is highly soluble in water (482 g L−1 at 24 °C).103 Therefore, the quantitative determination of NH3 is usually carried out in aqueous solution. In a typical experiment, a solution is used to absorb NH3 and the concentration of NH3 in the solution is determined using various techniques. However, the actual measurement is greatly affected by the NH3 in the background of the test system and the non-electrochemical effect on NH3 synthesis, which can be determined by a set of control experiments. At present, the relatively mature methods for the quantitative and qualitative analysis of NH3 include ion chromatography, spectrophotometry, ion selective electrode method, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
Spectrophotometry, also known as colorimetry, is widely used in the detection of NH3 due to its high precision and low price. The methods to measure NH3 can be subdivided into three categories, i.e., the indoxyl blue method, salicylic acid method, and Nessler reagent method.104 The indoxyl blue method is based on the Berthelot reaction to detect NH3, with the detectable concentration of 0–0.6 mg L−1 because phenol/salicylic acid and hypochlorite in alkaline solution will produce a blue indoxyl product. Sodium nitroprusside and potassium ferrocyanide are both used as catalysts to speed up the reaction, and citrate prevents the precipitation of ions that may form during the alkaline reaction. Salicylic acid is used instead of phenol to avoid the formation of hazardous o-chlorophenol during the reaction. The concentration of NH3 can be detected by measuring the absorbance of indoxyl between 630–650 nm by ultraviolet spectroscopy. Typically, 2 mL of the diluted electrolyte is taken from the electrochemical reaction vessel for determination. Afterward, 2 mL 1.0 M NaOH solution containing 5 wt% salicylic acid and 5 wt% sodium citrate is added. Subsequently, 1 mL of 0.05 M NaClO and 0.2 mL of an aqueous solution of 1 wt% C5FeN6Na2O (sodium nitroferricyanide) are added. After standing for 2 h at room temperature, the absorption spectrum is measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer. The formation of indophenol blue is determined using the absorbance at a wavelength of 655 nm. The concentration-absorbance curves are calibrated using standard ammonia chloride solutions, which contain the same concentration of electrolyte as that used in the electrolysis experiments.105,106 Although this method is precise and reliable, it has some disadvantages due to its time-consuming and laborious procedures. The Nessler reagent process involves the use of potassium hydroxide and potassium tetraiodomercurate. Mercury and iodide react with NH3 to form a reddish-brown compound, which can be detected by UV spectroscopy at an absorbance of 420 nm. It is worth noting the following: (1) nessler reagent contains the highly toxic mercury; therefore, care must be taken during the detection process; (2) nessler reagent has a short life; therefore, it should be used within three weeks; and (3) for accurate results, it is recommended to detect NH3 with Nessler reagent within 10–30 min to avoid any unreliable output.
4.3 Isotope labeling experiments
Isotope labeling experiments should be performed to further validate the origin of the products and deduce the plausible reaction pathways in the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction, especially for N-containing catalysts or the use of nitrogen-containing raw materials. Normally, the detected amount of organonitrogen compounds should agree well with that detected by another method. The feed carbon and nitrogen sources should only contain 15N and 13C, and therefore can be determined using different methods such as infrared spectroscopy (IR), mass spectroscopy (MS), and NMR spectroscopy to distinguish 15N and 13C from the possible contaminants 14N and 12C.

1H NMR is widely used because it is a very convenient method. Given that the chemical shifts between 14N and 15N are different, 1H NMR can distinguish isotopes very well.107–109 According to 14N in 14NH4+, the scalar interaction between 1H and 14N in 15N shows two symmetric signals separated by 53 Hz. In contrast, in 15N, the 1H resonance interacting with 15N in 15NH4+ is divided into three symmetric signals separated by 73 Hz.108–110 Additionally, by using 13CO2 as the feed gas, a doublet (188 Hz) appears at 8.63 and 8.16 ppm, suggesting the yield of H13COOH, compared to a singlet at 8.40 ppm originating from H12COOH when using 12CO2 as the feed gas.111 These results indicate that the reaction products evolve from CO2 reduction. The CO generated during the reaction can be confirmed to originate from CO2 by GC with mass spectrometer (GC-MS) measurements.
It is worth noting that the labeled products should be of high purity to avoid any other contamination during the reaction. Therefore, additional purification of the feed gas is essential to avoid the presence of other carbon and nitrogen species.112,113 In conclusion, the results obtained through a series of strictly controlled experiments are convincing.
5. Electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction
Currently, it is still a big challenge to electrochemically convert CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) into the target products via ECRR or ENRR with high selectivity and high yield rate, while it is more difficult to simultaneously drive these two electrochemical reduction reactions (ECRR/ENRR) to selectively form C–N-coupled products in the same electrochemical system. The bottleneck of this technique is the competitive nature of the C–N coupling reaction with the individual reduction reaction of CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.), together with the competing hydrogen evolution reaction. Therefore, to better explore the C–N coupling reaction, we first provide a systematic understanding of the ECRR and ENRR.
5.1 Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction
CO2 is a typical triatomic molecule with linear symmetry, in which the two sp hybrid orbitals of the C atom and the 2px orbitals of two O atoms (assuming that the CO2 molecule is placed along the x-axis) form two σ bonds in a head-to-head format.114 Meanwhile, the C atom has two 2p orbitals that are not involved in hybridization, which are located on the y-axis and z-axis, namely, 2py and 2pz orbitals. They overlap side-by-side with the 2p orbitals of the O atoms on both sides, respectively, forming two stable three-center four-electron p–p delocalized large π bonds (i.e., π34) which is a non-bonding orbital, and its electron cloud is mainly bound to two O atoms. The O atom is very electronegative, and thus the reactivity of the electrons on the two highest occupied molecular orbitals is relatively poor. The C atom is an electron-deficient center, which can act as an electrophile body and react with nucleophiles and electron-bearing groups. Accordingly, it is known that an effective way to achieve CO2 activation is to input electrons electro-/photo-chemically or capture electrons from other molecules during the reaction process and use them as a reductant. At present, the CO2 conversion technologies mainly include chemical reduction, photocatalytic conversion, photoelectric catalytic conversion, and electrochemical conversion.115–117
Among the various conversion strategies, the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 into high-value-added products has the dual promise of neutralizing carbon emissions and providing a long-term pathway to create energy-dense chemicals and fuels from atmospheric CO2. Since the first report of ECRR on metal electrodes in the 19th century, its potential for reducing the global greenhouse effect has been investigated. With substantial endeavors in developing efficient materials (e.g., nanostructured catalysts and electrodes) and technologies for the reduction of CO2 emission in the past decade, research on ECRR for emission abatement and fuel production has been extensively reported, together with the development of various renewable energy technologies (e.g., solar, wind, and hydropower). Theoretical predictions also indicated that ECRR by a non-renewable energy source can reduce the emission of carbon and produce high value-added chemicals.14,15,118 Despite the important value in sustainable energy utilization and environment protection, the large-scale deployment of the ECRR for practical applications is still limited to date by its generally low efficiency and suboptimal selectivity.
As mentioned above, the CO2 molecule possesses linear central symmetry with two carbon–oxygen double bonds (CO) with a bond length of 116.3 pm. The energy required to dissolve the CO bond in CO2 (800 kJ mol−1) is significantly higher than that for most carbonyl groups due to the fact that the bond length of CO is much shorter than that of the C–O bond and most multiple-bonded functional groups. Because of this, CO2 has a significant energy difference between its highest occupied and lowest empty molecular orbitals, making it chemically inert. The innate stability of CO2 molecules makes it difficult to activate them for participation in chemical processes unless they are subjected to extreme circumstances.
The electrolyte used in the ECRR system is usually low-cost inorganic salt solutions (e.g., KHCO3, NaHCO3, and Na2SO4), which can donate activated protons to break the CO bond. Besides, the electrodes can readily be scaled up or miniaturized, which are also feasible for being assembled with the energy or gas reactant input for mass production. However, the rational design and realization of highly efficient, selective, stable, and low-cost ECRR electrocatalysts remain a major challenge. As described above for electrosynthesis, the ECRR is performed using the typical three-electrode cell, including a working electrode loaded with the ECRR catalyst (cathode), a reference electrode to determine the applied potential, and a counter electrode to balance the charge and ion flow during the reaction (anode).80,120–124
In the ECRR system, the CO2 molecules adsorbed on the surface of the catalyst will change their molecular configuration, which can reduce their activation energy. Usually, CO2 molecules can adsorb on the catalyst surface in several different ways (Fig. 5a)119,125–127 and will undergo different changes under different potentials. The electrode potential for different paths of CO2 transformation is summarized in Table 1. Although the theoretical electrode potential of various products presented in Table 1 is not very negative, the applied reduction potential will be much greater than the theoretical value because the electrode potential required for the activation of CO2 molecules into *CO2 intermediates is very negative.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the different types of CO2 molecule adsorption modes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Proposed mechanisms for CO2 activation, C–C bond formation and elemental reaction pathways to various products during the ECRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Table 1 The equilibrium potentials for electrochemical reduction of CO2 (25 °C), 1 atmosphere of gases, and 1.0 M solutes in aqueous solution20




Reaction

E
0

Products or name





xCO2 + nH+ + ne− → product + yH2


CO2 reaction


CO2 + e− → CO2*−
−1.90 V vs. SHE
Carbonate anion radical


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO (g) + H2O
−0.10 V vs. RHE
Carbon monoxide


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH (aq) + H2O
−0.12 V vs. RHE
Formic acid


2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → (COOH)2 (s)
−0.47 V vs. RHE
Oxalic acid


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → C (s) + 2H2O
0.21 V vs. RHE
Graphite


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO (s) + H2O
−0.10 V vs. RHE
Formaldehyde


CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH (aq) + H2O
0.03 V vs. RHE
Methanol


CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 (g) + 2H2O
0.17 V vs. RHE
Methane


2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH (aq) + 2H2O
0.11 V vs. RHE
Acetic acid


2CO2 + 10H+ + 10e− → CH3CHO (aq) + 3H2O
0.66 V vs. RHE
Acetaldehyde


2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 (g) + 4H2O
0.08 V vs. RHE
Ethylene


2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH (aq) + 3H2O
0.09 V vs. RHE
Ethanol


2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 (g) + 4H2O
0.14 V vs. RHE
Ethane


3CO2 + 16H+ + 126e− → C2H5CHO (aq) + 5H2O
0.09 V vs. RHE
Propionaldehyde


3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH (aq) + 5H2O
0.10 V vs. RHE
Propanol


2H+ + 2e− → H2 (g)
0 V vs. RHE
Hydrogen


H2O → O2(g) + 4H+ + 4e−
1.23 V vs. RHE
Oxygen




The ECRR is a multi-proton coupled multi-electron transfer process. A typical ECRR catalytic process is usually divided into three steps, as follows:20,128 (1) chemisorption of CO2 molecule on the catalyst surface; (2) dissociation of CO bonds and/or generation of C–H and C–O bonds by transfer of electrons and protons; and (3) rearrangement of product species, followed by desorption from the electrode surface and diffusion into the electrolyte. In most heterogeneous ECRR processes, these steps occur at the interface of the solid electrocatalyst and CO2-containing electrolyte (H-type cell) or the three-phase interface of CO2 (gas), electrolyte (liquid), and electrocatalyst (solid) (flow cell). Generally, electrodes/catalysts that have higher reactivity with CO2 than that with competitive H2 are preferred to suppress the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction. At the thermodynamic level, transferring the first electron to a CO2 molecule requires large reorganizational energy to activate the CO2 molecule,129–132 during which the original linear structure of CO2 is rearranged to a bent radical anion, forming the key intermediate (CO2*−) for the ECRR.133 The subsequent multi-proton-coupled electron transfer processes proceed faster given that they are thermodynamically more advantageous than the first activation phase (Fig. 5b). Nevertheless, the product selectivity will become the primary problem of the ECRR due to the high activity of CO2*− and the small potential differences among the various potential reduction products, which highly depend on the specific activity of various catalyst surfaces and active sites. In addition, product selectivity can be further altered, especially when kinetic features are also considered. Typically, the rate of hydrogenation of low-carbon intermediates is faster than the rate of C–C bond formation, resulting in catalytic selectivity for C1 over C2+ products.
The direct reduction of CO2 involves one-electron transfer to the CO2*− intermediate. However, this step is highly unfavorable because it has a large formal redox potential of −1.97 V versus the standard hydrogen electrode (vs. SHE) in an aprotic solvent (N,N′-dimethylformamide, DMF) and −1.90 V in water (pH = 7). Thus, electrocatalytic strategies have been developed to bypass the formation of the CO2*− intermediate through proton-assisted multiple-electron transfer to reduce CO2 at lower energetic costs. Depending on the number of electrons and protons transferred, CO2 can be reduced to different products via the ECRR (Table 1), including C1 (CO, HCOOH, HCHO, CH4, and CH3OH), C2 (C2H4, CH3CHO, and C2H5OH, and C2H6), and C3 (C3H7OH). In contrast, the competing proton reduction via the hydrogen evolution reaction is a two-electron process.133,134 Depending on the binding energies between different metals and the key intermediates involved in the ECRR process, different catalysts show distinct properties and performances for the ECRR. In aqueous solution, *H, *OCHO, *COOH, and *CO are common intermediates in the ECRR process, and the binding energy difference between these intermediates and the surface of the metal material can induce a completely different reaction path.135,136
Although ECRR technology has promising prospects in solving the energy and environmental problems, it still faces several key challenges. Firstly, the large bond energy of CO with a stable linear structure will lead to a high overpotential for the activation of CO2 molecules. Secondly, in aqueous electrolytes, hydrogen evolution usually occurs easier than the ECRR due to its low reaction overpotential and simple kinetic process. Given that the ECRR process involves multiple electrons and multiple protons and the thermodynamic reduction potentials of different reaction pathways are very close, it will produce many types of products with poor selectivity. Thirdly, it is still difficult to realize the production of high-value-added C2+ reduction products via the ECRR in a single electrolysis device. Finally, the upstream supply of CO2 and the purification of downstream products still face challenges. Thus, to address these challenges, it is necessary to develop highly efficient and highly selective CO2 reduction electrocatalysts to promote ECRR technology for industrial applications.137–142
5.2 Electrocatalytic N2 reduction reaction
An N2 molecule is composed of two N atoms and each N atom has a total of 5 valence electrons in its outer 2s and 2p orbitals. In an N2 molecule, the 4 s–p atomic orbitals on each N atom combine to generate 8 new molecular orbitals (4 bonding orbitals with 2σ and 2π orbitals and 4 antibonding orbitals with 2σ* and 2π* orbitals), as shown in Fig. 6.160 The shared electrons on the π and 2σ orbitals form a high-strength NN triple bond. Thus, the N2 molecule is very stable and is usually used to provide an inert atmosphere. The high dissociation energy of the NN triple bond (941 kJ mol−1) with a bond length of 110 pm cannot be fully used to explain the inertness of the N2 molecule. This is because the dissociation energy of the HCCH (962 kJ mol−1) in C2H2 and the triple bond (1070 kJ mol−1) in CO are also much higher than that of the NN triple bond, but both are more active than N2.143,144 Here, the difference is thought to be that 410 kJ mol−1 is required to dissociate the first bond in NN, which is almost half of the total dissociation energy, but only 222 kJ mol−1 is needed for the cleavage of the first bond in HCCH, proving that the initiation of the triple bond dissociation in N2 is much more difficult. Additionally, the N2 molecule lacks permanent dipoles with a negative electron affinity of −1.90 eV, an ionization potential of 15.84 eV, and a proton affinity of 493.8 kJ mol−1, which is even lower than that of CH4 (543.5 kJ mol−1). These unique molecular characteristics increase the resistance of the N2 molecule to Lewis acids/bases. Moreover, N2 has a significant unfavorable energy gap (10.82 eV), making electron transport difficult.145,146 Therefore, N2 molecules are difficult to activate. Consequently, the direct protonation of N2 is not possible under ambient conditions, even under strong acid conditions.145,147
 Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structure of N2. (b) Schematic of N atomic orbitals and N2 molecular orbitals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
Considering that N2 is the main component in the Earth's atmosphere, N2 fixation via the conversion of atmospheric N2 to ammonia (NH3) has been regarded as a promising industrial process. NH3 not only plays a key role in producing fertilizers, organisms, drugs and chemicals to sustain the rising global population but also serves as a green energy carrier as an alternative transportation fuel.149–153 Biological N2 fixation occurs in nature when atmospheric N2 is converted to NH3 by nitrogenase enzyme in the presence of water and iron–molybdenum cofactor. This biological N2 fixation process is vital to sustaining life on Earth. However, the ultralow natural biological N2 fixation rate seriously restricts its industrial application. In industry, the dominant N2 fixation to produce NH3 is the Haber process, also known as the Haber–Bosch process. NH3 is a required precursor to produce fertilizers, explosives, and other important products. The industrial N2-to-NH3 conversion requires high pressures (>10 MPa) and high temperatures (>400 °C) over Ru- or Fe-based catalysts. On each pass, only about 15% of N2-to-NH3 conversion occurs, but any unreacted gases are recycled, and eventually, an overall conversion of 97% is achieved. Furthermore, high temperatures are needed to offset the sluggish kinetics of this reaction. However, the thermodynamics of this process favors NH3 decomposition to N2 and H2 at elevated temperatures, and hence high pressure is also required. Besides, additional energy is usually required to obtain the pure feed gases, pressurization, etc. Under these harsh conditions, the N2-to-NH3 conversion process requires a high energy input of roughly 485 kJ mol−1. Consequently, the industrial N2 fixation process alone consumes about 2% of the global annual energy supply and produces about 2.0 tons of CO2 for every ton of NH3 produced, accounting for about 1% of the annual greenhouse gas emissions globally.37,147,154–157 Therefore, the development of eco-friendly, highly efficient, and sustainable alternative approaches for N2 fixation is urgent.
Among the various artificial N2 fixation methods, driven by renewable electricity, the ENRR has emerged as a very attractive approach for the fixation and high-value conversion of N2 under mild conditions.158–164 Compared with the Haber–Bosch process, the electrochemical N2 fixation process has additional advantages, as follows: (1) potentially higher energy efficiency than that for the traditional Haber–Bosch process; (2) environmental compatibility through coupling with carbon-free renewable energy resources (solar, tidal, and wind energy); (3) elimination of fossil fuels as H2 sources, whereby the required protons are generated in situ from water oxidation; (4) flexible control of the reactions by adjusting external parameters (such as voltage and current), which is attractive for modular and small-scale operations; and (5) good scalability for on-demand, on-site NH3 production.
Similar to the ECRR, the ENRR process also occurs at the electrode–electrolyte three-phase interface and requires proton transfer from the electrolyte, electron transfer from the electrode, and optimized active sites on the electrode surface onto which the N2 molecules can be adsorbed, and subsequently activated. Accordingly, three major elementary steps should be considered when modeling the fundamental processes for the ENRR, as follows: (1) the diffusion and chemical adsorption of N2 molecules and protons on the cathode surface; (2) the cleavage and hydrogenation of NN triple bond; and (3) rearrangement and desorption of the NH3 product, or other reduction products (e.g., hydrazine and diazene) from the electrode surface and migration to the electrolyte.
Thermodynamically, N2 can be completely hydrogenated to form NH3, but this does not occur naturally. The formation of NH3 from the ENRR has a very high energy barrier due to the fact that the partially hydrogenated N2H2 and N2H4 have high enthalpies of formation, given that the energy of their possible intermediates (e.g., *N2H and *NH2, respectively) is expected to be high.165,166 In the electrosynthesis of NH3, the chemisorbed intermediate complexes provide an alternative reaction pathway, in which the energy barrier is significantly reduced, and thus it can even be overcome by thermal energy.165 However, given that the proton affinities of N2H2 and N2H4 are as high as 803 and 853.2 kJ mol−1, respectively, which are significantly higher than that of N2, this indicates that they are more protonated than N2. Thus, a large energy input is still required. Moreover, the energy gap (7.44 eV) of N2H4 is also lower than that of N2 (10.82 eV),144,162 which makes the NN bond unfavorable for electron transfer. Therefore, these features of the N2 molecule impede electron transfer and the reaction kinetics for the ENRR and NH3 production.166
Theoretically, when a sufficiently negative potential is applied to the electrodes, it should be possible to achieve the ENRR under ambient conditions.167 The equilibrium potentials (E0) of the ENRR process and the HER process are comparable in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes (Table 2), indicating that the HER process is the main competing reaction,168 while the HER only requires two electrons for each H2 produced in a single-half reaction. However, the ENRR is a multi-step process involving the transfer of 6 electrons and 6 protons as well as multiple intermediates,144,169 as summarized in Table 2. The higher reduction potential for the formation of the *N2H intermediate indicates that the initial H atom addition (N2 + H+ + e− ⇌ N2H) is very difficult. In the process of NN triple bond breaking, the second and third bonds are easier to break than the first bond, and thus the potentials of the four- and six-electron reduction processes (N2 + 4H+ + 4e− ⇌ N2H4 and N2 + 4H2O + 6e− ⇌ N2H4 + 4OH−) are lower than that of the one- and two-electron reduction processes (N2 + H+ + e− ⇌ N2H and N2 + 2H+ + 2e− ⇌ N2H2).147,170 These higher reduction potentials for the ENRR intermediates suggest that N2 hydrogenation is more difficult thermodynamically.
Table 2 The equilibrium potentials for the ENRR in aqueous solution




Reaction

E
0





N2 + 6H+ + 6e− ⇌ 2NH3 (g)
−0.148 V vs. RHE


2H+ + 2e− ⇌ H2 (g)
0 V vs. RHE


N2 + 6H2O + 6e− ⇌ 2NH3 + 6OH−
−0.736 V vs. SHE (pH 14)


2H2O + 2e− ⇌ H2 + 2OH−
0 V vs. RHE


N2 + H+ + e− ⇌ N2H (g)
−3.2 V vs. RHE


N2 + 2H+ + 2e− ⇌ N2H2 (g)
−1.1 V vs. RHE


N2 + 4H+ + 4e− ⇌ N2H4 (g)
−0.33 V vs. RHE


N2 + 4H2O + 6e− ⇌ N2H4 + 4OH−
−1.16 V vs. SHE (pH 14)


N2 + 5H+ + 4e− ⇌ N2H5+ (aq)
−0.23 V vs. RHE


N2 + e− ⇌ N2− (aq)
−3.37 V vs. RHE (pH 14)




A complex concerted proton–electron transfer (CPET) pathway or a sequential proton–electron transfer (SPET) pathway process is involved in the ENRR.144 At present, it is not clear whether the electron and proton transfer in the ENRR process is CPET or SPET. The results in the literature show that the CPET process is preferred on the surface of metal-based catalysts, while the SPET process also plays an important role. The SPET process has a relatively small activation energy to couple with the H atom when a proton and electron are transferred synchronously in the CPET process. In the SPET process, firstly H* tends to interact with the activated N2, and then the electrons are transferred to the positively charged protonated N2 intermediate.171 To date, the reported studies have shown that the use of the CPET or SPET process in the ENRR process depends on the pH value of the electrolyte.172 However, most of the current theoretical calculations ignore the influence of pH when simulating the reaction process. Also, the reaction mechanism is not fully understood thus far due to the multi-step proton–electron transfer and various intermediates involved in the ENRR process. Thus, more research is needed.
In general, the electrochemical conversion of N2 to NH3 is based on two basic reaction mechanisms, namely, the dissociative pathway and associative pathway, which differ in terms of the different reaction intermediates involved (Fig. 7).174 In the case of the dissociative pathway, the NN bond is broken first, and then hydrogenation occurs after the N2 molecules adsorb on the surface of the catalyst, which requires a large adsorption energy. According to the dissociative reaction mechanism, the adsorbed N2 molecules first undergo cleavage of the NN triple bond with a high energy input before the hydrogenation process due to the inertness of the NN bond, which explains why the Haber–Bosch process requires harsh conditions, given that it follows the dissociative reaction pathway.175 Regarding the associative pathway, the adsorbed N2 molecule binds with two H atoms before forming the first NH3 molecule. The breakage of the NN bonds occurs only when NH3 molecules are released during the ENRR process. Prior to this, the N2 molecules are first adsorbed on the surface of the heterogeneous catalyst, and then a multi-step 1H+/1e− PCET process occurs.
 Fig. 7  Mechanisms of the ENRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
According to the different hydrogenation sequences, the association pathway can be divided into the distal pathway and alternate pathway (Fig. 7). In the distal pathway, the successive hydrogenation of N atoms away from the catalyst surface releases an NH3 molecule, and then the remaining N atoms are re-hydrogenated to release a second NH3 molecule. In contrast, in the alternate pathway, two N atoms in the N2 molecule undergo a one-step 1H+/1e− PCET process simultaneously, and then the two N atoms are alternately hydrogenated, and finally, two NH3 molecules are gradually released.144,147,176
The great progress achieved in the ENRR field is sufficient to confirm the feasibility of the electrochemical reduction of N2 to produce NH3 in aqueous solution under ambient conditions. However, great challenges are still encountered with the ENRR in both the design and preparation of catalysts and the precise detection of the NH3 product. With the rapid development of advanced characterization techniques and the continuous improvement of theoretical tools as well as the development of highly efficient, selective, and stable ENRR catalysts, the industrialization of artificial green NH3 synthesis will be realized in the near future.
5.3 Electrocatalytic NO/NO2−/NO3− reduction reaction
The electrochemical reduction of NO/NO2−/NO3− is enriched by the fact that nitrogen is known to exist in at least ten different oxidation states ranging from −3 to +5. The electrochemical reduction of NO/NO2−/NO3− involves reactant diffusion, adsorption, charge transfer, product desorption, and separation. Given that both NO2− and NO3− are negatively charged, their transport can be augmented by an electric field, which has been employed in capacitive desalination devices.177,178 The adsorption of NO2− and NO3− on the active site is the first step for electrochemical reduction. The main processes that occur during the electrochemical reduction of NO/NO2−/NO3− are listed in Fig. 8. As shown, NO and NO2− are the key intermediates during the electrochemical reduction of NO3− to NH3 or N2. Therefore, next, we introduce the electrochemical reduction mechanism of NO3− and further transition from the key intermediates (NO and NO2−) to the introduction of the reduction mechanism of NO and NO2−. Overall, the electrochemical reduction mechanism of NO/NO2−/NO3− will be systematically introduced in this section.
 Fig. 8  Various mechanisms and main processes during the electrochemical reduction of nitrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
The formation of NO3− often proceeds via a concerted electrochemical–chemical–electrochemical mechanism. In detail, the initial electrochemical reduction yields NO32− with a short life span (about 20 μs) (NO3(ad)− + e− → NO3(ad)2−, E0 = −0.89 V vs. SHE).180,181 Then, NO32− is hydrolyzed via a homogenous chemical reaction to the nitrogen dioxide radical (NO2*) (NO3(ad)− + 2H+ → NO2(ad) + H2O).182 Consequently, NO2* is further reduced to NO2−, which adsorbs on the substrate via a second electron transfer reaction (NO2(ad) + e− → NO2(ad)−, E0 = 1.04 V vs. SHE).181 When the electrochemical reduction of NO3− to NO2− is performed at high acidity and concentration (1.0–4.0 M NO3−), an autocatalytic reaction may simultaneously occur in the presence of a catalytic concentration of HNO2 (>10−6 M).183 Different initiators in the catalytic cycle result in two possible autocatalytic mechanisms, as follows: (1) the Vetter mechanism184 and (2) the Schmid mechanism.185,186
In the Vetter mechanism, NO2* acts as the electroactive species in the autocatalytic cycle. The electroreduction of NO2 will generate NO2−, which protonates to HNO2 (NO2− + H+ → HNO2) under highly acidic conditions. The NO2* species will be propagated in the autocatalytic cycle (HNO2 + HNO3 → N2O4 + H2O; N2O4 → 2NO2), in which HNO2 reacts with HNO3, yielding N2O4, which quickly releases two electroactive NO2 species.
In the Schmid mechanism, the deprotonation of HNO2 (HNO2 + H+ → NO+ + H2O) in highly acidic electrolytes will produce NO+, which will be formed to NO by capturing an e− (NO+ + e−→ NO, E0 = 1.28 V vs. SHE).187 Subsequently, NO species will react with N2O4 or HNO3 to form HNO2 (N2O4 + 2NO + H2O → 4HNO2 or HNO3 + 2NO + H2O → 3HNO2).188,189
Both mechanisms occur only in highly acidic conditions below nitrate concentrations of 4.0 M. At nitric acid concentrations of >4.0 M, nitric acid naturally decomposes into NO and N2O4 (2HNO3 → 2NO + 3/2O2 + H2O; 2HNO3 → 2N2O4 + 1/2O2 + H2O).190 Both NO and N2O4 can lead to the formation of HNO2 (N2O4 + 2NO + H2O → 4HNO2 or HNO3 + 2NO + H2O → 3HNO2), which occurs without requiring electrochemical charge transfer reactions. Therefore, they cannot be considered a part of an indirect electrochemical reduction of NO3− in an autocatalytic cycle.
With the further reduction of NO2−, NO will be produced as a divergent center, leading to the formation of undesirable (e.g., NH4+ and N2O) and innocuous (i.e., N2) products. The direct charge injection to NO2− leads to the formation of dianion radical NO2− (NO2(ad)− + e− → NO2(ad)2−, E0 = −0.47 V vs. SHE).191,192 Similar to the unstable NO32−, the dianion radical NO22− will quickly hydrolyze and produce NO(ad) (NO2(ad)2− + H2O → NO(ad) + 2OH−).193,194 In weak acidic solution, the reduction of NOad will lead to the formation of nitroxyl (HNO) (NO(ad)− + H+ + e− → HNO(ad), E0 = −0.78 V vs. SHE). Katsounaros and Kyriacou identified that HNO can dimerize into hyponitrous acid (H2N2O2) (HNO + HNO → H2N2O2). Under ambient conditions, the chemical decomposition of the unstable H2N2O2 to N2O occurs (H2N2O2 → N2O + H2O).
In an alternative reaction path, NO can be electrocatalytically dimerized to produce N2O (NO(ad) + NO(aq) + H+ + e− → HN2O2(ad), E0 = 0 V vs. SHE; HN2O2(ad) + H+ + e− → N2O(ad) H2O, E0 = 1.59 V vs. SHE).195,196 Regarding N2O formation, early studies on Pt suggested that it may adopt the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism, in which two NO(ad) yield dimers such as ON–NO, NOH–NO, and HON–NOH.197 However, first-principles calculations show that it is energetically unfavorable for two NO(ad) to proceed in the Langmuir–Hinshelwood-like reaction.198 The Eley–Rideal-like mechanism has also been proposed, in which the solvated NO (NO(aq)) combines with NO(ad) to create HN2O2(ad).199 Further, HN2O2(ad) is reduced to N2O(ad) (HN2O2(ad) + H+ + e− → N2O(ad) H2O, E0 = 1.59 V vs. SHE). In this reaction system, the autocatalytic process will be inhibited due to the continuous consumption of NO. For N2 evolution, NO(ad) was reduced into N(ad) by coupling two protons (NO(ad) + 2H+ + 2e− → N(ad) + H2O). Subsequently, the two N(ad) will be combined to form an N2 molecule (N(ad) + N(ad) → 2H+ + N2).200 However, to date, this mechanism has not been confirmed experimentally.
For the electrochemical NO/NO2−/NO3− reduction, NH3 is the most desired product. The electrochemical–electrochemical theory is commonly recognized as the mechanism for the electrochemical conversion of NO to NH3, which involves several consecutive direct charge transfer reactions. Also, the rate-determining step of the reaction is the reduction of HNO to H2NO (HNO(ad) + H+ + e− → H2NO(ad), E0 = 0.52 V vs. SHE),200 which is followed by quick charge transfer, releasing hydroxylamine (NH2OH) (H2NO(ad) + H+ + e− → H2NOH(ad), E0 = 0.9 V vs. SHE).195 Subsequently, H2NOH is protonated depending on the pH (pKa = 5.93) (H2NOH + H+ → H3NOH+). Finally, NH3 is generated from the reduction of hydroxylamine coupling with two protons (H2NOH + 2H+ + 2e− → NH3 + H2O, E0 = 0.42 V vs. SHE).201 Equilibrium between NH3 and NH4+ will be achieved depending on the pH (pKa = 9.25) (NH3 + H+ → NH4+).202,203
6. Target products and mechanistic understanding of electrocatalytic C–N coupling reactions
The C–N coupling reaction, as an important strategy for efficiently constructing nitrogen-containing intermediates or miscellaneous compounds, has been widely used in the synthesis of drugs, natural products, ligands, and catalysts.204–212 Therefore, it is particularly important in the fields of organic synthesis, materials chemistry, and biochemistry. The traditional methods for C–N coupling reactions often require the use of metal reagents or oxidants. However, the addition of metal reagents in the total synthesis of drugs and natural products often requires multi-step post-treatments to remove the metal residues.213–216 In this case, although non-metallic methods have been explored to facilitate the formation of C–N bonds,217 oxidants or equivalent reducing agents are required, which will also produce corresponding by-products.
Organic electrosynthesis, as a new “green synthesis tool” for the preparation of organic compounds, has attracted increasing attention worldwide. Through organic electrosynthesis, many reactive active intermediates (e.g., carbon radicals, nitrogen radicals, and carbocations) can be efficiently generated, and the formed reactive active intermediates can be selectively applied for the construction of C–N bonds and C–C bonds.7,46,218 Considering the importance of the C–N coupling reaction in the total synthesis of drugs and natural products as well as its application in materials chemistry and biochemistry, it is necessary to develop new, green, and efficient synthesis methods. As a new strategy for the synthesis of organic compounds, organic electrosynthesis utilizes electrons and holes for reduction and oxidation on the cathode and anode, respectively, to reduce or eliminate the use of metal catalysts or equivalent oxidants for conventional organic synthesis, making the electrolysis system cleaner, greener, and cost-effective. In recent years, numerous achievements have been made in organic electrochemistry and various new electrosynthesis strategies have been developed.7,46 This has greatly enriched the types of electrochemical reactions and electrosynthesis methods have been widely recognized.
The study of electrosynthesis via C–N coupling reactions can be divided into two categories, as follows: (1) electrochemical oxidation to construct a C–N bond by directly oxidizing the reactant on the anode or by adding a medium and oxidizing the medium on the anode to generate an active intermediate, which subsequently interacts with the substrate (i.e., indirect oxidation). Consequently, the use of metal reagents or equivalent chemical oxidants can be reduced or eliminated. When the oxidation potential of the substrate is low, C–N coupling can be achieved by direct oxidation. When the oxidation potential of the substrate is high, it is necessary to add a medium to construct C–N coupling through indirect oxidation. (2) Electrochemical reduction to construct the C–N bond by directly reducing the substrate or by adding a medium and reducing the medium on the cathode to generate active intermediates, which subsequently react with the substrate. The construction of C–N coupling through electrochemical reduction can also reduce or eliminate the addition of reducing agents in traditional methods to reduce the wastage of reagents. However, compared to the widely reported anode oxidation strategies, the construction of C–N bonds through electrochemical reduction has been much less discussed.
The electrosynthesis of compounds containing C–N bond(s) from earth-abundant carbon (CO2) and nitrogen (N2, NO3−, NO2−, NO, etc.) sources can efficiently decrease the carbon footprint for a more sustainable economy. Combining the renewable-energy-driven CO2 and N2 activation/conversion with the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction is a promising alternative approach to the highly selective synthesis of C–N-coupled chemical products. As previously reported, electrochemical C–N coupling reactions can produce various compounds containing C–N bond(s), including urea, amide, amine, acetamide, ethylamine, formamide, glycine, and methylamine. Table 3 summarizes various electrocatalysts reported for the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reactions with significant industrial and economic benefits.31,43,219
Table 3 Summary of the previously reported state-of-the-art electrocatalysts for the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reactions based on CO2 as the carbon source and different nitrogenous small molecules as nitrogen sources




Catalyst
C source
N source
Medium
Product
Yield rate
FE (%)

E (V vs. RHE)
Quantification method
Reactor
Ref.




Note: “—” means that no values were reported for the corresponding parameters in the corresponding references. FE, faradaic efficiency and GDE, gas diffusion electrode.




Cu
CO
NH3
1.0 M KOH
Acetamide
—
38
−0.68

1H NMR
Flow cell

31



Cu
CO2
NH3
1.0 M KOH
Formamide
—
0.4
−0.58

1H NMR
GDE

220



ER-Cu
HCOO−
NO2−
0.5 M NaOH
Formamide
35.1 mmol h−1 g−1
29.7
−0.4
HPLC
H-Cell

221



Boron-doped diamond
CH3OH
NH3
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formamide
461.4 μmol h−1 cm−2
73.2
—

1H NMR
H-Cell

222



Te-doped Pd
CO2
NO2−
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
—
2
−1.1
Urease
H-Cell

35



ZnO-Vo
CO2
NO2−
0.2 M NaHCO3
Urea
16.56 μmol h−1
23.26
−0.79
HPLC
H-Cell

223



AuCu SANFs
CO2
NO2−
0.5 M KHCO3
Urea
3889.6 μg h−1 mg−1
24.7
−1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Urease
H-Cell

224



Cu–TiO2
CO2
NO2−
0.2 M KHCO3
Urea
20.8 μmol h−1
43.1
−0.4
Urease
H-Cell

34



Ni-PC
CO2
NO3−
0.2 M KHCO3
Urea
—
41
−1.1
Urease
GDE

225



TiO2/Nafion
CO2
NO3−
0.1 M KNO3
Urea
—
0
−0.5
Urease
H-Cell

226



In(OH)3-S
CO2
NO3−
0.1 M KNO3
Urea
533.1 μg h−1 mg−1
53.4
−0.6
Diacetylmonoxime
H-Cell

36



XC72R-AuPd
CO2
NO3−
0.075 M KHCO3
Urea
204.3 μg h−1 mg−1
15.6
−0.5
Diacetylmonoxime
H-Cell

227



BFeNi-DASC
CO2
NO3−
0.075 M KHCO3
Urea
20.2 mmol h−1 g−1
17.8
−1.5
Urease
H-Cell

228



VO-InOOH
CO2
NO3−
Deionized water
Urea
592.5 μg h−1 mg−1
51
−0.5
UV-vis
H-Cell

229



F-CNT
CO2
NO3−
Deionized water
Urea
6.36 mmol h−1 g−1
18.0
−0.65
UV-vis
H-Cell

230



Cu SACs
CO2
NO3−
0.1 M K2SO4
Urea
1800 μg h−1 mg−1
28
−0.9
UV-vis
H-Cell

231



Oxide-derived Cu
CO2
NO3−
1.0 M KHCO3
Ethylamine
—
0.3
−1.0
Diacetylmonoxime
H-Cell

232



Vo-CeO2-750
CO2
NO3−
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
943.6 mg h−1 g−1
—
−1.6
Urease
H-Cell

233



Cu@Zn
CO2
NO3−
0.2 M KHCO3
Urea
7.29 μmol cm−2 h−1
9.28
−1.75 V vs. SCE
HPLC
H-Cell

234



CoPC-NH2/CNT
CO2
NO3−
0.1 M KHCO3
Methylamine
—
13
−0.92

1H NMR
H-Cell

235



Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400
CO2
N2
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
3.36 mmol g−1 h−1
8.92
−0.4
Diacetylmonoxime + 1H NMR
H-Cell + flow cell

32



Co–PMDA-2-mbIM
CO2
N2
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
14.5 μmol g−1 h−1
49
−0.5
Diacetylmonoxime
H-Cell

236



Bi/BiVO4
CO2
N2
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
5.91 mmol g−1 h−1
12.55
0.4
Diacetylmonoxime + 1H NMR
H-Cell

237



BiFeO3/BiVO4
CO2
N2
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
4.94 mmol g−1 h−1
17.18
−0.4
Diacetylmonoxime + 1H NMR
H-Cell

238



Ni3(BO3)2
CO2
N2
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
9.7 mmol g−1 h−1
20.36
−0.5
Diacetylmonoxime
H-Cell

239



InOOH
CO2
N2
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
6.85 mmol g−1 h−1
21.97
−0.4
Diacetylmonoxime
H-Cell

219



CuPc NTs
CO2
N2
0.1 M KHCO3
Urea
2.39 mmol g−1 h−1
12.99
−0.6
Diacetylmonoxime
H-Cell

240



Zn foil
CO2
NO
0.2 M KHCO3
Urea
15.13 mmol g−1 h−1
11.26
−0.92
HPLC
H-Cell + flow cell

237



Cu-Hg
Oxalic acid
NO
15 wt% H2SO4
Glycine
—
3
−1.2

1H NMR
H-Cell

241





Electrocatalytic C–N coupling reactions can directly convert the abundant CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules into various targeted high-value-added organonitrogen compounds, as summarized in Table 1. Although the electrosynthesis C–N coupling reactions based on CO2/N2 and their derives present a unique opportunity for the production of high-value-added organonitrogen, it is also highly challenging. Currently, there is still a lack of mechanistic understanding of electrocatalytic C–N coupling reactions. A limiting factor is the complexity of the electrocatalytic C–N coupling, in which multiple reactions occur simultaneously.30 For example, recent research revealed that the formation of urea through electrocatalytic C–N coupling has many different reaction pathways, as summarized in Fig. 9. Moreover, at a high overpotential, C–N coupling reaction takes a different mechanism competing with the ECRR, ENRR, and HER. This leads to a narrow potential window for the formation of C–N products.242 Therefore, further research is needed to gain a mechanistic understanding of the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction.
 Fig. 9  Different proposed mechanisms of urea electrosynthesis from CO2 and N2 and their derives: (a and b) *CO + *N2 coupling mechanisms with different hydrogenation routes and RDS.32,237 (c) *CO + *NH2 coupling mechanism.243–245 (d) Revised *CO + *NH2 coupling mechanism.225 (e) *COOH + *NH2 coupling mechanism223 and (f) *CO2 + *NO2 coupling mechanism.36 Purple braces indicate a C–N coupling step and black arrows indicate a reduction step. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
In general, many compounds containing C–N bonds are produced via two key intermediates (*CO + *NHy and *CHx + *NHy), which are introduced to form different chemical bonds and products, including C(O)–N and CN bonds.28 For example, the simplest amide, urea, can be formed via *CO and *NHy intermediates. Amines and nitriles are important C–N coupling products featuring the CN bond. In the early exploration of the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction, Shibata et al. observed that only the electrocatalysts that can promote the reduction of CO2 to CO and NO2− to NH3 can generate urea, but the control experiment did not produce urea when CO2 was replaced with CO or NO2− with NH3.246,247 These results led to the hypothesis that urea is directly formed from *NH2 and *CO intermediates via the reduction of NO2− and CO2, respectively.243,244,247 Later, this reaction mechanism was further revised by Shibata et al. given the observation that the FEurea has a better linear relationship with (FECO*FENH4+)1/2 than with (FECO*FENH4+*FENH4+)1/3, which indicates the formation of *(NH2)CO from *CO and *NH2 as the key C–N coupling step.245 This was also observed by Shao et al.35 and Zhang et al. using different electrocatalysts.223
Although the aforementioned experimental findings provided the first mechanistic framework for a fundamental understanding of the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction, more discussions on the following points are desirable: (1) compared with the +4 valent C in CO2 and urea molecule, the C atom in the *CO intermediate is in a reduced state, which indicates that CO2 is first reduced, and subsequently oxidized during the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction. (2) Under equilibrium conditions, CO and the *CO intermediate should coexist and be interconvertible. Using ECRR or by adding CO directly to the electrolyte, the *CO intermediate can be generated on the surface of the electrocatalyst,248,249 which implies that similar *CO and *NH2 intermediates exist in the co-reduction of CO + NO2−. The fact that no urea was formed under this control condition, as verified by various studies,35,223,243,246 suggests that *CO may not be a C–N coupling species. (3) The nucleophilic attack of *NH2 may be responsible for the reaction between *NH2 and *CO. In theory, it is more advantageous for CO2 to couple with a nucleophilic N intermediate due to the greater electrophilic character of CO2 than CO. Furthermore, due to the charge delocalization and electron donation from the –NH2 group, the hypothetical intermediate product of *CONH2 is less likely to undergo nucleophilic attack by another *NH2.
Given the importance and complexity of the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction, we will discuss its formation mechanism in depth in conjunction with each target product. We focus on the design of the electrocatalyst and the reaction intermediates for the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction. In this section, various high-value-added products from the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction are also discussed with respect to the type of electrocatalyst used. For each type of electrocatalyst, the design strategy, performance, structure–activity relationship, product selectivity, and durability will be discussed through specific examples.
6.1. Urea
Among the numerous products from the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction, urea (CO(NH2)2), as one of the most efficient nitrogen fertilizers, is regarded as one of the most important products and is of great significance in the chemical industry.250 Industrially, urea is mainly synthesized through two consecutive reaction steps, as follows: (1) reaction of NH3 and CO2 to form ammonium carbamate (NH3 + CO2 → NH2COONH4) and (2) decomposition of ammonium carbonate to form urea and water (NH2COONH4 → H2O + CO(NH2)2), operating under harsh reaction conditions (180–210 °C; 150–250 bar), which results in intensive energy consumption.251–253 After reacting, the produced urea is evaporated and processed by prilling or granulating to obtain a solid end product (Fig. 10). In this process, NH3 is manufactured by the energy-intensive Haber–Bosch method (N2 + H2 → NH3), which needs high energy input with high reaction temperatures (300–550 °C) and pressures (200–350 bar) and large H2 input, requiring complex equipment and multi-step cycles to improve the conversion efficiency, and generating hundreds of millions of tons of CO2.4,176,254–257
 Fig. 10  Industrial process for the manufacture of urea. Reproduced with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2019 and 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Given the increasing global energy demand, it is highly desirable to develop green and efficient methods for the synthesis of urea. The ENRR has multiple advantages, including mild reaction conditions, utilization of clean energy, and obtaining protons from water. However, the separation and purification to obtain high-purity gaseous NH3 for the subsequent synthesis of urea are too complicated to be practical for urea production via the sequential synthesis of NH3 and CO2. Compared with the sequential industrial processes, the electrochemical synthesis of urea via N2 + CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CO(NH2)2 + H2O provides an appealing alternative under mild conditions.32 Recently, technology to electrochemically convert N2 and CO2 to urea has received extensive attention.32,237
For example, Wang and co-workers32 demonstrated an approach for the electrochemical coupling of CO2 and N2 in water to generate urea using an electrocatalyst consisting of PdCu alloy nanoparticles with an average particle size of 2–4 nm on oxygen vacancy-rich TiO2 nanosheets (Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400) (Fig. 11a and b). Urea was quantitatively analyzed via the diacetyl monoxime method,258 while the NH3 and N2H4 by-products were quantified by the indophenol blue method259 and Watt and Chrisp method,260 respectively. The experimental results showed that the introduction of oxygen vacancies promoted the catalytic activation of N2 and CO2. In a flow cell, the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst exhibited highly efficient urea electrosynthesis with a yield rate of 3.36 mmol g−1 h−1 and FE of 8.92% at an applied potential of −0.4 V vs. RHE in N2- and CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 aqueous solution (Fig. 11c and d).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram for synthesis of urea over the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst. (b) TEM image of Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400; the inset shows the distribution of the PdCu nanoparticles. (c) High-resolution TEM image of the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst. (d) FEs and total current densities for all products with CO2 and N2 as feeding gases. (e) Corresponding urea yield rate. Infrared signal in the range of (f) 2750–3600 cm−1 and (g) 1100–800 cm−1 under various potentials over the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst during the electrocoupling of N2 and CO2. (h) Free energy diagram of urea production. (i) Reaction pathway for the formation of *NCON*. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
The chemisorption of nitrogen gas is the first step in the electrocatalytic production of urea. In this study, the authors found that the nanocomposites showed an enhanced gas molecule adsorption capacity after hybridizing the PdCu alloy nanoparticles with oxygen vacancy-rich TiO2 nanosheets, and the adsorption capacity for CO2 molecules was also enhanced. More importantly, the shift in the corresponding peaks in the competitive adsorption reaction of CO2 and N2 was almost negligible, leading to high efficiency for urea electrosynthesis.
The intermediate products from the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst in the co-reduction of CO2 and N2 to urea via the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction were determined by the advanced isotope-labeling operando synchrotron-radiation Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (SR-FTIR) technology (Fig. 11f and g).261 As can be seen, N2 began to be activated to generate *NH and *NH2 intermediates at −0.2 V vs. RHE. When the applied potential reached −0.25 V vs. RHE, CO2 began to be activated to generate *CO and *C–O. With a further increase in the potential to −0.3 V vs. RHE, the C–N infrared vibration peak appeared, indicating that the C–N coupling reaction occurred to produce the target product of urea.
Using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, a detailed reaction mechanism for the formation of urea was comprehensively studied with the most stable geometric structures of the reactants, intermediates, and products (Fig. 11h and i). The analysis results revealed that it is thermodynamically and kinetically feasible for the generation of the *NCON* intermediate via the activation of the N2 molecule, as the key step for effective urea production. The presence of the *N2 intermediate can facilitate CO2 reduction, and the reduced CO can further react with *N2 to form urea with ultrahigh activity and selectivity. This coupling reaction occurs through C–N bond formation via the thermodynamically spontaneous reaction between *NN* and CO.
Although the aforementioned noble metal Pd-based catalysts can realize the electrosynthesis of urea, their electrocatalytic activity still needs to be improved. Besides, the high cost and scarcity of noble metals limit their large-scale applications. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop earth-abundant alternatives to further improve the urea electrosynthesis performance. In this regard, Zhang and co-workers proposed a Mott–Schottky heterostructure to improve the electrochemical performance of urea electrosynthesis.237 As a proof-of-concept catalyst, a non-noble metal Bi–BiVO4 was prepared via the NaBH4 reduction strategy (Fig. 12a). It was demonstrated that a unique Mott–Schottky heterostructure can be formed by combining metallic Bi and semiconducting BiVO4 (Fig. 12b) to allow spontaneous electron transfer from BiVO4 to metallic Bi to form a unique space-charge region (Fig. 12b), ensuring the effective electrosynthesis of urea at different active sites.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image and corresponding element mapping of the Bi–BiVO4 catalyst. (b) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer process in Bi–BiVO4. (c) FEs of different products with N2 and CO2 as the feeding gas at various potentials for Bi–BiVO4. (d) Electron density isosurface of CO2 and N2, where the color bar represents the electrostatic potential scale. (e) Electrolytic urea production via the alternating mechanism and the inset is a simplified schematic of N2 bonding to the V center. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (f) SEM image of the InOOH-100 catalyst and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping. (g) Schematic illustration of the formation of FLP sites affected by the calcination temperature. (h) LSV curves of InOOH-100 catalysts in various gas-saturated electrolytes. (i) FEs of the different products with N2 and CO2 as the feeding gas over InOOH-100. (j) Electrostatic potential surface of InOOH (001). (k) Schematic illustration of N2 and CO2 adsorbed on various sites. (l and m) Charge density difference of (l) N2 and (m) CO2 adsorbed on the site of FLPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
In N2- and CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte, the designed Bi–BiVO4 catalyst delivered a remarkable urea production rate of 5.91 mmol h−1 g−1 with a urea FE of 12.55% at −0.4 V vs. RHE (Fig. 12c).237 First-principles calculations were carried out to reveal the structure–function relationship. As shown in Fig. 12d, due to the electronic interaction, the electron-rich N atom in N2 and electron-deficient C atom in CO2 will adsorb on the electrophilic and nucleophilic regions, respectively, in the Bi–BiVO4 catalyst. In the VO4 tetrahedron unit, the empty eg orbitals of the V sites first accepted electrons from the occupied s orbitals of N2 molecules, and then the filled eg orbitals of the V sites donate electrons to the N2 empty * orbitals, effectively activating the N2 molecules on the surface of the Bi–BiVO4 catalyst (Fig. 12d and e). Moreover, N2 and CO2 molecules were targeted for adsorption and activation on the nearby electrophilic and nucleophilic areas by the space-charge region at the heterointerface, which was caused by the self-driven charge transfer.262 Besides, the proposed space-charge zone also improved the entire exposure of active sites and the thermodynamically viable electrochemical C–N coupling to form the required *NCON* intermediate, which enhanced the electrocatalytic kinetics. (Fig. 12e).
Recently, Zhang and co-workers also fabricated a BiFeO3/BiVO4-based heterojunction and demonstrated a good electrocatalytic urea synthesis performance with a yield rate of 4.94 mmol h−1 g−1 and urea FE of 17.18% at −0.4 V vs. RHE.238 Thus, the targeted adsorption and activation of N2 and CO2 molecules on the local electrophilic and nucleophilic regions in the BiFeO3/BiVO4 catalyst were promoted, and this contributed to the observed good performance. The unique ability of the heterojunction structure to accelerate the local charge redistribution was primarily responsible for this.237,262 This was motivated by the frustrated Lewis pairs (FLPs) composed of a Lewis acid (LA) and Lewis base (LB) for chemisorbing and reacting with various gas molecules.263–265
Zhang and co-workers219 further developed FLPs in InOOH-100 samples (Fig. 12f). In this catalyst, the unsaturated In sites and the neighboring surface–OH groups served as the LA and LB sites, respectively, which could be sterically prevented from bond formation and readily generate the artificial FLPs (Fig. 12g). The electrochemical tests showed that the current density in a mixed CO2 + N2-saturated electrolyte was significantly enhanced compared to the same electrolyte saturated with CO2 or N2 alone, suggesting the formation of urea (Fig. 12h). The products in the electrolyte after the chronoamperometry measurements were detected by ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 12i, the InOOH-100 catalyst delivered an excellent electrosynthesis performance for the production of urea. At the applied potential of −0.4 V vs. RHE, the maximum yield rate of 6.85 mmol h−1 g−1 and FE of 20.97% for the formation of urea were obtained. The electrostatic potential surface and Bader charge analysis showed that the Lewis acidic In sites (+0.93e) and Lewis basic –OH group (−1.07e) in the FLPs exhibited a positive and negative electrostatic potential, respectively (Fig. 12j). Consequently, it was possible to readily selectively chemisorb the electron-rich N atom in N2 and the electron-deficient C atom in CO2 on the interfacial LB and LA sites, respectively. By taking advantage of the cooperative activation mechanism between sterically hindered hydroxyls and unsaturated In sites (Fig. 12k), the InOOH-100 catalyst with enhanced artificial FLPs sites could readily adsorb N2 and CO2 molecules. Subsequently, the orbital-matched *NN* and *CO intermediates preferred to undergo the desired electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction, benefiting from the synergetic activation effect of the FLPs via the unique donation–acceptance process (Fig. 12l and m). This research opens up a new way to investigate FLP-coupled electrocatalysts for CO2 and N2 fixation, in addition to highlighting the crucial role of artificial FLPs in the ambient electrosynthesis of urea.
In another study, Mukherjee et al. reported that electrocatalysts based on copper phthalocyanine nanotubes (CuPc NTs) with multiple active sites (such as metal center, pyridinic-N1, pyrrolic-N2, and pyrrolic-N3) exhibited a high urea yield of 143.47 μg h−1 gcat.−1 with a urea FE of 12.99% at −0.6 V vs. RHE via co-reduction of N2 and CO2.240 Theoretical calculations suggested that the pyridinic-N1 and center Cu sites were responsible for the formation of C–N bonds during the electrosynthesis of urea through the reduction of N2 to NN* and CO2 to *CO, respectively.
Currently, N2 is mainly adopted as the N source for electrochemical C–N coupling reactions and great progress has been achieved. However, its inherent chemical inertia seriously limits its practical application. As described in the Introduction, the direct electrocatalytic C–N coupling via CO2 with NO, NO2−, NO3−, or NH3 into high-value organonitrogen compounds is a promising strategy from the standpoint of “turn waste into treasure” by driving it with renewable energy.
In 2017, Yoneyama et al. developed a TiO2–Nafion nanocomposite for the electrochemical co-conversion of CO2 and NO3− to urea, probably formed by CO* and NH2* intermediates generated in situ, respectively.226 Recently, Yan and co-workers36 realized highly selective urea production by electrochemically coupling NO3− with CO2 on In(OH)3 with well-defined single {100} facets (In(OH)3-S) (Fig. 13a). The In(OH)3-S catalyst exhibited a cube-like nanocrystal morphology with particle sizes of 100–200 nm (inset in Fig. 13b), which was synthesized via a facile solvothermal method.266 For the electrosynthesis of urea, 0.1 M KNO3 saturated with CO2 was used as the electrolyte. As shown in the LSV curves (Fig. 13b), CO2 significantly suppressed the HER to promote the NO3− reduction reaction (Fig. 13b). The amount of urea produced was quantitatively determined by the diacetyl monoxime method.258 As expected, a urea yield rate of 533.1 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at −0.6 V vs. RHE with a urea FE of 53.4% was achieved for the In(OH)3-S catalyst (Fig. 13c). The catalytic chemistry depends strongly on the type of the semiconductor catalyst used.267 As shown in Fig. 13d, the CO2-induced hole accumulation can shift the In(OH)3-S semiconductor from n-type to p-type to repel protons from approaching In(OH)3-S, hence impeding the occurrence of the HER. The capture of surface electrons will be difficult for bicarbonate due to its electronegative nature, leading to lower FEs for urea production in the electrolyte without feeding CO2 gas. Moreover, theoretical calculations revealed that the {100} facets in In(OH)3-S can favor direct C–N coupling via the reaction between the *NO2 and *CO2 intermediates. The early direct coupling of the *NO2 and *CO2 intermediates favors the {100} facets over the {110} facets (Fig. 13e), which results in the facet-dependent activity of In(OH)3. The higher selectivity of the direct coupling of *NO2 and *CO2 was possible due to the reduced energy barrier, which is in contrast with the protonation of each gas individually (Fig. 13e).
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of urea synthesis process on the surface of In(OH)3-S. (b) LSV curves in 0.1 M KNO3 electrolyte with Ar or CO2 feeding gas and SEM image of In(OH)3-S. (c) Urea yields at different potentials over In(OH)3-S in 0.1 M KNO3 electrolyte with CO2 feeding gas. (d) Schematic illustration of the n–p transformation process. (e) Atomic configurations for each step of urea production on In(OH)3-S. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (f) Illustration of the preparation of VO-InOOH and urea electrosynthesis processes. (g) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping. (h) Urea yields over VO-InOOH at various applied potentials, and the urea comparison between VO-InOOH and InOOH at −0.5 V vs. RHE. (i) Free-energy diagrams for urea production at 0 V versus RHE. (j) Bader charge analysis on various catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, Yan et al. (Fig. 13f) developed a highly-efficient catalyst for the electrosynthesis of urea using CO2 and NO3− as sources using defect-engineered InOOH with oxygen vacancies (VO-InOOH).229 The prepared VO-InOOH had a rod-like nanostructure with a length of ∼100 nm and width of ∼20 nm (Fig. 13g). The obtained VO-InOOH exhibited a urea yield rate of up to 592.5 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 with a urea FE of 51.0% (Fig. 13h), surpassing that of the pristine InOOH catalyst. Combining operando synchrotron radiation-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and theoretical calculations, it was revealed that the potential-determining step for the electrosynthesis of urea was *CO2NH2 protonation (Fig. 13i). The oxygen vacancy reconfigured the surface electronic structure of the In active sites, and thus high catalytic activity by lowering the electro-positivity of In1 and energy barrier for the conversion of *CO2NH2 into *COOHNH2 (Fig. 13j).268,269
Recently, Wang and co-workers also reported the electrosynthesis of urea by coupling CO2 with NO3.228,233 For instance, they developed oxygen vacancy-enriched CeO2 nanorods with an average length of 100 nm (Vo-CeO2-750) for electrosynthesis of urea under ambient conditions (Fig. 14a).233 As shown in Fig. 14b, the electrochemical tests demonstrated that the production of urea over the resultant catalyst was directly related to the oxygen vacancy concentration with a maximum yield rate of 943.6 mg h−1 g−1 at −1.6 V vs. RHE, which was much higher than that for the oxygen-vacancy-deficient CeO2. Combined in situ sum frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy and DFT calculations revealed that the oxygen vacancy in the CeO2 nanorods could form coordination unsaturated sites to enhance the adsorption of the reaction species and stabilize the intermediate species (i.e., *OCNO), which can serve as the descriptor to describe the oxygen vacancy-mediated selective coupling mechanism (Fig. 14e and d). Specifically, the energy barriers for four C–N coupling modes (*ON-CO, *NH2-CO, *NH-CO, and *N-CO) on the surface of CeO2 rich with oxygen vacancies and deficient in oxygen vacancies were first calculated. Compared with the protonation energy barriers of the four N-containing intermediates (*NO, *NH2, *NH, and *N), it was proposed that the C–N coupling reaction was more likely to occur on the surface of the oxygen vacancy-rich CeO2 through the formation of the *ONCO intermediate. However, the selectivity for the C–N coupling or protonation reaction was relatively poor on both surfaces of CeO2 and CeO2 deficient in oxygen vacancies. The use of the *OCNO intermediate species as a descriptor to identify the selective coupling mechanism mediated by oxygen vacancies was supported by in situ SFG spectroscopy, which confirmed that the oxygen vacancies promoted the *NO intermediate species to form the key intermediate *OCNO species for the efficient electrosynthesis of urea (Fig. 14e and d).
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of the Vo-CeO2-500 catalyst, and the inset is the corresponding selected area electron diffraction pattern. (b) Urea yield rates of the catalysts at various applied potentials. Comparison of the coupling energy barriers of the *NO, *N, *NH, and *NH2 intermediates with *CO and protonation on (c) Vo-enriched CeO2 and (d) Vo-deficient CeO2 catalysts. (e) Free energy diagram of electrosynthesis of urea on the Vo-enriched CeO2 catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (f) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of the B-FeNi-DASC catalyst. (g) Acquired HAADF-STEM image intensity profile accompanied by atomic-resolution EELS mapping of the Fe–Ni pair. (h) LSV curves over the BFeNi-DASC catalyst, and the inset is the Illustrated correlation between CO2RR activity, NO3RR activity, and urea production over various site configurations. (i) 3D operando SR-FTIR spectra. Reaction pathway of (j) first and (k) second C–N coupling reaction for the formation of the *NHCO and *NHCONO intermediates, respectively. The structures of the initial, transition and final states together with the formation of *NHCO and *NHCONO as insets, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. 
Moreover, Wang et al. also reported the preparation of a diatomic electrocatalyst with bonded Fe–Ni pairs (B-FeNi-DASC), which could significantly improve the performance of urea electrosynthesis via coordinated adsorption and activation of multiple reactants (Fig. 14f and g).228 By contrast, the selective adsorption and activation of CO2 or NO3− unilaterally were not constrained in the diatomic Fe–Ni (I-FeNi-DASC) electrocatalyst. Numerous C- and N-species were activated by the isolated Fe–N4 and Ni–N4 sites in I-FeNi-DASC, which also boosted the probability of connecting these intermediates to produce the vital C–N bonds. Moreover, the bridge sites of the Fe–Ni pairs (FeNi–N6) in B-FeNi-DASC were most effective for urea formation due to the intrinsically thermodynamic and kinetic favorable C–N coupling process, leading to a high urea yield rate of 20.2 mmol h−1 g−1 and maximum urea FE of 17.8% (Fig. 14h). Based on operando synchrotron-radiation Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (SR-FTIR) measurements (Fig. 14i) and first-principles calculations (Fig. 14j and k), it was concluded that the electrochemical production of urea on the B-FeNi-DASC catalyst mainly originated from the coupling of *NH with *CO intermediates to form the first C–N bond and the subsequent C–N coupling between the newly-formed *NHCO and *NO intermediates to form the second C–N bond, which was thermodynamic spontaneous and highly kinetically feasible on the bonded Fe–Ni pair sites with low energy barriers of 0.21 and 0.09 eV, respectively. These results present new insights into identifying and tailoring activation sites for the enhanced selective C–N coupling process via intermediate stabilization and mechanistic understanding of the electrocatalytic urea synthesis. This greatly promotes the green synthesis of urea via the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction under ambient conditions.
The electrosynthesis of urea via the co-reduction of CO2 and NO2− was first reported by Shibata et al. in 1995.243 By applying a gas-diffusion electrode, urea was generated over a Cu-based catalyst with an FE of 37% at an applied potential of −0.75 V vs. SHE in 0.02 M KNO2 aqueous solution. Recently, Huang and co-workers35 enriched the electrochemical synthesis strategy of urea by co-reducing CO2 and NO2− (Fig. 15a) on a Te-doped Pd nanocrystal (Te–Pd NCs) catalyst with an average diameter of 20 nm (Fig. 15b). The nanocrystal exhibited a high urea FE of about 12.2% for the formation of urea in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 + 0.01 M KNO2 solution as the electrolyte in an H-cell (Fig. 15c), which was much higher than that for the pristine Pd nanocrystal. The mechanism studies showed that the doping of the Te atom not only optimizes CO2/CO adsorption but also promotes NH3 production for the formation of urea. It has been demonstrated that CO2 and NO2− can be first reduced into *CO and *NH2 intermediates, respectively, and then further converted into urea (Fig. 15d), as confirmed by the calculated energy barriers for *CONH2 formation (Te–Pd(111): −0.49 eV and Pd: 0.61 eV) (Fig. 15e) and also supported by another study.270
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic depicting the formation of urea from the simultaneous electroreduction of CO2 and NO2−. (b) HAADF-STEM image, corresponding diameter histogram, and EDX elemental mappings of the Te–Pd NCs. (c) FE versus the applied potential for the electrosynthesis of urea over the Te–Pd NC catalyst. (d) Scheme of the synthesis of urea from CO2 and NO2− on Te–Pd NCs. (e) Free-energy diagram and activation barriers for the formation of *CONH2 on the surface of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZnO-V porous nanosheets. (g) SEM image of ZnO-V. (h) EPR of ZnO and ZnO-V porous nanosheets. (i) Urea yield rates under various potentials over ZnO-V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
The synergistic effect of Te and Pd species in the Te–Pd NCs significantly promoted the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to *CO and NO2− to *NH2 for the subsequent formation of urea via a C–N coupling reaction. More importantly, on the Te–Pd NC catalyst, the competitive reaction (i.e., the formation of N2 through the electroreduction of NO2− over the Pd NCs) was effectively inhibited. Therefore, the FE and conversion efficiency of the N atom to urea on the Te–Pd NCs were much higher than that on the pure Pd NCs.
Furthermore, Zhang's group223 also prepared a self-supported ZnO porous nanosheet with abundant oxygen vacancies (ZnO-V) on carbon cloth for the electrosynthesis of urea by co-reducing CO2 and NO2− (Fig. 15f–h). In 0.2 M NaHCO3 + 0.1 M NaNO2 electrolyte, the formation of urea over the ZnO-V catalyst was detected at −0.49 V vs. RHE. Simultaneously, the FE of urea over the ZnO-V catalyst increased with a decrease in the potential from −0.49 to −0.79 V vs. RHE and reached the maximum of 23.26% (Fig. 15i), which was much higher than the maximum of the pristine ZnO (8.10%). By decreasing the applied potential, the FE of urea decreased mainly due to the enhanced formation of by-products (e.g., H2, CO, and NO). The maximum production rate of urea for ZnO-V reached 16.56 mmol h−1 at the applied potential of −0.79 V (Fig. 15i), which is remarkably higher than that of the pristine ZnO (7.72 mmol h−1). A possible coupling pathway for the NH2* and COOH* intermediates for the formation of urea was revealed by the analysis of the results of in situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy and online differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS).
For the electrosynthesis of urea using CO2 and NO2− as carbon and nitrogen sources, respectively, Wang's group presented an ultrathin AuCu nanowire with a Boerdijk–Coxeter structure of (111)-dominant facets (Fig. 16a–c).224 The bimetallic AuCu alloy composition, coupled with the rich structural defects, provided a large number of highly catalytically active sites (Fig. 16a). Consequently, the resultant electrocatalyst displayed an excellent urea synthesis performance in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 + 0.01 M KNO2 solution with a yield rate as high as 3889.6 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 and FE of 24.7% at −1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl (Fig. 16b and c). The excellent urea synthesis activity and stability observed for the AuCu alloy nanowires are attributed to the unique combination of the fibrous 1D nanowire structure and the AuCu bimetallic composition.
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of the AuCu SANF catalyst. (b) LSV curves of the AuCu SANF catalyst in 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte containing 0.01 M KNO2 saturated with or without CO2. (c) Urea yield rate over the AuCu SANF catalyst at various potentials, and the inset is the corresponding FEs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. TEM image of (d) TiO2 and (e) Cu–TiO2. (f) LSV curves of the catalysts in 0.2 M KHCO3 + 0.02 M KNO2 aqueous solution saturated with CO2 or Ar. (g) FEs of the products over the Cu–TiO2 catalyst. (h) Possible mechanisms for the synthesis of urea and other by-products for the co-reduction of CO2 and NO2− over the Cu–TiO2 catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition, Ranjendran et al. reported the use of Fe-doped TiO2 electrodes for the electrocatalytic synthesis of urea in CO2-saturated NaHCO3 and KNO2 solutions but did not quantify the urea yield.271 Zheng et al. demonstrated that Cu–TiO2 with high oxygen vacancies could produce urea at an exceptional rate of 20.8 μmol h−1 and FE of 43.1% at the applied potential of −0.4 V vs. RHE for Cu–TiO2 rich with oxygen vacancies (Fig. 16d–h), which are substantially superior to the pristine TiO2.34 First-principles calculations showed that the low-valence Cu dopants induced rich oxygen vacancies due to their distinct d-electron properties, which are beneficial for exposing the bi-Ti3+ active sites. The efficient electrocatalytic activity resulted from the synergistic effect of the bi-Ti3+ pairs and poorly coordinated Cu ions. Urea was produced from CO2 and NO2 by the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction between the CO* species produced by the ECRR on the undercoordinated Cu sites and the NH2* precursor produced by the electrochemical NO2− reduction reaction on the bi-Ti3+ active sites (Fig. 16h).
Using NO as a nitrogen source, Zhang's group prepared Zn nanobelts (Zn NBs) via the in situ electrochemical reduction of the ZnO nanosheet precursor for the electroreduction of NO.272 Over the Zn NBs catalyst, the yield rate and FE of urea reached up to 15.13 mmol g−1 h−1 and 11.26%, respectively, at a current density of 40 mA cm−2 in a flow cell electrolyzer. Combined in situ experiments and theoretical calculations revealed that urea was formed through a ten-step cascade reaction process, in which the C–N bonds were formed through the step-by-step coupling of *CO with *NH2 intermediates.
Compared with the huge energy consumption industrial processes, urea electrosynthesis driven by renewable electricity provides an appealing route due to its mild conditions. As summarized in this section, various nitrogen sources have been explored as green and sustainable strategies for the electrosynthesis of urea by coupling CO2. Among them, the electrosynthesis of urea from the co-activation of N2 and CO2 has emerged as an attractive energy-saving route due to the abundance of N2. Nonetheless, the electrosynthesis of urea utilizing N2 as an N source still suffers from extremely low selectivity and reactivity as a result of the intrinsic chemical inertness and the low solubility of N2 as well as the high dissociation energy of the NN triple bond. Therefore, electrocatalytic urea synthesis by adopting reactive nitrogen contaminants as a nitrogen source to couple with CO2 is a win–win strategy from the perspectives of saving energy and protecting the environment.
Although CO2 and oxynitride (NO2−, NO3−, NO, etc.) as sources of C and C–N coupling reactions for the electrosynthesis of urea have significant advantages over N2, they also have some disadvantages. For example, due to the fact that NO2− is easier to reduce than NO3−, it has mostly been used as the N source for electrochemical C–N coupling reactions. From an application standpoint, the electrocatalytic coupling of NO3− with CO2 to produce the value-added urea is appealing given that NO2− is unstable and inclined to form NO3− in aqueous solution.30,31,273,274 Additionally, the electrocatalytic synthesis of urea involves multistep electrochemical processes (proton-coupling electron-transfer) and chemical steps (C–N coupling), in which the whole reaction to form urea from N2 requires more electrons and protons than that of oxynitride (NO2−, NO3−, NO, etc.) as follows:N2 + CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CO(NH2)2 + H2O2NO + CO2 + 10H+ + 10e− → CO(NH2)2 + 3H2O2NO2− + CO2 + 14H+ + 12e− → CO(NH2)2 + 5H2O2NO3− + CO2 + 18H+ + 16e− → CO(NH2)2 + 7H2O
The multiphoton-coupled multielectron-transfer process reduces the thermodynamics and kinetics of the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction, and thus the selective hydrogenation of the intermediate species to by-products rather than the occurrence of C–N coupling hinders the efficient electrosynthesis of urea. In any case, urea electrosynthesis technology via the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction still suffers from low selectivity and low reactivity. To date, the key to this technique is the design and exploration of low-cost, high-efficient, and stable electrocatalysts.
6.2. Acetamide
Acetamide (CH3CONH2) is the simplest amide derived from acetic acid. It is a colorless and transparent needle-like crystal, with the scent of mouse secretions and is easy to deliquescence, which is mainly used as an analytical reagent, industrial solvent, stabilizer, and plasticizer as well as in organic synthesis, the pharmaceutical sector, and dye industry. Acetamide can be viewed as an intermediate between acetone with two methyls (–CH3) on either side of the carbonyl (–CO) and urea with two amide (–NH2) groups at these positions. Acetamide is synthesized by the reaction of glacial acetic acid and liquid ammonia to generate ammonium acetate (CH3COONH4), followed by pyrolysis dehydration (CH3COONH4 → CH3CONH2 + H2O), crystallization, and separation. It can also be produced by the hydration of acetonitrile (CH3CN + H2O → CH3CONH2) as a by-product of acrylonitrile production.
In an early study, Jiao and co-workers creatively introduced NH3 as a nitrogen source to realize the C–N coupling reaction,31 demonstrating the construction of carbon–heteroatom bonds in CO2/CO electrolysis. Over highly crystalline metallic Cu NPs with an average particle size of 50 ± 20 nm and a small fraction of Cu oxides (Fig. 17a), the C–N bonds could be formed through the co-electrolysis of CO and NH3 with an acetamide selectivity of nearly 40% in KOH aqueous solution in a three-compartment continuous flow cell. It was shown that *(HO)CCOH was also hydrolyzed to *CCO, which in turn reacted with NH3 to form certain intermediates that proceed to form acetamide, while suppressing the formation of other C2+ products. Moreover, this work extended the range of C–N-containing products to include N-methylacetamide (C3H7NO), N-ethylacetamide (C4H9NO), N,N-dimethylacetamide (C4H9NO), and acetic monoethanolamide (C4H9NO2).
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic depicting NH3 inducing C–N bond formation from CO electrolysis. (b and c) FE versus the applied potential for CO (b) and CO + NH3 (c). (d) Mechanism for CO reduction on Cu, where one pathway features *CCOH for the production of ethylene, ethanol, and n-propanol, whereas the other pathway features *CCO for the production of acetamide and acetate. Total current density and Fes for CO electrolysis in 1.0 M KCl solution with various nitrogen-containing reactants (5.0 M): (e) methylamine, (f) ethylamine, and (g) dimethylamine. (h) Molar production fraction for different C2+ products at 200 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
In a typical experiment, galvanostatic electrolysis was performed in 1.0 M KOH solution to test the electroreduction activity of CO. When pure CO gas was introduced in the reaction vessel, a nearly exponential polarization response was observed, and C2+ products accounted for up to 80% of the total products. The main C2+ products from the CO electroreduction were identified to be ethylene, ethanol, acetate, and n-propanol.
Depending on the CO electrolysis activity, an NH3 and CO mixture gas in a molar ratio of 1:2 was fed into the flow cell. In the presence of NH3, the potential required to reach the same current density increased by ∼30 mV compared with that for pure CO, which is probably due to the reduced CO partial pressure in the test system.275,276 Remarkably, the presence of NH3 led to the considerable production of acetamide with a high FE of 38% and a partial current density of 114 mA cm−2 at −0.68 V vs. RHE (Fig. 17b and c). The catalytic selectivity switched toward the pure CO reduction products as the proportion of CO in the gas input increased, while the selectivity for acetamide was unaffected by increasing the ratio of NH3 beyond 2:1.
Full-solvent quantum mechanical calculations were applied to study the mechanism of electrocatalytic production of acetamide in the presence of NH3 (Fig. 17d). By using *(HO)CCOH as the starting state, it was found that the free energy barrier for the formation of the *CCO intermediate via the water-mediated pathway was 0.57 eV. As reported, *CCO was proposed as an intermediate in the pathway for the formation of C2H4.277 However, later full-solvent quantum mechanics research revealed that the formation of C2H4 originated from *CCOH and that *CCO came from the dehydration of *(HO)CCOH. Therefore, the intermediate *CCO tended to form at high pH and low potential in competition with the intermediate *CCOH from the proton-coupled electron transfer. Then, the C–N bond was formed from the reaction of NH3 with *CCO, and the formation of *CC(OH)NH2 was completed through a water-mediated reaction pathway. Subsequently, *CC(OH)NH2 was isomerized to *CH–C(O)NH2 through the keto–enol tautomer, followed by coupling steps involving two proton-coupled electron transfer steps to ultimately yield the acetamide product. In brief, acetamide is formed through the nucleophilic addition of NH3 to a surface-bound ketene intermediate, a step that competes with OH− addition, leading to the formation of the acetate product.
Similar results were also obtained using a mixture of NH4OH + KOH/KCl as the catholyte and using CO as the feed gas (Fig. 17e–h), demonstrating that acetamide can be produced from both gas- and liquid-phase NH3 with a noticeable FE. The ratio of ethylene to alcohol products was greatly reduced at moderate to high overpotentials, while the selectivity to acetate products was largely unchanged. Continuous electrolysis tests at a total current density of 100 mA cm−2 for 8 h were carried out to assess the stability of Cu-catalyzed CO electrolysis in the presence of gas NH3, and it was discovered that acetamide could be generated steadily. The authors also verified the origin of oxygen in acetamide by C18O isotopic labeling and found that 18O-labeled acetamide was the main product.
This work demonstrates a new pathway for the production of various amide products via CO electrolysis under ambient conditions. These products are commonly used in the polymer and pharmaceutical industries. Although the NH3 employed in this work was made from methanol and methane, renewable NH3 synthesis is now a topic of interest. More importantly, the nucleophilic attack of amines on ketene intermediates enables the reaction to generate a wider variety of chemistries containing carbon–heteroatom bonds. Previously, these chemicals could not be produced by conventional CO electrolysis. This progress is expected to facilitate CO2/CO electrolysis technology for commercial applications.
6.3. Methylamine
Methylamine (CH3NH2) with one of the hydrogen atoms in the NH3 molecule replaced by a methyl group is a colorless gas or liquid with an ammonia odor at room temperature. It is soluble in water, ethanol or ether, flammable, and explosive when its vapor is mixed with air. Depending on the number of methyl substitutions, monomethyl amine (CH3NH2, MMA), dimethylamine ((CH3)NH, DMA), and trimethylamine ((CH3)3N, TMA) can be formed. Methylamine is an important fine chemical raw material, which is widely used in various industries and mainly produced by the gas-phase catalytic reaction of methanol and ammonia in the current industry. Under high temperature (350–450 °C) and high pressure (0.5–4.1 MPa), methanol and ammonia are reacted under the action of a catalyst to produce crude methylamine via a dehydration or disproportionation reaction, and then separated by distillation to get monomethyl amine, dimethylamine, and trimethylamine with an equilibrium composition of 23:27:50, respectively.
Electrosynthesis affords a greener process to produce methylamine. Currently, the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction usually has a low efficiency, which is mainly caused by the repulsive dipole–dipole interaction between the adjacent coupling precursors. Thus, to address this problem theoretically, Jiao et al. reported the use of N-heterocyclic carbene to alter the unaltered catalyst surface as a simple strategy to weaken the repulsive dipole–dipole interaction. Owing to its excellent conductivity, high surface area, and tunable surface functionalities effective for the ECRR and ENRR,279,280 Mo2NO2 with O vacancy (Cu2@v-Mo2NO2) and two anchored Cu atoms was chosen as the model catalyst for the C–N coupling reaction from CO and NO. Specifically, the surface carbene-functionalized Cu2@v-Mo2NO2 was found to well promote the formation of methylamine from CO and NO by reducing the repulsive dipole–dipole interactions between the adsorbed coupling precursors. The electronic configuration analysis showed that the carbene functionalization played an important role in C–N bond formation by perturbing the electronic configuration between the Cu pairs to induce charge redistribution for the adsorbed intermediates. In particular, the fully overlapping d states significantly split after ligating carbene (Fig. 18a and b). The N atom became negatively charged after the functionalization of the surface of carbene, whereas the C atom maintained its positive charge. Consequently, the electrostatic relationship between the N and C atoms switched from repulsion to attraction, and the C*CO–N*NO distance also decreased from 3.7 to 2.8 (Fig. 18c and d), further confirming the weakened dipole–dipole repulsion. Furthermore, the attenuation of the dipole–dipole repulsion between the adjacent carbonaceous and nitrogenous intermediates was demonstrated to be beneficial for C–N bond coupling, which was identified to be the most stable intermediate toward the formation of methylamine over the designed catalyst. Although the *CO intermediate was protonated to *CHOH in this reaction route, the *NO intermediate was reduced to *NH. Following structural optimization, it was discovered that the *NH intermediate went toward the nearby Cu site on its own and linked with the *CHOH intermediate to produce *NH–CHOH. This electrochemical C–N coupling step exhibited a low kinetic barrier of 0.12 eV and a highly thermodynamically exothermic of 2.63 eV (Fig. 18e), indicating the minimization of the dipole–dipole repulsion by surface carbene functionalization to significantly boost the C–N coupling reaction.
 Fig. 18  PDOS for d-state of Cu atoms in the model (a) without and (b) with surface carbene functionalization. The side view of *NO and *CO co-adsorption on Cu2@v-Mo2NO2 (c) without and (d) with surface carbene functionalization, with a charge density difference and Bader charge analysis. The yellow and cyan area represent the accumulation and depletion of charge with a 0.005 e A−3 isosurface. (e) Minimum energy pathway of C–N coupling between *NH and *CHOH on surface carbene-functionalized Cu2@v-Mo2NO2. (f) Proposed mechanism for the electrosynthesis of methylamine from CO and NO. (g) Free-energy diagram for the information of methylamine over the surface of carbene-functionalized Cu2@v-Mo2NO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (h) One-pot electrosynthesis of methylamine via C–N coupling reaction from CO2 and NO3− over the CoPc-NH2/CNT catalyst. (i) FE and total current density for various products over the CoPc-NH2/CNT catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 

Fig. 18f shows the overall mechanism for the formation of methylamine via C–N coupling from NO and CO over the carbene-functionalized Cu2@v-Mo2NO2 electrocatalyst. Further evidence that the proposed electrocatalyst possesses activity and selectivity was provided by the low kinetic barrier for C–N coupling (0.12 eV at 0 V vs. RHE) and low limiting voltage (0.49 V vs. RHE) (Fig. 18g).221 Additionally, this method to increase bond coupling by surface carbene functionalization can be expanded to include C–C and N–N coupling for the sustainable synthesis of various multi-carbon/nitrogen chemicals because small-molecule precursors (*CO, *CHO, *NO, *NH, etc.) are typically dipole–dipole repulsive. Overall, this theoretical work can aid experimentalists in comprehending the dipole–dipole repulsion as a constraint on couplings and offers novel and practical strategies to issues associated with the dipole–dipole repulsion without being limited by the commonly employed heteroatom anchoring or vacancy engineering.
In the experimental frontier, Wang and co-workers first electrochemically converted CO2 and NO3− into CH3NH2 in aqueous media under ambient conditions catalyzed by a cobalt β-tetraaminophthalocyanine molecular catalyst supported on carbon nanotubes,235 as shown in Fig. 18h. Under ambient conditions, the newly developed Co-based catalyst exhibited an overall FE of 13% for the generation of CH3NH2 (Fig. 18i) without any performance decay for at least 16 h of continuous operation with a total turnover number of higher than 5,500. The entire reaction was an eight-step catalytic cascade process, which was made possible by the coupling of two reactive intermediates close to the catalyst surface. This coupling allowed the transfer of 14 e− and 15 H+ to produce each methylamine (CH3NH2) molecule. The spontaneous condensation of hydroxylamine (NH2OH) in NO3− reduction to formaldehyde (HCHO) in the CO2 reduction to formaldehyde oxime is a key step in the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction, which will further serve as a key intermediate for the formation of CH3NH2.
6.4. Formamide
Formamide (HCONH2), the simplest amide compound derived from formic acid, is a transparent oily liquid with a slight ammonia odor, hygroscopic and flammable nature. It is a raw material for synthetic medicines, dyes, herbicides, pesticides, softeners, etc. It can also be used as a solvent for spinning synthetic fibers, plastic processing, and the production of lignocaine inks. There are many industrial methods for the synthesis of formamide,281–284 as follows: (1) the first step is to generate methyl formate (HCOOCH3) from CO and methanol under the action of sodium methoxide.285 In the second step, methyl formate is re-ammonolysis to form formamide at 80–100 °C and 0.2–0.6 MPa. (2) Formic acid is first esterified with methanol to form methyl formate,286 which is then decomposed by ethyl carbamate to form formamide. Then, the methanol and impurities are separated by distillation to obtain the finished product. This method has become obsolete due to its high cost. (3) Formamide is directly synthesized from CO and ammonia under the catalysis of sodium methoxide at high pressure (10–30 MPa) and temperature of 80–100 °C (CO + NH3 → HCONH2).287 Currently, this is the main industrial process for the production of formamide. (4) Formamide is synthesized by ammonia water and formic acid,286 in which ammonia water and formic acid first generate ammonium formate (HCOOH + NH3 → HCOO−NH4+). Subsequent heating (HCOO−NH4+ → HCONH2 + H2O) generates formamide. (5) Formamide is also generated by the aminolysis of ethyl formate (HCOOCH2CH3 + NH3 → HCONH2 + CH3CH2OH).288 However, these traditional thermochemical synthesis processes require high temperatures and high pressures, resulting in huge energy consumption and CO2 emissions.
Instead of using the traditional reaction of fossil-fuel-derived CO and NH3 under harsh conditions to produce formamide, Zhang's group reported a sustainable electrosynthesis approach to upgrade CO2-derived formate (HCOOH) into formamide.221 The precursor formate can be specially prepared through the electroreduction of CO2 at an industrial current density of 500 mA cm−2.289–291 It is of great significance to explore economical and green methods to upgrade CO2-derived formic acid into formamide, particularly considering that the annual global demand for formate is only ∼1 million tons, which is much lower than the current scale of CO2 emissions.292,293
Theoretical predictions demonstrated that a Cu catalyst is a promising catalyst for the C–N coupling reaction by using formate and nitrite as C and N sources (Fig. 19a and b), respectively. The LSV curves showed the possible appearance of co-reduction over low-coordinated Cu nanocubes (ER–Cu) with an increased reduction current in the coexistence of formate and nitrite (Fig. 19b). Over the ER–Cu catalyst, 90.0% selectivity from HCOOH to formamide and a relatively high FE of 29.7% for the formation of formamide were obtained at −0.4 V vs. RHE in a mixed solution of 0.5 M NaOH + 0.2 M HCOOH + 0.02 M NaNO2 (Fig. 19c), as confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 19d). Also, the FE of 16.4% for the generation of acetamide over the ER–Cu catalyst was obtained (Fig. 19e).
 Fig. 19  (a) Catalyst screening for the electrosynthesis of HCONH2via C–N coupling reaction using HCOO− and NO2− as C and N sources, respectively. (b) LSV curves of Cu-based catalyst in various electrolytes. (c) FEs for different reduction products. (d) 1H NMR spectroscopy. (e) FEs of different products using CO2-derived ethanoic acid as a C-source. Potential-dependent in situ ATR-SEIRAS spectra using formic acid as the C source and (f) 14NO2− and (g) 15NO2− as the N source. (h) Potential-dependent in situ ATR-SEIRAS with the addition of only NO2−. (i) Potential-dependent in situ ATR-SEIRAS with the addition of only HCOOH. (j) Schematic illustration of the generation pathway of HCONH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, a series of in situ controlled experiments was conducted to reveal the formation mechanism for the key C–N bonds via coupling *CHO and *NH2 intermediates (Fig. 19f–i). As shown in Fig. 19f, both *CHO (1720 cm−1) and *NH2 (1155 cm−1) intermediates were detected using formic acid and nitrite as raw materials by in situ attenuated total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (ATR-SEIRAS).294–298 The control tests with formic acid or nitrite confirmed that the *CHO and *NH2 species originated from formic acid and nitrite reduction (Fig. 19h and i), respectively. Isotope-labeling in situ ATR-SEIRAS spectroscopy was carried out using 15NO2− as an N-source, where the C–15N bond and *15NH2 shifted to the lower wavenumber region (1410 and 1120 cm−1) due to the isotope effect (Fig. 19g). The results confirmed that the formation of formamide originated from the C–N coupling reaction from HCOOH and NO2− catalyzed by the ER–Cu catalyst. The reaction energy barriers of the coupled process were compared with that of the single reduction process (Fig. 19j).221 Notably, the conversion of formic acid to the *CHO intermediate was identified as a potential-determining step (PDS) with an energy barrier (ΔGPDS) of 1.19 eV on the ER-Cu catalyst.
Meanwhile, the coupling of the *CHO and *NH2 intermediates to form the critical C–N bond on the ER-Cu catalyst surface was thermodynamically favorable (−1.120 eV). In addition, by further analyzing the important competing reactions in the electrochemical system, namely, the hydrogenation reaction of *CHO and *NH2, the calculation showed that the energy barrier of the coupling step was much lower than that of hydrogenation alone on ER-Cu (the hydrogenation barriers for *NH2 and *CHO are −0.478 and −0.08 eV, respectively). The above-mentioned results demonstrate that *CHO and *NH2 can be spontaneously coupled to the low-coordination Cu sites, thus enabling the electrosynthesis process to produce formamide at a high yield. By converting NO2− to NO3− and using CO2-derived ethanoic acid as the C source, this electrochemical method can be extended to the synthesis of acetamide.
In another study, Zhang et al. reported a strategy for the direct synthesis of formamide via the electrooxidation of CH3OH and NH3 over a commercial boron-doped diamond (BDD) catalyst with a formamide FE of 41.2% at a high current density of 120 mA cm−2.222 Compared to the traditional high-temperature and high-pressure reaction conditions (Fig. 20a and b), renewable energy-driven electrosynthesis has attracted increasing interest for a carbon-neutral future. It has been found that the formation of the C–N bond in the formamide electrosynthesis originates from the nucleophilic attack of the aldehyde-like intermediate by NH3. For a pilot-scale test in an 8 L electrolytic cell on a BDD electrode, the FE of formamide could still reach 33.5% at 120 mA cm−2 and the yield of formamide achieved was 36.9 g h−1, confirming that this technique has broad prospects in the large-scale electrosynthesis of formamide. Using commercial BDD as the anode material and 0.5 M NaHCO3 as an electrolyte, the products and raw materials were identified and quantified by 1H NMR, ion chromatography (IC), and colorimetry. Simultaneously, the products were further confirmed by liquid chromatography-electrospray mass spectrometry (LC-MS). To improve the formamide electrosynthesis performance, the molar ratio of CH3OH to NH3 was first optimized. When the molar ratio of CH3OH to NH3 was 5:1 and in 0.5 M NaHCO3 electrolyte, the FE of formamide was the highest, reaching 41.2% at 120 mA cm−2. Notably, the generation of formamide was completely inhibited in a strong alkaline electrolyte (0.5 M NaOH) (Fig. 20c and d), probably due to the rapid self-decomposition of formaldehyde-like intermediates into HCOOH and CH3OH.
 Fig. 20  (a) Synthesis of formamide by the industrial thermochemical pathway and electrosynthesis technology. Current density-dependent FEs over BDD under different (b) feeding ratios of CH3OH to NH3 and (c) pH. (d) Possible reaction pathways for the coupling of CH3OH and NH3 to formamide via electrooxidation over BDD. (e) GC-MS analysis of H2 after electrolysis. (f) Online DEMS measurements over BDD with different electrolytes in 0.5 M NaHCO3 under 10 mA cm−2. (g) Scheme of the scaled-up electrolysis device. (h) Optimization of CH3OH to NH3 molar ratio for the synthesis of formamide at 100 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
According to the thermocatalytic analysis, there are two possible paths for the formation of formamide (Fig. 20e), as follows: (1) the intermediate aldehyde obtained by the electrochemical oxidation reaction of CH3OH reacts with NH3 to form aldimine, which is further oxidized to nitrile, and the nitrile is hydrolyzed to generate formamide (Pathway 1).299–301 (2) The formaldehyde produced by CH3OH dehydrogenation/dehydration reacts with NH3 to form hemiamine, which is subsequently dehydrogenated/dehydrated to form formamide (Pathway 2).302–304 The catholyte and anolyte were the same (2:1 molar ratio of CH3OH to NH3 in 0.5 M NaHCO3) in an H-type cell separated by a membrane. A series of control experiments was performed to determine the reaction pathway (Fig. 20f and g). Firstly, various possible oxidized derivatives of NH3, such as NO3−, NO2−, NH2OH, and N2H4, were mixed with CH3OH for electrolysis. However, none of the products containing formamide were obtained, indicating that NH3 played a key role in the formation of C–N bonds. When CH3OH was replaced with HCHO or HCOO−, the carboxamide product could be detected only in the mixture of HCHO and NH3, demonstrating the critical role of HCOH in the formation of the C–N bonds.305 After the reaction, no H2 by-product could be detected in the anode compartment, indicating that no dehydrogenation reaction occurred. These results indicated that H2C = NH was the key intermediate in the generation of formamide, and pathway 1 may be the optimal pathway for the generation of formamide.
Harnessing renewable energy, especially solar- and wind-power, has important implications for sustainable electrosynthesis. Thus, to explore the application potential of the large-scale electrosynthesis of formamide on BDD, a series of performance optimization experiments was carried out at different current densities in an 8 L amplified single-cell electrolysis device (electrode area 2200 cm2) driven by an external renewable power source (Fig. 20h). The results showed that when the molar ratio of CH3OH to NH3 was 2:1 at 120 mA cm−2, the yield and FE reached up to 0.82 mol h−1 and 33.5%, respectively (Fig. 20i).
6.5. Ethylamine
Ethylamine (C2H5NH2) is a colorless gas with a strong ammonia odor, which will condense into a liquid miscible with almost all solvents below room temperature. C2H5NH2 has been widely used in dye synthesis, extractants, emulsifiers, pharmaceutical raw materials, and reagents for organic synthesis in the chemical industry. Ethylamine can be produced on an industrial scale via two common methods, as follows: (1) ethanol ammoniation method: ethanol and ammonia are fed in a ratio of 4:1, and Al2O3 is used as a catalyst to carry out the ammoniation reaction (C2H5OH + NH3 → C2H5NH2 + H2O) at a temperature of 350–400 °C and pressure of 2.45–2.94 MPa, followed by fractional distillation to obtain ethylamine.306,307 (2) Acetaldehyde and hydrogen ammoniation: ethylamine can be prepared by reacting acetaldehyde, hydrogen, and ammonia as raw materials by using nickel as a catalyst (CH3CHO + NH3 + H2 → C2H5NH2 + H2O).308,309 Besides, ethylamine can be also prepared by several other methods (e.g., C2H4 + NH3 → C2H5NH2, C2H5Cl + NH3 + KOH → C2H5NH2 + KCl + H2O),310,311 but they are not economical.
Recently, Wang's group reported the first electrochemical conversion of CO2 and NO3− to ethylamine via a multi-electron–proton reduction process on oxide-derived Cu NPs in a near-neutral aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 21a),232 confirming the possibility for the electrosynthesis of C2+ organonitrogen compounds from cheap and abundant inorganic feedstocks. As shown in Fig. 21b, the Cu nanoparticles were active for both CO2 and NO3− electroreduction. Specifically, C2H4 (FE = 36.3%) and C2H5OH (FE = 14.3%) were obtained as the main hydrocarbon products in 1.0 M KHCO3 electrolyte. Ammonia with an FE of 73.5% and a partial current density of 40.2 mA cm−2 was formed in Ar-saturated 1.0 M KHCO3 containing 0.1 M KNO3 aqueous solution, while no C–N bond-containing compound was produced. However, by replacing Ar with high-purity CO2 in 1.0 M KHCO3 + 0.1 M KNO3 electrolyte, acetaldoxime (C2H5NO) with a relatively small FE of 0.36% was detected by 1H NMR spectroscopy after a continuous 1 h reduction reaction test (Fig. 21c). Interestingly, ethylamine was also formed in the electrochemical co-reduction process. As shown in Fig. 21d and e, the mechanistic analyses demonstrated that acetaldoxime was the key intermediate to ethylamine, which resulted from the condensation reaction between acetaldehyde and NH2OH. The further reduction of the key intermediate of acetaldoxime led to the formation of the final ethylamine. These results indicated that the overall yield of ethylamine was limited by the competing reduction of CH3CHO to C2H5OH and NH2OH to NH3.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reduction of CO2via coupling with NO3− into acetaldoxime and ethylamine over oxide-derived Cu nanoparticles. (b) FEs for different electrochemical reductions on the catalyst, including pure CO2 reduction, pure NO3− reduction, and CO2 + NO3− coupling reaction. (c) 1H NMR spectra of the post-electrolysis solutions corresponding to (b). (d) 1H NMR spectrum of the product solution after mixing acetaldehyde and NH2OH. (e) 1H NMR spectra of the post-electrolysis solutions after performing potentiostatic electrolyzes with different C and N sources. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
In summary, the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction involves the isolated reduction of the carbon precursor and nitrogen precursor to the respective intermediates. Considering that the various reactants (including, CO2, N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, and NH3) differ in their chemical makeup, it is necessary and desirable to rationally design electrocatalysts possessing multiple active sites with the appropriate distance to effectively couple these intermediates.
Thus far, different strategies have been applied to design high-efficiency electrocatalysts, including hetero-structured hybrids,219,312 Mott–Schottky heterostructures,237 oxygen-vacancy defect engineering,34,223,229,233 nano-alloying,227 facet engineering,36 core–shell hierarchical structure,234 and doping with heteroatoms,35,230 single-atoms,231 and dual-atoms.228,313 To achieve high activity and high productivity in the design of electrocatalysts for C–N coupling reactions, the following points should be systematically considered: (1) a higher specific surface area with easier adsorption of the reactants and facile desorption of the product are necessary. (2) The catalyst needs to possess multiple active sites for the co-activation and co-reduction of the reactants in similar potential ranges. (3) The electrocatalyst must have specificity and selectivity toward the simultaneous reduction of carbon and nitrogen sources. (4) For the suppression of competing reactions (e.g., HER), the choice of electrolyte and catalyst is crucial. In this regard, an electrocatalyst should have multiple active sites and selectivity toward both the ECRR and ENRR under a similar potential window, which may be effective for enhancing the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction from CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules.
7. Perspectives and outlook
In this review, we provided an updated comprehensive summary of the recent research development on the electrosynthesis of high-value-added organonitrogen compounds from the abundant CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) via the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction. Initially, the basic concepts, classification, reaction characteristics, and key evaluation indices for the electrosynthesis and electrocatalytic reactor (H-type cell, flow cell, and MEA cell) were introduced. Next, the two key reactions (i.e., ECRR and ENRR) involved in the C–N coupling reaction were described in detail. Furthermore, the design and reaction mechanism of electrocatalysts for the formation of various target products from the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction and the effects of different C and N sources on each of the target products were discussed in depth.
As is known, carbon and nitrogen constitute our colorful world due to their abundant reserves and complex bonding configurations in a large variety of chemical compounds. Thus, the research on electrochemical C–N coupling reactions is significant. In nature, plants convert CO2 and N2 into organic matter through photosynthesis to keep our planet blue and vibrant. Our goal is to realize an artificial carbon and nitrogen cycle, in which the CO2 and N2 molecules in the atmosphere are directly converted into energy substances. In the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction, CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) are first activated to become intermediates for further conversion to other useful species. However, our current understanding of the adsorption and desorption of these key intermediates on the electrocatalyst surface, the electrocatalytic bond cleavage, and formation between C, N, O, and H, and their interactions with the electrocatalyst surface is still in its infancy. Therefore, the exploration of scientific problems in this field is still a broad blue ocean.
In recent years, a series of breakthroughs has been made in the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction to gradually enhance the selectivity, yield, and stability. However, the yield and selectivity of the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction are still much lower than that for traditional synthetic methods. The construction of efficient, economical, and green catalytic systems to realize the large-scale electrosynthesis of organonitrogen compounds via C–N coupling reactions under mild conditions is still a key issue that needs to be the focus in the future. Although great progress in the rational design and development of efficient electrocatalysts for the C–N coupling reaction has been achieved in recent years, there are still many challenges that need to be further explored and solved before its industrial application can be realized.
Firstly, the mass transfer process severely limits the efficient progress of the C–N coupling reaction due to the low solubility of CO2 and N2 molecules in water. Therefore, the engineering problems faced in the electrochemical C–N coupling reaction must be solved to realize its large-scale production. In this case, the appropriate design of the electrochemical reactor is crucial for achieving high energy efficiency and low cost toward the C–N coupling reaction. An ideal electrolyzer should have advantageous properties to facilitate electron transfer, ion transport, and controllable gas diffusion. At the macro-scale, commercially relevant current densities have been achieved in GDE-based reactors by eliminating the mass transport limitations. MEA with zero-gap function excels in long-term stability and selectivity. However, some challenges, such as industrial-scale manufacturing and operational stability of GDEs, hydration management, and CO2/N2 crossover, still need to be addressed. On the microscopic side, a well-designed reaction interface (electrode–reactant–electrolyte) and local microenvironment will be beneficial for controlling CO2 electrolysis and optimizing the performance. Attempts to further optimize the C–N coupled reaction system in terms of three-dimensional freestanding integrated catalyst electrodes, novel electrolytes, high-performance membranes, and powerful electrochemical reactors are attractive for electrical synthesis at commercially relevant current densities, where the introduction of innovative concepts and devices by following the chemical engineering principles is strongly recommended.
Secondly, the rational design of electrocatalysts is the key to C–N coupling reactions. In this context, the targeted design of high-performance catalytically active sites is required. High-throughput material calculation and screening are needed for digital research and the development of new materials, including advanced electrocatalysts with high activity, selectivity, and stability for the C–N coupling reaction. Combined experimental and computer simulation methods should be employed to study the structure–property/performance relationship. The deep integration of new technologies, such as high-throughput computing, high-throughput preparation, and high-throughput characterization, will enable the faster and more accurate acquisition of the composition-structure-process-performance relationship. This enables the design prediction of advanced new catalysts and processes, enabling the required catalysts to be obtained more quickly.
Thirdly, an in-depth mechanistic understanding of electrocatalysts for C–N coupling reactions is still lacking. For instance, the specific mechanism of how the active site affects the catalytic activity and selectivity is still unclear. Currently, the design and development of highly efficient electrocatalysts still rely on trial and error. Thus, advanced characterization techniques need to be developed and applied to establish the structure-activity relationship of electrocatalysts (especially heterogeneous catalysts) for C–N coupling reactions. The mechanism study of the catalytic process by in situ spectroscopy will provide useful references for catalyst design and the establishment of efficient catalytic systems. Therefore, using modern catalyst characterization methods and theoretical calculation methods to develop efficient, economical, and industrialized C–N coupling reaction systems will be the future direction of development.
Fourthly, the exploration of the real/operational reaction mechanism is another key point for the research and development of electrochemical C–N coupling reactions. However, the complexity of the electrocatalytic reaction environment and the limited experimental methods make the exploration of the reaction mechanism under operational conditions very difficult, if not impossible. Most of the current mechanistic studies rely on first-principles calculations. In fact, the electrocatalytic C–N coupling reaction in an aqueous solution is a complex reaction process involving the gas–liquid–solid three-phase interface, and it is difficult for theoretical models to fully fit this real reaction process/environment. It is particularly critical to provide direct evidence for the confirmation of the reaction mechanism and intermediates through experimental methods. Therefore, “good tools are essential things”. Besides the conventional ex situ characterization and detection methods, in situ structural characterization techniques, such as in situ transmission electron microscopy, in situ Raman spectroscopy, in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and in situ synchrotron radiation spectroscopy, need to be explored in depth to capture the reaction intermediates. It is necessary to establish the precise structure–property relationship on the atomic scale, explain the reaction mechanism, and provide guidance for the optimization of the catalyst structure.
In conclusion, electrochemical synthesis via the C–N coupling reaction has both challenges and opportunities. Thus, with further research and development in this field and continued worldwide effort, this will surely become a very important and promising R&D area in the 21st century and make greater contributions to the progress of mankind.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U22A20432, 22278364, 22211530045, 22178308), National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFB4002100), the Development Project of Zhejiang Province's “Jianbing” and “Lingyan” (2023C01226), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (226-2022-00044, 226-2022-00055), the Startup Foundation for Hundred-Talent Program of Zhejiang University, the Research Funds of Institute of Zhejiang University-Quzhou (IZQ2021RCZX026), the Science and Technology Program of Zhejiang University-Quzhou (IZQ2021KJ2008), and the Australian Research Council (ARC, DP 190103881 and FL 190100126).
Notes and references
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Stamenkovic, D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 57–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, K. Jiang, H. Wang and X. Yao, Chem, 2019, 5, 1371–1397 CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2014, 345, 610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kingston, M. D. Palkowitz, Y. Takahira, J. C. Vantourout, B. K. Peters, Y. Kawamata and P. S. Baran, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 72–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Marken, A. J. Cresswell and S. D. Bull, Chem. Rev., 2021, 21, 2585–2600 CAS .
M. A. Bajada, J. Sanjose-Orduna, G. Di Liberto, S. Tosoni, G. Pacchioni, T. Noel and G. Vile, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3898–3925 RSC .
G. Soloveichik, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 377–380 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kingston, M. D. Palkowitz, Y. Takahira, J. C. Vantourout, B. K. Peters, Y. Kawamata and P. S. Baran, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 72–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, H. Chen, Y. Yin, M. T. Curnan, J. W. Han, Y. Chen and Z. Ma, Small, 2021, 17, e2005383 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Pu, I. Saana Amiinu, F. Gao, Z. Xu, C. Zhang, W. Li, G. Li and S. Mu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 238–244 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, R. Huang and D. Deng, EnergyChem, 2021, 3, 100050 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, Y. Dou, S. Chen, Z. Zhu, P. Liu and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Francke, B. Schille and M. Roemelt, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4631–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Masel, Z. Liu, H. Yang, J. J. Kaczur, D. Carrillo, S. Ren, D. Salvatore and C. P. Berlinguette, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 118–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. T. Kim, P. Zhu, F.-Y. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu, D. A. Cullen and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2022, 5, 288–299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Xiao, H. Peng, X. Hong, K. Chan and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Huang, F. Li, A. Ozden, A. Sedighian Rasouli, F. P. García de Arquer, S. Liu, S. Zhang, M. Luo, X. Wang, Y. Lum, Y. Xu, K. Bertens, R. K. Miao, C.-T. Dinh, D. Sinton and E.
H. Sargent, Science, 2021, 372, 1074–1078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
J. Wu, T. Sharifi, Y. Gao, T. Zhang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804257 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ma, X. He, W. Wang, S. Xie, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12897–12914 RSC .
T. Burdyny and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1442–1453 RSC .
X. She, Y. Wang, H. Xu, S. C. E. Tsang and S. P. Lau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202211396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, X. Yang, T. O'Carroll, H. Li, K. J. Chen and G. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 12, 2200586 CAS .
X. Song, S. Jia, L. Xu, J. Feng, L. He, X. Sun and B. Han, Mater. Today Sustain., 2022, 19, 100179 CrossRef .
S. Bhunia, G. G. Pawar, S. V. Kumar, Y. Jiang and D. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16136–16179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19572–19590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Zhang, K. Kuruvinashetti and N. Kornienko, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2022, 6, 303–319 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tao, C. L. Rooney, Y. Liang and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19630–19642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jouny, J. J. Lv, T. Cheng, B. H. Ko, J. J. Zhu, W. A. Goddard, 3rd and F. Jiao, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 846–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, X. Zhu, X. Wen, Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, H. Li, L. Tao, Q. Li, S. Du, T. Liu, D. Yan, C. Xie, Y. Zou, Y. Wang, R. Chen, J. Huo, Y. Li, J. Cheng, H. Su, X. Zhao, W. Cheng, Q. Liu, H. Lin, J. Luo, J. Chen, M. Dong, K. Cheng, C. Li and S. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 717–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. de Gennes and L. Leger, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1982, 33, 49–61 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cao, Y. Quan, A. Guan, C. Yang, Y. Ji, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 577, 109–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Huang, L. Li, T. Cheng and Q. Shao, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8282–8289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, L. Zhong, H. Liu, Z. Fang, C. Yan, M. Chen, Y. Kong, C. Lee, D. Liu, S. Li, J. Liu, L. Song, G. Chen, Q. Yan and G. Yu, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 868–876 CrossRef .
L. Li, C. Tang, H. Jin, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem, 2021, 7, 3232–3255 CAS .
T. Ren, K. Ren, M. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Wang, H. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang and Y. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130759 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Fischer and C. P. Koshland, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 3121–3126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sabeti, K. Ansarin, E. Seyedrezazadeh, M. A. Jafarabadi, V. Zafari, S. Dastgiri, M. Shakerkhatibi, A. Gholampour, Z. Khamnian, M. Sepehri, M. Dahim, J. Sharbafi and D. Hakimi, Environ. Pollut., 2021, 288, 117797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, H. Xiong, J. Low, R. Long and Y. Xiong, eScience, 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.esci.2022.11.002 .
S. Liu, M. Wang, Q. Cheng, Y. He, J. Ni, J. Liu, C. Yan and T. Qian, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 17911–17930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Y. Yang and J.-S. Hu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 1468–1476 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, N. He and S. Wang, Small Sci., 2021, 1, 2100070 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Siu, N. Fu and S. Lin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 547–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Francke and R. D. Little, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2492–2521 RSC .
D. Pletcher, R. A. Green and R. C. D. Brown, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4573–4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Heard and A. J. J. Lennox, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18866–18884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Francke, Chimia, 2020, 74, 49–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Frontana-Uribe, R. D. Little, J. G. Ibanez, A. Palma and R. Vasquez-Medrano, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 2099 RSC .
A. Wiebe, T. Gieshoff, S. Möhle, E. Rodrigo, M. Zirbes and S. R. Waldvogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5594–5619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Sires, E. Brillas, M. A. Oturan, M. A. Rodrigo and M. Panizza, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2014, 21, 8336–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ju, A. Bagger, G. P. Hao, A. S. Varela, I. Sinev, V. Bon, B. Roldan Cuenya, S. Kaskel, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 944 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang, R. B. Sandberg, A. J. Akey, X. Liu, D. C. Bell, J. K. Nørskov, K. Chan and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, I. T. McCrum, S. Deo, Y.-W. Choi, F. Scholten, W. Wan, J. G. Chen, M. J. Janik and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10012–10020 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, X. Sun, J. Ma, D. Yang, H. Wu, B. Zhang, J. Zhang and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14149–14153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, 3rd, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, W. A. Goddard, 3rd, T. Cheng and Y. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6685–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Limaye, J. S. Zeng, A. P. Willard and K. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, T. Cheng and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 139, 130–136 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-H. Fang and Z.-P. Liu, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 4364–4376 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shinagawa, A. T. Garcia-Esparza and K. Takanabe, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13801 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Marshall and L. Vaisson-Béthune, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 61, 23–26 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Luo, S. Chu, M. Peng, B. Liu, Q. Wu, P. Liu, F. M. F. de Groot and Y. Tan, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Boudart, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 661–666 CrossRef CAS .
C. Costentin, S. Drouet, M. Robert and J. M. Saveant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11235–11242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, X. Wang, W. Weng, Y. Yao, P. Kidkhunthod, C. Wang, Y. Hou and J. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, 202115503 Search PubMed .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, T. F. Jaramillo and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Norskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, X. Ge, Z. Liu, J. Y. Wang, J. M. Lee and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7768–7771 RSC .
D. Mukherjee, P. M. Austeria and S. Sampath, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, Q. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 266–273 RSC .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, R. Luo, M. Heima, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ross, P. De Luna, Y. Li, C.-T. Dinh, D. Kim, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 648–658 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Ding, P. Cai, L. Yi, Y. Li, C. Tu, Y. Hou, Z. Wen and L. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4993–5061 RSC .
X. Lu, Y. Wu, X. Yuan, L. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Xuan, Y. Wang and H. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2527–2532 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lv, M. Jouny, W. Luc, W. Zhu, J. J. Zhu and F. Jiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803111 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Z. Niu, F. Y. Gao, X. L. Zhang, P. P. Yang, R. Liu, L. P. Chi, Z. Z. Wu, S. Qin, X. Yu and M. R. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8011–8021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, D. Joulié, D. Salvatore, K. Torbensen, M. Wang, M. Robert and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2019, 365, 367–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Z. Niu, L.-P. Chi, R. Liu, Z. Chen and M.-R. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4169–4176 RSC .
K. Liu, W. A. Smith and T. Burdyny, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 639–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hasa, M. Jouny, B. H. Ko, B. Xu and F. Jiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lorin, Chem. News J. Phys. Sci., 1864, IX, 291 Search PubMed .
D. S. Ripatti, T. R. Veltman and M. W. Kanan, Joule, 2019, 3, 240–256 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, P. Ding, M. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Deng, Q. Ma, N. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Lu, Z. Feng, Y. Li, W. Zhou and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2807 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Jeng and F. Jiao, React. Chem. Eng., 2020, 5, 1768–1775 RSC .
Y. Luo, K. Zhang, Y. Li and Y. Wang, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 1313–1332 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Nguyen and C. T. Dinh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7488–7504 RSC .
F. Xiao, Y. C. Wang, Z. P. Wu, G. Chen, F. Yang, S. Zhu, K. Siddharth, Z. Kong, A. Lu, J. C. Li, C. J. Zhong, Z. Y. Zhou and M. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, S. Liu, C. Priest, Q. Shi and G. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3484–3524 RSC .
M. Uchida, Y. Aoyama, N. Eda and A. Ohta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 463–468 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Weng, A. T. Bell and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1950–1968 RSC .
D. Kim, W. Choi, H. W. Lee, S. Y. Lee, Y. Choi, D. K. Lee, W. Kim, J. Na, U. Lee, Y. J. Hwang and D. H. Won, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3488–3495 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lazaridis, B. M. Stühmeier, H. A. Gasteiger and H. A. El-Sayed, Nat. Catal., 2022, 5, 363–373 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, X. Lu, S. Ma, R. I. Masel and P. J. Kenis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7075–7084 RSC .
L. Ge, H. Rabiee, M. Li, S. Subramanian, Y. Zheng, J. H. Lee, T. Burdyny and H. Wang, Chem, 2022, 8, 663–692 CAS .
L. F. Greenlee, J. N. Renner and S. L. Foster, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7820–7827 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou and C. E. Boyd, Aquaculture, 2016, 450, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, Y. Mi, H. Bao, Y. Liu, D. Qi, Y. Qiu, L. Zhuo, S. Zhao, J. Sun, X. Tang, J. Luo and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105321 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Phelps and C. D. Deming, Chem. News J. Phys. Sci., 1908, 97, 86–87 Search PubMed .
J. Long, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Guo, X. Fu, D. Deng and J. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9711–9718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Wang, S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Shao, Z. Jiang, Q. Qiao, Y. Zhu, P. Song, D. Li, L. He, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, T. Wu and G. A. Ozin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12360–12364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1803498 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tao, C. Choi, L.-X. Ding, Z. Jiang, Z. Han, M. Jia, Q. Fan, Y. Gao, H. Wang, A. W. Robertson, S. Hong, Y. Jung, S. Liu and Z. Sun, Chem, 2019, 5, 204–214 CAS .
C. Tsounis, R. Kuriki, K. Shibata, J. J. M. Vequizo, D. Lu, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani, R. Amal and K. Maeda, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15333–15340 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H.-L. Du, D. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Andersen, V. Čolić, S. Yang, J. A. Schwalbe, A. C. Nielander, J. M. McEnaney, K. Enemark-Rasmussen, J. G. Baker, A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, M. J. Statt, S. J. Blair, S. Mezzavilla, J. Kibsgaard, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. Cargnello, S. F. Bent, T. F. Jaramillo, I. E. L. Stephens, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nature, 2019, 570, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Francke, B. Schille and M. Roemelt, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4631–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Appel, J. E. Bercaw, A. B. Bocarsly, H. Dobbek, D. L. DuBois, M. Dupuis, J. G. Ferry, E. Fujita, R. Hille, P. J. Kenis, C. A. Kerfeld, R. H. Morris, C. H. Peden, A. R. Portis, S. W. Ragsdale, T. B. Rauchfuss, J. N. Reek, L. C. Seefeldt, R. K. Thauer and G. L. Waldrop, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6621–6658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
T. Wang, X. Sang, W. Zheng, B. Yang, S. Yao, C. Lei, Z. Li, Q. He, J. Lu, L. Lei, L. Dai and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Sang, W. Zheng, S. Zhang, L. Shuai, B. Yang, Z. Li, J. Chen, L. Lei, N. M. Adli, M. K. H. Leung, M. Qiu, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 4192–4198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Z. Li, X. Wang, X. Sang, S. Zheng, S. Liu, B. Yang, Q. Zhang, L. Lei, L. Dai and Y. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, 202111683 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Li, K. Wang, Q. Dai, C. Lei, B. Yang, Q. Zhang, L. Lei, M. K. H. Leung and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104850 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, F. Chen, Q. Zeng, Z. Li, B. Yang, L. Lei, Q. Zhang, F. He, X. Wu and Y. Hou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ye, H. Yang, J. Qian, H. Su, K. J. Lee, T. Cheng, H. Xiao, J. Yano, W. A. Goddard, 3rd and E. J. Crumlin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1875 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Alvarez, M. Borges, J. J. Corral-Perez, J. G. Olcina, L. Hu, D. Cornu, R. Huang, D. Stoian and A. Urakawa, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 3135–3141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. E. Omr, M. W. Horn and H. Lee, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 418 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11326–11353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wen, B. Ren, Y. Zheng, M. Li, C. Silva, S. Song, Z. Zhang, H. Dou, L. Zhao, D. Luo, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2103289 CrossRef .
Q. Fan, M. Zhang, M. Jia, S. Liu, J. Qiu and Z. Sun, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 10, 280–301 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1730–1750 RSC .
S. Jin, Z. Hao, K. Zhang, Z. Yan and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 20627–20648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Zhu, J. L. Liu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3423–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kortlever, J. Shen, K. J. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4073–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, P. De Luna, F. P. García de Arquer, B. Zhang, N. Becknell, M. B. Ross, Y. Li, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, M. Liu, O. Voznyy, C. T. Dinh, T. Zhuang, P. Stadler, Y. Cui, X. Du, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2017, 1, 794–805 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Chernyshova, P. Somasundaran and S. Ponnurangam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E9261–E9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, A. Cao, Q. Zheng, Y. Fu, T. Wang, K. T. Arul, J. L. Chen, B. Yang, N. M. Adli, L. Lei, C. L. Dong, J. Xiao, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Sang, W. Zheng, B. Yang, S. Yao, C. Lei, Z. Li, Q. He, J. Lu, L. Lei, L. Dai and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, T. Wang, X. Wang, B. Yang, X. Sang, S. Zheng, S. Yao, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Lei, J. Xu, L. Dai and Y. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2110174 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Feng, W. Lu, Y. Zhao, S. Zheng, W. Zheng, X. Sang, L. Zheng, Y. Xie, Z. Li, B. Yang, L. Lei, S. Wang and Y. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104243 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Zheng, B. Yang, Z. Li, J. Lu, Q. Zhang, N. M. Adli, L. Lei, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104377 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Shuai, X. Wang, F. He, C. Lei, Z. Li, B. Yang, L. Lei, C. Yuan, M. Qiu, Y. Hou and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008146 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Shilov, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2003, 52, 2555–2562 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800369 CrossRef .
C.-G. Zhan, J. A. Nichols and D. A. Dixon, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 4184–4195 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, J. A. Schwalbe, M. Cargnello, K. Chan, T. F. Jaramillo, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 706–709 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. M. van der Ham, M. T. M. Koper and D. G. H. Hetterscheid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5183–5191 RSC .
L. Shi, Y. Yin, S. Wang and H. Sun, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6870–6899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kong, Y. Li, X. Sang, B. Yang, Z. Li, S. Zheng, Q. Zhang, S. Yao, X. Yang, L. Lei, S. Zhou, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2103548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Ji, Y. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Zheng, X. Sang, B. Yang, Z. Li, L. Lei, Z. Wen, X. Feng and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2202240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kong, L. Wu, X. Yang, Y. Li, S. Zheng, B. Yang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, S. Zhou, L. Lei, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, n/a, 2205409 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Li, J. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Kong, B. Yang, Z. Li, L. Lei, G. Chai, Z. Wen, L. Dai and Y. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 9078–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Li, B. Yang, J. Chen, L. Lei, S. Wang and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105613 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tanabe and Y. Nishibayashi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 2551–2564 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, C. Yu, X. Tan, Q. Wei, Z. Wang, L. Ni, L. Wang and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2776–2805 RSC .
Z. Han, P. Wu, M. He, X. Zhuang, H. Lin and S. Han, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 55, 105684 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, G.-F. Chen, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 12464–12485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, C. Choi, J. Masa, X. Li, J. Qiu, Y. Jung and Z. Sun, Chem, 2021, 7, 1708–1754 CAS .
F. Jiao and B. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805173 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, C. Tang, D. Yao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2111–2116 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9664–9672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, D. D. Babu, Z. Peng and Y. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Patil and D. Y. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1730–1750 RSC .
G. Ertl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3524–3535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Jia and E. A. Quadrelli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 547–564 RSC .
T. H. Rod, A. Logadottir and J. K. Nørskov, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 5343–5347 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Xia, H. Wang, K. Huang, C. Qian, C. T. Maravelias and G. A. Ozin, Joule, 2018, 2, 1055–1074 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, J. A. Iñiguez and C. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 846–856 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jones, T. Bligaard, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 064239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Gottle and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 458–465 RSC .
C. V. S. Kumar and V. Subramanian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 15377–15387 RSC .
Y. Wan, J. Xu and R. Lv, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 69–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Foster, S. I. P. Bakovic, R. D. Duda, S. Maheshwari, R. D. Milton, S. D. Minteer, M. J. Janik, J. N. Renner and L. F. Greenlee, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 490–500 CrossRef .
A. L. Garden and E. Skúlason, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26554–26559 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 57–68 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hand and R. D. Cusick, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2020, 6, 925–934 RSC .
H. I. Uzun and E. Debik, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 209, 776–781 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garcia-Segura, M. Lanzarini-Lopes, K. Hristovski and P. Westerhoff, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 546–568 CrossRef CAS .
H. O. Tugaoen, S. Garcia-Segura, K. Hristovski and P. Westerhoff, Sci. Total Environ., 2017, 599–600, 1524–1551 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Cook, N. Dimitrijevic, B. W. Dreyfus, D. Meisel, L. A. Curtiss and D. M. Camaioni, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 3658–3666 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Montesinos, N. Quici, H. Destaillats and M. I. Litter, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 85319–85322 RSC .
M. T. de Groot and M. T. M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 562, 81–94 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Vetter, Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie, 1959, 63, 1189–1191 CAS .
G. Schmid, Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie, 1961, 65, 531–534 CAS .
G. Schmid, Zeitschrift für Elektrochemie, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie, 1959, 63, 1183–1188 CAS .
K. Y. Lee, D. J. Kuchynka and J. K. Kochi, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 4196–4204 CrossRef CAS .
O. W. J. S. Rutten, A. V. Sandwijk and G. V. Weert, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1999, 29, 87–92 CrossRef .
M. Dortsiou and G. Kyriacou, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 630, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
F. Balbaud, G. Sanchez, G. Santarini and G. Picard, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1999, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, T. Lu, T. M. Cotton and G. Chumanov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6567–6572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goldstein, D. Behar, T. Rajh and J. Rabani, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 2307–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Su, I. Ruzybayev, I. Shah and C. P. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 199–209 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshioka, K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Kamiya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15729–15734 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Dutton, J. M. Fukuto and K. N. Houk, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4024–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. A. de Vooys, G. L. Beltramo, B. van Riet, J. A. R. van Veen and M. T. M. Koper, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 1307–1314 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Colucci, M. J. Foral and S. H. Langer, Electrochim. Acta, 1985, 30, 521–528 CrossRef CAS .
A. Clayborne, H.-J. Chun, R. B. Rankin and J. Greeley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8255–8258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. A. de Vooys, M. T. M. Koper, R. A. van Santen and J. A. R. van Veen, J. Catal., 2001, 202, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
I. Katsounaros and G. Kyriacou, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5477–5484 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lacasa, P. Cañizares, J. Llanos and M. A. Rodrigo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 213–214, 478–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. E. Gootzen, P. G. J. M. Peeters, J. M. B. Dukers, L. Lefferts, W. Visscher and J. A. R. van Veen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 434, 171–183 CrossRef CAS .
H. O'Neal Tugaoen, S. Garcia-Segura, K. Hristovski and P. Westerhoff, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 613–614, 1331–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Reginato, P. Sadler and R. D. Wilkes, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2011, 15, 1396–1405 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Carey, D. Laffan, C. Thomson and M. T. Williams, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2006, 4, 2337–2347 RSC .
S. D. Roughley and A. M. Jordan, J. Med. Chem., 2011, 54, 3451–3479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Cho, J. Y. Kim, J. Kwak and S. Chang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5068–5083 RSC .
J. Bariwal and E. Van der Eycken, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9283–9303 RSC .
J. Magano and J. R. Dunetz, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 2177–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Cooper, I. B. Campbell and S. J. Macdonald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8082–8091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Buchwald, C. Mauger, G. Mignani and U. Scholz, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2006, 348, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hili and A. K. Yudin, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2006, 2, 284–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ruiz-Castillo and S. L. Buchwald, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12564–12649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sambiagio, S. P. Marsden, A. J. Blacker and P. C. McGowan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3525–3550 RSC .
Q. Shen, S. Shekhar, J. P. Stambuli and J. F. Hartwig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1371–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gutmann, D. Cantillo and C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6688–6728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Galaffu, S. P. Man, R. D. Wilkes and J. R. H. Wilson, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2007, 11, 406–413 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Leech and K. Lam, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2022, 6, 275–286 CrossRef .
M. Yuan, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, R. Liu, R. Wang, T. Zhao, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. He, C. Yang, S. Zhang and G. Zhang, Chem. Catal., 2022, 2, 309–320 CrossRef .
J. Li and N. Kornienko, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 3957–3964 RSC .
C. Guo, W. Zhou, X. Lan, Y. Wang, T. Li, S. Han, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 16006–16011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shao, N. Meng, Y. Wang, B. Zhang, K. Yang, C. Liu, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202213009 CAS .
N. Meng, Y. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, S. Yin, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 3, 100869 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shibata and N. Furuya, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 507, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saravanakumar, J. Song, S. Lee, N. H. Hur and W. Shin, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3999–4003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Jiang, S. Li, F. Gou, X. Liu, Y. Jiang, W. Luo, W. Shen, R. He and M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 318, 121819 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Zhu, S. Bo, C. Chen, M. Qiu, X. Wei, N. He, C. Xie, W. Chen, J. Zheng, P. Chen, S. P. Jiang, Y. Li, Q. Liu and S. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lv, C. Lee, L. Zhong, H. Liu, J. Liu, L. Yang, C. Yan, W. Yu, H. H. Hng, Z. Qi, L. Song, S. Li, K. P. Loh, Q. Yan and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 8213–8222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, P. V. Kumar, Q. Chen, L. Zhao, F. Ye, X. Ma, D. Liu, X. Chen, L. Dai and C. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 316, 121618 CrossRef CAS .
J. Leverett, T. Tran-Phu, J. A. Yuwono, P. Kumar, C. Kim, Q. Zhai, C. Han, J. Qu, J. Cairney, A. N. Simonov, R. K. Hocking, L. Dai, R. Daiyan and R. Amal, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2201500 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tao, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, B. Shang, C. Rooney and H. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 65, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, X. Wen, Y. Liu, C. Chen, C. Xie, D. Wang, M. Qiu, N. He, P. Zhou, W. Chen, J. Cheng, H. Lin, J. Jia, X. Z. Fu and S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 11530–11535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Meng, X. Ma, C. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Yang, J. Shao, Y. Huang, Y. Xu, B. Zhang and Y. Yu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 9095–9104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Z. Jiang, Z. Lin, Y. Liang and H. Wang, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 725–730 CrossRef .
M. Yuan, J. Chen, H. Zhang, Q. Li, L. Zhou, C. Yang, R. Liu, Z. Liu, S. Zhang and G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2084–2095 RSC .
M. Yuan, J. Chen, Y. Bai, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, T. Zhao, Q. Wang, S. Li, H. He and G. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10910–10918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, J. Chen, Y. Bai, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, T. Zhao, Q. Shi, S. Li, X. Wang and G. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 6048–6058 RSC .
M. Yuan, J. Chen, Y. Xu, R. Liu, T. Zhao, J. Zhang, Z. Ren, Z. Liu, C. Streb, H. He, C. Yang, S. Zhang and G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6605–6615 RSC .
J. Meessen, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2014, 86, 2180–2189 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Kim, J. H. Jang, K. M. Lee, M. Balamurugan, Y. I. Jo, M. Y. Lee, S. Choi, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21943–21951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shibata, K. Yoshida and N. Furuya, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 387, 143–145 CrossRef .
M. Shibata, K. Yoshida and N. Furuya, Denki Kagaku oyobi Kogyo Butsuri Kagaku, 1998, 66, 584–589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shibata, K. Yoshida and N. Furuya, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2348–2353 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shibata, K. Yoshida and N. Furuya, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 442, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shibata, K. Yoshida and N. Furuya, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 595–600 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dunwell, Q. Lu, J. M. Heyes, J. Rosen, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan, F. Jiao and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3774–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Wang, H. X. Zhang, K. Jiang and W. B. Cai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14876–14879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Barzagli, F. Mani and M. Peruzzini, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1267 RSC .
D. B. Kayan and F. Köleli, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pérez-Fortes, A. Bocin-Dumitriu and E. Tzimas, Energy Proc., 2014, 63, 7968–7975 CrossRef .
G. F. Chen, S. Ren, L. Zhang, H. Cheng, Y. Luo, K. Zhu, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800337 CrossRef .
M. Alfian and W. W. Purwanto, Energy Sci. Eng., 2019, 7, 292–304 CrossRef .

          M. Appl, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry DOI:10.1002/14356007.a02_143.pub2.

          J. H. Meessen, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry DOI:10.1002/14356007.a27_333.pub2.
M. Rahmatullah and T. R. C. Boyde, Clin. Chim. Acta, 1980, 107, 3–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, D. Yan, Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zou, Y. Li and S. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, 1805029 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Watt and J. D. Chrisp, Anal. Chem., 1952, 24, 2006–2008 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Hao, Y. Guo, L.-W. Chen, M. Shu, X.-Y. Wang, T.-A. Bu, W.-Y. Gao, N. Zhang, X. Su, X. Feng, J.-W. Zhou, B. Wang, C.-W. Hu, A.-X. Yin, R. Si, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 448–456 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Yang, B. Huang, F. Lv, K. Wang, N. Li, M. Luo, Y. Chao, Y. Li, Y. Sun, Z. Xu, Y. Qin, W. Yang, J. Zhou, Y. Du, D. Su and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805833 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Melen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 880–882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Stephan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10018–10032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Stephan and G. Erker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6400–6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, G. Chen, Y. Yu, Y. Wu, M. Zhou, W. Zhang, H. Qin, C. Lv and W. Fu, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 1930–1937 RSC .
Y. He, Q. He, L. Wang, C. Zhu, P. Golani, A. D. Handoko, X. Yu, C. Gao, M. Ding, X. Wang, F. Liu, Q. Zeng, P. Yu, S. Guo, B. I. Yakobson, L. Wang, Z. W. Seh, Z. Zhang, M. Wu, Q. J. Wang, H. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yan, N. Li, L. Wang, W. Ran, P. N. Duchesne, L. Wan, N. T. Nguyen, L. Wang, M. Xia and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Zhu, H. Wang, H. Li and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1496–1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shin, S. Jung, S. Bae, W. Lee and H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 12768–12774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Siva, P. Prabu, M. Selvam, S. Karthik and V. Rajendran, Ionics, 2017, 23, 1871–1878 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, R. Yang, C. Wang, N. Meng, Y. Shi, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 7, 284–291 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, T. Li, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202115409 CAS .
C. L. Rooney, Y. Wu, Z. Tao and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19983–19991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, S. Ma, H.-R. Molly Jhong and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. A. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, M. Orazov, C. G. Morales-Guio, X. Liu, D. C. Higgins, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7445–7454 CrossRef CAS .
F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7282–72855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, C. Tang, Y. Zheng, K. K. Ostrikov and Y. Jiao, Energy Fuel., 2022, 36, 7213–7218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, A. D. Handoko, T. Wang, J. Qu, J. Xiao, X. Liu, D. Legut, Z. Wei Seh and Q. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5690–5698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, G.-F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Phelps and C. D. Deming, Am. J. Sci., 1907, s4–24, 173–175 CrossRef .
T. Kakumoto, K. Saito and A. Imamura, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 2286–2291 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Gerack and L. McElwee-White, Molecules, 2014, 19, 7689–7713 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Darla and S. Sitha, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 123, 8921–8931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shindell and C. J. Smith, Nature, 2019, 573, 408–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, Z. Dong, Y. Yao, L. Yang, F. Fang and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002176 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bünger, Chem. Ing. Tech., 1990, 62, 434 CrossRef .
G. Li, J. Yu, J. Jia, L. Yang, L. Zhao, W. Zhou and H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801332 CrossRef .
Z. H. Zhu, B. H. Zhao, S. L. Hou, X. L. Jiang, Z. L. Liang, B. Zhang and B. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 23394–23402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, C. Xia, P. Zhu, Y. Lu and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shan, S. Vanka, T.-T. Li, L. Troian-Gautier, M. K. Brennaman, Z. Mi and T. J. Meyer, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rumayor, A. Dominguez-Ramos, P. Perez and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 490–499 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhu and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 943–951 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vasileff, Y. Zhu, X. Zhi, Y. Zhao, L. Ge, H. M. Chen, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19649–19653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Jiao, L. Li, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, 202114253 Search PubMed .
A. Wuttig, C. Liu, Q. Peng, M. Yaguchi, C. H. Hendon, K. Motobayashi, S. Ye, M. Osawa and Y. Surendranath, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 522–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, J. Dong, Y. Zhu, L. Liu, Y. Jiao, H. Li, Y. Han, K. Davey, Q. Xu, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 6681–6690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, B. Jiang, W. B. Cai and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15664–15667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamaguchi, H. Kobayashi, T. Oishi and N. Mizuno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 544–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamaguchi, M. Matsushita and N. Mizuno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1576–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oishi, K. Yamaguchi and N. Mizuno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6286–6288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Daw, A. Kumar, N. A. Espinosa-Jalapa, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12202–12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, A. Wang, Y. Cui, X. Yang, Y. Huang, X. Liu, W. Liu, J.-Y. Son, H. Oji and T. Zhang, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2680 RSC .
C. Gunanathan, Y. Ben-David and D. Milstein, Science, 2007, 317, 790–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Sun, H. Q. Ji, L. X. Li, H. Y. Zhang, Z. K. Wang, J. H. He and J. M. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 22933–22939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bähn, S. Imm, L. Neubert, M. Zhang, H. Neumann and M. Beller, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1853–1864 CrossRef .
K. Das, R. Shibuya, Y. Nakahara, N. Germain, T. Ohshima and K. Mashima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hahn, P. Kunnas, N. de Jonge and R. Kempe, Nat. Catal., 2018, 2, 71–77 CrossRef .
S. Gomez, J. A. Peters and T. Maschmeyer, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2002, 344, 1037–1057 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tokmic, B. J. Jackson, A. Salazar, T. J. Woods and A. R. Fout, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13554–13561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Bagal and B. M. Bhanage, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 883–900 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, J. Chen, Y. Bai, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, T. Zhao, Q. Shi, S. Li, X. Wang and G. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 6048–6058 RSC .
L. Pan, J. Wang, F. Lu, Q. Liu, Y. Gao, Y. Wang, J. Jiang, S. Chao, J. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 62, e202216835 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the electrosynthesis of organonitrogen compounds via C–N coupling reaction of CO2 and nitrogenous small molecules (N2, NO, NO2−, NO3−, NH3, etc.) driven by renewable electricity. The black, blue, red, and white balls represent C, N, O, and H atoms, respectively.	 
r = (C × V)/(t × A)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of an H-type cell with a typical three-electrode system. (WE: working electrode, CE: counter electrode, and RE: reference electrode).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic comparison of the conventional (a) and modified (b) flow cell measurement systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of MEA cell for CO2 and N2 electrocatalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the different types of CO2 molecule adsorption modes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Proposed mechanisms for CO2 activation, C–C bond formation and elemental reaction pathways to various products during the ECRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 


xCO2 + nH+ + ne− → product + yH2	
	CO2 reaction
CO2 + e− → CO2*−	−1.90 V vs. SHE	Carbonate anion radical
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO (g) + H2O	−0.10 V vs. RHE	Carbon monoxide
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH (aq) + H2O	−0.12 V vs. RHE	Formic acid
2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → (COOH)2 (s)	−0.47 V vs. RHE	Oxalic acid
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → C (s) + 2H2O	0.21 V vs. RHE	Graphite
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO (s) + H2O	−0.10 V vs. RHE	Formaldehyde
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH (aq) + H2O	0.03 V vs. RHE	Methanol
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 (g) + 2H2O	0.17 V vs. RHE	Methane
2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH (aq) + 2H2O	0.11 V vs. RHE	Acetic acid
2CO2 + 10H+ + 10e− → CH3CHO (aq) + 3H2O	0.66 V vs. RHE	Acetaldehyde
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 (g) + 4H2O	0.08 V vs. RHE	Ethylene
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH (aq) + 3H2O	0.09 V vs. RHE	Ethanol
2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 (g) + 4H2O	0.14 V vs. RHE	Ethane
3CO2 + 16H+ + 126e− → C2H5CHO (aq) + 5H2O	0.09 V vs. RHE	Propionaldehyde
3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH (aq) + 5H2O	0.10 V vs. RHE	Propanol
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (g)	0 V vs. RHE	Hydrogen
H2O → O2(g) + 4H+ + 4e−	1.23 V vs. RHE	Oxygen

 	Fig. 6  (a) Molecular structure of N2. (b) Schematic of N atomic orbitals and N2 molecular orbitals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

N2 + 6H+ + 6e− ⇌ 2NH3 (g)	−0.148 V vs. RHE
2H+ + 2e− ⇌ H2 (g)	0 V vs. RHE
N2 + 6H2O + 6e− ⇌ 2NH3 + 6OH−	−0.736 V vs. SHE (pH 14)
2H2O + 2e− ⇌ H2 + 2OH−	0 V vs. RHE
N2 + H+ + e− ⇌ N2H (g)	−3.2 V vs. RHE
N2 + 2H+ + 2e− ⇌ N2H2 (g)	−1.1 V vs. RHE
N2 + 4H+ + 4e− ⇌ N2H4 (g)	−0.33 V vs. RHE
N2 + 4H2O + 6e− ⇌ N2H4 + 4OH−	−1.16 V vs. SHE (pH 14)
N2 + 5H+ + 4e− ⇌ N2H5+ (aq)	−0.23 V vs. RHE
N2 + e− ⇌ N2− (aq)	−3.37 V vs. RHE (pH 14)

 	Fig. 7  Mechanisms of the ENRR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Various mechanisms and main processes during the electrochemical reduction of nitrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 


Cu	CO	NH3	1.0 M KOH	Acetamide	—	38	−0.68	
1H NMR	Flow cell	
31

Cu	CO2	NH3	1.0 M KOH	Formamide	—	0.4	−0.58	
1H NMR	GDE	
220

ER-Cu	HCOO−	NO2−	0.5 M NaOH	Formamide	35.1 mmol h−1 g−1	29.7	−0.4	HPLC	H-Cell	
221

Boron-doped diamond	CH3OH	NH3	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formamide	461.4 μmol h−1 cm−2	73.2	—	
1H NMR	H-Cell	
222

Te-doped Pd	CO2	NO2−	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	—	2	−1.1	Urease	H-Cell	
35

ZnO-Vo	CO2	NO2−	0.2 M NaHCO3	Urea	16.56 μmol h−1	23.26	−0.79	HPLC	H-Cell	
223

AuCu SANFs	CO2	NO2−	0.5 M KHCO3	Urea	3889.6 μg h−1 mg−1	24.7	−1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Urease	H-Cell	
224

Cu–TiO2	CO2	NO2−	0.2 M KHCO3	Urea	20.8 μmol h−1	43.1	−0.4	Urease	H-Cell	
34

Ni-PC	CO2	NO3−	0.2 M KHCO3	Urea	—	41	−1.1	Urease	GDE	
225

TiO2/Nafion	CO2	NO3−	0.1 M KNO3	Urea	—	0	−0.5	Urease	H-Cell	
226

In(OH)3-S	CO2	NO3−	0.1 M KNO3	Urea	533.1 μg h−1 mg−1	53.4	−0.6	Diacetylmonoxime	H-Cell	
36

XC72R-AuPd	CO2	NO3−	0.075 M KHCO3	Urea	204.3 μg h−1 mg−1	15.6	−0.5	Diacetylmonoxime	H-Cell	
227

BFeNi-DASC	CO2	NO3−	0.075 M KHCO3	Urea	20.2 mmol h−1 g−1	17.8	−1.5	Urease	H-Cell	
228

VO-InOOH	CO2	NO3−	Deionized water	Urea	592.5 μg h−1 mg−1	51	−0.5	UV-vis	H-Cell	
229

F-CNT	CO2	NO3−	Deionized water	Urea	6.36 mmol h−1 g−1	18.0	−0.65	UV-vis	H-Cell	
230

Cu SACs	CO2	NO3−	0.1 M K2SO4	Urea	1800 μg h−1 mg−1	28	−0.9	UV-vis	H-Cell	
231

Oxide-derived Cu	CO2	NO3−	1.0 M KHCO3	Ethylamine	—	0.3	−1.0	Diacetylmonoxime	H-Cell	
232

Vo-CeO2-750	CO2	NO3−	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	943.6 mg h−1 g−1	—	−1.6	Urease	H-Cell	
233

Cu@Zn	CO2	NO3−	0.2 M KHCO3	Urea	7.29 μmol cm−2 h−1	9.28	−1.75 V vs. SCE	HPLC	H-Cell	
234

CoPC-NH2/CNT	CO2	NO3−	0.1 M KHCO3	Methylamine	—	13	−0.92	
1H NMR	H-Cell	
235

Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400	CO2	N2	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	3.36 mmol g−1 h−1	8.92	−0.4	Diacetylmonoxime + 1H NMR	H-Cell + flow cell	
32

Co–PMDA-2-mbIM	CO2	N2	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	14.5 μmol g−1 h−1	49	−0.5	Diacetylmonoxime	H-Cell	
236

Bi/BiVO4	CO2	N2	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	5.91 mmol g−1 h−1	12.55	0.4	Diacetylmonoxime + 1H NMR	H-Cell	
237

BiFeO3/BiVO4	CO2	N2	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	4.94 mmol g−1 h−1	17.18	−0.4	Diacetylmonoxime + 1H NMR	H-Cell	
238

Ni3(BO3)2	CO2	N2	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	9.7 mmol g−1 h−1	20.36	−0.5	Diacetylmonoxime	H-Cell	
239

InOOH	CO2	N2	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	6.85 mmol g−1 h−1	21.97	−0.4	Diacetylmonoxime	H-Cell	
219

CuPc NTs	CO2	N2	0.1 M KHCO3	Urea	2.39 mmol g−1 h−1	12.99	−0.6	Diacetylmonoxime	H-Cell	
240

Zn foil	CO2	NO	0.2 M KHCO3	Urea	15.13 mmol g−1 h−1	11.26	−0.92	HPLC	H-Cell + flow cell	
237

Cu-Hg	Oxalic acid	NO	15 wt% H2SO4	Glycine	—	3	−1.2	
1H NMR	H-Cell	
241


 	Fig. 9  Different proposed mechanisms of urea electrosynthesis from CO2 and N2 and their derives: (a and b) *CO + *N2 coupling mechanisms with different hydrogenation routes and RDS.32,237 (c) *CO + *NH2 coupling mechanism.243–245 (d) Revised *CO + *NH2 coupling mechanism.225 (e) *COOH + *NH2 coupling mechanism223 and (f) *CO2 + *NO2 coupling mechanism.36 Purple braces indicate a C–N coupling step and black arrows indicate a reduction step. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Industrial process for the manufacture of urea. Reproduced with permission from ref. 255. Copyright 2019 and 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram for synthesis of urea over the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst. (b) TEM image of Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400; the inset shows the distribution of the PdCu nanoparticles. (c) High-resolution TEM image of the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst. (d) FEs and total current densities for all products with CO2 and N2 as feeding gases. (e) Corresponding urea yield rate. Infrared signal in the range of (f) 2750–3600 cm−1 and (g) 1100–800 cm−1 under various potentials over the Pd1Cu1/TiO2-400 catalyst during the electrocoupling of N2 and CO2. (h) Free energy diagram of urea production. (i) Reaction pathway for the formation of *NCON*. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image and corresponding element mapping of the Bi–BiVO4 catalyst. (b) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer process in Bi–BiVO4. (c) FEs of different products with N2 and CO2 as the feeding gas at various potentials for Bi–BiVO4. (d) Electron density isosurface of CO2 and N2, where the color bar represents the electrostatic potential scale. (e) Electrolytic urea production via the alternating mechanism and the inset is a simplified schematic of N2 bonding to the V center. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (f) SEM image of the InOOH-100 catalyst and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping. (g) Schematic illustration of the formation of FLP sites affected by the calcination temperature. (h) LSV curves of InOOH-100 catalysts in various gas-saturated electrolytes. (i) FEs of the different products with N2 and CO2 as the feeding gas over InOOH-100. (j) Electrostatic potential surface of InOOH (001). (k) Schematic illustration of N2 and CO2 adsorbed on various sites. (l and m) Charge density difference of (l) N2 and (m) CO2 adsorbed on the site of FLPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of urea synthesis process on the surface of In(OH)3-S. (b) LSV curves in 0.1 M KNO3 electrolyte with Ar or CO2 feeding gas and SEM image of In(OH)3-S. (c) Urea yields at different potentials over In(OH)3-S in 0.1 M KNO3 electrolyte with CO2 feeding gas. (d) Schematic illustration of the n–p transformation process. (e) Atomic configurations for each step of urea production on In(OH)3-S. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (f) Illustration of the preparation of VO-InOOH and urea electrosynthesis processes. (g) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping. (h) Urea yields over VO-InOOH at various applied potentials, and the urea comparison between VO-InOOH and InOOH at −0.5 V vs. RHE. (i) Free-energy diagrams for urea production at 0 V versus RHE. (j) Bader charge analysis on various catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of the Vo-CeO2-500 catalyst, and the inset is the corresponding selected area electron diffraction pattern. (b) Urea yield rates of the catalysts at various applied potentials. Comparison of the coupling energy barriers of the *NO, *N, *NH, and *NH2 intermediates with *CO and protonation on (c) Vo-enriched CeO2 and (d) Vo-deficient CeO2 catalysts. (e) Free energy diagram of electrosynthesis of urea on the Vo-enriched CeO2 catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (f) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of the B-FeNi-DASC catalyst. (g) Acquired HAADF-STEM image intensity profile accompanied by atomic-resolution EELS mapping of the Fe–Ni pair. (h) LSV curves over the BFeNi-DASC catalyst, and the inset is the Illustrated correlation between CO2RR activity, NO3RR activity, and urea production over various site configurations. (i) 3D operando SR-FTIR spectra. Reaction pathway of (j) first and (k) second C–N coupling reaction for the formation of the *NHCO and *NHCONO intermediates, respectively. The structures of the initial, transition and final states together with the formation of *NHCO and *NHCONO as insets, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2022, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic depicting the formation of urea from the simultaneous electroreduction of CO2 and NO2−. (b) HAADF-STEM image, corresponding diameter histogram, and EDX elemental mappings of the Te–Pd NCs. (c) FE versus the applied potential for the electrosynthesis of urea over the Te–Pd NC catalyst. (d) Scheme of the synthesis of urea from CO2 and NO2− on Te–Pd NCs. (e) Free-energy diagram and activation barriers for the formation of *CONH2 on the surface of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZnO-V porous nanosheets. (g) SEM image of ZnO-V. (h) EPR of ZnO and ZnO-V porous nanosheets. (i) Urea yield rates under various potentials over ZnO-V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of the AuCu SANF catalyst. (b) LSV curves of the AuCu SANF catalyst in 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte containing 0.01 M KNO2 saturated with or without CO2. (c) Urea yield rate over the AuCu SANF catalyst at various potentials, and the inset is the corresponding FEs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. TEM image of (d) TiO2 and (e) Cu–TiO2. (f) LSV curves of the catalysts in 0.2 M KHCO3 + 0.02 M KNO2 aqueous solution saturated with CO2 or Ar. (g) FEs of the products over the Cu–TiO2 catalyst. (h) Possible mechanisms for the synthesis of urea and other by-products for the co-reduction of CO2 and NO2− over the Cu–TiO2 catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 
N2 + CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CO(NH2)2 + H2O
2NO + CO2 + 10H+ + 10e− → CO(NH2)2 + 3H2O
2NO2− + CO2 + 14H+ + 12e− → CO(NH2)2 + 5H2O
2NO3− + CO2 + 18H+ + 16e− → CO(NH2)2 + 7H2O

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic depicting NH3 inducing C–N bond formation from CO electrolysis. (b and c) FE versus the applied potential for CO (b) and CO + NH3 (c). (d) Mechanism for CO reduction on Cu, where one pathway features *CCOH for the production of ethylene, ethanol, and n-propanol, whereas the other pathway features *CCO for the production of acetamide and acetate. Total current density and Fes for CO electrolysis in 1.0 M KCl solution with various nitrogen-containing reactants (5.0 M): (e) methylamine, (f) ethylamine, and (g) dimethylamine. (h) Molar production fraction for different C2+ products at 200 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 18  PDOS for d-state of Cu atoms in the model (a) without and (b) with surface carbene functionalization. The side view of *NO and *CO co-adsorption on Cu2@v-Mo2NO2 (c) without and (d) with surface carbene functionalization, with a charge density difference and Bader charge analysis. The yellow and cyan area represent the accumulation and depletion of charge with a 0.005 e A−3 isosurface. (e) Minimum energy pathway of C–N coupling between *NH and *CHOH on surface carbene-functionalized Cu2@v-Mo2NO2. (f) Proposed mechanism for the electrosynthesis of methylamine from CO and NO. (g) Free-energy diagram for the information of methylamine over the surface of carbene-functionalized Cu2@v-Mo2NO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 278. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (h) One-pot electrosynthesis of methylamine via C–N coupling reaction from CO2 and NO3− over the CoPc-NH2/CNT catalyst. (i) FE and total current density for various products over the CoPc-NH2/CNT catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Catalyst screening for the electrosynthesis of HCONH2via C–N coupling reaction using HCOO− and NO2− as C and N sources, respectively. (b) LSV curves of Cu-based catalyst in various electrolytes. (c) FEs for different reduction products. (d) 1H NMR spectroscopy. (e) FEs of different products using CO2-derived ethanoic acid as a C-source. Potential-dependent in situ ATR-SEIRAS spectra using formic acid as the C source and (f) 14NO2− and (g) 15NO2− as the N source. (h) Potential-dependent in situ ATR-SEIRAS with the addition of only NO2−. (i) Potential-dependent in situ ATR-SEIRAS with the addition of only HCOOH. (j) Schematic illustration of the generation pathway of HCONH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Synthesis of formamide by the industrial thermochemical pathway and electrosynthesis technology. Current density-dependent FEs over BDD under different (b) feeding ratios of CH3OH to NH3 and (c) pH. (d) Possible reaction pathways for the coupling of CH3OH and NH3 to formamide via electrooxidation over BDD. (e) GC-MS analysis of H2 after electrolysis. (f) Online DEMS measurements over BDD with different electrolytes in 0.5 M NaHCO3 under 10 mA cm−2. (g) Scheme of the scaled-up electrolysis device. (h) Optimization of CH3OH to NH3 molar ratio for the synthesis of formamide at 100 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reduction of CO2via coupling with NO3− into acetaldoxime and ethylamine over oxide-derived Cu nanoparticles. (b) FEs for different electrochemical reductions on the catalyst, including pure CO2 reduction, pure NO3− reduction, and CO2 + NO3− coupling reaction. (c) 1H NMR spectra of the post-electrolysis solutions corresponding to (b). (d) 1H NMR spectrum of the product solution after mixing acetaldehyde and NH2OH. (e) 1H NMR spectra of the post-electrolysis solutions after performing potentiostatic electrolyzes with different C and N sources. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
