Exploration of irradiation intensity dependent external in-band quantum yield for ZnO and CuO/ZnO photocatalysts   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP06649D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP06649D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 10768-10779Exploration of irradiation intensity dependent external in-band quantum yield for ZnO and CuO/ZnO photocatalysts†

        
          
            Kaiyi 
            Luo‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Wenyu 
            Hu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaxuan 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiuping 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhonghao 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongyang 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Miao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunhong 
            Li
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Han
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyi 
            Wang
          
        
      *ae, 
      
        
          
            Xudong 
            Cui
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Pierre 
            Ruterana
          
        
      f
aCollege of Electrical Engineering, Southwest Minzu University, Chengdu 610041, China. E-mail: 80300024@swun.edu.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Xihua University, Chengdu 610039, Sichuan, China
cInstitute of Chemical Materials, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Mianyang 621900, China. E-mail: xudcui@caep.cn
dSchool of optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, Sichuan, China
eInstitute of Microelectronics and Nanoelectronics, College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310007, China
fCIMAP, UMR 6252, CNRS-ENSICAEN-CEA-UCBN, 14050 Caen, France
Received 
      25th December 2020
    , Accepted 9th March 2021First published on 9th March 2021AbstractDecorating metal oxides with wide band-gap semiconductor nano-particles constitute an important approach for synthesizing nano-photocatalysts, where the photocatalytic activity is attributed to the band diagram related effective charge separation and external in-band quantum yield (EIQY). However, up to now, the correlation between the irradiation intensity and the functionalization of the in-band quantum yield has not yet been explained. In this work, by investigating the photocatalytic activity of ZnO and CuO/ZnO (CZO) nano-photocatalysts under various irradiative intensities, we show that the effective charge separation in the CuO/ZnO band alignment is sensitive to weak illumination, while ZnO exhibits a competitive photocatalytic activity with CZO under strong illumination. As a consequence, by modifying the irradiation intensity, the intrinsic ZnO can achieve a similar photocatalytic activity to that of metal oxide decorated ZnO. Besides, the optimal photocatalytic activity of CZO is found to be reachable by manipulating the pollutant concentration.
Introduction
Photocatalysis is an effective technique for achieving ecological sustainability, from environmental remediation to clean energy harvesting.1 So far, numerous approaches have been developed to improve the performance of the applied photocatalytic platform, including heterostructure engineering,2 defect engineering,3 and synthetic strategy dependent morphology modulation,4 to name but a few. Diversified and increasingly simple methods are also being used to improve the activity of photocatalysts.5–8
For semiconductor-based photocatalytic materials, three main steps constitute the basic photocatalytic process: (i) light absorption to produce photogenerated charge carriers; (ii) transportation and separation of charge carriers; and (iii) consumption of charge carriers during surface catalytic reactions.9 Currently, the research for establishing highly active wide band-gap metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) based photocatalytic systems mainly focuses on enhancing the spectral absorption by introducing defect states,9 constructing well-matched binary/ternary band structures or more complex Z-scheme hetero-junction photocatalysts to achieve charge separation, thereby improving the photocatalytic efficiency.2,9,10 However, most of the current work on photocatalysis emphasizes the search for highly efficient band alignment between the active nanoparticles and the decorated material. By applying a fixed irradiation dose to investigate the photocatalytic activity of the modified photocatalyst, the enhanced charge separation efficiency is often the focus of attention. For instance, Chen et al.1 used the hydrogenation method to fabricate black TiO2, the as-treated photocatalysts exhibited ∼6.25 times higher photocatalytic efficiency for methylene blue (MB) degradation, and interestingly, the solar energy conversion rate reached 24% for hydrogen generation under a full-spectrum solar simulator, which produced ∼1 sun power at the sample. Zhang et al.11 reported a Ag/TiO2/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst, which showed a ∼10-fold visible light-driven hydrogen generation efficiency than pure g-C3N4 under a 300 W xenon lamp light source. Yu et al.12 used a 300 W xenon lamp as a visible light source to evaluate the performance of ZnO-CuO hetero-junction composites for Cr(VI) reduction and rhodamine b (RhB) degradation, and the attained performance was attributed to the prolonged charge carrier lifetime. Besides, the pollutant degradation rate is often described by conventional kinetic constant (K × t = ln(C0/Ct)).13,14 However, based on photon-material interaction theory, two obstacles may lead to the conventional kinetic relations inapplicable to quantify the photocatalytic activity:
(1) Based on the Beer–Lambert absorption equation, the transmission light intensity exponentially decays with the increase of the clarity of sample/pollutant suspension, indicating that the utilization of photons is associated with solution absorbance, sample concentration and the optical path. During the photocatalytic process, the light absorbance varies according to pollutant degradation. Meanwhile, for a nano-photocatalyst, the degrees of precipitation can also change the local sample density.
(2) According to Einstein's quantum theory,15 the large amount of inversion populations (excited valence electrons) under high illumination dose could cause the stimulation emission to be constant or even be suppressed. Therefore, for a photocatalyst suffering from inefficient photocatalytic activity, by applying the extreme irradiation dose, the accumulated charge could effectively engage in redox reaction, which enhances the photocatalytic activity to a large extent.
According to the obstacles mentioned above, the contribution of irradiation intensity seems omitted from the pollutant degradation kinetic equation, which leads to the immaturity of the illumination intensity controlled photocatalytic activity technique in current industrial applications. In this study, we constructed an illumination dependent kinetic equation for describing the photocatalytic activity. By monitoring the time dependent residual rhodamine B (RhB) concentration under 6 different illumination conditions, six kinetic equations can be then obtained by differentiating the individual C–t curves under certain excitation. These equations present the correlation between the excitation intensity and the pollutant degradation rate through an exponential function and an irradiation intensity dependent decay factor. Besides, by comparing the external in-band quantum yield (EIQY) enhancement ratio between the intrinsic ZnO and CuO decorated ZnO, the weakest illumination renders the EIQYCZO significantly stronger than EIQYZnO, while the strongest irradiation intensity could endow the EIQYZnO with competitive values compared to those of EIQYCZO. However, when the pollutant concentration is further modified, the EIQY enhancement ratio can still achieve a maximum value, indicating that the functionalization of effective charge separation along the CuO/ZnO band diagram can be manipulated to the optimal condition. This work provides the theoretical and experimental evidence for irradiation dependent photocatalytic activity, which creates the possibility for further improving the intrinsic semiconductor photocatalytic activity through modification of irradiation intensity and pollutant concentration.
Experimental section
Synthesis, micro-structural and optical analysis
The CuO/ZnO(CZO) NPs were synthesized by a polymer network gel method.16 Typically, Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and (CH3COO)2·H2O precursors were dispersed in deionized water. Then tartaric acid, acrylamide and N,N′-methylene diacrylamide were added into the solution in sequence, which were, respectively, used as a complexing agent, a monomer and a cross-linking agent in the synthetic process. Subsequently, glucose was added to prevent the gel formed during the preparation from contracting rapidly and thus to stabilize the gelation. The wet gel was obtained by heating and stirring the mixture at 90 °C. After drying for 24 hours, the resultant xerogel was calcined at 650 °C, and CuO decorated ZnO samples with different CuO content (1–10 mol%) were obtained. For selecting an optimal photocatalyst to conduct the subsequent experiments, the photocatalytic activities of the samples were compared by monitoring the RhB degradation under simulated sunlight (the experimental details can be found in the ESI†). As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), only modest CuO decoration content (3 mol%) can produce the optimal RhB degradation efficiency. The content of the hetero-junction in a compound photocatalyst is not the only driving force for influencing the photocatalytic efficiency, the surface redox property of the photocatalyst should also be taken into consideration (see the discussion later). The 3 mol% CuO decorated ZnO is labeled as CZO. The pure ZnO was prepared following the above procedure without adding (CH3COO)2·H2O. The raw materials content is shown in Table 1.
Table 1 The raw materials content used in the synthetic process for CZO and ZnO samples




Samples
Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O/g
(CH3COO)2·H2O/g
Glucose/g
Tartaric acid/g
Acrylamide/g
Methylene diacrylamide/g




CXZ
6.0099
0.1198
12
4.5389
10.8020
4.7095


Pure ZnO
6.0099
0.0000
12
4.5253
10.7697
4.6955




To confirm the formation of the CuO/ZnO heterojunction, DX-2000 powder XRD together with Thermo Fisher Titan G2 transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed. The incident X-ray wavelength is nominally 1.54 Å with an angular resolution of 0.02°, which is sufficient to resolve the diffraction peaks from ZnO and CuO/ZnO crystals. The TEM was operated at 300 kV, providing a 0.1 nm atomic resolution for CuO and ZnO identification. The surface photo-voltage (SPV) was detected by a home-built instrument consisting of a source of monochromatic light, a lock in amplifier (SR830-DSP) with a light chopper (SR540) and a photovoltaic cell.

In situ characterization of excitation wavelength dependent photocatalytic activity

In situ wavelength dispersive photoluminescence spectroscopy (IWDPS) was performed to determine the band alignment of the synthesized CuO/ZnO sample, and the experiment was performed using a PerkinElmer 8500F photoluminescence spectrometer. A 150 W xenon lamp equipped with a dispersive optical grating and a 150 mm optical slit was used to provide the excitation system, which allowed the selection of a certain monochromatic illumination wavelength in the 200 nm to 900 nm spectrum range. A 150 mm entrance slit with an optical grating coupled system provides a maximum 200–900 nm spectral range with a wavelength resolution (FWHM of excitation peak) of about 10 nm. Because only the excitation wavelength dependent charge separation could provide effective pollutant degradation, by in situ observing the evolution of pollutant florescence intensity under certain excitation wavelength, the effective charge separation response to a certain wavelength can be properly extrapolated.
For CuO/ZnO band diagram diagnosing and irradiation intensities related photocatalytic activity experiments, Rhodamine B (RhB) was used as an indicator, and 25 mg sample mixed with 50 mL RhB solution was used to produce a sample/pollutant suspension. 10 min ultra-sonic oscillation is sufficient to disperse the sample inside the RhB solution. Afterwards, the suspension was left in a dark cabinet for 30 min, where the pollutant molecule absorption/adsorption equilibrium condition was achieved.
Irradiation intensities dependent RhB degradation measurement set up
The irradiation intensity was controlled by 6 apertures with individual size made from a 1 mm copper plate. Analogous to the PCB copper etching technique, the diameters of the apertures used in this study were measured as 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 cm. A 300 W xenon lamp was fixed at 20 cm above the sample/pollutant suspension, where the aperture planes were fixed at the middle between the sample and the lamp. A 1 × 1 × 4.5 cm cuvette acted as a container for sample/pollutant suspension, which ensured that the sample/suspension was fully illuminated by the excitation source. The schematic experimental set up can be found in Fig. 1. A digital ultra violet irradiometer with 225 mW cm−2 maximum illumination power was used to measure the illumination intensities.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of experimental set-up. 
The intensity of the light spot was measured by the 10 × 10 digital ultra violet irradiatometer array, where the shape of the illumination beam can be observed in Fig. 2. At each time interval, the transmittance (T) is measured through a MAPADA V-1100 spectrophotometer. To exclude the degree of sample/suspension corresponding to the T value variation, the reference sample with exactly the same sample preparation procedure mentioned above was kept in a dark cabinet.
 Fig. 2  Measured illumination intensity distribution of (a) 0.3 cm, (b) 0.5 cm, (c) 0.7 cm, (d) 1.0 cm, (e) 1.5 cm and (f) 2 cm apertures. 
Theory modelling
Theoretically, if an inelastic scattering event takes place, the effective collisions between photons and nano-photocatalyst lead to e−/h+ pairs (excitons) production.15 In order to produce free carriers for photocatalytic reactions, the weak coulombic force should be overcome to create real “free” charge carriers. However, for intrinsic semiconductors, the free carriers can quickly undergo a recombination. By introducing an extra band alignment with metal oxides or transition metals to form a potential difference, the recombination process can be extensively suppressed, leading to an effective charge separation. For instance, when n-type ZnO is in contact with p-type CuO, the built-in electric field is formed due to the diffusional motion of majority-carriers. A barrier emerges near the interface to inhibit the further diffusion of majority carriers. The Fermi energy level will achieve equilibrium when the thermal equilibrium is attained. When the p–n hetero-structure is excited, the photo-generated electrons and holes will transmit in the opposite direction following the built-in electric field. Thus, the charge separation within the hetero-structure can be achieved. The band alignment of the CuO–ZnO hetero-structure is shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). When the energy of incident sunlight exceeds the band-gap widths of both ZnO and CuO, the minority carriers of CuO (electrons) transfer from the conduction band (CB) of CuO to the CB of ZnO, and the minority carriers of ZnO (holes) transfer from the valence band (VB) of ZnO to the VB of CuO, according to the energy positions of their CBs and VBs.17
As far as the mechanism of charge separation is concerned, it is soon recognized that the decomposition of dye molecules is strongly correlated with oxidizing hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), holes (h+) and oxygen radicals (˙O2−).18 Thanks to the photo-catalytic oxidation of RhB photo-degradation, and given that there is very little dissolved oxygen in water, it is difficult for excited electrons to react with oxygen molecules to form ˙O2−.18 Fig. S3 (ESI†) shows the RhB degradation curves with various radical quenching agents under simulated sunlight irradiation, and there is no obvious influence on the photocatalytic activity of the photocatalyst by adding e− quenching agent benzoquinone (BQ, 0.2 mmol), whereas the introduction of h+ and ˙OH quenching agents (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA-2Na, 0.5 mmol); isopropanol (IPA, 0.5 mmol)) drastically impairs the RhB degradation. Hence, the chemical reaction formula can be expressed as in eqn (1) and (2): h+ + OH− → ˙OH,(1) ˙OH + RhB → CO2 + H2O,(2)
According to the chemical formula, where the number of h+ is responsible for RhB molecule direct decomposition and hydroxyl radicals production, it is thus clear, for the two level photocatalyst system, that the pollutant degradation is controlled by the amount of h+ production under certain excitation intensity, which can be expressed as time dependent external in-band quantum yield (EIQYt): (3)where X is the number of h+ consumed during the decomposition of one RhB molecule, Mt and Nt are the amount of RhB molecules decomposed and incident photons during time t interval, respectively.
For evaluating the Mt, a degradation rate function should be established first. Conventional pollutant degradation rate is usually described by first order kinetic constant, which refers to the average pollutant degradation rate for the entire catalytic process. However, this theory is too optimistic for describing the photocatalytic process. Two main problems are listed below:
(1) The illumination intensity has not been properly addressed in the kinetic equation, where the stronger illumination could generally increase the photon-catalyst interaction probability rather than being absorbed by pollutants.
(2) At the beginning of the photocatalytic process, the high concentration of the RhB molecule could effectively absorb the incident photon, which minimizes the photon-catalyst interaction probability. In contrast, during the RhB degradation, the elimination of photon absorption could systematically increase the effective photon-catalyst interaction probability, which would accelerate the pollutant degradation rate.
Based on the problems mentioned above, it is soon recognized that the pollutant degradation rate is essentially illumination intensity and residual pollutant concentration dependent. Therefore, the degradation rate can be calculated as: (4) (5)where mRhB means the relative molecular mass of RhB, V is the volume of the RhB solution, and NA denotes the Avogadro constant.
For continuous illumination, the incident photon number (Nt) per unit area on the sample can be expressed as eqn (6): (6)where h is the Planck constant, c is the velocity of light, and λ denotes the wavelength of incident light.
In combination with eqn (3)–(6), the EIQYt can be described as in eqn (7) and (8): (7) (8)
For comparing the enhancement of EIQY in the developed metal oxides decorated semiconductor (EIQYMOdecoratedsemi) with the pure intrinsic semiconductor (EIQYintrinsicsemi), the EIQY enhancement ratio can be then expressed as eqn (9): (9)
As exhibited in eqn (9), because the number of h+ for decomposing one pollutant molecule is similar for both material systems, the enhancement ratio is only relevant with the irradiation intensity dependent kinetic equation.
Results and discussion
Morphology, micro-structure analysis of CZO and ZnO

Fig. 3a shows the XRD patterns of the samples. The strong diffraction peaks can be indexed as ZnO (JCPDF #65-3,411). The peaks located at 35.7° and 38.8° are assigned to (002) and (111) crystal planes of CuO (JCPDS files #48-1548). The statistics of CZO and ZnO particle sizes were measured from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 3b and d). The statistical histograms of 300 particle sizes with the corresponding Gaussian function fits are depicted in Fig. 3c and e. The peak position and FWHM are evaluated as 74.6 nm and 43.9 nm for CZO, and 79.6 and 44.3 nm for ZnO, respectively. According to Rayleigh and Mie scattering theory, the strength of scattering is associated with incident wavelength and particle size. Because the CZO and ZnO samples are similar in particle size distribution, the two samples would undergo similar elastic scattering processes at certain excitation wavelength, which produced nanoparticle–nanoparticle plural scattering events. It can then be assumed that the amount of incident photons on both samples is approximately equal, and only the absorption controlled EIQY matters for influencing the photocatalytic activity in an individual sample. The TEM image (Fig. 3f) explicitly exhibits numerous small-size CuO particles that adhere to ZnO. The CuO–ZnO hetero-structure is confirmed by High-Resolution TEM (HR-TEM) characterization (Fig. 3g and h). The lattice spacings of 0.24 nm and 0.25 nm, respectively, correspond to (101) and (002) crystal planes of ZnO and CuO.16,19 The elemental mapping results show the uniform distribution of Zn, Cu, O elements in CZO.
 Fig. 3  (a) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for samples CZO and ZnO. (b) Scanning electron microsocopy (SEM) image for CZO. (c) Statistical histograms of particle size of CZO. (d) SEM image for ZnO. (e) Statistical histograms of particle size of ZnO. (f) Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) image for sample CZO. (g and h) High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR-TEM) images for sample CZO. (i) Elemental mapping images for CZO. 
Excitation spectrum range for initiating the effective charge separation
For investigating the charge separation between CuO and ZnO, the surface photo-voltage (SPV) measurement is adopted, as shown in Fig. 4a. After CuO decoration, the positive SPV signal in the UV region is drastically intensified. Thanks to the p-type CuO with downward surface band bending, by forming the CuO/ZnO p–n junction, CuO shows a much stronger negative SPV response in the visible region, indicating the migration of photo-excited e− of CuO from the bulk to the surface under visible light irradiation, which endows ZnO with surface photo-reduction properties.20 The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra (Fig. 4b) further prove that the photo-generated carrier recombination rate is reduced with CuO introduction. With respect to the excitation wavelength for initiating the RhB dye degradation, we used our developed wavelength dispersive in situ PL technique with the RhB indicator to evaluate the light wavelength dependent effective charge separation for CZO.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photo-voltage signals for samples CZO and ZnO. (b) Steady-stated PL emission for CZO and ZnO samples. (c–f) The in situ PL emission characterization for RhB/CZO suspension under 340 nm, 350 nm, 360 nm and 450 nm excitation, respectively. (g) The photocatalytic degradation curves of RhB for samples ZnO and CZO under UV light excitation. (h) The photocatalytic degradation curves of RhB for samples ZnO and CZO under visible light excitation. 
Under 340 (Fig. 4c), 360 nm (Fig. 4e) UV light and 450 nm visible light (Fig. 4f) excitation, there is no decrease of RhB emission detected, implying that no obvious RhB degradation occurs at these excitation wavelengths. Apart from Fig. 4c, e and f, in Fig. 4d, a 350 nm excitation wavelength can produce a notable RhB florescence decay, which indicates that a ∼3.54 eV incident energy is allowed to produce effective charge separation between CuO and ZnO. To confirm that the CZO photocatalyst is only responsive to UV irradiation for RhB degradation, the conventional photocatalytic experiments16 of RhB degradation under UV and visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) were conducted, whose results are shown in Fig. 4g and h. The as-synthesized CZO shows enhanced UV light-driven photocatalytic performance, however, for both CZO and ZnO, there is no obvious degradation detected under visible light, suggesting that the photo-excited e− of CuO on the catalyst surface cannot produce effective dye oxidation due to the intrinsic reducibility of electrons. Hence, a moderate content of CuO decoration can produce efficient charge separation, whereas high content CuO coverage may impair the surface photo-oxidation property of ZnO. The results suggest that the CuO introduction only leads to an enhancement of photocatalytic efficiency under UV light. During the photocatalytic degradation, the RhB emission at its characteristic wavelength has a linear correlation with the residual RhB concentration (see Fig. S4 for the PL emission data, ESI†). As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), both ZnO and CZO show a stable photo-catalytic performance during three cycle experiments in 420 min (see the ESI,† for the cycling experiments details).
External in-band quantum yield evaluation
Conventionally, by repeatedly centrifuging the sample/pollutant suspension and measuring the absorbance of the residual pollutant (At), the photocatalytic degradation rate can then be calculated by At/A0, where A0 is the initial absorbance. After sampling, the ratio between the amount of the photocatalyst and pollutant changes for the further experiments, this introduces an error in pollutant degradation rate extrapolation. Hence, we set this experiment without separating the sample and the pollutant.
To explore the correlation between the actual concentration of RhB and the measured transmittance, we measured the T of the sample/RhB suspension (554 nm for RhB absorption edge). The transmittance is equal to the ratio of emergent light intensity (I) to incident light intensity (I0), which has a direct correlation with the scattering processes (Rayleigh scattering, Mie scattering, Raman scattering, etc.). During the degradation process, due to the precipitation of the photocatalyst (basically exists in most photocatalytic experiments), the transformation or change of scattering processes is assumed to influence the measurement of dye degradation rate in suspension. Therefore, by measuring the T parameter, some information related to the scattering can be obtained (see the ESI,† for detailed significance on the application of the T parameter). The measured T values with different RhB concentrations are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 The change of the measured T values for CZO/RhB and ZnO/RhB suspensions with RhB concentration




RhB concentration (mg L−1)

T (%) CZO/RhB

T (%) ZnO/RhB




4.0
8.83
1.63


3.5
9.57
1.93


3.0
11.5
2.50


2.5
13.1
2.80


2.0
18.5
3.30


1.5
24.87
4.07


1.0
30.33
4.90


0.5
41.83
6.67


0.0
53.53
9.47




As can be seen from Table 2, the T values for ZnO/RhB are much lower than those of CZO/RhB at different RhB concentrations, which indicates that the scattering intensity in ZnO/RhB suspension is stronger than in CZO/RhB suspension. As shown in Fig. 5a and b, the relations of C–T can be well described by exponential function, which correlates well with the Beer-Lambert law. However, the precipitation effect should be excluded before a proper conclusion can be made. To confirm the precipitation induced T value variation, the sample/pollutant suspension with 4 mg L−1 RhB was kept in a dark cabinet, where the photocatalytic activity could be effectively minimized. By measuring the transmittance at each time interval, T is confirmed to be constant with t, as shown in Fig. 5c and d. It is therefore clear that the nanoparticle precipitation process is a minor factor for T determination, which further confirms the validity of our measured C–T function as shown in Fig. 5a and b. To determine that the photocatalytic degradation of RhB is only driven by the photo-generated carriers of the photocatalyst, the RhB solution is irradiated under UV light irradiation without adding the photocatalyst (Fig. 5e). The transmittance remains constant according to experimental duration, indicating that the photocatalyst is necessary for producing significant pollutant degradation.
 Fig. 5  (a) Exponential fit of C–T curves for CZO/RhB suspension; (b) exponential fit of C–T curves for ZnO/RhB suspension; (c) the change of the T for CZO/RhB suspension over time under dark conditions. (d) The change of the T for ZnO/RhB suspension over time under dark conditions. (e) The change of the T for RhB solution over time under UV light irradiation. 
As far as the C–T function has been properly modelled, the different illumination intensities were applied to both CZO and ZnO sample/pollutant suspension with fixed 4 mg L−1 RhB concentration. Through the measurement of T at each time interval under certain excitation intensity, the time dependent T was transformed into C, which can be observed in Fig. 6 and 7.
 Fig. 6  RhB degradation curves for sample CZO under the illumination intensities of (a) 13.6 mW, (b) 80.7 mW, (c) 288.7 mW, (d) 380.2 mW, (e) 479.5 mW and (f) 544.9 mW, respectively. 
 Fig. 7  RhB degradation curves for sample ZnO under the illumination intensities of (a) 13.6 mW, (b) 80.7 mW, (c) 288.7 mW, (d) 380.2 mW, (e) 479.5 mW and (f) 544.9 mW, respectively. 
As exhibited in Fig. 6a–c, the measured C for CZO/RhB suspension decreases exponentially along with t. In Fig. 6d–f, the exponential decay of the C–t model can be clearly observed, and the degradation process almost saturates after 60 min of continuous illumination. Similar trends have been found from ZnO experiments’ results (Fig. 7) without the observation of degradation saturation (the negligible exponents result in a linear visual effect under weak light intensities).
Because the 4 mg L−1 RhB concentration is fixed for all experiments, the C as a function of t for CZO and ZnO can be then expressed as eqn (10), C = 4 × exp(−α × t)(10)
The pollutant degradation rate (K(t)) as a function of t can be determined according to eqn (4): K(t) = 4α × exp(−α × t),(11)where α denotes the decay factor in the degradation process under different illuminance intensities. To explore the relations between decay factor and irradiation intensity for CZO and ZnO samples, the K(t) functions at different illumination intensities are shown in Fig. 8a and b. The K values for CZO and ZnO increase with the enhancement of light intensity, and reduce exponentially with the increase of degradation time. By extrapolating each decay factor at corresponding irradiation intensity and fitting with the exponential function, the irradiation intensity as a function of decay factor for CZO and ZnO can be seen in Fig. 8c and d respectively. Therefore, the irradiation intensity dependent pollutant degradation rate can be modified as in eqn (12): K(t) = 4(y0 + Aexp(I0 × t) × exp(−(y0 + Aexp(I0 × t)) × t)),(12)where y0 and A are the parameters in the α–t function.
 Fig. 8  (a) The degradation rate of RhB as a function of time for CZO under the 6 illumination intensities. (b) The degradation rate of RhB as a function of time for samples CZO and ZnO under the 6 illumination intensities. (c) The decay constant as a function of light intensity for CZO. (d) The decay constant as a function of light intensity for ZnO. 
By comparing the decay factors of CZO and ZnO in Fig. 8c and d, it can be concluded that under the weak illumination intensity (<100 mW), the CZO decay factor is ∼4 times larger than the ZnO decay factor (αCZO/αZnO ∼ 4), while the proportion of αCZO/αZnO decreases to roughly 2 under strong irradiation (>500 mW). As the pollutant degradation is dominated by the decay factor, it is therefore clear that the photocatalytic activity for CZO is enhanced to a large extent under weak illumination intensity. As shown in Fig. S6a–f (ESI†), the EIQY/β value of the CZO and ZnO samples basically decreases with irradiation time due to the linear increase of incident photons. The EIQY/β of sample CZO reaches the peak value under the weakest irradiative intensity, then reduces drastically as the light intensity is increased. However, for sample ZnO, as the photocatalytic efficiency significantly enhances under strong light irradiation, the EIQY/β value of ZnO tends to increase with light intensity in the early stage of photocatalysis. Interestingly, along with the increase of irradiative intensity, the EIQY/β value of ZnO gradually approaches to that of CZO, which is attributed to the enhancing effect of CuO decoration on the photocatalytic activity of ZnO gradually decreases. To further explore the enhanced EIQY for CZO, the time dependent EIQY enhancement ratios under individual illumination intensity are depicted in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  (a) The EIQYCZO/EIQYZnO as a function of time under the illumination intensities of (a) 13.6 mW, (b) 80.7 mW, (c) 288.7 mW, (d) 380.2 mW, (e) 479.5 mW and (f) 544.9 mW. 
As shown in Fig. 9a, under the irradiation of 13.6 mW light intensity (the weakest illumination), the EIQYCZO is ∼33 times larger than EIQYZnO at the initial photocatalytic stage, during the RhB degradation, the γ drastically decreases to around 10 within initial 10 minutes and gradually reduces to ∼5 till the end of the experiment. A similar γ profile was observed in the 80.7 mW irradiation case (Fig. 9b), where the γ decreases from ∼5.5 to ∼2 within the entire RhB degradation.
As shown in Fig. 9c–f, all the profiles of γ exhibit a similar trend under relative strong illumination, where the γ increases in the first 20 minutes of the reaction and reaches a maximum value, and gradually reduces till the end of the experiment. A maximum peak can be found in all γ profiles, indicating that an optimal pollutant concentration can be modified for enhancing the functionalization of EIQYCZO to the maximal value. It is worth pointing out that by increasing the irradiation intensity, the γ value at each time interval tends to reduce. In particular, in Fig. 9e and f, the EIQYZnO and EIQYCZO could reach a competitive value, which implies that the functionalization of effective charge separation in the CuO/ZnO band diagram is weakened under strong irradiation. Furthermore, the highest γ value for each time interval is shown in Fig. 9d, suggesting that optimal strong irradiation intensity exists for achieving the best functionalization of effective charge separation along the CuO/ZnO band alignment. Therefore, through the observation, it is quite clear that the enhancement of illumination intensity could lead to the reduction of the degradation time dependent γ value; however, the optimized effective charge separation in the CuO/ZnO band diagram can be still achieved by modifying the pollutant concentration and irradiation intensity.
In the final analysis, the enhancement of photocatalytic performance of CZO is because the effective charge separation near the p–n junction reduces the recombination rate of photo-generated carriers. According to the p–n junction formation principle, in the thermal equilibrium state, the majority carrier diffusion and minority carrier drift of the p-type and the n-type semiconductors reach dynamic equilibrium, so that the p–n junction is finally formed. When light excitation breaks the dynamic equilibrium relationship, more minority carriers of ZnO and CuO break free from the covalent bond through intrinsic excitation, which systematically boosts the minority carrier drift across the built-in electric field. According to the theory of charge transfer between CuO and ZnO developed by Jung et al.17 and Qamar et al.19 (Fig. S2, ESI†), the charge transfer for photocatalytic application can be subjected to minority carrier drift between the two semiconductors. As is known, when the intrinsic excitation is enhanced in a p–n hetero-structure, the intrinsically excited minority carrier increases, while the concentration gradient of the majority carrier is basically constant. Hence, when the light intensity is enhanced, the space charge region width tends to be narrowed due to the promoted minority carrier drift motion, and jointly, the reduction of the electric field between the junctions will in turn inhibit the charge transfer.20 Therefore, for pure ZnO, under strong light intensity, the carrier recombination lifetime saturates21,22 and leaves the residual holes for engaging the photocatalytic process. By further increasing the excitation intensity, the amount of residual holes increases, which systematically improves the photocatalytic activity of ZnO. On the other hand, due to the strong excitation intensity that could lead to the inhibition of charge transportation across CuO/ZnO hetero-junction, the effect of the CuO/ZnO hetero-junction on the improvement of photocatalytic performance is limited. The mismatch of the growth rate of the photocatalytic efficiency between the two samples results in a decrease of the EIQYCZO/EIQYZnO value. Besides, the limited charge transfer under strong light intensity led by the small content of hetero-structure in the CZO sample is assumed to be another factor for the decreased EIQYCZO/EIQYZnO value.
We also conducted the experiments of RhB degradation without using apertures. As displayed in Fig. 10a and b, the decay factors for the degradation process with ZnO and CZO are both enhanced compared to the cases of using apertures. Fig. 10c shows the pollutant degradation rates for samples ZnO and CZO. The RhB degradation efficiency for CZO is only ∼1.57 times higher than ZnO at the initial stage of the experiments, and the degradation rates ratio gradually decreases with the degradation process. This observation confirms that the enhanced charge separation effect led by the introduced CuO/ZnO band structure is weak under strong light conditions, and basically remains stationary when the light intensity is further increased. The pollutant degradation for CZO and ZnO tends to saturate after 40 minutes of the experiments. As shown in Fig. 10d, the γ profile in the no aperture case displays an analogous trend to the strong light conditions with apertures (Fig. 9c–f), which further proves that the optimal functionalization of CuO/ZnO band alignment can be achieved by finding a most appropriate point of pollutant concentration.
 Fig. 10  (a) The C–t curve for RhB degradation with sample CZO. (b) The C–t curve for RhB degradation with sample ZnO. (c) The RhB degradation rate for samples ZnO and CZO. (d) The EIQYCZO/EIQYZnO value under the condition of no aperture. 
Conclusions
To conclude, we determine that the modified kinetic equation for describing the photocatalytic activity can be modelled as an exponential function, where the decay parameter is illumination intensity dependent. Simultaneously, the ZnO/CuO band diagram for an effective charge separation purpose shows pronounced functionalization at weak irradiation intensity, by gradually increasing the illumination intensity, and the CZO and ZnO tend to reach a similar EIQY value. In case of further maximizing the functionalization of effective charge separation along CuO/ZnO band alignment under strong irradiation, the pollutant concentration can be modified to the optimal value, where the peak EQIY enhancement ratio can be achieved.
The optimization of the corresponding parameters as rendered is expected to be useful in the development of an irradiation intensity controlled photocatalytic activity technique rather than further increasing the number of the relevant energy band diagram, which allows the simple and complex energy band photocatalytic material system to achieve competitive photocatalytic activity through the illumination intensity controlled technique.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, K. Y. Luo and X. Y. Wang; Data Acquisition, K. Y. Luo, X. Y. Wang and P. Ruterana; Data Analysis, K. Y. Luo and X. Y. Wang; Funding provider, Z. H. Wu, R. Han and C. H. Li; Investigation, K. Y. Luo, W. Y. Hu, J. X. Wei, Q. P. Zhang, Z. H. Wu, D. Y. Li, F. Miao, Y. Huang, M. Xu, J. Ma, C. H. Li, G. Chen, R. Han and X. Y. Wang; Methodology, K. Y. Luo, W. Y. Hu, J. X. Wei, Q. P. Zhang, Z. H. Wu, D. Y. Li, F. Miao, Y. Huang, M. Xu, J. Ma, C. H. Li, G. Chen, R. Han, X. Y. Wang, X. D. Cui and P. Ruterana; Project Administration, X. Y. Wang and X. D. Cui; Resources, K. Y. Luo, X. Y. Wang; Software, K. Y. Luo and X. Y. Wang; Supervision, X. D. Cui and P. Ruterana; Validation, X. Y. Wang and P. Ruterana; Visualization, K. Y. Luo and X. Y. Wang; Original Draft Writing, K. Y. Luo and X. Y. Wang; Review and Editing Writing, K. Y. Luo, X. Y. Wang, P. Ruterana and X. D. Cui. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
Z. H. Wu acknowledges the financial support from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Southwest Minzu University (Grant No: 2016NZYQN09), R. Han acknowledges the financial support from the Sichuan Science and technology program (Grant No: 2017JY0137) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No: 51703182). C. H. Li acknowledges the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61605188, No. 51876195), the Science, Technology Research Foundation of Sichuan Province (No. 2018JY0476, No. 2018GZ0493) and the Young Scholars Program of Xihua University (No. 21030027).
Notes and references
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Miao, Increasing solar absorption for photocatalysis with black hydrogenated titanium dioxide nanocrystals, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Chen, Y. P. Li, X. Y. Pan, D. Cortie, X. T. Huang and Z. G. Yi, Photocatalytic oxidation of methane over silver decorated zinc oxide nanocatalysts, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, C. S. Xie, H. Y. Li, C. Q. Yang, S. P. Zhang and D. W. Zeng, Selectively enhanced UV and NIR photoluminescence from a degenerate ZnO nanorod array film, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4566–4580 RSC .
S. Jung and K. Yong, Fabrication of CuO–ZnO nanowires on a stainless steel mesh for highly efficient photocatalytic applications, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2643–2645 RSC .
A. Primo, A. Corma and H. Garcíaa, Titania supported gold nanoparticles as photocatalyst, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 886–910 RSC .
Y. Z. Zhen, C. M. Yang, H. D. Shen, W. W. Xue, C. R. Gu, J. H. Feng, Y. C. Zhang, F. Fu and Y. C. Liang, Photocatalytic performance and mechanism insights of a S-scheme g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6 heterostructure in phenol degradation and hydrogen evolution reactions under visible light, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 26278–26288 RSC .
L. V. Bora and R. K. Mewada, Visible/solar light active photocatalysts for organic effluent treatment: fundamentals, mechanisms and parametric review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 1393–1421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, N. Zhang, C. Gao and Y. J. Xiong, Defect engineering in photocatalytic materials, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 296–336 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Wang, Y. F. Wang, Y. P. Feng, Y. Q. Zeng, Z. J. Xie, Q. X. Zhang, Y. H. Su, P. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Yao, W. Y. Lv and G. G. Liu, Novel ternary photocatalyst of single atom-dispersed silver and carbon quantum dots co-loaded with ultrathin g-C3N4 for broad spectrum photocatalytic degradation of naproxen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 510–520 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, S. Wang, Z. Zhao, S. Shi, S. Yan and Z. Zou, A Facet-Dependent Schottky-Junction Electron Shuttle in a BiVO4{010}-Au–Cu2O Z-Scheme Photocatalyst for Efficient Charge Separation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801214 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Sun, J. Bian, J. Wang, Y. Qu, R. Yan, C. Qin and L. Jing, Exceptional visible-light activities of g-C3N4 nanosheets dependent on the unexpected synergistic effects of prolonging charge lifetime and catalyzing H2 evolution with H2O, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Yu, S. D. Zhuang, X. Y. Xu, W. C. Zhu, B. Feng and J. G. Hu, Photogenerated electron reservoir in hetero-p-n CuO–ZnO nanocomposite device for visible light driven photocatalytic reduction of aqueous Cr(VI), J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1199–1207 RSC .
R. Rooydell, S. Brahma, R. Wang, M. R. Modaberi, F. Ebrahimzadeh and C. Liu, Cu doped ZnO nanorods with controllable Cu content by using single metal organic precursors and their photocatalytic and luminescence properties, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 69, 936–945 CrossRef .
C. Lops, A. Ancona, K. D. Cesare, B. Dumontel, N. Garino, G. Canavese, S. Hérnandez and V. Cauda, Sonophotocatalytic degradation mechanisms of Rhodamine B dye via radicals generation by micro- and nano-particles of ZnO, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 629–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Einstein, Strahlungs-emission und-absorption nach der Quantentheorie, Verh. Dtsch. Phys. Ges., 1916, 18, 318–332 CAS .
K. Y. Luo, Q. P. Zhang, H. Yuan, Y. T. Liu, X. Y. Wang, J. X. Zhang, W. Y. Hu, S. Y. Xu, I. Levchenko and K. Bazaka, Facile synthesis of Ag/Zn1−xCuxO nanoparticle compound photocatalyst for high-efficiency photocatalytic degradation: Insights into the synergies and antagonisms between Cu and Ag, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 48–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung and K. Yong, Fabrication of CuO–ZnO nanowires on a stainless steel mesh for highly efficient photocatalytic applications, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2643–2645 RSC .
K. Y. Luo, J. Li, W. Y. Hu, H. Li, Q. P. Zhang, H. Yuan, F. Yu, M. Xu and S. Xu, Synthesizing CuO/CeO2/ZnO Ternary Nano-Photocatalyst with Highly Effective Utilization of Photo-Excited Carriers under Sunlight, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Qamar, M. Aslam, I. M. I. Ismail, N. Salah and A. Hameed, Synthesis, Characterization, and Sunlight Mediated Photocatalytic Activity of CuO Coated ZnO for the Removal of Nitrophenols, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8757–8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jiang, T. F. Xie, Y. Zhang, L. P. Chen, L. L. Peng, H. Y. Li and D. J. Wang, Photoinduced charge transfer in ZnO/Cu2O heterostructure films studied by surface photovoltage technique, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15476 RSC .
X. Li, J. Qi, Q. Zhang, Q. Wang, F. Yi, Z. Wang and Y. Zhang, Saturated blue-violet electroluminescence from single ZnO micro/nanowire and p-GaN film hybrid light-emitting diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 221103 CrossRef .
R. K. Ahrenkiel, B. M. Keyes and D. J. Dunlavy, Intensity-dependent minority-carrier lifetime in III–V semiconductors due to saturation of recombination centers, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, 225 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp06649d‡ These authors have equal contribution to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

CXZ	6.0099	0.1198	12	4.5389	10.8020	4.7095
Pure ZnO	6.0099	0.0000	12	4.5253	10.7697	4.6955

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of experimental set-up.	 

 	Fig. 2  Measured illumination intensity distribution of (a) 0.3 cm, (b) 0.5 cm, (c) 0.7 cm, (d) 1.0 cm, (e) 1.5 cm and (f) 2 cm apertures.	 
h+ + OH− → ˙OH,	(1)
˙OH + RhB → CO2 + H2O,	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 3  (a) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for samples CZO and ZnO. (b) Scanning electron microsocopy (SEM) image for CZO. (c) Statistical histograms of particle size of CZO. (d) SEM image for ZnO. (e) Statistical histograms of particle size of ZnO. (f) Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) image for sample CZO. (g and h) High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR-TEM) images for sample CZO. (i) Elemental mapping images for CZO.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photo-voltage signals for samples CZO and ZnO. (b) Steady-stated PL emission for CZO and ZnO samples. (c–f) The in situ PL emission characterization for RhB/CZO suspension under 340 nm, 350 nm, 360 nm and 450 nm excitation, respectively. (g) The photocatalytic degradation curves of RhB for samples ZnO and CZO under UV light excitation. (h) The photocatalytic degradation curves of RhB for samples ZnO and CZO under visible light excitation.	 

4.0	8.83	1.63
3.5	9.57	1.93
3.0	11.5	2.50
2.5	13.1	2.80
2.0	18.5	3.30
1.5	24.87	4.07
1.0	30.33	4.90
0.5	41.83	6.67
0.0	53.53	9.47

 	Fig. 5  (a) Exponential fit of C–T curves for CZO/RhB suspension; (b) exponential fit of C–T curves for ZnO/RhB suspension; (c) the change of the T for CZO/RhB suspension over time under dark conditions. (d) The change of the T for ZnO/RhB suspension over time under dark conditions. (e) The change of the T for RhB solution over time under UV light irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 6  RhB degradation curves for sample CZO under the illumination intensities of (a) 13.6 mW, (b) 80.7 mW, (c) 288.7 mW, (d) 380.2 mW, (e) 479.5 mW and (f) 544.9 mW, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  RhB degradation curves for sample ZnO under the illumination intensities of (a) 13.6 mW, (b) 80.7 mW, (c) 288.7 mW, (d) 380.2 mW, (e) 479.5 mW and (f) 544.9 mW, respectively.	 
C = 4 × exp(−α × t)	(10)
K(t) = 4α × exp(−α × t),	(11)
K(t) = 4(y0 + Aexp(I0 × t) × exp(−(y0 + Aexp(I0 × t)) × t)),	(12)

 	Fig. 8  (a) The degradation rate of RhB as a function of time for CZO under the 6 illumination intensities. (b) The degradation rate of RhB as a function of time for samples CZO and ZnO under the 6 illumination intensities. (c) The decay constant as a function of light intensity for CZO. (d) The decay constant as a function of light intensity for ZnO.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The EIQYCZO/EIQYZnO as a function of time under the illumination intensities of (a) 13.6 mW, (b) 80.7 mW, (c) 288.7 mW, (d) 380.2 mW, (e) 479.5 mW and (f) 544.9 mW.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The C–t curve for RhB degradation with sample CZO. (b) The C–t curve for RhB degradation with sample ZnO. (c) The RhB degradation rate for samples ZnO and CZO. (d) The EIQYCZO/EIQYZnO value under the condition of no aperture.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp06649d
‡ These authors have equal contribution to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
