Integration of systems for demonstrating realistic devices: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7FD90019H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7FD90019H
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2017, 198, 539-547Integration of systems for demonstrating realistic devices: general discussion

        
          
            Leif 
            Hammarström
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jose 
            Martinez
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Richard 
            Cogdell
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kristine Rodulfo 
            Tolod
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alexander 
            Kibler
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Haruo 
            Inoue
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Devens 
            Gust
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Flavia 
            Cassiola
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Nocera
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Osamu 
            Ishitani
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fabio 
            Di Fonzo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kazunari 
            Domen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tohru 
            Setoyama
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Akihiko 
            Kudo
          
        
      
First published on 24th May 2017

Daniel Nocera opened discussion of the paper by Tohru Setoyama: In your analysis, you use 3.50 US$ per kg, while in the US, H2 from natural gas is approximately 1.50 US$ per kg. How does a change in the price per kilogram of hydrogen affect your technoeconomic analysis?

Tohru Setoyama replied: I recognize the difference of the production cost of hydrogen in the US. Although I agree with you that the production cost of solar hydrogen will be not as cheap during the depreciation period, we expect that this will drop to less than 1.00 US$ per kg after completion of the depreciation period. As you know, the production cost of chemicals by conventional processes are raw-material sensitive. On the other hand, those by artificial synthesis are depreciation sensitive. Therefore the key issue for us, is to realize a very cheap solar hydrogen module. High STH is not a key issue.

Daniel Nocera asked: I know that your H2/O2 separation technology is confidential and tied up in intellectual property (IP). But can you give a value for the current estimated cost of the H2/O2 separation using your special membrane technology?

Tohru Setoyama replied: We can estimate the required performance of membrane to be 10% STH. We have already some membrane business. The membrane is an highly oriented zeolite film attached to an α-alumina support. Because the zeolite film is very thin, its material cost is almost negligible. Therefore the cost of support is dominant in the production cost of membrane module. When we reach the target performance of membrane, we will need ca. 1 meter of support per square meter of catalyst sheet. The price of α-alumina is not very cheap at the moment because the amount produced is small, however, we expect it will become cheap enough at the time of practical installation.

Fabio Di Fonzo noted: Your techno-economical analysis shows that after 10 years the cost of the produced H2 will drop, mostly due to the end of depreciation. Nevertheless, we heard from Kazunari Domen that the durability of the catalyst sheets is still an issue, requiring replacement every few years. How does this affect your analysis?

Tohru Setoyama answered: We are focussing on the preparation of a photocatalyst sheet. This is because the cost of catalyst sheet is not very expensive, therefore exchanging the catalyst sheet every several years is feasible. The other components such as a transparent roof, reactor pool, pipe for gas transportation etc. should remain in good working condition for at least 10 years.

Devens Gust asked: Does your analysis include the cost of the land for the site where the solar collectors would be situated? In Japan, for example, suitable land area might be extremely expensive.

Tohru Setoyama responded: The cost of the land for the solar collector does not include this consideration. We think that the existing land used for industrial plants such as a refinary, cracker, forest for paper manufacture etc. should be used as the site because their costs are already covered. As you point out, the cost of Japan is very expensive and its latitude is too high to be economically feasible. We think that artificial photosynthetic chemicals should be produced in a sun-belt area.

Fabio Di Fonzo addressed Tohru Setoyama and Kazunari Domen: What is the impact of different electrolytes in your analysis? What type have you considered?

Tohru Setoyama answered: The pH condition should be almost neutral to avoid the critical issue of the corrosion of material. As a result, we can use very cheap materials for the reactor. Although some people asked us about the possibility of using sea water, I believe that halogen-free neutral electrolytes are should be used. As a general rule for chemical processes, halogen-ion containing aqueous solutions should be avoided.

Kazunari Domen replied: The water splitting activity of particulate photocatalyst sheets were measured at pH values ranging from 2.5 to 7.5 in our previous study. The activity was slightly enhanced in mildly-acidic aqueous solution but was almost independent of the pH values. Therefore, we did not examine the influence of reaction solutions in detail and used distilled water in most cases. It will be interesting to see if sea water can be directly used for water splitting.

Kristine Tolod asked Tohru Setoyama and Kazunari Domen: I understand that the economic analysis and feasibility is anchored on an assumption of 10% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency. What if you don’t reach 10% STH with the z-scheme photocatalysts? How will the economics change? Will the discrepancy in efficiency be compensated by photovoltaic systems?

Kazunari Domen responded: The impact of lowering the STH on the economics is unclear because it heavily depends on many industrial conditions such as the location of artificial photosynthesis plants. Probably, researchers from the industry can answer this question in detail. It is suspected that the amount of hydrogen produced becomes lower and hydrogen becomes more expensive. As a consequence, the flexibility of process design will be limited. We will try our best to achieve a STH value of 10% or higher.

Tohru Setoyama remarked: 10% STH was set in order to meet the required irradiation area for olefin production. After completing the depreciation of the initial investigation, the production cost of olefin will drop drastically because its material costs are composed of water and CO2. Furthermore we do not count the contribution of the consumption of CO2. This should have some value. Compared to the application of solar hydrogen as a fuel, olefin can be converted into value added chemicals. When we estimate the economic feasibility including value added chemicals, which have been commercialized, it may be possible to regard such a value added chemical derived from solar hydrogen. I think there are many optional business strategies to keep this economically feasible. If a country or region take the climate issues very seriously, they should support some attractive business models.

Daniel Nocera commented: The area needed scales with 1/x of the efficiency, and that relates directly to cost of the system.

Tohru Setoyama said: The efficiency is a key factor of the required area. The modules are composed of reactor vessel, catalyst sheet, separation unit, transparent roof, tube for gas transportation, water tank etc. Some of these will be almost constant per unit area. I can say that the efficiency is very influential to the total cost. Although the cost of catalyst sheet is not the major portion of total cost, it will have a clear upper limit to remain economically feasible because the value of solar hydrogen and oxygen is defined by STH. We have to pay attention to efficiency and cost composition together.

Osamu Ishitani asked: You have tried to develop CO2 conversion factories with H2 production systems using solar light. You should need a lot of water and avoid competition with vegetation in nature. Where will you construct these factories?

Tohru Setoyama communicated in reply: CO2 should be collected at the plant site such as a power plant using fossil resources and chemical processes using oxidation reactions. We can expect a high concentration of emitted CO2. Collection technologies for CO2 have been well established through the removal technology to provide H2 by reforming. At the same time, this is being improved by the necessity of CCS. In any case, we can expect very cheap CO2 at the period of installation of water splitting by sunlight. Such a location also support the compensation of the land price of the water splitting module because it has already been paid for by the existing plant. After depreciation of module, we can expand the area by spending the profit.

Alexander Kibler opened discussion of the paper by Daniel Nocera: During the process of carbon dioxide fixation to biomass, is it not necessary to supply sources of nitrogen, phosphorous and sulphur as well as other trace elements to the bacteria? If you rely on the nutrient media to supply those does the nutrient media need replenishing and how often would that need to occur?

Daniel Nocera answered: As you mention, we use an initial charge with nitrate and phosphate because you need these essential elements for building proteins, DNA, etc. After that initial charge, the bacteria are only fed solar-generated hydrogen. The P and N are then cycled through the release from dying cells and uptake of new cells. We maintain a steady-state growth condition when the cells are making fuels, so maintenance of the culture is minimal and after the initial charge of inorganics, the system is self-sustaining.

Fabio Di Fonzo asked: In your system, what is the maximum equivalent current that the bacteria can sustain?

Daniel Nocera replied: These sorts of questions depend primarily on the design of a working reactor. We are in the process of setting up a project on proto-typing and scale-up. Once we have working reactors, data can be collected to address these issues.

Fabio Di Fonzo queried: What is the maximum efficiency you expect from this system?

Daniel Nocera responded: The maximum energy efficiency depends intrinsically on the solar to hydrogen inefficiency, times the hydrogen to fuels efficiency. When these two factors are considered, I assume that systems like this will top out at 10–15% overall energy efficiencies.

Haruo Inoue commented: These are amazing results. In this case, are you using pure CO2? Have you considered the possibility of using atmospheric air with very small amount of CO2? In this case, oxygen will come into the system and will mix with hydrogen. Is there any problem with this?

Daniel Nocera said: We have run the bacteria under concentrated carbon dioxide and air. In the case of air, we can scrub carbon dioxide from 1200 litres of air because the organisms have natural carbon dioxide concentration mechanisms. One reason we chose Ralstonia eutropha is that the bacteria has hydrogenases that are relatively oxygen tolerant. When we run this in air, we make sure that we do not run with a combustible hydrogen/oxygen mixture.

Devens Gust said: You have engineered this organism so as to "enslave" it to produce a lot of something it does not usually produce in such quantity. Is the tendency of the organism to "revolt" and mutate back to a form that does something other than make fuel for humans a problem?

Daniel Nocera responded: The bacteria are capable of genetic mutation. We have taken advantage of this and challenged the bacteria with reactive oxygen species (ROS), and they mutated to eliminate a membrane efflux protein through which ROS was entering the cell. These super bugs are ROS resistant. At the same time, can mutations eliminate the fuel making machinery. For the months of duration of the operation, we’ve seen very little back pressure to eliminate the fuel making machinery. One reason we chose Ralstonia eutropha is their resilience to “revolting” and mutating backwards.

Leif Hammarström asked: You indicated that you may need to change the microorganism to give higher efficiencies. What other organisms would be interesting, and why? How much product accumulation can the present organisms tolerate?

Daniel Nocera replied: Your question addresses a phase of research that we have yet to tackle. To date, we have achieved energy efficiencies that are ten times that of natural photosynthesis and in a one litre reactor and one litre beaker we can scrub the equivalence of 1200 litres of carbon dioxide out of the air per day. The reactor design is crude and not optimized. We haven’t really pushed harder with hydrogen to date (say for example by introducing more hydrogenases into the cell), but we realize that then carbon dioxide may become limited. Thus it is critical now to begin building reactors and prototypes, a task we hope to undertake with collaborators over the next two years. Then as you say, there are other cellular systems to explore which is a second research pathway that is now under consideration.

Richard Cogdell commented: I live in a place where there are lots on windmills. But when too much wind blows the grid can’t cope and they turn them off. Would you consider using your system powered by the excess and free electricity that could come in the case of excess wind? Also how well does your system cope with the natural intermittency of solar energy?

Daniel Nocera answered: Here we have used a photovoltaic to generate the hydrogen to drive the water splitting catalysts. We have also used the artificial leaf to make the hydrogen but as you correctly note, we could use any renewable source to drive water splitting including wind. The system has no intermittency problems. We have shown that when the bacteria are not fed hydrogen, they continue to make carbon albeit at a lower rate. Then when the sun (or wind) is “turned on” again, i.e., the hydrogen supply is re-introduced, they start up once again. This is an important point. Once you have hydrogen, the carbon reduction cycle is thermoneutral and thus may continue in the dark. The data was presented in our Science paper in 2016,1 and shows that carbon dioxide fixation slows in the dark (i.e. with no hydrogen) but continues at a lower rate. When hydrogen is re-introduced, carbon dioxide fixation picks up at a faster rate. For the work reported here, this has been confirmed in the 13C experiments as well.
1 C. Liu, B. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210.

Richard Cogdell replied: The other thing about using windmills is that the land requirements are less than those required to harvest solar energy.

Daniel Nocera responded: At an energy efficiency of 10 times more than the most efficient land-based biomass, the bionic leaf requires 1/10th the land requirement. Moreover, the system does not compete for land resources such as crops. The land is needed for solar water splitting; the biomass conversion is performed separately from the solar water splitting process. Thus you are right in your assessment, the land requirement is dictated by solar water splitting, not carbon dioxide conversion.

Jose Martinez opened a general discussion of the paper by Tohru Setoyama and Daniel Nocera: How do you get people to adapt to using these new technologies and stop using what they use now?

Daniel Nocera answered: The answer to this question is sometimes trivialized by those in the field. I often get reviews asking about cost with issues brought up as long-term stability, vertical integration, etc., all driving at the system toward being “cheap enough”. I want to emphasize this — nothing we do will ever be cheaper than pumping carbon out of the ground and then feeding it into a multi-trillion dollar infrastructure, which has been paid off over the last hundred years. Carbon needs to be priced, plain and simple, for any of these technologies to have an immediate technological footing. Science need to begin genuinely working with policy people. Also, a large energy infrastructure has not been put in place in the developing world. For this reason, most of our efforts are focused there, in translating new technology.

Tohru Setoyama replied: Chemical industry will be one of the most plausible candidates to install this technology because the value addition to solar hydrogen by converting CO2 to olefins is more attractive than the application of solar hydrogen as a fuel. We also have to pay attention to CH4 utilization by the combination with CO2 in the future. Dry reforming is an almost established technology to realize CO2 utilization. It will construct an infrastructure of CO2 utilization.

Leif Hammarström commented: It is right that the main reason to reduce fossil fuel dependence is not that they are too expensive. Therefore in the long term, perspective target prices as low as current coal or natural gas cannot be relevant for solar fuels. Still, it is important to show to decision makers, funding agents etc. that solar fuels can be reasonably priced in the future. Predicting these prices is very difficult. Nevertheless, technoeconomic analysis can suggest what we should focus on and what we should avoid. What do you think are the most useful published techno-economic analyses?

Akihiko Kudo said: The answer will be in Dr Setoyama’s paper.

Tohru Setoyama responded: I have shown our feasibility study of semi-conductor type sheet catalyst and its application for chemical production. Please refer our methodology. The economic feasibility of the photocatalytic system process is very sensitive to initial investment. After completing the depreciation, the production cost of solar chemicals will become cheaper than those derived from fossil resources. This is the main issue in providing a cheaper module.

Flavia Cassiola remarked: The economics of making use of fossil fuels were well established by the decades we have been using it and by all the infrastructure developed to make modern life works as we enjoy it today. Still however, many people have no access to energy regardless its affordability.
No, we are not going to stop using fossil fuel because it is expensive or because of carbon taxation. The energy demand for the growing global population cannot afford abandonment of any source that we can responsibly explore to provide energy to everyone. Solar fuels will play an important role in future as each part in the globe will explore its best energy solution, which will depend on its needs, e.g. season of the year, lifestyle etc. Responsible governments will have huge participation not only in providing funds and incentives but also in educating their population on the responsible and sustainable consumption of energy. Therefore, it not just about replacing fossil fuels that will make solar fuels a success. That is the reason one has to be aware of local published techno-economic analysis studies, specific to countries/areas of the globe. Unbiased international agencies (the UN for example) would be a source as they are supposed to have local sources with deep knowledge covering different locations. Also, private sector companies investing in the energy sector usually contract their own analysis based on a specific area. I would say most of the reports are made available as part of investment strategy.

Fabio Di Fonzo addressed Daniel Nocera and Tohru Setoyama: Between indirect (i.e. solar H2 production followed by dark electrochemical or chemical CO2 reduction) and direct (CO2+H2O+solar energy into products) methods, which do you consider most promising path towards large scale, efficient and economical CO2 conversion into fuels of higher added value chemicals?

Daniel Nocera responded: This question comes down to the application. When we developed an artificial leaf with the self-repairing catalysts, we constructed side by side direct and indirect hydrogen splitting systems. What is made up for one in cost, is lost in another. For instance, the ability to simply split hydrogen with coatings on silicon lowers overall manufacturing costs but that saving is lost in hydrogen compression, which can be performed by electrolytic compression in an indirect system. So choice of direct versus indirect for me is one of application.

Tohru Setoyama communicated in reply: I cannot recommend the latter direct CO2 fixation, because the reaction velocity of CO2 fixation is not very fast, therefore high catalyst concentration and a large supply of CO2 will be necessary. This means that gas bubbling in solution may disturb the light radiation and the water supply to the catalyst. If you want to try this route, it should be a vapor phase reaction. In this case, we can expect some enhancement of catalytic performance at higher operation temperature.
As a conclusion, autogeneous H2 evolution and the conventional CO2 conversion technology will be preferable. It is a relatively easy two electron reaction and it is accessible to conventional technologies. I think it is very realistic.

Fabio Di Fonzo asked Daniel Nocera: Why is your process expensive if the bacteria are doing everything? What is the cause of this high cost?

Daniel Nocera replied: First off, cost is a relative term. Cost is referenced against a paid-off, existing fossil fuel infrastructure. As mentioned elsewhere, nothing will be cost-competitive in the short-term until carbon is priced. Having said this, there are capital expenditure costs with the system: those associated with hydrogen generation and with an actual reactor.

Flavia Cassiola asked: The duration of the membrane is described as 2 years; would this period be practical in a large scale system? Unless the new infrastructure is very simple, shutting down operations every 2-year period to replace membranes may not be viable. Instead of developing an exchange process, why not develop a more durable material? Would it be possible to dream of a membrane that will last at least 5 years? (Or ideally 10 years?)

Tohru Setoyama communicated in reply: I guess that there is some misunderstanding. I argued the duration of catalyst sheet as 2 years. We expect that the duration of the membrane for gas separation will be 10 years or more because it was a very stable ceramic membrane. On the other hand, the required weight of catalyst per square meter will be ca. 5g or so. For example, when we assume 500 US$ per kg as the production cost of catalyst, we pay 2.5 US$ per square meter. We recognize that to obtain a very stable catalyst is an important subject. Although we are tackling this tough issue, we think that the practical installation by means of a tentative catalyst sheet should be initiated if it has an enough economic feasibility.

Flavia Cassiola communicated: Prof Nocera commented that his system doesn’t do CO2 concentration; rather that they are bugs that have their own concentration mechanism. Within this assumption, is there anything else that could be done that would improve the fuel production (other than provide more CO2)? I assume the system must be homogenized constantly (microorganism and its substrate). What would be the ideal atmospheric CO2 capture in your system that would reduce to a minimum the homogenization requirement?

Daniel Nocera responded: At this point, the solar-to-biomass efficiency is 10% and solar-to-liquid fuels efficiency is 5–7% depending on the liquid fuel. This is with a 12% solar-to-hydrogen driver. The first place to pick up efficiency is to increase the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency. The field will probably top out this value somewhere between 15–20% (using inexpensive materials; of course, this could go much higher using more expensive photovoltaics). Under the current configuration, we are limited by hydrogen. So, a second place to pick up efficiency is to increase the hydrogen turnover (increase the hydrogenase copy number). But then we will become limited by carbon. Thus, a third place to turn is a new organism that has a faster carbon fixation cycle. Finally, you touch on reactor design and prototyping. Optimization will require scale-up, a task on which we are now working.

Daniel Nocera commented: With regard to land area requirements, the technology you are developing, with Professor Domen, could be implemented offshore in principle; is this possible?

Tohru Setoyama communicated in reply: I agree that installation offshore would be very attractive. One concern of this approach is the recent trend of climate issues. I think that these are becoming more serious year by year. To avoid the influence of a big hurricane or typhoon, we have to consider the mobility of the process for solar hydrogen production. It will be a nice strategy to combine offshore fossil resource and solar hydrogen. I think that would be more realistic.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
