The recent development of efficient Earth-abundant transition-metal nanocatalysts  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00629A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00629A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 816-854The recent development of efficient Earth-abundant transition-metal nanocatalysts

        
          
            Dong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Didier 
            Astruc
          
          
        
      *
      ISM, UMR CNRS 5255, Univ. Bordeaux, 33405 Talence Cedex, France. E-mail: wangdong0377@163.com; didier.astruc@u-bordeaux.fr
Received 
      22nd August 2016
    First published on 19th January 2017AbstractWhereas noble metal compounds have long been central in catalysis, Earth-abundant metal-based catalysts have in the same time remained undeveloped. Yet the efficacy of Earth-abundant metal catalysts was already shown at the very beginning of the 20th century with the Fe-catalyzed Haber–Bosch process of ammonia synthesis and later in the Fischer–Tropsch reaction. Nanoscience has revolutionized the world of catalysis since it was observed that very small Au nanoparticles (NPs) and other noble metal NPs are extraordinarily efficient. Therefore the development of Earth-abundant metals NPs is more recent, but it has appeared necessary due to their “greenness”. This review highlights catalysis by NPs of Earth-abundant transition metals that include Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, early transition metals (Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb and W) and their nanocomposites with emphasis on basic principles and literature reported during the last 5 years. A very large spectrum of catalytic reactions has been successfully disclosed, and catalysis has been examined for each metal starting with zero-valent metal NPs followed by oxides and other nanocomposites. The last section highlights the catalytic activities of bi- and trimetallic NPs. Indeed this later family is very promising and simultaneously benefits from increased stability, efficiency and selectivity, compared to monometallic NPs, due to synergistic substrate activation.
Dong Wang
Dong Wang studied organic chemistry with Prof. Baohua Chen at the University of Lanzhou where he received a doctoral degree. He prepared a second doctorate with Prof. Didier Astruc at the University of Bordeaux that he defended in 2014 on catalysis in dendritic nanoreactors. He conducted post-doc studies successively with Prof. Datong Song at the University of Toronto in 2014–2015 and now with Prof. Ben Zhong Tang in Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Didier Astruc
Didier Astruc was born in Versailles and studied in the University of Rennes where he defended his doctoral degrees with Prof. René Dabard. He was then a NATO post-doctoral fellow at MIT with Prof. Richard R. Schrok. He is professor of chemistry at the University of Bordeaux and a Member of the Institut Universitaire de France and several Academies.
1. Introduction
Nanoscience1,2 occupies an important place in both academic research and industry with a considerable potential of applications in everyday life including sensors, safety, medicine and multiple aspects of technology. As an essential part of nanoscience, nanocatalysis,3–10 defined as nanoparticle catalysis, i.e. catalytic processes involving catalytically active materials comprising either particles with 1–100 nm size in one dimension or porous compounds having pore diameters not bigger than 100 nm,1,2 has undergone explosive growth during the past decade.3–22 Nanocatalysis combines the positive aspects of both homogenous catalysis (high catalytic activity, high selectivity and mechanistic studies leading to catalyst optimization) and heterogeneous catalysis (easy catalyst separation and good recyclability). The so-called “semi-heterogeneous” nanocatalysts have recently become the subject of one of the most significant directions in ongoing research in catalysis and a prominent example illustrating the efforts towards “green chemistry”.16,17 Specific and outstanding properties of nanocatalysts are disclosed or expected concerning selectivity, activity, durability, tenability, recoverability and other unique properties compared to bulk catalysts.
In this context, nanomaterials based on transition metals are the main nanocatalysts, because transition-metal species do not only mimic metal surface activation and catalysis at the nanoscale, but are also utilized as nano-sized catalyst supports. The second- and third-row late transition metals, especially Pd, Au, Pt, Ru and Ag, have been extensively exploited in NP catalysis, and a large variety of organic transformations have been achieved using NPs based on these metals. However, their industrial applications are severely hampered by their high prices caused by their low abundances on Earth and by deleterious effects on the biological system. Metal residues of these noble metals in pharmaceuticals are subject to strict official regulations in order to minimize their amounts to low ppm level. As their 4d and 5d analogues, the Earth-abundant first-row transition metals including Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu (“biometals”) have been comparatively underutilized until the past few years, because of their labile nature compared to their second- and third-row counterparts, complex mechanistic manifolds and less obvious catalytic properties.23–27 In addition, NP catalysis involving Earth-abundant early transition metals (Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, and W) has also been investigated, in particular for photocatalysis over Ti oxides nanocatalysts. Besides Ti, however, only a few reports involving other Earth-abundant early transition metal NP catalysts have emerged. For economical and ecological issues, and with the rapid development of both nanotechnologies and analytical methods, these Earth-abundant transition metal NPs (so-called sustainable transition metals) have recently attracted increasing attention in the field of nanocatalysis. Indeed they benefit from low cost, ready availability, comparatively low toxicity, greater sustainability, and unique reactivity profiles. For many classic reactions and challenging transformations, Earth-abundant transition metal NP catalysts have already appeared as attractive alternatives to precious metal NPs.28,29
Therefore rapid recent advance in Earth-abundant transition metal NP catalysis prompts us to review the basic concepts, catalyst assortment, seminal studies, new breakthroughs and perspectives, with the aim of stimulating new development in this exciting research area. Emphasis is placed on literature that has appeared since 2012.
First, three classes of nanocatalysts will be distinguished and briefly defined: (i) pre-synthesized nanocatalysts, (ii) nanocatalysts generated in situ and (iii) catalyst supports. Then the Earth-abundant nanocatalysts of 3d biometals will be treated by metal according to the increasing atomic number of the late transition metals (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu) followed by the early transition metal-based nanocatalysts, and finally the bi- and polymetallic nanocatalysts. For each metal section, the zero-valent metal NPs (if any) are treated first. For the early transition metal nanomaterials and Mn, catalysis by very reactive zero-valent metal NPs is practically non-existent. Few examples are known with Fe, but blending Fe(0) NPs with another metal NP is more profitable for stability and synergistic activation. Zero-valent metal NP catalysts are numerous with Co, Ni and Cu. Then following the zero-valent metal NPs, the oxides and other nanocomposites are treated in each metal section.
2. Pre-synthesized Earth-abundant transition-metal nanoparticle catalysts
The intrinsic properties of transition-metal NP catalysts in selectivity, activity, stability, energy efficiency and atom economy are induced by several effects, such as their shape, size, support, dimensionality, morphology, oxidation state, composition, confinement, and interparticle distance.30 Therefore, pre-synthetic processes (meaning that nanocatalysts are prepared in a controlled way before catalytic use) for transition-metal nanocatalysis under controllable conditions are very important to achieve the enhancement, promotion, steering and control of catalysis. The use of this protocol leads to a majority of Earth-abundant transition-metal nanocatalysts that are classified in stabilized/encapsulated nanomaterials and inorganic solid-supported nano-hybrids.
Aggregation of naked Earth-abundant transition-metal nanomaterials that generally results from small interparticle distances, high surface energy, van der Waals forces and/or magnetic attraction is virtually unavoidable and causes an obvious decrease in their useful properties. To-date the use of suitable carriers or support materials is the best solution to overcome this drawback. Meanwhile the properties of synthesized Earth-abundant transition-metal nanomaterials are indeed affected by the inherent nature of these carriers or support materials.
Classic NP characterization techniques include transmission electron spectroscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM). These techniques allow evaluating the size, shape and polydispersity of the NPs. Synthetic methods usually target the smallest possible NPs in order to maximize the proportion of surface atoms that are generally the active ones in catalysis. High-resolution TEM provides a high precision in the observation of single atoms and NP shape. UV-vis spectroscopy is very useful to control the electronic structure, and characteristic bands are observable for given oxidation states. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) provides information on the oxidation state. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX) are indicative of the crystal structure and nature, composition and oxidation state of the elements. Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) commonly provides the amount of the metal in the nanomaterial. NMR and FTIR spectroscopy of the ligands bonded to the NP surface are sometimes useful for NP surface characterization. A major problem for the transition metal NPs in the zero oxidation state, in particular those of the first raw, is their sensitivity to air. Thus these NPs are more or less readily oxidized in air depending on the nature of the metal and protection by the NP stabilizer. Therefore the above combined methods are indispensible to characterize the nature and extent of NP surface oxidation to oxides. Magnetic susceptibility and optical studies are eventually applicable in specific cases (iron oxide supports, Cu NPs > 27 nm that are plasmonic).
Polymers (including dendrimers) are the most widely used stabilizing reagents in the preparation of Earth-abundant transition-metal nanomaterials,31 mainly because of their adjustable parameters, such as solubility, type of functional groups, molecular weight, degree of crosslinking, and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity. The stabilization of Earth-abundant transition metal nanomaterials using polymers as capping reagents is generally achieved by providing steric bulk of the polymeric framework, electrostatic interaction between functional groups and NPs, and/or ligand-like weak binding of heteroatoms of polymers to the NP surface. A variety of polymers have been found useful for the stabilization of these nanomaterials, such as poly(N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone) (PVP), polyethylene glycol (PEG), polyacrylic acid (PAA), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene) (PEDOT), carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propansulfonic acid) (PAMPS), polyaniline (PANI), polystyrene (PS), and many co-polymers.
PVP probably is the most utilized stabilizer to assemble transition-metal nanomaterials, because it is water-soluble and perfectly fulfills both steric and ligand requirements for stabilization. For instance PVP-coated Cu(0) NPs were readily prepared by a conventional chemical reduction route, and they performed well in both alkyne–azide cycloaddition32 and Ullmann ether synthesis.33 Interestingly these NPs were recovered by simple filtration and recycled several times without significant loss of catalytic activity.32 Reports on the syntheses and catalytic applications of PVP-stabilized Fe(0), Co(0), Ni(0) and bimetallic NPs have also recently appeared. Indeed these Earth-abundant transition-metal nanomaterials were sterically protected by PVP as a coordinative capping agent and showed good stability towards oxidation under harsh conditions. Their catalytic performances have been proven for several reactions, in particular Fenton reaction, bromate reduction, hydrogen production, Knoevenagel condensation and CO2 hydrogenation.
PEG is another very important and useful polymer stabilizer owing to its unique properties including low cost, good solubility both in water and oil, non-toxicity, biocompatibility and ready accessibility.34 PEG has been extensively applied to the construction of nanocatalysts involving Fe, Cu, Ni and Co. Astruc's group19 prepared a tris(triazolyl) fragment-functionalized PEG-2000 ligand and utilized it as stabilizer in syntheses of Fe NPs, Co NPs, Ni NPs, and Cu NPs with very small particle size ranging from 1.3 to 2.1 nm (Fig. 1). It was proposed that these NPs were stabilized and activated by both triazolyl and PEG groups, and the resulting good stability and activity ensured their applications in catalysis. All these pre-synthesized Earth-abundant transition-metal NPs were shown to be active in 4-nitrophenol reduction in water. Their catalytic performances were not as good as those of their precious metal analogs (Pt NPs, Ru NPs, PdNPs, and Au NPs). In the case of azide–alkyne cycloaddition, the tris(triazolyl)–PEG–Cu NPs were remarkably efficient in the model reaction of phenylacetylene with benzyl azide, and the desired 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole was quantitatively isolated in the presence of only 20 ppm of Cu, providing a TON of 28000 and a TOF of 1170 h−1.35
 Fig. 1  Tris(triazolyl)–PEG ligand-stabilized transition metal NPs in 4-nitrophenol reduction and CuAAC reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Polymeric stabilizers with variable functional groups play a crucial role in controlling the sizes and crystal structures of Earth-abundant transition-metal nanomaterials. Parimala et al.36 reported that Cu NPs were successfully assembled using PEG, CMC and PVP as stabilizers under the same conditions with mean sizes of 6, 12 and 15 nm, respectively. Comparative catalytic tests in reduction reactions of aromatic nitro compounds revealed that the Cu NPs synthesized with PEG and CMC provided better catalytic performances than the PVP-stabilized Cu NPs, confirming that smaller NPs possess higher catalytic efficiency than larger ones. In addition, the polymerization degree of polymeric capping molecules has been shown to be another important factor controlling the NP size.37
Dendrimers, a family of nanosized three-dimensional molecular frameworks with well-defined structures, sizes, molecular masses and precise numbers of functional groups38–44 have been shown to possess promising and essential uses in stabilization and encapsulation of transition metal NPs.43,44 The sizes of these dendrimer-stabilized NPs (DSNs) or encapsulated NPs (DENs) are generally tunable, because the number of metal atoms in the precatalyst is predictable according to the precise number of coordinating sites in dendrimers. Many remarkable works have been reported on DSNs or DENs in catalysis involving precious metals (Pd, Au, Pt).45,46 The catalytic capability of Earth-abundant transition metal NPs supported by dendrimers has been rarely studied, however. Indeed a few reports on DSNs and DENs based on Ni NPs47 and Co NPs48 have recently appeared. The complexation of hydroxyl-terminated PAMAM dendrimers of generation 6 (G6) with Co2+ cations, and further reduction by both ammonia borane (AB) and NaBH4 were carried out, and the assembly of PAMAM-encapsulated Co NPs (G6-OH(Co60)) was achieved using this process (Fig. 2). The pre-synthesized G6-OH(Co60) with an average diameter of 1.6 nm has been shown to be a high-performance catalyst for H2 generation from the hydrolysis of ammonia borane in aqueous solution, giving up to 47.2 molH2molmetal−1 min−1 of TOF value.48
 Fig. 2  Dendrimer-encapsulated Co NPs as efficient catalysts for the hydrolysis of ammonia borane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides the use of dendrimer as stabilizing reagents, these macromolecules have been also widely utilized as supports for the construction of dendritic complex catalysts with Earth-abundant transition metals including Cu, Co, and Cu/Fe (Fig. 3–5). In these catalysts, the presence of dendritic scaffold results in their nanomaterial property and application in nanocatalysis. Branched- or core-functionalized dendritic copper complexes (G4 PAMAM–Cu(I)49 or PEG-terminated Cu tren50) were highly efficient in the CuAAC reaction, regio-selectively yielding 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-trizoles. In both cases, water-soluble dendrimers work as nanoreactors, enabling the reaction of water-insoluble substrates in aqueous solution. Hydrolytic kinetic resolution (HKR) of terminal epoxides smoothly proceeded using PAMAM dendrimers loaded with Co–salen complexes (PAMAM–Co, Fig. 5) as catalysts,51 and the catalytic efficiency of the dendritic catalyst was superior to those of the monomeric and dimeric counterparts, showing a positive dendritic effect. The Yamamoto group reported the design, synthesis of dendritic phenylazomethine-supported bimetallic complexes assembled with Cu(II) and Fe(III) ions (DPAG4–Cu/Fe, Fig. 3), and their catalytic evaluation in aerobic oxidative polymerization of 2,6-difluorophenol.52 Comparison experiments revealed that DPAG4–Cu/Fe was very active in this polymerization, and the catalytic performance in term of molecular mass of produced polymer significantly outperformed that of its Cu-based monometallic analogs.
 Fig. 3  Dendrimer-supported catalysts G4 PAMAM–Cu(I) and DPAG4–Cu/Fe. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 and 52. Copyright 2011, Elsevier Ltd. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
 Fig. 4  PEG-terminated Cu tren catalyst for “click” reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 5  PAMAM dendrimer-supported Co complex catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2000, Wiley-VCH. 
Heterogenization by fixation onto heterogeneous solid supports has often been conducted with the aim to enhance the stability and recyclability of homogeneous nanocatalysts bearing Earth-abundant transition metals. In view of sustainable chemistry and economical issues, nanocatalysis involving immobilized or grafted Earth-abundant transition metals is nowadays undergoing an explosive development. Fixation of Earth-abundant transition metals including Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu, is known on almost all the conventional solid materials including graphene, carbon nanofibers, activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, alumina, silica materials and molecular organic frameworks (MOFs). These pre-synthesized nanocomposites generally perform well in various reactions concerning catalytic activity, tolerance of substrate scope, separation and recyclability. On the other hand, low-cost Earth-abundant transition metal-based nanomaterials are excellent supports for the immobilization of nano-sized or molecular catalysts, and the relevant content will be discussed in detail in the section on “Earth-abundant transition metals as supports”. A variety of protocols involving the assembly of supported nanocatalysts have been discovered, such as co-precipitation, sputtering colloidal means, deposition–precipitation techniques, impregnation, photodeposition and conventional coordination. In many cases, positive catalytic properties of hybrid materials have been unexpectedly initiated through immobilization processes resulting from interaction and/or synergistic effect between solid supports and catalytic species.
3. 
        In situ synthesized Earth-abundant transition-metal nanocatalysts
Besides Earth-abundant transition metal nanocatalysts discussed above that were prepared in a controlled way before catalytic use, researchers have also synthesized in situ assemblies in which Earth-abundant transition-metal nanocatalysts were generated during reactions from precatalysts including salts, metallic complexes and MOFs. The reaction conditions play a crucial role for the in situ formation of these nanomaterials. In general, potential stabilizers (for example PEG)53 or supports (for example Al2O3)54 are required in reaction mixtures. The reaction conditions involve either microwaves55 or photonic irradiation,56 and in some cases reducing reagents such as H2, ammonia-borane, NaBH4, hydrazine and alcohols are employed.57–59 Usually the original purpose of using these conditions is not the generation of nanocatalysts, but the promotion of the catalytic processes. TEM, XPS, EDX analyses and other techniques mentioned in Section 2 confirm the formation of the nanomaterials that are the really active species for the corresponding catalysis. The morphology and composition of these in situ assembled nanocatalysts is controllable by slight changes of reaction conditions. Obviously these in situ generation processes greatly circumvent cumbersome preparative procedures of nanocatalysts.
For instance Ni NPs formed in situ upon by stabilization with PEG using NiCl2 as NP precursor are highly active in carbonylative Suzuki–Miyaura reactions of arylboronic acids with aryl iodides at atmospheric CO pressure.60 The in situ generation of Ni NPs was demonstrated by TEM analysis. It was found that the use of PEG-400 provided a catalytic performance superior to that of either PEG-600 or PEG-2000. Moreover, the behavior of Ni NPs as heterogeneous catalyst was confirmed by poisoning experiments with mercury and CS2 additives. The catalyst also exhibited both excellent stability and recyclability. It was conveniently recovered and reused for at least five reaction cycles with only slight reduction in the catalytic activity.
Kappe's group55 generated Fe3O4 NPs with an average size of 6 nm in situ from Fe(acac)3 using hydrazine hydrate as reductant using a small-scale microwave batch heating at 150 °C. The catalytic application of Fe3O4 NPs was further evaluated in the reduction of nitroarenes, and various functionalized anilines containing a wide scope of substituents were selectively synthesized within a quite short period (2 to 8 min) with almost quantitative yields. The catalytic amount of Fe for the transformation was only 0.25 mol%. In addition after completion of the first reaction cycle the nanocatalyst formed was collected using a magnet and reused for successive several runs without decline of catalytic property. This efficient catalytic protocol was successfully translated from the small-scale batch microwave method to a scalable continuous-flow process (Fig. 6). Full conversion and complete selectivity were obtained using this means in both cases of reductions of nitrobenzene and 4-chloro-2′-nitrobiphenyl, allowing the isolation of several grams of pure aniline product in a batch with a productivity of more than 30 g h−1. The rapid generation of nanocatalyst, low catalyst cost, high selectivity, excellent catalytic efficiency, broad substrate scope, easy-operation and outstanding recyclability of this catalytic approach, and the use of continuous-flow process enable an efficient, simple and economical access to anilines from nitroarenes.55
 Fig. 6  Reduction of nitroarenes catalyzed by in situ formed Fe3O4 NPs using a continuous flow method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Photogeneration of NPs through visible-light irradiation is a new protocol for assembling NPs. It allows overcoming the drawback of conventional chemical reduction that involves sensitivity to oxides and is detrimental to subsequent catalytic performances. The reduction of NiCl2 to Ni(0) NPs was efficiently driven by visible light in the presence of fluorescein and in basic aqueous solution.56 Photogenerated Ni(0) NPs served as a highly stable and efficient catalyst for the formation of hydrogen. Moreover, the introduction of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) into this system led to a five-time increase in the hydrogen production rate. This enhanced catalytic activity was attributed to the formation of well-dispersed Ni(0) NPs with smaller size on the surface of RGO. This robust Ni NP catalyst is recyclable in the process of hydrogen production. This work represents a promising approach to achieve efficient hydrogen generation using both solar energy and abundant metal NPs.56 The development of safe, high-density hydrogen storage technologies is one of the challenges facing chemists in the area of hydrogen science. In a related context, MgH2 has recently emerged for hydrogen storage because of its attractive properties including low cost, non-toxicity, high hydrogen capacity, and outstanding reversibility. However, the high dehydrogenation thermal energy of MgH2 (ΔH = 75 kJ mol−1 H2) hinders the dehydrogenation process towards practical applications. The incorporation of metal NPs into MgH2 improves its dehydrogenation properties. Yao's group57 reported a one-step fabrication of 2–3 nm Ni NPs in a MgH2 matrix through a mechanochemical-force-driven approach, starting from a Ni-based MOF, with the use of MgH2 as a reducing and sacrificial agent (Fig. 7). The in situ prepared Ni NPs embedded in MgH2 nanohybrid exhibited excellent catalytic activity in the hydrogenation/dehydrogenation process, and the catalytic efficiency was influenced by the Ni NP size.57
 Fig. 7  Synthesis of a (Ni NPs)@MgH2 composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The water-in-oil microemulsion method has been shown to be an ideal system for the assembly of ultradispersed catalytic species due to the capability of water-in-oil to stabilize and restrict the size of the resultant particles, which holds advantages in catalysis. Husein et al.61 successfully prepared ultra-dispersed Ni NPs in heavy oil composed of 20 wt% vacuum residue and 80 wt% vacuum gas oil using a water-in-oil microemulsion protocol, with aqueous Ni(NO3)2 and hydrazine as precursor and reductant respectively. The generated 22 ± 5 nm Ni NPs in situ catalyze hydrogenation and free radical reactions in heavy oil, reaching 50% reduction in asphaltenes and 70% reduction in resins.
In some catalytic cases involving Fe complexes, it was observed that the real catalytic species for these transformations was Fe NPs rather than Fe complexes. Manners and co-workers62 reported that the readily available Fe complexes [FeCp(CO)2]2 and [Fe2Cp2(CO)3(MeCN)] served as good catalysts for the dehydrocoupling/dehydrogenation of Me2NH·BH3 giving cyclodiborazane [Me2N–BH2]2 under UV photoirradiation. The complex [Fe2Cp2(CO)3(MeCN)] obtained by photoirradiation of [FeCp(CO)2]2 provided better catalytic performance in dehydrocoupling reaction than [FeCp(CO)2]2. Detailed mechanistic studies demonstrated the heterogeneous properties of the active catalytic species in both cases of [FeCp(CO)2]2 and [Fe2Cp2(CO)3(MeCN)], and the active catalytic species were found to be FeNPs with sizes smaller than 10 nm.62 A similar work showed that the Fe complexes of general formula [Fe(NCMe)(L)(PPh2C6H4CHNCHR–)2][BF4]2 (L = CO or NCMe, R = Ph or H) were efficient for hydrogen generation from NH3·BH3. Up to 3.66 H2 per s and 2.9 total H2 equivalents were obtained when THF or isopropanol was used as solvent.63 TEM images confirmed that the active heterogeneous Fe(0) NP catalyst was produced by reduction of the Fe complexes mentioned above. In order to confirm the formation of FeNPs, investigations have been carried out with STEM, EDX, XPS, SQUID magnetometry analyses, poisoning experiments, polymer-supported substrate experiment, and a combined poisoning/STEM/EDX experiment. The FeNP size (around 4.5 nm in diameter) was measured by STEM analysis. SQUID and XPS analyses demonstrated the existence of superparamagnetic Fe(0) species. Poisoning tests determined the heterogeneous nature of the active catalytic species. The inactivity of Wang resin-supported substrate indicated the nanosize of the active catalytic species. Moreover, STEM/EDX measurements proved the bonding of poisoning agent (pentanethiol) to the Fe NPs.
Although only relatively rare examples of in situ generated Earth-abundant transition metal-catalysts have appeared, these studies should guide the design, use and mechanistic understanding and drive their development and applications.
4. Earth-abundant transition metal-based nanoparticles as support materials
Homogeneous catalysis has undergone a long-term development, and homogeneous catalysts are broadly used in plenty of academic and industrial applications. They benefit from totally accessible catalytic sites, tunable chemo-, regio- and enantioselectivity, and accessible mechanistic studies leading to catalyst optimization.64,65 The difficulty of catalyst separation from the end product creates economic and ecological barriers to broadening their scope, however. Heterogenization of homogeneous catalysts resulting in easy removal, recovery, and reusability of the catalysts appears to be a logical solution to address the separation problems in homogeneous catalysis.65–69 Many solid supports including alumina, silica, zeolite and ceria are commonly utilized in the heterogenization processes through entrapment or grafting of catalytic species on surfaces or inside the pores of these solid supports; in addition, some of these supports such as zeolites also play a role as catalysts or co-catalysts. Although the use of these conventional supports achieved minimization of catalyst leaching and catalyst reuse, the activity of the catalysts is usually reduced due to only partially accessible active sites in heterogeneous catalysts. In this context, the use of nanomaterials as supports has emerged as one of the most promising strategies. Almost all active sites of nanomaterial-supported catalysts are accessible to reactions, achieving rates and selectivities that are comparable to those of their homogeneous counterparts. A vast majority of transition-metal catalysts, organocatalysts and NPs with very small sizes have been immobilized on/in nanosized supports by covalent binding or simple adsorption, the former method being preferable in terms of catalyst stability and recyclability. In some cases, unique chemical and physical properties were provided through interaction between active sites and supports in the nanohybrids.
Considering economical and sustainable issues, Earth-abundant transition metal-containing nanomaterials have been widely used as supports in the catalysis of various reactions. NPs with superparamagnetic properties are undoubtedly the most representative examples. Their paramagnetic nature enables easy and efficient separation of the catalysts from the reaction mixture by magnetic decantation. Meanwhile on the basis of the specificity needed for a particular application, designed surface functionalities of magnetic NPs are easily manipulated because of exhaustive control of their properties, such as size, morphology, shape and dispersity. In addition, magnetic NPs are mechanically robust, resulting in excellent reusability under harsh reaction conditions. Recently magnetic NPs in the forms of metals (Fe, Co, Ni), alloys (FePt, CoPt), iron oxides (FeO, Fe2O3, Fe3O4), or ferrites MFe2O4 (M = Co, Mn, Cu, Zn), have been utilized for the immobilization of transition metals, organocatalysts and biocatalysts, offering remarkable catalytic performances in a wide range of reactions including Suzuki–Miyaura, Heck, Sonogashira and Hiyama reactions, alkyne–azide cycloaddition, hydrogenation of unsaturated compounds, reduction of nitroaromatics, oxidation reactions, arylation and alkylation reactions, epoxidation of alkenes, Fenton-like reactions, and multi-component “one-pot” syntheses. The use of magnetic NPs in catalysis fully embodies the principles of green and sustainable chemistry and builds a bridge between catalytic activity and catalyst separation. In other words, the new catalytic systems involving magnetic NP supports narrow the gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis.
These features of magnetic NPs lead to an explosive development (regarding the numbers of published papers and citations) of magnetically recyclable nanocatalysts in organic synthesis, as indicated by the data retrieved from Web of Science (Fig. 8). Moreover, Thomson Reuters showed that the topic of “magnetically recyclable nanocatalysts for organic synthesis” has been ranked no. 3 among the top 10 research frontiers in the field of Chemistry and Materials Science in 2015 (Fig. 9, lower panel). Since several reviews have appeared on catalysis based on magnetic NP support in the past few years,70–77 only some selected examples in the area will be described in this Review Article.
 Fig. 8  Annual numbers of publications and citations on magnetically recyclable nanocatalysts from 2006 to 2016 (data from Web of Science using the keywords “magnetic nanocatalyst” on December 21, 2016) (top). The topic of “magnetically recyclable nanocatalysts for organic synthesis” ranked 3rd in the top 10 research fronts in chemistry and materials science by Thomson Reuters in 2015. These materials are reproduced under a license from Thomson Reuters (bottom). These materials may not be copied or re-distributed in whole or in part without the prior written consent of Thomson Reuters. 
 Fig. 9  Mn3O4 NPs-catalyzed alcohol oxidation. 
5. Mn-Based catalysts
Manganese is the twelfth most readily available element, its concentration in the Earth's crust being around 950 g per ton.78 During the last decade, Mn-based nanomaterials with various sizes and shapes (such as nanorods, NPs, porous hexagonal plates, thin films, and nanofibers) have been assembled using various methods including microwave-assisted solution, vapor phase growth, thermal decomposition, precipitation, sol–gel, hydrothermal, etc. These nanomaterials showed activities in oxidation reactions of numerous substrates such as p-cresol, carbon monoxide, alcohols, thiols, hydrocarbon, and chlorinated phenols, and in olefin epoxidation.79–82
A majority of reported Mn-based nanocatalysts are manganese oxide species. Ching and co-workers83 discovered a simple method to prepare manganese oxide NPs and hollow spheres with the assistance of acids using both MnSO4 and KMnO4 as the Mn sources. These nanostructured manganese oxides with high surface areas exhibited catalytic activities for CO oxidation producing CO2. The acetic acid-derived hierarchical nanospheres displayed excellent catalytic performance in this transformation, with 93% conversion at 25 °C and full conversion at 50 °C. These nanospheres are much better oxidants than analogs obtained from the uses of propionic acid or butyric acid. Mn3O4 NPs were also simply synthesized by thermal treatment of MnCl2·4H2O or Mn(OAc)2·4H2O.84 Their catalytic properties were evaluated in the selective aerobic oxidation of alcohols, showing that they were efficient and selective for the conversion of benzylic alcohols, allylic alcohols and aliphatic alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes or ketones (Fig. 9). In addition, they were remarkably recoverable and reusable without significant degradation in catalytic performance in eleven successive cycles. Owing to its low preparation cost, high accessibility, non-toxicity, high catalytic efficiency and excellent recyclability, these Mn3O4 NPs are very competitive in catalysis of alcohols oxidation.84 Mansournia's group85 reported the preparation of Mn3O4 NPs through a new surfactant-free strategy at ambient temperature and catalytic application in the degradation of organic pollutants including methyl orange and Congo red. It was found that >70% of decolorization and >50% of COD reduction were reached within 10 min.
Besides nanostructured manganese oxide, NPs consisting of a Mn complex were also constructed and utilized as catalysts in organic synthesis. Mn(III) meso-tetraphenylporphyrin NPs were readily assembled using a host–guest strategy.86 These NPs with an average size of 24 nm performed well in olefin epoxidation and oxygenation of saturated hydrocarbons in the presence of PhI(OAc)2 in ethanol/water. This catalytic system tolerated a wide range of substrates, affording various epoxides and ketones with moderate to excellent conversions. Moreover, in the case of the oxidation of cyclooctene, its catalytic activity remained unaltered throughout four runs, showing the “green” character of this catalyst. A comparative investigation indicated that this NP catalyst possessed better catalytic ability in terms of stability and activity than its individual counterparts.86
Several supports including Fe3O4 NPs,87–89 MWNT,90 graphene,91,92 MFI-type zeolite,93 CoMn2O4 NPs94 and active carbon,95 have been employed to immobilize Mn-based nanomaterials or complexes, forming nanocomposites with catalytic activity for oxidation reactions. In the context of fast-growing research on magnetically recyclable nanocatalysts, many Mn species such as Mn(phox)2(CH3O)@NH2 (phox = 2-(2′-hydroxyphenyl)oxazoline), Mn(TPP)Cl@Im (TPP = meso-tetraphenylporphyrin; Im = imidazole) and Mn3O4 NPs have been recently immobilized on the surface of Fe3O4 NPs (Fig. 10). In these nanohybrids, the presence of Fe3O4 NPs leads to simple catalyst separation, good catalyst reusability and high catalytic activities in tested reactions including selective oxidation of thiols to disulfide,87 aerobic oxidation of biomass-derived 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to 2,5-diformylfuran,88 and epoxidation of olefins to epoxides.89
 Fig. 10  Magnetic Fe3O4 NPs-immobilized Mn catalysts. 
Apparently, no Mn(0) nanocatalysts have been reported. MnxOy NPs generally exhibit moderate or even very low activities in catalytic applications. Incorporation of other metals with MnxOy NPs, however, was shown to result in significant enhancement of the catalytic activity. This positive effect was attributed to interfacial synergy provoked by the electronic modification by other metal atoms combined with the morphology of the MnxOy NPs. Mn complexes show good catalytic properties in some specific reactions, and the combination of nanosized supports with Mn complexes generally leads to much better catalytic behavior in terms of activity and recyclability. The use of Mn-based nanocatalysts is thus promising for practical applications and industrial syntheses, considering the very low cost of this metal.
6. Fe-Based catalysts
Iron is the 4th most abundant element on Earth, and consequently one of the most inexpensive and environmentally friendly metals. The literature on iron is relatively underrepresented in the field of catalysis, however, compared to other transition metals.96 Recently Fe-based nanocatalysts have drawn significant attention due to their magnetic, electrical or catalytic properties.97,98 Pre- or in situ synthesized iron oxide nanomaterials have been proven to be versatile catalysts in a wide range of reactions including alcohol oxidation, decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, CO oxidation, ammonia decomposition, reduction of nitrogen oxide, synthesis of ortho-hydroxybenzophenones, alkenylation of sp3 C–H bonds, visible-light-driven water oxidation, alkylation reactions, oxidative esterification, and various one-pot syntheses such as those of those of N-2-aryl substituted 1,2,3-triazoles, benzoxazinone and benzthioxazinone derivatives, and pyranopyrazoles. See selected examples in Table 1. In the case of iron, the comparison of various reaction conditions is sufficiently meaningful to deserve presentation of this table with the conversions, TONs, TOFs and selectivities.99–101
Table 1 Selected examples of Fe-based nanocatalysts




#
Catalytic NPs
Size
Support
Catalytic application
Catalytic activity
Recycling
Ref.




1
α-Fe2O3
5–7 nm
None
Decomposition of hydrogen peroxide
Rate constant = 26.4 × 10−3 min−1 (g L−1)−1
Not mentioned

99



2
Fe2O3

2–5 nm
20–80 nm

Nitrogen-doped graphene
Transfer hydrogenation of nitroarenes
TON = 17.4–19
6 times

104



3
Rod-shaped Fe2O3
Diameter of 30–50 nm and length of 350–500 nm
None
Reduction of nitrogen oxide by ammonia
Up to 100% conversion
Not mentioned

110



4
Hollow iron oxide shells
Diameter of 16.7 nm; shell thickness of 3.9 nm
None
Oxidation of styrene into benzaldehyde
TON = 131.4, selectivity = 73%
4 times

116



5
Iron(0)
4–5 nm
Ionic liquids
Alkyne hydrogenation
TON= 2.6–19.6
8 times

120



6
Iron–polyphenol
50–80 nm
None
Fenton oxidation of azo dye
100% conversion
Not mentioned

126



7
Iron–phosphonate
50–70 nm
None
Synthesis of benzimidazoles
TOF = 323.9 h−1
4 times

127



8
Iron–phosphonate
3–5 nm
None
Synthesis of biofuels
88.3% conversion, 100% selectivity
5 times

128



9
α-Fe2O3
35–75 nm
SiO2
Ammonia decomposition
120000 cm−3 gcat−1 h−1
4 times

135



10
Iron–iron oxide core–shell
Core diameter of 44 nm and a shell thickness of 6 nm
None
Olefin & alkyne hydrogenation
Up to 100% conversion
10 times

136



11
Fe2O3
2.5–8 nm
Carbon nanotubes
Reduction of NO with NH3
97% conversion
Not mentioned

141



12
Fe/Fe2O3
1–11 nm
Single-walled carbon nanohorns
Esterification of palmitic acid
TON = 7
3 times

143



13
Fe(0)
5 nm
PEG, PS
Hydrogenation
Up to 100% conversion and selectivity
Not mentioned

144





Oxidation of alcohols and olefins has been disclosed using unsupported nano-γ-Fe2O3 and hydrogen peroxide as catalyst and oxidant, respectively. The corresponding carbonyl compounds were isolated with almost 100% selectivity and acceptable TON values (6–70). Nevertheless, the catalyst is well suited for continuous processes due to its low cost and simple recyclability using an external magnetic field (Fig. 11).102 FeOx surrounded by N-doped graphene shells immobilized on carbon support was shown by the same group to catalyze oxidative dehydrogenation of N-heterocycles with application to the synthesis of pharmaceutically relevant quinolines.103 This catalyst is also efficient for the reduction of nitroarenes to anilines and one-pot reductive amination of carbonyl compounds with nitroarenes, and altogether more than 40 amines were synthesized.104,105 Quasicubic α-Fe2O3 NPs were prepared by a simple solvothermal method, and their shape was remarkably controllable by reaction duration and surfactant.106 These pre-synthesized NPs enclosed six identical {110} planes. They displayed much better catalytic properties in term of the lowest complete conversion temperature (T100%) in the case of CO oxidation than those of nanophases with flowerlike, hollow, or other forms of irregular external morphologies having various crystal planes exposed to the gas. This study revealed the significant effect of external morphology toward the catalytic activity of α-Fe2O3 NP-catalyzed CO oxidation.106 An example of highly efficient Fe2O3 NP-catalyzed tandem three-component reaction of oxidative 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition and regioselective N-arylation using chalcones, sodium azide and aryl halides providing a series of N-2-arylated 1,2,3-triazoles in very good yields has been successfully developed.107 The Fe2O3 NPs were magnetically recovered and reused at least 3 times with only slight decrease in activity. Fe3O4 NPs were prepared from an aqueous FeCl3 solution using an aqueous extract of A. annua and characterized by a number of analytical techniques including UV-vis, XRD, TEM, energy dispersive X-ray analysis, FTIR, vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM), and TGA.108 The catalytic activities of the synthesized nanomaterials were investigated in the synthesis of biologically interesting benzoxazinone and benzthioxazinone derivatives via a three-component one-pot reaction protocol. Several desired products were obtained using this method with 80–94% yields (Fig. 12).108
 Fig. 11  Catalysis and recovery of nano-γ-Fe2O3 in benzyl alcohol oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 12  Fe3O4 NP-catalyzed synthesis of biologically valuable benzoxazinone and benzthioxazinone derivatives. 
As mentioned in the section entitled “in situ synthesized Earth-abundant transition metal nanocatalysts”, in some cases of reactions catalyzed by metallic salts or complexes the actual catalytic species are NPs formed in situ. Lau's group109 generated Fe2O3 NPs in the process of visible-light-driven water oxidation by Fe complexes at pH 7–9 along with ligand dissociation of Fe complexes, and these NPs were proven to be the actual catalyst of water oxidation. The generation of Fe2O3 NPs in the reaction medium was confirmed by EDAX, XPS, and TEM. Meticulous investigations including comparative experiments using pre-synthesized Fe2O3 NPs, isolation and reuse of the Fe2O3 NPs formed, and rigorous theoretical analysis revealed that the Fe2O3 NPs produced in situ were the actual catalyst for water oxidation. In addition, it was proposed that iron oxo species were essential intermediates of the active nanocatalyst.109
Besides spherical shape, iron oxide nanomaterials with rod morphology have also been shown to be active in catalysis. γ-Fe2O3 nanorods fabricated by two {110} end planes and two {110} and two {001} side planes (Fig. 13) exhibited excellent catalytic properties in selective reduction of nitrogen oxides with NH3 in terms of catalytic efficiency and stability.110 This catalytic reaction is of great significance for both academia and industry considering that plenty of nitrogen oxides are emitted from combustion of fossil fuels. The low preparation cost, non-toxicity and outstanding catalytic performance make γ-Fe2O3 promising nanorods to solve environmental problems caused by nitrogen oxides.
 Fig. 13  γ-Fe2O3 nanorods for selective catalytic reduction of nitrogen oxides with NH3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The catalytic activity of iron, cobalt, and nickel oxides and their mixed oxide NPs were improved upon electrochemical transformation of these typically 20 nm NPs into small 2–5 nm NPs through lithium-induced conversion reactions, maintaining excellent electrical interconnection among NPs and producing large surface areas with many catalytically active sites. Indeed lithium-induced small NiFeOx NPs were highly active and stable bifunctional catalysts for overall water splitting in base (10 mA cm−2 water-splitting current at 1.51 V for over 200 h without degradation in a two-electrode configuration and 1 M KOH).111
Fe(0) NPs, the reduced and much less stable counterparts of iron oxide, have recently been synthesized and initially studied in catalysis following the development of synthetic and analytical techniques for the preparation and analysis of sensitive metallic compounds.112–117 Several synthetic methods have been developed for the synthesis of Fe(0) NPs such as decomposition of Fe(0) complexes, reduction of iron salts and oxides with various reducing agents, evaporation of iron and condensation in a solvent/surfactant phase, and mechanical milling.112–116 These Fe(0) NPs served as catalysts in various reactions including hydrogenation, transfer hydrogenation, nitroarene reduction and coupling reactions. For example de Vries and co-workers118,119 reported the preparation of Fe(0) NPs having an average size of 2.7 nm by reduction of Fe salts with alkyl Grignard or alkyl lithium reagents and their efficient catalytic activity in hydrogenation of alkenes and alkynes using THF as solvent under an H2 atmosphere. A series of alkanes and alkenes were synthesized with up to 100% conversions. Nevertheless the authors indicated that they did not have solid evidence to prove that these pre-prepared Fe(0) NPs were the true active species in the transformation.119 Then on this basis, it was observed that the use of biphasic ionic liquids/heptanes as solvent enabled catalyst separation from the products and prevented NPs aggregation (Fig. 14).120 The synthesis of Fe(0) NPs was also achieved by decomposition of {Fe(N[Si(CH3)3]2)2}2 under 3 bar of H2. A TEM image revealed that the mean size of the monodisperse Fe NPs was 1.5 nm.121 Fe(0) NPs synthesized by this method displayed excellent catalytic property in the hydrogenation of terminal alkenes and alkynes. Reactions of internal olefins (except for cyclic olefins and aryl substituted ones) did not proceed, however. The inactivation toward internal olefins is perhaps attributed to the steric bulk at the surface of the Fe NPs arising from the presence of amido groups or from HN[Si(CH3)3]2 which was released from the Fe precursor during the decomposition process. These Fe(0) NPs121 showed much better catalytic performance in the hydrogenations of cyclic olefins and trans-stilbene than Fe(0) NPs prepared by reduction of Fe salts with alkyl Grignard reagents,118,119 indicating the significant influence of the particle size (1.5 nm versus 2.7 nm) and synthetic route (decomposition versus reduction) on catalytic efficiency.
 Fig. 14  Fe NPs-catalyzed alkyne hydrogenation in ionic liquids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared to very air-sensitive Fe(0) NPs, bimetallic containing Fe(0) NPs are much more developed because of the benefit of catalytic activation in synergy between two metals as shown in the Section 11 devoted to bi- and trimetallic NPs. Addition of [Co2(CO)9] on Fe(0) NPs at 150 °C under H2 led to monodisperse core–shell Fe@FeCo NPs that displayed large heating powers when placed in an alternating magnetic field. The combination of magnetic and surface catalytic properties of these NPs were used to demonstrate the possibility of performing Fischer–Tropsch syntheses by heating the catalytic NPs in an external alternating magnetic field.122
Organic–inorganic hybrid nanomaterials have received considerable attention. This is related to the amalgamation of the mechanical properties of inorganic solids, the versatile functionality of organic groups and interesting nano-structures achieved in these materials that emerge in applications, especially in catalysis. In the past few years, various Fe NP doping with other compositions have been assembled and applied as versatile catalysts.123–125 Iron–polyphenol NPs with sizes ranging from 50 to 80 nm were fabricated from a FeCl3 solution and plant polyphenols.126 These NPs were shown to be good Fenton-like catalysts for the degradation of azo dyes. The results showed that completion of the decolorization of acid black 194 was catalyzed by these NPs, and removal of over 87% of total organic carbon was achieved. Additionally, pH adjustment for the reaction was not needed.126 New organic–inorganic hybrid porous iron–phosphonate nanomaterials (HPFP-1) have been prepared by Bhaumik's group127 who observed that the morphology of these nanomaterials was controllable by the temperature of the synthetic system with the use of hexamethylenediamine-N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis-(methylphosphonic acid) as the organophosphorus precursor. Materials with flake-like, rod-like and spherical morphological features were obtained at 453 K, 443 K and 423 K, respectively (Fig. 16). N2-sorption analysis revealed that these nanomaterials were supermicroporous and interparticle mesoporous. HPFP-1 was shown to be a powerful catalyst for benzimidazole synthesis using o-phenylenediamine and aromatic aldehydes as starting materials within short reaction time at room temperature. A series of benzimidazole derivatives were isolated with up to 92% yields (Fig. 15). Moreover, HPFP-1 with spherical morphology exhibited much higher catalytic efficiency than HPFP-1 with flake-like or rod-like morphological features.127 The same group128 also utilized benzene-1,3,5-triphosphonic acid as the organophosphorus precursor yielding iron–phosphonate NPs that are very efficient in the transesterification reaction producing biofuels.
 Fig. 15  Synthesis and temperature-induced morphological control of an iron–phosphonate nanomaterial and catalytic application to the synthesis of benzimidazoles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
Various supports have been used to immobilize Fe complexes, and pre-synthesized or in situ-formed nanostructured Fe(0) and FexOy species gave highly stable and well-performing Fe nanocatalysts. These supports include inter alia polymers, silica NPs, porous silica materials, SBA-15, FexOy NPs and carbon materials.129–134
Silica materials are frequently used as solid supports for the construction of nanocatalysts. For instance, a new core–shell α-Fe2O3@pSiO2 was synthesized through bottom-up approach in which α-Fe2O3 NPs were coated by a porous silica shell by means of base-catalyzed hydrolysis of tetraethylorthosilicate with cetyltetramethylammonium bromide (Fig. 16).135 The obtained core–shell hybrid NPs were then employed as catalyst in the decomposition of ammonia showing that this nanocatalyst had very high thermostability and provided 80% conversion when the reaction was conducted at 750 °C within 33 h. Under reaction conditions above 650 °C, α-Fe2O3 was converted into both body-centered Fe and FeNx nanomaterials that were supposed to be the most active Fe phases for the decomposition of ammonia.135
 Fig. 16  Synthesis of SiO2-supported iron catalyst for ammonia decomposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
As the most used support containing Earth-abundant transition metals, FexOy has been also used to immobilize and protect Fe(0) NPs. Moores' group136,137 prepared and used core–shell Fe(0)@FexOy NPs for the hydrogenation of olefins and alkynes (Fig. 17). The catalyst gave excellent catalytic performances in these transformations using ethanol and aqueous ethanol as solvents, which indicated its robustness towards oxidants and water. It seems assumed that the FexOy shell with a thickness of 6 nm is catalytically inactive but protects the Fe(0) core against excessive oxidation in aqueous environments. Many alkenes and alkynes having various substituents were selectively hydrogenated using this highly stable and magnetically recoverable core–shell catalyst.
 Fig. 17  Core–shell Fe(0)@FexOy NPs for the hydrogenation of olefins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136 and 137. Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Carbon materials in the form of CMK-5 carbons,138 biochar-based carbon,139 single-shell carbon,140 carbon nanotubes,141,142 and carbon nanohorns143 have been shown to be promising supports for Fe nanocatalysts. For example, 6 nm-size γ-Fe2O3 NPs were readily immobilized within the channels of CMK-5 carbons by sequential impregnation and thermal treatment (Fig. 18).138 In the catalytic test involving ammonia decomposition in the presence of γ-Fe2O3/CMK-5 NPs completion of this reaction was reached at 600 °C at a space velocity of 7500 cm3 gcat−1 h−1, and full conversion was kept for 16 h. At 700 °C, complete ammonia conversion was achieved with a very high space velocity of up to 60000 cm3 gcat−1 h−1, indicating exceptionally high efficiency attributed to the high porosity of the CMK-5 NPs, high dispersion of the iron oxide, and high stability resulting from the presence of both carbon and silica in the support.138 Fe-Based NPs anchored or encapsulated on/in carbon nanotubes have been applied as catalysts in the process of selective catalytic reduction of NO with NH3141 and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).142 The latter was conducted in the presence of Fe NPs encapsulated within pod-like carbon nanotubes (Fe4@SWNT) prepared by a one-step synthesis employing ferrocene and sodium azide as precursors. TEM observation revealed that Fe4@SWNT has a pea-pod-like structure, each Fe NP being separately loaded within the compartments of carbon nanotubes. Each compartment contains 1–2 Fe NPs (Fig. 19).142 Fe4@SWNT nanohybrid can serve as catalyst for the reduction of oxygen in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (Fig. 19b), showing a rather high activity and long-term stability. Additionally, it was found that N doping into the carbon lattice significantly improved its catalytic performance in the oxygen reduction reaction.142
 Fig. 18  Synthesis of γ-Fe2O3 NPs within the tubes of CMK-5 carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of Fe4@SWNT. (b) A schematic representation of the ORR process at the surface of Fe4@SWNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
As a comparatively practical strategy for potential industrial scale-up syntheses, the continuous flow process holds a number of advantages: simplicity of preparation and operation, controllable procedure, high flexibility and outstanding productivity. The combination of continuous flow process with nanocatalysis involving Earth-abundant transition metals should build a new, economic and greener approach to various catalysts. Nanocatalysis in continuous flow with the use of Fe nanocatalysts or FexOy NP supports has been recently developed and utilized in some organic syntheses including hydrogenation,144 aerobic oxidation,145 and Dakin–West reaction.146 Investigations on heterogeneous Fe catalysis in hydrogenation have been reported by Moores and Uozumi et al.144 who employed continuous flow technology combined with an amphiphilic resin-stabilized Fe(0) NP catalyst as a process intensification tool to maximize catalyst efficiency. Upon using this system, hydrogenation of various alkenes, alkynes, aromatic imines and aldehydes smoothly proceeded in water and ethanol in the presence of H2, providing nearly full conversion in most cases. In addition, hydrogenation provided strict selectivity over ketone, ester, arene, nitro, and aryl halide functionalities. This catalytic system was successfully and reproducibly applied to multi-gram scale syntheses. These exciting results show the significance of continuous flow processes and the remarkable stability and protection abilities of amphiphilic polymers towards Fe(0) NPs.144
The use of Fe-based NPs has also been extended to a range of environmental challenges including degradation, photodegradation and/or adsorption of pollutants in air or water, such as dyes, herbicides, and related pollutants due to their excellent separation properties and their ability to be functionalized in various ways. Furthermore, the use of Fe-based NPs present the additional interest of low toxicity and biocompatibility.147–149 These inherent advantages of Fe-based NPs make them attractive candidates for biocatalysis and detection in living cells. For instance, a Fe3O4 NPs-based rapid-capture system for real-time detection of cellular NO has been explored. In this system, superoxide anion O2− that was generated from the decomposition of H2O2 catalyzed by Fe3O4 NPs plays a role as NO trapping agent giving peroxynitrite anion ONO2− in living cells. Then the concentration of NO is easily determined by peroxynitrite-induced luminal chemiluminescence.150
The majority of Fe-containing nanocatalysts are nano-structured iron oxide species that have been extensively investigated as catalysts, and catalysis involving Fe(0) NPs was rarely reported mainly because of their instability in air. Important developments have been made in the catalytic applications of Fe-based nanocatalysts in many aspects, for instance, a diversity of morphologies have been obtained, a large spectrum of reactions have been probed, and acceptable activity and selectivity has been achieved. Many challenges still remain to be addressed, however. In particular, overcoming the limited air stability of Fe(0) NPs and their tendency for aggregation are called for. The development of new technologies towards lowering the particle size of Fe-based nanocatalysts is indeed needed, since the particle size is usually large compared to those of noble metal NPs. In many cases, the catalytic mechanism is unclear, and the nature of the real catalytic species has not been ascertained. In addition, the catalytic activities are not comparable to those of noble metal nanocatalysts, partially due to the large particle size and their tendency for aggregation and aerobic oxidation. Toward this end, there are ongoing efforts to design polymers or inorganic materials-supported Fe-based nanocatalysts, and the problems of limited stability and relatively low activity have sometimes been partially resolved. Considering the abundance of Fe and the magnetic recoverability, it is believed that Fe-based nanocatalysis might have a bright future.
7. Co-Based catalysts
Co-Based nanocatalysts in the form of Co(0) NPs, CoxOy nanomaterials, and (P-, N-, and Se-) doped-Co nanocomposition have been increasingly recognized as appealing catalysts in diverse transformations such as carbon nanotube growth, hydrogenation, oxidation, reduction, Fischer–Tropsch reaction, oxygen reduction, NaBH4 hydrolysis and water splitting.
NP morphology151,152 and size153,154 are very important for the catalytic performances of Co-based nanocatalysts. Co3O4 nanorods with diameters of 5–15 nm and lengths of 200–300 nm were obtained by calcination of a cobalt hydroxide carbonate precursor, and high stability and activity in low-temperature CO oxidation at −77 °C were observed.155 Spinel-type Co3O4 NPs were synthesized through impregnation of activated carbon with concentrated cobalt nitrate and successive carbon burning.156 Their catalytic performance for CO oxidation was improved by decreasing the particle size with increasing the amount of silica in the carbon precursor. Mesoporous Co3O4 with {110} facets and Co3O4 nanosheets with {112} facets have been prepared via the nanocasting and precipitation methods.157 Mesoporous Co3O4 was shown to have much higher catalytic activity for trace ethylene oxidation at 0 °C than Co3O4 nanosheets, showing the essential role of the crystal facet {110} of Co3O4 in the catalytic oxidation process.
Various forms of Co3O4 NPs have been found to be excellent catalysts for aerobic oxidation of other common organic substrates such as alcohols and amines.158–165 Oxidation of alcohols, one of the most important transformations in organic synthesis, was conducted using Co nanocatalysts. Activated carbon-supported NPs were synthesized via wetness impregnation and applied as efficient catalyst in aerobic oxidation of alcohols, providing full conversion within 3 h. The recyclability test showed that these Co3O4 NPs were recoverable and reusable for at least 4 cycles with only slight decrease of catalytic activity.158 Nitrogen-doped graphite-coated Co NPs were shown to be powerful catalysts in the aerobic oxidation of alcohols to esters at room temperature under base-free and atmospheric conditions.159 The catalytic protocol was tolerant to a broad range of substrates, and a series of corresponding esters were isolated in up to >99% yield (Fig. 20). Co3O4 NPs have also recently been disclosed to catalyze the aerobic oxidation of amines to nitriles under mild conditions, and this catalyst was re-usable.160 Similar catalysts including N-graphene-modified Co3O4 NPs were also used in “green” hydrogenation processes, for instance of heteroarenes.161,162 These examples suggest that supported Co NPs and Co3O4 NP catalysts are attractive alternatives to noble metals in alcohol and amine oxidation and hydrogenation reactions.
 Fig. 20  Co-Based nanocatalyst-promoted oxidation of alcohols to esters at room temperature and atmospheric conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Oxidative coupling of aldehydes with methanol to produce methyl esters is one of the most representative oxidation reactions, and this transformation is of high efficiency to directly produce methyl esters in the absence of carboxylic acids or carboxylic acid derivatives. Oxidative coupling of aldehydes with methanol using molecular oxygen as the final oxidant was catalyzed by N-doped active carbon-supported Co-based NPs. This catalyst was fabricated through nano-coating associated with a sulfuric acid leaching protocol using melamine-formaldehyde resin as the N source and Co(NO3)2 as the Co precursor.166 With this synthetic procedure, the Co-based NPs obtained have a mean diameter of only 2.5 nm and acceptable Co loading (0.47 wt%). This nanohybrid exhibited an excellent catalytic performance in terms of efficiency with a TON of 257, broad substrate range, and recycling seven times without obvious deactivation. Considering the impressive catalytic outcome in this work, the nano-coating associated with acid leaching protocol could be extended to the preparations of other Earth-abundant transition-metal nanocatalysts.166
With the development of solar fuel production, solar-driven water oxidation has received considerable attention, and Ru and Ir--based metal oxides have been proven efficient for this transformation. Viewing economical and ecological issues, Co nanomaterials with various compositions and morphologies have recently been discovered and utilized as water oxidation catalysts. Co NPs that were produced via photoreduction of Co2+ salts were deposited onto various carbon-based materials, giving supported Co NPs that were further oxidized to Co2O3. This nanohybrid was active for the four-electron oxidation of water to oxygen under anodic bias (Fig. 21).167 The support is a critical factor in photocatalytic water oxidation using CoxOy as catalyst. Indeed Co3O4 NPs were immobilized onto several materials including mesoporous silica KIT-6, mesoporous silica SBA-15, SiO2 NPs, and γ-Al2O3 NPs.168 Catalytic results showed that the use of KIT-6 as support led to better catalytic performance than that of SBA-15, perhaps because the 3D porous structure of KIT-6 is more accessible than the 1D channels in SBA-15. It was also found that both SiO2 and γ-Al2O3 NP-supported Co3O4 NPs were more active than unsupported ones, and switching from SiO2 to γ-Al2O3 did not influence their activity in a significant way. These results suggest that the use of a support enhances both the stability and monodispersity of Co3O4 NPs and that the composition and surface atoms of the support do not play an important role for catalytic efficiency.168 In addition, the presence of the support allows the recovery and reuse of the Co catalyst in the water oxidation process.169 Laio and Fabris et al.170 found that Co-phosphate spherical NPs were useful to promote water oxidation to protons and dioxygen for which a one-electron one-proton reaction mechanism involving Co3+–OH and Co4+–O species was proposed based on electrokinetic experiments. Other solar-driven reactions such as water splitting also smoothly proceed using nanostructured CoxOy as photocatalyst.171
 Fig. 21  Oxidation of water to oxygen over Co2O3 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
As a globally accepted clean energy carrier, hydrogen has long been expected to facilitate the transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources. Development of practical catalysts for hydrogen production has been attracting increasingly intense attention. Catalysis involving Co nanocatalysts has emerged as a powerful way to promote hydrogen production using NaBH4, ammonia borane, methane and water as hydrogen sources. The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is a half reaction water-splitting procedure that is efficiently catalyzed by both nitrogen-rich carbon nanotubes-anchored Co (Co-NRCNT)172 and N-doped graphene nanosheets-immobilized Co NPs.173,174 A Co–NRCNT nanocomposition was readily prepared via thermal treatment of Co2+-embedded graphitic carbon nitride (Fig. 22a), and its catalytic performance in HER was excellent and even comparable to that of Pt catalysts. Co–NRCNT was tolerant to a wide pH range from pH 0.0 to 14.0. Both nitrogen dopants and concomitant structural defects of the material cause its high catalytic efficiency.173 A new class of N-doped carbon-wrapped Co NPs supported on N-doped graphene nanosheets was constructed by two-step processes including solvothermal procedure and subsequent calcination.173 The resulting composites were found to possess high electronic conductivity and abundant active sites for HER, showing a small overpotential of only −49 mV, a large current density, and a small Tafel slope of 79.3 mV dec−1. Theoretical calculations suggested that the catalytically active sites were due to carbon atoms promoted by the entrapped cobalt NPs.173 These two Co-catalyzed HER systems should open a field of effective catalysts for water splitting technology.
 Fig. 22  HER over Co-NRCNT and Co NPs on N-doped graphene nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is a powerful process for the catalytic conversion of coal, natural gas, and biomass-derived syngas (CO and H2) into alternative clean fuels and chemical feedstock. Co-Based nanocatalysts have exhibited attractive properties in these syntheses including high activity, low water gas shift reaction and higher selectivity to linear paraffin. Various strategies have been utilized to prepare Co NPs supported on/in different solid materials (multiwall carbon nanotubes, SBA-16, mesoporous carbons, silica gel and mesoporous zeolite-Y).175–183 The size, morphology, nanoscale distribution and support type of these supported Co NPs are crucial for FTS efficiency in terms of activity and selectivity, and Co NPs supported on the internal or external surface of MW-CNTs were fabricated and applied to the FTS process (Fig. 23).184 The activation temperatures and surface chemistry of the Co NPs affected the catalytic selectivity of the FTS in the production of C5+ molecules. On the other hand, variations of electronic densities between the internal concave and external convex surfaces of MW-CNT did not influence the selectivity. Indeed Co NPs supported on the internal and external surface of MW-CNTs provided other quite similar catalytic selectivity. Several core (Co3O4 NPs)–shell (mesoporous silica) nanohybrids having various Co3O4 NP sizes ranging from 5.5 nm to 12.7 nm were assembled by in situ coating with the goal consisting in the investigation of the size effect of the Co nanocatalyst in FTS.185 Catalytic results revealed that CO conversion was considerably enhanced with increasing the particle size from 5.5 to 8.7 nm. Decreased CO conversion was observed with further increased particle size to 12.7 nm, but the turnover frequency remained the same. In addition, the use of the nanocatalyst containing larger Co particles favored the production of hydrocarbons with a longer chain. These regularities guide the synthesis with specific goals. For instance, Co NPs with middle size (8.7 nm) exhibited excellent catalytic behavior in terms of activity and selectivity for middle distillates.185
 Fig. 23  FTS over MW-CNT-supported Co NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The ORR is a central research area for various renewable energy technologies, including fuel cells, water splitting, and metal–air batteries. Carbon material-supported Co-based nanomaterials have emerged and displayed good activities in the catalytic ORR process.186–190 In addition, modifying carbon materials with N or P further improves the catalytic properties of these Co nanocatalysts.191,192 Dai's group193 synthesized reduced graphene oxide-immobilized Co3O4 NPs through a general two-step method, and the nanocomposition obtained exhibited high activity for ORR in alkaline solutions. Additionally, nitrogen doping of graphene caused further enhancement of the catalytic activity and demonstrated comparable catalytic activity and superior stability compared with that of fresh commercial Pt/C catalyst. The excellent catalytic performance was attributed to the synergistic effect between Co3O4 and graphene. The Co-based catalysts were also powerful catalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER).193 Nitrogen-doped carbon embedded with numerous metallic Co NPs (Co/N–C-800) were obtained in situ by a solvothermal carbonization strategy using dopamine and Co(Ac)2 as precursors (Fig. 24).194 Catalytic investigations in ORR and OER over the hybrid composite showed a very small ΔE value (0.859 V) representing an oxygen electrode activity parameter to judge the overall electrocatalytic activity. This indicates here a highly efficient electrocatalytic activity and outstanding durability for both ORR and OER, and even better catalytic performance than Pt/C, making this nanomaterial a high-performance Co-based bi-catalyst for both ORR and OER. Moreover, the catalytic activity of Co/N–C-800 was higher than that of its oxidative counterparts, as a result of the high specific surface area and the efficient charge transfer ability of the nanocomposite.
 Fig. 24  Fabrication process of Co/N–C-800. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from Co-induced nanocatalysis, Co-based nanomaterials, especially Co/C NPs and nanobeads, have also been employed as versatile supports for the fabrication of magnetically recyclable and heterogeneous catalysts for various reactions, benefiting from their high thermal and chemical stability, good magnetic property, and convenient functionalization with catalytic species. Co/C-anchored precious metals and organocatalysts were proven powerful with high catalytic efficiencies and excellent recyclabilities in alkene hydrogenation, Suzuki–Miyaura reaction, and Michael additions.195–197
The core–shell structure has been observed to play an important role in applications due to its specific physical and chemical properties that generally result in a remarkable catalytic behavior. Some Co-based nanocomposites having a core–shell structure have emerged and have been used as catalysts in OER198 and ORR.199 For instance, Zong et al. assembled Co@Co3O4 core@shell NPs, then embedded them in pyrolyzed polydopamine (PPD) producing a Co@Co3O4@PPD core@bishell nanomaterial (Fig. 25) via a three-step sequential process involving hydrothermal synthesis, high temperature calcination, and gentle heating. High stability in aqueous alkaline solution over extended periods of time, good tolerance to methanol crossover effect, and high ORR activity of the core@bishell NPs has been achieved, benefiting from the integration of N-doped graphitic carbon outer shell and ultrathin nanocrystalline Co3O4 inner shell.199
 Fig. 25  ORR over Co@Co3O4@PPD core@bishell nanomaterial. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Co exhibits many unique features that are not observed with many other metals. The tendency of using Co-based nanocatalysts for both hydrogen production and solar-driven reactions has been witnessed in the past decade, which should open a gate to practically and elegantly overcome the global energy crisis. Despite much advancement in this area, there are still several difficulties that may restrict the applications of Co-based nanocatalysts. First, the limited stability of Co NPs that cause the tendency to aggregation and catalyst leaching under harsh conditions are issues under consideration. Secondly, the morphology of Co and Co-based nanocatalysts is not precisely controlled due to the limited development of preparation technology, which limits the wider usage of Co and Co-based nanocatalysts, considering that morphology control is an essential prerequisite for the establishment of shape-, size-, or defect dependent properties of the nanomaterials. Thirdly, study on deeper understanding of the functions/mechanism of the Co-based nanocatalysts through theoretical methods and experimental research is necessary.
8. Ni-Based catalysts
Nickel is present at a concentration of 84 g per ton in the earth's crust. Ni-Based nanocatalysis organic synthesis has experienced an exponential growth in the past few decades. Carriers or supporting materials-stabilized Ni(0) NPs, supported NixOy nanocomposition, Ni–P NPs, and nanomaterial-immobilized Ni complexes have been synthesized and served as catalysts in a variety of reaction manifolds including reduction and C–C, C–O, C–N and S–S coupling reactions, hydrogen generation, oxidation of CO, alcohols, toluene, and hydrogen, CO2 reforming of CH4, reforming of glycerol, alkene hydrosilylation with tertiary silanes, synthesis of primary amines from alcohols and ammonia, epoxidation, and hydrodesulfurization of thiophene.200–205
Reduction is the most investigated reaction in the area of Ni-based nanocatalysis. Ni NPs-supported on/in a variety of materials including PEG, Tween, mesoporous MOF, ionic liquids, silica, Fe3O4 NPs, PAA, PAA-functionalized carbon nanotubes, graphene materials, cellulose, anatase, hyperbranched polyamidoamine–polyvinylamine/SBA-15, mesoporous carbons, Fe3O4–SiO2–P4VP [P4VP = poly(4-vinylpyridine)], and hollow zeolite single crystals, have been shown to be useful in catalytic reductions of substituted benzenes, styrene, p-nitrophenol, furfural, nitroarenes, carbonyl compounds and nitrile.206–213
Polymers are undoubtedly the major candidates for stabilizing Ni NPs, and a series of polymer-stabilized Ni NPs have been prepared by reducing Ni oxalate with hydrazine hydrate in the presence of PEG 200, PEG 6000, Tween 40 or Tween 80.214 Both size and structure of these Ni NPs were stabilizer-dependent. For instance, the ability of stabilizers to decrease the particle size was in the order Tween 80 > PEG 6000 > PEG 200 > Tween 40. Ni NPs with a twin crystal structure, point defects, dislocations and a relatively perfect internal structure were formed from the use of PEG 6000, PEG 200, Tween 80 and Tween 40, respectively. All the prepared Ni NPs exhibited high catalytic activity and selectivity in the reduction of p-nitrophenol. Furthermore, the size and structure had the classic influence on the catalytic activity.
Ionic liquids have attracted much attention for application in the stabilization and modification of metal-based NPs, due to their eco-friendly nature, negligible vapor pressure, wide liquid range, high thermal stability, and excellent solubility. Hou and co-workers215 prepared well-dispersed Ni(0) NPs in an average size of 6–7 nm by reduction of nickel(II) salt with hydrazine using functionalized ionic liquids 1-(3-aminopropyl)-2,3-dimethylimidazolium bromide as stabilizer (Fig. 26). Multi-analysis revealed that the NH2 group of ionic liquids was adsorbed on the surface of the Ni(0) NPs and protected them from oxidation. These Ni NPs performed well in catalytic selective hydrogenation of CC double bonds. The corresponding hydrogenated products were generated in the aqueous phase at 40–90 °C in the presence of 1.0–3.0 MPa H2 gas with up to 100% conversion and selectivities. In addition, these Ni NPs were highly stable, allowing reuse for 7 cycles with only slight decrease in activity.
 Fig. 26  Functionalized ionic liquid stabilized Ni NPs, and their catalytic application in hydrogenation. 
A new Ni-based mesoporous carbon material has been readily synthesized by pyrolysis of supramolecular aggregates that were pre-synthesized via cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)-directed self-assembly of 8-quinolinol modified chitosan and nickel acetate (Fig. 27).216 Several characterization techniques identified the formation of Ni NPs and their homogeneous dispersity on the mesoporous carbonaceous framework. This Ni-based material (Ni/MC-t) served as efficient catalyst in 4-nitrophenol reduction using NaBH4 as reducing agent. Its catalytic performance was highly dependent on both the morphology of Ni NPs and the textural property of the carbonaceous supports that could be modified by changing the pyrolysis temperature. Additionally, Ni/MC-t was recoverable and reusable for 4-nitrophenol reduction.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of nickel-based mesoporous carbon preparation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As a versatile support, Fe3O4 NPs have been utilized in the immobilization of Ni NPs and provided excellent catalytic outputs in the transfer hydrogenation of nitroarenes and carbonyl compounds217 as well as in the reduction of aliphatic and aromatic nitriles.218 In both cases, Fe3O4-supported Ni NPs were magnetically recyclable and kept the same catalytic properties during several successive runs.
Various coupling processes have been successful using Ni NPs as catalyst and have shown good activity even comparable to conventional Pd catalysts. For example, phosphine dendrimer-stabilized Ni NPs were readily prepared using NiCl2 as precursor (Fig. 28) and used as catalyst in the Stille C–C coupling reaction.219,220 This reaction smoothly proceeded in water at room temperature, producing a series of biaryls having a wide range of substituents in 63–99% yield. After completion of the first cycle, the Ni NPs were removed from water and reused for 7 catalytic cycles, each with at least 98% yield and negligible amount of Ni leaching. Ni NPs supported on P4VP-grafted silica also catalyzed Sonogashira reactions using CuI as a co-catalyst.221 This system also worked for inactive chlorides, and the corresponding internal alkynes were isolated in moderate yields. Apart from Ni NPs, nanomaterial-immobilized Ni complexes were also active in coupling reactions. A new magnetite/silica NP-supported Ni complex functionalized with an N-heterocyclic carbene was synthesized and performed well in catalytic C–S coupling of various aryl halides with thiols. This catalyst was magnetically recovered and reused a few times, keeping almost the same activity.222 In another work, Sato and Arisawa et al. prepared self-assembled multilayer zerovalent Ni NPs with a size of ∼3 nm by a three-step procedure involving simultaneous in situ metal NP and nanospace organization. These Ni NPs have been proven versatile for mediating some coupling processes including carbon–carbon bond-forming cross coupling, Negishi coupling, Kumada coupling reactions under ligand-free conditions with good recyclability.223
 Fig. 28  Fabrication of phosphine dendrimer-stabilized Ni NPs catalyst for Stille reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Hydrogen generation has been achieved via decomposition of ammonia borane or hydrous hydrazine and hydrogen evolution procedure upon using functional Ni NPs or Ni12P5 NPs as catalysts. PVP-stabilized Ni NPs224 and MSC-30-,225 MCM-41-,225 ZIF-8-,226 and Ketjen carbon-227 supported Ni NPs were active in dehydrogenation of ammonia borane yielding hydrogen. Taking ZIF-8-supported Ni NPs (Ni/ZIF-8) as an example, the Ni-based hybrid was successfully prepared by sequential deposition–reduction methods using the 20-electron complex NiCp2 in which the Ni–Cp bonds are easily cleaved providing the precursor (Fig. 29).226 TEM images revealed that the generated Ni NPs were highly dispersed in water-stable ZIF-8 and had small particle size. This nanomaterial provided high catalytic efficiency and long durability for hydrogen production from hydrolysis of aqueous ammonia borane under mild conditions. Hydrous hydrazine having high content of hydrogen is another frequently used hydrogen source. Huang's group228 demonstrated the facile synthesis of CeO2-modified Ni NPs and its catalytic application in hydrolytic dehydrogenation of hydrous hydrazine. Catalysis investigation showed that this nanocomposition provided a 99% H2 selectivity and 3-fold higher TOF value than unsupported Ni NPs. The improved catalytic activity may be attributed to three parameters, (i) good stabilization ability of CeO2 toward Ni NPs, (ii) strong interaction between them, (iii) formation of a large number of strong basic sites. Such Ni-based catalysis represents a promising step toward practical significance in the design of other metal-oxide-supported catalysts with high efficiency.228
 Fig. 29  Preparation of Ni/ZIF-8 from (a) ZIF-8 via (b) NiCp2/ZIF-8, and (c) catalytic hydrogen generation from hydrolysis of aqueous AB. Reprinted with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yu's group229 reported that the hydrogen evolution reaction was mediated by Ni/NiO core@shell NPs anchored on CoSe2 nanobelts. This nanocomposition was simply prepared by solvothermal reaction and a subsequent thermal annealing process. By using this nanocatalyst, a small cathodic onset potential of about 0.03 V and a small Tafel slope of about 39 mV per decade were obtained, showing a highly efficient Pt-free electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution process. It was suggested that the compact configuration of the multifunctional nanomaterial resulted in excellent catalytic performance.229 Ni12P5 NPs have also been proven to be efficient for the hydrogen evolution reaction upon electrolysis and photoelectrolysis protocols.230 First, Ni12P5 NPs with 14.3 nm diameter were obtained from the reaction of nickel acetate tetrahydrate, triphenyl phosphine, and oleylamine, then these NPs were loaded on the surface of silicon nanowires (SiNWs) using the convenient drop coating method. Unloaded Ni12P5 NPs displayed excellent catalytic properties toward hydrogen evolution in acidic solution. The Ni12P5/SiNWs performed well in photoelectrolysis of water (Fig. 30), showing 2.97% of power conversion efficiency (PCE), which is larger than that of SiNWs-anchored Pt NPs. The results suggested promising possibilities of application of nonprecious metal-phosphide nanomaterials in photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation.230
 Fig. 30  Generation of hydrogen upon electrolysis and photoelectrolysis over Ni12P5 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Methane reforming to syngas (mixture of H2 and CO) has received a lot of attention owing to the utilization of natural gas, the consumption of greenhouse gases, and the important applications of syngas.231 Supported Ni nanomaterials are promising catalysts for this transformation, because nanostructured Ni is powerful for CH4 activation, and the use of supports allows high stability and high metal dispersion.232–234 Ni NPs/ AlCeZrOx hybrids decorated with another metal element (Mg, Co, La, Mn, or Fe) were prepared and employed as catalysts for oxidative CO2 reforming of methane.235 The additional metal significantly enhanced the catalytic activity and increased resistance to heating. Among these materials, Mg-containing NPs provided the best catalytic outputs with high CH4 and CO2 conversions, high selectivities and acceptable coke deposition, mainly due to the small particle sizes that increase the number of catalytic sites, the amounts of available surface oxygen atoms and the number of basic sites. The basicity of these catalysts improves adsorption and dissociation of CO2, which accelerates the catalytic process.235 The morphology of the Ni nanocatalysts is considered to be another important factor contributing to their catalytic behavior in methane reforming.236 Ni/CeO2 nanorods and nanopolyhedra were utilized to catalyze CO2 reforming of methane. Both the catalytic efficiency and coke resistance ability of Ni/CeO2 nanorods were superior to those of its nanopolyhedra counterpart, because the nanorods morphology having reactive {110} and {100} planes provided strong metal–support interaction (SMSI) and abundant oxygen vacancies (Fig. 31). SMSI effects significantly decrease the deactivation of catalytic activity by preventing Ni NPs sintering.236
 Fig. 31  CO2 reforming of methane over Ni/CeO2 nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Yolk–shell-like NPs have recently attracted the interest of catalysis chemists, due to their specific properties including high surface area, larger void space, and lower density. Kawi's group237,238 synthesized yolk–satellite–shell structured Ni–yolk@Ni@SiO2 nanocomposite (Fig. 32) and Ni@Ni embedded SiO2 yolk–shell nanocomposite, and tested their catalytic application in methane CO2 reforming. Both of them provided high CO2 and CH4 conversions and negligible carbon deposition. The excellent catalytic performance was attributed to their high surface area, high Ni dispersion and strong Ni–SiO2 interactions.
 Fig. 32  Methane CO2 reforming reaction catalyzed by yolk–satellite–shell structured Ni–Yolk@Ni@SiO2 nanomaterial. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Finally, Ni NP catalysts have been recycled upon using magnetic iron oxide supports, a productive seminal strategy that has been developed by the Polshettiwar and Varma group for the purpose of efficient and selective alkyne hydrogenation and hydrogenation transfer of organic derivatives containing carbonyl groups.219
In the area of Ni-based nanocatalysis, diversity including catalyst component, stabilizer/support and reaction type has been reached, which is an invaluable characteristic of outstanding catalysts. Ni and Ni-based nanocatalysts exhibit impressive catalytic properties in some classic reactions, making them valuable alternative to conventional precious metal NPs.219–221 Ni NPs are relatively stable compared to Fe and Co NPs; thus they are promising for practical applications in industrial production. Moreover, both production (H2) and use (sun light) of new energy have been achieved by utilizing Ni nanocatalysts, thus the utilization of Ni nanocatalysts might break some economic and ecological barriers and benefit to our environment. The fabrication, application and mechanism study of Ni nanocatalysis have seemingly become more and more mature. Consequently building on previous studies, continuous flow process and multi-kilogram scale synthesis in industrial production should be awaited using Ni-based nanocatalysts. The only drawback is that among the biometals Ni shows more toxicity than the other biometals even with lack of ligand toxicity. Deeper cytotoxicity studies are still called for, however, comparing the toxicity of Ni NPs compared to those of other biometal NPs.
9. Cu-Based catalysts
The concentration of Cu in the Earth's crust is around 60 g per ton. Because of their environmentally benign character, easy availability, excellent efficiency and low cost, Cu-based nanocatalysts with various morphologies involving Cu, CuO, Cu2O, Cu3N and supported Cu complexes have shown a large reaction diversity including “click” reaction, hydrogen generation, CO and alcohol oxidation, oxidative carbonylation, epoxidation, aza-Michael reaction, C–C, C–S, C–N, C–O, C–Se and S–S coupling, O- and N-arylation, homocoupling of terminal alkynes, hydrogenation, hydrogenolysis, nitrophenol reduction, ORR, and amination. For each reaction, the possible strategy may sometimes involve photo- or electrocatalysis, gas phase, microemulsion, alloying with a second metal, radiolysis, sonochemistry, magnetic recycling, domino or multicomponent (including A3: aldehyde–alkyne–amine or aminoacid) reaction. A comprehensive review on these Cu nanomaterials and reactions by the Varma group has recently appeared.239 The De Jongh group has established a strategy based on control over collective properties, revealing the pronounced impact of the three-dimensional nanospatial distribution of metal NPs on catalyst stability. Therefore near-maximum inter NP spacings was accessed quantitatively by electron tomography, which slowed down deactivation up to an order of magnitude compared to a catalyst having a non-uniform NP distribution, or a reference Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst.240,241
“Click” reaction
The CuAAC reaction yielding 1,2,3-triazoles has been undoubtedly the main example of “click” reaction to date. Since its discovery by the groups of Sharpless242 and Meldal243 in 2002, a series of Cu-based click nanocatalysts have been developed.244 Cu nanocatalysts in “click” reactions provide significant advantages including high stability, high catalytic performance, facile catalyst/product separation and good recyclability resulting from their inherent heterogeneous or semi-heterogeneous nature. Considering that the contamination with cytotoxic Cu ion is a long-standing problem that severely restricts the applications of this click reaction in electronics and biomedicine, facile catalyst/product separation is highly attractive for practical applications. In general, three strategies have been applied for the construction of nanostructured click reaction Cu catalysts: (i) adsorption or immobilization of homogeneous Cu ions or complexes onto nano-sized heterogeneous supports; (ii) soft material-stabilized Cu NPs; (iii) Cu NPs and CuxOy NPs supported by various materials including activated carbon, zeolites, montmorillonite, silica materials, polystyrene, chitosan, and microporous metal organic frameworks.245–252
Magnetic NPs have proven useful for the immobilization of Cu complexes, and outstanding catalytic performances in both catalytic activity and catalyst reusability were observed.253–256 New supported Cu(I) complexes bearing a multidentate nitrogenated tris(triazolyl) ligand were prepared and shown to be versatile material with application in the click reaction.253 Their robustness, heterogeneous nature, magnetically recyclability and negligible copper leaching were observed in aqueous reaction media, allowing catalyst recycling for 6 runs without significant loss of catalytic activity. This procedure was successfully extended to the synthesis of dendrimers having 27 allyl- or TEG-ended (TEG = triethylene glycol) branches and three-component one-pot syntheses of triazoles using benzyl bromides, alkynes, and sodium azide as starting materials.253 Copper sulfate immobilized on poly(imidazole-imidazolium) coated magnetic NPs (MNP@PILCu) was prepared by free-radical initiation polymerization of corresponding monomers in the presence of magnetic NPs and cross-linker (Fig. 33), and its catalytic activity was evaluated in the cascade azidation-click reaction with the assistance of sodium ascorbate. The desired 1,2,3-triazoles were isolated in excellent yields and selectivity, and after completion of the first cycle the catalyst was removed from reaction media and reused several times while keeping the same activity.256
 Fig. 33  Synthesis of the click catalyst MNP@PILCu. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Polymer (PVP or agarose)-stabilized Cu(0) and Cu(I) NPs have been constructed and used in click catalysis. Well-defined and small Cu NPs stabilized by agarose were synthesized using the conventional complexation–reduction method with copper bromide.257 The resulting material was applied in the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles through the reactions of alkyl halides or arenediazonium salts with sodium azide and alkynes with only 0.05 mol% of catalyst loading in water at 40 °C and gave the desired products selectively (Fig. 34). Cu NPs@agarose was air-stable and recycled at least 5 times without significant decrease in activity. PVP-stabilized Cu2O NPs were prepared by reduction of Cu(OAc)2 in the presence of glycerol and PVP under H2 atmosphere.258 TEM images showed that the Cu2O NPs with a mean diameter of 4.7 nm were well dispersed in glycerol. The catalytic activity of Cu2ONPs@PVP was assessed in click reaction of benzyl azide and various terminal alkynes in glycerol at 100 °C, and the corresponding 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles were obtained in 91–97% yields. In the reaction between benzyl azide and phenylacetylene, the catalyst was reused at least 10 times with constant catalytic performances. Cu2ONPs@PVP was also active for CN and CS bond formation reactions between iodobenzene and primary amines (or thio-alcohols).258
 Fig. 34  Multicomponent click synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles over agarose-supported Cu NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The nitride Cu3N in which Cu has the oxidation state I was expected to be promising in click catalysis. As shown in Fig. 35, the Cu3N/Fe3N@SiO2 hybrid was assembled by infiltration of a Cu source into Fe3N@SiO2 microspheres, followed by annealing under NH3 atmosphere.259 The catalytic properties of the resulting mesoporous superparamagnetic silica microspheres incorporating Cu3N NPs was further examined in click reactions. A series of desired triazole products were generated with moderate to excellent yields. In addition, this catalyst is magnetically recoverable and reusable. This click reaction catalyzed by Cu3N has kinetics comparable to that involving homogeneous CuI complexes, and the non-cytotoxicity of Cu3N is a significant advantage over soluble CuI complexes with potential applications to biological studies.
 Fig. 35  Synthesis of Cu3N/Fe3N@SiO2 silica microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the area of nanocatalysis, there is a long-standing question concerning the heterogeneity of the catalysts: are the organic syntheses catalyzed by heterogeneous nanomaterials or mediated by released metal ions leaching from the solid catalyst? Scaiano et al.260 have explored click nanocatalysis by Cu NPs between an alkyne conjugated to a donor dye and an azide modified with a dye acceptor. The formation of triazole ring brings two dyes close enough enabling Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET). The emission of the acceptor dye is detected by single-molecule spectroscopy, so that the click reaction is precisely monitored at the single-molecule scale. It was found that in the catalytic procedure the Cu–acetylide was initially formed on the surface of the Cu NP, then the azide was attached to the Cu–acetylide species to generate a triazole that was constructed on the Cu NP surface. Then the triazole remained on the Cu NP surface for a while before being released into the reaction medium. Therefore, this study provided strong evidence that the surface of the Cu NP was the real location where the click reaction occurred indicating catalysis at the Cu NP surface rather than homogeneous catalysis induced by ions released from the Cu NP.260
Coupling reactions
Coupling reactions for the construction of various bonds are a notable sub-branch of Cu nanocatalysis, and diverse models and functional products have been synthesized, showing remarkable catalytic performances comparable to those of precious metal catalysts. No ligands were needed for these catalytic procedures involving Cu nanocatalysts.261–265 C–X (X = S, O, N, C, P) bonds are essential moieties in plenty of biological molecules, pharmaceutical compounds, material products and commercial dyes. C–S cross coupling of thiols with iodobenzene were carried out in the presence of CuO NPs in DMSO at 80 °C. This catalytic system was tolerant to various aromatic and aliphatic thiols and iodobenzene bearing different substituents, and the desired coupling products were obtained in 85–99% yields.266 Park and co-workers267 reported efficient C–O cross-coupling of aryl halides with phenols via Ullmann coupling utilizing 0.1 mol% of Cu2O nanocubes as the catalyst. The catalytic protocol showed high activity, broad scope and good functional group tolerance. Additionally, the Cu2O nanocubes are thermally and air-stable, allowing gram-scaled synthesis of diphenyl ether derivatives and catalyst recovery and reuse. C–O cross-coupling also proceeded by employing CuI NP catalysts that performed well in the reaction between aromatic chlorides and phenols in DMF using K2CO3 as the base.266 The catalytic system involving CuI NPs was also powerful for the formation of C–N bonds via N-arylation of imidazole, pyrazoles, benzimidazoles, pyrroles, and alkylamines with chlorobenzenes, and in most cases the desired products were efficiently produced with over 90% isolated yields. Furthermore, these CuI NP catalysts were simply recovered and reused for several cycles without obvious loss in catalytic outputs.268 Chung's group269 successfully employed commercially available Cu or CuO NPs as efficient catalysts for cross-coupling reactions between alkyl bromides and chlorides and various Grignard reagents with the assistance of an alkyne additive. These reactions were smoothly conducted under mild conditions and gave the corresponding C–C coupling products in moderate to excellent yields. The catalytic system showed good activity, broad scope and good functional group tolerance. The hazardousness, relatively high cost and relatively low accessibility of Grignard reagents restrict the applications of this catalytic system, however.269 Corma and Leyva-Pérez et al.270 developed a Cu-catalyzed C–N, C–C, C–O, C–S, and C–P bond-formation method with the use of sub-nanometric 2–7 atom Cu clusters that were prepared by dissolving the unstabilized or PVP-stabilized Cu NPs, or by in situ reduction of Cu salts within an oxygen-protective polymer. The Cu clusters were remarkably effective for these cross-coupling reactions of iodobenzene with nucleophilic reagents bearing N, C, O, S, and P atoms, providing up to 104 of TON value (Fig. 36). The very high catalytic efficiency was attributed to the small Cu cluster size. Besides the formation of C–X bonds, Cu-based nanomaterials served as catalysts for the construction of Si–O bonds through the dehydrogenative coupling of silanes and alcohols.271 Cu NPs immobilized on graphene materials were assembled by pyrolysis of alginate or chitosan biopolymers functionalized with Cu(II) ions and applied in catalytic dehydrogenative coupling reactions. A series of the desired compounds were obtained with almost quantitative conversions and selectivities in most tested cases.
 Fig. 36  C–N, C–C, C–O, C–S, and C–P bond-forming reactions over naked sub-nanometric Cu clusters stabilized by polymeric films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Reduction reactions
Cu NPs supported on reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are much more stable in air than various other Cu NPs, which allows efficient catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol catalyzed by Cu NPs@rGO.272 Cu NPs supported or stabilized by cellulose nanocrystals, diamond NPs or PAA have been shown to be active for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol and alkenes.273–278 Water-dispersed 30 to 85 nm Cu NPs were obtained in aqueous media by stabilization with PAA, then their catalytic behavior was investigated in 4-nitrophenol reduction.273,274 It was found that these Cu NPs were highly active for this reaction, perhaps benefiting from the good stability caused by the protection with PAA. In addition, their catalytic performance was particle size-dependent, increasing activity being observed upon decreasing the Cu NP size. Cellulose nanocrystals (CNs) were a useful support for anchoring CuO NPs, because CNs can be utilized not only as supporting materials but also as stabilizing agents, and electrostatic interactions between many hydroxyl groups of CNs and Cu(II) make the obtained CuO NPs firmly-deposited onto the surface of CNs (Fig. 37).275 It was found that the presence of CNs in the resulting nanocomposition significantly improved the catalyst stability and activity for 4-nitrophenol reduction. Considering their biologic nature (easily made from plants) and excellent immobilizing ability (resulting from the abundant hydroxyl groups), CNs should become attractive supports for Earth-abundant metal nanocatalysts in industrial applications.
 Fig. 37  Fabrication of CN-supported CuO NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The selective reduction of CO2 is a key energy-related challenge that is being increasingly addressed with nanostructured Earth-abundant materials, in particular Cu. Nanostructured Cu films were adhered to IR-transparent Si prisms, and these films were used as electrodes for Cu NP-catalyzed CO2 reduction to electrogenerated CO beginning at −0.60 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode with increasing surface population at more negative potentials. This Cu-adsorbed CO generation serves to maintain a pool of this vital intermediate primed for further reduction to higher order fuel products.276 Cu NPs assembled on a pyridinic-N rich graphene (p-NG) support show a Cu NP mass- and size-dependent catalysis for the selective electrochemical reduction of CO2 to ethylene. The ethylene formation faradaic efficiency and hydrocarbon selectivity reach 19% and 79% respectively at −0.9 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode for 7 nm Cu NPs assembled on p-NG with the p-NG/Cu mass ratio of 1:1.277
Hydrogen evolution
Cu-Based nanocatalysts were found efficient in hydrogen evolution reactions279 and the hydrolysis of ammonia borane.280 25–35 nm Cu NPs that were electrodeposited at the polarized water/DCE interface by reduction of CuCl2 efficiently promoted in situ hydrogen evolution.279 Cu@Cu2O core–shell NPs and Cu2O NPs were synthesized upon oxidation of Cu NPs by the solvated metal atom dispersion method (Fig. 38),280 with compositions and morphologies strongly depending on the oxidation conditions. Catalytic investigations showed that all these Cu NPs mediate the hydrolysis of ammonia borane resulting in the generation of hydrogen. Moreover both Cu@Cu2O NPs and Cu2O NPs were superior to their Cu NP precursor. H2 evolution at a rate of 11.5 × 10−3 mu min−1 corresponding to an internal efficiency of 15.8% and an overall quantum efficiency of 3.5% for light between 310 and 710 nm was obtained upon illumination of a water–methanol mixture with 15 nm Cu2O NPs obtained by gas phase reduction by CO of CuO NPs (obtained via impregnation–drying–heating).281
 Fig. 38  Preparation of Cu@Cu2O core–shell NPs, and its catalytic application in the hydrolysis of ammonia borane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2008, The Owner Societies. 
Oxidation reactions
Cu NPs are powerful catalysts for the epoxidation of propylene282 and oxidations of CO,283–285 amines,286,287 and alcohols.286,287 Illuminating Cu NPs with visible light significantly enhanced the steady-state selectivity in epoxidation of propylene to propylene oxide, and the promoted catalytic performance was attributed to light-induced reduction of the surface Cu atoms resulting from photoexcitation of the Cu NP localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).282 The observed results suggested an effective avenue to develop viable heterogeneous propylene epoxidation catalysts. The reduction of Cu leads to an obvious enhancement of its catalytic activity, and this phenomenon was also observed in the case of Cu NP-catalyzed CO oxidation.283 Pretreatment of Cu NPs deposited on silica nanopowders by H2 increased the Cu0 fraction in a mixture of Cu0 and Cu2+ in Cu NPs and resulted in considerable promotion of catalytic ability. Full conversion of CO oxidation was obtained at 240 °C when H2-pretreated Cu NPs were employed (Fig. 39). On the contrary, temperatures of 345 °C and 356 °C were needed for full conversion when original Cu NPs and O2-pretreated Cu NPs were utilized, respectively.
 Fig. 39  CO oxidation over H2-pretreated Cu NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
CuI, TEMPO and NMI were grafted onto azide-functionalized silica NPs providing a composite Cu NP catalyst for aerobic alcohol oxidation that is superior to the homogeneous catalyst.287 The presence of Cu NPs was shown to boost electron mobility of graphene-like boron nitride (g-BN) for the aerobic oxidation of aromatic sulfur compounds with a catalytic activity >97%, and this Cu NP s/g-BN catalyst has been recycled 10 times without significant activity decrease. It is remarkable that g-BN be such an excellent protector of Cu NPs against oxidation.288 Microwave assistance was used together with hydrazine reductant and leaf extract of Psidium guajava as stabilizer for the formation of plasmonic (561–572 nm) 15 nm Cu NPs of exceptional stability that catalyze the degradation of the organic pollutants methylene blue, methyl red, methyl orange, eosin yellow, 2-nitrophenol and 3-nitrophenol. The in vitro cytotoxic effect of these Cu NPs on L929 fibroblast cells has been evaluated and found to be surprisingly small.289 Isotropic and oriented Cu NPs supported on graphene were shown to efficiently catalyze nucleophilic addition of anilines to N,N′-dialkylcarbodiimides to form the corresponding guanidines. This catalyst outperformed Cu NPs supported on C nanotubes, active carbon, layered clay, TiO2 and CeO2.290 Cu is a plasmonic metal, but plasmonic behavior in only observed for larger Cu NPs than for Au NPs and Ag NPs. Thus the coverage of Cu oxides with Cu NPs provides two sources of activation that intervene in synergy in catalytic reactions. For instance micron-sized Cu2O covered with Cu NPs induced a surface plasmon band at 565 nm, and methylene blue photodegradation experiments under visible light and with H2O2 showed that the introduction of Cu NPs onto this Cu2O material boosted the photocatalytic activity. Quenching experiments showed that activity in the dark of Cu2O–Cu NPs only led to the formation of OH˙ radicals, whereas under visible light O2˙− radicals also contributed to the formation of degradation products as a result of the Cu plasmonic activity.291
Surface-clean monodispersed CuOx NPs of sizes between 1 and 5 nm, in particular with 2 nm CuOx NPs, have been used in the oxidative coupling of alkynes without induction time. TiO2-supported CuOx NPs reacted similarly. O2 activation was shown to be the rate-determining step, and the oxygen species formed was CuOx with NP size-dependent and controlled catalytic activity.292 A peroxidase-like activity of 2 nm Cu NPs was disclosed using 6-thio-β-cyclodextrin as both template and modulator for β-CD/Cu NP assisted oxidation of tetramethylbenzidine by H2O2.293
An example of Cu2S NP catalysis is illustrated in the catalytic degradation of organic dyes by 50 nm Cu2S NPs formed by thermal decomposition of Cu(II) diethyldithiocarbamate at 220 °C.294
Catalysis by Cu and Cu-based NPs is nowadays undergoing an explosive development in the exploration of synthetic methods, the diversity of reactions, the improvement of catalytic activity and selectivity, and their uses in the ultrasound-assisted photodegradation and/or adsorption of pollutants.295 The use of these Cu nanocatalyst has been particularly successful for the CuAAC reaction, various couplings reactions, many oxidation and reduction reactions and multicomponent reactions. Many problems still remain to be resolved, however. In many cases, the catalytic performance of Cu-based NPs in terms of activity and recyclability is still restricted by the limited stability and catalyst leaching. Therefore the need of design of efficient synthetic protocols, stabilizers/supports is still important. Fundamental insights into the reaction and deactivation mechanisms of Cu-based nanocatalysis are called for towards a deeper understanding of the functions/mechanism and the interactions of the Cu species in catalytic systems. Furthermore mechanistic studies are essential to tune, tailor and optimize Cu NP-derived catalytic systems. Since the real catalytic species, active catalytic sites and the possible structural variation are not yet clear for some Cu-based nanocatalysts, it appears necessary to carry out a series of investigations focusing on comparison experiments, in situ observation and development of characterization methods for nanomaterials.
In view of economical issues and practical applications, the utilization of Cu-based nanocatalysts in continuous flow processes for organic syntheses in larger scale should be developed. In particular, continuous flow processes involving Cu-based bimetallic or trimetallic NPs will deserved increased attention.
10. Earth-abundant early transition metals-based nanocatalysts
Earth-abundant early transition metals-based nanomaterials in the forms of metal oxides, metal sulfides, zero-valence metals and supported metal complexes have been fabricated and used as nanocatalysts in many catalytic processes, especially in photocatalysis. Among these nanocatalyts, nanostructured metal oxides are the most utilized ones.
Titanium is the ninth most abundant element, its concentration in the Earth's crust being around 6300 g per ton. Nano-sized titanium dioxide (TiO2) is a promising semiconductor for photocatalysis. To date, nano TiO2 with the morphologies of spheres,296,297 nanotubes,298 nanorods,299 nanobelts300 nanowires301 and nanohollows,302 have been applied in various photocatalytic reactions. However, the high energy requirement for photoexcitation (higher than 3.2 eV) and the high recombination ratio of photo-induced hole–electron pairs reduce its catalytic efficiency and lead to TiO2-promoted photocatalysts functioning only under UV irradiation. In a related context, various strategies have been performed with nano TiO2 to promote its catalytic ability and develop new photocatalytic functions. These strategies include other elements (N, C, S, H, Co, V, Cu, Bi, W, N–S, N–F, V–N and noble metals303) for doping, decorating with Lewis acids, dye sensitizing, coupling with other semiconductors, and immobilizing on other materials (magnetic NPs, SBA-15, activated carbon, ZIF-8, SiO2 films, carbon nanofibers, PVA matrix, MoS2, graphene, and fibrous nano-silica).304,305
The control of the morphology of inorganic materials via simple methods and the investigation of the influence of morphology on the catalytic properties are of great interest. Nanostructured TiO2 with various morphologies were synthesized via a microemulsion-mediated hydrothermal method.306 The morphology of TiO2 changed from spherical to rod-shaped particles with increasing the hydrothermal temperature, because of the preferred growth of TiO2 crystal along the (101) direction in microemulsion with decreased interface intensity at elevated temperature (Fig. 40). These pre-synthesized TiO2 nanohybrids were then used as photocatalysts for the decomposition of rhodamine B, and it was demonstrated that the rod-like TiO2 displayed much better catalytic performance than its spherical counterpart. The catalytic activity of rod-like TiO2 is comparable and even higher than that of commercial P25. The remarkable catalytic behavior of these rod-like TiO2 NPs is attributed to its high crystallinity resulting from the higher hydrothermal temperature.306
 Fig. 40  Morphology control of TiO2 NPs in microemulsion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Among the strategies for the enhancement of the photocatalytic properties of nano TiO2, doping TiO2 with other elements is perhaps the most promising one. In this area, one of recent trends is the fabrication and use of bi-elements co-doped TiO2 nanocomposites involving the combinations of N–S, N–V, N–F.307 In these co-doped systems, improved photocatalytic activity was achieved by synergistic effects involving better separation of photogenerated electrons and holes, narrower band gap, and higher visible light adsorption, compared with singly doped and undoped TiO2. N–S co-doped TiO2 NPs and nanosheets with well-developed mesoporous structures were readily prepared by sol–gel and hydrothermal methods, respectively. Their catalytic applications were evaluated in visible-light-driven degradation of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ibuprofen (IBP) and naproxen (NPX).308 These TiO2 NPs and nanosheets provided good to excellent degradation conversion for IBP, and almost 100% degradation in the case of NPX, indicating significantly high photocatalytic efficiencies of N–S co-doped nano TiO2. Patel and co-workers309,310 demonstrated that the band gap of N–V-co-doped TiO2 NPs is 2.3 eV, which is narrower than that of N-, V-doped, and undoped TiO2 NPs, resulting in much higher photocatalytic activity for the degradation of rhodamine B under visible-light irradiation.
The addition of other Earth-abundant transition metals has been shown to be efficient and practical to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2 nanomaterials. Co, Cu and Ni-loaded TiO2 nanohybrids showed outstanding photocatalytic performances in many reactions, such as H2 production and aerobic C–H oxidation.311–313 The deposition of Cu NPs on the surface of TiO2 increases catalytic efficiency of TiO2-mediated H2 production.313 The phase of these loaded Cu NPs is tunable with the evolution of Cu–Cu2O–CuO through H2 or O2 treatments (Fig. 41). Among them, Cu NPs with thin Cu2O shells (Cu2Othi) that were obtained upon treatment with H2 reduction exhibited higher catalytic activity than unloaded TiO2, the enhancement being remarkably significant. These excellent catalytic performances are attributed to reduced charge carrier recombination and decrease in defects after H2 reduction. Jafarpour and Rezaeifard et al.312 reported that a 22–32 nm-size Co Schiff base- decorated TiO2 nanomaterial performed well in the visible-light-driven aerobic benzylic C–H oxidation of various alcohols and benzylic hydrocarbons (Fig. 42), benefiting from the synergistic effect between the Co complex and TiO2 NPs. Moreover, this heterogeneous catalyst is recoverable and reusable several times. The use of “green” oxidant, visible light and low-cost catalyst makes this system promising towards industrial applications.
 Fig. 41  Structural-phase evolution of Cu loaded on TiO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 42  Photocatalytic aerobic C–H oxidation by Co Schiff base complex-loaded TiO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently many materials have been used as supporting agents of nano TiO2 to raise its catalytic ability.314 For example due to its remarkable thermal and chemical stability ZIF-8 was regarded as an ideal host for constructing TiO2-based nanocomposites. In the case of the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue and rhodamine-8, TiO2 NPs encapsulated in ZIF-8 was superior to unsupported TiO2 NPs in terms of both activity and reusability.315 Carbon-based materials, including multiwall carbon nanotubes, graphene, activated carbon, and carbon nanofibers have be proven effective for enhancing the visible photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanocatalysts, because of the extended photoresponsive range and increased electron–hole pair separation efficiency of these nanocomposites and the wide visible light absorption of the carbon-based materials.316,317 For the decomposition of rhodamine B under visible-light irradiation both hierarchical TiO2@C hybrid hollow sphere318 and TiO2@carbon carbon nanofibers core/shell nanohybrids319 showed improved photocatalytic efficiencies compared to their unsupported TiO2 counterpart. TiO2 nanorods were also deposited on pre-synthesized one-dimensional porous carbon nanofibers (PCNFs) via a progressive process involving electrospinning technique and hydrothermal treatment.320 The catalytic property of this fabricated nanomaterial was further investigated in visible photocatalysis for dye degradation involving methylene blue, Congo red, eosin red and methyl orange. In these processes, the use of PCNFs improved the photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2 nanorods by increasing both e− transport and adsorption; it benefited from the highly porous structure and large surface area of PCNFs (Fig. 43).
 Fig. 43  Photocatalytic dyes degradation by a TiO2/PCNFs heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. 
Ti nanocatalysts have also been proven useful in many organic transformations without using light irradiation, such as Friedel–Crafts alkylation of indoles with epoxides,321 alcohols and olefins oxidations,322 one-pot synthesis of chromeno[4,3-e][1,3]oxazine compounds,323 radiofluorination,324 ORR reaction,325,326 oxidesulfurization,327 and the synthesis of 1,2,4,5-tetrasubstituted imidazoles.328
Radiofluorination is a powerful method for the synthesis of positron-emission tomography probes. Sergeev and Dam et al.324 demonstrated that 18F-radiofluorination of tosylated compounds smoothly proceeded in the presence of TiO2 NPs using tetra-n-butylammonium bicarbonate as a phase-transfer agent in highly aqueous medium (acetonitrile–thexyl alcohol) (Fig. 44). This synthetic method holds some advantages by comparison with conventional strategies. For instance it avoids the need of a drying/azeotroping step resulting in the reduction of both radiolabeling time and radioactivity loss. High radiochemical purity of the target compounds with a wide substrate scope was obtained within a short reaction time. The high radiofluorination efficiency of this catalytic system involving TiO2 nanocatalyst makes it remarkably useful in the area of positron-emission tomography radiochemistry.324 Besides titanium oxides, nano-sized titanium nitride is also efficient in catalysis. Carbon black-anchored TiN NPs were prepared by using a mpg-C3N4/CB composite as a template starting from CB, colloidal SiO2 and CNNH2 (Fig. 45).325 A TEM image revealed the uniform size and good dispersity of TiN NPs on CB. Interestingly, the pre-synthesized TiN/CB nanocomposition provided excellent performances as an electrocatalyst for ORR reaction in polymer electrolyte fuel cells.
 Fig. 44  Nano TiO2-catalyzed 18F-radiofluorination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 45  Synthesis of CB-immobilized TiN NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Copper-doped titanium dioxide materials with an anatase phase (Cu–TiO2, atomic Cu contents ranging from 0 to 3% relative to the sum of Cu and Ti), and particle sizes in the range 12–15 nm were synthesized by a solvo-thermal method using ethanol as the solvent and small amounts of water to promote the hydrolysis condensation process. Diffuse reflectance UV-vis spectroscopy shows that the edges of absorption of the titania materials are somewhat shifted to higher wavelengths due to the presence of Cu. XPS indicates that Cu(II) is predominant. Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 under UV-rich light was conducted in aqueous Cu–TiO2 suspension, and it was shown that the Cu content influenced the CO2 reduction photocatalytic activity.326
The studies of nanocatalysis with other Earth-abundant early transition metals including V (20th abundant element), Cr (22th), Zr (18th), Nb (34th), and W (19th), are relatively rare.
V-Based nanocatalysts are classified into two types: (i) nanomaterials (including magnetic NPs, starch nanocrystals, and zeolite-Y with nano-pores)-supported V complexes, (ii) nanostructured V2O5. To date, several V complexes such as chiral oxo-vanadium (+)-pseudoephedrine,329,330 amino vanadium oxo phthalocyanine,331 and oxo-vanadium Schiff base,332,333 have been immobilized on/in different nanomaterials. These nanohybrids showed acceptable catalytic outcome and good recyclability in the cyanosilylation of carbonyl compounds, the synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrano[c]chromenes derivatives, and the oxidation of sulfides, alcohols, styrene, and cyclohexane. In addition, unsupported, porous chitosan- and TiO2-supported, and polyaniline-stabilized V2O5 nanocomposites were designed, assembled and applied as catalysts for various organic reactions including oxidative deprotection of acetals to methyl esters, oxidation of alcohols to ketones, C–H oxidation of ethyl benzene to acetophenone, oxidation of aldehydes to esters, oxidative deprotection of dithianes, selective catalytic reduction of NOx to NH3, and ozonolysis of oleic acid.334–336
A few examples on Cr-based nanocatalysis are known; they involve Cr–V and Cr–Cu bimetallic catalysts (see the section of “Bi- or tri-abundant transition metals nanocatalysts”), and in situ formed Cr(0) NPs. [Cr(CO)6] was shown to be very efficient for the conversion of glucose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) in the presence of ionic liquids ([EMIM]Cl) upon using microwave irradiation or under thermal conditions.337 Strong evidence from multiple analyses indicated that the real catalytic species for this transformation was Cr(0) NPs with the sizes of 3.6 ± 0.7 nm and 2.3 ± 0.4 nm generated under microwave irradiation and thermal conditions, respectively (Fig. 46). The relatively low cost and good air-stability of the precursor [Cr(CO)6], low catalyst amount, and outstanding catalytic ability make this catalytic protocol very attractive.
 Fig. 46  Conversion of glucose into HMF catalyzed by Cr(0) NPs. 
Nanostructured Zr oxides not only play a role as catalyst, but also as support. Zonouz and Domen et al.338,339 reported the ZrOx NP-catalyzed synthesis of 2-aminochromene derivatives with a wide scope of substrates and ORR in acidic media. In the latter case, the satisfying performance of nano ZrOx was attributed to its very high chemical stability and excellent electronic conductivity.339 ZrO2 NPs have been used to support sulfonic acid yielding an heterogeneous acid catalyst with low cost and low toxicity that was proven efficient for various heterocyclic multi-component reactions providing polyhydroquinoline, hexahydroquinoline, 1,8-dioxo-octahydroxanthene, and 1,8-dioxo-decahydroacridine derivatives in 84–96% yields.340 Moreover, this solid catalyst was recovered and reused for at least 5 cycles with only slight decrease in catalytic activity, indicating the strong bonding of the sulfonic acid groups to nano ZrO2 NPs.
The literature on Nb-based nanocatalysts is relatively underrepresented. Tanaka's group341 synthesized Nb2O5 nano-plate particles that have a width of 35 nm and a length of 200 nm via solvothermal reaction using Nb(OC2H5)5 and ethylene glycol as starting materials. The Nb2O5 NPs obtained were applied as catalyst for selective photooxidation of benzyl alcohol producing benzaldehyde under visible-light irradiation and showed higher catalytic efficiency than analogs obtained from NbOH as precursor, because of the higher surface area of the Nb(OC2H5)5-related nano Nb2O5.
Catalysis involving nanostructured tungsten-containing WS2, WC, WO3 has recently emerged. Vertically aligned WS2 nanosheet films with plenty of exposed active WS2 edges and having porous structure were prepared by sulfurization of pre-fabricated WO3 films.342 The catalytic properties of these WS2 nanosheets were then tested in water splitting, and the results showed that the combination of W with S, morphology of nanosheet, and abundant active edges are beneficial for enhancing the catalytic efficiency. Water splitting proceeded with good performances using this catalyst that output low onset overpotential, small Tafel slope and high catalytic current. Li and co-workers343 prepared mesoporous tungsten carbide (WC) NPs with various carbon contents using a low-temperature combustion synthetic method. Investigation of their catalytic applications revealed that these WC nanomaterials offered excellent catalytic performance in the ORR process, and it was believed that this high performance benefited from the tunable carbon contents and mesoporous state. W-catalyzed olefin epoxidation using H2O2 or WO3 NPs conducted via flame aerosol technology provided large increases in terms of activity and space time yield compared to the current benchmark catalyst.344 This outcome should drive further development in the use of tungsten oxides NPs.
The catalytic applications of Ti-based nanocomposites have attracted increasing attention, particularly in photocatalysis, but nanocatalysis by other Earth-abundant early transition metals was rarely reported. The combination of Earth-abundant early transition metals with other elements could cause significant improvements of catalytic performance in terms of efficiency and separation. Thus more researches in this area should be carried out including the extension of catalyst diversity, development of reaction diversity and mechanism studies. In addition, considering the high efficiency of Earth-abundant early transition-metal nanocatalysts in photodegradation of pollutants in water at the lab-scale,345–351 more attempts in practical applications of such water treatment should be conducted.
11. Earth-abundant bi- and trimetallic transition metals nanocatalysts
Bi- and tri-metallic nanocatalysts of Earth-abundant transition metals composed of two or three abundant transition metals in a nanostructured material have received increasing attention due to their higher catalytic activity, selectivity and better catalyst recyclability than monometallic nanocatalysts resulting from synergistic surface interaction with substrates.352–367 Their catalytic activity and (or) selectivity depends not only on the composition but also on the size, morphology, crystallinity, the nature of exposed facets, monodispersity, fraction of each metal, and architectures (including ordered alloys, disordered alloys, heterodimers, core/shell, etc.). In most cases, synergetic electronic effects between two or more metals or elements at the nanomaterial surface strongly improve their catalytic performances, although on the other hand negative effects are sometimes also observed. An additional important concept is that an Earth-abundant metal may enhance the catalytic activity of a noble metal and eventually render it more selective, which would in the same time become more economical due to the dilution of the expansive metal by the cheap one. For example dilution of Ru NP with Fe enhanced the catalytic properties towards hydrogenation of aromatic substrates. Selectivities was also increased as shown by side group hydrogenation without saturation of the aromatic ring.358 A quite opposite concept consists in introducing a noble metal to enhance the catalytic activity of Fe. For instance Au as a plasmonic metal could enhance the dissociation of N2 by Fe in the Haber–Bosch process for NH3 synthesis upon injection of hot electrons and holes or induce resonant surface excitation. Indeed this possibility has recently been explored with some success using DFT calculations.359 Finally excellent results are also obtained using two Earth-abundant metals such as Fe and Co in alloyed NPs as shown in the cogeneration of ethylene and electricity in a proton-conducting ethane fuel cell.360
Sometimes Cu NP-containing bimetallic catalysts show enhanced activity compared to the related monocatalyst, highlighting the interest of adding the Earth-abundant metal to a noble metal. A recent example is the high performance of PtCux@Pt core–shell NPs decorated with nanoporous Pt surfaces disclosed for the ORR reaction.362
Electrocatalytic hydrogenation (ECH) of oxygenates was conducted using Cu/C, Ni/C and CuNi/C NPs for ECH of hydroxyacetone, a bioderived feedstock surrogate. CuNi/C shows increased turnover frequencies but reduced ECH selectivity (80% at 80% conversion) compared to the Ni/C catalyst.363 3 nm Cu NPs formed from Cu2+ at the external surface of Fe2O3 support during high-temperature water–gas-shift reaction were shown to promote this reaction contrary to the Cr promoter, because these Cu NPs introduced new catalytic active sites.364 Synergistic cooperative catalysis of alkyne homocoupling and cross coupling in air by mesoporous Cu/Mn oxides synthesized by an inverse micelle evaporation-induced self-assembly procedure was demonstrated inter alia by temperature-programmed desorption (TPD), TGA and DFT studies.365 RuCuCo NPs synthesized in situ into highly porous metal–organic framework ML-101 show higher catalytic activity than monometallic Ru and CuCo counterparts in ammonia borane hydrolysis to generate H2 with TOF value of 241 mol H2 min−1 mol−1 Ru.366
Morphology and phase-controlled construction of Pt–Ni NPs were found to be key parameters for the synthesis of very efficient catalysts. Such bimetallic nanoframes with tunable structure and large accessible surface area were obtained using dodecyltriethylammonium chloride and control of oleylamine/oleic acid ratio mediating the compositional anisotropic growth and segregated shape respectively. Tetrahedral nanocrystals were obtained in this way, and their treatment with acetic acid yielded highly open Pt–Ni NCs that were highly performing electrocatalysts for both ORR and alcohol oxidation, far better than Pt/C.367
Photocatalysis is an area for which the development of bimetallic catalysts acting in synergy is particularly promising using semi-conductors and plasmonic metals. For instance the hybrid alloy-semiconductor heterojunction structure composed of Cu/Ag/Ag3PO4 core–shell coaxial nanowires showed a higher degradation rate of methylene blue than pure Ag3PO4 NPs under visible-light irradiation.353 Cu NPs loaded on TiO2 surfaces co-catalyzed the photocatalytic debromination of the decabrominated diphenyl ether (BDE209) pollutant with over 25 times enhancement compared to TiO2. This positive effect was attributed to the Cu NP-induced adsorption of BDE209 facilitating electron transfer from the conduction band of TiO2 to the pollutant.354 Mesoporous Cu–TiO2 nanomaterials were prepared by doping, solvent free and impregnation methods. The doping method generated Cu+, whereas the solvent-free and impregnation provided CuO species. The doped CuO–TiO2 nanomaterial showed high activity for alkyne–alkyne homocoupling reaction with air as the sole oxidant under mild conditions.355
Accompanying the development of magnetically recyclable nanocatalysis, magnetic nanomaterials with two or three abundant transition metals such as MnFe2O4,368 MnCo2O4,369 CoxFe3−xO4,370 Co1.28Mn1.71O4,371 CuFe2O4,372 NiFe2O4,373 and CoMnxFe2−xO4374 have been prepared. These nanocatalysts possess several favorable features including low preparation cost, high accessibility and high stability, and exhibit excellent catalytic efficiency, recovery, and recyclability in a large variety of reactions. The diversity of the reactions is a significant advantage of these bi- and tri-metallic nanocomposites, compared to the commonly used Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3 magnetic NPs. On the other hand, considering further modification and functionalization with other species, Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3 magnetic NPs usually appear superior to these nanocomposites. Among them, CuFe2O4 and NiFe2O4 are the two most used nanocatalysts, benefiting from the versatile catalytic ability of Cu and Ni NPs. For instance CuFe2O4 NPs with different sizes have been broadly used as catalysts in oxidative cross-dehydrogenative coupling, click chemistry, asymmetric hydrosilylation of aryl ketones, cyclopropanation of diazoesters with styrene derivatives, α-arylation of 1,3-diketones, methanol steam reforming, S-arylation, Ullmann C–O coupling, and synthesis of imidazo[1,2-α]pyridines, 4-oxo-2-(phenylimino)thiazolidin-5-ylideneacetate derivatives, spirooxindoles, medicinally privileged spiropyrimidine scaffolds, diaryl or alkyl/aryl sulfones, and aza-arenes derivatives. Importantly, the magnetic character of ferrites in CuFe2O4 brings about the possibility of simple catalyst separation using an external magnetic field.
The architectures of bi- or tri-metallic transition metals nanocatalysts of abundant metals play a crucial role in the development of high-performance heterogeneous catalysts. Alloy and core/shell are the two most important architecture types. The catalytic alloyed NPs are remarkably size- and composition-dependent, and the preparation of alloy NPs having uniform composition and size maximizes their catalytic performances. The core/shell structure is regarded as a kind of phase separation with a core metal surrounded by the shell composed of the other metal(s). The core/shell boundary has been observed to play an important role in applications due to its specific physical and chemical properties. NPs architectures with Fe–Ni, Fe–Co, Co–Cu, Co–Ni, Co–Mn, Ni–Cu, Cr–V, Cr–Cu, Nb–W, Co–Cu–Mn, Ni–Co–Fe, Co–Ni–Cu and Co–Cu–Nb performed well as nanocatalysts in various reactions. For instance, the preparation of uniform Ni–Fe alloy NPs was achieved by means of calcination and reduction of a hydrotalcite precursor. The resulting alloyed material was highly active and coke-resistant in the steam reforming of toluene and phenol.375 Xu's group376 showed that abundant transition metal-based Cu@M (M = Co, Fe, Ni) core–shell NPs constructed via a one-pot approach under ambient conditions was superior to the corresponding alloy and monometallic counterparts in hydrogen generation via decomposition of ammonia borane.
Co–Ni–Cu alloys were successfully assembled via hydrazine reduction, and this composite material with an average size of 16.4 nm and good size distribution was shown to possess an homogeneous alloy structure.377 The trimetallic alloy displayed a much better catalytic activity than both Co–Ni and Ni–Cu bimetallic NPs in the thermal decomposition of ammonium perchlorate, showing synergetic effects of the different metals. Hierarchical branched PtCu NPs with three-dimensional open porous structure composed of integrated branches with small size of about 30 nm and composed of integrated ultrathin branches using a modified polyol process exhibited 2.5 and 1.7 times enhanced activity toward methanol oxidation compared to that of the commercial Pt–Ru and Pt–Ru/C catalysts, respectively.378 A ternary “CoCuNb” catalyst with bimodal nanosized particle structure was fabricated by an oxalate coprecipitation route.379 The ternary “CoCuNb” catalyst is constituted by Co–Cu particles with sizes ranging from 25 to 40 nm, and peripheral Nb oxides NPs with smaller size of 4 to 8 nm (Fig. 47). Catalytic investigations showed that high alcohol production via CO hydrogenation was efficiently conducted using this Co–Cu–Nb nanocomposition as catalyst. It was believed that Nb oxides NPs worked as structural dispersant in this system. Strong metal–support interactions with Co–Cu particles brought about a large enhancement of the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller specific surface area and an increase of the surface portion of Co in the combination of “CoCu”. Consequently both high catalytic efficiency and high primary alcohol production were obtained. This ternary “CoCuNb” catalyst exhibited high selectivity in C2–C5 alcohol formation.379 The optimization of long-chain C8–C14 alcohol production was achieved by the utilization of a ternary “CoCuMn” nanocatalyst.380
 Fig. 47  Ternary Co–Cu–Nb catalyst for the selective CO hydrogenation to higher alcohols. Reprinted with permission from ref. 379. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Although precious metal-based bi- and tri-metallic nanocatalysts have been extensively reported, bi- and tri-metallic nanocatalysts composed of two or three abundant transition metals in one nanostructured material are comparatively underutilized. Many features of combined nanohybrids containing Earth-abundant metals including morphology, crystallinity, monodispersity, components and architectures related to their catalytic properties and mechanistic studies should be further investigated for a deeper understanding and consequently for guiding the design of new improved catalysts. Due to the very low price and all-in-one physical and chemical properties, rationally designed bi- and tri-metallic abundant transition nanomaterials should be remarkably powerful for the catalysis of many challenging reactions. Other targeted uses could include the cascade synthesis of pharmaceuticals or fine chemicals using easy-to-get and cheap starting materials. In addition, continuous flow process and multi-kilogram scale synthesis in industrial production should subsequently be attempted following continuous design and efficiency improvements. Many unsolved problems and challenges still remain, however, such as dealing with the relative complexity of synthetic procedures that presently renders morphology aspects hard to precisely control. Indeed the size, shape, components and architecture of the nanosystems are of paramount importance in the design and the development of NPs with specific properties tailored towards applications in catalysis.
12. Conclusions and perspectives
Given such a large variety of Earth-abundant transition metals nanomaterials, it now appears that attention from the community for these materials is explosively growing. This is due to their low cost and higher biocompatibility compared to precious (noble) transition metals.381,382 To date, a number of Earth-abundant transition metal nanomaterials have been prepared via numerous protocols, and in many cases their sizes, morphologies, shapes, oxidation states and compositions were defined by design. DFT calculations are helpful in optimizing the structures for catalytic activity and selectivity and for the investigations of reaction mechanisms. The study and utilization of these nanocatalysts in continuous flow processes is progressing for organic syntheses in large scale. The use of plasmonic Cu and TiO2 semi-conductors in synergy with other metals allows visible light-driven catalysis and the development of high-performance energy conversion and storage nanocatalysts involving water splitting, ORR, OER, HER and FTS transformations.356,383 Earth-abundant transition metal nanomaterials have also been recently extensively used in environmental applications through conducting degradation of pollutants including dyes, herbicides and other toxic chemicals. As shown in the last section, there is a tremendous potential of nanomaterial sophistication upon blending Earth-abundant metals in alloyed, core–shell and yolk–shell structures and onto carbon-type, and oxides or other composite supports, and research in this sub-field is bursting with considerable challenges in catalysis.
Indeed, in spite of the remarkable progress in Earth-abundant transition metal-based nanocatalysis, many unsolved problems and challenges still remain. For instance, the aerobic instability of zero-valent nanocatalysts have so far restricted their catalytic applications; thus more powerful stabilizers and stabilizing technologies are needed in order to maximize their catalytic potential. Extension of both catalyst and reaction diversities is also called for. Further work is required to seek new and useful preparation methods in order to construct nanocatalysts with tunable properties. As indicated above, assembling bi- and trimetallic nanocomposites structures should be encouraged toward the increase of catalytic stability and properties. In addition, the understanding of many catalytic mechanisms is so far underdeveloped due to the complex mechanistic manifolds and restricted spectroscopic analyses of Earth-abundant transition metals. Illustration of their operation mechanisms should provide guidelines for the design of more efficient nanocatalysts. Also, building on previous studies of continuous flow processes, multi-kilogram scale synthesis in industrial production will hopefully be attempted using these low-cost and highly active nanocatalysts. Consequently, continuous investigations of more efficient and more practical catalyst systems based on Earth-abundant transition metals nanomaterials are still highly desired and should also be of considerable value for industry.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Chinese Scientific Council (CSC, PhD grant to D. W.), Université de Bordeaux, the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), and L'Oréal R&D France is gratefully acknowledged.
References
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Manna, A. Cabot, Z. Hens, D. V. Talapin, C. R. Kagan, V. I. Kiminov, A. L. Rogach, P. Reiss and D. J. Milliron, ACS Nano, 2015, 2, 1012–1057 CrossRef PubMed .

          Although it does apply to a very large majority of nanomaterials discussed here, this definition has been questioned, in Concepts of Nanochemistry, ed. L. Cademartiri and G. A. Ozin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2009, p. 5 Search PubMed .
Y. Li and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2011, 10, 2289–2295 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Gellman and N. Shukla, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 87–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schatz, O. Reiser and W. Stark, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8950–8967 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. B. Joo and F. Zaera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1816–1824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, L. Nguyen, Y. Zhu, S. Zhan, C.-K. Tsung and F. Tao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1731–1739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Zhang, B. Xu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 443, 7870–7886 RSC .
Y. H. Dai, Y. Wang, B. Liu and Y. H. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 268–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Nanocatalysis, ed. U. Heiz and U. Landman, Springer, Berlin,  2007 Search PubMed .

Nanoparticles and Catalysis, ed. D. Astruc, Wiley-VCH,  2008 Search PubMed .

Modern surface organometallic chemistry, ed. J.-M. Basset, R. Psaro, D. Roberto and R. Ugo, Wiley-VCH, Weiheim,  2009 Search PubMed .

Nanocatalysis: Synthesis and Applications, ed. V. Polshettiwar and T. Asefa, Wiley,  2013 Search PubMed .

Nanomaterials in Catalysis, ed. P. Serp and K. Philippot, Wiley-VCH,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Fihri, M. Bouhrara, B. Nekoueishahraki, J.-M. Basset and V. Polshettiwar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5181–5203 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. Nguyen, Y. Zhu, S. Zhan, C.-K. Tsung and F. Tao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1731–1739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Gellman and N. Shukla, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 87–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, F. Lu and J. Ruiz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7852–7872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 1884–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu and N. S. Hosmane, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 293–294, 357–367 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Zhu, A. Chakrabarti and N. S. Hosmane, Applications of Nanocatalysis in Boron Chemistry, in Boron-The Fifth Element, ed. D. Hnyk and M. Mckee, Springer,  2015, ch. 8 Search PubMed .
V. S. Thoi, Y. Sun, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2388–2400 RSC .
M. Albrecht, R. Bedford and B. Plietker, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 5619–5621 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaunt, T. Rovis and H.-F. Chow, Synlett, 2014, 2715–2716 CAS .
B. Su, Z.-C. Cao and Z.-J. Shi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 886–896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pinaka and G. C. Vougioukalakis, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 288, 69–97 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Holzwarth and B. Plietker, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1650–1679 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Bullock, Science, 2013, 342, 1054–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Amiens, D. Ciuculescu-Pradines and K. Philippot, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 308, 409–432 CrossRef CAS .
J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hillier, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1951, 11, 55–75 RSC .
A. Sarkar, T. Mukherjee and S. Kapoor, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3334–3340 CAS .
F. Benaskar, N. Patil, E. V. Rebrov, J. Meuldijk, V. Hessel, L. A. Hulshof, D. A. Jefferson, J. C. Schouten and A. E. H. Wheatley, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 248–251 CrossRef CAS .
E. Colacino, J. Martinez, F. Lamaty, L. S. Patrikeeva, L. L. Khemchyan, V. P. Ananikov and I. P. Beletskaya, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2893–2920 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, R. Ciganda, L. Salmon, D. Gregurec, J. Irigoyen, S. Moya, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3091–3096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Santhanalakshmi and L. Parimala, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1090–1093 CrossRef .
A. Wang, H. Yin, M. Ren, H. Lu, J. Xue and T. Jiang, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 708–713 RSC .

          G. R. Newkome, C. N. Moorefield and F. Vögtle, Dendrimers and Dendrons. Concepts, Syntheses, Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed .

          A.-M. Caminade, C.-O. Turin, R. Laurent, A. Ouali and B. Delavaux-Nicot, Dendrimers, Wiley, Chichester,  2011 Search PubMed .

Designing Dendrimers, ed. S. Campagnana, P. Ceroni and F. Puntoriero, Wiley, Hoboken,  2012 Search PubMed .
G. R. Newkome, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6338–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, E. Boisselier and C. Ornelas, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1857–1959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 255–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 2317–2334 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Crooks, M. Q. Zhao, L. Sun, V. Chechik and L. K. Yeung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 181–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Myers, M. G. Veier, E. V. Carino and R. M. Crooks, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1632–1646 RSC .
L. Wu, J. Ling and Z.-Q. Wu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 1452–1456 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aranishi, Q.-L. Zhu and Q. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1375–1379 CAS .
E. Moore, S. J. McInnes, A. Vogt and N. H. Voelcker, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 2327–2329 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 3434–3450 CrossRef CAS .
R. Breinbauer and E. N. Jacobsen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3604–3607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Imaoka, Y. Kawana and K. Yamamoto, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2011, 22, 1261–1265 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Bedford, M. Betham, D. W. Bruce, S. A. Davis, R. M. Frost and M. Hird, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1398–1400 RSC .
Z. Xu, N. Wang, W. Chu, J. Deng and S. Luo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1588–1597 CAS .
D. Cantillo, M. Baghbanzadeh and C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10190–10193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, S. Cao and W.-F. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11251–11253 RSC .
Y. Jia, C. Sun, Y. Peng, W. Fang, X. Yan, D. Yang, J. Zou, S. S. Mao and X. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8294–8299 CAS .
T. Turhan, Y. A. Güvenilir and N. Sahiner, Energy, 2013, 55, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arévalo, S. Ovando-Segovia, M. Flores-Alamo and J. J. Garcıa, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 2939–2943 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, X. Gong, X. Zhu, Z. Ni, H. Wang, J. Fu and W. Han, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 63216–63220 RSC .
S. Alkhaldi and M. M. Husein, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 643–649 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Vance, A. Schäfer, A. P. M. Robertson, K. Lee, J. Turner, G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3048–3064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Sonnenberg and R. H. Morris, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1092–1102 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Science, 2003, 299, 1702–1706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Baker and W. Tumas, Science, 1999, 284, 1477–1479 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Benaglia, Recoverable and Recyclable Catalysts, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2009 Search PubMed .
S. Wittmann, A. Shätz, R. N. Grass, W. J. Stark and O. Reiser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1867–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Coperet, M. Chabanas, R. P. Saint-Arroman and J. M. Basset, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 156–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Basset, C. Coperet, D. Soulivong, M. Taoufik and J. Thivolle-Cazat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 323–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shylesh, V. Schünemann and W. R. Thiel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3428–3459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. P. Stubbs, F. Ho, R. Liu, C. P. Ship, J. A. Maguire and N. S. Hosmane, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 365–374 CrossRef CAS .
V. Polshettiwar, R. Luque, A. Fihri, H. Zhu, M. Bouhrara and J. M. Basset, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3036–3075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. M. Kainz and O. Reiser, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 667–677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Molecules, 2014, 19, 4635–4653 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6949–6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, C. Deraedt, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1871–1880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Enghag, Encyclopedia of the elements, Wiley, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed .
Z.-Y. Fei, B. Sun, L. Zhao, W.-J. Ji and C.-T. Au, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 6480–6487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tu, Z. Yang and C. Hu, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2015, 90, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Li, F. Wu, L. Zhang and X. Liu, Catal. Commun., 2013, 31, 52–56 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bagherzadeh and A. Mortazavi-Manesh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 41551–41560 RSC .
S. Ching, D. A. Kriz, K. M. Luthy, E. C. Njagi and S. L. Suib, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8286–8288 RSC .
H.-Y. Sun, Q. Hua, F.-F. Guo, Z.-Y. Wang and W.-X. Huang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 569–573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mansournia, F. Azizi and N. Rakhshan, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2015, 80, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rezaeifard, V. Soltani and M. Jafarpour, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 2657–2664 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bagherzadeh, M. M. Haghdoost, F. M. Moghaddam, B. K. Foroushano, S. Saryazdi and E. Payab, J. Coord. Chem., 2013, 66, 3025–3036 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Z. Zhang, K. Lv, K. Deng and H. Duan, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 472, 64–71 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Saeedi, S. Tangestaninejad, M. Moghadam, V. Mirkhani, I. Mohammadpoor-Baltork and A. R. Khosropour, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 146, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Biswal, V. V. Dhas, V. R. Mate, A. Banerjee, P. Pachfule, K. L. Agrawal, S. B. Ogale and C. V. Rode, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15440–15448 CAS .
X. Lv, W. Lv, W. Wei, X. Zheng, C. Zhang, L. Zhi and Q.-H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3911–3914 RSC .
Y. Su, H. Chai, Z. Sun, T. Liu, D. Jia and W. Zhou, Catal. Lett., 2016, 146, 1019–1026 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Patra, A. Dutta, M. Pramanik, M. Nandi, H. Uyama and A. Bhaumik, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 220–229 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, E. Irtem, M. Ibáñez, R. Nafria, S. Martí-Sánchez, A. Genc, M. de la Mata, Y. Liu, D. Cadavid, J. Llorca, J. Arbiol, T. Andreu, J. R. Morante and A. Cabot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17435–17444 CAS .
C. Yin, J. Cai, L. Gao, J. Yin and J. Zhou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 305, 15–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bolm, J. Legros, J. Le Paih and L. Zani, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 6217–6254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Perez, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 535–536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hudson, Y. Feng, R. S. Varma and A. Moores, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4493–4505 RSC .
M. Hermanek, R. Zboril, I. Medrik, J. Pechousek and C. Gregor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10929–10936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Grau-Atienza, R. Campos, E. Serrano, M. Ojeda, A. A. Romero, J. Garcia-Martinez and R. Luque, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 3530–3539 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, H. Yan, P. Sun, Y. Zhu, L. Lu, D. Liu, G. Rong and J. Mao, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 976–981 RSC .
F. Shi, M. K. Tse, M.-M. Pohl, A. Brückner, S. Zhang and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8866–8868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, Y. Li, S. Bachmann and M. Beller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10652–10658 CAS .
R. V. Jagadeesh, K. Natte, H. Junge and M. Beller, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1526–1529 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Jagadeesh, T. Stemmler, A. E. Surkus, H. Junge, K. Junge and M. Beller, Nat. Protoc., 2015, 10, 548–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, F. Bao, L. Zhou, X. Wei, Y. Zhang and Q. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3093–3097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kamal and P. Swapna, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7419–7426 RSC .
N. Basavegowda, K. B. S. Magar, K. Mishra and Y. R. Lee, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 5415–5420 RSC .
G. Chen, Li. Chen, S.-M. Ng, W.-L. Man and T.-C. Lau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mou, B. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Yao, X. Wei, D. Sheng Su and W. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2989–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Wang, H. W. Lee, Y. Deng, Z. Y. Lu, P. C. Hsu, Y. Y. Liu, D. C. Lin and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Q. Zeng, G. H. Song, A. Moores and C. J. Li, Synlett, 2010, 2002–2010 CAS .
C. M. Cirtiu, T. Raychoudhury, S. Ghoshal and A. Moores, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 390, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hudson, S.-L. Ishikawa, C.-J. Li and A. Moores, Synlett, 2013, 1637–1642 CAS .
A. Welther and A. J. von Wangelin, Curr. Org. Chem., 2013, 17, 326–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Rak, M. Lerro and A. Moores, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12482–12485 RSC .
J. F. Sonnenberg and R. H. Morris, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3426–3438 CAS .
P.-H. Phua, L. Lefort, J. A. F. Boogers, M. Tristany and J. G. de Vries, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3747–3749 RSC .
C. Rangheard, C. de Julián Fernández, P.-H. Phua, J. Hoorn, L. Lefort and J. G. de Vries, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 8464–8471 RSC .
T. N. Gieshoff, A. Welther, M. T. Kessler, M. H. G. Prechtl and A. J. von Wangelin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2261–2264 RSC .
V. Kelsen, B. Wendt, S. Werkmeister, K. Junge, M. Beller and B. Chaudret, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3416–3418 RSC .
A. Meffre, B. Medhaoui, V. Connord, J. Carrey, P. F. Fazzini, S. Lachaize, M. Respaud and B. Chaudret, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3241–3248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3675–3679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, X. Liu, X. Yue, J. Jia and S. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1436–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Q. Dong, H. Huang, L. Yue, Z. Zhu and J. Dai, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2785 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, C. Fang and M. Megharaj, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1022–1025 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta, J. Mondal, A. K. Patra and A. Bhaumik, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 13372–13378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pramanik and A. Bhaumik, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8507–8514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Bedford, M. Betham, D. W. Bruce, S. A. Davis, R. M. Frost and M. Hird, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1398–1400 RSC .
N. M. Okun, T. M. Anderson and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3194–3195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, G. Qian, X. Zhou, Z. Sui, D. Chen and W. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rajabi, T. Kakeshpour and M. R. Saidi, Catal. Commun., 2013, 40, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Chernavskii, V. I. Zaikovskii, G. V. Pankina and A. Y. Khodakov, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1758–1761 CrossRef CAS .
M. Busch, A. Kompch, S. Suleiman, C. Notthoff, U. Bergmann, R. Theissmann, B. Atakan and M. Winterer, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167, 211–216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Feyen, C. Weidenthaler, R. Güttel, K. Schlichte, U. Holle, A.-H. Lu and F. Schüth, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 598–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hudson, A. Rivière, C. M. Cirtiu, K. L. Luska and A. Moores, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3360–3362 RSC .
R. Hudson, C. J. Li and A. Moores, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 622–624 RSC .
A.-H. Lu, J.-J. Nitz, M. Comotti, C. Weidenthaler, K. Schlichte, C. W. Lehmann, O. Terasaki and F. Schüth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14152–14162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yan, C. Wan, J. Liu, J. Gao, F. Yu, J. Zhang and Z. Cai, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1631–1640 RSC .
M. Tavakkoli, T. Kallio, O. Reynaud, A. G. Nasibulin, C. Johans, J. Sainio, H. Jiang, E. I. Kauppinen and K. Laasonen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4535–4538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, D. Zhang, P. Maitarad, L. Shi, S. Cai, H. Li, L. Huang and J. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 438–446 CAS .
D. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Poonjarernsilp, N. Sano, N. Sawangpanich, T. Charinpanitkul and H. Tamon, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4936–4943 RSC .
R. Hudson, G. Hamasaka, T. Osako, Y. M. A. Yamada, C.-J. Li, Y. Uozumi and A. Moores, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2141–2148 RSC .
D. Obermayer, A. M. Balu, A. A. Romero, W. Goessler, R. Luque and C. O. Kappe, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1530–1537 RSC .
Z. A. Narei, B. Shafiee and A. R. Khosropour, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 20132–20137 RSC .
Y.-B. Wang, L.-L. Qu, Q.-Y. Chen and C.-J. Feng, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 6053–6058 RSC .
Q. Wang, X. Gan, R. Zang, Y. Chai, Y. Yuan and R. Yuan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 81, 382–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, S. Zhang, D. Wang, C. Jia and P. Yang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 8846–8853 CrossRef .
H. Wang, M. Li, B. Wang, M. Wang, I. Kurash, X. Zhang and W. Feng, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 5479–5488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Stelmachowski, K. Ciura and G. Grzybek, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 5554–5560 CAS .
T. Umegaki, T. Inoue and Y. Kojima, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 663, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
P. van Helden, I. M. Ciobîcă and R. L. J. Coetzer, Catal. Today, 2016, 261, 48–59 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seo, Y. J. Sa, J. Woo, K. Kwon, J. Park, T. J. Shin, H. Y. Jeong and S. H. Joo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4347–4355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, Y. Li, Z.-Q. Liu, M. Haruta and W. Shen, Nature, 2009, 458, 746–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Pandey, C. Jia, W. Schmidt, M. Leoni, M. Schwickardi, F. Schüth and C. Weidenthaler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19405–19412 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Ma, Z. Mu, J. J. Li, Y. G. Jin, J. Cheng, G. Q. Lu, Z. P. Hao and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2608–2613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, K. Kailasam, A. Fischer and A. Thomas, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 342–347 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhong, H. Liu, C. Bai, S. Liao and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1850–1856 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, A.-E. Surkus, L. He, M. M. Pohl, J. Radnik, C. Topf, K. Junge and M. Beller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11718–11724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Westehaus, I. Sorribes, G. Wienhoefer and M. Beller, Synlett, 2015, 313–317 Search PubMed .
T. Stemmler, F. Chen, S. Pisiewicz, A. E. Surkus, M. M. Pohl, C. Topf and M. Beller, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17728–17737 CAS .
R. V. Jagadeesh, D. Banerjee, P. B. Arockiam, H. Junge, M. M. Pohl, J. Radnik, A. Bruckner and M. Beller, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 898–902 RSC .
K. Natt, R. V. Jagadeesh, M. Sharif, H. Neumann and M. Beller, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 3356–3359 Search PubMed .
R. V. Jagadeesh, T. Stemmler, A. E. Surkus, M. Bauer, M. M. Pohl, J. Radnik, K. Junge, H. Junge, A. Bruckner and M. Beller, Nat. Protoc., 2016, 11, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, F. Gu and Y. Li, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2594–2601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-L. Wee, B. D. Sherman, D. Gust, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, Y. Liu and J. C. Scaiano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16742–16745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yusuf and F. Jiao, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2753–2760 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zidki, L. Zhang, V. Shafirovich and S. V. Lymar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14275–14278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Hu, S. Piccinin, A. Laio and S. Fabris, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10497–10504 CAS .
L. Liao, Q. Zhang, Z. Su, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Lu, D. Wei, G. Feng, Q. Yu, X. Cai, J. Zhao, Z. Ren, H. Fang, F. Robles-Hernandez, S. Baldelli and J. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 69–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, X. Huang, A. Goswami, R. Silva, B. R. Sathe, E. Mikmeková and T. Asefa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4372–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. Lu, K. Zhou, L. Yang, Z. Tang, L. Li and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2026–2032 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhuang, X. Ou, Y. Dou, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, R. Wu, Y. Ding, M. Shao and Z. Luo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4691–4698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O. Eschemann, W. S. Lamme, R. L. Manchester and K. P. de Jong, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
P. Munnik and P. E. de Jongh, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6687–6718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O. Eschemann, J. Oenema and K. P. de Jong, Catal. Today, 2016, 261, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Li, K. Liew and M. R. B. Nordin, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kwak, J. Hwang, J.-Y. Cheon, M. H. Woo, K.-W. Jun, J. Lee and K.-S. Ha, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1773–1779 CAS .
X. Peng, K. Cheng, J. Kang, B. Gu, X. Yu, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4553–4556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Iablokov, S. K. Beaumont, S. Alayoglu, V. V. Pushkarev, C. Specht, J. Gao, A. P. Alivisatos, N. Kruse and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3091–3096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Høydalsvik, J. B. Fløystad, A. Voronov, G. J. B. Voss, M. Esmaeili, J. Kehres, H. Granlund, U. Vainio, J. W. Andreasen, M. Rønning and D. W. Breiby, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2399–2407 Search PubMed .
P. Munnik, P. E. de Jongh and K. P. de Jong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7333–7340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Y. Ye, S. Zhang, M. E. Leong and F. Tao, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8275–8280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zeng, B. Hou, L. Jia, J. Wang, C. Chen, Y. Sun and D. Li, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 3794–3801 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kong, C. Mao, Q. Lin, X. Wei, X. Bu and P. Feng, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 6748–6754 RSC .
R. Liu, Y. Jin, P. Xu, X. Xing, Y. Yang and D. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 464, 83–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, Y. Du, S. Yin, X. Tian, H. Yang, X. Wang, B. Liu, H. Zheng, S. Qiao and R. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2563–2570 CAS .
V. Kashyap, S. K. Singh and S. Kurungo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20730–20740 CAS .
H. Ghanbarlou, S. Rowshanzamir, M. J. Parnian and F. Mehri, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 14665–14675 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, X. Bo, Y. Zhang, M. Li, A. Nsabimana and L. Guo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5607–5611 RSC .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, D.-H. Lim, D. Y. Shin, S. H. Park, H. C. Ham, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kima and S. J. Yoo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15940–15943 RSC .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, Y. Zhu, H. Jiang, J. Shen, X. Yang, W. Zou, J. Chen and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15080–15089 RSC .
M. Keller, A. Perrier, R. Linhardt, L. Travers, S. Wittmann, A.-M. Caminade, J.-P. Majoral, O. Reiser and A. Ouali, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355, 1748–1754 CrossRef CAS .
M. Keller, V. Collière, O. Reiser, A.-M. Tan, J.-P. Majoral and A. Ouali, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3626–3629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. M. Kainz, R. Linhardt, R. N. Grass, G. Vilé, J. Pérez-Ramírez, W. J. Stark and O. Reiser, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2020–2027 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Fang, L. Wen, F. Li, G. Yin, W. Chen, X. An, J. Jin and J. Ma, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 5575–5582 RSC .
Z. Wang, B. Li, X. Ge, F. W. T. Goh, X. Zhang, G. Du, D. Wuu, Z. Liu, T. S. A. Hor, H. Zhang and Y. Zong, Small, 2016, 12, 2580–2587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhuang, S. A. Giles, J. Zheng, G. R. Jenness, S. Caratzoulas, D. G. Vlachos and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10141,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms10141 .
A. Modi, S. Singh and N. Verma, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 620–627 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Park, J. H. Lee, K.-D. Kim, D. H. Kim, M.-G. Jeong and Y. D. Kim, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 100–106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Tong, C. D. Gu, J. L. Zhang, H. Tang, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 6342–6352 CrossRef CAS .
I. Buslov, F. Song and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12295–12299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhiani and S. Kamali, Electrocatalysis, 2016, 7, 466–476 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, A. Tuel, D. Laprune, F. Meunier and D. Farrusseng, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 276–282 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, X. Guo, S. Wu, R. Zhang, J. Wang and L. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 13848–13853 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arévalo, S. Ovando-Segovia, M. Flores-Alamo and J. J. García, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 2939-–2943 CrossRef .
R. J. Kalbasi and F. Zamani, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7444–7453 RSC .
S. Pisiewicz, D. Formenti, A.-E. Surkus, M. M. Pohl, J. Radnik, K. Junge, C. Topf, S. Bachmann, M. Scalone and M. Beller, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Marakatti and S. C. Peter, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 5448–5457 RSC .
A. Kumar, P. Kumar, C. Joshi, M. Manchanda, R. Boukherroub and S. L. Jain, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 59 CrossRef .
K. Liu, Y. Wang, P. Chen, W. Zhong, Q. Liu, M. Li, Y. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Lu and D. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 196, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, H. Yin, M. Ren, H. Lu, J. Xue and T. Jiang, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 708–713 RSC .
Y. Hu, Y. Yu, Z. Hou, H. Yang, B. Feng, H. Li, Y. Qiao, X. Wang, L. Hua, Z. Pan and X. Zhao, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 1178–1184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Ren, C. Sun and S. Hao, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2273–2280 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, A. K. Rathi, P. S. Branco, I. D. Nogueira, A. Velhinho, J. J. Shrikhande, U. U. Indulkar, R. V. Jayaram, C. A. A. Ghumman, N. Bundaleski and O. M. N. D. Teodoro, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 12628–12632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Nabid, Y. Bide and M. Niknezhad, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 538–546 CrossRef CAS .
V. Polshettiwar and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 127–131 RSC .
L. Wu, X. Zhang and Z. Tao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 707–710 CAS .
F. Farjadian and B. Tamami, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 1767–1773 CAS .
H.-J. Yoon, J.-W. Choi, H. Kang, T. Kang, S.-M. Lee, B.-H. Jun and Y.-S. Lee, Synlett, 2010, 2518–2522 CAS .
N. Hoshiya, K. Fujiki, T. Taniguchi, T. Honma, Y. Tamenori, M. Xiao, N. Saito, M. Yokoyama, A. Ishii, H. Fujioka, S. Shuto, Y. Sato and M. Arisawa, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 2449–2459 CrossRef CAS .
D. Özhava, N. Z. Kılıçaslan and S. Özkar, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 573–582 CrossRef .
P.-Z. Li, A. Aijaz and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6753–6756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-Z. Li, K. Aranishi and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3173–3175 RSC .
Ö. Metin, V. Mazumder, S. Özkar and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1468–1469 CrossRef PubMed .
L. He, B. Liang, L. Li, X. Yang, Y. Huang, A. Wang, X. Wang and T. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1623–1628 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Xu, M.-R. Gao, Y.-R. Zheng, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8546–8550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Lv, H. Meng and C. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8121–8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Fan, A. Z. Abdullah and S. Bhatia, ChemCatChem, 2009, 1, 192–208 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, M. Cai, W. Sun, X. Liao, W. Chu and X. S. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2061–2065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Baktash, P. Littlewood, J. Pfrommer, R. Schomäcker, M. Driess and A. Thomas, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1280–1284 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shang, S. Li, L. Li, G. Liu and X. Liang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 210, 302–309 Search PubMed .
A. G. Bhavani, W. Y. Kim, J. W. Lee and J. S. Lee, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1445–1452 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, D. Zhang, L. Shi, R. Gao and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10009–10016 CAS .
Z. Li, L. Mo, Y. Kathiraser and S. Kawi, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1526–1536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Kathiraser and S. Kawi, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, F.-X. Felpin, T. Asefa, X. Huang, R. Silva, X. Zou, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3722–3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Munnik, M. E. Z. Velthoen, P. E. de Jong, K. P. de Jong and C. J. Gommes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9493–9497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pietro, J. Zecevic, H. Friedrich, K. P. de Jong and P. E. de Jong, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 34–39 Search PubMed .
V. V. Rostovtsev, L. P. Green, V. V. Fokin and K. B. Sharpless, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2596–2599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tornøe, C. Christensen and M. Meldal, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 3057–3064 CrossRef .
T. Jin, M. Yan and Y. Yamamoto, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1217–1229 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, B. Jaleh, P. Fakhri, A. Zahraei and E. Ghadery, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 2785 RSC .
K. Jayaramulu, V. M. Suresh and T. Kumar Maji, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 83–86 RSC .
S. Kaur, V. Bhalla and M. Kumar, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 526–529 RSC .
P. R. Bagdi, R. S. Basha, P. K. Baruah and A. T. Khan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 10652–10659 RSC .
F. Alonso, Y. Moglie, G. Radivoy and M. Yus, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 5031–5037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Molteni, C. L. Bianchi, G. Marinoni, N. Santo and A. Ponti, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 1137–1139 RSC .
Z. Zhang, C. Dong, C. Yang, D. Hu, J. Long, L. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and D. Kong, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2010, 352, 1600–1604 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sharghi, R. Khalifeh and M. M. Doroodmand, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 207–218 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, L. Etienne, M. Echeverria, S. Moya and D. Astruc, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4047–4054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zeng, L. Yang, R. Hudson and A. Moores, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 442–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ishikawa, R. Hudson, M. Masnadi and A. Moores, Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 8952–8958 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pourjavadi, S. H. Hosseini, N. Zohreh and C. Bennett, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 46418–46426 RSC .
M. Gholinejad and N. Jeddi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2658–2665 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chahdoura, C. Pradel and M. Gómez, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2929–2936 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Lee, M. Yi, S. Y. Chu, J. Y. Lee, H. R. Kwon, K. R. Lee, D. Kang, W. S. Kim, H. B. Lim, J. Lee, H.-J. Youn, D. Y. Chi and N. H. Hur, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3935–3937 RSC .
M. R. Decan, S. Impellizzeri, M. L. Marin and J. C. Scaiano, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4612 CAS .
S. U. Son, I. K. Park, J. Park and T. Hyeon, Chem. Commun., 2004, 778–779 RSC .
J.-H. Li, B.-X. Tang, L.-M. Tao, Y.-X. Xie, Y. Liang and M.-B. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 7488–7490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, F. Li, Z. Huang, F. Xue, T. Lu, Y. Yuan and G. Yuan, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1741–1745 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Wu and X. Yao, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2356–2360 RSC .
B. Mohan, C. Yoon, S. Jang and K. H. Park, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rout, T. K. Sen and T. Punniyamurthy, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 5679–5682 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, J. C. Park, A. Kim, A. Y. Kim, H. J. Lee, H. Song and K. H. Park, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 4219–4223 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sreedhar, R. Arundhathi, P. L. Reddy and M. L. Kantam, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 7951–7954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim and Y. K. Chung, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11101–11103 RSC .
J. Oliver-Messeguer, L. Liu, S. García-García, C. Canós-Giménez, I. Domínguez, R. Gavara, A. Doménech-Carbó, P. Concepción, A. Leyva-Pérez and A. Corma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3894–3900 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Blandez, A. Primo, A. M. Asiri, M. Álvaro and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12581–12586 CAS .
L. F. Hang, Y. Zao, H. H. Zhang, G. Q. Liu, W. P. Cai, Y. Li and L. T. Qu, Acta Mater., 2016, 105, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kaur, C. Giordano, M. Gradzielski and S. K. Mehta, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 189–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Zhao, Y. X. Tan, F. C. Wu, H. Y. Niu, Z. Tang and J. P. Giesy, Sci. Total Environ., 2016, 571, 380–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, C. Lu, X. Wu and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 26066–26073 RSC .
A. Wuttig, C. Liu, Q. L. Peng, M. Yagushi, C. H. Hendon, K. Motobayashi, S. Ye and M. Osawa, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 522–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, W. L. Zhu, J. J. Fu, H. Y. Zhang, G. Wu and S. H. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, S. Navalon, D. Sempere, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2359–2361 RSC .
E. Aslan, I. H. Patir and M. Ersoz, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4585–4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Kalidindi, U. Sanyal and B. R. Jagirdar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 5870–5874 RSC .
G. Wang, R. van den Berg, C. D. Donega, K. P. de Jong and P. E. Jongh, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 199–207 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marimuthu, J. Zhang and S. Linic, Science, 2013, 339, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Gonçalves, R. Wojcieszak, H. Wender, C. S. B. Dias, L. L. R. Vono, D. Eberhardt, S. R. Teixeira and L. M. Rossi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7987–7994 Search PubMed .
F. Yang, J. Graciani, J. Evans, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. F. Sanz and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3444–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Senanatake, D. Stacchiola and J. A. Rodriguez, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1702–1711 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Damodara, R. Arundhathi and P. R. Likhar, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Fernandes, O. Riant, K. F. Jensen and A. M. Jonas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11044–11048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Wu, W. S. Zhu, B. L. Dai, Y. H. Chao, C. F. Li, H. P. Li, M. Zhang, W. Jiang and H. M. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 301, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. A. Rufus and D. Philip, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 221, 1008–1021 CrossRef .
S. Frindy, A. El Kadib, M. Lahcini, A. Primo and H. Garcia, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3863–3869 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Cheng, Y. J. Lin, J. P. Xu, J. He, T. Z. Wang, G. J. Yu, D. W. Shao, W. H. Wang, F. Lu, L. Li, X. W. Du, W. C. Wang, H. Liu and R. K. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 366, 120–128 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Liu, T. Matsushita, P. Conception, A. Leyva-Perez and A. Corma, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2211–2221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhong, C. Deng, Y. He, Y. L. Ge and G. W. Song, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 2823–2830 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhadi and F. Siadatnasab, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 83, 345–353 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zou, L. Zhang, L. Liu, X. Wang, J. Sun, S. Wu, Y. Deng, C. Tang, F. Gao and L. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sood, S. K. Mehta, A. Umar and S. K. Kansal, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 3127–3136 RSC .
R. Singh, R. Bapat, L. Qin, H. Feng and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2770–2784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. C. Crittenden, S. Hackney, L. Sutter and D. W. Hand, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1201–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Liu, Y.-P. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Duan, G. Gao, M. Ge and W. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2342–2348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wu, J. Wang, D. N. Tafen, H. Wang, J.-G. Zheng, J. P. Lewis, X. Liu, S. S. Leonard and A. Manivannan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6679–6685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Soto-Vázquez, M. Cotto, J. Ducongé, C. Morant and F. Márquez, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 167, 23–28 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11914–11916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Kiyonaga and S. Naya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1849–1858 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. R. Grabstanowicz, S. Gao, N. S. Hosmane, B. Huang, Y. Dai, D. Liu and T. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 390–399 CAS .
P. Xu, T. Xu, J. Lu, S. Gao, N. S. Hosmane, B. Huang, Y. Dai and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1128–1134 CAS .
X. Li, W. Zheng, G. He, R. Zhao and D. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pathakoti, S. Morrow, C. Han, M. Pelaez, X. He, D. D. Dionysiou and H.-M. Hwang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 9988–9996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eslami, M. M. Amini, A. R. Yazdanbakhsh, A. Mohseni-Bandpei, A. A. Safarid and A. Asadi, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2016, 91, 2693–2704 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jaiswal, N. Patel, D. C. Kothari and A. Miotello, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
N. Patel and D. A. Miotello, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 1429–1464 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, L. Xi, S. K. Batabyal, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 11596–11599 RSC .
M. Jafarpour, H. Kargar and A. Rezaeifard, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25034–25046 RSC .
W. J. Foo, C. Zhang and G. W. Ho, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 759 RSC .
P. Lei, F. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Ding, S. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Liu and M. Yang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 227–228, 185–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chandra, S. Mukhopadhyay and M. Nath, Mater. Lett., 2016, 164, 571–574 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Lee, G. Sai-Anand, S. Komathi, A.-L. Gopalan, S.-W. Kang and K.-P. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 283, 400–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhuang, Q. Tian, H. Zhou, Q. Liu, P. Liu and H. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7036–7042 RSC .
P. Zhang, C. Shao, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. Mu, Z. Guo and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2943–2949 RSC .
X. Li, H. Lin, X. Chen, H. Niu, T. Zhang, J. Liu and F. Qu, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 7863–7872 RSC .
M. L. Kantam, S. Laha, J. Yadav and B. Sreedhar, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 6213–6216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amini, H. Naslhajian and S. M. F. Farnia, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 1581–1586 RSC .
A. Mondal, S. Rana and C. Mukhopadhyay, Tetrahedron Lett., 2014, 55, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Sergeev, F. Morgia, M. Lazari, C. Wang and R. M. van Dam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5686–5694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Takanabe, R. Ohnishi, D. Lu, S. Okada, H. Hatasawa, H. Morioka, M. Antonietti, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7492–7494 RSC .
H. Shin, H. Kim, D. Y. Chung, J. M. Yoo, S. Weon, W. Choi and Y.-E. Sung, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3914–3920 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salmasi, S. Fatemi and Y. Mortazavi, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 39, 66–76 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khazaei, A. R. Moosavi-Zare, F. Gholami and V. Khakyzadeh, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 30, 691–694 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rostami and B. Atashkar, Catal. Commun., 2015, 58, 80–84 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rostami and B. Atashkar, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 398, 170–176 CrossRef CAS .
M. Safaiee, M. A. Zolfigol, F. Afsharnadery and S. Baghery, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 102340 RSC .
S. Verma, J. L. Bras, S. L. Jain and J. Muzart, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 468, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Maurya, A. K. Chandrakar and S. Chand, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 274, 192–201 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Drew, Y. Yang, J. A. Russo, M. L. Campbell, S. A. Rackley, J. Hudson, P. Schmuki and D. C. Whitehead, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2610–2613 CAS .
A. E. Kadib, A. Primo, K. Molvinger, M. Bousmina and D. Brunel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 7940–7946 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cha, S.-T. Yun and J. Jurng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17900–17907 RSC .
J. He, Y. Zhang and E. Y.-X. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 61–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zonouzi, S. J. Afjei, A. Rahmani and S. W. Ng, Org. Prep. Proced. Int., 2016, 48, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2181–2189 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amoozadeh, S. Rahmani, M. Bitaraf, F. B. Abadi and E. Tabrizian, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 770–780 RSC .
K. Tamai, S. Hosokawa, K. Teramura, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Fei, G. Ruan, Y. Li and J. M. Tour, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6199–6204 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, P. Li, F. Zhai, Q. Wan, A. A. Volinsky and X. Qu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 70743–70748 RSC .
C. Hammond, J. Straus, M. Righettoni, S. E. Pratsinis and I. Hermans, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 321–327 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, R. Wang, H. Liu, K. Han, H. Cui and H. Ye, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 21,  DOI:10.1007/s11051-016-3330-4 .
L. H. Wee, M. Meledina, S. Turner, K. Custers, S. Kerkhofs, S. P. Sree, E. Gobechiya, C. E. A. Kirschhock, G. V. Tendeloo and J. A. Maetens, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 46678–46685 RSC .
D.-T. Nguyen and S.-S. Hong, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 1911–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Barton, V. Matejec and J. Matousek, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016, 317, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zargari, R. Rahimi, A. Ghaffarinejad and A. Morsali, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 466, 310–321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Veisi, M. A. Zazouli, M. A. Ebrahimzadeh, J. Y. Charati and A. S. Dezfoli, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016 DOI:10.1007/s11356-016-7199-7 .
A. G. Akerdi, S. H. Bahrami, M. Arami and E. Pajootan, Chemosphere, 2016, 159, 293–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vignesh, M. Prabu and S. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6019–6031 CAS .
J. L. Lv, K. Dai, L. H. Lu, L. Geng, C. H. Liang and G. P. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 682, 778–784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lv, X. F. Cao, H. Y. Jiang, W. J. Song, C. C. Chen and J. C. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 150–156 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, S. A. Cetegen, R. Miao, T. Jiang, S. Y. Chen, T. Jafari, Y. S. Zhang and S. L. Suib, J. Catal., 2016, 338, 94–103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4000–4007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Wang, S. Peng, L. Zhang, A. M. Al-Enizi, H. Zhang, X. Sun and G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501661 CrossRef .
K. L. Luska, A. Bordet, S. Tricard, I. Sinev, W. Grunert, B. Chaudret and W. Leitner, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3719–3726 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. P. Martinez and E. A. Carter, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2940–2949 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Liu, K. T. Chuang and J. L. Luo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 760–768 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, X. Huang, L.-J. Zhou, G.-D. Li, M. Fan and X. Zou, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 992–1000 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jung, Y. Sohn, J. H. Park, K. S. Nahm, P. Kim and S. J. Yoo, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 196, 199–206 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Carroll, T. Burger, L. Langenegger, S. Chavez, S. T. Hunt, Y. Roman-Leshkov and F. R. Brushett, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1904–1910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Zhu, T. C. R. Rocha, T. Lunkenbeim, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlogl and I. E. Wachs, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4455–4464 CrossRef CAS .
S. Biswas, K. Mullick, S. Y. Chen, D. A. Kriz, M. D. Shakil, C. H. Kuo, A. M. Angeles-Boza, A. R. Rossi and S. L. Suib, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5069–5080 CrossRef .
K. Z. Yang, L. Q. Zhou, X. Xiong, M. L. Ye, L. Li and Q. H. Xia, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 225, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Ding, L. Z. Bu, S. J. Guo, Z. P. Zhao, E. B. Zhu, Y. Huang and X. Q. Huang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2762–2767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ghahremanzadeh, Z. Rashid, A.-H. Zarnani and H. Naeimi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 43661–43670 RSC .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Su, W. Guo, Y. Leng, C. Yi and Z. Ma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 244–245, 736–742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Chen, J. Xing, H. B. Jiang and H. G. Yang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4123–4127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 5563–5566 RSC .
F. M. Moghaddam, B. K. Foroushani and H. R. Rezvani, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 18092–18096 RSC .
A. Goyal, S. Bansal, J. Singh and S. Singhal, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 877–889 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koike, D. Li, Y. Nakagawa and K. Tomishige, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2312–2314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Jiang, T. Akita and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10999–11001 RSC .
S. Singh, P. Srivastava and G. Singh, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 562, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Ca, Y. Yang, Y. F. Shan and Z. G. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5998–6003 Search PubMed .
Y. Xiang, R. Barbosa, X. Li and N. Kruse, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2929–2934 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, V. Chitry, P. Liddicoat, P. Felfer, J. Cairney, S. Ringer and N. Kruse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7114–7117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Gowda and E. Y.-X. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 181–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Kim, J. Lim, G. Y. Lee, S. H. Choi, U. N. Maiti, W. J. Lee, H. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1571–1577 CAS .
M. Govindhan, B. Mao and A. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1485–1492 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Dong Wang
	Dong Wang studied organic chemistry with Prof. Baohua Chen at the University of Lanzhou where he received a doctoral degree. He prepared a second doctorate with Prof. Didier Astruc at the University of Bordeaux that he defended in 2014 on catalysis in dendritic nanoreactors. He conducted post-doc studies successively with Prof. Datong Song at the University of Toronto in 2014–2015 and now with Prof. Ben Zhong Tang in Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.

Didier Astruc
	Didier Astruc was born in Versailles and studied in the University of Rennes where he defended his doctoral degrees with Prof. René Dabard. He was then a NATO post-doctoral fellow at MIT with Prof. Richard R. Schrok. He is professor of chemistry at the University of Bordeaux and a Member of the Institut Universitaire de France and several Academies.

 	Fig. 1  Tris(triazolyl)–PEG ligand-stabilized transition metal NPs in 4-nitrophenol reduction and CuAAC reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  Dendrimer-encapsulated Co NPs as efficient catalysts for the hydrolysis of ammonia borane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Dendrimer-supported catalysts G4 PAMAM–Cu(I) and DPAG4–Cu/Fe. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 and 52. Copyright 2011, Elsevier Ltd. Copyright 2011, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  PEG-terminated Cu tren catalyst for “click” reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  PAMAM dendrimer-supported Co complex catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2000, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Reduction of nitroarenes catalyzed by in situ formed Fe3O4 NPs using a continuous flow method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis of a (Ni NPs)@MgH2 composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Annual numbers of publications and citations on magnetically recyclable nanocatalysts from 2006 to 2016 (data from Web of Science using the keywords “magnetic nanocatalyst” on December 21, 2016) (top). The topic of “magnetically recyclable nanocatalysts for organic synthesis” ranked 3rd in the top 10 research fronts in chemistry and materials science by Thomson Reuters in 2015. These materials are reproduced under a license from Thomson Reuters (bottom). These materials may not be copied or re-distributed in whole or in part without the prior written consent of Thomson Reuters.	 

 	Fig. 9  Mn3O4 NPs-catalyzed alcohol oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 10  Magnetic Fe3O4 NPs-immobilized Mn catalysts.	 

1	α-Fe2O3	5–7 nm	None	Decomposition of hydrogen peroxide	Rate constant = 26.4 × 10−3 min−1 (g L−1)−1	Not mentioned	
99

2	Fe2O3	
2–5 nm
20–80 nm
	Nitrogen-doped graphene	Transfer hydrogenation of nitroarenes	TON = 17.4–19	6 times	
104

3	Rod-shaped Fe2O3	Diameter of 30–50 nm and length of 350–500 nm	None	Reduction of nitrogen oxide by ammonia	Up to 100% conversion	Not mentioned	
110

4	Hollow iron oxide shells	Diameter of 16.7 nm; shell thickness of 3.9 nm	None	Oxidation of styrene into benzaldehyde	TON = 131.4, selectivity = 73%	4 times	
116

5	Iron(0)	4–5 nm	Ionic liquids	Alkyne hydrogenation	TON= 2.6–19.6	8 times	
120

6	Iron–polyphenol	50–80 nm	None	Fenton oxidation of azo dye	100% conversion	Not mentioned	
126

7	Iron–phosphonate	50–70 nm	None	Synthesis of benzimidazoles	TOF = 323.9 h−1	4 times	
127

8	Iron–phosphonate	3–5 nm	None	Synthesis of biofuels	88.3% conversion, 100% selectivity	5 times	
128

9	α-Fe2O3	35–75 nm	SiO2	Ammonia decomposition	120000 cm−3 gcat−1 h−1	4 times	
135

10	Iron–iron oxide core–shell	Core diameter of 44 nm and a shell thickness of 6 nm	None	Olefin & alkyne hydrogenation	Up to 100% conversion	10 times	
136

11	Fe2O3	2.5–8 nm	Carbon nanotubes	Reduction of NO with NH3	97% conversion	Not mentioned	
141

12	Fe/Fe2O3	1–11 nm	Single-walled carbon nanohorns	Esterification of palmitic acid	TON = 7	3 times	
143

13	Fe(0)	5 nm	PEG, PS	Hydrogenation	Up to 100% conversion and selectivity	Not mentioned	
144


 	Fig. 11  Catalysis and recovery of nano-γ-Fe2O3 in benzyl alcohol oxidation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  Fe3O4 NP-catalyzed synthesis of biologically valuable benzoxazinone and benzthioxazinone derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 13  γ-Fe2O3 nanorods for selective catalytic reduction of nitrogen oxides with NH3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  Fe NPs-catalyzed alkyne hydrogenation in ionic liquids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Synthesis and temperature-induced morphological control of an iron–phosphonate nanomaterial and catalytic application to the synthesis of benzimidazoles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Synthesis of SiO2-supported iron catalyst for ammonia decomposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  Core–shell Fe(0)@FexOy NPs for the hydrogenation of olefins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136 and 137. Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Synthesis of γ-Fe2O3 NPs within the tubes of CMK-5 carbon. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM image of Fe4@SWNT. (b) A schematic representation of the ORR process at the surface of Fe4@SWNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  Co-Based nanocatalyst-promoted oxidation of alcohols to esters at room temperature and atmospheric conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Oxidation of water to oxygen over Co2O3 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  HER over Co-NRCNT and Co NPs on N-doped graphene nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  FTS over MW-CNT-supported Co NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Fabrication process of Co/N–C-800. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  ORR over Co@Co3O4@PPD core@bishell nanomaterial. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 26  Functionalized ionic liquid stabilized Ni NPs, and their catalytic application in hydrogenation.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of nickel-based mesoporous carbon preparation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  Fabrication of phosphine dendrimer-stabilized Ni NPs catalyst for Stille reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  Preparation of Ni/ZIF-8 from (a) ZIF-8 via (b) NiCp2/ZIF-8, and (c) catalytic hydrogen generation from hydrolysis of aqueous AB. Reprinted with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  Generation of hydrogen upon electrolysis and photoelectrolysis over Ni12P5 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  CO2 reforming of methane over Ni/CeO2 nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Methane CO2 reforming reaction catalyzed by yolk–satellite–shell structured Ni–Yolk@Ni@SiO2 nanomaterial. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Synthesis of the click catalyst MNP@PILCu. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  Multicomponent click synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles over agarose-supported Cu NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Synthesis of Cu3N/Fe3N@SiO2 silica microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 36  C–N, C–C, C–O, C–S, and C–P bond-forming reactions over naked sub-nanometric Cu clusters stabilized by polymeric films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 37  Fabrication of CN-supported CuO NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 38  Preparation of Cu@Cu2O core–shell NPs, and its catalytic application in the hydrolysis of ammonia borane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright 2008, The Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 39  CO oxidation over H2-pretreated Cu NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 40  Morphology control of TiO2 NPs in microemulsion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 41  Structural-phase evolution of Cu loaded on TiO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 42  Photocatalytic aerobic C–H oxidation by Co Schiff base complex-loaded TiO2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 312. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 43  Photocatalytic dyes degradation by a TiO2/PCNFs heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique.	 

 	Fig. 44  Nano TiO2-catalyzed 18F-radiofluorination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 45  Synthesis of CB-immobilized TiN NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 46  Conversion of glucose into HMF catalyzed by Cr(0) NPs.	 

 	Fig. 47  Ternary Co–Cu–Nb catalyst for the selective CO hydrogenation to higher alcohols. Reprinted with permission from ref. 379. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
