Organic crystals: properties, devices, functionalization and bridges to bio-molecules   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B913417B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B913417B
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2667-2694Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsOrganic crystals: properties, devices, functionalization and bridges to bio-molecules†

        
          
            James S. 
            Brooks
          
          
        
      *
      Physics Dept. and National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, 1800 East Paul Dirac Drive, Tallahassee Florida, USA. E-mail: jbrooks@fsu.edu;  Fax: +1-850-644-5038;   Tel: +1-850-644-2836
Received 
      25th February 2010
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      26th May 2010
    AbstractThe purpose of this critical review is twofold: first, to review organic “small molecule” crystalline materials in terms of structure and function; and second, to consider if and how such materials might eventually enter the realm of device applicability. This area, one of the most interdisciplinary fields of research in contemporary materials science, embraces chemistry, physics, engineering, biology, theory and computation. The review therefore attempts to treat a relatively large number of examples including fundamental physical and electronic structure, single component and charge transfer complexes, physical properties of single crystalline materials, thin film and single crystal electronic and photonic devices, functional materials, and bio-inspired structures. The point of view is that of an experimental physicist, and in this context, challenges and possible routes to further advances in the development and utilization of organic small molecule materials are discussed for both fundamental and applied purposes (153 references).
James S. Brooks
Since 1994, James Brooks has been Professor of Physics at Florida State University and Director of the Condensed Matter Science/Experimental Program at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society, holds the Moulton Chair of Physics, and is a Florida State University Distinguished Research Professor. He obtained his BA from Univ. California, Berkeley, and his PhD from the University of Oregon. As professor of Physics at Boston University, he pioneered the use of dilution refrigerators in high field resistive magnets, creating new opportunities for high field studies to millikelvin temperatures, and has worked in superfluidity, heavy fermions, organic conductors and superconductors, and semiconductors.
1. Introduction
One term that emerges as very relevant in the topic of this review is “small molecule” when describing the organic molecular building blocks of the materials herein described. A working definition is any high symmetry molecule that is not long enough to have a random folding structure, and which is not a monomer or oligomer prone to polymerization. Hence, small molecules will crystallize into well-defined structures with long range order and a specific symmetry. Some of the most common small molecules in the field of molecular electronics (to be presented here) include organic components such as TTF (tetrathiafulvalene), TCNQ (tetracyanoquinodimethane), rubrene (tetraphenylnaphthacene), pentacene, perylene, and buckminsterfullerene (C60); inorganic components including I3, PF6, and various halometallate anions; and more recently some bio-molecules such as cytosine, guanine, and other components of small proteins that readily form with charge transfer complexes.
There has been an enormous effort in the direction of making organic molecular materials deliver on the promise of cheap, flexible, low power electronic1,2 and efficient light harvesting devices.3 At present, the use of organic polymer-based materials in real world applications is a reality with organic based-devices working reliably in the temperature range −20 °C to 60 °C, for both light harvesting and light emitting applications. Organic single crystal-based devices are advancing behind (and learning from) polymers in practicality, promising higher quality materials with better performance due to larger carrier mobilities, well-defined electronic and magnetic structure, etc. Indeed, the mobility of practical organic field effect transistors—“OFET's”—(∼0.1 to 40 cm2 V−1 s−1) is now in the range of amorphous silicon. But a major barrier to practical single crystal devices involves thin film epitaxy of “small molecule” single component and charge transfer materials. Furthermore, a large disappointment to date is the decrease in mobility of nearly all small molecule organic devices at low temperatures. Until this problem is solved, the beautiful, fundamental physics of low-dimensional systems (the quantum Hall effect, superconductivity, etc. seen in bulk single crystalline organic charge transfer complexes4) will remain inaccessible in controllable device configurations. (At present the only exception, albeit not a small molecule, but a carbon atom structure, is graphene5,6 which can be formed as a single layer by either cleaving or epitaxial7 methods. Here the Fermi level can be controlled by electric fields and graphene exhibits remarkable magnetotransport properties even up to room temperature.8)
To overcome the fundamental limitations and challenges to realizing the full potential of small molecule organic materials in technology, the goals (or Holy Grails) that are in the field of view include:
(1) True epitaxial growth in small molecule single component and donor–acceptor (DA) charge transfer materials. This leads naturally to high mobility, band conduction, and low temperature performance.
(2) Epitaxial heterostructures allowing the spatial modulation of molecular materials with completely different physical properties.
(3) Phase change and functionalized material properties that occur under ambient environmental conditions.
(4) New materials with multifunctional properties.
Some possible routes to these goals include:
(1) Continued work and innovation in microcrystallinity in the regions of devices “where it counts” including interfaces at injection electrodes and conducting channels.
(2) Synthetic strategies to modify materials to increase the transition temperature of low temperature phenomena.
(3) Bio-inspired materials.
(4) Hydrogen-bonded compounds.
(5) Organic–inorganic hybrid compounds.
(6) Synthesis under non-equilibrium conditions (high pressure).
In the following review, many of these issues are addressed, starting with a brief (and approximate) history of the development of organic metals, and followed by a description of the building blocks and electronic structure of small molecule materials. Described then in succession are single component bulk and thin film materials, donor–acceptor charge transfer salts, field effect transistors and photonic devices, phase change and non-linear materials, thin films, functionalized materials, bio-inspired materials and devices, and a concluding section. Since this is an interdisciplinary area, some topics are treated at a very simple level to give the essential background for non-experts. An attempt has been made to discuss examples and present figures that give a broad “at a glance” view of important areas to try to at least touch on some of the most important aspects of this extremely wide interdisciplinary subject. Although single crystalline materials are a focus, polycrystalline, polymer, or amorphous forms of materials in devices are discussed since their examples often provide an essential starting point and background that ultimately lead to single crystal structures and function.
2. Quest for an organic metal‡
The advancement of molecular materials, sometimes perceived as transparent, non-magnetic, and electrically insulating “plastics”, took a number of great leaps forward starting with the report in 1954 of electrical conductivity behavior in Br-doped crystals of perylene by Akamatu et al. (described as “black in colour”; σ(RT) ∼ 1 S cm−1, Ea ∼ 0.055 eV)9 (Fig. 1). Subsequently, but years later (1977), electrical conductivity was observed in films of the Br, Cl, or I-doped polymer polyacetylene10,11 (“silvery-black”; σ(RT) ∼ 38 S cm−1, Ea ∼ 0.016 eV). In this same period, the first conducting (σ(RT) ∼ 650 S cm−1) donor–acceptor single crystal charge transfer complex TTF–TCNQ was discovered,12 and was found to remain metallic with a maximum conductivity of ∼1.5 × 104 S cm−1 just above a metal–insulator charge density wave (CDW) transition at 58 K13 (below which Ea ∼ 6 meV). In 1980 a metal insulator transition (spin density wave—SDW) was found to occur at lower temperatures (below 20 K) in the charge transfer (Bechgaard) salts (TMTSF)2X (TMTSF = tetramethyltetraselenafulvalene; X = PF6, AsF6, SbF6, BF4 and NO3).14 Here the low temperature conductivity just above the SDW transition was of order 105 S cm−1. Shortly afterwards, by suppressing the SDW transition under a pressure of 12 kbar, (TMTSF)2PF6 was discovered to be a superconductor at 0.9 K.15 Finally, in 1981 the salt (TMTSF)2ClO4 was found to be fully metallic, and superconducting (Fig. 2) below 1.3 K under ambient pressure conditions, where the size and symmetry of the ClO4 anion was thought to aid in the suppression of the SDW insulating state.16,17 (See section 9 for a description of SDW and CDW states.)
 Fig. 1  The apparatus used by Akamatu et al. for testing electrical conductivity in Br-doped perylene (Reproduced with permission from ref. 9, © 1987 American Institute of Physics). 
 Fig. 2  The first ambient pressure metallic organic conductor and superconductor, (TMTSF)2ClO4. Several samples exhibited a resistive drop below 1.3 K. The inset shows the linear “π” stacking of the TMTSF donor chain (open circles, Se) and the positions (including disorder) of the segregated ClO4 anion chain along the a-axis (Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, © 1981 American Physical Society). 
TTF–TCNQ and (TMTSF)2X involved segregated, linear packing of the donor molecules and the electrical conductivity anisotropy indicated quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) transport. In 1982 the donor BEDT-TTF (bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene), with planar stacking of the BEDT-TTF molecules (Fig. 3a and b), was electrocrystallized with ClO4 (also segregated), where it was found to be metallic and to exhibit quasi-two-dimensional (Q2D) transport18 at ambient pressure. Shortly afterwards, the first Q2D superconductor (BEDT-TTF)4(ReO4)2 was discovered with a critical temperature Tc ∼ 2 K above a critical pressure of 4 kbar,19 and in 1984 the first ambient pressure Q2D superconductor β-(BEDT-TTF)2I320 was reported. This was followed by a final, rigorous proof of the existence of a Q2D organic metal with a Fermi surface (Fig. 3c and d) with the discovery of Shubnikov–de Haas (SdH) oscillations in β-(BEDT-TTF)2IBr2.21
 Fig. 3  Crystal structure of β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 (that of β-(BEDT-TTF)2IBr2 is isostructural28). (a) and (b) Planar “β” stacking of the BEDT-TTF donor molecules in the a–b plane, with the segregated linear I3 anion planes above and below. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, © 1988 Elsevier). (c) Closed orbit Fermi surface derived from band structure and experiment. (d) Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations in the magnetoresistance of β-(BEDT-TTF)2IBr2. (e) Angular dependent magnetoresistance oscillations observed by rotating a single crystal with respect to a constant magnetic field, which are used to determine Fermi surface topology in (c). Physically, these measurements taken together mean that carriers move predominately in the a–b planes of the Q2D donor stacks (but do have some bandwidth in the least conducting direction between the donor planes), and exhibit cyclotron orbits at low temperatures in the presence of a magnetic field.24 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, © 1996 EDP Sciences). 
All of the pioneering work discussed above led to decades of exciting chemistry and physics where many new combinations of donors and acceptors have yielded a vast assortment of properties including metal, insulator, superconductor, magnetic, charge–order, spin–Peierls, charge density wave, spin density wave, and spin liquid states; many advances have been made in our understanding the physics of low dimensional materials together with advanced theoretical models.4,22–27 Although the properties of these compounds are of fundamental importance from a scientific point of view, the translation of their more important physical properties to realistic applications remains a challenge, with only a few success stories at present. In the following sections we review some of the aspects of organic molecular materials with an eye to important considerations that may help in future molecular designs and applications.
3. Fundamentals
a Conjugated molecular structure—a pathway for conductivity
This review will address chemistry and quantum chemistry issues at a cursory level. The reader is referred to previous reviews for a more detailed treatment.§ A simple starting point is to consider that for conducting molecular materials, a key aspect is the utilization of conjugated molecular building blocks with delocalized electronic structure. Perhaps the simplest example is the carbon and hydrogen based chains of polymers such as polyacetylene.31 The evolution of a conjugated conducting molecular arrangement is sketched in Fig. 4. The carbon atom has the 1s22s2p2 electronic configuration, but one of the 2s electrons is promoted and the valence electrons take up an sp3 “hybridized” configuration involving four orbitals with 109.5 degree separation. In methane (CH4) for instance, all four orbitals form C–H covalent bonds (Fig. 4a). Extending this however to ethylene (IUPAC name: ethene, C2H4), a carbon–carbon bond is introduced and the orbital configuration changes dramatically32 (Fig. 4b): here the hybridization becomes sp2pz where, for each carbon atom, the three sp2 orbitals involve two covalent bonds to hydrogens, and one covalent (sigma) bond to the other carbon. These sigma bonds have an ionization potential of 11 eV. The C2H4 configuration is planar in the x–y plane. The pz orbital is perpendicular to the molecular plane, and involves one unpaired “π” electron per carbon atom. In the Hückel description,32 the “π” electron orbitals on each carbon atom interact to produce a lower energy π-bonding (highest occupied molecular orbital—HOMO) and a higher energy π-antibonding (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital—LUMO) configuration. The ionization potential for the π electrons is much lower (∼6 eV) than for the sigma bonds.
 Fig. 4  Effects of s–p hybridization in organic small molecules and polymers. (a) Methane, (b) ethylene, (c) benzene, (d) polyacetylene, (e) pentacene, (f) BEDT-TTF and (g) polyethylene. All are conjugated except methane and polyethylene which are saturated. ((b,c) reproduced with permission from ref. 4, © 1998 Springer-Verlag and ref. 32, © 1985 Wiley). 
One can now extend this picture to benzene (C6H6) where each carbon atom uses the three sp2 orbitals to bond to one hydrogen and two carbons, leaving the pz orbitals perpendicular to the molecular plane (Fig. 4c). In the Hückel picture, the π-bonding orbitals produce a delocalized electron “cloud” above and below the benzene ring. Figuratively speaking, by stretching out in a chain an extended benzene configuration, one obtains polyacetylene, symbolically [–CHCH]n. The π-electron cloud will now extend along the polyacetylene backbone, allowing the possibility of delocalized carriers to move along the chain (Fig. 4d). For both aromatic ring structures, and for polymers, this conjugated (only one hydrogen atom per carbon) configuration underpins the basis for electrical conductivity. This realization led in part to the award of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Heeger, MacDiarmid and Shirakawa “for the discovery and development of conductive polymers” in 2000. A present, the benchmark for metallic performance in doped polyacetylene is anhydrous Fe(C1O4)3 doped polyacetylene, with a room temperature conductivity of 41 kS cm−1, and metallic behavior down to 1.5 K (65 kS cm−1).33
Pentacene (Fig. 4e) is a conjugated organic “small molecule” (C22H14) that contains fused aromatic rings and forms the basis for many organic molecular electronic devices. Heteroatoms (sulfur, selenium, etc.) may replace carbon in the aromatic rings (S in the case of BEDT-TTF in Fig. 4f).
Finally, for polyethylene (Fig. 4g), the CH2 monomer unit immediately tells us that all four sp3 hybridized carbon orbitals are involved in covalent sigma bonds (i.e. two hydrogen atoms per carbon is “saturated”), and no delocalized π-orbitals are present: polyethylene is an insulator.
b Molecular crystals—energy levels and dispersion
For single molecules, the energy levels are most simply described by a π-bonding (occupied – HOMO) and π*-antibonding (unoccupied – LUMO) picture. However, in conjugated polymers and molecular crystals with long-range order, the π orbitals will overlap in one or more dimensions and the electronic structure now involves valence and conduction bands that evolve from the molecular orbitals as shown schematically in Fig. 5. As a starting point, a simple but very powerful method is the molecular orbital theory4,32 in which a molecular orbital (MO), ψ is described in terms of the n underlying atomic orbitals ϕn. ψ must obey the Schrödinger equation (H − E)ψ = 0 where H is the Hamiltonian and E represents the set of eigenvalues (allowed energy levels). In the Hückel MO method, ψ is represented as a linear combination of the atomic orbitals (LCAO): ψ = Σncnϕn. The standard ∫ψ*(H − E)ψ dv = 0 volume integral is then used to compute the eigenvalues.
 Fig. 5  Evolution of bulk electronic structure in an organic semiconductor. Note that the conduction and valence bands do not necessarily directly correspond to the LUMO and HOMO orbitals. The valence and conduction bands in some cases may emerge only from incorporation of the HOMO orbitals in the tight binding band structure calculation as in the (TMTSF)2X salts35—Fig. 10a) On the right, energy levels relevant to molecular electronics are shown: ID and EA are the ionization and electron affinity energies from the valence and conduction band edges respectively. Carriers injected from electrodes produce electron and hole polarons (at energies Ep− and Ep+ separated by the “transport gap” ET) which can lose energy and become bound polaron (exciton) states with energy EOPT, which upon recombination can produce photons. Optical excitation can produce the opposite process. See also Fig. 11, 14, and 15 below. (A more complete description is given by Fraxedas.36) 
To simplify the explanation, one can assume the atoms are identical, evenly spaced, and that only onsite (n = m) and nearest neighbor (n ≠ m) AO wavefunction overlaps are significant. The resulting individual integrals can then be separated into three physically meaningful categories:
(1) The overlap integral ∫ϕm*ϕn dv that is only non-zero for m = n. (The ϕn can be chosen to be an “orthogonal basis set”.)
(2) The on-site Coulomb integral ∫ϕm*Hϕn dv, which for m = n, is represented as αn.
(3) The resonance or transfer energy integral ∫ϕm*Hϕn dv that is only non-zero for adjacent m and n, represented as βmn.
For the very simple case of di-atomic hydrogen (H2), the energy spectrum32 is E = α± β which leads to the lower bonding (HOMO) and upper antibonding (LUMO) molecular H2 orbitals. Here β is intrinsically negative. The same procedure leads to the orbital description of C2H2 (ethylene) shown in Fig. 4b. Assuming equivalent carbon sites, this method predicts that polyacetylene is gapless4 (no HOMO–LUMO gap), but when the difference between lengths of the single and double bonds are included, a gap opens up between the LUMO and the HOMO energy levels.¶
In Fig. 4 and 5, there is no information about the momentum of an electron (or hole). If the molecules are in the solid state, then one must consider how the HOMO and LUMO orbitals transform into conduction and valence bands where the energy levels can now depend on momentum, i.e. the dispersion relation ε(k) where k is the momentum vector. To accomplish this, molecular orbitals ψ from the Hückel method can be used to construct the wave function Ψ for electrons moving in direction r through an ordered solid with momentum k. This is accomplished by imposing a periodic condition on Ψ, i.e. the Bloch form for the wavefunction:Ψk (r) = Σiψ(r − ri)exp(ik·ri)where i labels the position of the ith molecule. This represents the one electron wavefunction Ψk of a particular molecular band in terms of the corresponding molecular orbital ψ at the molecular position ri, known as the tight binding approximation34). When all relevant atomic orbitals are considered in the Hückel method to construct the molecular orbitals, and the Bloch wavefunction representation is used, this is called the “extended Hückel tight binding” or EHTB approach.
In the EHTB method, for a simple orthorhombic lattice, the energy dispersion, now momentum dependent, is (for the case of a single band),ε(k) = 2ta cos(kxa) + 2tb cos(kbb) + 2tc cos(kcc),where ta, tb, and tc are the transfer integrals.4 The final step is to determine the transfer integrals between adjacent molecules. This can be done computationally either by starting from the atomic orbitals, or the molecular orbitals (where either or both the LUMO and HOMO orbitals are used, depending on the type of crystal structure), or experimentally from optical data. Examples of the results of the EHTB method for molecular crystals are shown in Fig. 6, 9b and 10.
4. Single component organic semiconductors and metals
Methods related to those in section 3b can determine the electronic structure of single component molecular materials, and pentacene is clearly one of great interest due to its applications in organic-based devices.37 Shown in Fig. 6 is the result of an EHTB calculation for the dispersion of the valence and conduction bands for a representative polymorph of pentacene.38 In the herringbone structure, there are two inequivalent molecular sites that lead to four bands near the Fermi level. Fig. 6 shows the spacing between the intermolecular carbon sites that fall within 4 Å. It is immediately clear that there is a significant energy gap between the valence and conduction bands (∼1 eV) with a relatively small (∼0.2 eV) average bandwidth. By functionalizing pentacene with stabilizing side groups,39 the pentacene structure stacks in a parallel (π-stacking) arrangement bringing the intermolecular carbon distances near the van der Waals separation (3.4 Å). The EHTB calculation shows this functionalization reduces the energy gap to less than 1 eV, with the largest average bandwidths in the Γ–X and Γ–Y directions. By inspection of Fig. 6, the Fermi energy does not cross any of the molecular bands, and therefore there are no allowed electron or hole carrier states at the Fermi level, and no “Fermi surface”.
 Fig. 6  Energy dispersion in single component organic crystals. (a) Herringbone structure of a pentacene polymorph showing the intermolecular carbon–carbon distances within 4 Å, and (b) band structure. (c) π-stacking arrangement in TIPS (pentacene with CC–Si(CH(CH3)2) side groups), and d) band structure for TIPS. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, © 2002 American Chemical Society.) 
The example in Fig. 6 shows that the stacking arrangement for planar molecules can greatly affect the electronic structure. Significant changes can occur in single component organic molecular crystals by (1) packing that minimizes the distance between the atoms in the molecule that have the most prominent π-orbitals, and (2) including atoms with larger (than carbon) π-orbitals.
A dramatic example of these effects is the single component molecular metal Ni[(tmdt)2] (tmdt = trimethylene tetrathiafulvalene dithiolate) as shown in Fig. 7. Although more complex that pentacene, the essential features of Ni[(tmdt)2] are that it has: 12 apical sulfur atoms, the presence of a d-electron atom at the symmetry point, almost exactly planar form, highly efficient packing with both close face-to-face π-staking contacts, and also close side-to-side sulfur contacts, all approaching the van der Waals distance,|| yielding a three-dimensional interaction of π orbitals. EHTB calculations show an overlap of the HOMO–LUMO bands at the Fermi level, indicating a metal with both electron and hole carriers, and resistivity measurements to low temperatures showed metallic behavior.40
 Fig. 7  Aspects of the single component molecular metal Ni[(tmdt)2]. (a), (b) Tight packing structure of the planar Ni[(tmdt)2] molecules. (c) Metallic behaviour of the resistivity (dR/dT > 0) and susceptibility χ (no magnetic order). (d), (e) Angular dependent de Haas–van Alphen oscillations from torque measurements at 0. 5 K showing unambiguous evidence for a three dimensional (3D) Fermi surface. (f) Complementary band structure calculations verifying the presence of both electron and hole 3D Fermi surfaces (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 43, © 2004 American Chemical Society). 
In many cases the LUMO is not included in the band calculations since it can be significantly higher in energy, and its inclusion along with the HOMO does not change appreciably the general features of the computed band structure.41 However, in Ni[(tmdt)2], due to the d-electron orbitals at the Ni site, the overlap interactions with the pz orbitals partially cancel,42 greatly reducing the HOMO–LUMO molecular energy gap (from ∼0.36 eV for the HOMO–LUMO molecular gap to ∼0.054 eV for the HOMO–LUMO band gap), and hence both molecular orbitals are included in the band structure calculation. Since there are very strong interactions due to the dense packing, the resulting bandwidths of what can be considered HOMO and LUMO bands in this case are greater than the energy difference between them, and they overlap and cross the Fermi level, producing a Fermi surface with both electrons and holes, i.e., a semimetal.
The final test for a metal from the physics point of view is evidence for a Fermi surface, and this was demonstrated for Ni[(tmdt)2] using angular dependent torque measurements to measure the de Haas–van Alphen (dHvA) effect, allowing a more complete comparison between experimental and band structure descriptions of the three dimensional Fermi surface of this material.43
5. Donor–acceptor charge transfer complexes (salts)
At this stage, we have gone from the electronic structure of atomic to molecular to single component molecular crystals where only in the very last case has a single component “small molecule” solid shown full metallic behavior. In this section we consider two-component compounds where one molecule acts as a donor (with ionization energy ID) and another molecule acts as an acceptor (with electron affinity EA). The relevant energy levels are schematically illustrated in Fig. 5 where for two small molecules, the degree of charge transfer will depend on the relative sizes of ID (a donor must give up charge +ρ from the HOMO band) and EA (an acceptor must take charge +ρ into the LUMO band). It is useful to re-visit the report of the discovery of metallic conductivity in the charge transfer salt TTF–TCNQ by Ferraris et al.12 who consider the donor TTF which can form a “radical cation” state TTF+ and the acceptor TCNQ that forms a “radical anion” state TCNQ−. To paraphrase, they note “the high symmetry of TTF (D2h) does not favor random potentials, and the presence of sulfur in the heterocyclic structure, which is highly polarizable, reduces the effects of coulomb repulsion on the neighboring TCNQ sites. Recrystallization from acetonitrile produces only the 1:1 complex with black, shiny plates with one long axis, very thin samples are semitransparent and olive green in color, and the crystals are easily cleaved in a direction parallel to the plates.” This description includes many of the unique properties of charge transfer complexes (color and metallicity, self-assembly, high purity and mobility, anisotropy and low dimensionality, and moderate carrier concentration), to which one can further add that these materials are usually air-stable, and do not degrade under ambient conditions for decades.
Subsequently, in an effort to develop a logical strategy for the synthesis of metallic organic charge transfer complexes, Saito and Ferraris45 identified thirteen requirements for an organic molecular crystalline metal. Of these, flatness and high symmetry of the cations, segregated stacking of donors and acceptors with long-range order, incomplete charge transfer with unpaired electrons, and minimal Coulomb repulsion effects in both donor and acceptor are some of the most important attributes that lead to the band conduction of carriers. They then considered the relationship for the molecular field energy46E = N[(ID − EA)ρ − Mρ2/2) as it applied to many different donor–TCNQ complexes in terms of their neutral, charge transfer, or ionic character. Here ρ is the average charge transfer, M is the Madelung energy, and N is the number of D–A pairs. In a modified form of the molecular field energy using the half wave potentials E1(D) and E2(A) (proportional to ID and EA respectively), the criterion for the partial charge transfer region was found to be: −0.02 ≤ E1(D) − E1(A) ≤ 0.34 V as shown in Fig. 8. This approach to charge transfer complex design, has been more recently reviewed in detail by Saito and Yoshida.47
 Fig. 8  (a) and (b) Crystal structure of TTF–TCNQ (Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, © EDP Sciences). (c) Dependence of neutral, partial charge transfer, and fully ionic properties of TTF–TCNQ related Donor–Acceptor compounds. For simplicity, of the 61 complexes studied, only DBTTF–TCNQ (neutral), TTF–TCNQ (partial CT), and TTF-F4TCNQ (ionic) are shown (Redrawn from ref. 45). 
A method for computation of the electronic band structure of TTF–TCNQ is to use the HOMO orbital of the TTF donor and the LUMO of the TCNQ acceptor.44 In the simplest description, this leads to two quasi-one-dimensional bands, one for each chain, as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  (a) π-orbital overlap in TCNQ stacks (Reproduced with permission from ref. 48). (b) Simplified dual and structure of TTF–TCNQ (Reproduced with permission from ref. 26, © American Chemical Society). (b) More complete LDA (local density approximation) band structure calculation (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49, © 2001 Elsevier). 
In TTF–TCNQ, the charge transfer involves a single donor and acceptor, i.e. a 1:1 salt D+ρA−ρ where the charge transfer is ρ ∼ ±0.55. However, many molecule-based conductors are of the type (D+ρ)2A−2ρ(2:1 salts) where each donor has an average ½ electron ionization (ρ = ±0.50), and the charge compensating anion has a 1 (or other integral) charge.** Various approximations can be used to construct the donor molecular orbitals for the band calculation (the donors may be dimerized), and unlike in the case of TTF–TCNQ, the anion orbitals are not included since each acceptor has one electron, no π-orbitals, is insulating, and not involved in the band calculation. The crystal structure, resulting band structure and Fermi surface for quasi-one-dimensional (TMTSF)2AsF6 is shown in Fig. 10a and b,35 and for quasi-two-dimensional α-(BEDT-TTF)2NH4Hg(SCN)4 in Fig. 10c and d.50 Since the Fermi energy (determined by the degree of band filling) crosses one or more of the bands, these materials have well defined Fermi surfaces, defined as the loci of momenta in the Brillouin zone where the band energy ε(k) = EF, as shown for both cases. To go further, we simply note that at this stage, if the conditions in charge transfer complexes for an organic metal are not carefully met, then effects of band filling, dimerization, and of course low dimensional instabilities can lead to Mott and band insulators, antiferromagnetism, charge order (see Fig. 19 below), etc.51,52 These effects can be tuned with chemical and physical pressure, temperature, and magnetic field.
 Fig. 10  (a) π-orbital overlap of the donor stacks in (TMTSF)2PF6 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 26, © 2004 American Chemistry Society). (b) Band structure and Fermi surface of (TMTSF)2AsF6 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, © 1983 EDP Sciences). (c), (d) donor and crystal structure of α-(BEDT-TTF)2KHg(SCN)4, band structure and Fermi surface of α-(BEDT-TTF)2KHg(SCN)4 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, © 1990 Chemical Society of Japan). 
6. Alkali-metal doped molecular crystals
There have been extensive developments in doped-fullerene and related materials. Unlike the usually rigid donor–acceptor charge ratio ρ of the charge transfer salts, alkali-metal doping in for instance the fullerenes KxC60 (1 ≤ x ≤ 6) can be tuned to produce metal, superconducting, or insulating phases. This topic is too vast to review herein, but there are two recent examples that serve the purpose of introducing this topic. The first is the report of the highest bulk superconducting transition temperature (Tc = 38 K) in a doped fulleride, namely Cs3C60 under pressure.53 The samples were grown by solvent-controlled synthesis, and the phase of interest is the A15 structure. At ambient pressure, due in part to the size of the Cs atom, the material is an insulating antiferromagnetic state. However, under hydrostatic pressure of about 7 kbar, the material becomes superconducting (while maintaining the A15 crystal structure). A summary of the pressure dependent phases is shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Pressure-dependent antiferromagnetic insulating (AFI) and superconducting (SC) phases in Cs3C60. Squares, AFI transitions; circles, SC transitions; open symbols, co-existing AFI and SC transitions. Symbol colors represent different samples. Inset: A15 structure of Cs3C60. Small and large spheres are the Cs atoms and the C60 fullerenes respectively (Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, © 2010 AAAS). 
More recent work by the same group has indicated that the superconductivity is unconventional, involving a purely electronically driven transition from the insulating to the superconducting state with pressure.54 The second example is a recent report investigating alkali-doped picene (Axpicene where A = K, Rb, Cs, or Na, and 1 ≤ x ≤ 5.1). Picene (a five-ring polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon—C22H14) crystallizes into a herring bone structure. For A = K and Rb, the compound was found to be superconducting with transition temperatures up to 18 K. Curie, Pauli, and metal insulator phases were observed in the non-superconducting materials. (See also recent work by the author on intercalated graphite materials such as CaC6.55)
7. Field effect transistors
In addition to two-component charge transfer, charge injection into single component molecular materials may be accomplished by electric fields,56–58 generally following the formalism of semiconductor field effect transistors.59 A generalized physical and electronic description of an organic field effect transistor device is shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Generalized organic field effect transistor: physical and electronic structure. Electrons are injected into the channel conduction band from a low work function (ϕS) source electrode, and taken out of the channel valence band by a high work function (ϕD) drain electrode (equivalent to channel hole injection). In unipolar devices, generally with identical electrodes (ϕS = ϕD), drain-source current (IDS) current only flows for one gate bias (VG) polarity, but in ambipolar devices (with different electrodes where (ϕS ≠ ϕD), both gate polarities can produce IDS current. The dielectric (κ) can be an oxide or an organic insulator. 
Typically, an organic thin film channel material is deposited on a thin (<1 nm) SiO2 insulating layer that covers a metallic-doped silicon substrate (gate) with thin film gold source and drain electrodes evaporated either on the SiO2 (bottom electrode—Fig. 13) or on the organic thin film (top electrode—Fig. 15) configurations. Initial work involved primarily organic thin film transistors (OTFT's) based on evaporated or sublimated organic semiconducting polycrystalline or amorphous thin film materials such as pentacene. (We will discuss thin film processing in more detail in section 10 below.) OTFT devices at this stage are quite advanced, although the mobilities appear to be limited to the range 1–10 cm2 V−1 s−1, comparable to amorphous silicon devices. Most devices are of the p-type, and run in the accumulation mode due to the relationship of the HOMO–LUMO (and resulting band) energies and the work functions of typical source and drain electrode materials such as Au and Ag. The characteristic gate and source–drain voltages are generally in the range of 1 to 100 volts, and the current densities are typically below a microamp. Self assembling organic monolayers (SAM's) have been used between gate insulators like SiO2 and AlOx and the organic layer to reduce defect states at the interface. Even so, such devices, now state of the art, still have many hurdles in terms of uniformity, long term stability, relatively high operating voltages, low operating currents and mobilities, etc. before becoming truly practical for applications.
Beyond OTFT's, single crystalline organic field effect transistors (OFET's) have reached significantly higher mobilities57,60 due to the reduction in disorder (grain boundaries, etc.). Electrode and gate structures can either be deposited on the surface of a single crystal, or thin single crystals can be “laminated” onto standard silicon FET-type structures. The state of the art is for rubrene single crystal devices with an intrinsic mobility61 reaching 40 cm2 V−1 s−1 (with VSD and VG levels below 10 V), approaching that of poly-silicon, shown in Fig. 13. Here a high-density organosilane self-assembled monolayer (SAM) layer is used to reduce the presence of interface traps on the FET structure before laminating the single rubrene crystal. Another important advance has been the development of the parylene (poly-p-xylene) gate insulator57 that is relatively pin-hole free, and can be used as a top-gate electrode insulating layer on single crystal devices.
 Fig. 13  Single crystal field effect transistor structure. (a) Lamination of rubrene crystal onto SAMS-treated FET structure. (b) Assembled OFET device (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62, © 2003 American Institute of Physics). (c) Characteristics of a 40 cm2 V−1 s−1 (just above threshold) single crystal rubrene FET (Reproduced with permission from ref. 61, © 2007 American Institute of Physics). 
In the single crystal structures, fundamental questions about the nature of the charge transport and the limits of mobility can be addressed. Reducing defects in the single crystal at the interface, higher quality single crystals, enhanced charge injection at the electrodes, and a better understanding of the nature of charge transport in these structures are all under present consideration. The latter include the role of polarons vs. carriers in the channel conduction63 (see Fig. 5), and thermal ion effects that may provide intrinsic limitations to the mobility64 under room temperature operation. In polycrystalline devices, grain boundaries have also been shown to be detrimental, decreasing the mobility at lower temperatures.65 Ultimately, the mobility of OFET's decrease at low temperatures and to date no OFET has been produced that exhibits superconductivity. The limitations on low temperature mobility have made the beautiful physics of the two-dimensional electron gas (quantum Hall effect, etc.) and the study of electron pairing states inaccessible to this point in small molecule gated structures. In contrast, the charge transfer complexes (in bulk single crystals with no control over carrier concentration) show a pantheon of such beautiful physical effects.4,24,66
8. Photonic devices
a Electroluminescence
Electroluminescence (EL) in organic materials involves injecting excited carriers into an organic material (with high voltages for a metal–organic–metal single layer device), producing excitons (see Fig. 5), followed by radiative recombination processes that produce fluorescence. A breakthrough in efficiency came with the demonstration of a bi-layer organic interface device by Tang and VanSlyke,67 as shown in Fig. 14. It is instructive to consider the essential features of this design. The low work function of the 10:1 alloy MgAg (ϕMg ∼ 3.68 eV) cathode injects electrons into the Alq3 (8-hydroxyquinoline aluminium) side, and the diamine (tetraphenyldiamine—TPD) side only transports holes, injected from the indium–tin–oxide (ITO) side. Hence the device is strictly an organic light emitting diode (OLED) biased in the forward direction. The ITO electrode, with a higher work function (ϕITO ∼ 4.7 eV), served as a transparent conducting anode. Electron-hole recombination takes place at the interface, and the green electroluminescence spectrum is similar to the Alq3 florescence spectrum, indicating that the electron–hole recombination occurs on the Alq3 side of the interface. With less than 10 volts bias, a current density and EL intensity of 10 mA cm−2 and 1 mW cm−2 respectively were achieved. Key features in the Tang–VanSlyke design are the carrier injection efficiency, the exclusively hole transporting nature of the TPD, and the use of an interface to localize the region of electron–hole recombination.
 Fig. 14  The Tang–VanSlyke electroluminescent bilayer device. ID and EA are 5.39 and 1.87 eV for diamine (TPD) and 5.81 and 2.84 eV for Alq3 respectively.68 The cyclohexane ring in diamine (TPD) can have two forms, the stable (S) “chair” and the unstable (U) “boat” forms. (Upper figures reproduced with permission from ref. 67, © 1987 American Institute of Physics). 
More recently, these concepts have been advanced by the development of ambipolar devices, that allow the control of the region of electron–hole recombination by gate bias as shown in Fig. 15 (see also Fig. 12). The device shown is for a single component PPV (polyphenylenevinylene) derivative thin film with low (Ca) and high (Ag) work function injection electrodes. By controlling the gate voltage near 50% of the drain voltage, both electron and hole carriers are injected, recombining at a Vg controlled position in the conduction channel. (See also subsequent work by Zaumseil et al.,69 using another PPV-related material.) It is important to mention that considerable progress has been made in the synthesis of hybrid-type molecules that incorporate electron rich moieties with π-electron systems, thereby creating balanced charge transport materials with bipolar electroluminescent function.70
 Fig. 15  Ambipolar electroluminescent device: Physical and electronic structure; gate dependence of current and light intensity; (a), (b), and (c) correspond to the dependence of the light emission region on gate voltage ((a): 88 V, (b): 93 V, (c): 98 V). Device legend: SY, “Super Yellow”, a phenyl-substituted poly-phenylenevinylene (PPV) commercially available from Merck; PPcB, polypropylene-co-1-butene (14 wt% 1-butene); SiNx, silicon nitride. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, © 2005 American Institute of Physics). 
The ambipolar method has more recently been applied successfully to single crystal devices of BP3T (α,ω-bis(biphenylyl)terthiophene) with Ca and Au electrodes,71 tetracene with identical Ag and Ag electrodes,72 and rubrene with Au and Ca electrodes.73 The gate insulating layers have been passivated with thin organic buffer layers (SAMs) to reduce the influence of insulator defect states on the surface of the organic channel material.
The performance of these single crystal devices is still short of robust industrial applications, and the operating voltages are still quite high. More importantly, a viable organic light emitting transistor (OLET) laser (exclusively electroluminescent and not optically pumped) has yet to be demonstrated.75 However, the BP3T single crystal device exhibited “light pipe” effects,71 where the luminescence appeared at the edges of the crystal, giving some guidance in how a laser might eventually be developed from these structures.
A fundamental limitation to electroluminescent devices involves the excitation of singlet and triplet exciton states, and their radiative relaxation.76 Singlet (allowed) relaxation yields fluorescence which can occur on short time scales, and triplet (forbidden) relaxation yields phosphorescence with longer time scales. By exciting both types of excitons, the total efficiency of electroluminescence can be increased four-fold, where the slower triplet relaxation acts to store energy on longer time scales for light emission. Enormous progress has been made in the development of flat panel OLED arrays in industry by fabricating multilayer devices where a recombination layer separates the hole and electron carrier layers. This intermediate layer, which has predominantly singlet excitations, is doped with a phosphorescent material that allows triplet excitations. This design has been engineered, for instance by Konica-Minolta,77 to produce white light sources with efficiencies of 60 lm W−1 (1000 cd m−2) and life times of 10000 h, parameters that are competitive with incandescent, fluorescent, and LED systems.
The general area of white organic LED materials and devices, or “WOLEDs” has been reviewed recently.78,79 The development of solid state lighting that can surpass the performance of incandescent, fluorescent, and LED sources is a major priority in the future use of energy. This exciting area presents many complex problems to be solved spanning issues of broad-band emission, reflected color fidelity, the synthesis of new small molecules and polymers, processing methods, carrier mobilities and exciton lifetimes, durability, low-power requirements, and theories of the many required processes, just to name a few.
b Photovoltaic devices
Photovolatic (solar cell) devices are essentially un-biased OLED or OLET configurations running in reverse,80i.e. photons excite the electron–hole excitations, and the two carriers migrate to the opposite electrodes producing a potential difference and photocurrent under load. Recently, more complex two layer devices have been developed, including a rubrene–fullerene structure (shown in Fig. 16) that has a very low EL turn on voltage bias (∼1 V), and also serves as a photovoltaic source.81
 Fig. 16  Complementary photovoltaic/OLED Rubrene–C60 device. (a) Schematic of device structure with relevant work functions of conducting electrodes and LUMO–HOMO levels of rubrene and C60. (b) Photocurrent for different light power levels. (c) Electroluminescence spectrum for two different channel structures (Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, © 2007 Wiley VCH). 
This area has also been highly developed by the polymer community, and present devices can involve very complex laminated heterostructures with donor, acceptor, and an intermediate exciton forming layers that are doped with pigments, dyes, and even nano-particles to enhance light harvesting.80 This area has been recently reviewed by Heremans et al. who discuss the key factors in increasing efficiency.82 These include the ability to absorb broad-band light and exciton creation, exciton diffusion lengths and singlet and triplet populations, the morphology of the exciton dissociation region, electron and hole mobilities, and the efficient collection of charge carriers at the electrodes. Not only are new materials critical for improvement, but so are the device architectures.
For polymers, the technology is already very successful in the market place, as shown in Fig. 17 for completely organic and flexible solar cells produced by Konarka Tech. Inc. with no heavy metal content.83 What role single crystalline materials will have in this rapidly developing area is not presently clear, except to note that progress in polycrystalline, crystalline array, and epitaxial thin films (as discussed in section 9 below) may change the landscape in the near future.
 Fig. 17  Commercially available flexible organic “Power Plastic” solar cell manufactured by Konarka Technology, Inc. Individual organic device strips (a) with channels doped with dyes are connected in series (b) by attaching the transparent electrode of each cell to the primary electrode of the next cell via the substrate to produce the required voltage. (c) The external quantum efficiency (EQE) is relatively broad-band in the visible range (Redrawn after ref. 83). 
9. Non-linear and phase change devices
Another category of organic devices involve phase changes, metastable phases, and non-linear transport. In particular, broken symmetry ground states can produce charge or spin density wave collective states. These involve the spatial modulation of charge density with a period (wavelength) of the order of the lattice constant spacing (either commensurate or incommensurate with the underlying lattice). The spin-up and spin-down charge densities can be either in phase (CDW) or out of phase (SDW) spatially.84 These density waves can be pinned by either commensurability (lattice) or by impurities, and depinned at a threshold electric field ET (or by an ac field resonant with the pinning energy).85,86
When the mode is depinned, there is an enhancement in the conductivity due to the collective motion of the otherwise static density wave. Heating is also possible, leading to additional non-linear and latching effects. Such effects are well known in the chalcogenides and bronzes,84 but less common in organic charge transfer salts. The depinning of an ordered collective mode can change the charge or spin configuration from static to dynamic, and this can be detected by probes that are sensitive to long range order, including NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) and XRD (X-ray diffraction). Some examples are provided below.
a Non-linear effects in density wave materials
The spin density wave state in (TMTSF)2PF6 can be depinned, for instance by ac electric fields87Fig. 18a, or by dc fields as shown in Fig. 18b where the existence of a dynamic depinned mode in (TMTSF)2PF6 was confirmed by 1H NMR.88 An example of the threshold electric field for depinning of the SDW in (TMTSF)2NO389 is shown in Fig. 18c. Likewise, the charge density wave mode in TTF–TCNQ can depinned with an electric field.90,91 In some cases, narrow-band noise associated with the non-linear, metastable I–V characteristics of a sample in a density wave state can be generated, as has been seen in the CDW state of Per2[Au(mnt)2] (Per = perylene; mnt = maleonitrile dithiolate)92 in Fig. 19.
 Fig. 18  Depinning effects in SDW materials. (a) Frequency dependent conductivity in the spin density wave state of (TMTSF)2PF6 below TSDW ∼ 12 K. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, © 1985 American Physical Society). (b) NMR validation of SDW depinning at a critical current in (TMTSF)2PF6. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, © 1993 American Physical Society). (c) dc threshold electric field SDW depinning in (TMTSF)2NO3. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, © 1989 American Physical Society). 
 Fig. 19  Narrow-band noise in the CDW linear conductor Perylene2[Au(mnt)2] (a) Resisitivity vs. temperature indicating the TCDW∼ 12 K transition (b) Current dependence of dc (dots) and rms ac (squares) sample voltages. Solid line: slope of ohmic behavior. (c) Fourier transform of the ac signal. Curves a and b are below the critical current (∼3 mA) and only show broad-band noise. For increasing current (curves c–f), the current dependent narrow-band noise appears. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, © 1994 EDP Sciences). 
Another type of broken symmetry charge configuration is “charge order” (CO) (Fig. 20) that occurs in many organic molecular materials that are generally insulators at low temperatures.52 A thyristor characteristic has recently demonstrated for θ-(BEDT-TTF)2CsZn(SCN)4 that has a charged ordered stripe configuration in the high resistance state. XRD measurements in the isostructural compound θ-(BEDT-TTF)2CsCo(SCN)4 show that in the low resistance state, the stripe pattern “melts”. For specific circuit bias conditions, the compliance is observed to oscillate with a frequency of about 40 Hz. Another example is (TMET-TTP)4PF6 (2-4,5-bismethylthio-1,3-dithiol-2-ylidene-5-4,5-ethylenedithio-1,3-dithiol-2-ylidene-1,3,4,6-tetrathiapentalene) which does not have a specific CO transition, but which develops a homogeneous (non-stripe) type of charge ordering at lower temperatures. This material exhibits a threshold field for enhanced conductivity and also exhibits narrow-band noise at high current bias.94
 Fig. 20  Organic thyristor. (a) Crystal structure of θ-(BEDT-TTF)2CsZn(SCN)4 showing positions of BEDT-TTF molecules. (b) Circuit used to measure current and voltage for different bias conditions. (c) Time-dependent current oscillations in circuit biased in the non-linear regime. (d) “3fold” charge order pattern. (e) Current-induced XRD intensity changes due to the suppression of the charge ordering96 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, © 2009 American Physical Society). 
b Photo-induced phase transitions
There are a number of materials that have temperature dependent structural transitions coupled to either charge or spin that can be reversed with optical excitation, i.e. photo-induced phase transitions (PIPT). One remarkable example97,98 is the metal–insulator transition in (EDO-TTF)2PF6 (EDO-TTF: ethylenedioxytetrathiafulvalene) where below 278 K the ¼ filled metallic band of the EDO-TTF chain undergoes a charge ordering to a 1001 state where alternating pairs of EDO-TTF donors are either ½ filled or empty, producing a bending distortion in the neutral donors (Fig. 21). Using time-resolved optics, a photon excitation of 0.12 ps pulses of 1.55 eV energy (approximately resonant to the charge transfer band), the low temperature insulator phase can converted to the metallic state in a few ps. The “melted” charge order state is detected by reflectivity spectra that confirm an approximately 50% conversion from the insulating to the metallic state.
 Fig. 21  (A) Low temperature charge-ordered insulator and high temperature metallic charge configurations in (EDO-TTF)2PF6. (B) Double-well free energy model for stability of insulating and metal phases and structure of EDO-TTF molecule (Reproduced with permission from ref. 97, © 2005 AAAS). 
Another example involves light induced excited spin state trapping (LIESST) behavior is in spin-cross over compounds such as [Fe(2-pic)3]Cl2EtOH (tris(a-picolylamine)iron(II) chloride-ethanol). In these materials (Fig. 22), the FeII ion is in an octahedral ligand field [FeN6] and at room temperature FeII is in the high spin (S = 2) state. Below ∼120 K, the spin state changes to the low spin (S = 0) state. Coincident with the spin crossover transition is the observation of changes in the Fe–N bond lengths in XRD.99 Photo-excitation in the low spin state induces changes in the Raman spectra, indicating changes in the ligand symmetry, however the photo-induced configuration is different from that of the thermal effect.100 A change in the magnetic susceptibility (towards the high spin value) also accompanies photo excitation of the low temperature, low spin state.101 Recently, progress has been made in patterning these materials in thin film arrays for possible applications in magnetic storage devices,102 and new materials have been synthesized with spin-crossover transitions at room temperature.103,104
 Fig. 22  Aspects of spin-crossover materials. (a) Low spin state structure of [Fe(2-pic)3]Cl2EtOH (Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, © 1980 IUCr.-). (b) Simplified [FeN6] structure and (c) microstrips of cis-bis(thiocyanato)bis(1,10-phenanthroline)FeII on silicon (Reproduced with permission from ref. 102, © 2008 Wiley InterScience). (d) Spin configurations in high and low spin states, optical absorption spectra, and (e) Raman spectra showing photo-induced differences in ligand field modes in low and high spin states of [Fe(2-pic)3]Cl2EtOH (Reproduced with permission from ref. 100, © 2001 American Physical Society). (f) Photo-induced changes in the magnetic susceptibility in the low spin state of [Fe(abpt)2(tcpd)] (tcpd2− = (C[C(CN)2]3)2−, abpt = 4-amino-3,5-bis(pyridin-2-yl)-1,2,4-triazole). Inset shows characteristic LIESST temperature dependence after photo excitation (Reproduced with permission from ref. 101, © 2009 RSC Publishing). 
c Ferroelectrics
The charge transfer systems discussed in the previous section involved charge and spin configurations distributed periodically on a lattice with the same organic donor (D) species at ever site where the anion (A) played no role. Here we note that these materials are in segregated stacking motifs.
The charge-ordered configurations in these materials can produce dipole effects and large peaks in the dielectric constant can be observed at the C–O transition.105
In contrast, another way to produce an electric dipole moment that can be disordered (paraelectric) or ordered (ferroelectric), is a mixed-stack (alternating stacking of D and A) crystal configuration. An example (discussion after Tokura and Horiuchi106) is the compound TTF-CA (where the anion is CA: p-chloranil(tetrachloro-p-benzoquinone) which undergoes a paraelectric transition from a neutral (D0A0) to ionic (D+ρA−ρ) state at about 70 K (where ρ ∼ 0.58). The drawbacks of these materials include conductivity losses due to their relatively low or incomplete gap structure, and to date, no polarization vs. electric field (P–E) hysteresis has been observed. In contrast, their fast relaxation may be adaptable to high speed devices.
A more promising route to single crystal organic ferroelectrics involves hydrogen bonded acid–base systems, where changes in the proton position in the acid–base bridging bonds (e.g. O–H⋯N) produces the variable electric dipole moment. A dramatic example106 (Fig. 23) is that of the co-crystal Phz–H(or D)2xa (phenazine-2,5-dihalo-3,6-dihydroxy-p-benzoquinone, or anilic acid) which has a ferroelectric transition temperature of 260 K for H and 300 K for D, and which exhibits a clear P–E hysteretic behavior below TC. It is noted that TC is very sensitive to pressure, which may be another route to device applications. Very recently, the same group has demonstrated ferroelectricity at room temperature and above in croconic acid (4,5-dihydroxy-4-cyclopentene-1,2,3-trione, H2C5O5) in a single component molecular crystalline form.107 As in the acid–base systems discussed above, the polarization (as high as 20 μC cm−2) arises from the motion of the protons in the hydrogen bonded molecular crystal structure.
 Fig. 23  (a), (b), (c) Alternating acid–base structure of Phz–H2xa, an organic ferroelectric. Electric polarization results from a shift of hydrogen in the N⋯H–O and O–H⋯N bonds. (d) Single crystals showing direction of polarization along the b axis. (e) P–E hysteresis curves (E//b) showing ferroelectric response up to room temperature (Reproduced with permission from ref. 106, © 2008 Nature Publishing Group). 
10. Thin films, interfaces, and micro/nano crystals
Thin films of single component molecular materials are now routinely produced by evaporation, vapor transport, sublimation methods for organic device applications on silicon, SiO2, glass, etc. However, epitaxial organic film growth generally requires a substrate with a large unit cell, and with a van der Waals interaction between the molecules and the substrate. For this purpose, dichalcogenides (MoS2, NbSe2, etc.) provide a reasonable approximation for eptaxial growth where the larger unit cell is a superlattice structure where large organic molecules such as vanadyl-phthalocyanine (VOPc) will arrange in an approximately ordered arrangement where the very thin films will have a larger lattice constant than the bulk crystalline materials. (See Koma108 for a recent review of this area.) Alkali-halide substrates also produce “crystalline” organic thin films.
To reduce the problem of dangling bonds, and also increase the van der Waals-type interaction, the substrate surface can be passivated, as is done with hydrogen on silicon (H–Si(111)) or with chalcogenide terminated GaAs. For organic transistor devices, the insulating oxide layer between gate and the organic film is often passivated with a self-assembling molecular (SAM) film, prior to organic film deposition, which reduces the influence of traps in the conducting channel. At present, the state of the art is to select very thin single crystals and to physically “laminate” them on to a SAMs-treated substrate surface (see Fig. 13 above).
The drawback of the low solubility of materials like rubrene in the standard solvents used for spin casting from solution has been recently addressed via the eutectic route.109 Here, with a 0.4 mole fraction of rubrene in the diluents 5,12-diphenylanthracene, the melting point can be greatly reduced from about 270 °C to less than 100 °C. The vitreous solution is spin cast onto the FET structure, and then dried to remove the diluent. Heating to around 240 °C produces a thin, polycrystalline rubrene film that exhibits mobilities up to 0.7 cm2 V−1 s−1 in FET devices that perform effectively in ring oscillator configurations.
A greater challenge, due to the added complexity of a donor and acceptor, is the growth of single crystalline (epitaxial) thin films of charge transfer complexes. (We note that there has been some success with Ba-doped C60 thin films grown by “hot wall epitaxy”.110). A very attractive prospect would be the ability to grow charge transfer salts (CTS) epitaxially, with only a few alternating donor and acceptor layers that faithfully follow the bulk unit cell structure. From the scientific standpoint, this would be a major breakthrough since one would be able to start to control the multitude of ground state properties (superconductivity, magnetism, etc.) with film thickness (size effects), electric fields, strain, etc. and also have optical transparency.
An important advance that lamination techniques have provided is a recent example of the interface structure between two single crystals of TTF and TCNQ, as shown in Fig. 24, where Alves et al. demonstrated the formation of free carriers at the interface between the separate donor and acceptor single crystals.111 This approach may be one of the most important ways to advance the possibility of some of the most interesting physical systems that the charge transfer complexes have to offer.112 This effect is very similar to the recently discovered high mobility 2DEG (10000 cm2 V−1 s−1) at the interface of LaAlO3 and SrTiO3 epitaxial layers,113 which even becomes superconducting at low temperatures.114
 Fig. 24  (a) Laminated TTF–Interface–TCNQ structure. A two dimensional electron gas (2DEG) with approximately 1014 carriers cm−2 forms at the interface. (b) Two and four terminal temperature dependent resistance of the 2DEG. The crossover resistance per square between metallic and insulating behavior occurs near the value of the resistance quantum h/e2 (Modified figure reproduced with permission from ref. 111, © 2008 Nature Publishing Group). 
Notably, single layer graphite (graphene) can be grown epitaxially by solid state graphitization where single crystal SiC samples are heated above 1150 °C, desorbing Si and leaving excess C behind to form a single graphite layer on the remaining substrate.7
There have been many methods used to make thin films of CTS complexes. Since these materials can be formed electrochemically, the substrate, or the patterned electrodes on a substrate can be used. However, this usually produces tiny crystallites that form with misalignment in arbitrary directions, and also may not be well inter-connected due to grain boundaries. A second method uses electrochemically produced single CTS crystals as the source for thermal sublimation. For example, TTF–TCNQ has been sublimated (at 430 K) onto cleaved alkali-halide substrates (at ≤325 K) and annealed in nitrogen gas at ≤350 K115 shown in Fig. 25. However, although the surface coverage is uniform, the thin film consists of microcrystals of order several microns in size, and the transport properties of the films do not follow closely the conventional temperature dependent resistance signatures of bulk single crystals. In Fig. 25, the resistance is activated below room temperature and the CDW transition signature is greatly reduced.
 Fig. 25  (a) High quality polycrystalline thin films of TTF–TCNQ on Si grown by thermal sublimation under different substrate and annealing conditions. (b) Temperature dependent resistivity of film # 3 (Tsubstrate = 325 K, Tanneal = 350 K) on a (100) KCl substrate indicating a change at the CDW transition temperature (Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, © 2002 Elsevier). 
Thin film charge transfer complexes can also be produced by the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) process where for instance, the acceptor TCNQ can be modified by adding an octadecyl tail (C18-TCNQ).116 By adding the donor TMB (3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine) in solution, a charge transfer segregated stack multilayered film of TMB-C18TCNQ can be produced on a quartz substrate. However, there was no evidence for a neutral–ionic transition in the film, as is seen even in evaporated thin films of TMB-TCNQ material at 230 K. (See Bryce and Petty for a more extensive review of the LB process for charge transfer materials.117) One patent118 describes the use of a stearic acid monolayer deposited by the Langmuir–Blodgett process on a silicon substrate. Thin films of (BEDT-TTF)2I3 are then evaporated from the bulk charge transfer starting material. It is claimed that the films are superconducting 1.5 K, and that by compressing the films, the higher temperature superconducting phase (8 K) is stabilized.
TTF–TCNQ thin films have also been produced by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) using helium gas as the carrier of individual sources of TTF and TCNQ heated to their respective vaporization temperatures.119 The films showed randomly ordered crystallites (∼10 microns in size), and also nano-wire structures. The films exhibited activated resistance below room temperature, and there was no direct evidence for the CDW transition.
A recent success (see Fig. 26) in moving the properties of the charge transfer salts into the realm of room temperature applications is the use of the material α-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 as a flexible thin-film strain sensor.120–124
 Fig. 26  (a) Bilayer β-(BET-TTF)2I3—polycarbonate flexible piezoresistive film. (b) Orientation of donor molecules is along the c-axis, which is the predominant orientation of the crystal axes in the film. Note: both BEDT-TTF and BET-TTF (bis(ethylenethio)tetrathiafulvalene), which differs by one less sulfur in the outer ring, which have similar charge transfer and stacking motifs,125 have been used in this work. (c) Prototype gas pressure sensor device. (d) Linear resistive response of device to pressure. (e) Response of device to human pulse (Reproduced with permission from ref. 120, © 2009 Wiley InterScience). 
Here the donor BEDT-TTF is mixed with polycarbonate in a melt and drop-cast onto a substrate, producing a thin film. The thin film containing the BEDT-TTF donors is then exposed to a vapor of TCE-I2, (TCE = trichloroethylene) which softens the polycarbonate and allows the BEDT-TTF donors to migrate to the soft film surface where the iodine then combines with the donor to produce tiny crystallites of α-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 embedded, and in strong mutual contact at the surface of the polycarbonate film. The sub-micron sized crystallites form with a preferred direction with the c-axis perpendicular to the film surface. Resistance measurements of the resulting thin films shows a strong, highly reproducible resistance change with strain on the film, leading to the development of a number of transducers with strong promise for medical applications.
An essential aspect of the mechanism of the piezoresistance response involves how the polycrystals of α-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 produce the reversible resistivity changes. Through frequency and temperature dependent resistivity studies and X-ray diffraction, it appears that the polycrystalline grain boundary contacts are not involved. Rather, the resistance changes are the result of bending strain in the single crystallites themselves, which are strongly interconnected electrically.120
Another approach is to make single crystalline materials very small. An example of innovation in the development of single crystalline properties in the “thin film” landscape is the patterning of arrays of sub-100 micron-sized single crystals of pentacene, rubrene, and C60 in OFET configurations on silicon and plastic substrates.126 As shown in Fig. 27, reasonable OFET performance can be achieved on flexible PET substrates.
 Fig. 27  (a) Flexible OFET array structure using a micro-single crystalline array. (b) Crystal morphology. (c) Typical drain–source I–V characteristics vs. gate voltage (Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, © 2006 Nature Publishing Group). 
In summary of this section, the prospects for a large area single crystal epitaxial thin film of either single component or donor–acceptor organic materials remains an ongoing challenge. Particularly, for most reports of CT complex thin film structures, the bulk properties do not translate readily to the thin film properties at low temperatures. However, in very recent work Hla and co-workers have successfully deposited by evaporation nano-sized structures of stoichiometric (BETS)2-GaCl4 with as few as 4 pairs of (BETS)2 and GaCl4 co-linear chains on a Au(111) surface.127 Remarkably, scanning tunneling microscopy shows the structures are superconducting, reflecting the known superconductivity in the bulk (BETS)2-GaCl4 materials (see Fig. 29c). This represents a considerable advance in the quest for epitaxial-type forms of charge transfer complexes, especially where the bulk properties translate to a thin film, and in this case monolayer, crystalline structure.128
11. Functionalized materials
The area of functionalized π-electron (conjugated) systems is now a major international area of investigation129,130 (these two reviews are relevant to most subjects discussed in the present review). Functionalization can be accomplished in a number of ways, such as the modification of the molecule in a single component material, modifying one or more of the molecules in a charge transfer complex, or combining organic and inorganic molecular structures in other ways. Three examples follow below.
a Molecular structure
Crystalline pentacene has a herringbone like stacking structure, which reduces the π-overlap of adjacent pentacene molecules, thereby increasing the band gap of the material. In addition, pentacene is not readily soluble in most organic solvents, and difficult to process in solution. However, by adding “pendant” groups such as triisopropyl–silylethynyl (TIPS) to the 6 and 13 pentacene positions, Anthony et al.131 stabilized the more optimum “face-to-face” π-stacking of the pentacene molecules, thereby reducing the band-gap considerably (Fig. 6 above). In addition, the side groups are soluble in solvents such as acetone, thereby greatly increasing the flexibility to coat substrates using standard solution-deposition procedures. Hence the funtionalization of pentacene has led to a number of advances in the development of photovoltaics,132 OFETS and OLEDS,133 and logic devices134 (see Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  Functionalized pentacene NOR gate. (a) TIPS–pentacene molecule. (b) Thin film morphology and FET structure. (c) Example of Voutvs. input signals at A and B for d) the NOR gate (Reproduced with permission from ref. 134, © 2006 American Institute of Physics). 
b Magnetic π–d electron materials
Although antiferromagnetic and even ferromagnetic-like ground states can appear in purely π-electron compounds due to band instabilities or Mott mechanisms, another method of introducing magnetism is through the inorganic anion135 (see Fig. 29). A very successful example of this is λ-(BETS)2FeCl4 where the Fe3+ d-electron is in the high spin 5/2.136 The result is a marvelous interplay of the itinerant π conduction electrons in the donor stacks with the localized d-electron moments in the anion stacks that produces a dramatic antiferromagnetic insulating state below 8 K, and which can be reverted to a field induced superconducting state above 20 T below 4 K.137 However, of all of the “π–d” materials synthesized to date, λ-(BETS)2FeCl4 has the strongest coupling between the two electron systems, whereas in other similar compounds, the effects of the d-electron moments on the transport properties and the non-magnetic ground states can be very small.138
 Fig. 29  Magnetic and pressure dependent properties of π–d electron systems. Upper panel: (a) global phase diagram of λ-(BETS)2FexGax−1Cl4 showing dependence of antiferromagnetic and field induced superconducting phases on Fe (d-electron) concentration; (b) characteristic field induced superconducting behavior in the resistance of magnetic λ-(BETS)2FeCl4 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 137, © 2006 IPAP); (c) characteristic critical field and quantum oscillation behavior in non-magnetic λ-(BETS)2GaCl4 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 139, © 2001 IOP Science). Lower panel: (d) pressure dependent phases of β-(BDA-TTP)2MCl4 (M = Fe, Ga); (e) comparison of the magnetoresistance in the magnetic (M = Fe) and non-magnetic (M = Ga) compounds vs. angle in the superconducting phase (Reproduced with permission from ref. 138, © 2004 American Institute of Physics). 
The direction of interest in the progress of this area will be to better understand how to synthesize new materials with strong π–d interactions, add to control the magnetic properties through electric field, current, pressure, light, etc.
c Ferroelectric/multiferroic materials and hybrids
In “hybrid” organic–inorganic compounds140 the crystal structure consists of both organic and inorganic structures. For instance dielectric studies141 have shown antiferroelectric ordering at 170 K in [(CH3)2NH2]Zn(HCOO)3. This material is an “inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite” structure as shown in Fig. 30a and b. The electric dipole behavior arises from ordering of the dimethylamine (DMA) cation NH2(CH2)2+ in the center “cage” of the unit cell at low temperature. For Zn2+ there is no magnetism, but for Mn, Co, and Ni weak ferromagnetic order occurs at 8.5, 14.9, and 35.6 K respectively,142 as shown in Fig. 30c and d for Mn. However no dielectric studies have been performed on the magnetic systems, even though the DMA cation should have ferroelectric correlations, which may be influenced by the presence of d-electron moments. In addition, there are other transition metal ion compounds (Cr, etc.) that may have different magnetic transition temperatures, and this area promises to be a fruitful area of investigation in the future.
 Fig. 30  Hybrid structures. (a) Crystal structure of [(CH3)2NH2]Zn(HCOO)3 The structure is that of an ABX perovskite where A = (CH3)2NH2+, B = Zn2+, and X = HCOO−. (b) Dielectric measurements showing antiferroelectric order near 160 K (Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, © 2008 American Chemical Society). (c) Crystal structure of Mn(CHOO)3[NH2(CH3)2] (protons not shown; Mn can be replaced by Co or Ni). (d) Temperature dependent susceptibility showing magnetic order at 8.5 K (Reproduced with permission from ref. 142, © 2004 American Chemical Society). 
12. Bio-inspired materials and crystal engineering
As mentioned above for ferroelectrics, hydrogen bonding is a promising route for increasing the possible functions of organic materials.143 In light of this, there has been a lot of recent activity in using bio-related molecular structures with hydrogen bonding sites in conjunction with either donor or acceptor molecules (such as TTF or TCNQ) to form new types of charge transfer complexes.
By adding hydrogen bonding to a molecular crystal structure, the degree of charge transfer, staking motif, π-overlap, and magnetic interactions can be tuned, an approach sometimes called bio-inspired crystal engineering.144 An example of a modified donor is the compound (TTF-uracil)-I3 shown in Fig. 31 where the donor TTF has been modified by adding a uracil molecule.145 In the charge transfer complex using I3 as the anion, the uracil, through its double hydrogen bonds (N–H⋯O), connects the TTF pairs producing a “π-dimer” structure which also includes S⋯S and S⋯I contacts. The material is, however an insulator (10−8 S cm−1).
 Fig. 31  (a) Structure of TTF-uracil and position of double hydrogen bonds through N–H⋯O links. (b) Crystal structure of the charge transfer complex (TTF-uracil)-I3 showing the TTF-uracil dimer. (c) HOMO distribution on the TTF-uracil molecule showing that the HOMO is concentrated on the TTF moiety. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 145, © 2005 Chemical Society of Japan). 
In the example above, TTF-uracil acts as a single component in the crystal structure. Another way to combine bio-molecules is to use them as either donors or acceptors in charge transfer complexes. For instance, Suzuki et al. has used a donor molecule related to bioluminescence, PhIP (2-phenylimidazo[1,2-a]pyrazin-3(7H)-one) to produce the PhIP-TCNQ charge transfer structure144 shown in Fig. 32.
 Fig. 32  (a) Crystal structure of the charge transfer complex PhIP–TCNQ. (b) The bio-molecule PhIP (donor). (c) Non-segregated stacking of D–A chains. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, © 2006 Chemical Society of Japan.) 
Unlike the ∼60% charge transfer in TTF–TCNQ, the charge transfer in PhIP–TCNQ is 16%, where it is noted that the non-segregated stacking (Fig. 32c) leads to an insulator. Nishimura et al. have used cytosine as the donor with TCNQ.146,147 This synthetic direction has also provided some new aspects of charge transfer complexes: in addition to cytosine acting as an electron donor molecule, it also promotes considerable hydrogen bonding and keeps the TCNQ stacks from dimerizing at low temperatures. Similar compounds have also been obtained using guanine,148 illustrating the diversity of this approach.
Magnetism has been addressed with cytosine substituted into a nitronylnitroxide radical (types A and B).149 When crystallized, hydrogen bonds form between the cytosine moieties, and segregated A and B stacks are formed, as shown in Fig. 33. The paramagnetic susceptibility indicates the presence of antiferromagnetic correlations associated with intermolecular contacts of the O2 sites on the nitronylnitroxide radical. This work suggests new routes towards bio-inspired magnetic materials using nucleobase moieties.
 Fig. 33  (a) Cytosine-phenylnitronylnitroxide crystal structure. (b) Paramagnetic susceptibility indicating spin ½ molecular antiferromagnetism (Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, © 2004 American Chemical Society). 
One final example, although not a single crystalline material, indicates that bio-molecules may advance organic photonic devices as well. An aqueous solution of the horse-heart protein cytochrome c has been spin cast to produce a “BIODE” bio-molecule light emitting diode (Fig. 34) using a simple ITO/cytrochrome c/Al structure.150
 Fig. 34  Biomolecular light emitting diode (BIODE). (a) Structure of cytochrome c: iron porphorin (heme) ring axially coordinated with histidne (His) and methionine (Met) groups. (b) Electronic structure of BIODE device indicating the main optical transitions between the cytochrome c molecular levels. (c) Image of light emission through the ITO electrode. (d) EL spectrum of thin film prepared from an aqueous solution (Reproduced with permission from ref. 150, © 2005 Chemical Society of Japan). 
The external quantum efficiency (light power/current) was about 10−7 W A−1, and the light emitting area became wider with continued current cycles. The EL spectrum was sensitive to the pH of the starting cytochrome material, where at pH = 7 the best performance was observed. An unexpected result was the observation of three optical bands of comparable intensity at 400, 500, and 690 nm not normally detected in PL or absorption. Hence the unique electronic structure of the electrodes and the bio-molecule give rise to optical transitions not normally observed.
13 Conclusions: ebonite to BIODES⋯and beyond?
In this review early explorations of conducting organic materials up to the use of bio-materials in electroluminescent devices have been discussed. Along the way, there have been a number of “home runs” including the doping of conjugated small molecule and polymer materials that has led to modern “plastic electronics”, the development of charge transfer salts that has led to decades of beautiful low dimensional physical phenomena, materials functionalization to produce processable and magnetic materials, and new synthetic routes to manipulate crystal structure, dielectric properties, and to increase the occurrence of controllable phase change phenomena into practical ranges of temperature.
However, in many cases to date, the properties of “small molecule” single component or charge transfer organic single crystal compounds are very far from practical application, although there are literally hundreds (each) of organic metals, superconductors, semiconductors, Mott-type insulators, density wave systems, π–d type materials, and antiferromagnetic materials that have been synthesized. The advantages of these materials is the variety of physical properties, their high quality single crystalline form, and, in the case of charge transfer salts, their usually long time stability under ambient conditions of temperature and humidity. Charge transfer complexes introduce additional complications in attempts at epitaxial growth due to the need to control both the donor and acceptor. Indeed, their strong tendency for self assembly which produces high quality bulk single crystals may also work against the epitaxial growth process. Although there remains a wealth of fundamental physical and synthetic science to be exploited from these systems, until their superior properties can be manipulated at room temperature in true epitaxial thin film configurations, progress towards real applications in this field has reached a plateau, and it is going to take some radical innovations to go to the next stage.
However, sometimes important advances occur in smaller steps, and polycrystallinity has provided one bridge from bulk single crystal to thin film structures. For instance, local crystallinity may be established at critical points in the structure (such as a channel interface or at the electrodes of an OFET).151 Likewise, the development of the bi-layer polycrystalline β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3—polycarbonate film sensors120 is an effective example of coping with the difficulties of growing otherwise epitaxial charge transfer complexes, and further, exploiting the room temperature properties of the strain dependent conductivity for real applications. Recent work on interface,111 micro- and nano-scale126,152 structures are also important examples on how progress can be made in overcoming seemingly difficult materials issues.
Fukuyama has recently considered the prospects for crystal engineering, moving in the direction of more complex materials that involve the interface of the charge transfer complexes and biological molecules.23 Several important points are made in his review that are worth revisiting here. First, the success of the EHTB model to describe the electronic structure of “small molecule” organic crystals suggests an excellent starting point to address at least small components of much larger bio-molecular structures. This is a new frontier since only a few small biomolecules are understood.36 Second, there is much work to do to understand the role of functional groups and metallic ions in organic compounds, porphyrins, proteins, etc. Similarly, there are many fundamental problems (and surprises) with present materials, such as the difficulty in predicting and synthesizing new compounds with very strong π–d interactions, and the fundamental differences between EL-device spectra and PL and absorption solution spectra in and the BIODE structures.
A challenge is to use the powerful theoretical and experimental tools and understanding of small molecule materials, developed for single component and charge transfer compounds for well over 30 years, to approach new types of materials such as hybrid, small bio-molecular, and metallic ion containing systems. The latter is important since purely organic molecules have small spin–orbit coupling, which can be increased with the addition of transition metal ions, thereby expanding versatility in the mixing of single and triplet states in electro-optical devices.153 Likewise, metallic ions can add more gas molecule storage and transport functionality as in Heme-related structures.154 In this effort, it may be that hydrogen bonding and/or other new ways to configure molecular crystalline structures may play important roles.143
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to acknowledge NSF-DMR 0602859, 0203532, and 9971474 during which periods some of the work reported here was carried out, and to thank Dr John Schlueter for helpful discussions concerning the manuscript. The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory is supported by NSF DMR-0654118, by the State of Florida, and the DOE.
References
D. J. Gundlach, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 173–174 CrossRef CAS .
H. Klauk, U. Zschieschang, J. Pflaum and M. Halik, Nature, 2007, 445, 745–748 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 RSC .

          T. Ishiguro, K. Yamaji and G. Saito, Organic Superconductors II, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
T. Seyller, A. Bostwick, K. V. Emtsev, K. Horn, L. Ley, J. L. McChesney, T. Ohta, J. D. Riley, E. Rotenberg and F. Speck, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 1436–1446 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 1137201–1137202 .
H. Akamatu, H. Inokuchi and Y. Matsunaga, Nature, 1954, 173, 168–169 .
C. K. Chiang, C. R. Fincher, Y. W. Park, A. J. Heeger, H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, S. C. Gau and A. G. MacDiarmid, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1978, 40, 1472 CrossRef .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .
J. Ferraris, D. O. Cowan, V. Walatka and J. H. Perlstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 948–949 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Cohen, L. B. Coleman, A. F. Garito and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1974, 10, 1298–1307 CAS .
K. Bechgaard, C. S. Jacobsen, K. Mortensen, H. J. Pedersen and N. Thorup, Solid State Commun., 1980, 33, 1119–1125 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jerome, A. Mazaud, M. Ribault and K. Bechgaard, J. Phys., Lett., 1980, 41, L95–98 .
K. Bechgaard, K. Carneiro, M. Olsen, F. B. Rasmussen and C. S. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 46, 852–855 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bechgaard, K. Carneiro, F. G. Rasmussen, K. Olsen, G. Rindorf, C. S. Jacobsen, H. J. Pedersen and J. E. Scott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 2440–2442 CrossRef CAS .
G. Saito, T. Enoki, K. Toriumi and H. Inokuchi, Solid State Commun., 1982, 42, 557–560 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. P. Parkin, E. M. Engler, R. R. Schumaker, R. Lagier, V. Y. Lee, J. C. Scott and R. L. Greene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 50, 270–273 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Yagubskii, I. F. Shchegolev, V. N. Laukhin, P. A. Kononovich, M. V. Kartsovnik, A. V. Zvarykina and L. I. Buravov, JETP Lett., 1984, 39, 12 CAS .
M. V. Kartsovnik, V. N. Laukhin, V. I. Nizhankovskii and A. A. lgnat’ev, JETP Lett., 1988, 47, 363 .

The Physics of Organic Superconductors and Conductors, ed. A. Lebed, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2008 Search PubMed .
H. Fukuyama, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 75, 051001–051007 CrossRef .

          J. Wosnitza, Fermi Surfaces of Low Dimensional Organic Metals and Superconductors, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1996 Search PubMed .

          J. M. Williams, J. R. Ferraro, R. J. Thorn, K. D. Carlson, U. Geiser, H. H. Wang, A. M. Kini and M. W. Whangbo, Organic Superconductors (including Fullerenes), Prentice-Hall, Englewoods Cliffs, New Jersey, 1st edn,  1992 Search PubMed .
D. Jérome, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 5565–5592 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jerome and H. J. Schulz, Adv. Phys., 2002, 51, 293–479 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Williams, H. H. Wang, M. A. Beno, T. J. Emge, L. M. Sowa, P. T. Copps, F. Behroozi, L. N. Hall, K. D. Carlson and G. W. Crabtree, Inorg. Chem., 1984, 23, 3839–3841 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kuroda, K. Yakushi, H. Tajima, A. Ugawa, M. Tamura, Y. Okawa, A. Kobayashi, R. Kato, H. Kobayashi and G. Saito, Synth. Met., 1988, 27, A491–A498 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kartsovnik and V. N. Laukhin, J. Phys. I, 1996, 6, 1753–1786 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Heeger, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2001, 73, 681 CrossRef CAS .

          J. N. Murrell, S. F. A. Kettle and J. M. Tedder, The Chemical Bond, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2nd edn,  1985 Search PubMed .
Y. W. Park, E. S. Choi and D. S. Suh, Synth. Met., 1998, 96, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Berlinsky, J. F. Carolan and L. Weiler, Solid State Commun., 1974, 15, 795–801 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Grant, Journal de Physique C3, 1983, 44, 847–857 Search PubMed .

          J. Fraxedas, Molecular Organic Materials, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. Klauk, D. J. Gundlach, J. A. Nichols and T. N. Jackson, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 1999, 46, 1258–1263 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Haddon, X. Chi, M. E. Itkis, J. E. Anthony, D. L. Eaton, T. Siegrist, C. C. Mattheus and T. T. M. Palstra, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8288–8292 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Anthony, J. S. Brooks, D. L. Eaton and S. R. Parkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9482–9483 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tanaka, Y. Okano, H. Kobayashi, W. Suzuki and A. Kobayashi, Science, 2001, 291, 285–287 CrossRef CAS .
A. Troisi and G. Orlandi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1849–1856 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rovira, J. J. Novoa, J.-L. Mozos, P. Ordejón and E. Canadell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 081104–081104 CrossRef .
H. Tanaka, M. Tokumoto, S. Ishibashi, D. Graf, E. S. Choi, J. S. Brooks, S. Yasuzuka, Y. Okano, H. Kobayashi and A. Kobayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10518–10519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shitzkovsky, M. Weger and H. Gutfreund, J. de Physique IV, 1978, 39, 711–717 Search PubMed .
G. Saito and J. P. Ferraris, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1980, 53, 2141–2145 CAS .
H. M. McConnell, B. M. Hoffman and R. M. Metzger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1965, 53, 46–50 CAS .
G. Saito and Y. Yoshida, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80, 1–137 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Garito and A. J. Heeger, Acc. Chem. Res., 1974, 7, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sing, R. Claessen, T. Finteis, S. Hao, S. Hüfner and P. Blaha, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2001, 114–116, 717–721 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mori, S. Tanaka, M. Oshima, G. Saito, T. Mori, Y. Maruyama and H. Inokuchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1990, 63, 2183–2190 CAS .
T. Mori, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4947–4969 CrossRef CAS .
H. Seo, C. Hotta and H. Fukuyama, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 5005–5036 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Ganin, Y. Takabayashi, Y. Z. Khimyak, S. Margadonna, A. Tamai, M. J. Rosseinsky and K. Prassides, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 367–371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takabayashi, A. Y. Ganin, P. Jeglic, D. Arcon, T. Takano, Y. Iwasa, Y. Ohishi, M. Takata, N. Takeshita, K. Prassides and M. J. Rosseinsky, Science, 2009, 323, 1585–1590 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jobiliong, H. D. Zhou, J. A. Janik, Y.-J. Jo, L. Balicas, J. S. Brooks and C. R. Wiebe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 052511 CrossRef .
J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1296–1323 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Gershenson, V. Podzorov and A. F. Morpurgo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2006, 78, 973–917 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ahn, A. Bhattacharya, M. Di Ventra, J. N. Eckstein, C. D. Frisbie, M. E. Gershenson, A. M. Goldman, I. H. Inoue, J. Mannhart, A. J. Millis, A. F. Morpurgo, D. Natelson and J.-M. Triscone, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2006, 78, 1185–1128 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  1981 Search PubMed .
T. Hasegawa and J. Takeya, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2009, 10, 024314–024316 CrossRef .
J. Takeya, M. Yamagishi, Y. Tominari, R. Hirahara, Y. Nakazawa, T. Nishikawa, T. Kawase, T. Shimoda and S. Ogawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 102120–102123 CrossRef .
J. Takeya, C. Goldmann, S. Haas, K. P. Pernstich, B. Ketterer and B. Batlogg, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 5800–5804 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, V. Podzorov, N. Sai, M. C. Martin, M. E. Gershenson, M. Di Ventra and D. N. Basov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 016403–016404 CrossRef CAS .
A. Troisi and G. Orlandi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 086601–086604 CrossRef .
G. Horowitz and M. E. Hajlaoui, Synth. Met., 2001, 122, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .

          J. S. Brooks, in Handbook of High Temperature Superconductivity, ed. J. R. Schrieffer and J. S. Brooks, Springer, New York, Editon edn,  2007, pp. 463–490 Search PubMed .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Xie, J. Feng, J. S. Huang, S. Y. Liu, Y. Wang and J. C. Shen, Synth. Met., 2000, 108, 81–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zaumseil, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Kamtekar, C. Wang, S. Bettington, A. S. Batsanov, I. F. Perepichka, M. R. Bryce, J. H. Ahn, M. Rabinal and M. C. Petty, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3823–3835 RSC .
S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu, Y. Yomogida, H. Shimotani, T. Yamao, S. Hotta and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1728–1735 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takahashi, T. Takenobu, J. Takeya and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1623–1628 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takenobu, S. Z. Bisri, T. Takahashi, M. Yahiro, C. Adachi and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 066601–066604 CrossRef .
J. S. Swensen, C. Soci and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 253511–253513 CrossRef .
I. D. W. Samuel and G. A. Turnbull, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1272–1295 CrossRef CAS .
M. Segal, M. A. Baldo, R. J. Holmes, S. R. Forrest and Z. G. Soos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 075211–075214 CrossRef .
Konica-Minolta, http://www.konicaminolta.com/about/research/oled/advanced/vol01.html.
K. T. Kamtekar, A. P. Monkman and M. R. Bryce, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 572–582 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. D’Andrade and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1585–1595 CrossRef .
K. Walzer, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1233–1271 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pandey and J.-M. Nunzi, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3613–3617 CrossRef CAS .
P. Heremans, D. Cheyns and B. P. Rand, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1740–1747 CrossRef CAS .
I. Konarka Technologies, http://www.konarka.com/.

          G. Grüner, Density Waves in Solids, Addison-Wesley, Reading,  1994 Search PubMed .
G. Grüner, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1988, 60, 1129 CrossRef .
G. Grüner, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1994, 66, 1 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. S. Javadi, S. Sridhar, G. Grüner, L. Chiang and F. Wudl, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 1216–1214 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Wong, M. E. Hanson, W. G. Clark, B. Alavi and G. Grüner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 72, 2640–2643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tomic, J. R. Cooper, D. Jérome and K. Bechgaard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1989, 62, 462–464 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Lacoe, H. J. Schulz, D. Jérome, K. Bechgaard and I. Johannsen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tomic, F. Fontaine and D. Jérome, Phys. Rev. B J1-PRB, 1988, 37, 8468–8470 Search PubMed .
E. B. Lopes, M. J. Matos, R. T. Henriques, M. Almeida and J. Dumas, Synth. Met., 1995, 70, 1267–1270 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Wong, M. E. Hanson, B. Alavi, W. G. Clark and W. A. Hines, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 1882–1884 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mori, T. Ozawa, Y. Bando, T. Kawamoto, S. Niizeki, H. Mori and I. Terasaki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115108 CrossRef .
E. B. Lopes, M. J. Matos, R. T. Henriques, M. Almeida and J. Dumas, Europhys. Lett., 1994, 27, 241–246 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Kaneko and M. Ogata, arXiv:cond-mat/0510464v2 [cond-mat.str-el],  2005, pp. 1–7.
M. Chollet, L. Guerin, N. Uchida, S. Fukaya, H. Shimoda, T. Ishikawa, K. Matsuda, T. Hasegawa, A. Ota, H. Yamochi, G. Saito, R. Tazaki, S.-i. Adachi and S.-y. Koshihara, Science, 2005, 307, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ota, H. Yamochi and G. Saito, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2600–2602 RSC .
M. Mikami, M. Konno and Y. Saito, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1980, 36, 275–287 CrossRef .
T. Tayagaki and K. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 2886 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dupouy, M. Marchivie, S. Triki, J. Sala-Pala, C. J. Gomez-Garcia, S. Pillet, C. Lecomte and J.-F. Letard, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3404–3406 RSC .
M. Cavallini, I. Bergenti, S. Milita, G. Ruani, I. Salitros, Z.-R. Qu, R. Chandrasekar and M. Ruben, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8596–8600 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boca, F. Renz, M. Boca, H. Fuess, W. Haase, G. Kickelbick, W. Linert and M. Vrbová-Schikora, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2005, 8, 227–230 CrossRef CAS .
I. Boldog, A. B. Gaspar, V. Martínez, P. Pardo-Ibañez, V. Ksenofontov, A. Bhattacharjee, G. Philipp and J. A. Real, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6433–6437 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nad, P. Monceau and H. M. Yamamoto, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, L509–L514 CrossRef CAS .
S. Horiuchi and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 357–366 CrossRef CAS .
S. Horiuchi, Y. Tokunaga, G. Giovannetti, S. Picozzi, H. Itoh, R. Shimano, R. Kumai and Y. Tokura, Nature, 2010, 463, 789–792 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koma, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 1995, 30, 129–152 CrossRef CAS .
N. Stingelin-Stutzmann, E. Smits, H. Wondergem, C. Tanase, P. Blom, P. Smith and D. de Leeuw, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 601–606 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sitter, A. Andreev, G. Matt and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 2003, 138, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alves, A. S. Molinari, H. Xie and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 574–580 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kirtley and J. Mannhart, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 520–521 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ohtomo and H. Y. Hwang, Nature, 2004, 427, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gariglio, N. Reyren, A. D. Caviglia and J. M. Triscone, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 164213–164213 CrossRef .
J. Fraxedas, S. Molas, A. Figueras, I. Jiménez, R. Gago, P. Auban-Senzier and M. Goffman, J. Solid State Chem., 2002, 168, 384–389 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nichogi, A. Taomoto, T. Nambu and M. Murakami, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 254, 240–245 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Bryce and M. C. Petty, Nature, 1995, 374, 771–776 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Miyanaga, United States Patent 5,284,779,  1994, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
H. Wada, D. de Caro, L. Valade, T. Ozawa, Y. Bando and T. Mori, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 518, 299–304 CrossRef CAS .
E. Laukhina, R. Pfattner, L. R. Ferreras, S. Galli, M. Mas-Torrent, N. Masciocchi, V. Laukhin, C. Rovira and J. Veciana, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1–5 .
E. Laukhina, V. Tkacheva, R. Shibaeva, S. Khasanov, C. Rovira, J. Veciana, J. Vidal-Gancedo, A. Tracz, J. K. Jeszka, A. Sroczynska, R. Wojciechowski, J. Ulanski and V. Laukhin, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 1785–1786 CrossRef CAS .
E. Laukhina, V. Tkacheva, I. Chuev, E. Yagubskii, J. Vidal-Gancedo, M. Mas-Torrent, C. Rovira, J. Veciana, S. Khasanov, R. Wojciechowski and J. Ulanski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11089–11097 CrossRef CAS .
E. Laukhina, V. Tkacheva, S. Khasanov, L. Zorina, J. Gómez-Segura, A. P. d. Pino, J. Veciana, V. Laukhin and C. Rovira, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 920–923 CrossRef CAS .
E. Laukhina, V. Laukhin, M. Mas-Torrent, C. M. Creely, D. V. Petrov, J. Veciana and C. Rovira, Transducers '07, Int. Conf. Solid-State Sens., Actuators Microsyst., 2007, 2247–2249 Search PubMed .
C. Rovira, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 5289–5317 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. M. Ling, S. Liu, R. J. Tseng, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. Bao, Nature, 2006, 444, 913–917 CrossRef CAS .
K. Clark, A. Hassanien, S. Khan, K. F. Braun, H. Tanaka and S. W. Hla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Brooks, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 244–245 CrossRef CAS .
in Chemical Reviews, ed. P. Batail, American Chemical Society, Editon edn,  2004, vol. 104, pp. 4887–5782 Search PubMed .

Organic Electronics and Optoelectronics, ed. S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, D. L. Eaton and S. R. Parkin, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 15–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Lloyd, A. C. Mayer, A. S. Tayi, A. M. Bowen, T. G. Kasen, D. J. Herman, D. A. Mourey, J. E. Anthony and G. G. Malliaras, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Wolak, J. Delcamp, C. A. Landis, P. A. Lane, J. Anthony and Z. Kafafi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1943–1949 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Park, R. Vasic, J. S. Brooks and J. E. Anthony, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 044511–044516 CrossRef .
E. Coronado and P. Day, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 5419–5448 CrossRef .
H. Kobayashi, H. Tomita, T. Naito, A. Kobayashi, F. Sakai, T. Watanabe and P. Cassoux, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 368–377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uji and J. S. Brooks, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 75, 051014–051014 CrossRef .
E. S. Choi, D. Graf, J. S. Brooks, J. Yamada, H. Akutsu and M. Tokumoto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 024517–024518 CrossRef .
C. Mielke, J. Singleton, M.-S. Nam, N. Harrison, C. C. Agosta, B. Fravel and L. K. Montgomery, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2001, 13, 8325–8345 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Cheetham and C. N. R. Rao, Science, 2007, 318, 58–59 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jain, N. S. Dalal, B. H. Toby, H. W. Kroto and A. K. Cheetham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10450–10451 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Wang, L. Gan, S.-W. Zhang and S. Gao, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 4615–4625 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fourmigue and P. Batail, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 5379–5418 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suzuki, T. Fujii, T. Nogami, T. Hirano and T. Ishida, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 250–251 CrossRef CAS .
E. Miyazaki, Y. Morita, Y. Umemoto, K. Fukui and K. Nakasuji, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1326–1327 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nishimura, T. Murata, Y. Enomoto, G. Honda, S. Y. M. Sakata and G. Saito, Multifunctional Molecular Materials, 2005, 306, 49–54 Search PubMed .
T. Murata, Y. Enomoto and G. Saito, Solid State Sci., 2008, 10, 1364–1368 CrossRef CAS .
T. Murata, K. Nakamura, H. Yamochi and G. Saito, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 2375–2377 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shiomi, M. Nozaki, T. Ise, K. Sato and T. Takui, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16606–16608 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ikeda, H. Tajima, M. Matsuda, Y. Ando and H. Akiyama, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2005, 78, 1608–1611 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Gundlach, J. E. Royer, S. K. Park, S. Subramanian, O. D. Jurchescu, B. H. Hamadani, A. J. Moad, R. J. Kline, L. C. Teague, O. Kirillov, C. A. Richter, J. G. Kushmerick, L. J. Richter, S. R. Parkin, T. N. Jackson and J. E. Anthony, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
K. Clark, A. Hassenien, S. Khan, K.-F. Braun, H. Tanaka and S.-W. Hla, Nat. Mater., 2010, 5, 261–265 CAS .
M. A. Baldo, S. Lamansky, P. E. Burrows, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 4–6 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Harada, M. Taguchi, Y. Miyajima, T. Tokushima, Y. Horikawa, A. Chainani, Y. Shiro, Y. Senba, H. Ohashi, H. Fukuyama and S. Shin, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 2009, 78, 044802 (044801-044805) Search PubMed .

          J. Schlueter, private communication .

Footnotes† Part of the Conducting Polymers for Carbon Electronics themed issue.‡ In general, “electrically conducting” refers to a conductivity of order σ(RT) ∼ 1 S cm−1 or above at room temperature. However, in this range most materials are semiconductors, and the conductivity will show activated behaviour (i.e. σ(T) ∼ σ0e−Ea/kT) vs. temperature. For many organic charge transfer complexes σ(RT) ∼ 100 S cm−1 or more, and σ(T) increases monotonically with decreasing temperature, meaning “metallic”. The ultimate demonstration that a material is a “metal” is through the observation of the de Haas–van Alphen (or Shubnikov–de Haas) effect, which proves the existence of a Fermi surface.§ See for instance ref. 36 for a more advanced treatment.¶ It is intriguing to note that in conjugated systems like polyacetylene the π-bonding orbital symmetry is broken and the π-charge density localizes on every other carbon–carbon site, leading to alternating short (1.39 Å) and long (1.42 Å) carbon–carbon bonds. That is, this is a transformation to a charge density wave with an associated lattice distortion, i.e. a Peierls transition.|| The cut-off distance for carbon is 1.23, and for sulfur is 1.45, i.e. the π-electron wave function for sulfur is larger.42** There is a difference between charge transfer complexes and cation radical salts. TTF–TCNQ is a charge transfer complex with a non-stoichiometric charge transfer. Stoichiometric BEDT-type salts are not considered charge transfer complexes, but rather cation radical salts: the anion has a fixed charge and is not really accepting charge from the electron donor—it is just needed to compensate the charge.155This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

James S. Brooks
	Since 1994, James Brooks has been Professor of Physics at Florida State University and Director of the Condensed Matter Science/Experimental Program at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society, holds the Moulton Chair of Physics, and is a Florida State University Distinguished Research Professor. He obtained his BA from Univ. California, Berkeley, and his PhD from the University of Oregon. As professor of Physics at Boston University, he pioneered the use of dilution refrigerators in high field resistive magnets, creating new opportunities for high field studies to millikelvin temperatures, and has worked in superfluidity, heavy fermions, organic conductors and superconductors, and semiconductors.

 	Fig. 1  The apparatus used by Akamatu et al. for testing electrical conductivity in Br-doped perylene (Reproduced with permission from ref. 9, © 1987 American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 2  The first ambient pressure metallic organic conductor and superconductor, (TMTSF)2ClO4. Several samples exhibited a resistive drop below 1.3 K. The inset shows the linear “π” stacking of the TMTSF donor chain (open circles, Se) and the positions (including disorder) of the segregated ClO4 anion chain along the a-axis (Reproduced with permission from ref. 16, © 1981 American Physical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  Crystal structure of β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 (that of β-(BEDT-TTF)2IBr2 is isostructural28). (a) and (b) Planar “β” stacking of the BEDT-TTF donor molecules in the a–b plane, with the segregated linear I3 anion planes above and below. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, © 1988 Elsevier). (c) Closed orbit Fermi surface derived from band structure and experiment. (d) Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations in the magnetoresistance of β-(BEDT-TTF)2IBr2. (e) Angular dependent magnetoresistance oscillations observed by rotating a single crystal with respect to a constant magnetic field, which are used to determine Fermi surface topology in (c). Physically, these measurements taken together mean that carriers move predominately in the a–b planes of the Q2D donor stacks (but do have some bandwidth in the least conducting direction between the donor planes), and exhibit cyclotron orbits at low temperatures in the presence of a magnetic field.24 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, © 1996 EDP Sciences).	 

 	Fig. 4  Effects of s–p hybridization in organic small molecules and polymers. (a) Methane, (b) ethylene, (c) benzene, (d) polyacetylene, (e) pentacene, (f) BEDT-TTF and (g) polyethylene. All are conjugated except methane and polyethylene which are saturated. ((b,c) reproduced with permission from ref. 4, © 1998 Springer-Verlag and ref. 32, © 1985 Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 5  Evolution of bulk electronic structure in an organic semiconductor. Note that the conduction and valence bands do not necessarily directly correspond to the LUMO and HOMO orbitals. The valence and conduction bands in some cases may emerge only from incorporation of the HOMO orbitals in the tight binding band structure calculation as in the (TMTSF)2X salts35—Fig. 10a) On the right, energy levels relevant to molecular electronics are shown: ID and EA are the ionization and electron affinity energies from the valence and conduction band edges respectively. Carriers injected from electrodes produce electron and hole polarons (at energies Ep− and Ep+ separated by the “transport gap” ET) which can lose energy and become bound polaron (exciton) states with energy EOPT, which upon recombination can produce photons. Optical excitation can produce the opposite process. See also Fig. 11, 14, and 15 below. (A more complete description is given by Fraxedas.36)	 
Ψk (r) = Σiψ(r − ri)exp(ik·ri)
ε(k) = 2ta cos(kxa) + 2tb cos(kbb) + 2tc cos(kcc),

 	Fig. 6  Energy dispersion in single component organic crystals. (a) Herringbone structure of a pentacene polymorph showing the intermolecular carbon–carbon distances within 4 Å, and (b) band structure. (c) π-stacking arrangement in TIPS (pentacene with CC–Si(CH(CH3)2) side groups), and d) band structure for TIPS. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, © 2002 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Aspects of the single component molecular metal Ni[(tmdt)2]. (a), (b) Tight packing structure of the planar Ni[(tmdt)2] molecules. (c) Metallic behaviour of the resistivity (dR/dT > 0) and susceptibility χ (no magnetic order). (d), (e) Angular dependent de Haas–van Alphen oscillations from torque measurements at 0. 5 K showing unambiguous evidence for a three dimensional (3D) Fermi surface. (f) Complementary band structure calculations verifying the presence of both electron and hole 3D Fermi surfaces (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 and 43, © 2004 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) and (b) Crystal structure of TTF–TCNQ (Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, © EDP Sciences). (c) Dependence of neutral, partial charge transfer, and fully ionic properties of TTF–TCNQ related Donor–Acceptor compounds. For simplicity, of the 61 complexes studied, only DBTTF–TCNQ (neutral), TTF–TCNQ (partial CT), and TTF-F4TCNQ (ionic) are shown (Redrawn from ref. 45).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) π-orbital overlap in TCNQ stacks (Reproduced with permission from ref. 48). (b) Simplified dual and structure of TTF–TCNQ (Reproduced with permission from ref. 26, © American Chemical Society). (b) More complete LDA (local density approximation) band structure calculation (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49, © 2001 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) π-orbital overlap of the donor stacks in (TMTSF)2PF6 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 26, © 2004 American Chemistry Society). (b) Band structure and Fermi surface of (TMTSF)2AsF6 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, © 1983 EDP Sciences). (c), (d) donor and crystal structure of α-(BEDT-TTF)2KHg(SCN)4, band structure and Fermi surface of α-(BEDT-TTF)2KHg(SCN)4 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, © 1990 Chemical Society of Japan).	 

 	Fig. 11  Pressure-dependent antiferromagnetic insulating (AFI) and superconducting (SC) phases in Cs3C60. Squares, AFI transitions; circles, SC transitions; open symbols, co-existing AFI and SC transitions. Symbol colors represent different samples. Inset: A15 structure of Cs3C60. Small and large spheres are the Cs atoms and the C60 fullerenes respectively (Reproduced with permission from ref. 54, © 2010 AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 12  Generalized organic field effect transistor: physical and electronic structure. Electrons are injected into the channel conduction band from a low work function (ϕS) source electrode, and taken out of the channel valence band by a high work function (ϕD) drain electrode (equivalent to channel hole injection). In unipolar devices, generally with identical electrodes (ϕS = ϕD), drain-source current (IDS) current only flows for one gate bias (VG) polarity, but in ambipolar devices (with different electrodes where (ϕS ≠ ϕD), both gate polarities can produce IDS current. The dielectric (κ) can be an oxide or an organic insulator.	 

 	Fig. 13  Single crystal field effect transistor structure. (a) Lamination of rubrene crystal onto SAMS-treated FET structure. (b) Assembled OFET device (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62, © 2003 American Institute of Physics). (c) Characteristics of a 40 cm2 V−1 s−1 (just above threshold) single crystal rubrene FET (Reproduced with permission from ref. 61, © 2007 American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 14  The Tang–VanSlyke electroluminescent bilayer device. ID and EA are 5.39 and 1.87 eV for diamine (TPD) and 5.81 and 2.84 eV for Alq3 respectively.68 The cyclohexane ring in diamine (TPD) can have two forms, the stable (S) “chair” and the unstable (U) “boat” forms. (Upper figures reproduced with permission from ref. 67, © 1987 American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 15  Ambipolar electroluminescent device: Physical and electronic structure; gate dependence of current and light intensity; (a), (b), and (c) correspond to the dependence of the light emission region on gate voltage ((a): 88 V, (b): 93 V, (c): 98 V). Device legend: SY, “Super Yellow”, a phenyl-substituted poly-phenylenevinylene (PPV) commercially available from Merck; PPcB, polypropylene-co-1-butene (14 wt% 1-butene); SiNx, silicon nitride. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, © 2005 American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 16  Complementary photovoltaic/OLED Rubrene–C60 device. (a) Schematic of device structure with relevant work functions of conducting electrodes and LUMO–HOMO levels of rubrene and C60. (b) Photocurrent for different light power levels. (c) Electroluminescence spectrum for two different channel structures (Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, © 2007 Wiley VCH).	 

 	Fig. 17  Commercially available flexible organic “Power Plastic” solar cell manufactured by Konarka Technology, Inc. Individual organic device strips (a) with channels doped with dyes are connected in series (b) by attaching the transparent electrode of each cell to the primary electrode of the next cell via the substrate to produce the required voltage. (c) The external quantum efficiency (EQE) is relatively broad-band in the visible range (Redrawn after ref. 83).	 

 	Fig. 18  Depinning effects in SDW materials. (a) Frequency dependent conductivity in the spin density wave state of (TMTSF)2PF6 below TSDW ∼ 12 K. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, © 1985 American Physical Society). (b) NMR validation of SDW depinning at a critical current in (TMTSF)2PF6. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 93, © 1993 American Physical Society). (c) dc threshold electric field SDW depinning in (TMTSF)2NO3. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, © 1989 American Physical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  Narrow-band noise in the CDW linear conductor Perylene2[Au(mnt)2] (a) Resisitivity vs. temperature indicating the TCDW∼ 12 K transition (b) Current dependence of dc (dots) and rms ac (squares) sample voltages. Solid line: slope of ohmic behavior. (c) Fourier transform of the ac signal. Curves a and b are below the critical current (∼3 mA) and only show broad-band noise. For increasing current (curves c–f), the current dependent narrow-band noise appears. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 95, © 1994 EDP Sciences).	 

 	Fig. 20  Organic thyristor. (a) Crystal structure of θ-(BEDT-TTF)2CsZn(SCN)4 showing positions of BEDT-TTF molecules. (b) Circuit used to measure current and voltage for different bias conditions. (c) Time-dependent current oscillations in circuit biased in the non-linear regime. (d) “3fold” charge order pattern. (e) Current-induced XRD intensity changes due to the suppression of the charge ordering96 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 94, © 2009 American Physical Society).	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Low temperature charge-ordered insulator and high temperature metallic charge configurations in (EDO-TTF)2PF6. (B) Double-well free energy model for stability of insulating and metal phases and structure of EDO-TTF molecule (Reproduced with permission from ref. 97, © 2005 AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 22  Aspects of spin-crossover materials. (a) Low spin state structure of [Fe(2-pic)3]Cl2EtOH (Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, © 1980 IUCr.-). (b) Simplified [FeN6] structure and (c) microstrips of cis-bis(thiocyanato)bis(1,10-phenanthroline)FeII on silicon (Reproduced with permission from ref. 102, © 2008 Wiley InterScience). (d) Spin configurations in high and low spin states, optical absorption spectra, and (e) Raman spectra showing photo-induced differences in ligand field modes in low and high spin states of [Fe(2-pic)3]Cl2EtOH (Reproduced with permission from ref. 100, © 2001 American Physical Society). (f) Photo-induced changes in the magnetic susceptibility in the low spin state of [Fe(abpt)2(tcpd)] (tcpd2− = (C[C(CN)2]3)2−, abpt = 4-amino-3,5-bis(pyridin-2-yl)-1,2,4-triazole). Inset shows characteristic LIESST temperature dependence after photo excitation (Reproduced with permission from ref. 101, © 2009 RSC Publishing).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a), (b), (c) Alternating acid–base structure of Phz–H2xa, an organic ferroelectric. Electric polarization results from a shift of hydrogen in the N⋯H–O and O–H⋯N bonds. (d) Single crystals showing direction of polarization along the b axis. (e) P–E hysteresis curves (E//b) showing ferroelectric response up to room temperature (Reproduced with permission from ref. 106, © 2008 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Laminated TTF–Interface–TCNQ structure. A two dimensional electron gas (2DEG) with approximately 1014 carriers cm−2 forms at the interface. (b) Two and four terminal temperature dependent resistance of the 2DEG. The crossover resistance per square between metallic and insulating behavior occurs near the value of the resistance quantum h/e2 (Modified figure reproduced with permission from ref. 111, © 2008 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) High quality polycrystalline thin films of TTF–TCNQ on Si grown by thermal sublimation under different substrate and annealing conditions. (b) Temperature dependent resistivity of film # 3 (Tsubstrate = 325 K, Tanneal = 350 K) on a (100) KCl substrate indicating a change at the CDW transition temperature (Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, © 2002 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Bilayer β-(BET-TTF)2I3—polycarbonate flexible piezoresistive film. (b) Orientation of donor molecules is along the c-axis, which is the predominant orientation of the crystal axes in the film. Note: both BEDT-TTF and BET-TTF (bis(ethylenethio)tetrathiafulvalene), which differs by one less sulfur in the outer ring, which have similar charge transfer and stacking motifs,125 have been used in this work. (c) Prototype gas pressure sensor device. (d) Linear resistive response of device to pressure. (e) Response of device to human pulse (Reproduced with permission from ref. 120, © 2009 Wiley InterScience).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Flexible OFET array structure using a micro-single crystalline array. (b) Crystal morphology. (c) Typical drain–source I–V characteristics vs. gate voltage (Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, © 2006 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 28  Functionalized pentacene NOR gate. (a) TIPS–pentacene molecule. (b) Thin film morphology and FET structure. (c) Example of Voutvs. input signals at A and B for d) the NOR gate (Reproduced with permission from ref. 134, © 2006 American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 29  Magnetic and pressure dependent properties of π–d electron systems. Upper panel: (a) global phase diagram of λ-(BETS)2FexGax−1Cl4 showing dependence of antiferromagnetic and field induced superconducting phases on Fe (d-electron) concentration; (b) characteristic field induced superconducting behavior in the resistance of magnetic λ-(BETS)2FeCl4 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 137, © 2006 IPAP); (c) characteristic critical field and quantum oscillation behavior in non-magnetic λ-(BETS)2GaCl4 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 139, © 2001 IOP Science). Lower panel: (d) pressure dependent phases of β-(BDA-TTP)2MCl4 (M = Fe, Ga); (e) comparison of the magnetoresistance in the magnetic (M = Fe) and non-magnetic (M = Ga) compounds vs. angle in the superconducting phase (Reproduced with permission from ref. 138, © 2004 American Institute of Physics).	 

 	Fig. 30  Hybrid structures. (a) Crystal structure of [(CH3)2NH2]Zn(HCOO)3 The structure is that of an ABX perovskite where A = (CH3)2NH2+, B = Zn2+, and X = HCOO−. (b) Dielectric measurements showing antiferroelectric order near 160 K (Reproduced with permission from ref. 141, © 2008 American Chemical Society). (c) Crystal structure of Mn(CHOO)3[NH2(CH3)2] (protons not shown; Mn can be replaced by Co or Ni). (d) Temperature dependent susceptibility showing magnetic order at 8.5 K (Reproduced with permission from ref. 142, © 2004 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Structure of TTF-uracil and position of double hydrogen bonds through N–H⋯O links. (b) Crystal structure of the charge transfer complex (TTF-uracil)-I3 showing the TTF-uracil dimer. (c) HOMO distribution on the TTF-uracil molecule showing that the HOMO is concentrated on the TTF moiety. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 145, © 2005 Chemical Society of Japan).	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Crystal structure of the charge transfer complex PhIP–TCNQ. (b) The bio-molecule PhIP (donor). (c) Non-segregated stacking of D–A chains. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 144, © 2006 Chemical Society of Japan.)	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Cytosine-phenylnitronylnitroxide crystal structure. (b) Paramagnetic susceptibility indicating spin ½ molecular antiferromagnetism (Reproduced with permission from ref. 149, © 2004 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 34  Biomolecular light emitting diode (BIODE). (a) Structure of cytochrome c: iron porphorin (heme) ring axially coordinated with histidne (His) and methionine (Met) groups. (b) Electronic structure of BIODE device indicating the main optical transitions between the cytochrome c molecular levels. (c) Image of light emission through the ITO electrode. (d) EL spectrum of thin film prepared from an aqueous solution (Reproduced with permission from ref. 150, © 2005 Chemical Society of Japan).	 
Footnotes
† Part of the Conducting Polymers for Carbon Electronics themed issue.
‡ In general, “electrically conducting” refers to a conductivity of order σ(RT) ∼ 1 S cm−1 or above at room temperature. However, in this range most materials are semiconductors, and the conductivity will show activated behaviour (i.e. σ(T) ∼ σ0e−Ea/kT) vs. temperature. For many organic charge transfer complexes σ(RT) ∼ 100 S cm−1 or more, and σ(T) increases monotonically with decreasing temperature, meaning “metallic”. The ultimate demonstration that a material is a “metal” is through the observation of the de Haas–van Alphen (or Shubnikov–de Haas) effect, which proves the existence of a Fermi surface.
§ See for instance ref. 36 for a more advanced treatment.
¶ It is intriguing to note that in conjugated systems like polyacetylene the π-bonding orbital symmetry is broken and the π-charge density localizes on every other carbon–carbon site, leading to alternating short (1.39 Å) and long (1.42 Å) carbon–carbon bonds. That is, this is a transformation to a charge density wave with an associated lattice distortion, i.e. a Peierls transition.
|| The cut-off distance for carbon is 1.23, and for sulfur is 1.45, i.e. the π-electron wave function for sulfur is larger.42
** There is a difference between charge transfer complexes and cation radical salts. TTF–TCNQ is a charge transfer complex with a non-stoichiometric charge transfer. Stoichiometric BEDT-type salts are not considered charge transfer complexes, but rather cation radical salts: the anion has a fixed charge and is not really accepting charge from the electron donor—it is just needed to compensate the charge.155

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
