Indole frameworks via transition-metal-free annulation: a current perspective  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3NJ01488F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3NJ01488F
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 13729-13775Indole frameworks via transition-metal-free annulation: a current perspective

        
          
            Suven 
            Das
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry, Rishi Bankim Chandra College for Women, 24-Parganas (N), Pin-743165, Naihati, India. E-mail: suvenchem@yahoo.co.in
Received 
      30th March 2023
    , Accepted 19th June 2023First published on 20th June 2023AbstractIndole structural motifs are ubiquitous in natural products, pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and functional materials. The immense importance of the indole moiety, especially in the field of drug discovery, has fuelled continued attention in indole chemistry for over a century. In the recent past, a large number of metal-free methodologies have been developed apart from metal-catalyzed annulation processes. The present review focuses on recent (2019–mid-2023) efforts towards the construction of the indole core via transition-metal-free methods, which include acid-catalyzed, base-catalyzed, photochemical, electrochemical, iodonium-salt promoted, SOCl2/DMSO-mediated, uncatalyzed/thermally assisted and miscellaneous methods. The reactions described in this review mostly employed readily accessible starting materials, and inexpensive catalysts that are environmentally benign and easy to handle. In most cases, mechanistic aspects have also been highlighted for better understanding of the reaction pathways. Interestingly, some of the synthesized compounds mentioned in this review are potentially bioactive.
1. Introduction
Azaheterocycles have received considerable attention because of their ready accessibility, synthetic utility and prominent bioactivity.1–5 Among the variety of classes, indole ring systems are impressive due to their abundance in numerous natural products and pharmaceuticals (Fig. 1). For example, serotonin is a neurotransmitter containing an indole core and is found in all bilateral animals.6 Likewise, melatonin, a hormone found in both animals and plants, plays a vital role in the human body.7 Reserpine, an indole alkaloid, is used for the treatment of hypertension,8 whereas teleocidin B, a terpenoid indole alkaloid, is a strong protein kinase C-activator.9 Murrayanine, isolated from the Indian plant Murraya koenigii, exhibits potent anti-inflammatory activity,10 whereas racemosin B, obtained from the green alga Caulerpa racemose, displays anticancer activity.11 Clauraila A derived from the roots of Clausena harmandiana shows cytotoxic activity,12 while mitragynine, a mitragyna alkaloid, was found to act as an opioid receptor modulator.13 Similarly, carprofen,14 eudistomin C,15 and (+)-catharanthine16 are important naturally occurring compounds with significant medicinal applications. Recently, indole rings are employed as a template for target-based design of various anticancer agents.17,18
 Fig. 1  Naturally occurring bioactive compounds containing the indole moiety. 
In addition to their prominent biological profiles, indoles find ample applications in the field of materials sciences. Indole-fused heterocycles are used as blue phosphorescent OLEDs with high quantum efficiency.19 Hybrid indole architectures act as sensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cells.20–22 Fluorescent probes containing an indole core have been applied for the detection of selective ions or species.23–27 Recent research revealed that indole scaffolds could efficiently be employed as a new sustainable aromatic core to prepare top class biopolymers.28–30 Furthermore, functionalized indole moieties are capable of serving as useful building blocks for the synthesis of complex molecular architectures.31–36
The chemistry of indoles has been studied for more than 150 years; however, research toward synthesis of functionalized indoles is still in demand because of their enormous applications in diverse fields. Therefore, a variety of synthetic strategies have been adopted for constructing this heterocyclic system. The classical methods for synthesizing indole scaffolds are famous named reactions, which include Fischer,37 Bischler,38 Reissert,39 Madelung,40 Sandberg,41 Bartoli,42 Larock43 Nenitzescu,44 Fukuyama,45etc. Moreover, the indole skeleton could be prepared from diverse functionalized starting materials using various transition-metal catalysts. The recently published reviews mainly focussed on the transition-metal-catalyzed synthetic approaches towards the indole skeleton.46–56 In 2018, Cheng and Shao published an interesting review on organocatalytic asymmetric transformations involving the cyclic imine moiety in indole analogues.57 Immediately after, Neto and Zeni published a review article on metal-free synthesis of indoles from typical alkynes and a nitrogen source.58 The present review focuses on recent (2019–mid-2023) efforts towards the construction of the indole core based on transition-metal-free strategies, which include (1) acid-catalyzed, (2) base-catalyzed, (3) photochemical, (4) electrochemical, (5) iodonium-salt mediated, (6) SOCl2/DMSO-mediated, (7) uncatalyzed/thermally assisted and (8) miscellaneous methods.
2. Acid-catalyzed synthesis
Polyphosphoric acid (PPA)-mediated cascade cyclization of ortho-aminophenyl-4-oxobutanenitriles 1 to access 2-(1H-indol-2-yl)acetamides 2 was reported by Aksenov, Rubin and co-workers.59 The metal-free protocol was compatible with a broad range of substrates resulting in desired indolylamides 2 in moderate to good yields (38–88%). Various electron-donating or electron-withdrawing functionalities (Me, Et, NMe2, OMe, F, Cl, etc.) in the aromatic ring participated in the cyclization process. A plausible mechanism for the acid-catalyzed reaction is depicted in Scheme 1. In the presence of PPA the β-ketonitrile 1 was converted into phosphorylated enolate A, which after 5-exo-dig cyclization gave imino furan intermediate B. Afterwards, tautomerization (intermediate C) followed by dephosphorylation resulted in 2-aminofuran intermediate D. Subsequent protonation generated intermediate E and nucleophilic attack with the ortho-aniline moiety via 5-exo-trig mode led to furoindolium species F. Tautomer G then underwent C–O bond cleavage resulting in indolium ion intermediate H. Finally, deprotonation delivered 2-(1H-indol-2-yl)acetamides 2.
 Scheme 1  PPA-assisted cyclization of ortho-aminophenyl-4-oxobutanenitriles to afford substituted indoles. 
In 2022, Liu, Sun and co-workers devised an AcOH-catalyzed three component reaction of ortho-alkynyl aromatic amines 3 with arylaldehydes 4 for the synthesis of 3,3′-(arylmethylene)bis(1H-indoles) 5.60ortho-Alkynyl anilines bearing electron-rich and electron-deficient aromatic rings reacted with aromatic aldehydes 4 for annulation. However the reaction failed to provide the target indoles in the case of aliphatic aldehydes such as acetaldehyde and propionaldehyde and ketones. The cyclization/condensation strategy took place in a regioselective fashion where four new C–C and C–N bonds were generated in a one-pot. As for the mechanistic rationale (Scheme 2) initially acid-promoted intramolecular cyclization of ortho-alkynyl anilines 3 generated stable indole compound 6. In the meantime, aromatic aldehyde 4 was protonated to form intermediate A which suffered nucleophilic attack by indole 6 affording intermediate B. Concomitant proton transfer and dehydration led to the formation of intermediate C. Next, the nucleophilic attack of another indole molecule on intermediate C gave bisindole species D, which upon deprotonation yielded final product 5.
 Scheme 2  AcOH-catalyzed reaction of ortho-alkynyl anilines with arylaldehydes to access 3,3′-(arylmethylene)bis(1H-indoles). 
Gros et al. developed an efficient condensation–annulation strategy for the preparation of indole 9 and indolone 10 starting from 1,4-diketone 7 and amine 8. The reaction could be carried out under acidic conditions (3 mol% AcOH in toluene).61 The probable mechanism is presented in Scheme 3. At first, protonation of conjugated carbonyl group of 1,4-diketone 7 generated protonated species A which upon reaction with primary amine 8 resulted in imine B. Next, an intramolecular 1,2-addition to the Michael acceptor part of enamine C, followed by prototropy gave cyclic intermediate D. Dehydration led to intermediate E and subsequent aromatization by air oxidation afforded indole 9. For the indolone skeleton, formation of imine F (via the reaction between 1,4-diketone 7 and amine 8), imine–enamine equilibrium (F → G), followed by 1,4-addition to the Michael acceptor and prototropy resulted in enol intermediate H. Finally, keto–enol equilibrium (I) and aromatization afforded indolone 10.
 Scheme 3  AcOH-assisted annulation of 1,4-diketone and amine affording indole/indolone. 
The reaction of nitrosoarenes and aliphatic amines in the presence of 4-nitrobenzoic acid was investigated by Jana's group.62 When nitrosoarenes 11 were reacted with aliphatic amines, such as tetrahydroquinoline 12, the corresponding indole derivatives 13 were generated in 33–71% yields. Alkyl (Me, Et, nPr, iPr, tBu) and halogen (F, Cl, Br) substituted nitrosoarenes reacted smoothly to provide desired indoles 13. Interestingly, acyclic secondary amines, such as N-phenyl β-arylethylamines 14, yielded the corresponding indole derivatives 15 under similar reaction conditions (Scheme 4). Mechanistically it is conceivable that, the protonated nitrosoarene A suffered nucleophilic attack by amine 12 to form intermediate B. The acid-promoted dehydration of B produced azonium ion C. The isomerized product D then underwent deprotonation to afford ene-hydrazine intermediate E. [3,3]-Sigmatropic rearrangement resulted in aniline F. Lastly, intramolecular cyclization followed by elimination of the aminoaryl moiety delivered the desired product (G → 13).
 Scheme 4  4-NO2-PhCO2H mediated annulation of nitrosoarenes and amines to form indoles. 
Trofimov et al. uncovered a unique strategy for preparing richly decorated N-aminoindoles catalyzed by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, CF3CO2H).63 The acid-catalyzed reaction of arylhydrazines 17 with 6,8-dioxabicyclo[3,2,1]octanes (DOBCOs) 16 proceeded through a cascade ring opening/ring closure sequence (Scheme 5). The reaction was well tolerated for diverse DOBCOs with aromatic and aliphatic substituents in the bicyclic core. Likewise, arylhydrazines bearing Me, F, Cl, and NO2 substituents in the aromatic ring efficiently reacted with DOBCOs to form indole derivatives. Mechanistically it is conceivable that the initially acid-triggered rearrangement of DOBCO 16 took place to form acetyldihydropyran A.64 Condensation with arylhydrazine 17 would result in compound B, which was followed by addition of a water molecule to the enol double bond to form hemiacetal C. Subsequent pyran ring opening (to generate hydroxyl hydrazone D), protonation (E), and dehydration provided carbocation F/F′. The latter (F′) was transformed to indole 18via the attack by the imine on the ortho position of the benzene ring.
 Scheme 5  TFA-assisted reaction of DOBCO and arylhydrazine to form an indole ring. 
In 2023, a modular synthesis of densely functionalized indoles 20 from aryl substituted propargyl amines 19 was realized by Guo et al.65 The reaction was catalyzed by TFA and proceeded via amino-Claisen rearrangement leading to the formation of the corresponding annulated products in good yields (53–95%). The metal-free strategy could be performed at room temperature with a broad substrate scope. Notably, both terminal and internal alkynes responded to the annulation process. Substituted and unsubstituted amines (R2 = H, Me, Bn) smoothly delivered the desired indoles under ambient conditions (Scheme 6).
 Scheme 6  TFA-promoted amino-Claisen rearrangement of aryl substituted propargyl amines to obtain functionalized indoles. 
The reaction of α-arylaminocyclobutanones 21 with alcohols 22 was investigated by Frongia.66 The TsOH-catalyzed solvent-free process occurred via a ring closure–ring fusion cascade to afford N-alkyl-3-(2-alkoxyethyl)indoles 23. N-Alkyl-N-aryl-α-aminocyclobutanones 21 containing N-methyl, ethyl, hexyl, phenyl and benzyl substituents were smoothly converted to the corresponding indoles 23 in acceptable yields. In this reaction, triptamine derivative 24 was obtained as a minor product. A plausible mechanism for the formation of indole 23 is illustrated in Scheme 7. Under acidic conditions, the attack of alcohol 22 on the cyclobutanone moiety of 21 gave intermediate A, which after dehydration would generate oxonium ion B. The latter underwent ring closure leading to intermediate C. Finally, the acid-induced “depart-and-return” rearrangement process (via intermediate D) furnished final product 23.
 Scheme 7  TsOH-catalyzed reaction of α-arylaminocyclobutanones with alcohols resulting in N-alkylindoles. 
In 2021, Neochoritis, Dömling and co-workers disclosed a novel two-step one-pot protocol for the synthesis of 2-tetrazolo substituted indoles (Scheme 8).67 The first step comprised the Ugi-four component reaction (Ugi-4CR) of anilines 25, isocyanides 26, and glyoxal dimethyl acetal 27 in an aqueous solution of TMSN328 at room temperature to form Ugi-4CR derivatives 29. In the second step, the ring closure reaction of Ugi-adduct 29 was performed using MeSO3H (MsOH) at 70 °C. The desired indole derivatives 30 were precipitated from the reaction mixture in good yields. The reaction was applicable for multi-gram synthesis. It should be mentioned that the synthesized tetrazolo indoles 30 are biologically active with fluorescence property.
 Scheme 8  Two-step one-pot synthesis of tetrazolo-indoles via Ugi-4CR followed by acid-induced annulation. 
In the next year, the authors developed a similar type of Ugi-4CR method for indole-2-amide derivatives.68 The condensation of anilines 25, isocyanides 26, glyoxal dimethyl acetal 27 and formic acid 31 led to Ugi-adduct 32, which then underwent acid-assisted (MsOH) cyclization to form indole-2-amides 33. This transformation was mild, straightforward, economic and scalable, addressing many of the twelve principles of green chemistry. Interestingly, some of the synthesized compounds are biologically relevant, such as the SETD2 inhibitor and anti-tuberculosis agents (Scheme 9).
 Scheme 9  Two-step one-pot preparation of indole-2-amides via the Ugi-4CR method followed by acid-assisted annulation. 
In 2022, an interesting acid–base promoted regiospecific method for constructing 3-arylindole derivatives 36 from arylhydrazine 34 and 3-aryloxirane-2-carbonitriles 35 was devised by Xu et al.69 In this transformation, organic acid TsOH·H2O and organic base triethylamine (Et3N) play a crucial role in the Fischer indolization process (Scheme 10). Mechanistically, it is conceivable that in the presence of acid arylhydrazinium 34′ (produced from arylhydrazine 34) underwent nucleophilic ring opening via attack on the benzylic carbon atom of 35′. In the next step, 3-aryl-3(1-arylhydrazinyl)-2-hydroxypropanenitrile A experienced a reverse hydrocyanation to form 2-aryl-2(1-arylhydrazinyl)acetaldehyde B. The resulting HCN was neutralized by triethylammonium cyanide. Then 2-aryl-2(1-arylhydrazinyl)acetaldehyde B would undergo the Fischer indolization process with aryl hydrazines through the formation of arylhydrazones (C), tautomerization (D), and [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement (E). Subsequent aromatization (F), 5-exo-trig cyclization (G), and elimination of aryldiazine H, ammonia and triethylammonium afforded 3-arylindole 36.
 Scheme 10  TsOH-Et3N promoted synthesis of 3-arylindoles from arylhydrazine and 3-aryloxirane-2-carbonitriles. 
Mandal and Balamurugan employed triflic acid (TfOH) for cyclative transposition of vinylogous amides 37 to obtain 3-alkenylindoles 38.70 The use of HFIP solvent was the best choice for polarization of the substrates and stabilization of polar intermediates. TfOH was employed for the efficient cyclization process at room temperature. The products 3-alkenylindoles were obtained with an exclusive E geometry. This protocol successfully led to the formation of fluorescent indoles, naturally occurring indoles and indole-based drug compounds. The mechanistic rationale for the metal-free method is depicted in Scheme 11. The reaction started with acid-triggered cyclization to form iminium ion A, followed by nucleophilic attack of alkyne to produce vinyl triflate B. Subsequent retro-aza-Michael reaction resulted in ring opening to afford intermediate C. The rotamer D then underwent intramolecular aza-Michael addition on the dienone to give indole core E, which after elimination of the triflate ion yielded 3-alkenylindoles 38.
 Scheme 11  TfOH-promoted cyclative transposition of vinylogous amides leading to alkenylindoles. 
One-pot tandem consecutive Ugi-4CR followed by camphorsulfonic acid (CSA)-promoted annulation for constructing indole ring systems was reported by the Chen group.71 In the first step, the Ugi adduct 43 was accomplished via the reaction between 2′-aminoacetophenones 39, aldehydes 40, cyclohecaneisocyanide 41 and phenylpropiolic acids 42 under ambient conditions. Next, the Ugi adduct 43 was subjected to cyclization in the presence of CSA. This transformation was amenable to a wide range of substrates with electron donating and withdrawing substituents (38 examples). The mechanistic pathway for the formation of indole is shown in Scheme 12. The Brønsted acid CSA formed hydrogen bonding with Ugi adduct 43. Immediately after, the conjugate base of CSA abstracted the proton from intermediate A, therefore stabilizing the enol B. The five membered indoline ring C would be formed via the nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon. Finally, the indole scaffold 44 was obtained through elimination of cyclohexyl isocyanate.
 Scheme 12  Tandem Ugi-4CR followed by CSA-mediated annulation to form an indole core. 
Meanwhile, Mantellini et al. carried out metal and oxidant-free synthesis of functionalized indole derivatives using alternative Bischler-related synthesis.72 In the first step, aniline 25 and 1,2-diaza-1,3-dienes 45 were allowed to react under mild conditions to obtain α-N-arylaminohydrazone 46. The next step involved Brønsted acid (Amberlyst 15H)-assisted hydrolysis of hydrazone 46 to α-N-arylaminoketone 47, which was followed by cyclization employing Amberlyst 15H. Richly decorated indoles 48 were obtained in moderate to good yields (Scheme 13). Using this methodology various fused indole frameworks could be generated.
 Scheme 13  Amberlyst 15H-assisted synthesis of indoles from anilines and 1,2-diaza-1,3-dienes. 
Synthesis of coumarin tethered indole 52 was reported by Majee's group employing anilines 25 and arylglyoxals 49 in refluxing ethanol. Brønsted acidic ionic liquid (BAIL-1) efficiently catalyzed the reaction between 4-hydroxycoumarin 51 and in situ formed imine 50 to provide the coumarin-indole hybrid 52 in good yields.73 The catalyst (BAIL-1) could be easily recycled (5 times) without significant loss of catalytic activity. The plausible mechanism is illustrated in Scheme 14. Initially, aniline 25 and arylglyoxal 49 reacted to generate intermediate 50 which upon protonation afforded iminium ion 50′. The latter suffered nucleophilic attack by 4-hydroxycoumarin 51 to form intermediate A. Further protonation of benzoyl carbonyl (to give intermediate B) by the ionic liquid triggered the cyclization process leading to intermediate C. Dehydration yielded final indole product 52. The protocol was green with high atom economy and involved water as the only by-product. Moreover, some of the synthesized compounds exhibited inhibitory activity against the MCF-7 cell.
 Scheme 14  Ionic liquid-promoted synthesis of coumarin embedded indoles from aniline, arylglyoxal and 4-hydroxycoumarin. 
Formation of a variety of 2-aminoindoles 55 through [3+2] annulation of ynamide 54 with anthranils 53 was investigated by Wang and Chang.74 This methodology provided a flexible way to accomplish the desired indole scaffold employing Tf2NH or TMSOTf as an acidic promoter (Scheme 15). The anthranils bearing halogens (Cl, Br, F, etc.) and electron donating groups (OMe, acetal) in the aromatic ring efficiently furnished the corresponding indoles in excellent yields (up to 99%). A mechanistic study suggested that the reaction was triggered by electrophilic addition of ynamide 54 to form keteniminium ion A. The latter would be trapped by the imino nitrogen of anthranil 53 to generate intermediate B, which after ring fragmentation afforded carbocation C. Intramolecular nucleophilic attack led to annulated carbocationic species D, which in turn underwent deprotonation to provide intermediate E. Subsequent aromatization delivered indole product 55.
 Scheme 15  Tf2NH (or TMSOTf)-promoted annulation of ynamide with anthranils towards 2-aminoindoles. 
Indole ring systems could be constructed via a B(C6F5)3-mediated cycloaddition reaction of N-methyl-2-(phenylethynyl)anilines 56 with diphenylsilane (Ph2SiH2) 57 as reported by Yan et al.75 In this process, diphenylsilane served as an electrophilic silylation reagent. The reaction worked well for substrates with various alkyl groups and halogens in the aromatic ring of terminal alkynes 56. Even thienyl group bearing substrates reacted with diphenylsilane to offer the corresponding indoles. A tentative mechanism is highlighted in Scheme 16. The silane was activated by B(C6F5)3via a B–H interaction to form adduct A. The cationic Ph2SiH+ species generated in this way preferably attacked the triple bond of methyl-2-(phenylethynyl)anilines 56 to produce intermediate B with the formation of the C–N bond. Deprotonation yielded 3-silylindoles 58 along with regeneration of catalyst B(C6F5)3.
 Scheme 16  B(C6F5)3-catalyzed cycloaddition of N-methyl-2-(phenylethynyl)anilines with diphenylsilane to afford 3-silylindoles. 
During their research work Reddy's group synthesized fused indole scaffolds 61 by reacting 2,4-diyne-1-ols 59 with 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds 60 in the presence of BF3-etherate.76 The protocol involved acid-catalyzed propargylation reaction of 1,3-dicarbonyls followed by base mediated pyrrolynation in one-pot (Scheme 17). Mechanistically, it was conceivable that, under the BF3·Et2O condition the carbocation 59′ (generated from diyne-1-ol 59) underwent nucleophilic addition with diketone 60 (propargylation step) to generate intermediate A. The intermediate A (which was actually isolated) would react with amines (R2NH2) producing the corresponding imines B. The latter tautomerized to enamine form C. Finally, intramolecular cyclization afforded richly decorated indole scaffolds (D → 61) in the presence of DBU.
 Scheme 17  BF3·Et2O-mediated formation of functionalized indoles from 2,4-diyne-1-ols and 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds. 
3. Base-catalyzed synthesis
In 2020, Giri's group disclosed a novel K2CO3-catalyzed protocol to synthesize densely functionalized indole derivatives 63 from 1,3-diketones 60 and fumaronitrile 62.77 The reaction involved condensation of two molecules of fumaronitrile and one molecule of 1,3-diketone producing both benzene ring and pyrrole moiety in one step. Symmetric 1,3-diketones possessing linear and steric alkyl groups, viz. Me, Et, iBu, and tBu, smoothly delivered the expected product under ambient conditions. The mechanism was quite interesting (Scheme 18). Under basic conditions, the 1,3-diketone enolate 60′ underwent conjugate addition with fumaronitrile 62 to form carbanion A. Intramolecular cyclization generated cyclobutane intermediate B and cleavage of the four-membered ring (via retro aldol) produced 1,5-diketone enolate C. The latter underwent protonation/deprotonation leading to ene-ketenimine enolate D, which would attack a second molecule of fumaronitrile to afford carbanion E. Cyclization (F) followed by dehydration resulted in intermediate G. Tautomerization (H), base-mediated cyclization by NH2 (I), and dehydration furnished final product 63.
 Scheme 18  K2CO3-catalyzed synthesis of indoles from 1,3-diketones and fumaronitrile. 
Using potassium tert-butoxide (tBuOK) as the base and DMSO as an effective carbon source, Wang et al. synthesized 2-arylindoles 65 from readily accessible ortho-N-substituted aryl aldehydes 64.78 The cyclization reaction was effective for tertiary amine substrates bearing N-Et, N-Pr, N-Bu, and N-Bn substituents. This tert-butoxide-catalyzed reaction could be applied for gram-scale synthesis of target indoles. According to the mechanism (Scheme 19), initially the nucleophilic attack of DMSO on the aldehyde gave β-hydroxyl sulfoxide, which upon elimination of one molecule of water formed vinyl sulfoxide A (aldol condensation). Next, the Michael addition reaction occurred to generate cyclic intermediate B. Finally, elimination of sulfenic acid (CH3SOH) at high temperature followed by isomerisation yielded the indole compound (C → 65). Notably, DMSO played a dual role in this transformation, i.e., as a solvent as well as methyl surrogate.
 Scheme 19  

t
BuOK-promoted synthesis of 2-arylindoles exploiting ortho-N-substituted aryl aldehydes and DMSO. 
Employing tBuOK as a promoter, Qu, Kang and co-workers developed a unique approach for indole synthesis using radical coupling of 2-halotoluenes 66 and imines 67via late-stage C–N bond formation.79 Substituted indoles 68 could be obtained for all types of aryl halides (F, Cl, Br, and I). The transformation proceeded without any extra oxidizing agent or transition metal under ambient conditions. A plausible mechanism for the radical process is proposed in Scheme 20. The reaction was initiated by tBuOK-DMF-assisted formation of radical A from halotoluene 66 under mild heating (50 °C). Afterwards, addition of the radical to the imine gave iminyl radical B, the key intermediate for the cyclization process. Intramolecular radical addition led to intermediate C, which was followed by aromatization to produce intermediate D with regeneration of radical A. Finally, tBuOK-promoted elimination furnished indole derivatives (D → 68).
 Scheme 20  

t
BuOK-promoted synthesis of indole scaffolds via radical coupling of 2-halotoluenes and imines. 
In 2021, Cheong, Lee and co-workers unveiled a tBuOK-mediated modular indole synthesis via the reaction of 2-iodoanilines 69 and ketones 70.80 Bathophenanthrene (P) was applied as a promoter in DMSO medium at 60 °C for an effective radical process. Both electron-rich and electron-deficient acetophenones reacted efficiently with 2-iodoanilines bearing various alkyl and benzyl substituents. As for the mechanistic rationale (Scheme 21), the condensation of aniline 69 and ketone 70 in the presence of tBuOK formed enolate complex A. The latter would undergo 7-endo-trig intramolecular cyclization to form intermediate B (C–C bond formation step), which in turn produced amino ketone intermediate Cvia SET reaction. Condensation delivered indole derivative 71. The authors also successfully performed DFT studies to establish the mechanistic pathway for the formation of desired products. Importantly, this method could be applied to the concise synthesis of the non-steroidal selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) zindoxifene.
 Scheme 21  

t
BuOK-mediated indole synthesis employing 2-iodoanilines and ketones. 
The indole architecture could be constructed by reacting N-(ortho-chloromethyl)aryl amides 72 with appropriate acyl chlorides 73 and PPh374 in the presence of cesium hydroxide (CsOH).81 The concept comprised a tandem phospha-Michael addition followed by intramolecular Wittig reaction of in situ generated aza-o-quinone methides to access 2,3-disubstituted indoles 75 (up to 91%). A plausible mechanism for the cascade process is provided in Scheme 22. Firstly, the reaction of PPh3 with N-(ortho-chloromethyl)aryl amides 72 led to the phosphonium salt Bvia in situ generation of aza-o-quinone methide A. The phosphonium salt B then underwent an acylation with benzoyl chloride 73 to afford N-benzoyl intermediate C. Subsequent base-promoted deprotonation produced ylide D, which underwent intramolecular Wittig reaction to yield indole 75 along with the generation of triphenylphosphine oxide 76.
 Scheme 22  CsOH promoted synthesis of indoles from N-(ortho-chloromethyl)aryl amides, acyl chlorides and PPh3. 
Very recently, Ge et al. recommended a practical protocol for 6-nitroindole derivatives 79 starting from easily accessible enaminones 78 and nitroaromatic compounds 77.82 The transformation was promoted by Cs2CO3 in chlorobenzene solvent. A series of N-substituted-3-aminocyclohex-2-enones possessing electro-donating/withdrawing groups (Me, tBu, OMe, OEt, F, Cl, CF3, etc.) in the aromatic ring underwent successful coupling with various nitroaromatics. This regioselective reaction comprised formation of two new C–C and C–N bonds with a five membered ring. The tentative mechanism is provided in Scheme 23. Initially, base-promoted deprotonation of enaminone 78 occurred to generate anion 78′. The latter subsequently attacked the aromatic ring of 77 to furnish intermediate Bvia intermediate A (SNAr reaction). Anion C would be formed through the base-catalyzed deprotonation process. The nitro group of C then suffered intramolecular nucleophilic attack by the enamine nitrogen via another SNAr reaction to accomplish fused indole framework 79.
 Scheme 23  Cs2CO3-mediated synthesis of 6-nitroindoles from enaminones and nitroaromatics. 
An interesting base-promoted procedure for the synthesis of highly decorated 2,3-disubstituted indoles 82 from 2-(tosylamino)aryl-substituted para-quinone methides (p-QMs) 80 and bromomethyl aryl ketones 81 was developed by Anand's group.83 A combination of inorganic and organic bases (Cs2CO3-DBU) was employed to carry out this transformation. This one-pot cascade cyclization afforded direct access to a wide variety of 2,3-disubstituted indoles in good yields (56–95%) under ambient conditions. A plausible mechanism for the sequential reaction is provided in Scheme 24. At first, Cs2CO3-mediated N-alkylation generated intermediate A, which might undergo intramolecular cyclization to offer the dihydroindole derivative B. Afterwards, the tosyl group would be eliminated with the aid of organic base DBU to form intermediate C. Finally, the isomerisation/aromatization sequence led to desired indole 82.
 Scheme 24  Cs2CO3-DBU-assisted 2,3-disubstituted indoles from 2-(tosylamino)aryl-substituted p-QMs and bromomethyl aryl ketones. 
Zhou and co-workers developed an efficient one-pot protocol for the synthesis of indole scaffolds via intramolecular nucleophilic addition reaction of imines.84 The ketimines 85 could be readily obtained by combining isatin derivatives 83 and 2-(2-nitroethyl)anilines 84 with the aid of p-TsOH in MeOH. The regiodivergent intramolecular cyclization of ketimines 85 was achieved by Na2CO3 thereby resulting in indole skeleton 86. As both the steps worked well in MeOH, the base could be added after the completion of imine formation to neutralize the residual p-TsOH to facilitate N-attack cyclization. The use of MeOH is crucial for the reaction because the hydroxyl groups of alcoholic solvents might serve as oxyanion holes to stabilize the enolate (Scheme 25). Notably, acyclic nitroalkane-ketimines 87 also underwent intramolecular N-attack addition reactions to afford indoles 88 as the major product along with the formation of tetrahydroquinoline derivatives 89 (minor product).
 Scheme 25  Na2CO3-promoted regiodivergent intramolecular cyclization of ketimines to form the indole skeleton. 
Very recently the authors developed a one-pot tandem protocol to synthesize N-functionalized indoles with the nitrogen tethered to an aza-quaternary carbon.85 Initially the imine 91 formation was carried out from isatin 83 and 2-(2-nitroethyl)anilines 84 in the presence of p-TsOH and 5 Å MS in toluene. After completion of the imine synthesis, the solvent toluene was removed; then CsOH, alkyl bromide 90, and MeOH could be introduced in the reaction vessel. The transformation occurred via the imine formation/N-cyclization/C-alkylation sequence to deliver desired indole products 91 in moderate to good yields (27–85%). A similar type of reaction sequence may be applied for keto ester 92 to afford corresponding indole derivatives 93 (Scheme 26).
 Scheme 26  Synthesis and base-promoted cyclization of imines to form functionalized indoles. 
Chen and Xu devised a base-promoted tandem nucleophilic substitution/decarboxylation/hydroamination sequence for the chemoselective preparation of 3-sulfonylindoles and 2-methyleneindophenols.86 Treatment of ethynyl benzoxazinanones 94 with nucleophiles like sodium sulfonate 95 under mild basic conditions (K2CO3) led to 3-sulfonylindoles 96 in good yields. The reaction could be extended for other nucleophiles, such as malonates, alcohols, and indoles. On the other hand, the use of phenols 97 as a nucleophile selectively produced 2-methyleneindophenols 98 (Scheme 27). A wide substrate scope, mild conditions, selectivity and scalability certified the protocol as practical for preparation of indole derivatives.
 Scheme 27  K2CO3-promoted chemoselective synthesis of 3-sulfonylindoles and 2-methyleneindophenols from ethynyl benzoxazinanones. 
2-Alkynyl anilines are important building blocks for the synthesis of diverse heterocyclic systems. Recently, Lee et al. devised an efficient method to access 3-sulfenyl/selenyl-1H-indoles via base-promoted chalcogenoaminative annulation.87 The reaction of 2-alkynyl anilines 99 with disulfides/diselenides 100 in the presence of tBuOK in DMSO solvent at 120 °C led to 3-sulfenyl/selenyl-1H-indoles 101 in good yields (45 examples, up to 89%). The annulation was amenable to 2-alkynyl anilines bearing electron donating and electron withdrawing functionalities at the alkynyl moiety. A variety of substituted disulfides/diselenides were found to be compatible with the protocol (Scheme 28).
 Scheme 28  

t
BuOK-assisted chalcogenoaminative annulation between 2-alkynyl anilines and disulfides/diselenides to form 3-sulfenyl/selenyl-1H-indoles. 
In 2019, Walsh introduced the synthesis of 2-aryl indoles 104 by combining 2-fluorotoluenes 102 and nitriles 103 with the aid of LiN(SiMe3)2 and CsF.88 This straightforward strategy accomplished a library of indole compounds in 48–92% yield. Notably, preparation of 2,3-diaryl/heteroaryl-substituted indoles could be readily achieved by using suitable reaction partners. A plausible mechanism is depicted in Scheme 29. Initially, 2-fluorotoluene 102 was deprotonated (in the presence of LiN(SiMe3)2 and CsF) to generate an alkali metal complex A. Next, intermediate A attacked the nitrile 103 to form the metalated imine intermediate B. The latter could be either protonated or silylated, affording imine C. In the presence of Li/CsN(SiMe3)2, the imine C underwent reversible transimination (viaD) to give nitrogen-exchanged intermediate E which underwent silyl transfer and SNAr to furnish desired indole 104.
 Scheme 29  LiN(SiMe3)2/CsF-assisted synthesis of 2-aryl indoles by combining 2-fluorotoluenes and nitriles. 
Meanwhile, Asachenko and co-workers investigated intramolecular cyclization of unactivated tertiary amines bearing ortho-toluidine moiety 105 resulting in 1,2-disubstituted indoles 106.89 Among various bases, organic base LDA in THF was the best choice for desired indole derivatives in excellent yields (up to 99%). A plausible mechanism is demonstrated in Scheme 30. Initially deprotonation of the methyl group in 105 led to intermediate A, which then suffered intramolecular nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group to form intermediate B. The latter would undergo dehydrative aromatization resulting in the corresponding indole compound 106 during acid hydrolysis (viaE). This is a generally accepted mechanism of the Madelung reaction. However, intermediate B might undergo ring-opening to afford intermediate C. Protonation of C gave intermediate D (isolable) which after cyclization and dehydration offered indole 106 (via intermediate E).
 Scheme 30  LDA-promoted intramolecular cyclization of unactivated tertiary amines bearing the ortho-toluidine moiety towards 1,2-disubstituted indoles. 
Zhao et al. disclosed a diastereo- and atropenantioselective strategy to synthesize indole fused heterocycles.90 The reaction of aryl substituted propargylic tertiary alcohols 107 with aldehydes 108 in the presence of catalytic azolium and DIPEA (base) at room temperature efficiently furnished fused indole scaffolds 109. The diastereo and enantioselectivity remained at a high level (>98:2 dr, 92–99% ee). This NHC-catalyzed transformation proceeded via a propargylic substitution cascade. Mechanistically it is conceivable that (Scheme 31) intermediate A generated via nucleophilic addition to the unactivated alkyne moiety underwent facile dehydration to form allene intermediate B. Subsequently the attack of phenoxide on the acyl azolium moiety afforded eight-membered intermediate C. The release of NHC produced intermediate D. Finally, the attack of aniline nitrogen on the allene moiety assisted by NHC as a Brønsted base catalyst produced indole product 109.
 Scheme 31  Azolium-DIPEA assisted formation of fused indoles from propargylic tertiary alcohols and aldehydes. 
Xie, Deng and co-workers developed a one-pot domino strategy for regioselective synthesis of bioactive 1,2-diarylindoles 112 from substituted cyclohexanones 110, anilines 25 and α-hydroxy ketones 111 under aerobic conditions.91 In this transformation, cyclohexanones were used as the aryl sources for the indole framework, and the secondary amine (morpholine, organic base) acted as a catalyst. Cyclohexanones containing substituents at 3- or 4-position worked well; however, substituents at 2-position failed to provide the desired products due to steric reasons. A probable mechanism is presented in Scheme 32. Condensation between anilines 25 and α-hydroxy ketones 111 produced intermediate A, which might tautomerize to generate enol intermediate B. The latter once again tautomerized to aldehyde form C. In the meantime, cyclohexanones 110 would condense with morpholine to afford enamine D which suffered nucleophilic attack of intermediate C leading to intermediate E. Subsequent hydrolysis (F) followed by cyclization produced intermediate G. The final indole compounds 112 could be attained under KI/DMSO/O2 conditions.
 Scheme 32  Morpholine-mediated synthesis of 1,2-diarylindoles from cyclohexanones, anilines and α-hydroxy ketones. 
In 2020, Lewis base catalysis of weakly activated allenes for constructing the indole core was reported by Yu, Xia and co-workers.92 The intramolecular amino-acylation of aryl allenes 113 was attained by Lewis base 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) resulting in 2-methyl-3-aroylindoles 114 in excellent yields (up to 92%). The probable mechanism is outlined in Scheme 33. At the beginning, the nucleophilic addition of DMAP to aryl allene 113 would give pyridinium enamine intermediate A, which underwent intramolecular nucleophilic attack on the amide's carbonyl (C–C bond formation) to afford intermediate B. Then C–N bond cleavage of the hemiaminal produced deprotonated amine intermediate C. Subsequent [1,4] proton transfer would generate intermediate D, which in turn experienced [1,6] proton transfer to provide α,β-unsaturated ketone intermediate E. Next, nucleophilic addition of the nitrogen anion at the β-position afforded intermediate F (C–N bond formation step). Finally, removal of DMAP delivered the desired indole derivative 114.
 Scheme 33  DMAP-promoted intramolecular amino-acylation of aryl allenes to form aroylindoles. 
A facile cyclization of N-(2-(bromomethyl)aryl)-N-arylbenzamides 115 with sodium-p-tolylsulfinate 116 (or KCN) was examined by Asachenko et al.93 The reaction was catalyzed by base 1,3-diazabicyclo(4,3,0)non-5-ene (DBN) in DMSO solvent. This one-pot base-promoted protocol enabled synthesis of 1,2-disubstituted indoles 117 bearing aromatic moieties (on indole nitrogen and at 2-position) in moderate to good yields. This kind of reaction was unprecedented for preparing CF3 and adamantane substituted indoles. A tentative mechanism is proposed in Scheme 34. Initially, nucleophilic substitution of bromide 115 by p-tolylsulfinate 116 occurred to form tosylate A. Then DBN-triggered intramolecular cyclization produced intermediate C (via carbanion B). Next, protonation (D, E) and nitrogen lone pair-assisted elimination of water furnished intermediate F. Finally DBN-induced deprotonation delivered indole product 117.
 Scheme 34  DBN-assisted cyclization of N-(2-(bromomethyl)aryl)-N-arylbenzamides to access 1,2-disubstituted indoles. 
4. Photochemical synthesis
Metal-free photocatalytic preparation of indole scaffolds is a challenging task in organic synthesis. Guo, Zheng and co-workers devised a photodriven direct C–C/C–N bond formation concept for the construction of densely substituted indoles 120via [3+2] annulation of secondary amines 118 and but-2-ynedioates 119.94 The reaction was supposed to be initiated by electron donor–acceptor (EDA) complexes without any photocatalysts and metals. The probable mechanism is shown in Scheme 35. Initially, the EDA-complex I (generated in situ from amines 118 and but-2-ynedioates 119) resulted in radical ion pair II through the light-triggered SET process. Subsequent coupling of the radical ion pair yielded intermediate A which upon addition with the iodine radical produced radical intermediate B. The latter was transformed into intermediate Cvia the SET process under air/O2 conditions. Afterwards, elimination of a proton produced intermediate D, and fragmentation resulted in intermediate E. Oxidation by C4H9I afforded intermediate F, C4H9 and iodide ion. Of note, C8F18 was obtained by GC-MS in 62% yield. Finally, deprotonation afforded indole 120.
 Scheme 35  Photodriven construction of the indole core via [3+2] annulation of secondary amines and but-2-ynedioates. 
In 2020, Hiersemann et al. implemented the concept of photochemically elicited two-carbon homologation of a π–donor–π–acceptor substituted chromophore by triple bond insertion.95 When modularly assembled vinylogous amides 121 were exposed to UV light (254 nm) in trifluoroethanol at room temperature, cyclohepta[b]indoles 122 were obtained via intramolecular annulation reaction (Scheme 36). This transformation was fruitful for various alkyl, aryl and halogen substitutions on the aromatic ring. However, the reaction failed to provide the desired product for nitro substituents. The authors successfully carried out TD/DFT studies in support of the mechanism. Under photochemical conditions, amide 121 underwent 5-exo-dig cyclization to form spiro intermediate A, which after double isomerisation would generate intermediate B. [2+2] Cycloaddition (cycloadduct C) following 4π-electrocyclic ring opening provided cyclohepta indole framework 122.
 Scheme 36  Irradiation (254 nm) of modularly assembled vinylogous amides to accomplish cyclohepta[b]indoles. 
An Eosin Y-catalyzed redox-neutral sustainable approach involving N-arylated allenamides 123 and N-(acyloxy)phthalimides (NHPI esters) 124 to obtain substituted indoles 125 was demonstrated by De Sarkar et al.96 Control experiments revealed that the photocatalyst, light, and DIPEA played a crucial role in the success of the annulation reaction. A wide range of electronically diverse para-, ortho- and meta-substitutions on the benzene ring were well tolerated resulting in respective indole products in acceptable yields (45–74%). The reaction should be carried out under air-free conditions. The plausible mechanistic pathway is depicted in Scheme 37. The authors calculated the quantum yield of the process and performed “light/dark” experiments, and a high value of quantum yield (Φ = 16) indicated the feasibility of the radical chain mechanism. The reaction was triggered by an oxidative quenching of the excited photocatalyst Eosin Y* by NHPI ester 124 to produce corresponding radical-anion intermediate A. Fragmentation of A afforded tertiary radical C and phthalimide anion B. Intermediate C underwent intramolecular addition on the terminal carbon of the allene unit of 123 resulting in transient radical D. Intramolecular cyclization of D offered radical intermediate E, which got deprotonated by DIPEA or B to radical anion F. Oxidation via the SET process yielded indole 125 along with regeneration of Eosin Y.
 Scheme 37  Eosin Y-catalyzed photoredox approach involving N-arylated allenamides and NHPI esters to access substituted indoles. 
In 2021, Siddiqui's group investigated visible light-mediated one-pot three-component assembly of anilines 25, 2,2-dihydroxy-1-arylethan-1-one 126 and 4-hydroxy-6-methyl-2H-pyran-2-one 127.97 Eosin Y was employed as an organophotoredox catalyst in EtOH/H2O medium at room temperature to obtain 3-substituted indoles 128 in good yields. According to the mechanism (Scheme 38), under visible light irradiation, Eosin Y (EY) was excited to its singlet state 1EY* which after intersystem crossing came to stable triplet state 3EY*. Meanwhile proton abstraction from 127 gave anion A. The photocatalytic cycle commenced with excitation of EY by visible light. Subsequent single electron transfer from anion A would generate radical B, which might trap arylglyoxal 126 to form intermediate C. At this stage, oxidative quenching of EY via electron transfer to C produced intermediate D. Elimination of water would form intermediate E, which experienced nucleophilic attack by aniline –NH2 resulting in intermediate F. Intramolecular cyclization (G) following dehydration accomplished indole 128.
 Scheme 38  Eosin Y-catalyzed visible light-mediated reaction of aniline, 2,2-dihydroxy-1-arylethan-1-one and 4-hydroxy-6-methyl-2H-pyran-2-one to access indoles. 
In 2022, Cao, Lu, Yan and co-workers discovered a photoexcited switchable strategy for annulation of 2-nitroarylethanols 129 to obtain indole scaffolds 131 under blue-light irradiation.98 The use of diboron reagent (B2nep2) 130 is crucial for favourable oxy-transfer reactivity to in situ generated nitroso species. This annulative method is amenable to alkyl, aryl and halogen substituents, and even alkynyl-substrates responded well. A plausible mechanism for the nitro-triggered radical chemistry is illustrated in Scheme 39. The reaction was initiated through the photoexcitation of the ground-state nitroarene 129 to the long-lived triplet state (biradical T). Subsequent intramolecular double hydrogen atom abstraction (d-HAA) led to nitroso intermediate 132, which after diborylation afforded intermediate A. Hydrolysis generated intermediate B (release of 133) which then underwent intramolecular nucleophilic addition to result in intermediate C. Proton transfer produced intermediate D, which underwent sequential deprotonation and dehydration with the aid of tertiary amines to form E and F. The N-oxide F became engaged in the oxygen transfer process assisted by boron-compound 130 to yield indole 131.
 Scheme 39  Photoexcited strategy for annulation of 2-nitroarylethanols to obtain indoles. 
5. Electrochemical synthesis
In recent years, organic electrochemistry has become a powerful tool for synthesizing organic compounds in a greener way. Recently, Xu and co-workers developed an electrocatalytic strategy to build indole skeleton 136via dehydrogenative cyclization of 2-vinylanilides 134.99 The reaction employed an organocatalyst (phenothiazine 135) without using any external chemical oxidant. The electrolysis could be performed with a Schlenk tube with a reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) anode and a Pt plate cathode. In this process, vinylanilides bearing terminal (R3 = H) as well as substituted alkenes (R3 = alkyl) smoothly cyclised to the desired indoles in good yields (up to 98%). The benzene ring possessing diverse functionalities (alkyl, halide, OCF3, CF3) was well tolerated. The probable mechanism for the electrochemical process is provided in Scheme 40. The electrocatalytic process was initiated with the anodic oxidation of the catalyst 135 to the corresponding radical anion and cathodic reduction of solvent H2O to form H2 and OH−. The OH− generated in the cathode would deprotonate the anilide 134 [pKa (TsNHPh) = 8.46 in H2O] to its conjugate base A. The latter was oxidized by radical cation 135.+ to generate radical B. Cyclization of B led to radical intermediate C, and subsequent oxidation resulted in cation D. Finally deprotonation delivered indole 136.
 Scheme 40  Electrocatalytic formation of indoles via dehydrogenative cyclization of 2-vinylanilides. 
Lindsay, Kilmartin and Sperry realized an electrochemical cyclization of aryl nitroenamines 137 to 3-nitroindoles 138 in the presence of potassium iodide.100 The use of glassy carbon electrodes (potential 2.05 V) offered the best result. The reaction was unsuccessful when performed in a divided cell. The control experiments using radical scavenger TEMPO clearly indicated that the radical was generated adjacent to the nitro group. The mechanism for sequential paired electrolysis is provided in Scheme 41. The reaction started with anodic generation of the iodine radical, which upon electron transfer with nitroenamine 137 produced radical cation A. Intermediate B was obtained via radical cyclization, and deprotonation (by cathodically generated OH− or OMe−) led to indoline radical C. Subsequent reduction at the cathode resulted in anion D. 3-Nitroindoline intermediate E could be obtained through protonation, which then underwent facile oxidation to form 3-nitroindole 138.
 Scheme 41  Electrochemical cyclization of aryl nitroenamines to 3-nitroindoles. 
Electrochemical [3+2] cycloaddition of substituted anilines 25 and 1,3-dicarbonyl 139 compounds for the construction of functionalized indoles 140 was reported by Sun et al.101 The electrochemical reaction was designed in an undivided cell equipped with a carbon anode and a platinum cathode connected to a DC regulated power supply (1.5 mA). A wide range of N-protected anilines (PG = Ts, Bs, Bz, Boc, Me) with diverse substitution in the aromatic ring (R1 = OMe, OEt, OnPr, NO2, CN, Br, Cl, etc.) were subjected to react with various aliphatic and aromatic 1,3-dicarbonyls under ambient conditions to form respective indole derivatives 140 in acceptable yields (Scheme 42).
 Scheme 42  Electrochemical [3+2] cycloaddition of anilines and 1,3-dicarbonyls to synthesize functionalized indoles. 
Zha, Wang and co-workers developed a strategy for switchable synthesis of indolines and indoles from readily available 2-vinyl anilines 141 in the presence of Me4NI under electrochemical conditions.102 Different additives could change the distribution of products. The use of NH4PF6 and amines promoted the formation of indoline 142; however, the addition of potassium thiocyanate (KSCN) afforded indole products 143. Notably, 2-vinyl anilines with various substituents, such as alkyl, halogen, trifluoromethyl, cyano, ester, and nitro, efficiently delivered the corresponding indole derivatives in excellent yields. The practicability of the protocol was certified by gram-scale synthesis of desired indole compounds. A plausible mechanism is demonstrated in Scheme 43. The reaction started with oxidation of iodide to molecular iodine, which then reacted with 141 to generate cyclic iodonium intermediate A. Nucleophilic addition offered intermediate C and subsequent deprotonation led to iodide D. Subsequent nucleophilic attack of PhNH2 produced indoline 142. On the other hand, iodide D might be substituted by thiocyanate to form E, and OH−-assisted elimination furnished indole 143. Meanwhile, H2O was reduced to hydrogen and hydroxyl anion at the cathode.
 Scheme 43  Electrochemical synthesis of indolines and indoles from 2-vinyl anilines. 
6. Iodinium-salt-mediated synthesis
In 2020, Ishikawa et al. developed a fascinating approach for the synthesis of electron-rich indoles 145 from boron-masking N-hydroxyamides 144 in the presence of [bis(trifluoroacetoxy)iodo]benzene (PIFA).103 This intramolecular conversion comprised in situ generation of diaryliodonium-salt A by treatment with hypervalent iodine in non-nucleophilic HFIP (Scheme 44). The diaryliodonium-salt A was then treated with a base (Et3N) to obtain oxoanion B. This deborylation step was the rate limiting step. Afterwards, N → O acyl migration occurred to provide O-acyl intermediate C, which underwent intramolecular cyclization furnishing six-membered heterocyclic species D. Subsequently, the reductive elimination process took place (forming the aromatic C–N bond) resulting in indole precursor E. Desorption of benzoic acid followed by tautomerization yielded indole 145.
 Scheme 44  PIFA-mediated synthesis of electron-rich indoles exploiting boron-masking N-hydroxyamides. 
Wang, He and Fan devised a simple route for rapid construction of 4-acetoxyindoles 147 from easily available 2-alkynylanilines 146 by means of a dearomatization strategy.104 PhI(OAc)2 was employed as the oxidant and AcOH played a dual role, i.e., as a solvent and reactant. The nature of the protecting group had an influence on the reaction. The reaction was effective for N-Ts and N-Ms protected substrates; however, N-Ac and N-Boc protected substrates failed to provide desired 4-acetoxyindoles. A plausible mechanism is proposed in Scheme 45. Initially, PhI(OAc)2-mediated oxidative dearomatization of 146 generated intermediate A. After that, nucleophilic attack by nitrogen on the triple bond formed indole core C (viaB). Finally, removal of AcOH furnished 4-acetoxyindoles 147. It should be mentioned that the resulting 4-acetoxyindoles could be converted to several C4-functionalized indoles.
 Scheme 45  PhI(OAc)2-mediated synthesis of 4-acetoxyindoles from 2-alkynylanilines. 
Diaryliodonium salts could be employed to achieve indole scaffolds as directed by Shibata, Takao, and Ogura.105 It was observed that treatment of diaryliodonium salts 148 with tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF) in DMF yielded N-alkoxyindolones 149. However, the use of Boc protected substrate 150 and 4 Å MS delivered the corresponding indole products in a similar to that of Ishikawa indole synthesis.103 The plausible mechanism is proposed in Scheme 46. At first, deprotection of the oxygen atom gave zwitterions A. Intramolecular attack of the anionic oxygen on the iodine center led to formation of seven-membered ring intermediate B. Subsequently, recombination of the chemical bond was assisted by reductive elimination of PhI to form intermediate C. Next, N → O acyl migration furnished O-Boc intermediate D. Intramolecular hydrogen subtraction (E) followed by isomerization gave indole 151.
 Scheme 46  Diaryliodonium salt-based synthesis of indole derivatives. 
7. SOCl2/DMSO-mediated synthesis
Du et al. developed a C(sp2)-H amination protocol employing the SOCl2/DMSO system for the chemoselective formation of 2-unsubstituted indoles and 2-thiomethylindoles.106 They observed that the reaction of 2-vinylanilines 152 with SOCl2/DMSO (or DMSO-d6) at 70 °C accomplished 2-thiomethylindoles 153. However, replacing DMSO with diethyl sulfoxide (Et2SO) delivered 2-unsubstituted indoles 154 in a highly selective way. A tentative mechanism for switchable transformation is outlined in Scheme 47. Initially, the reaction of SOCl2 and DMSO (polar form) gave sulfochlorine cation A. The in situ generated RSCl B (electrophilic in nature) suffered attack by the alkene moiety of substrate 152 to form sulfonium ion intermediate C. Next, 5-exo-tet cyclization produced intermediate D, which upon deprotonation offered indoline intermediate E. Elimination of SR leading to intermediate F and concomitant proton abstraction (deprotonative aromatization) afforded unsubstituted indole 154. Notably, the use of DMSO as solvent would generate 2-thiomethylindoles 153 (via intermediate G).
 Scheme 47  SOCl2/DMSO (Et2SO)-mediated cyclization of 2-vinylanilines towards indoles. 
The authors also realized a similar type of reaction by employing 2-alkenylanilines 155 with SOCl2 in DMSO to prepare 3-unsubstituted indoles and 3-methylthioindoles.107 Interestingly, the method was tunable by temperature (Scheme 48). When the reaction was carried out at room temperature, 3-unsubstituted indoles 157 were produced via intramolecular cyclization and elimination. Formation of 3-methylthioindoles 156 was observed at higher temperature (70 °C) through further electrophilic methylthiolation. The strategy was amenable to 2-alkenylaniline substrates bearing N-Ts, N-Ms, and N-Boc substituents. However, N-Me, N-Bn or N-OH containing substrates would not provide the desired indoles under standard conditions. Therefore, the SOCl2/DMSO system was very effective for cyclization of alkenylaniline compounds for the construction of the indole architecture.
 Scheme 48  SOCl2/DMSO-mediated annulation of 2-alkenylanilines to access substituted indoles. 
8. Uncatalyzed/thermally assisted synthesis
Performing an organic reaction without catalyst or additive is an important aspect of organic synthesis. An easy access to 2-substituted indoles 159 by employing 2-alkynyldimethylamines 158 in ethanol was demonstrated by Gandon, Alami and Provot.108 The cyclization could be achieved without any additive or catalyst under microwave heating (120 °C). Using this eco-friendly protocol, a variety of 2-arylindoles, 2-heteroarylindoles, 2-styrylindoles, and 2-alkenylindoles were obtained in good to excellent yields. Interestingly, ortho-substituted anilines (in which the N-atom is included into a ring) 160 delivered the corresponding indole products 161 in good yields. A plausible mechanism is provided in Scheme 49. At first, the nitrogen atom of the pyrrolidine reacts with the alkyne moiety via 5-endo-dig cyclization giving rise to intermediate A. Next, EtOH as solvent (or ethanolate species formed during the annulation process) would react with the methylene unit by SN2 mode thereby opening the pyrrolidinium intermediate to afford 161. The authors also carried out DFT studies to confirm the mechanistic rationale.
 Scheme 49  Additive-free synthesis of 2-substituted indoles from 2-alkynyldimethylamines in ethanol. 
Deng et al. devised a three-component reaction for fused pyrrole derivatives 164 from cyclic ketones 162, amines 25 and nitrovinylarenes 163 in refluxing toluene.109 Various active substituents, viz. halogens, nitro, ester, and N-Boc groups, were compatible with this method. Moreover, functionalized indoles 165 could be readily obtained from the same starting materials under oxidative conditions via a two-step one-pot strategy. The probable mechanism is postulated in Scheme 50. Initially, condensation between cyclohexanone 162 and amine 25 generated an imine intermediate A. The tautomerized form B upon addition with nitrovinylarenes 163 would produce adduct C which in turn tautomerized to form D. Next, intramolecular cyclization afforded cyclo intermediate E. Subsequent elimination of water and nitroxyl (HNO) molecules furnished compound 164. Finally, oxidation produced indole product 165 through the dehydrogenative aromatization method.
 Scheme 50  Three-component reaction of cyclic ketones, amines and nitrovinylarenes to afford the indole skeleton. 
In 2021, Hughes-Whiffing and Perry developed an efficient strategy for 1,2,3-trisubstituted indoles based upon the Fischer indolization-indole N-alkylation sequence.110 This method comprised reaction of phenylhydrazine hydrochloride 166 and butanones 167 under microwave heating (150 °C) in THF to afford 2,3-disubstituted indoles 168, followed by reaction with alkyl halides resulting in N-alkylated indoles 169 (Scheme 51). The one-pot three-component protocol was applicable for widely available substrates, rapid (within 30 min) and high yielding (67–98%).
 Scheme 51  One-pot synthesis of 1,2,3-trisubstituted indoles from phenylhydrazine hydrochloride, butanones and alkyl halides. 
Very recently, the effect of alkylation at the terminal position of aryl and heteroaryl hydrazines in the Fischer indolization process was investigated by Schmidt.111 The author observed that compared to their unalkylated counterparts, reactions involving N-alkylated hydrazines 170 and ketone 167 delivered indole derivatives 171 at faster rates with higher yields in warm alcohol (up to 99%). The reactions could be performed at lower temperatures without additional acid or Lewis acid and the substrate salt alone was sufficient for Fischer indole reaction. A tentative mechanism is provided in Scheme 52. For example, N-methyl hydrazine 170 upon condensation with ketone 167 led to the formation of hydrazone A which underwent favourable tautomerization affording intermediate B. The latter was reactive enough to ensure [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement to provide intermediate C. Finally, intramolecular nucleophilic attack by amine nitrogen and subsequent elimination of the alkyl group (as MeNH3X) furnished indole derivative 171.
 Scheme 52  Fischer indolization involving N-alkylated hydrazine and ketone to form indoles. 
Trimerization of isocyanide compounds is very rare in heterocycle synthesis. A fascinating chemoselective trimerization reaction of isocyanides for synthesis of 2-(indol-2-yl)quinolines and 2-(indol-2-yl)-pyridines was accomplished by Dong, Xu and co-workers.112 The authors found that the reaction of aryl isocyanides 172 and o-alkenyl arylisocyanides 173 in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) at 150 °C selectively produced 2-(indol-2-yl)quinolines 174. On the other hand, the assembly of aryl isocyanides 172 and 1,3-dienyl isocyanides 175 yielded trimerized product 2-(indol-2-yl)-pyridines 176 under similar reaction conditions. A wide range of aryl isocyanides bearing electron-neutral, electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups were well accommodated to give the desired products in excellent yields. Importantly, four C–C bonds and two heterocycles were constructed in a single step. A plausible mechanism for the domino reaction is proposed in Scheme 53. The reaction commenced with a “head to head” chemoselective heterodimerization of 172 and 173 to generate the highly reactive nonsymmetrical 1,4-diazabutatriene intermediate A. The latter underwent 6π-electrocyclization reaction to form the ketenimine intermediate B, which immediately aromatized to produce N-arylamine C. Nucleophilic addition of C with third isocyanide 172 gave intermediate D, and subsequent cyclization produced indole core E. Finally, isomerisation (aromatization) afforded target product 174.
 Scheme 53  Chemoselective trimerization of isocyanides affording 2-(indol-2-yl)quinolines and 2-(indol-2-yl)-pyridines. 
9. Miscellaneous methods
Chloride ion (Cl−)-assisted facile access to indolo[2,3-b]quinolines 179via cascade reactions of freshly prepared o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes 178 was reported by Kuhakarm et al.113 Compound 178 could be readily derived from o-alkynyl arylformamide 177 upon treatment with POCl3 and iPr2NEt in CH2Cl2 at 0 °C. Subsequent treatment of o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes 178 in DMF at 80 °C provided indolo[2,3-b]quinolines 179 in moderate to excellent yields (45–99%). Mechanistically it was conceivable that (Scheme 54), Cl− in association with isocyanide 178 acted as a nucleophile and added to the isocyano carbon resulting in imidoyl anion intermediate A. Afterwards, intermediate A experienced 6-endo cyclization following protonation from moist DMF to afford 2-chloroquinoline adduct B. Intermediate C could be obtained from Bvia the intramolecular nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) process. At last, elimination of HCl and aromatization gave indoloquinoline 179.
 Scheme 54  Chloride ion-assisted access to indolo[2,3-b]quinolines from o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes. 
The authors also performed alkanethiol-mediated cyclization of o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes 178 for preparing bis-thiolated indole derivatives 181 under mild reaction conditions.114 Here, alkanethiols (RSH) 180 were employed as effective nucleophiles. A range of o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes bearing diverse substitution in the aromatic rings efficiently reacted with various alkanethiols resulting in bis-thiolated indoles 181 in acceptable yields. A probable mechanism is depicted in Scheme 55. The reaction was initiated by the nucleophilic attack of alkanethiol 180 on the isocyano carbon leading to the formation of intermediate A, which upon deprotonation provided intermediate B. The latter underwent 5-exo cyclization followed by protonation to generate 3-alkylidene-3H-indole intermediate C. Finally, the addition of a second molecule of alkanethiol to intermediate C yielded bis-thiolated indoles 181.
 Scheme 55  Alkanethiol-mediated cyclization of o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes to obtain bis-thiolated indoles. 
The cyanide-catalyzed imino-Setter reaction of aldimines was investigated by Jeon and Cheon.115 The aldimines 184 derived from 2-aminochalcones 182 and aldehydes 183 under mild conditions (Na2SO4/MgSO4) yielded 2-aryl-3-arenacylindole derivatives 185 in high yields (up to 99%). Formation of indole 185 from aldimine 184 might be explained according to the mechanism in Scheme 56. Initially, the imine moiety of 184 suffered nucleophilic attack by cyanide to generate cyanide adduct A. Concomitant proton transfer from carbon to nitrogen afforded umpolung B, which underwent conjugate addition to α,β-unsaturated carbonyl to rise to indole core 185. It should be mentioned that the indole 185 could be converted to benzo[a]carbazoles 186 through intramolecular Friedel–Crafts reaction with the aid of HBr/AcOH.
 Scheme 56  Formation of indole derivatives via cyanide-catalyzed imino-Setter reaction of aldimines. 
Shao, Li and Chen realized an organoselenium-promoted synthesis of 3-selenylindoles 189 involving 2-styrylanilines 187 and diphenyldiselenide 188 with the aid of N-fluorobenzenesulfonamide (NFSI).116 Substrates possessing ortho-, meta-, or para-substituents in the aromatic ring smoothly delivered the corresponding selenylindoles in good yields (up to 94%). Diselenides bearing electron-withdrawing (F, NO2) and electron-donating groups (Me, OMe, naphthyl) in the aromatic ring were well tolerated. However, the reaction was not suitable for 2-styrylphenol substrates. A plausible mechanism is outlined in Scheme 57. The reaction began with the nucleophilic attack of diphenyl diselanide 188 on NFSI to generate selenium species A, which acted as a nucleophile and attacked the double bond of 187 resulting in three-membered cyclic intermediate B. Next, intramolecular nucleophilic attack by the NH2 group gave intermediate Cvia three-membered ring opening. Subsequent proton elimination from intermediate D by the pyridine base furnished target indole 189.
 Scheme 57  Organoselenium-mediated synthesis of 3-selenylindoles employing 2-styrylanilines and diphenyldiselenide. 
Lead(IV) carboxylate-assisted intramolecular oxidative amino-hydroxylation of o-allenyl anilines for the construction of the indole skeleton was reported by Njardarson et al.117 Treatment of carbamate protected o-allenyl anilines 190 with lead(IV) carboxylate 191 in dichloromethane at room temperature led to tandem C–N (allene cyclization) and C–O bond formation (carboxylate trapping) to offer indoles 192. Various lead(IV) carboxylates, including lead tetraacetate (LTA), cinnamate, benzoate and the corresponding 4-fluoro and 4-trifluoromethyl analogues could be employed for this transformation. A tentative mechanism (for example, LTA) is given in Scheme 58. Initially, the reaction between carbamate 190 and LTA 191 would generate intermediate A which underwent Wessely type dearomatization to form intermediate B (detectable by NMR). Intermediate C obtained through cyclization experienced attack by AcOH via path a (or alternatively, via path b through intermediate D) to form indole 192.
 Scheme 58  Lead(IV) carboxylate-assisted intramolecular oxidative amino-hydroxylation of o-allenyl anilines to obtain the indole core. 
Synthesis of the indole skeleton directly from anilines 25 and α,β-ynones 193via the cascade aza-Michael addition/C–H functionalization was reported by Jian, Gao and co-workers.118 The iodine-mediated reaction offered a wide variety of indole derivatives 194 in moderate to excellent yields (up to 99%). A tentative mechanism for the radical pathway is provided in Scheme 59. At first, amine 25 and α,β-ynone 193 underwent aza-Michael addition reaction to generate enaminone adduct 195 which could be detected by ESI-MS. Next, oxidation by I2-CsOAc resulted in N-iodo intermediate A with the concomitant release of the iodine radical. Homolysis of the N–I bond produced intermediate B. The tautomerized form of B, i.e., C, upon intramolecular radical addition led to cyclic intermediate D, which underwent radical coupling to give intermediate E. Finally, deprotonation furnished desired indole 194.
 Scheme 59  I2-mediated synthesis of the indole skeleton directly from anilines and α,β-ynones. 
In 2022, Yaragorla and Arun developed a Ca(II)-promoted diversity oriented synthetic strategy for the preparation of C2-aryl indole.119 One-pot four-component reaction of glyoxal 196, amine 197, arene 198 and 2-(trimethylsilyl) aryl triflate 199 at room temperature in the presence of Ca(NTf)2 afforded C2-aryl indole derivatives 201. Notably, 2-(trimethylsilyl) aryl triflate 199 acted as an aryne 200 precursor. Both aromatic and aliphatic glyoxals showed good reactivity. The reaction was compatible with aromatic amines, but failed for aliphatic amines. However, 1,3,5-trimethoxybenzene, indoles, naphthols, and alkyl amines displayed excellent reactivity as arenes. A plausible mechanism is shown in Scheme 60. The reaction was commenced with the condensation of glyoxal 196 and amine 197 to produce C-acylamine intermediate A. Then, Ca(II)-promoted Friedel–Crafts acylation with arenes 198 took place affording α-aminoketone B. Subsequently, formal [3+2] cyclization of aryne 200 (generated in situ from triflate 199) with aminoketone B would produce intermediate indolin-3-ol D (viaC). Finally, aromaticity-driven dehydration led to the formation of desired 1,2,3-trisubstituted indole 201. It should be mentioned that intermediate B and D could be isolated from the reaction mixture.
 Scheme 60  Ca(II)-promoted synthesis of indoles from glyoxal, amine, arene and aryl triflate. 
10. Conclusions
The indole-based heterocycles are one of the most significant privileged molecules that constitute numerous natural products. They are frequently employed as effective building blocks to obtain pharmaceutical drugs and agrochemicals. Therefore, a variety of novel methodologies have been developed for building the indole architecture. In the recent past, a large number of metal-catalyzed annulation reactions have also emerged apart from classical methods, viz. Fischer, Bischler, Reisert, Madelung, Sandberg, Bartoli, Larock Nenitzescu, Fukuyama, etc. This review summarizes recent transition-metal-free strategies for the indole skeleton especially highlighting on the mechanistic aspect.
This review consists of the following sections. The acid-catalyzed section comprises the use of different types of acids, such as PPA, AcOH, TFA, TsOH, MsOH, TfOH, CSA, acidic ionic liquids, BF3, and B(C6F5)3. In the base-catalyzed part, reactions involving K2CO3, tBuOK, CsOH, Cs2CO3, LDA, DIPEA, morpholine, DBN, DMAP, etc. are described. Some novel photodriven/organo-photoredox assisted syntheses of indoles are discussed in the photochemical section which is followed by electrochemical cyclization, iodonium-assisted and SOCl2/DMSO-mediated reactions accordingly. Several novel protocols regarding uncatalyzed/thermally assisted indolization have also been demonstrated. Finally, miscellaneous transition-metal-free-methods such as Cl-, CN-, alkanethiol-, and organoselenium-promoted indole formation are highlighted. In most of the cases, the reaction mechanism has been illustrated for a better understanding of the reaction pathway. It is believed that this review will attract the attention of organic and medicinal chemistry researchers for further developments in that area.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The laboratory facility of Department of Chemistry, Rishi Bankim Chandra College for Women, is gratefully acknowledged. The author would like to thank the authors of the papers covered here for their hard work that made this review possible. The author is grateful to the reviewers for their constructive suggestions.
References
N. Singh, S. Singh, S. Kohli, A. Singh, H. Asiki, G. Rathee, R. Chandra and E. A. Anderson, Recent progress in the total synthesis of pyrrole-containing natural products (2011–2020), Org. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 5550–5573,  10.1039/D0QO01574A .
S. De, A. Kumar, S. K. Shah, S. Kazi, N. Sarkar, S. Banerjee and S. Dey, Pyridine: the scaffolds with significant clinical diversity, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 15385–15406,  10.1039/D2RA01571D .
A. W. Schmidt, K. R. Reddy and H.-J. Knölker, Occurrence, Biogenesis, and Synthesis of Biologically Active Carbazole Alkaloids, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3193–3328,  DOI:10.1021/cr200447s .
S. Das, Recent Applications of Quinolinium Salts in the Synthesis of Annulated Heterocycles, SynOpen, 2022, 6, 86–109,  DOI:10.1055/a-1834-2189 .
S. Das, Stereoselective synthesis of fused-, spiro- and bridged heterocycles via cyclization of isoquinolinium salts: a recent update, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 1838–1868,  10.1039/d1ob02478g .
D. E. Nichols and C. D. Nichols, Serotonin Receptors, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1614–1641,  DOI:10.1021/cr078224o .
D. Pala, A. Lodola, A. Bedini, G. Spadoni and S. Rivara, Homology Models of Melatonin Receptors: Challenges and Recent Advances, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 8093–8121,  DOI:10.3390/ijms14048093 .
F.-E. Chen and J. Huang, Reserpine: A Challenge for Total Synthesis of Natural Products, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 4671–4706,  DOI:10.1021/cr050521a .
T. Awakawa and I. Abe, Biosynthesis of the teleocidin-type terpenoid indole alkaloids, Org. Bioorg. Chem., 2018, 16, 4746–4752,  10.1039/C8OB00803E .
Y. Nalli, V. Khajuria, S. Gupta, P. Arora and S. Riyaz-Ul-Hassan, Four new carbazole alkaloids from Myrraya koenigii that display anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial activities, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 3322–3332,  10.1039/c6ob00267f .
X. Xiao, M. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Yao, L.-N. Liang, P. Ed Chung, Q. Long, E. Zacksenhaus, Z. He, S. Liu and Y. Ben-David, Novel racemosin B derivatives as new therapeutic agents for aggressive breast cancer, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 2018, 26, 6096–6104,  DOI:10.1016/j.bmc.2018.11.014 .
U. Songsiang, T. Thongthoom, C. Boonyarat and C. Yenjai, Claurailas A–D, Cytotoxic Carbazole Alkaloids from the roots of Clausena harmandiana, J. Nat. Prod., 2011, 74, 208–212,  DOI:10.1021/np100654m .
A. C. Kruegel, M. M. Gassaway, A. Kapoor, A. Varádi, S. Majumdar, M. Filizola, J. A. Javitch and D. Sames, Synthetic and Receptor Signaling Explorations of the Mitragyna Alkaloids: Mitragynine as an Atypical Molecular Framework for Opioid Receptor Modulator, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6754–6764,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.6b00360 .
A. D. Favia, D. Habrant, R. Scarpelli, M. Migliore, C. Albani, S. M. Bertozzi, M. Dionisi, G. Tarozzo, D. Piomelli, A. Cavalli and M. D. Vivo, Identification and characterization of a Carprofen as a Multitarget fatty Acid Hydrolase/Cyclooxygenase Inhibitor, J. Med. Chem., 2012, 55, 8807–8826,  DOI:10.1021/jm3011146 .
Y. Ota, T. Chinen, K. Yoshida, S. Kudo, Y. Nagumo, Y. Shiwa, R. Yamada, H. Umihara, K. Iwasaki, H. Masumoto, S. Yokoshima, H. Yoshikawa, T. Fukuyama, J. Kobayashi and T. Uso, Eudistomin C, an antitumor and antiviral natural product, targets 40S ribosome
and inhibits protein translation, ChemBioChem, 2016, 17, 1616–1620,  DOI:10.1002/cbic.201600075 .
M. Kono, S. Harada, T. Nozaki, Y. Hashimoto, S.-I. Murata, H. Gröger, Y. Kuroda, K.-I. Yamada, K. Takasu, Y. Hamada and T. Nemoto, Asymmetric Formal Synthesis of (+)-Catharanthine via Desymmetrization of Isoquinuclidine, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 3750–3754,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.9b01198 .
S. Dadashpour and S. Emami, Indoles in the target-based design of anticancer agents: a versatile scaffold with diverse mechanisms, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2018, 150, 9–29,  DOI:10.1016/j.ejmech.2018.02.065 .
A. K. Singh, V. Raj and S. Saha, Indole-fused azepines and analogues as anticancer lead molecules: privileged findings and future directions, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2017, 142, 244–265,  DOI:10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.07.042 .
C. W. Lee and J. Y. Lee, Above 30% External Quantum Efficiency in Blue Phosphorescent Organic Light-Emitting Diodes Using Pyrido[2,3-b]indole Derivatives as Host Materials, Adv. Mater., 2013, 35, 5450–5454,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201301091 .
P. R. Nitha, S. Soman and J. John, Indole-fused heterocycles as sensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cells, Mater. Adv, 2021, 2, 6136–6168,  10.1039/D1MA00499A .
Y. Wang, Z. Wan, C. Jia and X. Yao, Indole-based organic dyes with different electron donors for dye-sensitized solar cells, Synth. Met., 2016, 211, 40–48,  DOI:10.1016/j.synthmet.2015.10.024 .
Q. Li, L. Lu, C. Zhong, J. Shi, Q. Huang, X. Jin, T. Peng, J. Qin and Z. Li, New Indole-Based Metal-free Organic Dyes for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 14588–14595,  DOI:10.1021/jp906334w .
Q. Wang, D. Li, N. Rao, Y. Zhang, Y. Le, L. Liu, L. Huang and L. Yan, Development of indole-based fluorescent probe for detection of fluoride and cell imaging of HepG2, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 188, 109166,  DOI:10.1016/j.dyepig.2021.109166 .
J. Zhou, Y. Luo, Q. Li, J. Shen, R. Wang, Y. Xu and X. Qian, Assembly of indole fluorophore in situ for hydrogen sulfide signaling through substrate triggered intramolecular reduction–cyclization cascade: a sensitive and selective probe in aqueous solution, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 2770–2773,  10.1039/C3NJ01465G .
B. Ojha, K. Laxman and M. Ravikanth, Synthesis of 3H-Pyrrolo-(1,2-a) Indole-based Fluorophore Macrocycles and their Stable Cation Radicals, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2021, 10, 857–867,  DOI:10.1002/ajoc.202100068 .
Y.-J. Sun, D.-J. Zhao and B. Song, Indole-substituted flavonol-based cysteine fluorescence sensing and subsequent precisely controlled linear CO liberation, Analyst, 2022, 147, 3360–3369,  10.1039/D2AN00631F .
D. Choe, H. So, S. Park, H. Lee, J. B. Chae, J. Kim, K.-T. Kim and C. Kim, An Indole-Based Fluorescent Chemosensor for Detecting Zn2+ in Aqueous Media and Zebrafish, Sensors, 2021, 21, 5591,  DOI:10.3390/s21165591 .
P. Wang, C. R. Arza and B. Zhang, Indole as a new sustainable aromatic unit for high quality biopolyesters, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 4706–4710,  10.1039/C8PY00962G .
X. Li, X. Wang, S. Subramaniyan, Y. Liu, J. Rao and B. Zhang, Hyperbranched Polyesters Based on Indole- and Lignin-Derived Monomeric Aromatic Aldehydes as Effective Nonionic Antimicrobial Coatings with Excellent Biocompatibility, Biomacromolecules, 2022, 23, 150–162,  DOI:10.1021/acs.biomac.1c01186 .
R. M. Bouldin, A. Singh, M. Magaletta, S. Connor, J. Kumar and R. Nagarajan, Biocatalytic Synthesis of Fluorescent Conjugated Indole Oligomers, Bioengineering, 2014, 1, 246–259,  DOI:10.3390/bioengineering1040246 .
M. Shiri, Indoles in Multicomponent Reactions (MCRs), Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3508–3549,  DOI:10.1021/cr2003954 .
G. M. Ziarani, R. Moradi, T. Ahmadi and N. Lashgari, Recent advances in the application of indoles in multicomponent reactions, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 12069–12103,  10.1039/C7RA13321A .
Q. Qin, X.-L. Liu, A.-J. Ma, X.-Z. Zhang and J.-B. Peng, Unprecedented Multicomponent Reaction of Indoles, CS2 and Nitroarenes: Stereoselective Synthesis of (Z)-3-((Arylamino)methylene)indoline-2-thiones, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 3890–3894,  DOI:10.1002/asia.202101008 .
T. T. Nguyen and P. H. Tran, One-pot multicomponent synthesis of thieno[2,3-b]indoles catalyzed by a magnetic nanoparticle-supported [Urea]4[ZnCl2] deep eutectic solvent, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 9663–9671,  10.1039/D0RA00773K .
A. N. Komogortsev, B. V. Lichitsky and V. G. Melekhina, Multicomponent Approach to the Synthesis of 4-(1H-indol-3-yl)-5-(4-methoxyphenyl)furan-2(5H)-one, Molecules, 2021, 2021, M1292,  DOI:10.3390/M1292 .
O. Ghashghaei, M. Pedrola, F. Seghetti, V. V. Martin, R. Zavarce, M. Babiak, J. Novacek, F. Hartung, K. M. Rolfes, T. Haarmann-Stemmann and R. Lavilla, Extended Multicomponent Reactions with Indole Aldehydes: Access to Unprecedented Polyheterocyclic Scaffolds, Ligands of the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2603–2608,  DOI:10.1002/anie.202011253 .
E. Fischer and F. Jourdan, Ueber die Hydrazine der Brenztraubensäure, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1883, 16, 2241–2245,  DOI:10.1002/cber.188301602141 .
A. Bischler, Ueber die Entstehung einiger substituirter Indole, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1892, 25, 2860–2879,  DOI:10.1002/cber.189202502123 .
A. Reissart, Einwirkung von Oxalester und Natriumäthylat auf Nitrotoluole. Synthese nitrirter Phenylbrenztraubensäuren, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1897, 30, 1030–1053,  DOI:10.1002/cber.189703001200 .
W. Madelung, Über eine neue Darstellungsweise für substituierte Indole. I, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1912, 45, 1128–1134,  DOI:10.1002/cber.191204501160 .
R. J. Sundberg and T. Yamazaki, Rearrangements and ring expansions during the deoxygenation of. beta., beta.-disubstituted o-nitrostyrenes, J. Org. Chem., 1967, 32, 290–294,  DOI:10.1021/jo01288a009 .
G. Bartoli, G. Palmieri, M. Bosco and R. Dalpozzo, The reaction of vinyl Grignard reagents with 2-substituted nitroarenes: a new approach to the synthesis of 7-substituted indoles, Tetrahedron Lett., 1989, 30, 2129–2132,  DOI:10.1016/S0040-4039(01)93730-X .
R. C. Larock and E. K. Yum, Synthesis of indoles via palladium-catalyzed heteroannulation of internal alkynes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 6689–6690,  DOI:10.1021/ja00017a059 .
C. Nenitzescu, Über eine neue Indol-Synthese, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1925, 58, 1063–1064,  DOI:10.1002/cber.19250580613 .
T. Fukuyama, X. Chen and G. Peng, A Novel Tin-Mediated Indole Synthesis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 3127–3128,  DOI:10.1021/ja00086a054 .
S. W. Youn and T. Y. Ko, Recent Advances in Metal Catalyzed Synthesis of Substituted Indoles, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2018, 7, 1467–1487,  DOI:10.1002/ajoc.201800290 .
M. S. Christodoulou, E. M. Beccalli, F. Foschi and S. Giofrè, Pd-Catalyzed Domino Reactions Involving Alkenes to Access Substituted Indole Derivatives, Synthesis, 2020, 2731–2760,  DOI:10.1055/s-0040-1707123 .
L. Zheng, K. Tao and W. Guo, Recent Developments in Photo-Catalyzed/Promoted Synthesis of Indoles and Their Functionalization: Reactions and Mechanisms, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2021, 363, 62–119,  DOI:10.1002/adsc.202001079 .
B. S. Mathada, N. G. Yernale, J. N. Basha and J. Badiger, An insight into the advanced synthetic recipes to access ubiquitous indole heterocycles, Tertrahedron Lett., 2021, 85, 153458,  DOI:10.1016/j.tetlet.2021.153458 .
J. S. S. Neto and G. Zeni, Recent Developments in the Cyclization of Alkynes and Nitrogen Compounds for the Synthesis of Indole Derivatives, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2021, 10, 1282–1318,  DOI:10.1002/ajoc.202100013 .
S. Sahu, A. Banerjee, S. Kundu, A. Bhattacharyya and M. S. Maji, Synthesis of functionalized indoles via cascade benzannulation strategies: a decade's overview, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 3029–3042,  10.1039/d2ob00187j .
K. Krüger, A. Tillack and M. Beller, Catalytic Synthesis of Indoles from Alkynes, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 2153–2167,  DOI:10.1002/adsc.200800409 .
O. S. Kamble, M. Khatravath and R. Dandela, Applications of Ethynylanilines as Substrates for Construction of Indoles and Indole-Substituted Derivatives, ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 7408–7427,  DOI:10.1002/slct.202101437 .
Z.-S. Ye, J.-C. Li and G. Wang, Transition-Metal-Catalyzed Enantioselective Synthesis of Indoles from 2-Alkynylanilines, Synthesis, 2022, 2133–2147,  DOI:10.1055/a-1729-9572 .
J. S. S. Neto and G. Zeni, Recent advances in the synthesis of indoles from alkynes and nitrogen sources, Org. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 155–210,  10.1039/C9QO01315F .
D. I. Bugaenko, A. V. Karchava and M. A. Yurovskaya, Synthesis of indoles: recent advances, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2019, 88, 99–159,  DOI:10.1070/RCR4844 .
D.-J. Cheng and Y.-D. Shao, Organocatalytic Asymmetric Transformations Involving the Cyclic Imine Moiety in Indole and Isoindole Related Heterocycles, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2018, 363, 3614–3642,  DOI:10.1002/adsc.201800345 .
J. S. S. Neto and G. Zeni, Synthesis of Indoles from Alkynes and a Nitrogen Source under Metal-Free Conditions, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2020, 18, 4906–4915,  10.1039/D0OB00670J .
N. A. Aksenov, D. A. Aksenov, A. A. Skomorokhov, L. A. Prityko, A. V. Aksenov, G. D. Griaznov and M. Rubin, Synthesis of 2-(1H-indol-2-yl)acetamides via Brønsted Acid-Assisted Cyclization Cascade, J. Org. Chem., 2020, 85, 12128–12146,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.0c01344 .
H. Li, Y. Zhu, C. Jiang, J. Wei, P. Liu and P. Sun, HOAc catalyzed three-component reaction for the synthesis of 3,3′-(arylmethylene)bis(1H-indoles), Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 3365–3374,  10.1039/d2ob00395c .
D. El-Marrouki, S. Touchet, A. Abdelli, H. M’Rabet, M. L. Efrit and P. C. Gros, Tuneable access to indole, indolone, and cinnoline derivatives from a common 1,4-diketone Michael acceptor, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2020, 16, 1722–1731,  DOI:10.3762/bjoc.16.144 .
S. K. Roy, A. Purkait, S. M. Tarik and C. K. Jana, Acid Mediated Coupling of Aliphatic Amines and Nitrosoarenes to Indoles, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3167–3170,  10.1039/C9CC09616G .
E. Y. Schmidt, N. V. Semenova, I. V. Tatarinova, I. A. Ushakov, A. V. Vashchenko and B. A. Trofimov, Toward Acetylene Renaissance: Functionally Rich N-Aminoindoles from Acetylene Gas, Ketones, and Hydrazines in Two Steps, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 4275–4279,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.9b01452 .
E. Y. Schmidt, B. A. Trofimov, N. V. Zorina, A. I. Mikhaleva, I. A. Ushakov, E. V. Skital’tseva, O. N. Kazheva, G. G. Alexandrov and O. A. Dyachenko, Synthesis of Functionalized 3,4-Dihydropyrans via Rearrangement of the Products of a One-Pot Diastereoselective Assembly of Ketones and Acetylene, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2010, 6727–6730,  DOI:10.1002/ejoc.20101229 .
Y. Zhang, Y. He, T. Liu and W. Guo, Modular Divergent Synthesis of Functionalized Indoles via TFA-Promoted Amino-Claisen Rearrangement at Room Temperature, Org. Lett., 2023, 25, 2680–2684,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.3c00764 .
L. Serusi, M. Bonnans, A. Luridiana, F. Secci, P. Caboni, T. Boddaert, D. J. Aitken and A. Frongia, Brønsted acid catalysed synthesis of 3-(2-alkoxyethyl)indoles from α-arylaminocyclobutanones and alcohols, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2019, 361, 1908–1912,  DOI:10.1002/adsc.201900175 .
X. Lei, P. Lampiri, P. Patil, G. Angeli, C. G. Neochoritis and A. Dömling, A multicomponent tetrazolo indole synthesis, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 6652–6655,  10.1039/d1cc02384e .
X. Lei, G. K. Angeli, C. G. Neochoritis and A. Dömling, Sustainable multicomponent indole synthesis with broad scope, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 6168–6171,  10.1039/d2gc02060b .
C. Xu, W. Xie and J. Xu, Metal-free and regiospecific synthesis of 3-arylindoles, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2020, 18, 2661–2671,  10.1039/d0ob00317d .
M. Mandal and R. Balamurugan, TfOH-promoted synthesis of indoles and benzofurans involving cyclative transposition of vinyl ketone, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 9778–9881,  10.1039/d2cc03730k .
S. P. Murugan, H.-J. Zhong, C.-Y. Wu, H.-W. Pan, C. Chen and G.-H. Lee, Camphorsulfonic Acid-Mediated One-Pot Tandem Consecutive via the Ugi Four-Component Reaction for the Synthesis of Functionalized Indole and 2-Quinolone Derivatives by Switching Solvents, ACS Omega, 2022, 7, 5713–5729,  DOI:10.1021/acsomega.1c05460 .
G. Mari, L. D. Crescentini, G. Favi, S. Santeusanio and F. Mantellini, Metal and oxidant free construction of substituted- and/or polycyclic-indoles: a useful alternative to Bischler and related syntheses, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2020, 5411–5424,  DOI:10.1002/ejoc.202000845 .
S. Samanta, R. Chatterjee, S. Sarkar, S. Pal, A. Mukherjee, I. I. Butorin, O. A. Konovalova, T. Choudhuri, K. Chakraborty, S. Santra, G. V. Zyryanov and A. Majee, Brønsted acidic ionic liquid-catalyzed tandem reaction: an efficient and sustainable approach towards the regioselective synthesis and molecular docking studies of 4-hydroxycoumarin substituted indoles bearing lower E-factors, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 9161–9171,  10.1039/d2ob01431a .
J. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Zhang, X.-N. Wang and J. Chang, Metal-Free [3+2] Annulation of Ynamides with Anthranils to Construct 2-Aminoindoles, Org. Lett., 2021, 23, 2029–2035,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.1c00158 .
M. Li, T. Wang, Z. An and R. Yan, B(C6F5)3-Catalyzed Cyclization of alkynes: Direct Synthesis of 3-Silyl Hetero Cyclic Compounds, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 11953–11956,  10.1039/D0CC04314A .
C. R. Reddy, M. Aila, M. Subbarao, K. Warudikar and R. Grée, Domino Reaction of 2,4-Diyn-1-ols with 1,3-Dicarbonyl Compounds: Direct Access to Aryl/Heteroaryl-Fused Benzofurans and Indoles, Org. Lett., 2021, 23, 4882–4887,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.1c01615 .
R. A. S. Pike, R. R. Sapkota, B. Shrestha, R. K. Dhungana, K. C. Sekhar, D. A. Dickie and R. Giri, K2CO3-Catalyzed Synthesis of 2,5-Dialkyl-4,6,7-tricyano-Decorated Indoles via Carbon-Carbon Bond Cleavage, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 3268–3272,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.0c01057 .
P. Yang, W. Xu, R. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Xie, X. Zeng and M. Wang, Potassium tert-Butoxide-Mediated Condensation Cascade Reaction: Transition Metal-Free Synthesis of Multisubstituted Aryl Indoles and Benzofurans, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 3658–3662,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.9b01093 .
Y.-W. Li, H.-X. Zheng, B. Yang, X.-H. Shan, J.-P. Qu and Y.-B. Kang, 
            
t
BuOK-Promoted Cyclization of Imines with Aryl Halides, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 4553–4556,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.0c01615 .
H. Chung, J. Kim, G. A. Gonzalez-Montiel, P.
H.-Y. Cheng and H. G. Lee, Modular Counter-Fischer−Indole Synthesis through Radical-Enolate Coupling, Org. Lett., 2021, 23, 1096–1102,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.1c00003 .
T.-B. Hua, F. Chao, L. Wang, C.-Y. Yan, C. Xiao, Q.-Q. Yang and W.-J. Xiao, Tandem Phospha-Michael Addition/N-Acylation/Intramolecular Wittig Reaction of aza-o-Quinone Methides: Approaches to 2,3-Disubstituted Indoles, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2020, 362, 2615–2619,  DOI:10.1002/adsc.202000343 .
D. Ge, L.-W. Sun, Z.-L. Yu, X.-L. Luo, P. Xu and Z.-L. Shen, Regioselective synthesis of 6-nitroindole derivatives from enaminones and nitroaromatic compounds via transition metal-free C–C and C–N bond formation, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 1493–1499,  10.1039/d1ob02443d .
R. Pandey, G. Singh, V. Gour and R. V. Anand, Base-mediated sequential one-pot approach for the synthesis of 2,3-disubstituted indoles from 2-(tosylamino)aryl-substituted para-quinone methides, Tetrahedron, 2021, 82, 131950,  DOI:10.1016/j.tet.2021.131950 .
Y.-H. Wang, J.-S. Tian, P.-W. Tan, Q. Cao, X.-X. Zhang, Z.-Y. Cao, F. Zhou, X. Wang and J. Zhou, Regiodivergent Intramolecular Nucleophilic Addition of Ketimines for the Diverse Synthesis of Azacycles, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1634–1643,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201910864 .
J.-S. Tian, Z. Tu, E. Zhou, J.-S. Yu and J. Zhou, Tandem imine generation/N-cyclization/C-alkylation sequence to access N-functionalized indoles featuring an aza-quaternary carbon, Org. Chem. Front., 2023, 10, 1759–1766,  10.1039/D3QO00114H .
G. F. Chen and B. Xu, Mild Base-Promoted Tandem Nucleophilic Substitution/Decarboxylation/Hydroamination: Access to 3-Sulfonylindoles and 2-Methyleneindophenols, Org. Lett., 2021, 23, 9157–9162,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.1c03472 .
W.-C. Chen, R. Bai, W.-L. Cheng, C.-Y. Peng, D. M. Reddy, S. S. Badsara and C.-F. Lee, Base-mediated chalcogenoaminative annulation of 2-alkynylanilines for direct access to 3-sulfenyl/selenyl-1H-indoles, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2023, 21, 3002–3013,  10.1039/D3OB00279A .
J. Y. Mao, Z. T. Wang, X. Y. Xu, G. Q. Liu, R. S. Jiang, H. X. Guan, Z. P. Zheng and P. J. Walsh, Synthesis of Indoles through Domino Reactions of 2-Fluorotoluenes and Nitriles, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11033–11038,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201904658 .
G. A. Chesnokov, A. A. Ageshina, M. A. Topchiy, M. S. Nechaev and A. F. Asachenko, Transition-Metal-Free Synthesis of 1,2-Disubstituted Indoles, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2019, 4844–4854,  DOI:10.1002/ejoc.201900772 .
S. Lu, J.-Y. Ong, H. Yang, S. B. Poh, X. Liew, C. S. D. Seow, M. W. Wong and Y. Zhao, Diastereo- and Atroposelective Synthesis of Bridged Biaryls Bearing an Eight-Membered Lactone through an Organocatalytic Cascade, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17062–17067,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.9b08510 .
C. Li, Y. Xie, F. Xiao, H. Huang and G.-J. Deng, Regioselective three-component synthesis of 1,2-diarylindoles from cyclohexanones, α-hydroxyketones and anilines under transitionmetal-free conditions, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4079–4082,  10.1039/C9CC00943D .
Z.-B. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z.-X. Yu and J.-B. Xia, Lewis Base-Catalyzed Amino-Acylation of Arylallenes via C–N Bond Cleavage: Reaction Development and Mechanistic Studies, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5419–5429,  DOI:10.1021/acscatal.0c01000 .
G. K. Sterligov, A. A. Ageshina, S. A. Rzhevskiy, O. V. Shurupova, M. A. Topchiy, L. I. Minaeva and A. F. Asachenko, One-Pot Modified Madelung Synthesis of 3-Tosyl- and 3-Cyano-1,2-disubstituted Indoles, ACS Omega, 2022, 7, 38505–38511,  DOI:10.1021/acsomega.2c03754 .
W. Guo, K. Tao, Z. Xie, L. Cai, M. Zhao, W. Tan, G. Liu, W. Mei, L. Deng, X. Fan and L. Zheng, Photodriven Photocatalyst/Metal-Free Direct C−C/C−N Bond Formation: Synthesis of Indoles via EDA Complexes, J. Org. Chem., 2019, 84, 14168–14178,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.9b01689 .
D. C. Tymann, L. Benedix, L. Iovkova, R. Pallach, S. Henke, D. Tymann and M. Hiersemann, Photochemical Approach to the Cyclohepta[b]indole Scaffold by Annulative Two-Carbon Ring-Expansion, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 11974–11978,  DOI:10.1002/chem.202002581 .
S. Das, A. Azim, S. K. Hota, S. P. Panda., S. Murarka and S. De Sarkar, An organophotoredox-catalyzed redox-neutral cascade involving N-(acyloxy)phthalimides and allenamides: synthesis of indoles, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 13130–13133,  10.1039/d1cc05397c .
N. Yadav, M. D. Ansari, V. B. Yadav, A. Verma, S. K. Tiwari, S. Ansari and I. R. Siddiqui, Metal-free visible-light-mediated organophotoredox catalysis: synthesis of 3-functionalized indole via C–C, C–N bond formation, Mol. Divers., 2021, 25, 1103–1109,  DOI:10.1007/s11030-020-10044-y .
B. Wang, H. Ren, H.-J. Cao, C. Lu and H. Yan, A switchable redox annulation of 2-nitroarylethanols affording N-heterocycles: photoexcited nitro as a multifunctional handle, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 11074–11082,  10.1039/d2sc03590a .
Y.-T. Zheng, J. Song and H.-C. Xu, Electrocatalytic Dehydrogenative Cyclization of 2-Vinylanilides for the Synthesis of Indoles, J. Org. Chem., 2021, 86, 16001–19007,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.1c00988 .
A. C. Lindsay, P. A. Kilmartin and J. Sperry, Synthesis of 3-nitroindoles by sequential paired electrolysis, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2021, 19, 7903–7913,  10.1039/d1ob01453f .
X. Chang, X. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ma, D. Zhang, L. Yang and P. Sun, Electrochemical [3+2] Cycloaddition of Anilines and 1,3-Dicarbonyl Compounds: Construction of Multisubstituted Indoles, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2022, 364, 2865–2871,  DOI:10.1002/adsc.202200488 .
K. Hu, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Yang, Z. Zha and Z. Wang, Iodine-Mediated Electrochemical C(sp2)–H Amination: Switchable Synthesis of Indolines and Indoles, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 5773–5777,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.0c01821 .
M. Matsumoto, K. Wada, K. Urakawa and H. Ishikawa, Diaryliodonium Salt-Mediated Intramolecular C−N Bond Formation Using Boron-Masking N-Hydroxyamides, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 781–785,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.9b04076 .
Y. Wang, Q. He and R. Fan, Facile synthesis of 4-acetoxyindoles via PhI(OAc)2-mediated dearomatization of 2-alkynylanilines, Org. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 3004–3007,  10.1039/d1qo00358e .
K. Shibata, K.-i Takao and A. Ogura, Diaryliodonium Salt-Based Synthesis of N-Alkoxyindolines and Further Insights into the Ishikawa Indole Synthesis, J. Org. Chem., 2021, 86, 10067–10087,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.1c00820 .
J. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. He, H. Shi and Y. Du, Divergent synthesis of 2-methylthioindole and 2-unsubstituted indole derivatives mediated by SOCl2 and dimethyl/diethyl sulfoxides, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 7886–7890,  10.1039/d2ob01580c .
J. Zhang, X. Li, X. Li, H. Shi, F. Sun and Y. Du, DMSO/SOCl2-mediated C(sp2)–H amination: switchable synthesis of 3-unsubstituted indole and 3-methylthioindole derivatives, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 460–463,  10.1039/D0CC07453E .
G. Zhao, C. Roudaut, V. Gandon, M. Alami and O. Provot, Synthesis of 2-Substituted
Indoles through Cyclization and Demethylation of 2-Alkynyldimethylanilines by Ethanol, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 4204–4210,  10.1039/C9GC01880H .
J. Chen, D. Chang, F. Xiao and G.-J. Deng, Three-Component Ordered Annulation of Amines, Ketones, and Nitrovinylarenes: Access to Fused Pyrroles and Substituted Indoles under Metal-Free Conditions, J. Org. Chem., 2019, 84, 568–578,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.8b02410 .
C. A. Hughes-Whiffing and A. Perry, One-pot, three-component Fischer indolisation–N-alkylation for rapid synthesis of 1,2,3-trisubstituted indoles, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2021, 19, 627–634,  10.1039/d0ob02185g .
M. A. Schmidt, Effect of Terminal Alkylation of Aryl and Heteroaryl Hydrazines in the Fischer Indole Synthesis, J. Org. Chem., 2022, 87, 1941–1960,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.1c00203 .
L. Bao, Y. Liu, J. Peng, Y. Wang, J. Dong and X. Xu, Chemoselective Trimerization of Isocyanides: De Novo Synthesis of 2-Indole-Substituted Quinolines and Pyridines, Org. Lett., 2022, 24, 105–109,  DOI:10.1021/acs.orglett.1c03693 .
O. Khaikate, N. Inthalaeng, J. Meesin, K. Kantarod, M. Pohmakotr, V. Reutrakul, D. Soorukram, P. Leowanawat and C. Kuhakarm, Synthesis of Indolo- and Benzothieno[2,3-b]quinolines by a Cascade Cyclization of o-Alkynylisocyanobenzene Derivatives, J. Org. Chem., 2019, 84, 15131–15144,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.9b02081 .
K. La-ongthong, P. Naweephattana, O. Khaikate, P. Surawatanawong, D. Soorukram, M. Pohmakotr, V. Reutrakul, P. Leowanawat and C. Kuhakarn, Alkanethiol-Mediated Cyclization of o-Alkynylisocyanobenzenes: Synthesis of Bis-Thiolated Indole Derivatives, J. Org. Chem., 2020, 85, 6338–6351,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.0c00003 .
J. Jeon and C.-H. Cheon, Synthesis of benzo[a]carbazoles via cyanidecatalyzed imino-Stetter reaction/Friedel–Crafts reaction sequence, Org. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 456–467,  10.1039/c8qo01209a .
Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Shao, W. Xiong, R. Li and J. Chen, Synthesis of 3-Selenylindoles through Organoselenium-Promoted Selenocyclization of 2-Vinylaniline, J. Org. Chem., 2020, 85, 15015–15025,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.0c01918 .
N. R. Lauta, R. E. Williams, D. T. Smith, V. K. Kumirov and J. T. Njardarson, Oxidative Route to Indoles via Intramolecular Amino-Hydroxylation of o-Allenyl Anilines, J. Org. Chem., 2021, 86, 10713–10723,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.1c01379 .
J. Su, K. Zhang, M. Zhuang, F. Ma, W.-Q. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Zhang, Y. Jian and Z. Gao, One-Pot Synthesis of Indoles from aniline and α,β-ynones through Iodine-Mediated transition metal free tandem aza-Michael addition/C–H functionalization, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2019, 8, 482–486,  DOI:10.1002/ajoc.201900152 .
S. Yarogorla and D. Arun, Arylation and Aryne Insertion into C-Acylimines: A Simple, Flexible, and Divergent Synthesis of C2-Aryl Indoles, J. Org. Chem., 2022, 87, 14250–14263,  DOI:10.1021/acs.joc.2c01753 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Naturally occurring bioactive compounds containing the indole moiety.	 

 	Scheme 1  PPA-assisted cyclization of ortho-aminophenyl-4-oxobutanenitriles to afford substituted indoles.	 

 	Scheme 2  AcOH-catalyzed reaction of ortho-alkynyl anilines with arylaldehydes to access 3,3′-(arylmethylene)bis(1H-indoles).	 

 	Scheme 3  AcOH-assisted annulation of 1,4-diketone and amine affording indole/indolone.	 

 	Scheme 4  4-NO2-PhCO2H mediated annulation of nitrosoarenes and amines to form indoles.	 

 	Scheme 5  TFA-assisted reaction of DOBCO and arylhydrazine to form an indole ring.	 

 	Scheme 6  TFA-promoted amino-Claisen rearrangement of aryl substituted propargyl amines to obtain functionalized indoles.	 

 	Scheme 7  TsOH-catalyzed reaction of α-arylaminocyclobutanones with alcohols resulting in N-alkylindoles.	 

 	Scheme 8  Two-step one-pot synthesis of tetrazolo-indoles via Ugi-4CR followed by acid-induced annulation.	 

 	Scheme 9  Two-step one-pot preparation of indole-2-amides via the Ugi-4CR method followed by acid-assisted annulation.	 

 	Scheme 10  TsOH-Et3N promoted synthesis of 3-arylindoles from arylhydrazine and 3-aryloxirane-2-carbonitriles.	 

 	Scheme 11  TfOH-promoted cyclative transposition of vinylogous amides leading to alkenylindoles.	 

 	Scheme 12  Tandem Ugi-4CR followed by CSA-mediated annulation to form an indole core.	 

 	Scheme 13  Amberlyst 15H-assisted synthesis of indoles from anilines and 1,2-diaza-1,3-dienes.	 

 	Scheme 14  Ionic liquid-promoted synthesis of coumarin embedded indoles from aniline, arylglyoxal and 4-hydroxycoumarin.	 

 	Scheme 15  Tf2NH (or TMSOTf)-promoted annulation of ynamide with anthranils towards 2-aminoindoles.	 

 	Scheme 16  B(C6F5)3-catalyzed cycloaddition of N-methyl-2-(phenylethynyl)anilines with diphenylsilane to afford 3-silylindoles.	 

 	Scheme 17  BF3·Et2O-mediated formation of functionalized indoles from 2,4-diyne-1-ols and 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds.	 

 	Scheme 18  K2CO3-catalyzed synthesis of indoles from 1,3-diketones and fumaronitrile.	 

 	Scheme 19  

t
BuOK-promoted synthesis of 2-arylindoles exploiting ortho-N-substituted aryl aldehydes and DMSO.	 

 	Scheme 20  

t
BuOK-promoted synthesis of indole scaffolds via radical coupling of 2-halotoluenes and imines.	 

 	Scheme 21  

t
BuOK-mediated indole synthesis employing 2-iodoanilines and ketones.	 

 	Scheme 22  CsOH promoted synthesis of indoles from N-(ortho-chloromethyl)aryl amides, acyl chlorides and PPh3.	 

 	Scheme 23  Cs2CO3-mediated synthesis of 6-nitroindoles from enaminones and nitroaromatics.	 

 	Scheme 24  Cs2CO3-DBU-assisted 2,3-disubstituted indoles from 2-(tosylamino)aryl-substituted p-QMs and bromomethyl aryl ketones.	 

 	Scheme 25  Na2CO3-promoted regiodivergent intramolecular cyclization of ketimines to form the indole skeleton.	 

 	Scheme 26  Synthesis and base-promoted cyclization of imines to form functionalized indoles.	 

 	Scheme 27  K2CO3-promoted chemoselective synthesis of 3-sulfonylindoles and 2-methyleneindophenols from ethynyl benzoxazinanones.	 

 	Scheme 28  

t
BuOK-assisted chalcogenoaminative annulation between 2-alkynyl anilines and disulfides/diselenides to form 3-sulfenyl/selenyl-1H-indoles.	 

 	Scheme 29  LiN(SiMe3)2/CsF-assisted synthesis of 2-aryl indoles by combining 2-fluorotoluenes and nitriles.	 

 	Scheme 30  LDA-promoted intramolecular cyclization of unactivated tertiary amines bearing the ortho-toluidine moiety towards 1,2-disubstituted indoles.	 

 	Scheme 31  Azolium-DIPEA assisted formation of fused indoles from propargylic tertiary alcohols and aldehydes.	 

 	Scheme 32  Morpholine-mediated synthesis of 1,2-diarylindoles from cyclohexanones, anilines and α-hydroxy ketones.	 

 	Scheme 33  DMAP-promoted intramolecular amino-acylation of aryl allenes to form aroylindoles.	 

 	Scheme 34  DBN-assisted cyclization of N-(2-(bromomethyl)aryl)-N-arylbenzamides to access 1,2-disubstituted indoles.	 

 	Scheme 35  Photodriven construction of the indole core via [3+2] annulation of secondary amines and but-2-ynedioates.	 

 	Scheme 36  Irradiation (254 nm) of modularly assembled vinylogous amides to accomplish cyclohepta[b]indoles.	 

 	Scheme 37  Eosin Y-catalyzed photoredox approach involving N-arylated allenamides and NHPI esters to access substituted indoles.	 

 	Scheme 38  Eosin Y-catalyzed visible light-mediated reaction of aniline, 2,2-dihydroxy-1-arylethan-1-one and 4-hydroxy-6-methyl-2H-pyran-2-one to access indoles.	 

 	Scheme 39  Photoexcited strategy for annulation of 2-nitroarylethanols to obtain indoles.	 

 	Scheme 40  Electrocatalytic formation of indoles via dehydrogenative cyclization of 2-vinylanilides.	 

 	Scheme 41  Electrochemical cyclization of aryl nitroenamines to 3-nitroindoles.	 

 	Scheme 42  Electrochemical [3+2] cycloaddition of anilines and 1,3-dicarbonyls to synthesize functionalized indoles.	 

 	Scheme 43  Electrochemical synthesis of indolines and indoles from 2-vinyl anilines.	 

 	Scheme 44  PIFA-mediated synthesis of electron-rich indoles exploiting boron-masking N-hydroxyamides.	 

 	Scheme 45  PhI(OAc)2-mediated synthesis of 4-acetoxyindoles from 2-alkynylanilines.	 

 	Scheme 46  Diaryliodonium salt-based synthesis of indole derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 47  SOCl2/DMSO (Et2SO)-mediated cyclization of 2-vinylanilines towards indoles.	 

 	Scheme 48  SOCl2/DMSO-mediated annulation of 2-alkenylanilines to access substituted indoles.	 

 	Scheme 49  Additive-free synthesis of 2-substituted indoles from 2-alkynyldimethylamines in ethanol.	 

 	Scheme 50  Three-component reaction of cyclic ketones, amines and nitrovinylarenes to afford the indole skeleton.	 

 	Scheme 51  One-pot synthesis of 1,2,3-trisubstituted indoles from phenylhydrazine hydrochloride, butanones and alkyl halides.	 

 	Scheme 52  Fischer indolization involving N-alkylated hydrazine and ketone to form indoles.	 

 	Scheme 53  Chemoselective trimerization of isocyanides affording 2-(indol-2-yl)quinolines and 2-(indol-2-yl)-pyridines.	 

 	Scheme 54  Chloride ion-assisted access to indolo[2,3-b]quinolines from o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes.	 

 	Scheme 55  Alkanethiol-mediated cyclization of o-alkynylisocyanobenzenes to obtain bis-thiolated indoles.	 

 	Scheme 56  Formation of indole derivatives via cyanide-catalyzed imino-Setter reaction of aldimines.	 

 	Scheme 57  Organoselenium-mediated synthesis of 3-selenylindoles employing 2-styrylanilines and diphenyldiselenide.	 

 	Scheme 58  Lead(IV) carboxylate-assisted intramolecular oxidative amino-hydroxylation of o-allenyl anilines to obtain the indole core.	 

 	Scheme 59  I2-mediated synthesis of the indole skeleton directly from anilines and α,β-ynones.	 

 	Scheme 60  Ca(II)-promoted synthesis of indoles from glyoxal, amine, arene and aryl triflate.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
