Enhanced thermoelectric performance of Cu 3 SbS 4 flower-like hierarchical architectures composed of Cl doped nanoflakes via an in situ generated CuS  ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP06465A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP06465A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 1460-1475Enhanced thermoelectric performance of Cu3SbS4 flower-like hierarchical architectures composed of Cl doped nanoflakes via an in situ generated CuS template†

        
          
            Qun 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jianhuan 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jianjun 
            Li
          
        
      *b
aMIIT, Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, 92 West Dazhi Stree, Harbin 150001, P. R. China. E-mail: wangqun5992@hit.edu.cn;  Fax: (+86)-431-85168624;   Tel: (+86)-431-85168662
bScience and Technology on Advanced Composites in Special Environment Laboratory, Harbin Institute of Technology, 92 West Dazhi Stree, Harbin 150001, P. R. China. E-mail: ljj8081@gmail.com
Received 
      21st September 2017
    , Accepted 4th December 2017First published on 4th December 2017AbstractIn this work, Cu3SbS4 hierarchical flower-like microspheres composed of chlorine (Cl−)-doped Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes are realized via a one pot solvothermal ion exchange reaction. The kinetic factors including the duration time, the ratio of source materials, and the KOH concentration, are systematically investigated. Using a suite of analytical techniques, including SEM, XRD and FTIR, the mechanism of the two stage in situ chemical transformation of CuS flower-like microspheres consisting of nanoflake intermediates to the target product Cu3SbS4 is elucidated. The difference in solubility between reactants and products (Ksp(CuS) > Ksp(CuSbSx)) determines that the ion-exchange reaction from transition binary to ternary metal chalcogenides is favorable under the impetus of a thermodynamic driving force. In addition, the optical and enhanced thermoelectric transport properties are investigated. The results revealed that Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 exhibited an improved power factor, which was 8 times higher than that of undoped Cu3SbS4 at 500 K. The current study not only provides a facile and economical way to synthesize high-quality Cl-doped Cu–Sb–S three dimensional (3D) hierarchical nanostructures, but also opens up a new route for preparation of other I–V–VI multicomponent chalcogenide NCs, such as Cu–Bi–S and Cu–Pb–S systems, which would be difficult to obtain otherwise.
1. Introduction
Recently, it has been generally accepted that complex three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical architectures fabricated from low-dimensional nanocrystals retain the advantages of nanocrystals whilst offering additional benefits resulting from their secondary architecture. In the last decade, the ternary Cu–Sb–S system which belongs to a family of group I–V–VI semiconductors, has attracted increasing attention because it not only meets the requirements of the constituent elements being cost effective, but also offers potential applications in solar cell1,2 and thermoelectric (TE) materials3,4 and so on. Owing to the variable valences of Cu (I or II) and Sb (III or V), and different types of Cu and Sb coordination environments (CuSn and SbSn, n = 3, 4), ternary Cu–Sb–S semiconductors are a large group of crystalline structure phases including four common crystal phases: famatinite (Cu3SbS4), tetrahedrite (Cu12Sb4S13), skinnerite (Cu3SbS3), and chalcostibite (CuSbS2). In particular, as a key member of the Cu–Sb–S family, the famatinite-Cu3SbS4 compound could be suitable as a solar radiation absorber in solar cells because of its experimental energy band gap (0.46–1.0 eV), and high absorption coefficient, greater than 104 cm−1 over the visible region.2 On the other hand, it is reported that p-type semiconductor Cu3SbS4 could exhibit excellent TE properties due to its relatively low κL (0.80 W m−1 K−1) and large S (171.1 μV K−1) at 523 K.3 Despite these valuable properties, the existing literature on the synthesis and formation of Cu3SbS4 has not been extensively explored so far. To date, there are only a few reports on the synthesis of Cu3SbS4 nanostructures synthesized in solution. For instance, Gupta et al. reported the selective synthesis of phase-pure Cu–Sb–S nanocrystals of all four phases by careful selection of the metal, sulfide precursors, and reaction parameters such as reaction temperature, precursor type and ratio, and ligand composition.5 Tachibana et al. reported the synthesis of monodisperse famatinite (Cu3SbS4) nanocrystals using bis(trimethylsilyl)-sulfide as a sulfur source.6 Embden et al. presented the novel synthesis of tetrahedrite (Cu12Sb4S13) and famatinite (Cu3SbS4) nanocrystals and provided a detailed investigation of the optical and photoelectrical properties.7 In addition, three phases (CuSbS2, Cu12Sb4S13 and Cu3SbS4) of copper antimony sulfide (CAS) nanocrystals were successfully synthesized by choosing N,N′-diphenylthiourea as the sulfide precursor, which is favorable for balancing the relative reactivity of Cu and Sb ions.8 Apparently, zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles and one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials are the most common shapes observed in the literature. However, to the best of our knowledge, the synthesis of their two-dimensional (2D) analogues has been rarely reported until now, let alone reports concerning the large scale preparation of Cu3SbS4 three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical architecture microspheres composed of 2D Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes. Therefore, it is still a meaningful study to develop a suitable method for the synthesis of Cu3SbS4 3D flower-like hierarchical architectures.
On the other hand, in recent years, chlorine (Cl) has been reported to be an effective dopant to improve the photovoltaic properties, chemical stability and thermoelectric performance and so on.10–14 Usually, Cl ions act as electronic dopants and can easily lose electrons and insert into the host lattice. Therefore, they will influence the distribution of electrons between various ions and oxidation states of transition metals, dramatically improving the charge transport within the perovskite MAPbI3 layer.9 Simultaneously, with regard to the thermoelectric materials, Cl-doped PbTe-based thermoelectric nanocomposites (AgPb18SbSe20−xClx and PbTe) showed an enhanced thermoelectric performance compared with the undoped PbTe-based sample.10,11 Very interestingly, except for a traditional high temperature solid state doping reaction process, Han et al. demonstrated the introduction of Cl to thermoelectric SnSe nanoparticles using a one-pot in situ solution approach.12 In addition, it was found that composites with Cl doping in graphite layers and MoS2 have superior properties compared to an undoped sample.13,14
Several attempts have been made to investigate the formation pathway in the literature for the ternary copper chalcogenide-based nanomaterials. Usually, colloidal CuS-based composites are commonly prepared by a direct synthesis, where all three precursors (i.e., compounds serving as Cu precursors, other transition metal precursors, and S sources) are utilized together in one pot, either by using a hot-injection method or heat-up synthesis.15 The Agrawal and Hillhouse group revealed insights into the formation pathway of CuInSe2 nanoparticles by the formation of cuprous selenide (CuSe) and the less thermodynamically stable indium selenide (InSe) intermediates using chloride precursors and elemental selenium in coordinating solvent oleylamine. Moreover, it was found that the reaction between the binary selenides, CuSe and InSe, primarily resulted in the formation of the disordered sphalerite phase of CuInSe2, however the relatively fast liquid–solid phase reaction between InCl3 and CuSe in the presence of selenium increased the yield of the ordered chalcopyrite crystal structured nanocrystals.15 However, as these materials contain multivalent cations, which have different reactivity, their formation chemistry remains more diverse than that of the well-established binary semiconductors. One of the most acceptable protocols studied for the formation of these nanostructures is the insertion of atoms of a third element into the parent crystal lattice of a semiconductor host nanostructure with a definite shape and phase by means of the diffusion mechanism.16 Akkerman et al. presented an approach for the synthesis of ternary copper indium sulfide (CIS) and quaternary copper indium zinc sulfide (CIZS) nanocrystals (NCs) through a three-step approach based on a partial cation exchange with In3+ and Zn2+, starting from Cu2S nanoparticles.17 Furthermore, it was shown that by combining two precursors (In3+ and Zn2+) in one pot, homogeneously alloyed CIZS NCs with a higher zinc content could be synthesized. Similarly, a diffusion-controlled chemical transformation for the conversion of binary anisotropic 1D Sb2Se3 to ternary I–V–VI Cu3SbSe3 nanorods is reported.18 More importantly, the aspect ratios and volumes of the rods were unchanged, suggesting that on insertion of a required amount of Cu(I) ions, half of the original Sb atoms were replaced via substitution. Recently, the Milliron research group described the synergistic role of trivalent dopants, gallium and antimony, in the shape of alloyed copper chalcogenide nanocrystals. That means one dopant (Sb) catalyzes the incorporation of the other (Ga), tuning the reaction kinetics and leading to the formation of Sb-doped CuIn1−xGaxS2 nanodumbbells.19 These findings provide in-depth insights into the mechanisms of diffusion and formation of group I–V–VI anisotropic semiconductor nanostructures.
However, at present, Cu3SbS4 synthesis systems are still in their primitive stages and far from being well understood. As we all know, tetragonal Cu3SbS4 compounds can hardly spontaneously grow into an anisotropic nanostructure and simultaneously integrate into 3D superstructures. Without exception, the crystallization mechanism of Cu3SbS4 is also rather complex. In particular, there is no report on a controllable assembly of Cl doped Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes so far. Simultaneously, exploring a general and new chemical transformation route for Cu3SbS4 allows us to design and fabricate a large variety of new CuS-based ternary and quarternary alloy artificial solids. Given this background, we herein present a facile and general in stiu template-based method for the synthesis of ternary Cu3SbS4 semiconducting 3D nanostructures in high yield. The detailed structural characterization and morphology evolution were investigated and depicted based on the time-dependent experiment. On the basis of the obtained results, new insights related to the formation mechanism of such hierarchical architectures are proposed in solution. In addition, other factors affecting the morphologies of Cu3SbS4 crystals were also systematically studied. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on Cu3SbS4 hierarchical flower-like microspheres composed of chlorine (Cl−)-doped Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes to date. Moreover, the thermoelectric transport properties of the bulk compacted by Cu3SbS4 samples were measured ranging from 300 to 520 K.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Materials and preparation procedures
All chemicals were of analytical grade and were directly used without any treatment. In a typical procedure, a mixture of ethylene glycol (analytical reagent, A. R) and acetylacetone (A. R) with the volume ratio of 3:1 was put into a beaker. Then 1.6 mmol copper(II) chloride dehydrate (CuCl2·2H2O), and 0.16 mmol antimony potassium tartrate (K(SbO)C4H4O6·5H2O), were added under stirring at room temperature to ensure good dispersion of the reactants. After stirring for 30 min, with good mixing, the resulting suspension mixture was transferred into a 50 mL Teflon-lined stainless steal autoclave, which was filled with 1.8 mmol KOH and 5 mmol of sulfur powder (C. R.). The autoclave was sealed and maintained in an electric oven at 180 °C for 8 h and the closed system was then cooled to ambient temperature naturally. The black precipitates were washed with distilled water and absolute alcohol several times and dried in a vacuum at 60 °C for 6 h. The specimens were then collected, in preparation for analysis and characterization.
2.2. Characterization
The Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed on a Rigaku Dmax 2000 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154178 nm), in the 2θ range from 10° to 80°. The microstructure and composition analyses were conducted on a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, FEI QUANTA 200F) working at 30 kV. Transmission electron microscopic (TEM) images and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images were taken on a transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI Tecnai G2) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) working at 300 kV. For typical SEM sampling, 1 mg of product was added into 5 mL of absolute ethanol and then sonicated for 10 min to achieve a homogeneous suspension. The suspension can stay stable for several days without obvious settling at the bottom of the container. The suspension was then dropped onto a smooth silicon wafer substrate using a pipet for SEM measurement and onto carbon coated 200 mesh Cu grids for TEM, HRTEM and EDX characterization. The binding energy and surface oxidation of the prepared products were explored on an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) (PHI 5700 ESCA40), using Al Kα radiation as the excitation source. The UV-vis diffusion reflection spectrum (UV-vis) was acquired on a Perkin-Elmer Lambda-20 spectrometer at room temperature.
2.3. Thermoelectric transport property measurements
In addition, the products were pressed into compact bar-shaped samples (10 × 4.6 × 1.0 mm3) under a high pressure of 30 MPa for electrical property measurements. The electrical conductivities of the samples were measured by a DC four-probe technique using a 2400 sourcemeter (Keithley 2400, Keithley Instruments Inc., America) under an argon atmosphere from room temperature to 250 °C, in order to avoid possible oxidization at high temperature. To obtain the Seebeck coefficient, a microheater that created a temperature difference of about 3–15 K between the cool and hot ends of the specimen was applied. The temperature differences (ΔT) were determined by calibrated nickel chromium–nickel silicon thermocouples, while the corresponding thermally induced voltage ΔV was recorded by the voltage probes. Then the Seebeck coefficient can be obtained by the formula, S = −ΔV/ΔT. The experimental data of electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient were collected by a computer-controlled multifunctional measuring system under an argon atmosphere. Hall coefficients (RH) were measured in a Quantum Design Physical Property measurement system (PPMS). The charge carrier concentration (nH) was calculated by using nH = 1/RHe, where e is the elementary charge. The Hall carrier mobility (μH) was calculated according to the relation μH = σRH.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Formation of Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes

Fig. 1a exhibits the experimental synthesis procedure of black Cu–Sb–S powder products. The details are described in the Experimental section. The phases of the products synthesized at 180 °C for 8 h can be easily distinguished by the powder X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD), which is employed to examine the phase composition, crystallinity and phase purity of the as-prepared product. From inspection of the XRD patterns in Fig. 1b, we can clearly see that both the weak and the strong reflections appear broad, which is consistent with nano-size crystal domains. The spectrum clearly reveals the presence of the four main characteristic peaks located at 28.7°, 32.5°, 47.5°, and 56.7°, corresponding to the reflections from (112), (200), (204), and (312) crystal planes of the famatinite structure Cu3SbS4 (JCPD No. 35-0581), respectively. Famatinite (space group I2m, No. 121) crystallizes to form a zincblende-related body-centered tetragonal lattice and both the copper and antimony atoms are seen to be tetrahedrally coordinated to bridging sulfur atoms. The crystallite sizes of the nanoflakes were calculated from the Debye–Scherrer formula,  where ‘D’ is the diameter of the crystallite, the Scherrer constant (K) of 0.94 was used for a spherical nanocrystal, ‘λ’ is the wavelength of the X-rays (0.15406 nm), ‘β’ is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) and ‘θ’ is the diffraction angle. The calculated crystallite size for the prominent (112) lattice reflection at 28.7° was found to be 18.5 nm. The morphology and structure of the black product were obviously observed by SEM. A typical low-magnification SEM image shows that the majority of the products are composed of numerous hierarchical flower-like microspheres with diameters ranging from 1.5 to 2 μm (Fig. 1c) suggesting that high yield and good uniformity can be readily achieved by this strategy. More detailed morphologies, as displayed in Fig. 1d, demonstrated that the final products possess highly developed hierarchical structures built by many interleaving two-dimensional (2D) nanoflakes, and each nanoflake has a typical thinckness up to approximately 20 nm, which is in excellent agreement with the result of the XRD patterns. To further characterize the microstructures of the samples, TEM images were taken as shown in Fig. 2. Nearly spherical nanostructures with an average size of 1.5 to 2 μm composed of many nanoflakes and several dispersive nanoflakes obtained from the broken microspheres due to the ultrasonic treatment external force collision can be seen in Fig. 2a–c. Furthermore, in the HRTEM image (Fig. 2d), the observed lattice spacing of 0.31 could be assigned to the (112) plane of tetragonal Cu3SbS4, which is in good agreement with the strongest (112) diffraction peak of the XRD result.
 Fig. 1  (a) Flow chart of the experimental synthesis procedure of black Cu–Sb–S powder products at 180 °C and 8 h. (b) Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of Cu3SbS4. (c and d) Low- and high magnification SEM images of the as-prepared Cu3SbS4 products. 
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM images of a single Cu3SbS4 flower-like microsphere and (b and c) several nanoflakes breaking off the microspheres and (d) HRTEM image of the edge of a nanoflake. 

Fig. 3a, c and d shows a high angle annular dark-field (HAADF) micrograph of a selected dense and intact area of an individual nanoflake that fell off from the broken microspheres. The EDS of the region shown in Fig. 3b reveals the peaks of Cu, Sb, S and Cl elements and suggests an atomic composition of Cu3.2SbS3.8Cl0.3. Moreover, ICP-AES results determined the elemental composition of the prepared hierarchical flower-like microspheres, whose data were similar to those measured by EDS. Lastly, the EDX elemental mapping studies on the Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes further confirmed the solid solution structures. It is noteworthy that some tiny island-like Cu3SbS4 particles were attached on the surface of the nanoflakes marked by white arrows, indicating that some defect sites on the nanoflakes served as nucleation sites for the growth of Cu3SbS4 particles. These defects may originate from the release of crystal stress, which is also in line with the mechanism behind the stress induced by Sb ions entering the CuS template host lattices. Interestingly, it is clearly seen that the Cl element is evenly distributed in the entire Cu3SbS4 lattice, confirming the homogeneous solid solution phase behavior of the nanocrystals, which is in line with the experimental XRD observation in the current work. The yellow color, blue color, red color and orange color in the elemental mappings (Fig. 3d) indicate the uniform spatial distribution of Cu, Sb, S and Cl in the product, respectively. The existence of Cl should result from the precursor of CuCl2. To the best of our knowledge, Cu3SbS4 with Cl doped nanoflakes is prepared guided by a one pot chemical transformation route for the first time.
 Fig. 3  (a) Representative TEM and (b) EDS images of Cu3SbS4 nanoparticles. (c) High angle annular dark field (HAADF) image. The four panels in (d) are (clockwise from top left) elemental mapping for Cu (yellow), S (red), Cl (orange) and Sb (blue). 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis evaluates the chemical bonding states of each element on the surface of the as-prepared Cu3SbS4 sample. High resolution XPS spectra of the as-prepared Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes are shown in Fig. 4. The binding energies corresponding to Cu 2p3/2, Sb 4d and S 2p are 931.7, 529.6 and 161.6 eV, respectively (Fig. 4a–c). According to quantitative XPS analysis, Cu+, Sb3+ and S2− are present in the sample. The core level spectrum of Cu 2p is split into Cu 2p3/2 (931.3 eV) and Cu 2p1/2 (951.3 eV), corresponding to the binding energy of Cu+ but quite different from that of Cu2+.20,21 Embden et al. found that only Cu(I) is present in the famatinite Cu3SbS4 whereas for the tetrahedrite Cu12Sb4S13 both Cu(I) and Cu(II) are represented.7 The peaks at around 935 eV associated with CuS and CuSO4 and the peaks at 955 eV related to CuO were not observed, indicating no possible oxidation at the surface of the famatinite.7 Therefore, in the present work, the starting Cu2+ (CuCl2·5H2O) has been reduced to Cu+ in the chemical reactions, which will be discussed in the following mechanism section. Usually, antimony possesses two chemical valence states. The peak of Sb 3d is split into 529.6 (3d5/2) and 539.2 eV (3d3/2), which is consistent with the value of Sb(V), indicating that the oxidation state of antimony in the obtained product should be +5 without the chemical valence state +3.21 Tang et al. reported that sulfur vapor could completely oxidize Sb3+ in Cu12Sb4S13 into Sb5+ forming pure phase Cu3SbS4, which proceeded following this equation: 2Cu12Sb4S13 + 3S2 = 8Cu3SbS4,21 which is consistent with an S-rich chemical reaction environment in our present work. In the core level spectrum of the S 2p region, the binding energies at 161.6 and 162.5 eV are assigned to S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2, which are related to Cu–S and Sb–S, respectively. These results are in good agreement with the reported values.7,21 It could be concluded that the chemical composition of the hierarchical microspheres is Cu3SbS4. The Cl 2p spectra (Fig. 4d) of the samples are composed of two peaks; the strong peak centered at 199.3 eV and the minor contribution at 201.2 eV might be assigned to Cl 2p3/2 and Cl 2p1/2 states, respectively, indicating that the Cl incorporated into the crystal lattice of Cu3SbS4 and exists in the form of Cl−.13,14 This implies that electron doping indeed originates from the halide on substitution for S2−. As a matter of fact, James et al. found one previous report of a solvothermal synthesis of tetrahedrite Cu12Sb4S13 to produce a heterogeneous and chloride doping product in recent years. But it is a pity that the authors did not further investigate the formation mechanism.4
 Fig. 4  XPS spectra of the Cu3SbS4 nanoparticles: (a) XPS survey pattern of S 2p, (b) XPS spectrum of Cu 2p, (c) XPS spectrum of Sb 3d, and (d) XPS spectrum of Cl 2p. 
Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals have a very distinct absorption behavior with broad shoulders having maxima at 410 nm (3.02 eV), 547 nm (2.26 eV), and 677 nm (1.83 eV) in Fig. 5a. The absorbance features are present in the spectrum as indicated by the arrows, which may be indicative of phonon assisted transitions or due to direct higher order transitions. The absorption features observed for Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals are consistent with an earlier report.5,6 The band gap values of nanocrystals have been obtained by plotting (Ahν)2versus hν for a direct band gap and (Ahν)1/2versus hν for an indirect band gap (A = absorbance, h = Planck's constant, and ν = frequency) and extrapolating the linear portion of the spectrum in the band edge region. For the semiconductors with a direct band gap, the n should be set as 2, while it is equal to 1/2 for the semiconductors with an indirect band gap. It is clearly seen that our sample showed a high band gap value (1.09 eV). Analysis of the band gap using a Tauc plot was conducted, and a straight line for the (Ahν)1/2 plot indicated that Cu3SbS4 was an indirect band gap material, which agrees with the previous reported results. For instance, Ramasamy and co-workers found that an oblate spheroid Cu3SbS4 nanocrystal with an average size of 23 ± 4 nm using colloidal hot-injection methods displayed indirect band gaps (1.2 eV).5 An indirect band gap for famatinite Cu3SbS4 synthesized by a ligand-assisted liquid phase route was measured at ∼1 eV based on the linear spectra observed for n = 1/2.7 Chen et al. presented a solution-based hot-injection method for the synthesis of Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals and the band gaps of 5.95 nm sized Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals with an indirect band gap is 1.50 eV.8 In addition, it is reported that the Cu3SbS4 indirect band gap was calculated to be ca. 0.8 eV from the Tauc plot.23 However, it is important to note that Cu3SbS4 has been reported as a direct gap material in the bulk state. Goto et al. observed that the direct-type optical band gap of bulk Cu3SbS4 prepared by a solid-state reaction using CuS, Cu2S, and Sb2S3 as starting materials was 0.9 eV.22 This apparent contradiction may be a consequence of surface contributions to the electronic structure within nanocrystals, or due to quantum size effects.6 Another possible reason for the discrepancies is the presence/absence of impurities or defects in the Cu–Sb–S nanocrystals.23 As a matter of fact, the presence of some small linear regions in the (Ahν)2 plot does not allow for omission of the presence of some direct band character. However, the degree of this contribution in famatinite Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals is still unclear.6 Therefore, as a novel material, further measurements are required to elucidate the precise nature of the electronic transitions in Cu3SbS4. In addition, nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding pore size distribution plots for synthesized hierarchical Cu3SbS4 nanoflowers are shown in Fig. 5b. On the basis of random self-assembly of the nanoflakes, porous structures with a wide pore size distribution could be expected. The isotherm of the as-synthesized sample exhibited a hysteresis loop characteristic of mesopores, indicating the presence of inter-particles. The hysteresis loop in the lower relative pressure range (0.5 < P/P0 < 0.9) is related to the existence of mesopores, and in the higher relative pressure range (0.9 < P/P0 < 1) it is associated with the empty spaces between microspheres. The broad hysteresis loop in the curve implies that the pore-size distribution is relatively wide due to irregular assembly of nanoflakes. Groen et al. have elaborated that when calculating the pore size distribution the adsorption branch of the isotherm should be used in order to avoid the tensile strength effect (TSE) of the adsorbed phase.24 As shown in the distribution plot calculated from the adsorption part of the isotherms (Fig. 5b), a broad pore-size distribution in the range of 10–50 nm can be observed, further confirming inter-particle pores due to interconnection of the tiny Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes.
 Fig. 5  The UV-vis absorption spectrum (a) and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore-size distribution plots of Cu3SbS4 flower-like microspheres (b). 
3.2. The influence of experimental parameters
Sheldrick et al. reported that hydrothermal (or solvothermal) reaction may be regarded as a special case of a chemical transport reaction, and a variety of experimental factors can also have an impact on the final morphology.25 Reaction kinetics is significantly influenced by the selection of a suitable type and concentration of the chemicals used, including solvents, precursors, surfactant and redox agents, and the temperature profile, considering that the time and temperature of addition of each component to the reaction mixture, and thus the morphology and crystallinity of the resulting Cu3SbS4 nanostructures, vary under different reaction conditions. Experiments were conducted by varying one experimental parameter while keeping the other parameters (reaction temperature and time, etc.) constant. The morphologies of the as-synthesized products were examined by SEM, XRD and FTIR analysis.
The effects of temperature and degree of supersaturation (as controlled by temperature gradient) on the morphology of hydrothermally grown products were investigated. All the samples were prepared under the same reaction conditions as shown in the typical synthesis process, but with varied growth temperatures. Obviously, there is no solid product in the light-blue precursor solution at room temperature. At 80 °C, the main products give several amorphous large plate-like microparticles (XRD pattern is not shown here) (Fig. 6a). When the reaction temperature was increased to 120 °C, plenty of microspheres with a size of 1–1.5 μm consisting of nanoflakes appeared, as shown in Fig. 6b, showing that high reaction temperature is favorable to form a bigger product through absorbing more nutrition. As we all known, in the classical nucleation theory, homogeneous nucleation has a high thermodynamic energy barrier that originates from the high surface-to-volume ratio of the nucleus. Given that the surface energy per area, γ, and the bulk energy per volume, ΔGv, are constant, the free energy change, ΔG, resulting from homogeneous nucleation is written asΔGhom(r) = 4πr2γ + 4/3πr3ΔGvwhere r is the radius of a spherical nucleus.26 From the condition d[ΔGhom(r)]/dr = 0, the critical radius, r* = −2γ/ΔGv, is derived. Only the nuclei with r ≥ r* can spontaneously grow into larger particles (d[ΔGhom(r)]/dr < 0), whereas those with r < r* will dissolve in the solution. This energy barrier is important in the synthesis of uniformly sized nanoparticles. Significant growth of Cu3SbS4 into nanoflkes requires higher temperatures to overcome the thermodynamic barrier. Once the requirement is met, the kinetics can be controlled by adjusting the reaction temperature to overcome the activation energy. In this classical model, nucleation and growth are proceeded by the consecutive deposition of atoms or molecules from a supersaturated solution. The reaction pathway differs according to the relative critical energy barrier of amorphous nuclei (ΔGa*) and crystalline nuclei (ΔGc*): when ΔGa* < ΔGc*, metastable amorphous nuclei may grow into large amorphous precipitates.27 Such analogous amorphous products were also observed by many previously published literature reports, which often appear at low temperature or an early reaction stage, and two-step nucleation through an amorphous-to-crystalline transition is energetically favorable at the high pressure and temperature of the solvothermal environment.28–31 In the first step, amorphous nuclei are formed and their surface energy is lower than that of crystalline nuclei as a consequence of their disordered interfaces with the solution. In the second step, an amorphous-to-crystalline transition takes place in the middle of the amorphous phase; this transition has to overcome a much lower free energy barrier compared with direct crystallization from solution. In other words, the amorphous phase can mediate the nucleation of the crystalline phase by buffering the large entropy difference between the solution and crystal. Similarly, a two-step nucleation mechanism has been observed in protein crystallization, in which crystalline nuclei are formed inside a metastable dense liquid phase.31 With temperature going up to 200 °C (Fig. 6c), it seems that some nanoflakes began to dissolve and subsequently broke down and divided into small sized pieces, indicating that a high reaction temperature led to the dissolution of large scale nanoflakes into the mother liquor. The dissolved matter is re-deposited on the larger particles, leading finally to a smaller number of particles. This means that a perfect plate/flake containing some defects (chemically active sites) or active elements was eventually divided into small pieces through etching and extracting some elements in the parent template.32 Generally, the dissolution of nanoparticles is induced by high temperature. Thus, it is reasonable to control nucleation and growth processes at suitable temperatures to modulate the nucleation and growth processes under kinetic control for the formation of anisotropic inorganic nanostructures (Fig. 6d). The facts show indeed that growth kinetics with sufficient thermal energy plays a key role in determining the morphology of a Cu–Sb–S product, which is in agreement with our above assumption.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of samples synthesized under different temperatures: (a) 80 °C, (b) 120 °C and (c) 200 °C, and (d) a summary of the sample morphology change from plate to flower-like with increasing temperature. 
We also conducted experiments to clarify the role of the amount of OH ions in the present experimental system. In our present work, we carried out detailed studies by varying the amount of KOH without changing other experimental conditions. Fig. 7 shows the FESEM images of the products prepared with different OH concentrations at 180 °C for 8 h. Tiny flakes appear in the absence of KOH (0 g) (Fig. 7a). With an increasing amount of KOH (0.8–1.2 g), microspheres consisting of nanoparticles are formed and the size distribution is wide (Fig. 7b and c). Very interestingly, when the quantity of KOH was further increased to 2.0 g and 3.0 g, micro-size nanowires with the length of about 40–70 μm were obtained instead (Fig. 7d and e). Recently, Huang et al. reported that a new layered compound KCu2SbS3 was synthesized using a reactive flux method using thiourea as a reactive flux with the assistance of the condensed base KOH at 200 °C for 3 days.33 Although the standard XRD pattern of KCu2SbS3 is unavailable, the obtained XRD pattern of the sample in Fig. 7f in the present work is similar to the reported one by Huang et al. (the inset of Fig. 7f),33 indicating that ultra-long KCu2SbS3 nanowires are prepared at a high amount of KOH. To the best of our knowledge, reports on the synthesis of quaternary chalcogenides by using the solution reaction media are still rare. This is the first report concerning the growth of quaternary K–Cu–Sb–S 1D nanowires with a length of several micrometers by one-pot solution-based soft-templating approaches. From the above experimental facts, it is concluded that the amount of KOH used in the preparation changes the reaction kinetics and influencs the crystal structures of the products, which results in the structure transformation from the 3D Cu3SbS4 microspheres to 1D KCu2SbS3 ultra-long nanowires. In other words, there is competition between the ternary Cu3SbS4 and KCu2SbS3 nucleation processes. At lower concentrations of KOH, Cu3SbS4 is the dominant product, while at higher concentrations of KOH, an additional available pathway leads to the formation of a 1D KCu2SbS3 nanowire structure.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of samples synthesized with different amounts of KOH: (a) 0 g (0 mmol), (b) 0.8 g (14.3 mmol), (c) 1.5 g (26.8 mmol), (d) 2.0 g (35.7 mmol), and (e) 3.0 g (53.6 mmol), and (f) the corresponding XRD pattern of Cu3SbS4 synthesized using 3.0 g KOH. 
3.3. Possible chemical reaction route and shape evolution formation mechanism
In liquid-phase methods, the decomposition/reaction of atomic or molecular monomers takes place within a solvent heated to moderate temperatures. In order to shed some light on the intrinsic reaction route and growth mechanism of the transformation from the CuS to Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes on the molecular level and nanoscale in our reaction system, a systematic series of time-resolved experiments without changing other reaction parameters was performed. To monitor and clarify the rapid nucleation and growth, autoclave containers were taken out at the appropriate time interval and quenched to room temperature with ice water immediately. Fig. 8 shows a set of SEM images of the products acquired at different reaction times including 30 min, 2 h, 6 h, 24 h and 48 h, respectively. At the initial stage after 30 min solvothermal treatment, the obtained product is composed of numerous flower-like microspheres composed of nanoflakes together with large irregular aggregates (Fig. 8a). Prolonging the reaction time to 2 h and 6 h, a large number of flower-like microspheres composed of thin nanoflakes are obtained (Fig. 8b and c). Further increasing the reaction time to 24 h and 48 h, both the population and size of the product become larger through a ripening process (Fig. 8e and f). The XRD pattern in Fig. 8d demonstrates the evolution of the crystal phases with the reaction time from 30 min to 6 h. For the sample obtained at 30 min, it is observed carefully that the characteristic (006) diffraction peak of the binary CuS (covellite) was detected, indicating that the current synthesized product is mainly predominant hexagonal covellite-phase CuS (JCPDS No. 06-0464). The lower diffraction intensity of Cu3SbS4 at 2 h indicates that the crystallinity of Cu3SbS4 is comparatively poor. Unsurprisingly, the peaks assigned to CuS gradually disappeared when the reaction time increased to 2 h and 6 h, and the diffraction peak intensity of Cu3SbS4 increases dramatically as the reaction time increases at the same time, suggesting that CuS microspheres are the intermediates that participate in the formation process of Cu3SbS4. In fact, copper chalcogenide phases were reported as intermediates for the synthesis of copper-containing ternary or quaternary chalcogenides,15,17 since copper chalcogenide is more easily formed in the initial stage than the ternary or quaternary target products. On the basis of SEM and XRD results, the conclusion can be drawn that the main products at the early stage of the solvothermal process are CuS microspheres consisting of nanoflakes. As the solvothermal process continues, CuS microspheres may act as sacrificial templates that will be gradually consumed and transformed into Cu3SbS4 microspheres consisting of nanoflakes.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of samples obtained by solvothermal treatment after introducing the Sb source for different time intervals: (a) 30 min, (b) 2 h, (c) 6 h, (e) 24 h, and (f) 48 h, and (d) XRD pattern of Cu3SbS4 synthesized at 30 min, 2 h, and 6 h, respectively. 

3.3.1 Chemical reaction route on the molecular level. 
The synthesis of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals relies on a chemical reaction between metal and chalcogenide precursors to form a material of interest. Previous studies show that precursor reactivity controlled by ligands, solution composition, and reaction temperature can limit the rates of crystal nucleation and growth.34,35 Obviously, it is important to balance and tune the relative reactivity of the Cu and Sb metal precursors. Herein, two key aspects, including the formation constants and solubility, contributed to the plausible explanation for the formation of in stiu CuS template reactions spontaneously taking place, resulting in the successful formation of Cu3SbS4.
Firstly, a potassium tartrate ion has a strong binding ability to antimony ions in solution which suppresses the reactivity of Sb. It is well known that formation constant K (stability constant) is a measure of the strength of the interaction between the reagents that come together to form the metal complex. The values of conditional stability constant Ka (105 M−1) were 8.13–9.12 for antimony potassium tartrate, which formed more stable complexes and an equilibrium between the antimony potassium tartrate and Sb3+ is established in the reaction solution,36,37 suggesting that Sb3+ was released at a very low speed in our present chemical system. In other words, in the presence of antimony potassium tartrate, the nucleation of the Sb2S3 seeds would be further delayed due to the free Sb3+ low release rate of antimony potassium tartrate (K(SbO)C4H4O6·5H2O). Under these conditions, Sb complexes were too strong, which reduced the rate of nucleation in solution considerably and at the same time, CuS was first formed at an early reaction stage. In addition, in order to illustrate and understand the formation process of CuS intermediates at a molecular level, FTIR was employed because the by-product associated with the formation of the Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals, was readily detected by using this technique (Fig. 9a). It can be clearly seen that there is an obvious characteristic peak at about 1580 cm−1 in the spectrum for 30 min, which confirms that the 3d Cu(II) acetylacetone complexes exist. Usually, it is reported that the acetylacetone molecule was proved with the appearance of a peak at 1632 cm−1, assigned to the carbonyl stretching mode of the acac group. But in the presence of CuCl2, the carbonyl stretching band of the acac group can be observed at 1577 cm−1, which usually takes place when metal complexation occurs.38 Therefore, the close similarity in the position and intensity of the band with those reported for 3d Cu(II) acetylacetone complexes clearly establishes the Cu–acetylacetone complexes. With increasing the reaction time to 4 h (Fig. 9a), the main peaks can be attributed to ethylene glycol (EG) molecules, showing that acetylacetone participated in the chemical reaction and has been converted into small molecules under the high temperature and pressure under solvothermal conditions. At 24 h, form the FTIR spectrum of the product (Fig. 9a), it can be seen that the amount of ethylene glycol became small, indicating that most of the ethylene glycol had been consumed. The previous literature showed that acetaldehyde is produced by dehydration of EG at high temperature, where the acetaldehyde can donate a hydrogen atom and act as a reducing agent and the copper(II) is reduced easily to copper(I) under solvothermal conditions,39,40 which is also consistent with the existence of Cu+ in the XPS result. It is well known that some complicated organic chemical reaction can occur under high temperature and pressure. And it further proves that organic molecules play an important role in tuning the relative reactivity of the Cu and Sb metal precursors. Therefore, based on the above facts, we propose a possible chemical equilibrium to illustrate the formation of the Cu3SbS4, which mainly comprises two processes: when the reaction mixture was heated to a certain temperature in the oven, antimony potassium tartrate remains in the ion state, where a CuS reaction between precursors supplies the reaction medium with monomers ([CuS]i, Fig. 9b) that subsequently undergo crystallization by assembly into nanocrystals ([CuS]n), which means nucleation of CuS takes place first. The formation of crystalline materials from solution is usually described by the nucleation and growth theory, where atoms or molecules are assumed to assemble directly from solution. It is well known that in crystallization reactions that follow the La Mer model of colloidal crystallization,41 the precursor reaction determines the rate at which monomers supersaturate prior to nucleation. Precursor conversion reactions that limit the crystallization determine the temporal evolution of monomer concentration as well as the steady state supersaturation during the growth phase. In this scenario, precursors can be thought of as an internal reservoir of monomers that are released by the conversion reaction (Fig. 9c). It is indicated that potassium tartrate inhibits nucleation of Sb2S3 by coordinating the starting antimony ions and reducing their reactivity at the first reaction stage. Subsequently, antimony potassium tartrate slowly decomposed to Sb3+ and these newly produced Sb3+ diffused into the flower-like microsphere CuS matrix through ion exchange transformation with each other to form Cu3SbS4 due to the higher stability. It is worth mentioning here that the temperature change also affected the equilibrium constant of antimony potassium tartrate, resulting in an overall increase of the Sb3+ (aq) supersaturation. High temperature is favorable to force the hydrolysis of the antimony potassium tartrate species. In addition, samples synthesized with different amounts of Sb source were prepared, showing that suitable Sb3+ (aq) supersaturation conditions are also important for the formation target products (Fig. S1, ESI†). A direct synthesis of ternary or quaternary materials from multiple precursors in one pot often suffers from stoichiometric imbalance and formation of secondary phases due to differences in precursor reactivity. In our case, it is very important to control the release order and rate of the metal ion precursors.
 Fig. 9  (a) FTIR spectra of Cu3SbS4 synthesized at 30 min, 4 h, and 24 h, respectively. (b and c) Kinetics of solute supersaturation according to La Mer including the superaturation, nucleation and growth stages. 
Second, Alivisatos and co-workers postulated that the solubility product of the ionic solids in the reaction medium may determine the thermodynamic direction of transformations.42 It is well known that a forward reaction is expected to occur when an ionic solid product has lower solubility than a reactant one in the reaction medium. The solubility product constant (KSP) is a useful parameter for calculating the aqueous solubility of soluble ionic crystals under various conditions. It may be determined by direct measurements or it can be calculated from the standard Gibbs energies of formation ΔfG⊖ of the species involved at their standard states. In general, as the solubility of CuS is extremely low, Ksp = 6.3 × 10−36 and the solubility of SbS is 2 × 10−26.16,42 Indeed, even if the solubility of ionic crystals in many common polar solvents (such as methanol or ethanol) is not available in the literature, one should expect those of ternary chalcogenides to be lower than that of CuS because there are several reports on the preparation of ternary CuS-based compounds through a binary template.17 The difference in solubility between intermediate reactants and products (KspCuS > KspCu3SbS4) determines that the ion-exchange reaction from transition binary to ternary metal chalcogenides is favorable under the impetus of thermodynamic driving force.
Based on the discussion above, the overall possible chemical reaction series process is proposed (Fig. 10): in our synthetic procedure, sulfur powder and copper(II) chloride dehydrate (CuCl2·2H2O) and antimony potassium tartrate K(SbO)C4H4O6·0.5H2O were used as a S source, Cu source and Sb source, respectively. First of all, the action of copper and acetylacetone gives rise to a complex product via chelation of two molecules of an organic moiety with one copper. Coordination motifs of acetylacetone to metal ions can be seen in reaction (1) in Fig. 10. Secondly, acetaldehyde produced by dehydration of EG at high temperature can donate a hydrogen atom and act as a reducing agent, then the sulfur was reduced to S2− in reaction (2) and (3) in Fig. 10.40 Thirdly, antimony potassium tartrate slowly decomposed to free Sb3+ ions at high temperature and formed the final Cu3SbS4 product in reaction (4)–(6) in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Chemical reaction route of Cu3SbS4 flower-like microspheres. 


3.3.2 Shape and structural evolution and Cl-doping mechanism. 
From the view of ratio of Cu3SbS4 product, covellite CuS can be described as Cu4S4. Stoichiometrically, the transformation consists of replacing Cu+ cations with Sb3+ cations. On the other hand, from the view of structural transformation from a CuS to Cu3SbS4 product, the covellite structure can be described by a repeat unit composed of a layer of triangular CuS3 units, sandwiched between two layers of CuS4 tetrahedra (see Fig. 11). Each triple layer is then linked to a top and bottom triple layer by disulfide bonds.43 In other words, in the covellite lattice, one-third of the Cu has planar trigonal coordination, and the remaining two-thirds of the Cu have tetrahedral coordination. The more weakly bound trigonally coordinated copper is presumably more easily extracted and therefore is most likely to be replaced by Sb. The disulfide bonds not only link the CuS triple layers but also provide two free holes in the valence band per unit cell.44 Covellite thus behaves as a semimetal with the highest hole concentration among the family of stable Cu2−xS (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) materials. The disulfide bonds also appear to play a key role in the transformation from CuS to Cu3SbS4, in which breaking of disulfide bonds makes space for entering Sb, the formation of famatinite involves replacement of Cu with Sb in the covellite framework. We propose that Sb3+ can reduce the disulfide bonds and can thus be simultaneously oxidized and incorporated into the covellite structure. It is the so-called in situ transformation mechanism by which the shape and structure of the sacrificial templates will be inherited by the final products. Under the present solvothermal circumstances, in situ transformation of CuS toward Cu3SbS4 extends from the surface toward the center of the sacrificial templates. The structural and compositional similarities between the targeted phase and the self-sacrificial structural template reagent minimize the length of the atomic diffusion path during the ion exchange transformation process and also reduce the energy cost for the reaction. The newly formed Cu3SbS4 flakes gradually grow, interleave, connect, and develop hierarchical structures. Finally, the sacrificial templates, the CuS microspheres, completely transform to hierarchical Cu3SbS4 microspheres (Fig. 11). The diameters of the final products are slightly larger than those of the sacrificial templates due to the highly developed hierarchical structures.
 Fig. 11  A schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism diagram of synthesis of Cu3SbS4 flower-like microspheres. 
Subsequently, the following questions need to be raised. How does Cl as a doped element incorporate into the host crystal lattice? Doping is a well-known approach to modulate the electronic and optical properties of nanoparticles (NPs). However, doping at the nanoscale level is hard to perform, and the reasons for this are not well understood. Difficulty of doping may have thermodynamic nature. Previously, it was suggested that the defect formation energy in NPs is higher than those of bulk host materials, and as a result, the doped NPs are thermodynamically less stable than the undoped ones. It should be noted that halogens can be readily doped into bulk metal chalcogenides (MC) by high-temperature synthesis using metal halide precursors,10,14 but doping proves challenging for solution-synthesized MC nanostructures.11,12 Annealing or hot pressing halogen-coated nanoparticles allows halides to diffuse into the Pb-based metal chalcogenide lattice and substitute for chalcogenide anions.11 However, with the progress in the synthetic strategies, it was established that the reaction kinetics also plays a crucial role in the synthesis of doped NPs and allows their synthesis under thermodynamically unfavorable conditions.45 As a result, different synthetic strategies based on control over reaction kinetics via adjustment of the reactivity of the precursors, reaction temperature, and diffusion have been proposed. When the dopant and host precursors have similar reactivity, the dopant atoms can participate in the nucleation and growth of the host material and direct in situ doping is possible.46 In fact, halide ions are a source of impurities which has come under intense scrutiny very recently, as can be envisaged from the numerous literature reports describing their influence on the nucleation and growth kinetics of NCs of various materials such as Cd chalcogenides,47 nickel sulfide and copper sulfide.48
In the present research work, the simple one pot solution synthesis of hierarchical Cu3SbS4 microspheres via in situ generated metastable CuS microsphere templates is achieved using CuCl2 as both copper reactant and Cl source. Therefore, we speculate that a chloride ion originating from a CuCl2 precursor is embedded in the matrix of Cu3SbS4. To confirm this assumption, a contrast experiment, in which the precursor CuCl2·2H2O (Cl-bearing precursor) is replaced with CuSO4 and CuNO3 (Cl-deficient precursor), and twice the amount of the standard experiment (3.2 mmol CuCl2) with the other reaction parameters kept the same, is carried out. Only small irregular micro- and nanoparticles are obtained (Fig. S2a and b, ESI†), indicating that the Cl− ions not only assist the formation of large-sized CuS nanoflakes (Fig. S2c, ESI†) but also induce chlorine incorporated into the crystal lattice of CuS. Similarly, Bryks et al. proposed a formation mechanism to support that Cl− coordinates with Cu sites in the Cu–S(Se) plane and is subsequently incorporated into the crystal structure.49 So Cl can complex with the Cu site in a CuS crystal cell and is embedded in the matrix through the further consumption of monomers produced in the growth process. Additionally, the current study not only provides a facile and economical way to synthesize high-quality Cu–Sb–S NCs, but also opens a new route for the preparation of other CuS-based multicomponent multinary chalcogenide NCs, such as Cu–Bi–S and Cu–Pb–S systems that would be difficult to obtain otherwise (XRD and SEM results are shown in Fig. S3 and S4, ESI†).

3.4. Electrical transport properties
Very recently, bottom-up fabrication of metal chalcogenide nanocomposites via solution-based processes has already led to substantially higher thermoelectric efficiencies, and further improvements are expected to arise from precise chemical engineering of nanoscale building blocks and interfaces. Since the first thorough investigation of the thermoelectric properties of solution synthesized PbTe nanocrystals by Nolas's research group in 2007, research on dense materials compacted from various solution-based or wet-chemical synthesized metal chalcogenide nanocrystals has attracted broad interest.50 Ternary Cu–Sb–S system nanomaterials including Tetrahedrite Cu12Sb4S13 and Famatinite Cu3SbS4 have been fabricated by solution-phase methods and their thermoelectric properties were investigated previously.3,4
The temperature-dependent thermoelectric properties of three Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals synthesized with different amounts of CuCl2 (Sample 1, high Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 synthesized using twice the amount of the standard experiment, 3.2 mmol CuCl2, in Fig. S2c and Table S1, ESI†), (Sample 2, low Cl-doped Cu3.2SbS3.8Cl0.3 flower-like microspheres), (Sample 3, without Cl doped Cu3SbS4 nanoparticles using a CuSO4 precursor in Fig. S2a and Table S1, ESI†) in the range of 300–520 K are presented in Fig. 12 under the same measurement conditions. Fig. 12a clearly shows that the value of the three Cu3SbS4 samples linearly increases with increasing temperature from room temperature to about 520 K. The upwards trend is indicative of a slight charge carrier increase, which is typical of the thermal excitation of the carriers in a semiconductor, indicating the semiconducting nature of the product. It can be observed that Sample 1 has the highest electrical conductivity (78.5 S cm−1 at 500 K), which is higher than the value of pure Cu3SbS4 (about 62 S cm−1 at 500 K) reported by Chen et al.3 It is found that σ of Sample 3 increases from 9.3 S cm−1 at 300 K to 22.5 S cm−1 at 500 K. The relative intensity of the former sample is almost 3 times higher than that of the latter at 500 K. In the present research work, the electrical conductivity of Cu3SbS4 at 300 K is much lower than those of the literature-prepared tetrahedrite Cu15.8Sb7.8S13 (135.1 S cm−1) and solid-state tetrahedrite (455.5 S cm−1) reported by Brock's research group.4 On the basis of the significant quantities of chlorine detected in the EDS, we attribute this dramatic decrease in electrical conductivity to chloride doping in the literature-prepared sample. Recently, Nolas et al. observed that the transport properties of PbTe nanocomposites prepared from solution-phase synthesized PbTe nanocrystals have a strong sensitivity to stoichiometry, surface oxygen adsorption, and porosity (density).51 Usually, it is expected the Cl-doping will reduce the conductivity because Cu3SbS4 is a p-type semiconductor. However, in the current research work, different from the solid state chemical reaction under vacuum, bottom-up solution synthesized Cu3SbS4 crystals were fabricated in different metal precursor (Cl-free CuSO4 and CuCl2) chemical synthesis systems, therefore, the stoichiometry, defects, surface oxygen adsorption and porosity (density) are not neglected. In our case, Sample 3 is nanoparticles and Cl-doped Samples 1 and 2 appeared as flower-like composed of nanoflakes, so the density of grain boundaries of the compacted bulk should also be considered. Cl-free Sample 3 has more grain boundaries and higher resistivity, leading to lower electrical conductivity compared to nanoflake nanocomposites of high and low Cl-doped Cu3SbS4. Furthermore, a previous report showed that the presence of SnO2 (and SnSe2) clearly also has an effect on the electrical properties. Oxide impurities need to be minimized to optimize this electrical performance.52 A large surface-to-volume ratio of nanoflakes shows high reaction reactivity with O2, because more dangling bonds of bare and uncoordinated metal sites may exist. Even in the CuCl2 precursor chemical synthesis system, different Cl amounts will lead to a sample with different sizes and surface microstructures. Therefore, these contributing factors can drastically influence the electrical conductivity of the materials; the origins of the electrical behavior require further investigation in systematic experiments. The relative densities of all the final products were measured to be ≈85% of their theoretical densities by the Archimedes principle. Obviously, the density of the products can be used to explain the higher electrical conductivity. The electrical conductivity, in principle, could be further improved using a better densification procedure (such as hot-pressed treatment) to promote grain growth and minimize the scattering of charged carriers.
 Fig. 12  Temperature dependence of (a) electrical conductivities, (b) Seebeck coefficients and (c) power factors of Cu3SbS4 sample bars pressed by three types of Cu3SbS4 nanostructures including high-Cl doped Cu3SbS4 (Sample 1), low-Cl doped Cu3SbS4 (Sample 2) and nanoparticles using CuSO4 precursor (Sample 3) from room temperature to 520 K. 
Seebeck coefficients reflect the type of carrier with the change in temperature. Positive and negative values represent the p- and n-type conduction mechanisms, respectively. Fig. 12b shows the temperature dependence of the Seebeck coefficient in the Cu3SbS4 samples. It is revealed that the major charge carriers are holes and this is consistent with p-type semiconducting nature. It is clearly seen that the Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 samples show significantly enhanced Seebeck coefficients (256 μV K−1 for Sample 1 and 220 μV K−1 Sample 2 at 500 K) compared to Sample 3 at the same temperature (118 μV K−1 at 500 K), which is close to 120 μV K−1 in Cu3Ni0.05Sb0.95S4 nanocrystals,3 and a little larger than 105 μV K−1 in solid-state tetrahedrite (solid state) and 115 μV K−1 in the solvothermal tetrahedrite synthesized with 300% molar excess thiourea (tetrahedrite).4 In addition, it is noteworthy that the former values (272 μV K−1 and 248 μV K−1) of Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 samples at 520 K are larger than that of 171.6 μV K−1 in Cu2.25Ni0.75SbS4 nanocrystals and 171.1 μV K−1 in neat Cu3SbS4 nanocrystals3 and 185 μV K−1 in the solvothermal tetrahedrite mixed with natural mineral (Tet. + NM), and 175 μV K−1 in the solid-state tetrahedrite mixed with NM (solid state + NM).4 These findings may be due to chloride acting as an electron dopant, filling the valence band holes and pushing the Fermi level toward the band gap.
The thermoelectric properties are normally evaluated by the so-called power factor (PF = S2σ), where S and σ are the Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity, respectively. The power factor of the samples is found to dramatically increase with temperature, attaining the highest value of 380 μW m−1 K−2 for Sample 2 and 300 μW m−1 K−2 for Sample 1 at 500 K, which is on par with that of tetrahedrite samples (∼460 μW m−1 K−2 at 500 K) and Zn-doped tetrahedrite samples (∼300 μW m−1 K−2 at 500 K) fabricated by a modified polyol process.53 Such a high power factor can provide high values of ZT at high temperatures by taking the lattice thermal conductivity (κL) to be equal to that reported in the literature.53 It is reported that the κL values of different Cu–Sb–S nanocrystals are below 1 W m−1 K−1 within the entire temperature range: about 0.33 W m−1 K−1 at 500 K for Zn-doped tetrahedrite,52 0.8 W m−1 K−1 and 0.68 at 500 K for neat Cu3SbS4 and Ni-doped Cu3SbS4,3 0.4 W m−1 K−1 at 500 K for the solvothermal tetrahedrite mixed with natural mineral (Tet. + NM), and 0.5 W m−1 K−1 at 500 K for the solid-state tetrahedrite mixed with NM (solid state + NM),4 due to additional phonon-boundary scattering at grain boundaries in nanocrystals. In the present work, κL was selected as 0.8 W m−1 K−1 reported by Chen et al., and it is roughly estimated that ZT at 500 K for Sample 2 is 0.24, which is bigger than those of Cu3SbS4 and Cu3Ni0.05Sb0.95S4 nanocrystals, (0.1 and 0.18 at 500 K),3 and smaller than that of Ni-doped Cu2.25Ni0.75SbS4 (0.31 at 500 K),3 and Zn-doped tetrahedrite (0.32 at 500 K),53 and the solvothermal tetrahedrite mixed with natural mineral (Tet. + NM) (0.5 at 500 K), and the solid-state tetrahedrite mixed with NM (solid state + NM) (0.6 at 500 K).4 We believe that the enhanced ZT values in our samples could be possible if one could produce high density bulk samples through some special techniques, such as the spark plasma sintering (SPS) process or the hot press method. At the same time, it is proved that tuning carrier concentration via chemical Cl doping is the most successful strategy to optimize the thermoelectric figure of merit. Recently, Gregory's research group reported Cl doping overweight created electrons, Cl-doped SnSe2 nanosheets show n-type conduction.12,52 Interestingly, different from Cu3SbS4 p-type intrinsic behavior, in this study, it is a new discovery that Cl doping changed the conductive type from p to n using the CuCl2 precursor (6.4 mmol, Sample 4) (see Table S2, ESI†). The room-temperature Hall coefficient of four times the amount Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 (Sample 4) is negative, which indicates n-type conduction. The Hall carrier concentration can be increased from ≈3.9 × 1019 cm−3 for Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 (1.6 mmol CuCl2 precursor, Sample 2) to ≈−2.2 × 1020 cm−3 for Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 (6.4 mmol CuCl2 precursor, Sample 4) at room-temperature. The former carrier concentration (3.9 × 1019 cm−3) is bigger than that of the p-type KCu2SbS3 semiconductor with a carrier concentration of 7 × 1016 cm−3,33 and Cl-doped SnSe by optimizing the Cl doping level from 0.1–0.6 at% (1.24–6.43 × 1018 cm−3).52 Usually, when Cl−1 is doped into the S2− site, an extra electron carrier would be introduced to the host matrix. Nevertheless, how the dopants affect charge transport is not completely understood. Further investigations should be performed.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we reported that exquisite fabrication of a Cu3SbS4 nanostructure with different growth behaviors can be realized under thermodynamic or kinetic control by changing the amount of KOH and the reaction time. It describes the reaction chemistry of metal and sulfur precursors and the growth and doping mechanisms for Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes. Our studies demonstrate that the reaction consists of crystal-to-crystal chemical and structural phase transformation, and the in stiu produced intermediate CuS precursor, which serves as a self-sacrificial structural template guiding the reaction toward the desired Cu3SbS4 product. An approximately eightfold improvement in the power factor (380 μW m−1 K−2) is observed for chlorine (Cl−)-doped Cu3SbS4 as compared to Cu3SbS4 without Cl doping at 500 K. Furthermore, conduction type n and p Cl-doped Cu3SbS4 nanoflakes have been successfully prepared for the first time in a one-pot solvothermal method. The current study not only provides a facile and economical way to synthesize high-quality Cu–Sb–S nanocrystals (NCs), but also opens a new route for the synthesis of other multinary or multicomponent I–V–VI chalcogenide NCs by controlling the relative reactivity of precursors, such as Cu–Bi–S and Cu–Pb–S systems that would be difficult to obtain otherwise. It is envisioned that the tailored synthesis of Cu–M–S (M = La, Fe, Co, Ni, etc.) hierarchical nanostructures may promise unique opportunities for producing thermoelectric materials with greatly enhanced performance.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51572060 and 51502062), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. HIT.NSRIF.2013076).
Notes and references
Y. C. Choi, E. J. Yeom, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, CuSbS2-Sensitized Inorganic–Organic Heterojunction Solar Cells Fabricated Using a Metal–Thiourea Complex Solution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4005–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Crespo, Microscopic Optical Absorption, Analysis, and Applications of Famatinite Cu3SbS4, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7959–7965 CAS .
D. S. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. N. Chen, T. Y. Lu, Y. Y. Wang, J. Zhou and Z. Q. Liang, Thermoelectric Enhancement of Ternary Copper Chalcogenide Nanocrystals by Magnetic Nickel Doping, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500473 CrossRef .
D. J. James, X. Lu, D. T. Morelli and S. L. Brock, Solvothermal Synthesis of Tetrahedrite: Speeding Up the Process of Thermoelectric Material Generation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23623–23632 CAS .
K. Ramasamy, H. Sims, W. H. Butler and A. Gupta, Selective Nanocrystal Synthesis and Calculated Electronic Structure of All Four Phases of Copper–Antimony–Sulfide, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2891–2899 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Embden and Y. Tachibana, Synthesis and characterisation of famatinite copper antimony sulfide nanocrystals, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11466–11469 RSC .
V. Embden, J. Latham, K. Duffy, N. W. Tachibana and Y. Nearinfrared, Near-Infrared Absorbing Cu12Sb4S13 and Cu3SbS4 Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Characterization, and Photoelectrochemistry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11562–11571 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Chen, Q. Chen, P. Zhou and Y. L. Liu, A green synthesis route for the phase and size tunability of copper antimony sulfide nanocrystals with high yield, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5146–5152 RSC .
D. E. Starr, G. Sadoughi, E. Handick, R. G. Wilks, J. H. Alsmeier, L. Kőhler, M. Gorgoi, H. J. Snaith and M. Bärace, Direct observation of an inhomogeneous chlorine distribution in CH3NH3PbI3−xClx layers: surface depletion and interface enrichment, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1609–1615 CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. C. Lan, S. L. Yang, F. Cao, M. L. Yao, C. Opeil, D. Broido, G. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Increased thermoelectric performance by Cl doping in nanostructured AgPb18SbSe20−xClx, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1121–1127 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ibáñez, R. J. Korkosz, Z. S. Luo, P. Riba, D. Cadavid, S. Ortega, A. Cabot and M. G. Kanatzidis, Electron Doping in Bottom-Up Engineered Thermoelectric Nanomaterials through HCl-Mediated Ligand Displacement, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4046–4049 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Han, S. R. Popuri, H. F. Greer, J. G. Bos, W. Zhou, A. R. Knox, A. Montecucco, J. Siviter, E. A. Man, M. Macauley, D. J. Paul, W. Li, M. C. Paul, M. Gao, T. Sweet, R. Freer, F. Azough, H. Baig, N. Sellami, T. K. Mallick and D. H. Gregory, Facile Surfactant-Free Synthesis of p-Type SnSe Nanoplates with Exceptional Thermoelectric Power Factors, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6543–6547 CrossRef .
L. L. Wang, C. Guo, Y. C. Zhu, J. B. Zhou, L. Fan and Y. T. Qian, A FeCl2-graphite sandwich composite with Cl doping in graphite layers: a new anode material for high-performance Li-ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14174–14179 RSC .
X. W. Zhang, F. Meng, S. Mao, Q. Ding, M. J. Shearer, M. S. Faber, J. H. Chen, R. J. Hamersa and S. Jin, Amorphous MoSxCly electrocatalyst supported by vertical graphene for efficient electrochemical and photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 862–868 CAS .
M. Kar, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Formation Pathway of CuInSe2 Nanocrystals for Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17239–17247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Trizio and L. Manna, Forging Colloidal Nanostructures via Cation Exchange Reactions, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10852–10887 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, A. Genovese, C. George, M. Prato, I. Moreels, A. Casu, S. Marras, A. Curcio, A. Scarpellini, T. Pellegrino, L. Manna and V. Lesnyak, From Binary Cu2S to Ternary Cu–In–S and Quaternary Cu–In–Zn–S Nanocrystals with Tunable Composition via Partial Cation Exchange, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 521–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Guria, G. Prusty, S. Chacrabarty and N. Pradhan, Fixed Aspect Ratio Rod-to-Rod Conversion and Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance in Semiconducting I–V–VI Nanorods, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 447–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, J. Ciston, K. Bustillo, D. Nordlund and D. J. Milliron, Synergistic Role of Dopants on the Morphology of Alloyed Copper Chalcogenide Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6464–6467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rossi, D. Atzei, S. DaPelo, F. Frau, P. Lattanzi, K. England and D. Vaughan, Quantitative X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study of enargite (Cu3AsS4) surface, Surf. Interface Anal., 2001, 31, 465–470 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, B. Yan, Z. Xia, M. Leng, Y. Zhou, D. J. Xue, J. Zhong, L. Gao, H. Song and J. Tang, Synthesis and characterization of hydrazine solution processed Cu12Sb4S13 film, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 33–39 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Goto, Y. Sakai, Y. Kamihara and M. Matoba, Effect of Sn-Substitution on Thermoelectric Properties of Copper-Based Sulfide, Famatinite Cu3SbS4, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 84, 044706 CrossRef .
S. Suehiro, K. Horita, M. Yuasa, T. Tanaka, K. Fujita, Y. Ishiwata, K. Shimanoe and T. Kida, Synthesis of Copper–Antimony–Sulfide Nanocrystals for Solution-Processed Solar Cells, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7840–7845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Groen, L. A. A. Peffer and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Pore size determination in modified micro- and mesoporous materials. Pitfalls and limitations in gas adsorption data analysis, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 60, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Sheldrick and M. Wachhold, Solventothermal Synthesis of Solid-state Chalcogenidometalates, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1997, 36, 206–224 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kwon and T. Hyeon, Formation mechanisms of uniform nanocrystals via hot-injection and heat-up methods, Small, 2011, 7, 2685–2702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Min, J. Kwak, A. Soon and U. Jeong, Nonstoichiometric Nucleation and Growth of Multicomponent Nanocrystals in Solution, ACS Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2887–2893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, How does a transient amorphous precursor template crystallization, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13520–13526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Zhang and X. Y. Liu, Nucleation: what happens at the initial stage?, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2009, 48, 1308–1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Savage and A. D. Dinsmore, Experimental evidence for two-step nucleation in colloidal crystallization, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 198302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Vekilov, The two-step mechanism of nucleation of crystals in solution, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2346–2357 RSC .
W. Wang, D. Long, Y. Liang, G. Zhang, B. Zeng and Q. He, Conversion of Hexagonal Sb2Te3 Nanoplates into Nanorings Driven by Growth Temperature, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 815–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Q. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Q. He, C. Zheng, J. H. Lin and F. Q. Huang, Synthesis, crystal structure, electronic structure, and photoelectric response properties of KCu2SbS3, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3473–3479 RSC .
R. G. Xie, M. Rutherford and X. G. Peng, Formation of High-Quality I–III–VI Semiconductor Nanocrystals by Tuning Relative Reactivity of Cationic Precursors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5691–5697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Smith, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Tuning the synthesis of ternary lead chalcogenide quantum dots by balancing precursor reactivity, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 183–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Song, D. Y. Zhang, X. L. Pan and D. J. Lee, Complexation of HSA with different forms of antimony (Sb): an application of fluorescence spectroscopy, J. Lumin., 2013, 136, 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Shi, J. B. Yu, H. S. Wang and H. J. Zhang, Hydrothermal synthesis of single-crystalline antimony telluride nanobelts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16490–16491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saberi, S. Mahdudi, S. Cheraghi and A. Heydari, Cu(II)eacetylacetone complex covalently anchored onto magnetic nanoparticles: synthesis, characterization and catalytic evaluation in amide bond formation via oxidative coupling of carboxylic acids with N,N-dialkylformamides, J. Organomet. Chem., 2014, 772-773, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Wang, J. J. Feng, Z. H. Li, Q. C. Liao, Z. Z. Wang and J. R. Chen, Solvothermal synthesis of Cu/Cu2O hollow microspheres for non-enzymatic amperometric glucose sensing, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1289–1295 RSC .
S. M. Wan, F. Guo, L. Shi, Y. Y. Peng, X. Z. Liu, Y. G. Zhang and Y. T. Qian, Single-step synthesis of copper sulfide hollow spheres by a template interface reaction route, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2489–2491 RSC .
R. García-Rodríguez, M. P. Hendricks, B. M. Cossairt, H. Liu and J. S. Owen, Conversion Reactions of Cadmium Chalcogenide Nanocrystal Precursors, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1233–1249 CrossRef .
G. D. Moon, S. Ko, Y. Xia and U. Jeong, Chemical Transformations in Ultrathin Chalcogenide Nanowires, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2307–2319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, A. Riedinger, M. Prato, A. Casu, A. Genovese, P. Guardia, S. Sottini, C. Sangregorio, K. Miszta, S. Ghosh, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Copper Sulfide Nanocrystals with Tunable Composition by Reduction of Covellite Nanocrystals with Cu+ Ions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17630–17637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Conejeros, I. d. P. R. Moreira, P. Alemany and E. Canadell, Nature of holes, oxidation states, and hypervalency in covellite (CuS), Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 12402–12406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, Z. Luo, H. Yang and Y. Wu, The Effects of the Size and the Doping Concentration on the Power Factor of n-type Lead Telluride Nanocrystals for Thermoelectric Energy Conversion, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1153–1157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Buonsanti and D. J. Milliron, Chemistry of Doped Colloidal Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1305–1317 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saruyama, M. Kanehara and T. Teranishi, Drastic Structural Transformation of Cadmium Chalcogenide Nanoparticles Using Chloride Ions and Surfactants, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3280–3282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Wu, S. Chakrabortty, C. K. L. Chang, A. Guchhait, M. Lin and Y. Chan, Promoting 2D Growth in Colloidal Transition Metal Sulfide Semiconductor Nanostructures via Halide Ions, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6120–6126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Liu, H. D. Wu, Y. Zhao and G. B. Pan, Metal Ions Mediated Morphology and Phase Transformation of Chalcogenide Semiconductor: From CuClSe2 Microribbon to CuSe Nanosheet, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 4958–4963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ortega, M. Ibáñez, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, M. V. Kovalenko, D. Cadavid and A. Cabot, Bottom-up engineering of thermoelectric nanomaterials and devices from solution-processed nanoparticle building blocks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3510–3528 RSC .
J. Martin, L. Wang, L. Chen and G. S. Nolas, Enhanced Seebeck coefficient through energy-barrier scattering in PbTe nanocomposites, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115311 CrossRef .
G. Han, S. R. Popuri, H. F. Greer, L. F. Llin, J. G. Bos, W. Zhou, D. J. Paul, H. Ménard, A. R. Knox, A. Montecucco, J. Siviter, E. A. Man, W. Li, M. C. Paul, M. Gao, T. Sweet, R. Freer, F. Azough, H. Baig, T. K. Mallick and D. H. Gregory, Chlorine-Enabled Electron Doping in Solution-Synthesized SnSe Thermoelectric Nanomaterials, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602328 CrossRef .
D. P. Weller, D. L. Stevens, G. E. Kunkel, A. M. Ochs, C. F. Holder, D. T. Morelli and M. E. Anderson, Thermoelectric Performance of Tetrahedrite Synthesized by a Modified Polyol Process, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1656–1664 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp06465aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 		 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Flow chart of the experimental synthesis procedure of black Cu–Sb–S powder products at 180 °C and 8 h. (b) Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of Cu3SbS4. (c and d) Low- and high magnification SEM images of the as-prepared Cu3SbS4 products.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM images of a single Cu3SbS4 flower-like microsphere and (b and c) several nanoflakes breaking off the microspheres and (d) HRTEM image of the edge of a nanoflake.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Representative TEM and (b) EDS images of Cu3SbS4 nanoparticles. (c) High angle annular dark field (HAADF) image. The four panels in (d) are (clockwise from top left) elemental mapping for Cu (yellow), S (red), Cl (orange) and Sb (blue).	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS spectra of the Cu3SbS4 nanoparticles: (a) XPS survey pattern of S 2p, (b) XPS spectrum of Cu 2p, (c) XPS spectrum of Sb 3d, and (d) XPS spectrum of Cl 2p.	 

 	Fig. 5  The UV-vis absorption spectrum (a) and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore-size distribution plots of Cu3SbS4 flower-like microspheres (b).	 
ΔGhom(r) = 4πr2γ + 4/3πr3ΔGv

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of samples synthesized under different temperatures: (a) 80 °C, (b) 120 °C and (c) 200 °C, and (d) a summary of the sample morphology change from plate to flower-like with increasing temperature.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of samples synthesized with different amounts of KOH: (a) 0 g (0 mmol), (b) 0.8 g (14.3 mmol), (c) 1.5 g (26.8 mmol), (d) 2.0 g (35.7 mmol), and (e) 3.0 g (53.6 mmol), and (f) the corresponding XRD pattern of Cu3SbS4 synthesized using 3.0 g KOH.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of samples obtained by solvothermal treatment after introducing the Sb source for different time intervals: (a) 30 min, (b) 2 h, (c) 6 h, (e) 24 h, and (f) 48 h, and (d) XRD pattern of Cu3SbS4 synthesized at 30 min, 2 h, and 6 h, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) FTIR spectra of Cu3SbS4 synthesized at 30 min, 4 h, and 24 h, respectively. (b and c) Kinetics of solute supersaturation according to La Mer including the superaturation, nucleation and growth stages.	 

 	Fig. 10  Chemical reaction route of Cu3SbS4 flower-like microspheres.	 

 	Fig. 11  A schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism diagram of synthesis of Cu3SbS4 flower-like microspheres.	 

 	Fig. 12  Temperature dependence of (a) electrical conductivities, (b) Seebeck coefficients and (c) power factors of Cu3SbS4 sample bars pressed by three types of Cu3SbS4 nanostructures including high-Cl doped Cu3SbS4 (Sample 1), low-Cl doped Cu3SbS4 (Sample 2) and nanoparticles using CuSO4 precursor (Sample 3) from room temperature to 520 K.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp06465a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
