Emerging negative differential resistance effects and novel tunable electronic behaviors of the broken-gap KAgSe/SiC 2 van der Waals heterojunction   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC02100H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC02100H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8107-8119Emerging negative differential resistance effects and novel tunable electronic behaviors of the broken-gap KAgSe/SiC2 van der Waals heterojunction†

        
          
            Qiang 
            Wang
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Liang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Yao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianwei 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Wang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jian 
            Wang
          
        
      *ae
aShenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Thin Films and Applications, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, People's Republic of China. E-mail: binwang@szu.edu.cn; jianwang@hku.hk
bKey Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Hanshan Normal University, Chaozhou 521041, People's Republic of China
dSchool of Physics, State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, 250100 Jinan, People's Republic of China
eDepartment of Physics and the Center of Theoretical and Computational Physics, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China
Received 
      29th April 2020
    , Accepted 21st May 2020First published on 22nd May 2020AbstractKAgSe is a newly discovered two-dimensional (2D) layered material, which shows great performance in optical absorption and potential applications as a favorable optical electronic device. However, its band gap is independent of the layer numbers, which restricts its further application in the field of tunneling field effect transistor (TFET). To address this issue, by integrating 2D KAgSe with a substrate of 2D penta-SiC2, a 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vertical van der Waals heterojunction (vdWH) is proposed to extend the application of 2D KAgSe, and its structural, electronic and quantum transport behaviors are systematically investigated by using the first-principles method. Firstly, the robust structural stability of this vdWH is verified by evaluating its formation energy, vibrational phonon spectrum and molecular dynamics at high temperature. Moreover, various new functionalities are found for this novel 2D vdWH, which displays a relatively unique type-III band alignment and implies favorable application in TFETs considering the band-to-band tunneling process. The ideal electronic features of the vdWH can also be modulated by various external parameters including in-plane strain, interfacial distance, and external electric field. Especially under increasing negative external electric field, phase transitions occur for the vdWH from type-III band alignment to type-II, and then type-I and finally Schottky contact accompanied by the decrease of charge transfer and the reversal of net electric field in the interfacial region. Furthermore, quantum transport properties are investigated for a 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based two-probe nano-device, and a sizable negative differential resistance (NDR) effect is obtained. Interestingly, the NDR effect is mainly dominated by the bias related band alignments in both leads associated with the mismatch of the conducting channel in the leads and scattering region, which is fundamentally different from the mechanism of general TFETs reported in previous publications where the NDR effect is mainly induced by the energy renormalization of the center material. The complete new mechanism of NDR effects in KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH may provide a new strategy for the experimental design of future TFETs. We believe that the fascinating 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH can not only extend the application range of 2D KAgSe, but also inspire intensive research studies on the engineering of multi-functional nanoelectronic devices in the near future.
1 Introduction
Exploring novel two-dimensional (2D) materials with desired properties and advanced functionalities is one of the most exciting scientific areas today in both research and application fields.1–6 Because the carrier transport and heat diffusion are confined in the plane, 2D materials show a series of unique and prominent phenomena which demonstrate their favorable application prospects in nanoelectronics and spinelectronics.7–9 Although a large number of 2D materials have been proposed and investigated extensively, it is still of great significance to find new 2D materials with remarkable characteristics in both physics and material science.7,10–14 One effective way to obtain new 2D materials is to construct heterojunctions based on the existing 2D materials.15,16 The newly combined 2D heterojunctions can enrich the exceptional properties of the isolated components and break the limitations of their applications in many fields.2,17–19 Due to charge transfer or charge accumulation between the interfacial layers, the band structure and the related electron transport, exciton and magnetic properties of a heterojunction can be effectively tuned by external electromagnetic field, illumination and pressure, which reveals broad application prospects of the heterojunction in new electronic and optoelectronic devices.15,16 Typically, the band alignments in bilayer heterojunctions can be divided into three types, namely straddling type-I, staggered type-II, and broken-gap type-III.20 For type-I band alignment, the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) of one component are between the CBM and VBM of the other component. The straddling band bending is beneficial for the spatial localization of electrons and holes, which can efficiently enhance the probability of carrier recombination. Thus, type-I heterojunction is suitable for the application in light-emitting diodes and lasers.21,22 For type-II band alignment, the VBM of component A is between the VBM and CBM of component B, while the CBM of component A is higher than the CBM of component B. The staggered band offset tends to separate the electrons and holes into different layers and reduce the probability of carrier recombination, implying potential applications in photoelectric devices, photocatalysis and excitonic solar cells.23–25 For the type-III band alignment, the VBM of one component is even higher than the CBM of the other component. Thus, the band-to-band transport mechanism can facilitate a transition engineering from conduction band to valence band, providing an outstanding candidate in the field of tunneling field effect transistors (TFETs).26,27 So far, most reported heterosjunctions belong to type-I or type-II band alignments, while few type-III heterosjunctions are synthesized and studied and the related principles and mechanisms are still unclear. Therefore, it is of great significance to explore the fundamental physical mechanisms of the type-III heterojunctions and further enrich their application prospects by tuning external fields.
Very recently, a new family of novel 2D layered KAgSe have attracted researcher's attention owing to its outstanding material properties and superior performances of corresponding electronic nano-devices.13,25,28 As a representative member of the family, KAgSe has a PbFCl-type tetragonal structure with a space group of P4/nmm, and was synthesized and characterized experimentally a decade ago.29 A series of prominent behaviors have been verified on the semi-conducting 2D layered KAgSe, such as ideal direct band gap, significant carrier mobilities, remarkable optical absorption in visible light region, ultrahigh power conversion efficiency in the KAgSe/Ca(OH)2 heterojunction, and creditable performances in the corresponding photovoltaic and thermoelectric nano-devices.13,25,28 Even so, the research is still far from enough to reflect the wide application prospects of this novel 2D material, and efforts toward further exploring novel functionalities and excellent characteristics are still being made. As such, it is highly desirable to construct a KAgSe-based heterojunction to further enrich the applications by integrating the properties of the substrate materials. Lately, a new 2D material of pentagonal silicon dicarbide (penta-SiC2) was proposed from a first principles prediction, which was constructed by sp2d hybridization of carbon and silicon atoms with a dynamically stable configuration.30,31 This novel pentagonal structure shows perfect ductility in the 2D plane implying a potentially prominent substrate material. The uniaxial compressive strain can even reach 22% under in-plane stress while maintaining a stable configuration and very high carrier mobility.32 In addition, penta-SiC2 is also a potential material in thermoelectric nano-devices due to its favorable thermal transport properties.33 More importantly, the lattice mismatch between KAgSe and penta-SiC2 is very small, which provides us an ideal candidate to design the KAgSe and SiC2 based heterojunctions.
In this regard, a 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH is constructed and its material and physical behaviors are investigated in detail to stretch the application capabilities of KAgSe. Our findings are summarized as follows. First of all, the stability and electronic properties of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH are investigated systematically, and intrinsic type-III band alignment is observed. Secondly, by tuning the interfacial distances, in-plane strains and external electric fields, and phase transitions with different band alignments of the vdWH can be realized among type-III configuration, type-II configuration, type-I configuration, and Schottky contact. The underlying physics of each phase transfer is analyzed in detail. Finally, a quantum transport study through a KAgSe/SiC2 based nano-device also confirms the type-III connection of the vdWH, which gives rise to novel negative differential resistance (NDR) effects under a finite bias voltage. We show that the formation mechanism of the NDR effect in the newly designed KAgSe/SiC2 nano-device is fundamentally different from that reported in previous publications, which provides possible guidance on the experimental fabrication of field effect transistors from a new perspective. In general, our research in this work not only enriches potential applications of 2D KAgSe, but also adds another dimension in designing novel multi-functional nanoelectronic devices.
The rest part of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the first principles calculation methods used in this study are briefly introduced. In Section 3, the numerical results are presented systematically with the underlining physical mechanisms analyzed in detail, including the structural stability, electronic properties, and tunable behaviors of the proposed 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. In addition, the quantum transport calculation in a KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based nano-device is also performed. In Section 4, a summary of this work is briefly presented.
2 Computational methods
In this study, the electronic behaviors of 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH were implemented by the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP)34 based on the density functional theory (DFT), where the ion-electron interaction was manipulated using the projected augmented wave (PAW) approach.35 The exchange–correlation functional was used with the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) at the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) level,36 and the cut-off energy of the plane wave function was set as 500 eV. A vacuum larger than 20 Å perpendicular to the 2D plane was used to demonstrate the finite size along this direction, and the k-meshed grid of 15 × 15 × 1 in the first Brillouin zone was set to describe the periodic property in the plane. Moreover, the phonon spectrum was calculated by adopting the Phonopy code to demonstrate the dynamical stability,37 and the total energy evaluation under finite temperature was evaluated by performing the ab initio molecular dynamics simulation to verify the thermal stability of the vdWH.38
The quantum transport properties of the 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based nano-device were analysed by using the first principles package NanoDcal,39–41 which is based on the combination of the non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) and DFT. In this method, the norm-conserving nonlocal pseudo-potential42 was adopted to define the atomic cores, and the exchange–correlation potential was handled at the PBE level.43 The atomic orbitals with double-zeta polarization (DZP) were used as basis sets to expand the wave functions. Finally, the NEGF-DFT self-consistency was carried out until the numerical tolerance of the Hamiltonian matrix is less than 10−5 eV.
Moreover, we should mention that the semi-local functional (PBE) may underestimate band gaps and overestimate electron transfer in the actual calculation process, which can be remedied by using a Hubbard U correction for the heavy atoms or directly using the HSE functional.44–46 In fact, both PBE+U and HSE methods have been used in our previous research about the electronic and photoelectronic transport properties of pristine 2D KAgSe.13 We found that although PBE+U and HSE functionals can give more accurate results, the band structures of pristine KAgSe from PBE calculation are quantitatively in agreement with those from the other two functionals. Thus, we only performed the electronic and quantum transport properties of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based on the PBE functional in this work considering the huge cost of the computing resources. We believe the conclusions should still be valid for the Hubbard U and HSE calculations, although the data may be slightly different.
3 Numerical results and discussions
3.1 Structural characteristic and stability of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH

Fig. 1(a) shows two schematic structures of 2D monolayer KAgSe and monolayer SiC2 from the top and side views. As indicated by the red squares in these two panels, there are two K atoms, two Ag atoms and two Se atoms in a KAgSe unit cell, and there are two C atoms and four Si atoms in a SiC2 unit cell. The KAgSe monolayer is a planar compound with five different layers as a period, and the SiC2 monolayer is a wrinkled irregular structure. The relaxed lattice constants are a = b = 4.485 Å for KAgSe and a = b = 4.410 Å for SiC2, which are in good agreement with previously reported results.13,30 The KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH is constructed by stacking the KAgSe monolayer and SiC2 monolayer together perpendicular to the 2D planes. Fig. 1(b) shows the top and side views of the schematic KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, where 1 × 1 unit cells of both monolayers are delicately chosen to construct the stacking pattern. The fully optimized structural parameters are a = b = 4.4186 Å, corresponding to about 1.51% contraction of the pristine monolayer KAgSe and around 0.20% stretching of the pristine monolayer SiC2 in the 2D plane. This scaling of lattice expansion and contraction is reasonable, which is far less than the previously reported experimental feasibility of 4% for the monolayer WS2 structure.47 In addition, the optimized nearest interfacial distance between KAgSe and SiC2 is found to be 3.0 Å, which is much larger than the summation of the covalent radii of the K atom and C atom, suggesting a weak vdW interaction of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH.
 Fig. 1  (a) Top and side views of the schematic structures of monolayer KAgSe (left) and SiC2 (right). The C, Si, K, Ag and Se atoms are labeled by black, blue, violet, silver and green balls, respectively. The unit cells are shown by squares at the lower-left corners in the top view panels. (b) Top and side views of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, the nearest interfacial distance d is also marked. (c) Phonon dispersion curves of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. (d) The variation of total energy as a function of time at 500 K. Insets: Top and side views of a snapshot of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at 5 ps. (e) Young's modulus of KAgSe monolayer (black curve), SiC2 monolayer (orange curve) and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH (green curve) along the arbitrary in-plane direction. (f) From left to right: ELFs of SiC2 monolayer (top view), KAgSe monolayer (side view) and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH (side view). 
In the following, we verify the structural stability of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under different conditions. Firstly, the energy stability was examined by exploring the interfacial binding energy as follows, Eb = (EKAgSe/SiC2 − EKAgSe − ESiC2)/S,(1)where S is the contact area at the interface per unit cell. EKAgSe/SiC2, EKAgSe and ESiC2 are the total energies of the unit cell of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, monolayer KAgSe and monolayer SiC2, respectively. The numerical results show that the Eb of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH is equal to −0.327 J m−2, which is much larger than that of some recently reported vdWHs including phosphorene/SnS2 (−0.017 J m−2), phosphorene/SnSe2 (−0.019 J m−2),48 WTe2/HfS2 (−0.204 J m−2),49etc. Therefore, the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH should possess a higher energy stability. Besides, the dynamical stability of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH was also verified by calculating its phonon spectrum as shown in Fig. 1(c), where the absence of the imaginary phonon mode in the entire Brillouin zone proves the dynamical stability of the structure. Moreover, the thermal stability of the vdWH was also examined by evaluating the temporal evolution of the total energy using the first principles molecular dynamics simulation method. In this calculation, the temperature is fixed at 500 K and the evolutionary time is set at 5 ps with a time step of 1 fs for the utilized 3 × 3 supercell. As presented in Fig. 1(d), the total energy oscillates with small fluctuations around a fixed value, and the snapshot of dynamic configuration of the vdWH does not have broken bonds and geometry reconstruction, which reveals the excellent thermal stability of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH even at high temperatures. All these features demonstrate the structural stability of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH and provide a possible guidance for its experimental synthesis.
The structural stability is also closely related to the lattice distortion which often appears in the mechanical operation of materials in experiments. Thus, we also investigated the mechanical stability of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH by calculating its elastic constants Cij (i,j = 1, 2) and Young's modulus E(θ). The numerical results of the in-plane Cij for monolayer KAgSe, monolayer SiC2 and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH are presented in Table 1. It is obvious that all the studied sheets obey Born criteria, that is to say, all the values of Cij are positive and C11C22 − C112 > 0, indicating their favorable mechanical stability.50,51 Based on Cij, the Young's modulus E(θ) was also explored for these three kinds of 2D materials. Here, E(θ) describes the in-plane deformation resistance and can be calculated by52,53 (2)where θ is an arbitrary angle between the distortion direction and x axis. Values of E(θ) at θ = 0, π/4, π/2 are also listed in Table 1. Fig. 1(e) shows an annular graph of E(θ) versus θ of monolayer KAgSe (black curve), monolayer SiC2 (orange curve) and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH (green curve) with different radii indicating their magnitudes. Two observations can be made. Firstly, obvious mechanical anisotropy can be found for all these three 2D materials, where the maximum values of E(θ) locate at θ = kπ/2 with k = 0, 1, 2, 3 and the minimum values appear at θ = (k + 1/2)π/2. In view of the huge E(θ) of SiC2 at θ = kπ/2, the maximum values of E(θ) for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH is greatly enhanced when compared with those for the KAgSe monolayer, indicating a significant improvement of KAgSe in material rigidity. The maximum value of E(θ) for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH is 114.4 N m−1, which is even comparable to that of the recently proposed MXene Ti2C (130 N m−1).54 Secondly, the mechanical anisotropy ratio also improved effectively for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH when compared with that of the KAgSe monolayer, which is defined as η = Max(E(θ))/Min(E(θ)). The anisotropy ratio η of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH can reach 1308.92%, four times larger than that of the KAgSe monolayer. The huge mechanical anisotropy of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH is of significant interest and may possess extensive potential applications for various mechanical devices in the future.
Table 1 The elastic constants C11, C22, C12, and Young's modulus E(0), E(π/4), and E(π/2) of the KAgSe monolayer, SiC2 monolayer and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH




Structures (N m−1)

C
11


C
22


C
12


E(0)

E(π/4)

E(π/2)




SiC2
139.3
138.2
3.45
139.1
3.32
135.9


KAgSe
35.5
35.4
0.32
35.4
11.34
34.7


KAgSe/SiC2
122.6
121.2
31.65
114.4
8.74
112.7




3.2 Electronic properties of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH
Once the structural stability is confirmed, we now examine the electronic behavior of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. Fig. 1(f) shows the real space projection of the electron localization functions (ELF(r)) for monolayer SiC2, monolayer KAgSe and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH from the top view or side view. ELF is a continuous variable value from 0 to 1 which describes the spatial localization extent of the reference electrons.55 ELF = 1 represents the complete localization of the electron, while ELF = 0 indicates full decentralization of the electron. For SiC2, the ELFs are approximately equal to 1 at the bonds between the Si and C atoms, indicating the strong covalent characters for the Si–C bonds. For KAgSe, the ELFs between each pair of neighboring atoms are almost equal to zero, implying an ionic interaction between them. For KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, the weak interfacial interaction can also be visualized by analyzing the corresponding ELF. The bare electron is localized at the interface region between the KAgSe and SiC2 layers, which indicates no binding at the interface and confirms a weak vdW interaction of the KAgSe/SiC2 heterojunction.
To gain further insight into the charge distribution within the interface of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, the renormalized real space charge density difference Δρ(r) was analyzed based on the following formula, Δρ(r) = [ρKAgSe/SiC2 − ρKAgSe − ρSiC2]/n,(3)where ρKAgSe/SiC2, ρKAgSe and ρSiC2 are the charge densities of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, the individual KAgSe monolayer and the individual SiC2 monolayer, respectively. Here, n = 2 indicates two different components of vdWH. In Fig. 2(a), both the 1D plane integrated Δρ(z) and 3D isosurface plot of Δρ(r) are displayed. Obviously, distinct charge redistribution occurs at the interface, and the charge mainly transfers from KAgSe to SiC2. Detailed calculation of Bader charge indicates that roughly 0.14 electron is transferred from KAgSe to SiC2 per unit cell of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, revealing a strong built-in electric field in the interfacial region.48,49,56 To understand the fundamental cause of charge transfer, the 2D plane averaged electrostatic potential of the vdWH along the z direction is displayed in Fig. 2(b). The potential near the SiC2 layer (ΔV) is much deeper than that near the KAgSe layer because of different electronegativities possessed in C (2.55), Si (1.90), K (0.82), Se (2.48) and Ag (1.93) atoms. Thus, a strong driving force is established between the two layers, and electrons can be driven across the border from KAgSe to SiC2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Charge density deformation of plane projection and three-dimensional integration for the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. The green vertical lines indicate the edges of KAgSe and SiC2, and the yellow and cyan isosurfaces represent the charge accumulation and depletion in the vdWH with an isovalue of 0.003 e Å−3. (b) Electrostatic potential profile of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at the equilibrium distance along the z direction. The green vertical line indicates the interface of the vdWH, the electrostatic potential difference ΔV combined with the height (ΦTB) and width (ωTB) of the square potential barrier are marked. (c) Band structure and PDOS of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at the PBE level. The Fermi level is set to zero, the contribution from KAgSe and SiC2 is distinguished by black and red dotted lines with magnitudes indicated by the size of the dots. (d) Schematic diagrams of the band alignment between the monolayer from KAgSe and SiC2 before and after the formation of the heterostructure. ΔEC and ΔEV are the energy difference of CBM and VBM between KAgSe and SiC2, respectively, and Wf is the work functions for each structure. 
Both the tunneling barrier height (ΦTB) and width (ωTB) are also labeled in Fig. 2(b), where ΦTB is defined as the height difference between the highest potentials of the vdW gap and the KAgSe layer, ωTB is the full width of the vdW gap barrier at the potential top height of the KAgSe layer. These two factors are important in determining the tunneling performance of the vdWH contact. In addition, based on ΦTB and ωTB, the tunneling probability PTB can be estimated by the following formula,57 (4)where ħ is the reduced Planck's constant and m is the mass of the free electron. The calculated ΦTB is 3.48 eV and ωTB is 2.37 Å for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, and therefore PTB is 20.2%. This value is higher than that of recently reported InS/Au (17%) vdWH,58 indicating a high efficiency of carrier injection in the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH.
After the detailed analysis of the real space charge and potential distribution, we further focus on the band structure and density of states of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. To begin with, let's review the electric behaviors of the individual KAgSe monolayer and SiC2 monolayer as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The KAgSe monolayer exhibits semiconducting characteristics with a direct band gap of 0.62 eV, and both the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the valence band maximum (VBM) are located at the Γ point. The CBM is contributed by almost all the atomic orbitals, while the VBM is mainly dominated by the p orbitals of Se atoms and d orbitals of Ag atoms. SiC2 monolayer is an indirect band gap semiconductor with a band gap of 1.31 eV. The CBM lies at the M point and the VBM locates between the M and Γ points. Both the CBM and VBM are mainly contributed by the p orbitals of the C and Si atoms. These results agree well with previously reported works.13,30Fig. 2(c) depicts the band structure and PDOS of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. In view of the weak interaction between the two layers, the band structure of the vdWH seems to be a direct superposition of the bands from the two individual monolayers, apart from the overall upward shift of bands from SiC2. More importantly, because the VBM contributed by KAgSe is located above the CBM from SiC2 with the Fermi level crossing them, the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH consisting of two semi-conducting monolayers shows metallic behavior with type-III (broken gap) band alignment.
To explore the physical mechanisms of the type-III band alignment of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, the schematic diagram about the band alignments of the individual KAgSe monolayer, individual SiC2 monolayer and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH are presented in Fig. 2(d). For individual KAgSe and SiC2 monolayers shown in the left two panels, the work functions are 2.48 eV and 5.35 eV, respectively. The CBM offset ΔEC between KAgSe and SiC2 is equal to 2.38 eV, and the VBM offset ΔEV is equal to 2.88 eV. More importantly, the VBM of individual KAgSe is even higher than the CBM of individual SiC2. Thus, once the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH is formed, the charge tends to transfer from the VBM of KAgSe to the CBM of SiC2, which leads to a built-in electric field from the former to the latter in their interfacial regions and further reduces the band offsets. Indeed, for the formed KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, the band edges move down for KAgSe and move up for SiC2 due to the build-in electric field (see the right panel of Fig. 2(d)), and ΔEC decreases to 1.08 eV and ΔEV decreases to 1.40 eV. Interestingly, the work function is located exactly between the VBM of KAgSe and the CBM of SiC2, forming a broken-gap vdWH with type-III band alignment. For such a type-III heterojunction, the electrons can tunnel from the VBM of the KAgSe layer to the CMB of the SiC2 layer and realize a band-to-band tunneling. Such type-III band alignment is sensitive to an external electric field, and negative differential resistance can be realized in such a system under an external bias voltage.48
3.3 Tunable effects of different factors on KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH
The electronic behaviors of the vdWHs are strongly related to the charge transfer across the interface, which is effectively tuneable under various external conditions, such as vertical or in-plane strain and external electric field.59–63 Thus, we carefully investigate the tunable electronic properties of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH which could be triggered by these external conditions.
First of all, we investigate the effects of vertical strain perpendicular to the 2D plane to electronic properties of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, which is implemented by changing the interfacial distance. In experiments, the interfacial distance can be modulated by vacuum thermal annealing or imposing pressure with a scanning tunneling microscopy tip.64,65 As displayed in Fig. 3(a), when the interfacial distance d between KAgSe and SiC2 decreases from 4.0 Å to 2.0 Å, the VBM shifts gradually from above to below the Fermi level accompanied by an opposite shift of the CBM, resulting in a conversion from conductor to semiconductor for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. When d is larger than 2.5 Å, the contribution of bands from KAgSe or from SiC2 is clearly distinguished. However, when d decreases and is smaller than 2.5 Å, increasing hybridization from both layers can be observed in the band structure, especially for the bands near the Fermi level, due to the increasing interfacial interaction. To gain further insight into the effects of vertical strain on the interfacial interaction, the binding energy combined with the charge transfer under different interfacial distances d are presented in Fig. 3(b). The binding energy remains negative within the entire strain range, revealing the energetic stability of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under vertical strain. The minimum value of binding energy is located at d = 3.0 Å which is the static equilibrium distance. Besides, Δq decreases roughly monotonically versus d indicating continuous charge transfer from KAgSe to SiC2. This attenuated charge accumulation shows that the interfacial interactions are hampered by increasing interfacial distance. Fig. 3(c) shows the isosurface plot of charge density differences at three typical interfacial distances, where a significant difference of charge accumulation at the interface appears when increasing the interfacial distance. Finally, the electrostatic potentials under different interfacial distances d are also investigated. As displayed in Fig. S2(a–c) (ESI†), upon increasing d from 2.4 Å to 3.6 Å, the height of interfacial potential barrier increases from 2.14 eV to 3.78 eV and its width from 1.45 Å to 3.31 Å.
 Fig. 3  (a) Band structures of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at various interfacial distances. In each panel, the contribution to the bands is projected to KAgSe and SiC2 with different magnitudes indicated by different colors. The green horizontal lines show the Fermi level. (b) Variation of charge transfer (Δq) and binding energy (Eb) as functions of the interfacial distance for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. The white vertical line represents the equilibrium interfacial distance of the vdWH. (c) Isosurface of the charge density difference for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various vertical strains. The yellow and green regions correspond to charge accumulation and depletion, respectively. 
At the same time, the tunneling probability PTB decreases from 46.4% to 10.4%, indicating a monotonic rising electron injection efficiency with the decrease of d. In summary, reducing the interfacial distance would increase the charge transfer efficiency from KAgSe to SiC2 and enhance the built-in electric field at the interface, which clearly explains the mechanism of stronger orbital hybridization and metal-to-semiconductor conversion of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under a vertical compressive strain.
The electronic properties of the vdWH can also be tuned by in-plane strains. Fig. 4(a) shows the band structures of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under different biaxial in-plane strains ε, which is defined as ε = (a − a0)/a0 × 100% with a0 and a being the lattice constant of the system before and after the application of strain, respectively. As ε increases from −5% to 5%, the bands from the KAgSe layer are almost unchanged whose VBM and CBM are always fixed at the Γ point, while the bands from the SiC2 layer are changed significantly whose VBM is shifted from M to Γ and CBM is changed from the point between M and Γ to M. To gain more insight into the mechanism of the band shift of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under different in-plane strains, we choose the two most representative points A and B as examples to analyze their electronic properties. Fig. 4(b) and (c) present the isosurface plots of real space charge distribution at points A and B under different strains of −5%, 0 and 5%. At point A, the interfacial interaction between KAgSe and SiC2 is mainly contributed by C atoms at the bottom layer of SiC2. As tensile strain increases, the interfacial interaction fades away, and thus the band at point A shifts towards the lower energy. Whereas at point B, the contributed charges are mainly located around the C atoms at the top layer of SiC2. When the tensile strain increases, the wrinkled SiC2 layer becomes thinner, and the distance between the top layer C atoms and KAgSe layer decreases. As a result, the interfacial interaction increases, and thus the band at point B shifts towards the higher energy. We believe that this understanding of fundamental physics may provide a better strategy for analyzing the band shift versus in-plane strain in many other 2D layered materials in the near future.
 Fig. 4  (a) Band structures of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various biaxial strains. In each panel, the contribution to the bands is projected to KAgSe and SiC2 with different magnitudes indicated by different colors. The green horizontal lines show the Fermi level. (b and c) Side views of the isosurface plot of partial charge densities of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at point A (b) and point B (c), which are marked in the first panel of (a). In both (b) and (c), the panels from left to right represent the charge density under −5%, 0, and 5% biaxial strain, respectively. 
External electric field is another effective approach to tune the electric behaviors of the broken-gap KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. As shown in Fig. 5(b), an external electric field is applied perpendicular to the 2D plane along the direction from KAgSe to SiC2, which is in accordance with the direction of intrinsic built-in electric field in the vdWH. The projected band structures of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under moderate external electric fields from −0.5 V Å−1 to 0.5 V Å−1 are displayed in Fig. 5(a), where the blue curves and red curves indicate the bands contributed by thte KAgSe layer and SiC2 layer, respectively. Two obvious variations of the bands can be found under different electric fields. Firstly, both the CBM and VBM contributed by the KAgSe layer shift upward as the electric field increases, especially the CBM band. When the electric field intensity EZ is equal to −0.5 V Å−1, the CBM and VBM from KAgSe cross each other at the Fermi level indicating a metallic behavior of the KAgSe layer. Upon further increasing EZ, the CBM and VBM become separate, and the KAgSe layer turns into a semi-conductor with a direct band gap. Secondly, both the CBM and VBM contributed by the SiC2 layer move down continuously versus EZ, and the CBM decreases across the Fermi level. The band structures under various electric fields suggest two different types of band alignments accompanied by a phase transition from metallic to semi-conducting state. When EZ is −0.5 V Å−1, the KAgSe layer shows metallic behavior and the SiC2 layer shows a semi-conducting behavior, indicating a n-type Schottky contact of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. Furthermore, when EZ increases from −0.25 V Å−1 to 0.5 V Å−1, the VBM of the KAgSe layer is even higher than the CBM of the SiC2 layer implying the type-III (broken gap) band alignment of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. Moreover, the overlap region is broadened as EZ is increased, implying an enhanced band-to-band tunneling probability from the VBM of KAgSe to CBM of SiC2.
 Fig. 5  (a) Band structures of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various external electric fields. In each panel, the contribution to the bands is projected to KAgSe and SiC2 with different magnitudes indicated by different colors. The green horizontal lines show the Fermi level. (b) Schematic diagram of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under a positive external electric field. (c) Band offsets ΔEg,KAgSe, ΔEC and ΔE2 and Bader charge transfer Δq in KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various electric fields (EZ). (d) Schematic diagrams of different types of band alignments of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various electric fields. 
To further explore the details of phase transition of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH when increasing the external electric field, we plot the band alignments of the KAgSe layer and SiC2 layer versus EZ in Fig. 5(c) and (d). In panel (c), ΔEg,KAgSe, ΔEC and ΔE2 indicate the energy differences between the CBM and VBM of the KAgSe layer, the VBM of KAgSe and the CBM of SiC2, and the CBMs of KAgSe and SiC2, respectively. Obviously, ΔEg,KAgSe, ΔEC and ΔE2 increase with various degrees when increasing EZ. When EZ is less than −0.4 V Å−1, ΔEg,KAgSe is equal to zero indicating a metallic behavior, and thus ΔEC and ΔE2 are less than zero. In this case, KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH shows n-type Schottky contact behavior. When EZ is in the range of −0.4 V Å−1 and −0.38 V Å−1, ΔEg,KAgSe becomes positive meaning an opened gap of KAgSe. Negative ΔEC and ΔE2 indicate that the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH belongs to type-I (straddling gap) connection. With further increase of EZ from −0.38 V Å−1 to −0.3 V Å−1, both ΔEC and ΔE2 are positive, but ΔE2 is still less than ΔEg,KAgSe. This means that KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH shows type-II (staggered gap) connection in this range of electric field. When EZ is larger than −0.3 V Å−1, ΔE2 becomes larger than ΔEg,KAgSe, meaning that the system finally becomes a type-III vdWH. This band alignment related phase transition is also presented more intuitively in Fig. 5(d) by bar chart, where the system shows in turn the n-type Schottky connection, type-I connection, type-II connection and type-III connection.
A consecutive phase transition of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH versus EZ is directly related to the intrinsic built-in electric field at the interface due to charge transfer. As shown in Fig. 5(b), positive values of EZ indicate the same direction of the built-in electric field at the interface from the KAgSe layer to the SiC2 layer. With the increase of positive EZ, the strength of built-in electric field is enhanced, and thus more charges are transferred from the KAgSe layer to the SiC2 layer. In contrast, a negative electric field can weaken the built-in electric field and can even establish an opposite electric field, and further restrict the charge transfer from KAgSe to SiC2. Indeed, the transferred charge decreases monotonously from roughly 0.18 e to 0.07 e per unit cell with the decrease of EZ from 0.5 V Å−1 to −0.5 V Å−1 as shown in the inset of Fig. 5(c). Specifically, as EZ decreases from 0 to −0.5 V Å−1, the intrinsic built-in electric field first becomes zero, and then the net electric field increases pointing from SiC2 to KAgSe, which further blocks the charge transfer from KAgSe to SiC2. Therefore, the band edges of the KAgSe layer keep moving downward and the band edges of the SiC2 layer continues to increase, and finally results in the four different electric field tunable band alignments in KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH.
The consecutive phase transition of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under an external electric field reveals great application prospects in nanoelectronics. For electronic devices made of type-III band alignment vdWHs, an interesting phenomenon is gate controlled negative differential resistance, which indicates a promising application of the system in tunneling field effect transistors (TFETs). For type-II vdWHs, the built-in electric field at the interface not only facilitates the separation of free electrons and holes into different layers, but also reduces the recombination probability of the separated electrons and holes. These promising properties will greatly extend the lifetime of excitons, and thus the system is appealing for use in the optoelectronic devices and solar energy conversion devices.66 For type-I vdWHs, the electrons and the holes are preferentially localized in the same layer of the vdWHs, which gives rise to the recombination of electrons and holes and reduces their separation. Therefore, type-I vdWHs are more suitable for applications in luminescent devices, such as light-emitting diodes and lasers.21,22 For the n-type Schottky contact, only the electrons with energy higher than the Schottky barrier can tunnel into the metallic layer, and thus allow the application of Schottky diodes. Anyhow, the variable responses of electronic properties upon external electric fields can provide KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH as a new testing bed for experimental design and more novel applications in future electronic devices.
In summary, the modulation of the electronic properties of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH was investigated by interfacial distance, in-plane strain and external electric field, which can effectively adjust the band alignments of the system. Moreover, the vdWH can be adjusted by an external electric field to realize the phase transition from type-III connection to type-II, type-I and finally an n-type Schottky contact. The consecutive transition of band alignments provide the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH with a promising platform for a multi-functional device design.
3.4 Electronic transport properties in the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based nanodevice
In the previous sections, we have discussed the electronic behaviors of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH accompanied with band alignment modification by external force and electric field. Although some potential applications of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH have been proposed, they are only qualitative predictions since the periodic boundary condition was used in predicting device characteristics. Since a nanoelectronic device is not a periodic system, it is therefore necessary to build a KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based practical device and explore its quantum transport properties by using the first principles calculation method.

Fig. 6 shows the schematic structure of a pure KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH-based 2D nano-device, where both the leads and scattering region are constructed by periodic extension of 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH in the (x,y) plane and quantum transport occurs along the y direction. Compared with the metal-KAgSe/SiC2 tunneling junctions, the pure KAgSe/SiC2 device has more advantages including a simple structure, easy preparation, smooth continuous interface and no lattice mismatch. So far, such simplified device models have been used in a series of previous theoretical works,48,67–69 and have been confirmed to be effective models to qualitatively evaluate the quantum transport properties in practical devices. Moreover, to achieve correct potential drop under bias voltage at two boundaries between the lead and scattering region, one column of C atoms along the x direction in the center of the scattering region is replaced by a column of hydrogenated N atoms. In the following, we investigate the quantum transport properties of the newly designed pure KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based 2D nano-device at zero temperature based on the Landauer–Büttiker formula as follows,70 (5)where e is the electron charge and h is Planck's constant; fL(R) is the Fermi distribution function of the left (right) lead related with the chemical potential μL(R) = −eVL(R) which determines the bounds of integration. τ(E) is the transmission coefficient of the two probe system, which can be calculated by71 τσ(E) = Tr[ΓLGrΓRGa],(6)where Gr and Ga are the retarded and advanced non-equilibrium Green's functions of the system, which include all the information of the scattering electrons and the system, such as electron energy E, reciprocal vector k and bias voltage Vb = (μL − μR)/e. ΓL and ΓR are the corresponding line-width functions, which describe the coupling between leads and scattering region.
 Fig. 6  Schematic structure of the pure 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based two probe device. The left red region and right green region represent the drain and source, respectively, and the red zone in the center scattering region stands for the area under an external gate voltage. Moreover, the right side panel is the enlarged image of the black square area. 

Fig. 7(a) shows the transmission coefficient τ versus energy E under different bias voltages Vb of the KAgSe/SiC2 device. When Vb is equal to zero, large τ appears in the full energy region from −0.3 eV to 0.3 eV due to the perfect conducting behavior of type-III vdWH. In particular, τ decreases roughly linearly at first when E increases from −0.3 eV to −0.1 eV, then shows a plateau from −0.1 eV to 0.1 eV, and finally rises up again from 0.1 eV to 0.3 eV. The plateau near the Fermi level can be maintained when Vb < 0.1 V, which induces a roughly linear I–V curve under a small bias voltage as shown in Fig. 7(b). With the increase of Vb, τ decreases gradually in the whole energy region. In view of the almost completely symmetric structure, the behavior of τ under a negative bias voltage is very similar to that under an equivalent positive bias voltage as shown in the inset of Fig. 7(b). When Vb > 0.2 V, a quasi-gap appears near the Fermi level, which becomes broad with a further increase of Vb indicating the decrease of system conductivity. Therefore, although the integral domain of the current as in eqn (5) under a large bias voltage is broad, the increasing quasi-gap range of τ near the Fermi level will reduce the growth rate of the current and even show negative differential resistance behavior. Indeed, we find that the increasing speed of the current becomes slow when Vb > 0.1 V and NDR appears at 0.3 V bias voltage as shown in Fig. 7(b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Transmission coefficient τ versus energy E under different bias voltage Vb for the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based nanodevice. (b) I–V curve of the system, the right inset is an enlarged view of the NDR effect in the range of Vb > 0.3 V, and the left inset is the 2D planer distribution of τ versus E and Vb for the system. (c) Band alignment diagram of the whole device including the source, the center scattering region, and the drain. (d) Bar distribution of the current versus gate voltage Vg for the device system. 
To understand the NDR behavior of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH device, the band alignments under different bias voltages of the device are presented in Fig. 7(c). Due to the broken gap of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH in both the scattering region and lead regions, a favorable conducting channel is located near the Fermi level and contributes a large transmission coefficient. When the system is under small bias voltage from −0.1 V to 0.1 V, only slight mismatch happened between the conducting channels in the lead and scattering region (see the green dashed line). Thus, τ of the system near the Fermi level is almost unchanged, which eventually leads to the linear increase of the current. With further increase of Vb, the overlap of the conducting channels in the lead and scattering region is reduced. The transmission coefficient decreases and even reaches zero, and the increasing speed of the current declines. With further increase of bias voltage, the conducting channels in the lead regions are only contributed by one of the component layers (see the black dashed lines). Therefore, the energy gap of τ near the Fermi level is further broadened, and finally the NDR effects occurs. Note that the formation mechanism of the NDR effect in this device is mainly dominated by the bias related band alignments in both leads associated with the mismatch of the conducting channel in the lead and scattering region, which is completely different from the mechanism of general tunneling field effect transistors reported in previous publications where the NDR is mainly induced by the energy renormalization of the center material.72,73 This distinctive formation mechanism of NDR effect in our designed KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH device may provide possible guidance for the experimental realization of NDR effect from a new perspective.
Finally, we also investigate the gate controlled behaviors of the KAgSe/SiC2 nanodevice, where a gate voltage Vg perpendicular to the 2D plane is applied in the scattering region as marked by a pink color in the device center shown in Fig. 6. The calculated conductance is defined as G = q2/h × τ(Ef) with τ(Ef) indicating the gate controlled transmission coefficient at the Fermi level. As shown in Fig. 7(d), G increases monotonically versus Vg from −40 V to 24 V. This is reasonable because a positive electric field will increase the type-III overlap of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, and vice versa. Furthermore, because only 1/3 of the center scattering region is applied to a gate voltage, the influence of Vg to the conductance of the system is greatly reduced compared with that of the periodic system. In view of various band alignments from type-III, type-II, type-I and Schottky contact formation of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under negative electric field, we argue that G would first decrease to 0 and then increases monotonically as Vg decreases to large enough negative values. All these novel performances suggest that the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based device has great potential applications in the experimental tuneable electronic devices.
4 Summary
In summary, we proposed a novel 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH and systematically investigated its related structural, mechanical, electronic and quantum transport properties by using the first principles calculation methods. Firstly, the 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH was confirmed to be stable under different conditions by evaluating its formation energy, vibrational phonon spectra and total energy evolution at high temperature. The calculated elastic constants and Young's modulus indicate that the vdWH is obviously anisotropic. Secondly, the band structure shows that the vdWH possesses a rare type-III band alignment which implies favorable application of the system in TFETs. The band alignments can be modulated by in-plane strain, interfacial distance, and external electric field. Especially, when under increasing negative electric field, phase transitions of the vdWH can occur from type-III arrangement to type-II, type-I, and Schottky contact in turn accompanied by the decrease of charge transfer and the reversal of net electric field in the interfacial region, which may provide new guidance on the experimental design of multi-functional nanoelectronic devices. Finally, we built a KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based 2D nano-device and investigated its quantum transport properties. The transmission coefficient can be effectively adjusted by an external bias, and obvious NDR effects occurs at a finite bias voltage. Moreover, the NDR effect here is mainly dominated by the band alignments in the lead regions, which is different from that in traditional TFETs in previous reports. This new mechanism of NDR effects may shed new light on exploring new TFETs in future experiments.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11774238), and the Shenzhen Key Lab Fund (ZDSYS 20170228105421966).
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Katoch, S. Ulstrup, R. J. Koch, S. Moser, K. M. McCreary, S. Singh, J. Xu, B. T. Jonker, R. K. Kawakami and A. Bostwick, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 355–358 Search PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Lin, X. Lin, Z. Xu, P. Wang, S. Zhang, H. Zhong, W. Xu, Z. Wu and W. Fang, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 134–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104070 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Klimovskikh, M. M. Otrokov, V. Y. Voroshnin, D. Sostina, L. Petaccia, G. Di Santo, S. Thakur, E. V. Chulkov and A. M. Shikin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 368–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Y. Sun, X. Jiang and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25712–25771 RSC .
P. Zhao, H. Yang, J. Li, H. Jin, W. Wei, L. Yu, B. Huang and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24145–24152 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Wang and H. Guo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 165417 CrossRef .
L. Wang, P. Hu, Y. Long, Z. Liu and X. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22855–22876 RSC .
Q. Wang, J. Li, Y. Liang, Y. Nie and B. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41670–41677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. H. Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. Lee, W. Que, J. Z. Xu and L. B. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039–3068 RSC .
M. Gobbi, E. Orgiu and P. Samor, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706103 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Li, Y. Liang, B. Wang and Y. Nie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10684–10695 RSC .
H. Yang, J. Li, L. Yu, B. Huang, Y. Ma and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4161–4166 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature, 2019, 567, 323–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-J. Wang, X.-H. Li, R. Zhao, X.-L. Cai, W.-Y. Yu, W.-B. Li, Z.-S. Liu, L.-W. Zhang and S.-H. Ke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8923–8929 RSC .
V. O. Özcelik, J. G. Azadani, C. Yang, S. J. Koester and T. Low, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 035125 CrossRef .
S. Nakamura, M. Senoh, N. Iwasa and S.-I. Nagahama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 34, L797 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Arakawa and A. Yariv, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1986, 22, 1887–1899 CrossRef .
M. Massicotte, P. Schmidt, F. Vialla, K. G. Schädler, A. Reserbat-Plantey, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K.-J. Tielrooij and F. H. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 42–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, R. K. Ghosh, R. Addou, N. Lu, S. M. Eichfeld, H. Zhu, M.-Y. Li, X. Peng, M. J. Kim and L.-J. Li, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–6 Search PubMed .
W. Xu, R. Wang, B. Zheng, X. Wu and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14457–14462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. O. Koswatta, S. J. Koester and W. Haensch, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 3222–3230 CAS .
T. Roy, M. Tosun, M. Hettick, G. H. Ahn, C. Hu and A. Javey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 083111 CrossRef .
M. M. Mahmoud, E. K. Rugut, M. P. Molepo and D. P. Joubert, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2019, 92, 87 CrossRef .
G. Savelsberg and H. Schäfer, J. Less-Common Met., 1981, 80, P59–P69 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, G. Qin, Y. Lin and M. Hu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3831–3842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lopez-Bezanilla and P. B. Littlewood, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19469–19474 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Ning, H. Zhang, G. Ni, H. Shao, B. Peng, X. Zhang, X. He, Y. Zhu and H. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45705–45713 RSC .
Z. Liu, X. Wu, V. Varshney, J. Lee, G. Qin, M. Hu, A. K. Roy and T. Luo, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Togo and I. Tanaka, Scr. Mater., 2015, 108, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Barnett and U. Landman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qiao, S. A. Yang, B. Wang, Y. Yao and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 035431 CrossRef .
D. Waldron, P. Haney, B. Larade, A. MacDonald and H. Guo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 166804 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Taylor, H. Guo and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 245407 CrossRef .
D. Hamann, M. Schlüter and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 43, 1494 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Himmetoglu, A. Floris, S. De Gironcoli and M. Cococcioni, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2014, 114, 14–49 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guss, M. E. Foster, B. M. Wong, F. Patrick Doty, K. Shah, M. R. Squillante, U. Shirwadkar, R. Hawrami, J. Tower and D. Yuan, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 034908 CrossRef .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
R. Roldán, A. Castellanos-Gomez, E. Cappelluti and F. Guinea, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 313201 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xia, J. Du, M. Li, X. Li, X. Zhao, T. Wang and J. Li, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 10, 054064 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lei, Y. Ma, X. Xu, T. Zhang, B. Huang and Y. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 23089–23095 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Yip, S. Phillpot and D. Wolf, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 4182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Born and K. Huang, Dynamical Theory of Crystal Lattices, Clarendon Press,  1954 Search PubMed .
E. Cadelano, P. L. Palla, S. Giordano and L. Colombo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 235414 CrossRef .
K. Michel and B. Verberck, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 224301 CrossRef .
S. Wang, J.-X. Li, Y.-L. Du and C. Cui, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 83, 290–293 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Becke and K. E. Edgecombe, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 92, 5397–5403 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Dai, Y. Ma, L. Ju, W. Wei and B. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2073–2080 RSC .

          E. Merzbacher, Quantum Mechanics, 3rd edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
H. Jin, J. Li, L. Wan, Y. Dai, Y. Wei and H. Guo, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025116 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, D. Chang, Q. Gao, C. Niu, C. Li, F. Wang, X. Huang, C. Xia and Y. Jia, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10256–10262 RSC .
J. Shang, L. Pan, X. Wang, J. Li, H.-X. Deng and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7201–7206 RSC .
J. Du, C. Xia, W. Xiong, T. Wang, Y. Jia and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17585–17592 RSC .
C.-X. Xia, J. Du, X.-W. Huang, W.-B. Xiao, W.-Q. Xiong, T.-X. Wang, Z.-M. Wei, Y. Jia, J.-J. Shi and J.-B. Li, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 115416 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Peng, Q. Qian, J. Du, S. Wang and Y. Huang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703536 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tongay, W. Fan, J. Kang, J. Park, U. Koldemir, J. Suh, D. S. Narang, K. Liu, J. Ji and J. Li, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3185–3190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yankowitz, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. San-Jose and B. J. LeRoy, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
K. Cheng, Y. Guo, N. Han, X. Jiang, J. Zhang, R. Ahuja, Y. Su and J. Zhao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 143902 CrossRef .
W. Wu, W. Guo and X. C. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9264–9276 RSC .
A. Saraiva-Souza, M. Smeu, J. G. da Silva Filho, E. C. Girão and H. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11856–11866 RSC .
G. Berdiyorov, H. Bahlouli and F. Peeters, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 225101 CrossRef .
M. Büttiker, Y. Imry, R. Landauer and S. Pinhas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 31, 6207 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Wang and H. Guo, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2001, 70, 2645–2651 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, C. Liu, C. Li, W. Bao, S. Ding, D. W. Zhang and P. Zhou, Small, 2017, 13, 1701478 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nourbakhsh, A. Zubair, M. S. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1359–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc02100hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Top and side views of the schematic structures of monolayer KAgSe (left) and SiC2 (right). The C, Si, K, Ag and Se atoms are labeled by black, blue, violet, silver and green balls, respectively. The unit cells are shown by squares at the lower-left corners in the top view panels. (b) Top and side views of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH, the nearest interfacial distance d is also marked. (c) Phonon dispersion curves of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. (d) The variation of total energy as a function of time at 500 K. Insets: Top and side views of a snapshot of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at 5 ps. (e) Young's modulus of KAgSe monolayer (black curve), SiC2 monolayer (orange curve) and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH (green curve) along the arbitrary in-plane direction. (f) From left to right: ELFs of SiC2 monolayer (top view), KAgSe monolayer (side view) and KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH (side view).	 
Eb = (EKAgSe/SiC2 − EKAgSe − ESiC2)/S,	(1)
	(2)

SiC2	139.3	138.2	3.45	139.1	3.32	135.9
KAgSe	35.5	35.4	0.32	35.4	11.34	34.7
KAgSe/SiC2	122.6	121.2	31.65	114.4	8.74	112.7
Δρ(r) = [ρKAgSe/SiC2 − ρKAgSe − ρSiC2]/n,	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Charge density deformation of plane projection and three-dimensional integration for the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. The green vertical lines indicate the edges of KAgSe and SiC2, and the yellow and cyan isosurfaces represent the charge accumulation and depletion in the vdWH with an isovalue of 0.003 e Å−3. (b) Electrostatic potential profile of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at the equilibrium distance along the z direction. The green vertical line indicates the interface of the vdWH, the electrostatic potential difference ΔV combined with the height (ΦTB) and width (ωTB) of the square potential barrier are marked. (c) Band structure and PDOS of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at the PBE level. The Fermi level is set to zero, the contribution from KAgSe and SiC2 is distinguished by black and red dotted lines with magnitudes indicated by the size of the dots. (d) Schematic diagrams of the band alignment between the monolayer from KAgSe and SiC2 before and after the formation of the heterostructure. ΔEC and ΔEV are the energy difference of CBM and VBM between KAgSe and SiC2, respectively, and Wf is the work functions for each structure.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Band structures of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at various interfacial distances. In each panel, the contribution to the bands is projected to KAgSe and SiC2 with different magnitudes indicated by different colors. The green horizontal lines show the Fermi level. (b) Variation of charge transfer (Δq) and binding energy (Eb) as functions of the interfacial distance for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH. The white vertical line represents the equilibrium interfacial distance of the vdWH. (c) Isosurface of the charge density difference for KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various vertical strains. The yellow and green regions correspond to charge accumulation and depletion, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Band structures of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various biaxial strains. In each panel, the contribution to the bands is projected to KAgSe and SiC2 with different magnitudes indicated by different colors. The green horizontal lines show the Fermi level. (b and c) Side views of the isosurface plot of partial charge densities of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH at point A (b) and point B (c), which are marked in the first panel of (a). In both (b) and (c), the panels from left to right represent the charge density under −5%, 0, and 5% biaxial strain, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Band structures of KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various external electric fields. In each panel, the contribution to the bands is projected to KAgSe and SiC2 with different magnitudes indicated by different colors. The green horizontal lines show the Fermi level. (b) Schematic diagram of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under a positive external electric field. (c) Band offsets ΔEg,KAgSe, ΔEC and ΔE2 and Bader charge transfer Δq in KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various electric fields (EZ). (d) Schematic diagrams of different types of band alignments of the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH under various electric fields.	 
	(5)
τσ(E) = Tr[ΓLGrΓRGa],	(6)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic structure of the pure 2D KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based two probe device. The left red region and right green region represent the drain and source, respectively, and the red zone in the center scattering region stands for the area under an external gate voltage. Moreover, the right side panel is the enlarged image of the black square area.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Transmission coefficient τ versus energy E under different bias voltage Vb for the KAgSe/SiC2 vdWH based nanodevice. (b) I–V curve of the system, the right inset is an enlarged view of the NDR effect in the range of Vb > 0.3 V, and the left inset is the 2D planer distribution of τ versus E and Vb for the system. (c) Band alignment diagram of the whole device including the source, the center scattering region, and the drain. (d) Bar distribution of the current versus gate voltage Vg for the device system.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc02100h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
