van der Waals oxide heteroepitaxy for soft transparent electronics  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR04219F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR04219F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 18523-18544van der Waals oxide heteroepitaxy for soft transparent electronics

        
          
            Yugandhar 
            Bitla
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ying-Hao 
            Chu
          
          
        
      *bc
aDepartment of Physics, School of Physical Sciences, Central University of Rajasthan, Ajmer 305817, India
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan. E-mail: yhc@nctu.edu.tw
cDepartment of Electrophysics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan
Received 
      2nd June 2020
    , Accepted 18th August 2020First published on 18th August 2020AbstractThe quest for multifunctional, low-power and environment friendly electronics has brought research on materials to the forefront. For instance, as the emerging field of transparent flexible electronics is set to greatly impact our daily lives, more stringent requirements are being imposed on functional materials. Inherently flexible polymers and metal foil templates have yielded limited success due to their incompatible high-temperature growth and non-transparency, respectively. Although the epitaxial-transfer strategy has shown promising results, it suffers from tedious and complicated lift-off-transfer processes. The advent of graphene, in particular, and 2D layered materials, in general, with ultrathin scalability has revolutionized this field. Herein, we review the direct growth of epitaxial functional oxides on flexible transparent mica substrates via van der Waals heteroepitaxy, which mitigates misfit strain and substrate clamping for soft transparent electronics applications. Recent advances in practical applications of flexible and transparent electronic elements are discussed. Finally, several important directions, challenges and perspectives for commercialization are also outlined. We anticipate that this promising strategy to build transparent flexible optoelectronic devices and improve their performance will open up new avenues for researchers to explore.Yugandhar BitlaDr Yugandhar Bitla obtained his MPhil and PhD degrees from the University of Hyderabad in 2006 and 2013, respectively. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at National Chiao Tung University and the Indian Institute of Science, he joined Central University of Rajasthan as an assistant professor in 2019. His research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of complex oxides in different forms, flexible electronics, nanoscale magnetism, magnetic phase transitions, critical phenomena, spintronics and multiferroics.Ying-Hao ChuProfessor Chu received his PhD from the Department of Materials Science & Engineering at National Tsing-Hua University in 2004. Currently, he is appointed as a distinguished professor at National Chiao Tung University. In 2019, he joined ACS Applied Electronic Materials as an associate editor. His research is highly focused on complex functional oxides and strongly correlated electron systems. He has extensive experience in the use of advanced characterization techniques to understand and manipulate functional oxide heterostructures, nanostructures, and interfaces. His current goal is to create a pathway to use high quality oxide heteroepitaxy for soft transparent technology.
1. Introduction
Transparent flexible electronics (TFE) have attracted significant attention from academia and industry alike due to their numerous emerging electronics application prospects in wearables, transparent logic, conformable biomedical sensors, etc. Research discoveries over the past decade have led to the emergence of advanced electronic and optoelectronic systems that can bend, twist, fold, stretch, and wrap conformally onto arbitrary curved surfaces without significantly changing device characteristics. Fully transparent and flexible electronic devices demand transparent active layers, in addition to the transparent electrodes being flexible at the same time. The design and development of transparent flexible (TF) electronic elements necessiates the integration of intended electronic, mechanical, and optical properties. This multi-property coupling requirement is not straightforward, as these properties are often mutually exclusive. Moreso, additional impositions, such as longevity, thermal and chemical stabilities, call for careful consideration. Eventually, research on TFE led to the development of wide variety of new materials, novel structural engineering, and smart fabrication processes that allowed the broad field of soft electronics to make scientific and technological progress in TF electronic devices, including TF conductors, heaters, sensors, field-effect transistors, memory devices, optoelectronic components, nanogenerators, and supercapacitors, beyond the scope of devices built on conventional rigid and inflexible templates. The key challenge is to identify and optimize systems that can simultaneously provide transparency, high performance, high thermal stability and soft compliant mechanics (Fig. 1). TFE devices must be capable of maintaining their functional properties and electronic performance parameters even under mechanical deformation. Correspondingly, devices that measure strain (sensors) or harvest energy from strain (piezoelectric generators) should have consistent response to strain throughout the device lifetime.1
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the combined functionalities required in the design and development of transparent flexible electronics applications. 
Oxide materials are ubiquitous in modern technology, and their inorganic nature result in environmentally stable devices with long lifetime. Complex oxides are attractive due to the interplay of lattice, charge, orbital, and spin degrees of freedom, which generate a rich spectrum of competing phases and physical properties. The design, synthesis and processing of novel oxide materials with suitable electronic, mechanical and optical properties allow large number of material combinations for oxide electronics. Fully transparent and flexible substrates incorporating transparent oxides are very critical to realize next generation electronic devices with sensing, display, storage, self-powering and portable functionalities. For instance, exploiting transparent conducting oxides for electrical conduction, ferroelectric oxides for memory, piezoelectric oxides for sensing and energy harvesting, and semiconducting or dielectric oxides for high-performance transistors and logic can be envisaged in the context of invisible-flexible electronics. This integration will eventually lead to high-performing, powerful and practical transparent flexible electronics only if single crystalline forms are used. However, a generic approach to build flexible electronics based on epitaxial functional oxides is yet to be developed. In fact, the realization of freestanding single crystalline films would provide an additional degree of freedom to functional oxides (Fig. 2) in addition to the charge, spin, orbital and lattice degrees of freedom.
 Fig. 2  Degrees of freedom inherent to flexible functional oxide heteroepitaxy. 
In this review, devices with the capability of withstanding a level of mechanical strain less than 3% and optical transparency above 60% are mostly discussed. We focus on the current methodologies, technologies, and strategies for the development of TF electronic devices and on the desired performance. First, we introduce the materials, underscoring the importance of two-dimensional materials, followed by fabrication strategies and mechanics relevant to transparent flexible electronics. Second, some of the most recent developments in this emerging field based on van der Waals epitaxy on mica, with some emphasis on the work from our group, are highlighted. Challenges, conclusions and future prospects in the field of transparent and flexible electronics are outlined in the final section.
2. Materials systems
Advances in materials science research arise in the pursuit of new materials and structures with emergent properties and subsequently lead to application-inspired basic research. The choice of materials and fabrication strategies, including systems architectures and processes with suitable optical, electrical and mechanical attributes, will enable future TFE technologies.
2.1. van der Waals oxides
Interest in two-dimensional (2D) materials is increasing daily across the scientific community as an important class of materials for next generation electronics. The discovery of graphene in 20042 led to a resurgence of research activities in 2D layered materials, leading to explosive progress in various aspects, including new material discovery, preparation, property exploration and device applications.2,3 2D materials or van der Waals (vdW) materials refer to structures which present anisotropic bonds, strong intra-layer chemical bonds and weak inter-layer vdW bonds. Based on the chemical element location in the periodic table, the 2D materials library2,4 encompasses group IV (graphene, silicene, germanene), group V (black and blue phosphorene), III–V compounds (h-BN), transition metal dichalcogenides (MoS2, WSe2, MoTe2), III–VI compounds (In2Se3, GaS, GaTe), IV–VI compounds (GeS, SnSe, SnS2), V–VI compounds (Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3), IV–VII compounds (HgI2, PbI2), metal oxides, hydroxides (V2O5, Ni(OH)2) and others. They cover a complete set of metallic, semimetallic, semiconducting, topological insulating and insulating properties with atomic scalability, transparency and mechanical compliance, which can revolutionize applications in electronics, optoelectronics, energy harvesting, catalysis and quantum fields.5 Despite their unique features, 2D oxides have received relatively little attention compared to other members of the 2D material family. Unlike layered van der Waals materials, which have weak inter-layer bonds, layered oxides consist of charged sheets with charged species intercalated between them. They can be further categorized into binary oxides (MoO3, WO3, Ga2O3, and V2O5), clay-minerals (Mica, Kaolinite, Montmorillonite), ABO2-type (LiCoO2), layered oxide perovskites (Ruddlesden–Popper, Dion–Jacobson and Aurivillius phases), Brownmillerite Ca2Fe2O5, etc.6 These 2D nanosheets/membranes find potential applications in supercapacitors, photocatalysts, batteries, sensors and even as templates for epitaxial growth.
2.2. Transparent and flexible substrates
The venture into fabricating transparent flexible electronic device elements must begin with the choice of a proper substrate material, as it plays a pivotal role in terms of meeting cost, performance, reliability, and manufacturing goals for the emergence of TFE as a competitive product. This material must be transparent, flexible, chemically inert, thermally conducting, and electrically insulating, and it must possess high thermal stability.7,8 Currently, flexible device elements can be made directly on metal foil, ultra-thin glass, or a variety of plastic substrates. Thin metal foils are good choices for flexible electronics because they offer superior chemical resistance in a number of environments, act as good barriers and are compatible with high temperature processing. However, they undergo plastic deformations at very small bending strains, restricting their flexibility range; this can be improved by reducing their thicknesses. Moreover, they are opaque and prone to oxidation; pre-treatments such as polishing or planarization to reduce surface roughness and, in some cases, electrical passivation to reduce capacitive coupling between the devices and the conductive metal foil surface are necessary. Ultra-thin glass (50–200 μm) displays properties such as flexibility, diffusion barrier, transparency, high surface quality, chemical and thermal durability; however, its cost, fragility and handling difficulty in manufacturing are liabilities. Polymer substrates exhibit excellent flexibility and have light weights compared to glass substrates; however, their sensitivity to heat treatment and chemicals, susceptibility to gas permeation and large thermal expansion coefficients are major drawbacks.9 Buffer layers are used to avoid moisture permeation and develop smooth surfaces.10 Most polymer substrates suffer from structural instability and melt at 300 °C, restricting the growth processes to low temperatures.11 The non-availability of an inorganic flexible substrate paved the way for electronics built using organic materials on polymer/plastic substrates with excellent mechanical attributes to prosper in the past; however, the high performance applications of these materials were limited due to their intrinsic thermal instabilities and low mobilities. Moreover, crack formation during repeated flexing, ingress of moisture, etc., and electrical reliability issues related to polymer degradation, continued phase segregation, surface passivation, contact diffusion, and low-efficiency are important challenges faced by organic electronics9. 2D mica overcomes the shortcomings of the aforementioned transparent flexible substrates. Mica qualifies as an ideal substrate for transparent-flexible electronic device applications due to its 2D structure with atomically flat surface as well as its transparent, elastic, flexible, chemically inert, non-toxic, thermally conductive, and electrically insulating properties. Also, it is nonmagnetic, lightweight, biocompatible, inexpensive and compatible with all modern thin film deposition techniques.12 Mica unanimously stands out as the best flexible substrate to date for realizing high performance flexible electronics applications, and it will be shown in following sections that the direct growth of functional oxides on mica,12–105 currently serves as the best possible strategy. All the conventional transparent flexible templates available for building soft transparent electronics are compared in Table 1.
Table 1 Conventional transparent flexible substrates for soft transparent electronics




Transparent flexible substrates
Polymer
Glass
SS
Muscovite
Phlogopite


PC
PDMS
PEN
PES
PET
PI




∥ – parallel and ⊥ – perpendicular to cleavage plane.




Refractive index
1.58
1.4
1.5–1.75
1.66
1.66
1.7
1.5



n
α: 1.563, nβ: 1.596, nγ: 1.60

n
α: 1.55, nβ: 1.59, nγ: 1.60


Transparent
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes


Surface smoothness
No
No
No
No
No
No
Good
No
Excellent
Excellent


Melting point (°C)
225
-45
270
380
>250
520
720
>1500
1000
1100


Operating temp (°C)
115–150
260
155–180
223
115–170
250–320
600
1400
700
800


TEC (10−6 K−1)
66–70
1
20, 16
54
20–80
30–60
3–5
10
8–12 (∥)
5–13 (∥)


15–25 (⊥)
0.001–1 (⊥)


Electrical conductivity
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No


Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
0.2
0.15
0.15
0.13–0.18
0.15–0.24
0.12
1.16
16
0.3 (∥)
0.3 (∥)


3 (⊥)
3 (⊥)


Youngs modulus (GPa)
∼2
∼6 × 10−4
5–6
2.2
2–4
2–3
75
200
172
172


Tensile strength (MPa)
55–75
2.24
200–275
83
55–75
150–230
22–32
400
225–300
255–300


Compression strength (MPa)
>80






80
51


250
221
221




In addition to providing basic features such as electrical conductivity and transparency, the TFE elements and their device architectures must fulfil mechanical ruggedness criteria to avoid damage during both processing and operation. Recognising the importance of inorganic materials in the flexible electronics arena, efforts to understand the mechanical failure modes and their limitation has been gaining attention. The inherently brittle nature of most inorganic materials restricts the mechanical ruggedness of flexible devices built using these materials.
The mechanical strain1,106εb experienced by a thin film of thickness tf on a flexible substrate of thickness ts under bending of the entire heterostructure into a radius R is given by:   where η = tf/ts, χ = Yf/Ys, and Yf and Ys are the Young's moduli of the thin film and the substrate, respectively. In the context of vdW epitaxy, the nature of the interface (vdW or Quasi-vdW) and the strength of the interlayer interactions for the stress transfer become very important. However, it should be noted that the total strain is the sum of an internal strain and a bending strain (ε = εi + εb). The internal strain (εi) is essentially controlled by the fabrication process, while the bending strain (εb) results from the radius of curvature applied and is inversely proportional to the distance from the neutral plane. A mechanically neutral plane exists within the heterostructure where the bending strain is negligible; however, opposite-type strains (compressive and tensile) occur across this plane and attain maximum values on the surfaces. In general, tf ≪ ts, and assuming minimal elastic mismatch, the imposable strain on the thin film is , ensuring that the neutral axis lies well within the substrate. Therefore, at a given strain value, the minimum bending radius can be improved by choosing a thinner substrate. The strain tolerance of brittle/fragile materials can be improved by positioning them in the neutral mechanical plane.106 All flexible heterostructures are normally examined either in flex-in (thin film under compression) mode or flex-out (thin film under tension) mode as long as the bending strain does not exceed the yield strain of the thin film, leading to detrimental effects on the device performance. The bending direction also plays a key role in the device performance metrics. The critical radius of bending beyond which the device fails requires knowledge of the critical strain, thickness, and Young's moduli of both the film and substrate. Controlling intrinsic stresses associated with process-induced disorder (tensile or compressive in inorganic films and tensile in organic films), thermal stresses arising due to mismatched thermal expansion coefficients of the substrate and thin film (tensile or compressive in organic films and compressive in inorganic films) and hygroscopic stresses resulting upon exposure to ambient humidity because of a mismatch in hygroscopic expansions (tensile or compressive in organic films and tensile in inorganic films) are crucial to achieve dimensional stability during processing.9 The main failure mechanisms in a film/substrate structure are compressive stress buckling (debond) and delamination in flex-in mode while tensile stress cracking and delamination in flex-out mode; these depend on the nature of the film and substrate materials and the types of interfaces they form.107
3. Fabrication strategies
Soft technology platforms using flexible and stretchable electronics are built via complementary strategies of using structures or materials that can flex or stretch.108 One strategy involves new structural layout designs in conventional materials, while the other relies on the design of new materials in conventional layouts. Therefore, the fabrication of soft transparent electronic devices employs either geometric engineering of transparent and flexible materials on TF substrates or direct deposition of intrinsically transparent and flexible materials on TF substrates. The former approach of structural engineering exhibits high stability but limited flexibility, while the latter approach of intrinsic TF electronic devices shows limited stability but high flexibility. Therefore, combining smart structural engineering of more compliant TF materials to fabricate TF electronic devices may be the next candidate for improvements in the mechanical durability and electrical stability of TF electronic devices.
There are three generic approaches to realize flexible functional thin films, as depicted in Fig. 3, and their salient features are summarized in Table 2.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the process of fabricating flexible functional layers via (1) direct growth, (2) growth-thinning and (3) growth-transfer techniques. 
Table 2 Summary of the major strategies for flexible electronics elements




Method
Direct growth
Growth-thinning
Growth-release-transfer


Thinning
Spallation
Physical
Chemical
Laser




Substrate type
Polymers
Ultrathin glass
Metal foil
2D material
Si based
Si based
Oxide
Oxide
Double-side polished


Substrate
PI
Glass (20 μm)
Hastelloy
Mica(001)
SiO2/Si (100)
SiO2/Si(100)
Graphene/STO
STO
Sapphire


Mechanism
Conventional epitaxy
Conventional epitaxy
Conventional epitaxy
vdWE
Ion etching
Physical force
Remote epitaxy
Chemical reaction
Laser-material interaction


Merits
Simple operation
Diffusion barrier
Simple operation
No damage to film


No damage to functional film
Reusable substrate
Low cost
Fast process


Good ductility
Chemical and thermal durability


Flexible






Less damage to films
Easy to control


Transparent




Large area growth






Easy to integrate




Challenges
Poor crystallinity due to low temperature deposition process
High cost
Non-transparent
Specific (111) growth of perovskites and spinels
High cost
Potential device damage inherent to peel-off process
More materials remain unexplored
Lattice matching and etching solution selection limitation.
Need of high cost facility


Fragility
Magnetic and conducting substrate


Damage to films
Limited flexibility and transparency


Slow release rate
Damage to films


Handling difficulties
Limited combination and complex buffer layers




Left over substrate cannot be reused


Constraint between epilayer, sacrificial layer and substrate.
Large area film difficult due to small size of laser spot




Plastic deformation at very small mechanical strains








Hard to transfer large area films
Annealing or chemical etching to recover/remove unwanted layer




3.1. Direct growth
First, the direct growth involves the deposition of functional elements on already available flexible substrates via conventional and van der Waals epitaxies. Epitaxial growth is a method of depositing a film of specific crystalline orientation on a crystalline substrate. It includes liquid phase epitaxy (LPE), chemical vapour deposition (CVD), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), sputtering, atomic layer deposition (ALD) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Amongst transparent-flexible substrates, 2D mica has emerged as an effective template to realize TFE device elements. A number of growth methods to grow functional oxides on mica are being explored. To date, PLD, MBE, sputtering, and CVD methods have emerged as popular means to achieve van der Waals oxide heteroepitaxy on mica, as indicated in Table 3. In all these methods, process parameters such as the carrier gas, temperature, and applied power must be controlled carefully for successful deposition of epitaxial functional oxide layers.
Table 3 Summary of soft transparent elements realized via MICAtronics




System
Growth method
Epitaxial relationship
Transparency (%)
Bending radius (mm)
Ref.





a At 2600 nm.





ITO
Pulsed laser deposition
(222) [−110] ITO || (001) [010] mica
68–97
4

25



AZO
Sputtering
(001) [010] AZO || (001) [010] mica
75–90
7

25



Ba0.96La0.04SnO3
Pulsed laser deposition
(111)BLSO || (001) mica
85–90



56



VO2
Pulsed laser deposition
(100)[100] VO2 || (001)[100] mica
70a
5

26



MoO2
Pulsed laser deposition
(010)[001] MoO2 || (001)[100] mica
Semitransparent
10

17



Pb1−xLax(ZryTi1−y)O3
Pulsed laser deposition
(100)[001] PLZT || (001)[010] mica
80
5

21



Pb(Zr0.1Ti0.9)O3
Pulsed laser deposition
(101)PZT || (001) mica
73
4

59



ε-Ga2O3
Chemical vapor deposition
(001) [010] ε-Ga2O3 || (001) [010] mica
70



143



NiO
Pulsed laser deposition
(111) [01–1] NiO || (001) [010] mica
80
5

19



YSZ
Pulsed laser deposition
(111) [112] YSZ || (001) [100] mica
90
10

32



ZnO
Sputtering
(002) [−110] ZnO || (001) [100] mica
80
5

65



γ-Fe2O3
Pulsed laser deposition
(111) [01–1]Fe2O3 || (001)[010] mica
70
10

144



Eu-doped 0.94Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3-0.06BaTiO3
Pulsed laser deposition
(111) [1–10] BNTBT:Eu || (001) [010] mica
70
2

54



Pr-doped Ba0.85Ca0.15Ti0.9Zr0.1O3
Pulsed laser deposition
(111) [01–1] BCZT:Pr || (001) [010] mica





60





In the recent past, the field of MICAtronics12–16 has evolved as an effective approach to realize single crystalline functional elements on mica substrates via van der Waals epitaxy to exploit their best performance metrics and flexibility at the same time. Mica, the most abundant subgroup of phyllosilicates with 2D layered structures, is commonly used as an insulating material, a dielectric in capacitors and an unmatched substrate for the study of 2D ion diffusion, crystal nucleation, surface conductivity phenomena and surface force measurements. Recently, ultrathin mica sheets were used as insulators for large area organic thin film transistor arrays with promising implications in organic and inorganic electronics to minimize coupling capacitances.8 Muscovite [KAl2(Si3Al)O10(OH)2], biotite [K(Mg,Fe)3(AlSi3O10)(F,OH)2], and phlogopite [KMg3(AlSi3O10)(OH)2] are common mica variants which exhibit monoclinic structures with a tendency towards the pseudo-hexagonal structure on the basal plane. Each structural unit of muscovite (∼1 nm) contains an aluminium octahedral (AlO4(OH)2) layer sandwiched between two silicate (SiO4) tetrahedral sheets wherein Si ions are partially replaced by Al ions (Al/Si = 1/3), resulting in a net negative charge. These tetrahedral–octahedral–tetrahedral layers with strong covalent bonding within them are weakly held together by interlayer (K+) cations, maintaining charge neutrality and separating each unit by the van der Waals gap (Fig. 4a). Atomically flat surfaces with equal but randomly distributed K+ ions are obtained by cleaving mica along this vdW gap (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  (a) Structure of muscovite mica. (b) Basal plane surface of mica. Schematics of (c) conventional and (d) (quasi) van der Waals heteroepitaxies. 
MICAtronics, or vdW epitaxy on mica, is likely to have a significant impact on high-performance flexible optoelectronics, sensors, memories, energy-harvesting devices, etc. In particular, 2D materials or mica are promising candidates for miniaturized and high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices due to their atomically flat, ultrathin natures and lack of dangling bonds. This lack of surface bonds results in a new form of epitaxy, namely van der Waals epitaxy,109–115 which offers several benefits over conventional epitaxy. Normally, van der Waals epitaxy is typified by a consistent over layer-substrate orientation relationship with sharp, incoherent and incommensurate interfaces. These interfaces show no excessive strain induced by the epitaxy; also, this epitaxy persists even for systems with large lattice mismatches (as large as 60%)116,117 and different symmetries, allowing material combinations that are inaccessible to conventional epitaxy. vdW epitaxy can be achieved in 2D materials which naturally exhibit no surface dangling bonds or in 3D materials whose surfaces are treated to passivate surface dangling bonds. The conventional epitaxy characterized by strong interfacial chemical bonds (covalent, ionic and metallic) of the constituents presents larger substrate clamping effect than the van der Waals epitaxy characterized by weaker interfacial van der Waals bonds (Fig. 4c and d). Generally, the nucleation and growth in conventional epitaxy (3D/3D) involves chemisorption, while that in van der Waals epitaxy (2D/2D) involves a physisorption process. In quasi-vdW epitaxy (3D/2D and 2D/3D), a strong interfacial layer is initially formed via directional bonds on which the film further grows homoepitaxially. The vdW bonds present weak inter-molecular/ionic coulombic interactions wherein there is no electron transfer or sharing between ions or molecules participating in the bond.118 Therefore, vdW epitaxy as an alternative strategy towards the successful heteroepitaxial growth of planar and nonplanar geometries (nanowire arrays, tripods, tetrapods and complex nanostructures) will broaden the domain of thin film heteroepitaxy. It also provides an opportunity to investigate the fundamental mechanisms that govern nucleation and growth in view of the inherent anisotropic interactions (strong intra-planar and weak inter-planar) of the 2D materials. In short, vdWE is set to expand the functionalities of existing heterostructures for potential applications while enabling the investigation of emergent phenomena originating due to the proximity of 2D materials with 2D materials, 3D materials, and combinations thereof.119 A summary of soft transparent yet epitaxial elements realized via van der Waals oxide heteroepitaxy on mica is presented in Table 3.
3.2. Growth thinning
Second, the growth-thinning technique employs the growth of functional elements on a rigid support and consequent thinning down to render them flexible. Thinning down the substrate post-device fabrication via ion-etching,120 polishing, grinding and thinning-by-dicing121 tends to damage the on-chip devices, reducing the yield and increasing the cost. Alternately, flexible substrates obtained from rigid substrates by exfoliation or spalling processes122,123 suffer from limited bendability, opaqueness of the released portion and use of costly substrates. Similarly, anodic etching,124 which creates a double layer of Si and introduces porosity in the bottom layer, involves unfamiliar procedures; thus, integration with modern fabrication processes is difficult. Another approach of combining the mechanical and electrical properties of silicon with flexible polymer substrates125 has made significant progress.
3.3. Growth-transfer
Third, in the growth-transfer technique, removal of the epitaxial functional element from the rigid support post-growth process is achieved via laser, physical and chemical lift-off/release methods, and the element is ultimately transferred onto a flexible template. The epitaxial growth-transfer technique relies on the lift-off of freestanding single crystalline films by selectively etching the buffer layer using acid,126,127 dissolving the substrate128 or sacrificial buffer layer129,130 using water, or melting the film-substrate interface using laser131 and ion implantations132 to transfer them onto any desired flexible substrates. Despite successful prototype demonstrations and the advantage of reusable substrates, the epitaxial-transfer process (a) uses sophisticated and expensive equipment, rendering it costly, (b) has inherent unpredictability of the transfer process due to the limited options for complete removal of the finished devices, and (c) is applicable to a limited set of materials.
However, both growth-thinning and growth-transfer strategies are multistep, tedious and difficult to generalize to a wide range of oxides. 2D materials with atomic flat surfaces without dangling bonds or charge traps and ultra-thin thicknesses offer novel mechanics and architecture designs as well as endless material combinations2,5,108,133–136 to achieve stable device performance under stretching, flexing or twisting. In addition to (Q)vdW epitaxy based on 2D mica for epitaxial flexible electronic applications, remote epitaxy based on popular 2D graphene has recently emerged as a promising strategy. In remote epitaxy, epitaxy of functional oxides occurs through remote atomic interactions between the oxide overlayer and substrate via graphene. The inability of the weak vdW potential of graphene to screen the strong potential fields of many substrates allows the epitaxial growth. Eventually, the functional layer on graphene is mechanically exfoliated and transferred onto a flexible substrate of interest, which offers cost saving advantage in terms of the reusable graphene-coated substrate.119,137,138 However, the quality of graphene on the substrate determines the crystalline quality of the epilayer and exfoliation area. Also, mastering of nucleation and growth is still required to obtain perfectly planar films via this method.119 Many interesting oxide materials as well as the effects of nanoscale defects in graphene on the functional layer properties remain unexplored in this 2D material-based remote epitaxy. Among the strategies discussed above, simple direct growth of epitaxial functional elements on flexible mica with pristine properties offers new research avenues for the design and development of next-generation smart electronic devices.
4. Applications
A typical soft electronic system will comprise the following elements: (i) human–machine interface (display, sensor, actuator and functional system); (ii) signal control, processing and storage (logic circuits and memory); (iii) communication (radiofrequency and microwave circuits); and (iv) power management (battery, solar cells, supercapacitors and energy harvestors). All these elements are integrated on a soft template.
4.1. Conductors
Transparent electrodes are essential elements in information (monitors) and energy (window glass, solar cells and photovoltaics) technologies that meet the requirements of the transport of electrons and photons.139 The attributes of flexibility, transparency, and electrical conduction are the defining features of flexible transparent conducting oxides (TCO). Therefore, the choice of materials for the development of TCO is critical, as they are the primary elements which influence the optical, electrical, and mechanical performance of flexible optoelectronic devices. Flexible TCOs-indium tin oxide (ITO) and Al-doped zinc oxide (AZO) fabricated on mica25 reveal only ITO(111) and AZO(001) orientations on mica, as shown in Fig. 5a, and 6-fold symmetry in the phi-scan measurement for the ITO{440} and AZO{101} reflections (Fig. 5b), implying epitaxial growth. The high-resolution cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy study showed semi-coherent, defect-free and clear interfaces. Average visible transmittances of 68%–97% for ITO films and 75%–90% for AZO films on mica with optical band gaps of 4.1(2) eV for AZO and 3.7(2) eV for ITO were obtained. The photographs of 200 nm ITO/mica and AZO/mica in the inset of Fig. 5(b) demonstrate the high optical transparency of these heterostructures. The mobility of flexible TCO/mica as a function of carrier concentration was on par with that of epitaxial TCO counterparts grown on rigid single crystalline substrates. Comparable figure of merit values (ΦTC (Ω−1) = T10/Rs, where T is the average optical transmittance and Rs is the sheet resistance) with those of their rigid counterparts assert the superior optoelectronic performance brought about by the improved structural quality. The sheet resistance remains constant down to 4 mm (7 mm) and 6 mm (9 mm) bending radii during both the compressive and tensile deformations, respectively, for ITO(AZO). It is evident from Fig. 5(c) that the critical bending radius of curvature decreases with the TCO thickness. It is noteworthy that the critical bending strains for TCO under compressive strain (0.75% for ITO and 0.80% for AZO) are higher than the tensile strains (0.41% for ITO and 0.46% for AZO), which is comparable with reported values. Furthermore, the AZO/mica exhibited very stable sheet resistance even after 2000 bending cycles under a radius of curvature of 8 mm, while ITO/mica exhibited an 10% increase in its resistance beyond 100 cycles. The long-term optoelectronic stability of TCO under mechanical flexing was marked by stable conductivity retention at room temperature in open atmosphere for longer durations of time. Moreover, these heterostructures maintain inherent metallic character under bending even at elevated temperatures (∼350 °C) due to the higher melting point of the underlying mica, unlike conventional polymer substrates, which curl11 at temperatures above 150 °C and eventually lead to device failure. They also exhibit robust conductivity against various chemicals, such as acetone, ethanol, xylene, toluene and chlorobenzene, for at least 10 min. The aforementioned mechanical, thermal and chemical stabilities of these heterostructures open up new avenues for transparent functional devices and, hence, their commercialization. Relying on the high thermal conductivity and low specific heat capacity of mica, an AZO/mica TF heater (Fig. 5d) with an ultra-high heating rate (200 °C s−1), 5–50 times faster than that of conventional flexible heaters, was fabricated.57 TF heaters57,64 can be employed in defogging/de-icing transparent windows and as potential heating sources for automobiles, displays, sensors, reaction cells and microchips. Semiconducting perovskite Ba0.96La0.04SnO3 on flexible mica with a BaTiO3 buffer layer also displayed promising transparent conducting oxide properties.56
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD and (b) Phi scans of ITO/mica and AZO/mica films. (c) Critical strain values under flex-in (compression strain) and flex-out (tension strain) bending modes for various ITO and AZO thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Temperature profile of an AZO/mica heater at different voltages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018 American Institute of Physics. 
4.2. Smart windows
Smart window coatings based on thermochromic materials for buildings are expected to reduce energy consumption by modulating the solar radiation entering or blackbody radiation leaving the buildings, thereby reducing their contribution towards annual greenhouse gas emissions. VO2 exhibits first-order metal (M)-insulator (I) and rutile-monoclinic structural transitions, which are strongly coupled to optical transmittance, in the vicinity of room temperature. These transitions are sensitive to thermal, electrical, optical and strain stimuli and have potential applications in smart windows, thermal switches, ultrafast switching and thermo-optical modulators. The VO2/mica heterostructure XRD pattern displayed only the (001) reflections of VO2, while the transmission electron microscope study revealed an abrupt VO2/mica interface with extracted lattice parameters slightly larger than those of the bulk.26Fig. 6a displays thermal hysteresis in R, characterizing a first-order M-I transition where the resistance changes by three orders of magnitude (ΔR/R > 103), while the corresponding optical transmittance at 2600 nm also changes by 50% (from 70% to 20%) with a similar transition width of ∼9 °C around Tc = 70 °C. A photograph of flexible VO2 can be seen in the inset. The stable resistance as a function of the radius of the bending and bending cycles (r = 5 mm) marks the mechanical robustness of this heterostructure (Fig. 6b). Moreover, extremely low optical trigger threshold (Fth = 0.21 mJ cm−2), almost 5% that of VO2/Al2O3, and large THz field modulation depth (Md = 81.2%) in the VO2/mica heterostructure (Fig. 6c) makes it the best candidate for low-cost and high-performance THz switches and modulators.140 Also, a TF Mott transistor using a solid ionic gel gate and VO2 channel displayed a very large on/off ratio of 105 at room temperature, with excellent mechanical stability.141 Furthermore, electric control of the reversible and non-volatile M-I phase (Fig. 6d) and optical characteristics governed by proton insertion/extraction into/from the VO2 lattice were successfully demonstrated.
 Fig. 6  (a) Transmittance and resistance as a function of temperature in heating and cooling cycles. The inset shows the actual VO2/mica heterostructure. (b) Device conduction under mechanical testing. Adapted from ref. 26. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Pump fluence dependence of the differential transmission (ΔT/T0) signals of VO2/mica and VO2/Al2O3 films at 1 THz. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Temperature dependence of the sheet resistance of the VO2 channel at several positive VG under a bending radius of 10 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
4.3. Sensors
Modern resistive flexible sensors based on polymeric matrices and conductive materials (graphene, CNTs, metal nanoparticles, etc.) suffer from sensitivity, repeatability, reproducibility and lifetime issues. A transparent flexible ZnO/mica65 sensor was demonstrated based on the inherent piezoresistive effect of ZnO. The heterostructure exhibits neither strain nor the substrate clamping effect, with the sharp interface expected of a van der Waals heteroepitaxy. The electromechanical performance in Fig. 7a–c presents the following salient features: (i) very large resistivity changes  of −80% and 240% in flex-in and flex-out modes, respectively, for a 1 μm-thick film. (ii) The heterostructure maintains (a) a retention of >105 s and (b) a durability of 104 bending cycles for a bending radius of 5 mm. This very large resistivity change is attributed to changes in the carrier concentration (mobility), which increases (decreases) and decreases in the flex-in and flex-out modes, respectively. Reversible piezopotential developed along the mechanical strain direction results in the accumulation of depletion of carriers at the ZnO surface, acting like gating. This conjuncture was further supported by XPS analysis and bending model simulations using the finite element method. A gauge factor of >1000 was achieved, which is the best amongst oxide systems. This demonstration marks an important milestone in the field of TF piezotronics in terms of both science and technology. Another prototype strain sensor52 based on polycrystalline BaNb0.5Ti0.5O3/mica (Fig. 7d) robust over a wide temperature range (20–773 K) for potential high-temperature applications in interstellar probes, polar exploration, petrochemical and metal smelting; stable over 5000 bending cycles, low-power consumption (0.96 μW cm−2) and a gauge factor of 27.5 (best among flexible strain sensors) was demonstrated. Typical sensing applications, including human body joint motion monitoring and multimodal sensing in the presence of light and mechanical bending stimuli, were performed successfully (Fig. 7e).
 Fig. 7  Resistivity changes as a function of the (a) bending radius, (b) retention and (c) bending cycles of a ZnO/mica sensor. The inset shows a photograph of the sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. ΔR/R0 responses of the flexible BNTO/mica strain sensor as a function of (d) temperature in bent conditions and (e) finger bending–releasing movements at a sensing current of 0.1 mA. (The inset shows the actual flexible strain sensor fixed on fingers in releasing and bending states.) Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
4.4. Memories
Flexible memory is an integral part of flexible electronic systems for data processing, information storage, and communication. The room temperature structural characterization revealed the epitaxial nature of the Pb1−xLax(ZryTi1−y)O3 (PLZT)/ITO/ZnO/mica heterostructure.21 This transparent FE capacitor had a saturation polarization (Psat) of 84 μC cm−2, remanent polarization (Pr) of 41 μC cm−2 and coercive field (EC) of 290 kV cm−1 at 25 °C, which remained constant up to 200 °C, as shown in Fig. 8a; this underscores its potential for high-temperature TFE applications. These transparent capacitors are robust against mechanical strain, wherein no noticeable changes were observed in the values of Psat, Pr and Ec when both compressive and tensile bending strains down to 5 mm were applied. Neither the bending cycles in both compressive and tensile modes (Fig. 8b) nor the radiation dosage affected the properties. The heterostructure retained its optical transmittance of ∼80% over a wide range in the ultraviolet-visible-infrared regime before (inset of Fig. 8b) and after the tests and displayed no visible damage or cracks, emphasizing the importance of vdWE in mitigating the mechanical strain effect. In addition, the transparent ferroelectric PLZT/ITO/ZnO/mica heterostructure generated an open circuit voltage of 0.3 V and short-circuit current of 4 nA under bending, suggesting its potential application in transparent antiradiative piezoelectric devices, self-powered sensors and nanogenerators. In another study,59 a TF ferroelectric Pb(Zr0.1Ti0.9)O3/ITO/YSZ/mica heterostructure with 73% transmittance, Psat = 71 μC cm−2, Pr = 39 μC cm−2 and EC = 220 kV cm−1 retaining stable FE metrics up to 150 °C was demonstrated. Recently, vdWE of ferroelectric ε-Ga2O3 on mica143via chemical vapor deposition method attractive for flexible deep-ultra violet optoelectronic devices such as solar blind detectors was demonstrated. A polycrystalline ITO/Bi3.25La0.75Ti3O12(BLT)/Ag-ITO/mica transparent ferroelectric memory with data writing/erasing speed <50 ns and 108 cycles that are stable up to 150 °C was shown. An additional functionality of nondestructive optical reading of ±P states by photovoltaic current was displayed, unlike the destructive reading by applying bias and detecting polarization switching current with a further rewrite step to recover initial information in conventional FeRAM devices.142 When an external bias of 8 V induces the −P state, the ISC increases to −0.43 nA. The +P state induced by a −8 V bias changes the ISC to 0.35 nA. The −P and +P states can be identified by detecting the corresponding ISC under illumination (Fig. 8c and d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Pr, Psat and Ec variation as a function of temperature and (b) fatigue after radiation exposure of 5 Mrad in unbent and bent conditions of a PLZT/ITO/ZnO/mica ferroelectric memory element. The inset shows a photograph of the heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) ISC with either +P or −P in the darkness and under illumination, respectively and (d) real-time ISC evolution after +P/−P is written by −8/+8 V of ITO/BLT/Ag-ITO/mica memory. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Memristors or resistive switching memories can store and process information by recording changes in resistance states under an external electric field. Therefore, they have been widely investigated as one of the most promising candidates for next-generation logical, computing, synaptic, and non-volatile memory devices due to their simple structures, small sizes, high speeds, low power consumption, good endurance, long retention and cost-effectiveness. A transparent flexible memristor based on van der Waals heteroepitaxial growth composed of an AZO/NiO/AZO (ANA) sandwich structure on a muscovite substrate was fabricated19 owing to the wide band gap (3.6–4.0 eV), high-temperature stability and reliable memory characteristics of NiO. The XRD results revealed the presence of three sets of structural domains of NiO, with a small out-of-plane epitaxial compression of 0.33% strain. The high-resolution TEM images revealed defect-free and coherent NiO/AZO and AZO/muscovite interfaces.
The different thermal activation energies for HRS (0.66 eV) confirm that different carrier conduction mechanisms are prevalent in these states. More so, the thermal evolution of the resistive switching behavior of a transparent ANA/mica memristor (Fig. 9a) at different temperatures ranging from 25 °C to 185 °C reveals that the VThreshold (Vth) and VHold (Vh) resistances in the high-resistance state (RHRS) and low-resistance state (RLRS) decrease gradually with temperature, such that the resistance ratio RHRS/RLRS ∼105 at 25 °C decreases to 103 at 185 °C. The optical transmittance of the ANA/muscovite heterostructure is 80% in the visible region, and the inset shows a photograph of the ANA/muscovite memristor. Not only were stable endurance (up to 103 cycles) and retention (∼105 s) of the memristor maintained under compressive and tensile bent states down to 5 mm radius of bending (Fig. 9b), but these properties were also retained even after undergoing as many as 1000 mechanical bending cycles (r = 6.5 mm). Therefore, the TF ANA/mica memristor with reliable memory characteristics (resistance ON/OFF ratio >105, endurance of 105 cycles and long relation time of 105 s) under thermal and mechanical constraints is set to offer new pathways in the development of next generation memory, logical and computing devices. Transparent resistive random access memory (ReRAM)58 based on a polycrystalline ITO/Ag/BaTi0.95Co0.05O3−δ/Ag-ITO/mica heterostructure exhibiting uniaxial resistive-switching behavior with fast response speed (50 ns), long retention time (>106 s) and low operation voltage (<2.8 V) was reported. The dependence of RHRS and RLRS on the retention time and writing/erasing cycles showed a RHRS/RLRS of ∼5000 even for the dynamic bending process with a bending radius of curvature of 2.2 mm (Fig. 9c). Moreover, the I–V curves of the memory cell remained stable even after 14400 bending cycles (Fig. 9d).
 Fig. 9  (a) I–V characteristics at selected operating temperatures and (b) resistance retention after different bending cycles for a bending radius of 6.5 mm of the ANA/muscovite memristor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (c) HRS and LRS as a function of bending cycles and time of the dynamic bending process shown in the inset and (d) I–V curves after bending 14400 times under a radius of curvature of 2.2 mm for ITO/Ag/BTCO/Ag–ITO/mica memory. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 
4.5. Fuel cells
Fuel cells convert the chemical energy of fuel into electrical energy and have higher efficiency than conventional power generators. Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) employing oxide ion conductor-based electrolytes allow oxygen to directly permeate into the fuel electrode and achieve direct oxidation of various fuels. Oxide ion conductors show better stability than proton-conducting polymers under the same operating conditions. Corrosion-resistant and chemically stable YSZ is a popular ionic conductor with potential applications in the development of solid oxide fuel cells, membranes, salteries and electrochromic windows. XRD studies confirmed the growth of high-quality epitaxial YSZ with a multi-domain feature. The cross-sectional TEM image in Fig. 10a–c reveals a sharp and defect-free YSZ/mica32 interface. The ionic conductivity of the YSZ/mica heterostructure in Fig. 10(d) is higher than the bulk single crystalline counterpart due to the redistribution of ionic defects at the hetero-interface, which breaks the crystalline symmetry. It is also clear that there are two activation energies in the low and high temperature regions which have contributions from the bulk and interface, respectively. Moreover, the high and stable values of ionic conductivity are maintained even under compressive and tensile bending strains up to a radius of bending of ∼10 nm. The low Ea (∼0.75 eV) and high Ea (∼0.125 eV) energies obtained using the thermally activated Arrhenius law remain constant. Furthermore, the ionic conductivity and activation energies remain within 10% of their unbent state values even after 800 bending cycles, as shown in Fig. 10(e), and maintain their retention times of 105 s, implying their long-term stability. The inset shows an actual image of the YSZ/mica heterostructure, which has transmittance as high as 90%. This heterostructure has also shown promising results as a gas sensor.
 Fig. 10  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of the YSZ/muscovite ionic conductor along with the corresponding FFT patterns of (b) YSZ and (c) muscovite. (d) Ionic conductivity as a function of reciprocal temperature under different bending conditions along with that of the bulk single crystal. (e) Cyclability test under a bending radius of 10 mm. The inset shows the actual YSZ/mica heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
4.6. Energy harvesting and storage systems
Ever-increasing demand for energy consumption and depletion of fossil fuels has necessitated the development of clean and renewable energy sources. Conversion of solar power to chemical energy based on solar-driven photo-electrochemical (PEC) water splitting has emerged as an eco-friendly alternative. A semi-transparent (T ∼70%) but epitaxial γ-Fe2O3/ZnO/mica photoelectrode-based PEC cell displayed photocurrent three times higher than that of pure ZnO and Fe2O3 electrodes under visible-light irradiation.144 The change of photocurrent collected at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl under simulated sunlight irradiation (Fig. 11a) shows retention of stable photocurrent down to a smallest bending radius of 3.5 mm in both bending modes. The heteroepitaxial photoelectrodes retain their photocurrent after continuous bending cycles (>3000 cycles; Fig. 11b) after being bent to a 5 mm radius. The photoelectrodes also exhibited long-term PEC stability (9 h) in bent conditions and robust photocurrent against prolonged light irradiation. The field of electrochemical energy storage with long life, high energy/power density, and ecofriendliness has emerged as another promising alternative for energy-storage conversion for portable electronic devices. A TF supercapacitor using NiO-coated AZO/mica nanorod array66-based electrodes with enhanced energy storage performance was demonstrated. The geometry of the nanorods offers the advantages of large surface area, short carrier diffusion length and freedom of volume expansion. A combination of SEM and TEM with EDs confirmed the epitaxial nature and the chemical composition of the NiO-coated AZO nanorods. The as-prepared epitaxial NiO-coated AZO nanorods on muscovite (Fig. 11c) with 80% transmittance showed stable conductivity under bent conditions down to a 5 mm radius of bending. The cyclic voltammetry investigations of the TF supercapacitor with Pt, Ag/AgCl and NiO-AZO/muscovite electrodes in KOH, LiClO4, Na2SO4, H2SO4 and Zn2SO4 electrolytes displayed ideal charge–discharge cycles under flat and bent conditions with a large areal specific capacitance of 3.4 mF cm−2 and a long life of 1000 cycles (Fig. 11d). In addition, they serve as promising electrodes in hybrid Zn-ion batteries with interesting electrochemical characteristics even under mechanical constraints, reaching 92% coulombic efficiency. Dielectric mica displayed an excellent energy density of around 11.27 J cm−3 in the temperature range of 50 °C–200 °C with a charge–discharge efficiency of 94.3% at the breakdown strength of 580 MV m−1, which is best among known conventional TF energy storage systems at elevated temperatures; therefore, it is a sought-after material for high-temperature energy storage.145
 Fig. 11  Photoelectrochemical performance of the Fe2O3/ZnO/mica photoelectrode under different (a) bending radii and (b) bending cycles. The insets show a photograph and a schematic of the electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of a NiO-coated AZO nanorods/mica supercapacitor electrode under (c) different bending radii. The inset shows a photograph of the electrode. (d) CV curves under mechanical bending at radii of 5 mm after various bending cycles. The inset shows a schematic of the heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
4.7. Photo-luminescent systems
Electric field-controlled optical properties of functional ferroelectrics are attractive for tunable light sources, photodetectors and biological imaging. Reversible manipulation of photoluminescence (PL) properties by an electric field via strain mediation in ferroelectric photoluminescent films has significant implications in tunable transparent memory, sensors and displays. Purely mechanical strain-controlled PL response in Eu-doped 0.94Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3-0.06BaTiO3 (BNTBT:Eu) transparent ferroelectric films on mica has provided an additional degree of freedom to realize these advanced applications.54 A transparent BNTBT:Eu/mica heterostructure had a bulk lattice constant (strain-free, εi = 0) atypical of vdWE. The PL emission peaks centred at 585, 624, 654 and 690 nm due to the 5D0 → 7F1, 5D0 → 7F2, 5D0 → 7F3 and 5D0 → 7F4 transitions of Eu3+, respectively, increase in intensity and split into two peaks as the bending radius of curvature approaches ±2 mm (Fig. 12a).
 Fig. 12  (a) PL emission spectra in the unbent (ROC = ∞) and bent (ROC = ±2 mm) states before and after 104 cycles of bending and (b) relative PL intensity changes (ΔI/I) of the 5D0 → 7F1 emission peak as a function of compressive and tensile bending strain for the BNTBT:Eu/mica heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) PL emission spectra in different tensile bent states and (d) ΔI/I of the 3P1 → 3H6 emission peak as a function of tensile strain for the BCZT:Pr/mica heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
The relative change of the PL intensity (ΔI/I) of the strongest emission peak (5D0 → 7F1) increases monotonically with applied mechanical strain (Fig. 12b), attaining larger values in flex-out/tensile bending (∼895%) than in flex-in/compressive bending (276%) at a strain of 0.25% and a very high gauge factor, (ΔI/I)/ε, of 3580. The relative PL changes (ΔI/I) retain their values under bent conditions for a time duration of 104 s. Moreover, the PL spectrum (Fig. 12a) remains unaltered even after 104 bending cycles, highlighting its superior endurance. The change in PL intensity has been attributed to a decrease in the mechanical strain-induced crystal symmetry and, thus, in the crystal field splitting, which facilitates the design of dynamic and continuous strain tunable photoluminescent devices. In a follow-up study on another ferroelectric photoluminescent system, Pr-doped Ba0.85Ca0.15Ti0.9Zr0.1O3 (BCTZ:Pr) on mica with an out-of-plane epitaxial tensile strain of 0.09% was realized.60 The heterostructure displayed similar PL emission peaks centered at 549 (3P0 → 3H5), 578 (3P1 → 3H6), 596 (1D2 → 3H4), 616 (3P0 → 3H6), and 647 (3P0 → 3F2) nm, associated with stark splitting of Pr3+ ions, and a PL intensity (ΔI/I) change of 445% at 0.25% mechanical tensile strain (Fig. 12c and d) with a very large gauge factor of 6853.
5. Challenges
As novel applications that exploit the functional properties of oxides on 2D templates continue to grow out of fundamental research, many technologically important multifunctional oxides and their composites remain unexplored. The nature and strength of the (Q)vdW interfacial bonds in a vdW heteroepitaxy play crucial roles in determining the electromechanical coupling and, hence, the device performance. However, a theoretical understanding beyond vdW interactions on the interfacial characteristics of (Q)vdW is lacking. Therefore, detailed investigations on the effects of inherent anisotropic interactions (strong intra-planar and weak inter-planar) in 2D materials and the fundamental mechanisms that govern the nucleation and growth of overlayers (2D or 3D) are necessary to exploit the full potential of vdW heteroepitaxy. Also, more experimental and theoretical studies are needed to unravel the physiochemical-mechanical interactions that lead to device failure and to develop suitable strategies. Therefore, in situ characterization tools, control of interfacial properties and effective computational methods to devise more (Q)vdW heterostructures along with scalable synthetic routes and understanding of their structure–property correlations will be indispensable in translating their potential into practical high-performance soft technology. Although a large number of prototypical soft electronic devices have been demonstrated in research laboratories, it remains challenging to understand the role of defects, disentangle and model the complex physics of cooperative quantum phases, and identify and translate their most compelling industrial applications. Development of large-scale synthesis and assembly techniques for high-quality films will not only outperform conventional electronics in performance and function but also open up new markets for the electronic industry.
6. Conclusions and outlook
The vision of TFE applications lies beyond the reach of current optoelectronic technologies, and their commercial viability is difficult to assess. Over the past few years, both organic and inorganic van der Waals heterostructures, owing to the multifunctional platforms they provide due to their artificial stacking characteristics, have significantly contributed to developing new strategies for high-performance TFE. The opportunities in the design and development of high-performance and low-power applications stems from the natural thickness scalability of 2D material-based flexible electronics. Combining 2D materials with traditional materials may be the best option to realize practical applications, and the range of material combinations within the scope of van der Waals heteroepitaxy on mica is very broad. New concepts in materials science based on vdW epitaxy on mica, such as those illustrated in previous sections, can rapidly open up new possibilities in device engineering with potential implications in areas of healthcare, such as epidermal and implantable functional membranes to monitor physiological status, as well as in lighting and photovoltaic systems. For instance, invisible sensing and processing electronic systems on the human body to harvest energy from motion can be envisioned. Mica can also serve as a template to build high-performance transient electronics. In all cases, fundamental developments in existing and new materials, including composite designs, growth techniques, processing strategies, integration schemes, and mechanical-electrical-optical properties, will determine the rate of progress. Undiscovered phenomena, design of innovative functionalities, and commercialization are expected to emerge in the near future, leading to scientific contributions and novel applications for next-generation electronics. The ultimate goal of realizing soft transparent smart electronics with excellent chemical and thermal stabilities appears to be not much further away. By summarizing the recent progress made in this field, we anticipate that this field of MICAtronics will flourish, with significant contributions extending from scientific value to practical applications in the foreseeable future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (Grants No. 109-2124-M-009-001-MY3, 109-2124-M-009-009, 109-2224-E-003-001), Academia Sinica, Taiwan (iMATE-107-11) and Center for Emergent Functional Matter Science of National Chiao Tung University from The Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (MOE) in Taiwan. YB thanks the University Grants Commission, India for the start-up grant.
References
K. D. Harris, A. L. Elias and H. J. Chung, Flexible electronics under strain: a review of mechanical characterization and durability enhancement strategies, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 2771–2805 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, van der Waals heterostructures, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, Progress, challenges, and opportunities in two-dimensional materials beyond graphene, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
D. Akinwande, N. Petrone and J. Hone, Two-dimensional flexible nanoelectronics, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5678 CrossRef .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Two dimensional and layered transition metal oxides, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
A. M. Hussain and M. M. Hussain, CMOS-Technology-Enabled Flexible and Stretchable Electronics for Internet of Everything Applications, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4219–4249 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Sallelo and W. S. Wong, Flexible Electronics: Materials and Applications, Springer, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .

          B. W. D'Andrade, A. Z. Kattamis and P. F. Murphy, Handbook of flexible organic electronics: Materials, Manufacturing and Applications,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. Choi, Y. Kim and C.-S. Ha, Polymers for flexible displays: From material selection to device applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 581–630 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zardetto, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, Substrates for flexible electronics: A practical investigation on the electrical, film flexibility, optical, temperature, and solvent resistance properties, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 638–648 CrossRef .
Y. Bitla and Y. H. Chu, MICAtronics: A new platform for flexible X-tronics, FlatChem, 2017, 3, 26–42 CrossRef .
Y. H. Chu, Van der Waals oxide heteroepitaxy, npj Quantum Mater., 2017, 2, 67 CrossRef .
M. Yen, Y. Bitla and Y. H. Chu, van der Waals heteroepitaxy on muscovite, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 234, 185–195 CrossRef .
Y. Bitla and Y.-H. Chu, Development of magnetoelectric nanocomposite for soft technology, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 234006 CrossRef .
P.-C. Wu and Y.-H. Chu, Development of oxide heteroepitaxy for soft technology, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6102–6117 RSC .
C. H. Ma, J. C. Lin, H. J. Liu, T. H. Do, Y. M. Zhu, T. D. Ha, Q. Zhan, J. Y. Juang, Q. He, E. Arenholz, P. W. Chiu and Y. H. Chu, van der Waals epitaxy of functional MoO2 film on mica for flexible electronics, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 0–5 Search PubMed .
H. J. Liu, C. K. Wang, D. Su, T. Amrillah, Y. H. Hsieh, K. H. Wu, Y. C. Chen, J. Y. Juang, L. M. Eng, S. U. Jen and Y. H. Chu, Flexible Heteroepitaxy of CoFe2O4/Muscovite Bimorph with Large Magnetostriction, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7297–7304 CrossRef CAS .
V. Q. Le, T. H. Do, J. R. D. Retamal, P. W. Shao, Y. H. Lai, W. W. Wu, J. H. He, Y. L. Chueh and Y. H. Chu, van der Waals heteroepitaxial AZO/NiO/AZO/muscovite (ANA/muscovite) transparent flexible memristor, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 322–329 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Wu, P. F. Chen, T. H. Do, Y. H. Hsieh, C. H. Ma, T. D. Ha, K. H. Wu, Y. J. Wang, H. B. Li, Y. C. Chen, J. Y. Juang, P. Yu, L. M. Eng, C. F. Chang, P. W. Chiu, L. H. Tjeng and Y. H. Chu, Heteroepitaxy of Fe3O4/Muscovite: A New Perspective for Flexible Spintronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33794–33801 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Ma, J. Jiang, P.-W. Shao, Q.-X. Peng, C.-W. Huang, P.-C. Wu, J.-T. Lee, Y.-H. Lai, D.-P. Tsai, J.-M. Wu, S.-C. Lo, W.-W. Wu, Y.-C. Zhou, P.-W. Chiu and Y.-H. Chu, Transparent Antiradiative Ferroelectric Heterostructure Based on Flexible Oxide Heteroepitaxy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30574–30580 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Y. Bitla, Q.-X. Peng, Y.-C. Zhou and Y.-H. Chu, A fabrication and measurement method for a flexible ferroelectric element based on van der Waals heteroepitaxy, J. Visualized Exp., 2018, 134, e57221 Search PubMed .
M.-F. Tsai, J. Jiang, P.-W. Shao, Y.-H. Lai, J.-W. Chen, S.-Z. Ho, Y.-C. Chen, D.-P. Tsai and Y.-H. Chu, Oxide Heteroepitaxy-Based Flexible Ferroelectric Transistor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25882–25890 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Jung, J. S. Choi, J. B. Koo, C. W. Park, B. S. Na, J. Y. Oh, S. C. Lim, S. S. Lee, H. Y. Chu and S. M. Yoon, Flexible nonvolatile organic ferroelectric memory transistors fabricated on polydimethylsiloxane elastomer, Org. Electron., 2015, 16, 46–53 CrossRef .
Y. Bitla, C. Chen, H. C. Lee, T. H. Do, C. H. Ma, L. Van Qui, C. W. Huang, W. W. Wu, L. Chang, P. W. Chiu and Y. H. Chu, Oxide Heteroepitaxy for Flexible Optoelectronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32401–32407 CrossRef .
C. I. Li, J. C. Lin, H. J. Liu, M. W. Chu, H. W. Chen, C. H. Ma, C. Y. Tsai, H. W. Huang, H. J. Lin, H. L. Liu, P. W. Chiu and Y. H. Chu, Van der Waal Epitaxy of Flexible and Transparent VO2 Film on Muscovite, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3914–3919 CrossRef .
T. Amrillah, Y. Bitla, K. Shin, T. Yang, Y. H. Hsieh, Y. Y. Chiou, H. J. Liu, T. H. Do, D. Su, Y. C. Chen, S. U. Jen, L. Q. Chen, K. H. Kim, J. Y. Juang and Y. H. Chu, Flexible Multiferroic Bulk Heterojunction with Giant Magnetoelectric Coupling via van der Waals Epitaxy, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6122–6130 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Chen, M. Yen, Y.-H. Lai, A. Markou, L. Zhang, Y.-Y. Chin, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, C. Felser and Y.-H. Chu, Heteroepitaxy of Co-Based Heusler Compound/Muscovite for Flexible Spintronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35162–35168 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, Y. Bitla, C. W. Huang, T. H. Do, H. J. Liu, Y. H. Hsieh, C. H. Ma, C. Y. Jang, Y. H. Lai, P. W. Chiu, W. W. Wu, Y. C. Chen, Y. C. Zhou and Y. H. Chu, Flexible ferroelectric element based on van der Waals heteroepitaxy, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700121 CrossRef .
C. Jia, X. Zhao, Y.-H. Lai, J. Zhao, P.-C. Wang, D.-S. Liou, P. Wang, Z. Liu, W. Zhang, W. Chen, Y.-H. Chu and J. Li, Highly flexible, robust, stable and high efficiency perovskite solar cells enabled by van der Waals epitaxy on mica substrate, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 476–484 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Quynh, C. Van Nguyen, W. Y. Tzeng, C. W. Huang, Y. H. Lai, J. W. Chen, K. A. Tsai, C. L. Wu, W. W. Wu, C. W. Luo, Y. J. Hsu and Y. H. Chu, Flexible Heteroepitaxy Photoelectrode for Photo-electrochemical Water Splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3900–3907 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Wu, Y. P. Lin, Y. H. Juan, Y. M. Wang, T. H. Do, H. Y. Chang and Y. H. Chu, Epitaxial Yttria-Stabilized Zirconia on Muscovite for Flexible Transparent Ionic Conductors, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6890–6896 CrossRef CAS .
R. Onn Winestook, C. Saguy, C. Ma, Y. Chu and Y. Ivry, Enhanced Ferroelectric Functionality in Flexible Lead Zirconate Titanate Films with In Situ Substrate–Clamping Compensation, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1900428 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, L. You, Y. Wang, G. Yuan, Y.-H. Chu, Z. Liu and J.-M. Liu, Flexible PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 Capacitors with Giant Piezoelectric Response and Dielectric Tunability, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600542 CrossRef .
L. Su, X. Lu, L. Chen, Y. Wang, G. Yuan and J.-M. Liu, Flexible, Fatigue-Free, and Large-Scale Bi3.25La0.75Ti3O12 Ferroelectric Memories, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21428–21433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Gao, Z. Xie, Y. Wang, G. Yuan and J. Liu, An All–Inorganic, Transparent, Flexible, and Nonvolatile Resistive Memory, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800412 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Z. Liang, C. Ma, G. Hu, L. Shen, Z. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Lu, M. Liu and C. L. Jia, Flexible Lead-Free BaTiO3 Ferroelectric Elements with High Performance, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2019, 40, 889–892 CAS .
B. Li, L. Ding, P. Gui, N. Liu, Y. Yue, Z. Chen, Z. Song, J. Wen, H. Lei, Z. Zhu, X. Wang, M. Su, L. Liao, Y. Gao, D. Zhang and G. Fang, Pulsed Laser Deposition Assisted van der Waals Epitaxial Large Area Quasi–2D ZnO Single–Crystal Plates on Fluorophlogopite Mica, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 1901156 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Shen, T. Duan, C. Ma, C. Cao, C. Jiang, X. Lu, H. Sun and M. Liu, Integration of Both Invariable and Tunable Microwave Magnetisms in a Single Flexible La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 Thin Film, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22677–22683 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, M. Liu, L. Shen, L. Lu, C. Ma, X. Lu, X. Lou and C. L. Jia, All-Inorganic Flexible Embedded
Thin-Film Capacitors for Dielectric Energy Storage with High Performance, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5247–5255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, H. Wang, X. Sun, X. Zhang and H. Wang, Multifunctional La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 (LSMO) Thin Films Integrated on Mica Substrates toward Flexible Spintronics and Electronics, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42698–42705 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, C. Ma, L. Shen, L. Lu, X. Lu, X. Lou, M. Liu and C.-L. Jia, Flexible lead-free oxide film capacitors with ultrahigh energy storage performances in extremely wide operating temperature, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 519–527 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huo, Z. Mei, Y. Sui, Z. Han, T. Wang, H. Liang and X. Du, Flexible Transparent InGaZnO Thin-Film Transistors on Muscovite Mica, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2019, 66, 2198–2201 CAS .
L. Shen, G. Lan, L. Lu, C. Ma, C. Cao, C. Jiang, H. Fu, C. You, X. Lu, Y. Yang, L. Chen, M. Liu and C.-L. Jia, A Strategy to Modulate the Bending Coupled Microwave Magnetism in Nanoscale Epitaxial Lithium Ferrite for Flexible Spintronic Devices, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800855 CrossRef .
W. C. Zheng, D. X. Zheng, Y. C. Wang, C. Jin and H. L. Bai, Uniaxial strain tuning of the Verwey transition in flexible Fe3O4/muscovite epitaxial heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 142403 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Feng, R. Tang, R. Zhao, J. Gao, D. Shi and H. Yang, Mechanically Tunable Magnetic Properties of Flexible SrRuO3 Epitaxial Thin Films on Mica Substrates, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700522 CrossRef .
W. Liu, M. Liu, R. Ma, R. Zhang, W. Zhang, D. Yu, Q. Wang, J. Wang and H. Wang, Mechanical Strain-Tunable Microwave Magnetism in Flexible CuFe2O4 Epitaxial Thin Film for Wearable Sensors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705928 CrossRef .
L. Shen, L. Wu, Q. Sheng, C. Ma, Y. Zhang, L. Lu, J. Ma, J. Ma, J. Bian, Y. Yang, A. Chen, X. Lu, M. Liu, H. Wang and C.-L. Jia, Epitaxial Lift-Off of Centimeter-Scaled Spinel Ferrite Oxide Thin Films for Flexible Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702411 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Cao, H. Hu, X. Wang, P. Li, Y. Yang, J. Zheng, C. Zhang, Z. Song, A. Li and Z. Wen, Flexible Metal-Insulator Transitions Based on van der Waals Oxide Heterostructures, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8284–8290 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Gao, C. Jin, W. C. Zheng, X. Pang, D. X. Zheng and H. L. Bai, Strain-mediated magnetic properties of epitaxial cobalt ferrite thin films on flexible muscovite, Europhys. Lett., 2018, 123, 17002 CrossRef .
D. Gao, Z. Tan, Z. Fan, M. Guo, Z. Hou, D. Chen, M. Qin, M. Zeng, G. Zhou, X. Gao, X. Lu and J.-M. Liu, All-Inorganic Flexible Ba0.67Sr0.33TiO3 Thin Films with Excellent Dielectric Properties over a Wide Range of Frequencies, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27088 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, M. Guo, D. Gao, W. He, J. Feng, A. Zhang, Z. Fan, D. Chen, M. Zeng, S. Wu, J. Gao, C. F. Guo, G. Zhou, X. Lu and J. Liu, A Flexible Strain Sensor of Ba(Ti, Nb)O3/Mica with a Broad Working Temperature Range, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 1900578 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, Z. Zhang, M. Li, R. Ishikawa, B. Feng, H. J. Liu, Y. L. Huang, N. Shibata, X. Ma, S. Chen, J. Zhang, K. Liu, E. G. Wang, D. Yu, L. Liao, Y. H. Chu and Y. Ikuhara, Possible absence of critical thickness and size effect in ultrathin perovskite ferroelectric films, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15549 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, X.-Y. Li, H. Ni, X.-M. Li and J. Gao, van der Waals epitaxy for highly tunable all-inorganic transparent flexible ferroelectric luminescent films, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8310–8315 RSC .
Z. Xie, Y. Yang, L. Fang, Y. Wang, X. Ding, G. Yuan and J.-M. Liu, Photovoltaic, photo-impedance, and photo-capacitance effects of the flexible (111) BiFeO3 film, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 112902 CrossRef .
W. Sun, J. Fan, R. Xu, X. Zhang, C. Kan, W. Liu, L. Zhang, C. Ma, D. Hu, Y. Ji, Y. Zhu and H. Yang, High optical transmittance and anomalous electronic transport in flexible transparent conducting oxides Ba0.96La0.04SnO3 thin films, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 18001 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ke, J. Xie, C. Chen, P. Lin, X. Zeng, L. Shu, L. Fei, Y. Wang, M. Ye and D. Wang, van der Waals epitaxy of Al-doped ZnO film on mica as a flexible transparent heater with ultrafast thermal response, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 031905 CrossRef .
D. Wang, G. Yuan, G. Hao and Y. Wang, All-inorganic flexible piezoelectric energy harvester enabled by two-dimensional mica, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ren, C. Tan, L. Gong, M. Tang, M. Liao, Y. Tang, X. Zhong, H. Guo and J. Wang, Highly transparent, all-oxide, heteroepitaxy ferroelectric thin film for flexible electronic devices, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 458, 540–545 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, H. Sun and K. W. Kwok, Mechanically controlled reversible photoluminescence response in all-inorganic flexible transparent ferroelectric/mica heterostructures, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11, 52 CrossRef .
S. Steinberg, W. Ducker, G. Vigil, C. Hyukjin, C. Frank, M. Z. Tseng, D. R. Clarke and J. N. Israelachvili, van der Waals epitaxial growth of α-alumina nanocrystals on mica, Science, 1993, 260, 656–659 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Zheng, D. X. Zheng, Y. C. Wang, D. Li, C. Jin and H. L. Bai, Flexible Fe3O4/BiFeO3 Multiferroic Heterostructures with Uniaxial Strain Control of Exchange Bias, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2019, 481, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, G. Yuan, Z. Yan, Y. Wang, X. Lu and J. M. Liu, Flexible, Semitransparent, and Inorganic Resistive Memory based on BaTi0.95Co0.05O3 Film, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700425 CrossRef .
S. Ke, C. Chen, N. Fu, H. Zhou, M. Ye, P. Lin, W. Yuan, X. Zeng, L. Chen and H. Huang, Transparent Indium Tin Oxide Electrodes on Muscovite Mica for High-Temperature-Processed Flexible Optoelectronic Devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28406–28411 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yen, Y. H. Lai, C. L. Zhang, H. Y. Cheng, Y. T. Hsieh, J. W. Chen, Y. C. Chen, L. Chang, N. T. Tsou, J. Y. Li and Y. H. Chu, Giant Resistivity Change of Transparent ZnO/Muscovite Heteroepitaxy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21818–21826 CrossRef CAS .
V. Le, P. Le, S. Wu, Y. Lai, Y. Lin, K. Wei, Y. Chueh and Y. Chu, NiO coated AZO/Muscovite Nanorods Arrays for Enhanced Transparent Flexible Energy Storage Performance, Small, 2020, 2000020 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Ha, M. Yen, Y. H. Lai, C. Y. Kuo, C. T. Chen, A. Tanaka, L. Z. Tsai, Y. F. Zhao, C. G. Duan, S. F. Lee, C. F. Chang, J. Y. Juang and Y. H. Chu, Mechanically tunable exchange coupling of Co/CoO bilayers on flexible muscovite substrates, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3284 RSC .
D. L. Ko, M. F. Tsai, J. W. Chen, P. W. Shao, Y. Z. Tan, J. J. Wang, S. Z. Ho, Y. H. Lai, Y. L. Chueh, Y. C. Chen, D. P. Tsai, L. Q. Chen and Y. H. Chu, Mechanically controllable nonlinear dielectrics, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz3180 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhong and J. Li, Muscovite mica as a universal platform for flexible electronics, J. Mater., 2020, 6, 455–457 Search PubMed .
M. I. B. Utama, F. J. Belarre, C. Magen, B. Peng, J. Arbiol and Q. Xiong, Incommensurate van der Waals epitaxy of nanowire arrays: A case study with ZnO on muscovite mica substrates, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2146–2152 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Y. Dai, H. Du, M. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Raza, D. Wang and C. L. Jia, Atomic Scale Understanding of the Epitaxy of Perovskite Oxides on Flexible Mica Substrate, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Bao, X. Deng, F. Mao, N. Zhong, F. Y. Yue, L. Sun, P. H. Xiang and C. G. Duan, Ultra-flat ITO films on mica for high temperature transparent flexible electrodes, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 2268–2272 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, Y. Ling, J. Wang, R. Liu, Z. Han, Q. Li, J. Du and Q. Xu, The preparation of flexible Ni-Mn-In thin films on mica substrates by pulsed laser deposition, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2019, 488, 165244 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Sinha, J. Lee, J. K. Kim, S. K. Ray and B. Paul, Rapid growth of fully-inorganic flexible CaxCoO2 thin films from a ligand free aqueous precursor ink for thermoelectric applications, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7784–7787 RSC .
J. Xie, Y. Bi, M. Ye, Z. Rao, L. Shu, P. Lin, X. Zeng and S. Ke, Epitaxial ultrathin Au films on transparent mica with oxide wetting layer applied to organic light-emitting devices, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 081902 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, J. Xie, M. Mai, J. Wang, X. Shen, S. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Kisslinger, H. Q. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Deng, S. Ke and X. Zeng, High-Quality AZO/Au/AZO Sandwich Film with Ultralow Optical Loss and Resistivity for Transparent Flexible Electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16160–16168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Zhang, M. Ye, Z. Rao, T. Tian, L. Shu, P. Lin, X. Zeng and S. Ke, Flexible TiO2/Au thin films with greatly enhanced photocurrents for photoelectrochemical water splitting, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 815, 152471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Chen, M. Ye, Z. Rao, L. Shu, Y. Hu, X. Zeng and S. Ke, Large photoelectrochemical activity of flexible TiO2/SrRuO3 oxide heterojunction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144544 CrossRef .
C. Yang, Y. Han, J. Qian, P. Lv, X. Lin, S. Huang and Z. Cheng, Flexible, Temperature-Resistant, and Fatigue-Free Ferroelectric Memory Based on Bi(Fe0.93Mn0.05Ti0.02)O3 Thin Film, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12647–12655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, R. Liu, H. Wang, S. Xiao, D. Qu, G. Wang, Z. Han, J. Du and Q. Xu, Martensitic transformation and large exchange bias in Mn-rich Ni–Mn–Sn thin films on mica substrates, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 827, 154303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Arata, H. Nishinaka, K. Shimazoe and M. Yoshimoto, Epitaxial Growth of Bendable Cubic NiO and In2O3 Thin Films on Synthetic Mica for p- and n-type Wide-Bandgap Semiconductor Oxides, MRS Adv., 2020, 5, 1671 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Tang, W. W. Tang, X. G. Tang, Q. X. Liu, Y. P. Jiang, W. H. Li, Z. H. Tang, X. B. Guo and Z. F. Tang, Analog-type resistive switching behavior of Au/HfO2/ZnO memristor fabricated on flexible Mica substrate, Phys. E, 2020, 120, 114047 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. B. Utama, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, F. J. Belarre, J. Arbiol and Q. Xiong, Recent developments and future directions in the growth of nanostructures by van der Waals epitaxy, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3570–3588 RSC .
D. Wang, J. N. Li, Y. Zhou, D. H. Xu, X. Xiong, R. W. Peng and M. Wang, van der Waals epitaxy of ultrathin α-MoO3 sheets on mica substrate with single-unit-cell thickness, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 053107 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. Song, Y. Wu, S. Ding, P. Hou, H. Song, J. Wang and X. Zhong, The resistive switching behaviors of a flexible device based on a SrTiO3 film, EPL (Europhys. Lett.), 2019, 127, 26001 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, J. Qian, P. Lv, H. Wu, X. Lin, K. Wang, J. Ouyang, S. Huang, X. Cheng and Z. Cheng, Flexible lead-free BFO-based dielectric capacitor with large energy density, superior thermal stability, and reliable bending endurance, J. Mater., 2020, 6, 200–208 Search PubMed .
F. Zhao, B. Wang, X. Cui, N. Pan, H. Wang and J. G. Hou, Buckle delamination of textured TiO2 thin films on mica, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 489, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yen, Y.-H. Lai, C.-Y. Kuo, C.-T. Chen, C.-F. Chang and Y.-H. Chu, Mechanical Modulation of Colossal Magnetoresistance in Flexible Epitaxial Perovskite Manganite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2004597 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, C. Ma, X. Lu and M. Liu, Recent progress on flexible inorganic single-crystalline functional oxide films for advanced electronics, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 911–930 RSC .
X. Lu, C. Ma, M. Liu and C. Jia, Flexible Lithium Ferrite Nanopillar Arrays for Bending Stable Microwave Magnetism, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39422–39427 CrossRef .
B. Shen, Y. Li and X. Hao, Multifunctional All-Inorganic Flexible
Capacitor for Energy Storage and Electrocaloric Refrigeration over a Broad Temperature Range Based on PLZT 9/65/35 Thick Films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34117–34127 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Y. Han, C. Feng, X. Lin, S. Huang, X. Cheng and Z. Cheng, Toward Multifunctional Electronics : Flexible NBT-Based Film with a Large Electrocaloric E ff ect and High Energy Storage Property, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6082–6089 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, P. Lv, J. Qian, Y. Han, J. Ouyang, X. Lin, S. Huang and Z. Cheng, Fatigue–Free and Bending–Endurable Flexible Mn–Doped Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3–BaTiO3–BiFeO3 Film Capacitor with an Ultrahigh Energy Storage Performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803949 CrossRef .
P. Lv, C. Yang, J. Qian, H. Wu, S. Huang and X. Cheng, Flexible Lead-Free Perovskite Oxide Multilayer Film Capacitor High-Performance Dielectric Energy Storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1904229 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ren, G. Zhong, Q. Xiao, C. Tan, M. Feng, X. Zhong, F. An, J. Wang, M. Zi, M. Tang, Y. Tang, T. Jia and J. Li, Highly Robust Flexible Ferroelectric Field Effect Transistors Operable at High Temperature with Low-Power Consumption, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, Y. Xie, F. Qian, Y. Ji, D. Hu, R. Tang, W. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Tong, C. Ma and H. Yang, Isotropic magnetoresistance and enhancement of ferromagnetism through repetitious bending moments in flexible perovskite manganite thin film, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 806, 753–760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, L. Fan, Q. Fang, W. Xu, S. Chen, G. Zan, H. Ren, L. Song and C. Zou, Nano Energy Free-standing SWNTs/VO2/Mica hierarchical films for high-performance thermochromic devices, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 144–151 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, Z. Zhou, J. Zhao, Q. Liu, H. Wang, G. Yuan and J. Chen, Flexible memristors as electronic synapses for neuro-inspired computation based on scotch tape-exfoliated mica substrates, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1183–1192 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-N. Lai, C.-H. Chang, P.-C. Wang and Y.-H. Chu, Highly efficient flexible organic light-emitting diodes based on a high-temperature durable mica substrate, Org. Electron., 2019, 75, 105442 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paul, V. Khranovskyy, R. Yakimova and P. Eklund, Donor-doped ZnO thin films on mica for fully-inorganic flexible thermoelectrics, Mater. Res. Lett., 2019, 7, 239–243 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, C. Yang, D. Gao, Q. Li, A. Zhang, J. Feng, H. Yang, R. Tao, Z. Fan, M. Zeng, G. Zhou, X. Lu and J. M. Liu, A flexible and high temperature tolerant strain sensor of La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/Mica, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 44, 42–47 CrossRef .
W. Liu, R. Ma, M. Liu and H. Wang, Highly Stable In-Plane Microwave Magnetism in Flexible Li0.35Zn0.3Fe2.35O4(111) Epitaxial Thin Films for Wearable Devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32331 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Xu, X. Deng, Y. F. Zhao, R. R. Ma, N. Zhong, R. Huang, H. Peng, P. H. Xiang and C. G. Duan, Hydrogenation Dynamics of Electrically Controlled Metal–Insulator Transition in Proton-Gated Transparent and Flexible WO3 Transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902497 CrossRef .
D. Y. Kim, S. Lee, Z. H. Lin, K. H. Choi, S. G. Doo, H. Chang, J. Y. Leem, Z. L. Wang and S. O. Kim, High temperature processed ZnO nanorods using flexible and transparent mica substrates for dye-sensitized solar cells and piezoelectric nanogenerators, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 101–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and X. Wei, AZO/Ag/AZO transparent flexible electrodes on mica substrates for high temperature application, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 15442–15446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Suo, H. Gleskova and S. Wagner, Mechanics of rollable and foldable film-on-foil electronics, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1177–1179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Xiao, J. Song, H. Ko, K.-H. Hwang, Y. Huang and J. Rogers, Mechanics of curvilinear electronics, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 5757–5763 RSC .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Materials and mechanics for stretchable electronics, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koma, van der Waals epitaxy for highly lattice-mismatched systems, J. Cryst. Growth, 1999, 201, 236–241 CrossRef .
A. Koma, van der Waals epitaxy-a new epitaxial growth method for a highly lattice-mismatched system, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 216, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koma, K. Sunouchi and T. Miyajima, Fabrication and characterization of heterostructures with subnanometer thickness, Microelectron. Eng., 1984, 2, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, K. Saiki, T. Shimada and A. Koma, Epitaxial growth of transition metal dichalcogenides on cleaved faces of mica, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1990, 8, 68–72 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koma and K. Yoshimura, Ultrasharp interfaces grown with van der Waals epitaxy, Surf. Sci., 1986, 174, 556–560 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koma, K. Ueno and K. Saiki, Heteroepitaxial growth by van der Waals interaction in one-, two- and three-dimensional materials, J. Cryst. Growth, 1991, 111, 1029–1032 CrossRef CAS .
A. Koma, K. Sunouchi and T. Miyajima, Fabrication of ultrathin heterostructures with van der Waals epitaxy, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom., 1985, 3, 724 CrossRef .

          W. Jaegermann, A. Klein and C. Pettenkofer, in Electron Spectroscopies Applied to Low-Dimensional Materials, ed. H. P. Hughes and H. I. Starnberg, Springer, Netherlands,  2002, pp. 317–402 Search PubMed .
M. I. B. Utama, M. de la Mata, C. Magen, J. Arbiol and Q. Xiong, Twinning-, polytypism-, and polarity-induced morphological modulation in nonplanar nanostructures with van der Waals Epitaxy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1636–1646 CrossRef CAS .

          B. S. Mitchell, An Introduction to Materials Engineering and Science: For Chemical and Materials Engineers, Wiley, New York,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kum, W. Kong, Y. Kim, C. Choi, B. Lee, P. Lin, Y. Park and J. Kim, Integration of bulk materials with two-dimensional materials for physical coupling and applications., Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 550–560 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rogers, Materials for semiconductor devices that can bend, fold, twist, and stretch, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 549–556 CrossRef .

          J. Burghartz, Ultra-thin Chip Technology and Applications, Springer Berlin/Heidelberg,  2000 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhai, L. Mathew, R. Rao, D. Xu and S. Banerjee, High-performance flexible thin-film transistors exfoliated from bulk wafer, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5609–5615 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shahrjerdi and S. W. Bedell, Extremely Flexible Nanoscale Ultrathin Body Silicon Integrated Circuits on Plastic, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 315 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Burghartz, W. Appel, H. D. Rempp and M. A. Zimmermann, A New Fabrication and Assembly Process for Ultrathin Chips, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2009, 56, 321 CAS .
E. Menard, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Bendable single crystal silicon thin film transistors formed by printing on plastic substrates, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 093507 CrossRef .
S. R. Bakaul, C. R. Serrao, M. Lee, C. W. Yeung, A. Sarker, S. L. Hsu, A. K. Yadav, L. Dedon, L. You, A. I. Khan, J. D. Clarkson, C. Hu, R. Ramesh and S. Salahuddin, Single crystal functional oxides on silicon, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–5 Search PubMed .
D. M. Paskiewicz, R. Sichel-Tissot, E. Karapetrova, L. Stan and D. D. Fong, Single-Crystalline SrRuO3 Nanomembranes: A Platform for Flexible Oxide Electronics, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 534–542 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Matthews, Growth of face-centered-cubic metals on sodium chloride substrates, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1966, 3, 133–145 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ji, S. Cai, T. Paudel, S. Huiyuan, C. Zhang, L. Han, Y. Wei, Y. Zang, M. Gu, Y. Zhang, W. Gao, H. Huyan, W. Guo, D. Wu, Z. Gu, E. Tsymbal, P. Wang, Y. Nie and X. Pan, Freestanding crystalline oxide perovskites down to the monolayer limit, Nature, 2019, 570, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, D. Baek, S. Hong, L. Kourkoutis, Y. Hikita and H. Hwang, Synthesis of freestanding single-crystal perovskite films and heterostructures by etching of sacrificial water-soluble layers, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1255–1260 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Wong, T. Sands and N. W. Cheung, Damage-free separation of GaN thin films from sapphire substrates, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 599–601 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruel, Application of hydrogen ion beams to silicon on insulator material technology, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1996, 108, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, R. Wang and K. Liu, Substrate induced changes in atomically thin 2-dimensional semiconductors: Fundamentals, engineering, and applications, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 011301 Search PubMed .
H. Chang, S. Yang, J. Lee, L. Tao, W. Hwang, D. Jena, N. Lu and D. Akinwande, High-performance, highly bendable MoS2 transistors with high-k dielectrics for flexible low-power systems, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5446–5452 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Sun and J. A. Rogers, Inorganic semiconductors for flexible electronics, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1897–1916 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Liu, D.-M. Sun, L. Huang, L.-P. Ma, L.-C. Yin, T. Ma, Z. Zhang, X.-L. Ma, L.-M. Peng, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform monolayer WS2 on reusable Au foils, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8569 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kum, H. Lee, S. Kim, S. Lindemann, W. Kong, K. Qiao, P. Chen, J. Irwin, J. H. Lee, S. Xie, S. Subramanian, J. Shim, S. Bae, C. Choi, L. Ranno, S. Seo, S. Lee, J. Bauer, H. Li, K. Lee, J. A. Robinson and C. A. Ross, Heterogeneous integration of single- crystalline complex-oxide membranes, Nature, 2020, 578, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. S. Cruz, K. Lee, B. O. Alawode, C. Choi, Y. Song, J. M. Johnson, C. Heidelberger, W. Kong, S. Choi, K. Qiao, I. Almansouri, E. A. Fitzgerald, J. Kong, A. M. Kolpak, J. Hwang and J. Kim, Remote epitaxy through graphene enables two-dimensional material-based layer transfer, Nature, 2017, 544, 340–343 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ellmer, Past achievements and future challenges in the development of optically transparent electrodes, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 809–817 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liang, Y. Jiang, J. Guo, N. Li, W. Qiu, H. Yang, Y. Ji and S. Luo, van der Waals Heteroepitaxial VO2/Mica Films with Extremely Low Optical Trigger Threshold and Large THz Field Modulation Depth, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 1900647 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, Y. F. Zhao, N. Zhong, F. Y. Yue, R. Huang, H. Peng, X. D. Tang, P. H. Xiang, Y. H. Chu and C. G. Duan, Proton-Mediated Phase Control in Flexible and Transparent Mott Transistors, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900742 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Chen, J. Wang, G. Yuan and J.-M. Liu, Transparent, Flexible, Fatigue-Free, Optical-Read, and Nonvolatile Ferroelectric Memories, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35169–35176 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Arata, H. Nishinaka, D. Tahara and M. Yoshimoto, van der Waals epitaxy of ferroelectric ε -gallium oxide thin film on flexible synthetic mica, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 59, 025503 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Quynh, C. N. Van, W. Y. Tzeng, C. W. Huang, Y. H. Lai, J. W. Chen, K. A. Tsai, C. L. Wu, W. W. Wu, C. W. Luo, Y. J. Hsu and Y. H. Chu, Flexible Heteroepitaxy Photoelectrode for Photo-electrochemical Water Splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3900 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, W. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Yuan, J. Chen, R. Ma, F. Xiang and H. Wang, Flexible mica films for high-temperature energy storage, J. Mater., 2018, 4, 173 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yugandhar Bitla	Dr Yugandhar Bitla obtained his MPhil and PhD degrees from the University of Hyderabad in 2006 and 2013, respectively. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at National Chiao Tung University and the Indian Institute of Science, he joined Central University of Rajasthan as an assistant professor in 2019. His research focuses on the synthesis and characterization of complex oxides in different forms, flexible electronics, nanoscale magnetism, magnetic phase transitions, critical phenomena, spintronics and multiferroics.
Ying-Hao Chu	Professor Chu received his PhD from the Department of Materials Science & Engineering at National Tsing-Hua University in 2004. Currently, he is appointed as a distinguished professor at National Chiao Tung University. In 2019, he joined ACS Applied Electronic Materials as an associate editor. His research is highly focused on complex functional oxides and strongly correlated electron systems. He has extensive experience in the use of advanced characterization techniques to understand and manipulate functional oxide heterostructures, nanostructures, and interfaces. His current goal is to create a pathway to use high quality oxide heteroepitaxy for soft transparent technology.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the combined functionalities required in the design and development of transparent flexible electronics applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Degrees of freedom inherent to flexible functional oxide heteroepitaxy.	 



Refractive index	1.58	1.4	1.5–1.75	1.66	1.66	1.7	1.5	
	
n
α: 1.563, nβ: 1.596, nγ: 1.60	
n
α: 1.55, nβ: 1.59, nγ: 1.60
Transparent	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	No	Yes	Yes
Surface smoothness	No	No	No	No	No	No	Good	No	Excellent	Excellent
Melting point (°C)	225	-45	270	380	>250	520	720	>1500	1000	1100
Operating temp (°C)	115–150	260	155–180	223	115–170	250–320	600	1400	700	800
TEC (10−6 K−1)	66–70	1	20, 16	54	20–80	30–60	3–5	10	8–12 (∥)	5–13 (∥)
15–25 (⊥)	0.001–1 (⊥)
Electrical conductivity	No	No	No	No	No	No	No	Yes	No	No
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)	0.2	0.15	0.15	0.13–0.18	0.15–0.24	0.12	1.16	16	0.3 (∥)	0.3 (∥)
3 (⊥)	3 (⊥)
Youngs modulus (GPa)	∼2	∼6 × 10−4	5–6	2.2	2–4	2–3	75	200	172	172
Tensile strength (MPa)	55–75	2.24	200–275	83	55–75	150–230	22–32	400	225–300	255–300
Compression strength (MPa)	>80	
	
	
	80	51	
	250	221	221

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the process of fabricating flexible functional layers via (1) direct growth, (2) growth-thinning and (3) growth-transfer techniques.	 


Substrate type	Polymers	Ultrathin glass	Metal foil	2D material	Si based	Si based	Oxide	Oxide	Double-side polished
Substrate	PI	Glass (20 μm)	Hastelloy	Mica(001)	SiO2/Si (100)	SiO2/Si(100)	Graphene/STO	STO	Sapphire
Mechanism	Conventional epitaxy	Conventional epitaxy	Conventional epitaxy	vdWE	Ion etching	Physical force	Remote epitaxy	Chemical reaction	Laser-material interaction
Merits	Simple operation	Diffusion barrier	Simple operation	No damage to film	
	No damage to functional film	Reusable substrate	Low cost	Fast process
Good ductility	Chemical and thermal durability	
	Flexible	
	
	
	Less damage to films	Easy to control
Transparent	
	
	Large area growth	
	
	
	Easy to integrate	

Challenges	Poor crystallinity due to low temperature deposition process	High cost	Non-transparent	Specific (111) growth of perovskites and spinels	High cost	Potential device damage inherent to peel-off process	More materials remain unexplored	Lattice matching and etching solution selection limitation.	Need of high cost facility
Fragility	Magnetic and conducting substrate	
	Damage to films	Limited flexibility and transparency	
	Slow release rate	Damage to films
Handling difficulties	Limited combination and complex buffer layers	
	
	Left over substrate cannot be reused	
	Constraint between epilayer, sacrificial layer and substrate.	Large area film difficult due to small size of laser spot

	Plastic deformation at very small mechanical strains	
	
	
	
	Hard to transfer large area films	Annealing or chemical etching to recover/remove unwanted layer


ITO	Pulsed laser deposition	(222) [−110] ITO || (001) [010] mica	68–97	4	
25

AZO	Sputtering	(001) [010] AZO || (001) [010] mica	75–90	7	
25

Ba0.96La0.04SnO3	Pulsed laser deposition	(111)BLSO || (001) mica	85–90	
	
56

VO2	Pulsed laser deposition	(100)[100] VO2 || (001)[100] mica	70a	5	
26

MoO2	Pulsed laser deposition	(010)[001] MoO2 || (001)[100] mica	Semitransparent	10	
17

Pb1−xLax(ZryTi1−y)O3	Pulsed laser deposition	(100)[001] PLZT || (001)[010] mica	80	5	
21

Pb(Zr0.1Ti0.9)O3	Pulsed laser deposition	(101)PZT || (001) mica	73	4	
59

ε-Ga2O3	Chemical vapor deposition	(001) [010] ε-Ga2O3 || (001) [010] mica	70	
	
143

NiO	Pulsed laser deposition	(111) [01–1] NiO || (001) [010] mica	80	5	
19

YSZ	Pulsed laser deposition	(111) [112] YSZ || (001) [100] mica	90	10	
32

ZnO	Sputtering	(002) [−110] ZnO || (001) [100] mica	80	5	
65

γ-Fe2O3	Pulsed laser deposition	(111) [01–1]Fe2O3 || (001)[010] mica	70	10	
144

Eu-doped 0.94Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3-0.06BaTiO3	Pulsed laser deposition	(111) [1–10] BNTBT:Eu || (001) [010] mica	70	2	
54

Pr-doped Ba0.85Ca0.15Ti0.9Zr0.1O3	Pulsed laser deposition	(111) [01–1] BCZT:Pr || (001) [010] mica	
	
	
60


 	Fig. 4  (a) Structure of muscovite mica. (b) Basal plane surface of mica. Schematics of (c) conventional and (d) (quasi) van der Waals heteroepitaxies.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD and (b) Phi scans of ITO/mica and AZO/mica films. (c) Critical strain values under flex-in (compression strain) and flex-out (tension strain) bending modes for various ITO and AZO thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Temperature profile of an AZO/mica heater at different voltages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Transmittance and resistance as a function of temperature in heating and cooling cycles. The inset shows the actual VO2/mica heterostructure. (b) Device conduction under mechanical testing. Adapted from ref. 26. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Pump fluence dependence of the differential transmission (ΔT/T0) signals of VO2/mica and VO2/Al2O3 films at 1 THz. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Temperature dependence of the sheet resistance of the VO2 channel at several positive VG under a bending radius of 10 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Resistivity changes as a function of the (a) bending radius, (b) retention and (c) bending cycles of a ZnO/mica sensor. The inset shows a photograph of the sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. ΔR/R0 responses of the flexible BNTO/mica strain sensor as a function of (d) temperature in bent conditions and (e) finger bending–releasing movements at a sensing current of 0.1 mA. (The inset shows the actual flexible strain sensor fixed on fingers in releasing and bending states.) Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Pr, Psat and Ec variation as a function of temperature and (b) fatigue after radiation exposure of 5 Mrad in unbent and bent conditions of a PLZT/ITO/ZnO/mica ferroelectric memory element. The inset shows a photograph of the heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) ISC with either +P or −P in the darkness and under illumination, respectively and (d) real-time ISC evolution after +P/−P is written by −8/+8 V of ITO/BLT/Ag-ITO/mica memory. Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) I–V characteristics at selected operating temperatures and (b) resistance retention after different bending cycles for a bending radius of 6.5 mm of the ANA/muscovite memristor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (c) HRS and LRS as a function of bending cycles and time of the dynamic bending process shown in the inset and (d) I–V curves after bending 14400 times under a radius of curvature of 2.2 mm for ITO/Ag/BTCO/Ag–ITO/mica memory. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image of the YSZ/muscovite ionic conductor along with the corresponding FFT patterns of (b) YSZ and (c) muscovite. (d) Ionic conductivity as a function of reciprocal temperature under different bending conditions along with that of the bulk single crystal. (e) Cyclability test under a bending radius of 10 mm. The inset shows the actual YSZ/mica heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Photoelectrochemical performance of the Fe2O3/ZnO/mica photoelectrode under different (a) bending radii and (b) bending cycles. The insets show a photograph and a schematic of the electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of a NiO-coated AZO nanorods/mica supercapacitor electrode under (c) different bending radii. The inset shows a photograph of the electrode. (d) CV curves under mechanical bending at radii of 5 mm after various bending cycles. The inset shows a schematic of the heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) PL emission spectra in the unbent (ROC = ∞) and bent (ROC = ±2 mm) states before and after 104 cycles of bending and (b) relative PL intensity changes (ΔI/I) of the 5D0 → 7F1 emission peak as a function of compressive and tensile bending strain for the BNTBT:Eu/mica heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) PL emission spectra in different tensile bent states and (d) ΔI/I of the 3P1 → 3H6 emission peak as a function of tensile strain for the BCZT:Pr/mica heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
