Artificial molecular shuttles: from concepts to devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B818609J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B818609J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2279-2294Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsArtificial molecular shuttles: from concepts to devices

        
          
            Serena 
            Silvi
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Margherita 
            Venturi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Alberto 
            Credi
          
          
        
      *
      Dipartimento di Chimica “G. Ciamician”, Università di Bologna, via Selmi 2, 40126, Bologna, Italy. E-mail: alberto.credi@unibo.it;  Fax: +39 051 2099456;   Tel: +39 051 2099540
Received 
      20th October 2008
    , Accepted 5th December 2008First published on 4th February 2009AbstractThe bottom-up construction and operation of mechanical machines of molecular size is a topic of great interest in nanoscience, and a fascinating challenge of nanotechnology. Researchers in this field are stimulated and inspired by the progress of molecular biology that has begun to reveal the secrets of the natural nanomachines which constitute the material base of life. In an artificial context, the most common implementation of the molecular machine concept is represented by molecular shuttles. They are rotaxanes equipped with (at least) two distinct recognition sites on the axle portion of their dumbbell-shaped component, in which the interlocked macrocyclic component can be displaced from one site to the other in a controlled manner as a result of an external stimulation. Here we present the strategies at the basis of the design of molecular shuttles, illustrate the operation of a selected number of examples working in solution and on surfaces, and describe recent attempts of constructing functional devices and materials based on molecular shuttles. Open problems and perspectives of these kinds of systems are also critically discussed.Serena SilviSerena Silvi was born in 1978. She received her “Laurea” in Chemistry in 2002 from the University of Bologna, where she also earned her Ph.D. in 2006 under the supervision of Professor Alberto Credi. In 2005 she spent a research period in the laboratory of Professor Angel E. Kaifer at the University of Miami, working on cucurbituril-based supramolecular species. In 2008 she became lecturer at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Bologna. Her research focuses on the design of artificial molecular machines and the investigation of their photochemical, photophysical and electrochemical behaviour in solution.Margherita VenturiMargherita Venturi is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna, Italy. From 1972 to 1991 she worked at the National Research Council of Bologna where she mainly studied, by means of pulsed and continuous radiolytic techniques, the electron-transfer processes involved in model systems for the conversion of solar energy. In 1992 she moved to the group of Prof. Balzani, where she is still now. Her present research interests are in the field of supramolecular photochemistry and electrochemistry. She is co-author of more than 170 publications in international journals, including several reviews and a monograph entitled “Molecular Devices and Machines”.Alberto CrediAlberto Credi was born in 1970. He received his “Laurea” (1994) from the University of Bologna where, after a research period in the United States, he also earned his Ph.D. (1999). He is currently associate professor of chemistry at his Alma Mater. He received several scientific awards and co-authored more than 150 scientific papers in the fields of supramolecular chemistry, molecular devices, photochemistry and electrochemistry. He is the co-author of a monograph entitled “Molecular Devices and Machines”, and of a handbook of photochemistry.
1. Introduction
The design, synthesis, and operation of supramolecular (multicomponent) systems capable of performing specific, directional mechanical movements under the action of a defined energy input—namely, molecular machines—constitute a fascinating challenge in the field of nanoscience. Such a daring goal finds its scientific origin in the existence of natural molecular machines,1,2 although it is clear that the construction of systems of such structural and functional complexity by using the bottom-up molecular approach would be, at present, an impossible task. Therefore, what can be done is to synthesise simple artificial prototypes consisting of a few molecular components capable of moving in a controllable way, and to investigate the challenging problems posed by interfacing such nanodevices with the macroscopic world, particularly as far as energy supply and information exchange are concerned.
In recent years synthetic talent—that has always been the most distinctive feature of chemists—combined with a device-driven ingenuity evolved from chemists' attention to functions and reactivity, have led to outstanding achievements in this field. Among the systems of interest there are molecular tweezers,3 adaptable receptors,4 propellers,5 rotors,6 turnstiles,7 gyroscopes,8 gears,9 brakes,10 pedals,11 ratchets,12 switches,13 lifts,14 muscles,15 valves,16 processive artificial enzymes,17 walkers,18 and catalytic self-propelled micro- and nano-rods.19 Several excellent reviews,20 thematic issues,21 and a monograph22 dealing with artificial molecular machines and motors are available.
In this feature article we focus on molecular shuttles, namely rotaxanes that can perform as linear molecular machines. After a discussion on the design of such systems, we describe a few paradigmatic examples working in solution, mostly taken from our own research. We then illustrate recent efforts aimed at transferring artificial molecular shuttles on solid surfaces, and at exploiting their operation in device-like settings. Finally, we critically discuss open problems, limitations and perspectives of these kinds of systems.
1.1. Basic concepts on molecular machines
Like their macroscopic counterparts, molecular machines can be classified according to characteristics such as: the type of energy supply to make them work, the kind of motion (translation, rotation, oscillation, etc.) performed by their components, the way of monitoring their operation (the rearrangements of the component parts should cause readable changes in some chemical or physical property of the system), the possibility to repeat the operation in cycles, the time scale needed to complete a cycle, and the function that can be ultimately carried out. It should be recalled, however, that nanoscale machines cannot be simply considered as ‘shrunk’ versions of macroscopic counterparts because several intrinsic properties of molecular-level entities are quite different from those of macroscopic objects.1 A thorough discussion on the basic concepts of molecular machines can be found in refs. 20–22.
Molecular machines operate through chemical reactions and need to be fed by an energy source. The obvious way to provide a chemical system with energy is through an exoergonic chemical reaction. If a molecular machine has to work by inputs of chemical energy, addition of fresh reactants (‘fuel’) at any step of its working cycle is needed, with the concomitant formation of waste products. Research in the field has shown that artificial molecular machines can also conveniently be powered by electrical energy (through electrochemically induced redox reactions) and by light (through photoinduced reactions such as photoisomerization and photoinduced electron-transfer processes).
As for any device invented and constructed for a specific purpose, the function performed by a molecular machine represents its most important feature. Indeed, Nature uses molecular machines to perform a large number of important functions, including energy conversion, cell division, intracellular displacement and muscle contraction. Why have artificial nanomachines found no technological applications until now, despite the remarkable progresses of the field in the past 15 years? The reason is that, while chemists have reached a good understanding of the design principles and can master efficient synthetic methodologies, they are still in the process of learning how these (admittedly complicated) chemical systems can be brought to the next level of structural complexity. In other words, we need to investigate how molecular machines can be transferred from fluid solutions to more organised and sophisticated environments, in order to operate them with some degree of control in space and in time, and possibly coordinate their performance on larger scales.
1.2. Linear motions in molecular systems
In this feature article we will deal with molecular machines designed to perform linear movements, that is, the unidimensional translation of a movable part along a well defined path. This kind of motions is essential in both Nature and technology. In living organisms movements related to intracellular trafficking and muscle contraction are produced by linear motor proteins such as kinesin, dynein and myosin.23 Another example of a linear biomolecular machine is RNA polymerase, which moves along DNA while carrying out transcriptions. Indeed, biological supramolecular architectures are themselves the premier, proven examples of the feasibility and utility of nanotechnology, and constitute a sound rationale for attempting the realization of artificial devices based on nanomachines.1
Artificial molecular machines are necessarily built on something much simpler than motor proteins; in principle they can be designed starting from several kinds of molecular and supramolecular species.20–22 However, for the reasons described below, most of the systems constructed so far are based on interlocked molecular species such as rotaxanes and related species. The names of these compounds derive from the Latin words rota and axis for wheel and axle, respectively. Rotaxanes24 are minimally composed (Fig. 1) of an axle-shaped molecule surrounded by a macrocyclic compound (the ‘ring’) and terminated by bulky groups (‘stoppers’) that prevent disassembly. Important features of these systems derive from noncovalent interactions between the components that contain complementary recognition sites. Such interactions, which are responsible for the efficient template-directed syntheses of rotaxanes, include: electron donor–acceptor ability, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic–hydrophylic character, π–π stacking, electrostatic forces and, on the side of the strong interaction limit, metal–ligand bonding.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the intercomponent motions that can occur in a rotaxane: ring shuttling (a) and rotation (b). 
Rotaxanes are appealing systems for the construction of molecular machines because (i) the mechanical bond enables a large variety of mutual arrangements of the molecular components while conferring stability to the system, (ii) the interlocked architecture limits the amplitude of the intercomponent motion in the three directions, (iii) the stability of a specific arrangement (co-conformation25) is determined by the strength of the intercomponent interactions, and (iv) such interactions can be modulated by external stimulation. Two interesting molecular motions can be envisaged in rotaxanes, namely translation, i.e., shuttling of the ring along the axle (Fig. 1a), and rotation of the ring around the axle (Fig. 1b).† Hence, rotaxanes are good prototypes for the construction of both linear and rotary molecular machines. The systems of the first type are termed molecular shuttles and constitute indeed the most common implementation of the molecular machine concept with rotaxanes.‡
1.3. Design of molecular shuttles

          If, during the template-directed synthesis of a rotaxane, the location of two identical recognition sites (‘stations’) within its dumbbell component can be arranged (Fig. 2), a degenerate, co-conformational equilibrium state is obtained in which the macrocyclic component spontaneously shuttles back and forth between the two stations along the linear portion of the dumbbell.26 Compound 14+ (Fig. 3a) is an example of rotaxane that behaves as a degenerate molecular shuttle.26a
 Fig. 2  (a) Operation of a two-station rotaxane as a degenerate molecular shuttle. (b) Idealised representation of the potential energy of the system as a function of the position of the ring relative to the axle. The number of circles in each potential well reflects the relative population of the corresponding co-conformation in a statistically significant ensemble. 
 Fig. 3  Structural formulae of two-station rotaxanes that behave as a degenerate molecular shuttle (a) and a non-degenerate controllable molecular shuttle (b). 
When the two recognition sites in the dumbbell component are different (Fig. 4) a rotaxane can exist as two different equilibrating co-conformations, the populations of which reflect their relative free energies as determined primarily by the strengths of the two different sets of noncovalent bonding interactions. In the schematic representation shown in Fig. 4 it has been assumed that the molecular ring resides preferentially around station A (state 0), until a stimulus is applied that switches off this recognition site (A → A′). As a consequence the system is brought into a non-equilibrium state that subsequently relaxes (equilibrates) according to the new potential energy landscape. This process implies the motion of the molecular ring to the second recognition site (station B) until a new equilibrium is reached (state 1). If station A is switched on again by an opposite stimulus, the original potential energy landscape is restored, and another co-conformational equilibration occurs through the shuttling of the ring back to station A. In appropriately designed rotaxanes the switching process can be controlled by reversible chemical reactions (protonation–deprotonation, reduction–oxidation, isomerization) caused by chemical, electrochemical, or photochemical stimulation. After the first reported example (compound 24+, Fig. 3b),27 a remarkable number of controllable molecular shuttles have been described in the literature.20–22,28 Owing to their bistability, controllable molecular shuttles are also interesting for processing and storing binary information.
 Fig. 4  Schematic operation of a two-station rotaxane as a controllable molecular shuttle, and idealised representation of the potential energy of the system as a function of the position of the ring relative to the axle upon switching off and on station A. The number of dots in each position reflects the relative population of the corresponding co-conformation in a statistically significant ensemble. Structures (a) and (c) correspond to equilibrium states, whereas (b) and (d) are metastable states. An alternative approach would be to modify station B through an external stimulus in order to make it a stronger recognition site compared to station A. 
It should be noted that a molecular shuttle like that shown in Fig. 3b could not perform net mechanical work in a full cycle of operation because—as for any reversible molecular shuttle—the work done in the ‘forward’ stroke would be cancelled by the ‘backward’ stroke.20f As will be discussed below, more advanced molecular machines and/or better engineering of their operating environment (e.g., a surface or a membrane) are required to reach this goal.
The energy barrier associated with the shuttling motion can also be modified by modulating the steric hindrance experienced by the ring in the region of the axle comprised between the two stations. This result can be achieved by covalent attachment–detachment of a bulky group,29 metal-ion coordination,30 and photoisomerisation.31 In these systems the thermodynamic stimulus may not be followed by relaxation, leaving the rotaxane molecules in non-equilibrium states (Fig. 4, b and d). This strategy was used to construct rotaxanes in which the axle performs the task of directionally changing the net position of the macrocycle.29 Such ‘energy ratcheting’ effects are crucial for the design of unidirectional molecular transport systems akin to biomolecular motors. Driving the ring distribution away from equilibrium by an information ratchet mechanism was recently reported.31a For a more detailed discussion on ratcheting effects in the context of molecular machines, see refs. 20f,29,31a,32.
2. Systems working in solution
2.1. Chemically controlled molecular shuttles, muscles, and lifts

Rotaxane
33+ (Fig. 5a) incorporates a dialkylammonium and a bipyridinium recognition site in its dumbbell-shaped component.33 In acetone or acetonitrile at room temperature the macrocycle, namely a dibenzo[24]crown-8 (DB24C8), resides exclusively around the ammonium station (Fig. 5a, state 0), as demonstrated by a variety of techniques including 1H NMR spectroscopy and voltammetry. The preference of the macrocycle for the ammonium site is a result of a combination of [+N–H⋯O] and [C–H⋯O] interactions between the –CH2NH2+– hydrogen atoms of the dumbbell and the oxygen atoms of the macrocycle. On addition of excess base (i-Pr2NEt or n-Bu3N) to a solution of 33+, deprotonation of the ammonium centre occurs. As a result the intercomponent hydrogen bonds are destroyed and the DB24C8 ring shuttles to the bipyridinium station (Fig. 5a, state 1). The original co-conformation is restored by addition of CF3CO2H, because protonation of the ammonium centre is followed by the shuttling of the macrocycle back to encircle the ammonium station. The shuttling process in this rotaxane is quantitative and can be followed by 1H NMR spectroscopy and electrochemical techniques. A kinetic study of the shuttling revealed that the base-induced ‘forward’ step is significantly slower than the acid-induced ‘backward’ motion of the ring, despite a lower enthalpy of activation for the forward step. This result has been ascribed to entropic factors arising from the rearrangement of counterions in the transition state.34
 Fig. 5  Structural formulae and operation of molecular shuttle 33+ (a), muscle 46+ (b) and lift 59+ (c) by acid–base inputs. 
A recent exciting development of the chemistry described above is the synthesis of the rotaxane dimer 46+ (Fig. 5b), designed to perform contraction and extension movements under acid–base control.35 Systems of this kind are referred to as ‘molecular muscles’15,36 because the executed mechanical motion resembles the shortening and lengthening of the functional elements (sarcomeres) present in muscle fibers. An NMR spectroscopic analysis indicates that the initially stable co-conformation for 46+ in acetonitrile at 298 K is the ‘extended’ one (Fig. 5b, state 0), in which the DB24C8 rings surround the ammonium units. Molecular models show that the length of this species is approximately 3.1 nm. The addition of a stoichiometric amount of a strong, non-nucleophilic phosphazene base causes the deprotonation of the two ammonium centres of the rotaxane dimer. As a consequence, the two interlocked filaments glide along one another through the terminal DB24C8 rings until the latter reach the bipyridinium stations (Fig. 5b, state 1). Reprotonation of the dialkylamine units following the addition of CF3CO2H results in the return of the DB24C8 rings to the ammonium stations. Because the so-obtained ‘contracted’ form is about 2.2 nm in length, deprotonation induces a 29% shortening (0.9 nm) of the longitudinal molecular size with respect to the original extended length.
By using an incrementally staged strategy, the architectural features of the switchable rotaxane 33+ (Fig. 5a)33 were incorporated into those of a previously investigated37 triply-threaded two-component supramolecular bundle. The result was the construction of two-component molecular devices like 59+ (Fig. 5c) that behave like nanometre-scale ‘lifts’.14,38 Compound 59+, which measures about 2.5 nm in height and 3.5 nm in diameter, consists of a tripod component containing two different notches—one ammonium centre and one bipyridinium unit—at different levels in each of its three legs. Such legs are interlocked by a tritopic host, which plays the role of a platform that can be stopped at the two different levels.
Initially the platform resides exclusively on the ‘upper’ level, i.e. with the three rings surrounding the ammonium centres (Fig. 5c, state 0). On addition of a phosphazene base to an acetonitrile solution of 59+, deprotonation of the ammonium centres occurs and, as a result, the platform moves to the ‘lower’ level, i.e. with the three crown ether rings surrounding the bipyridinium units (Fig. 5c, state 1). The distance travelled by the platform is ∼0.7 nm and it was estimated that a force of up to 200 pN, i.e. more than one order of magnitude larger than that generated by natural linear motors,23 could be generated. Subsequent addition of acid restores the ammonium centres, and the platform moves back to the upper level. The ‘up and down’ lift-like motion, which corresponds to a quantitative switching and can be repeated many times, was monitored by 1H NMR spectroscopy, electrochemistry, and absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy.14,38 Detailed spectroscopic investigations showed that the platform operates by taking three distinct steps associated with each of the three deprotonation processes. In this regard, the molecular lift is more reminiscent of a legged animal than it is of a passenger or freight lift.
The base–acid controlled mechanical motion in 59+ is associated with interesting structural modifications, such as the opening and closing of a large cavity (1.5 × 0.8 nm) and the control of the positions and properties of the bipyridinium legs. This behaviour can in principle be used to control the uptake and release of a guest molecule, a function of interest for the development of drug delivery systems.
2.2. Molecular shuttles powered by light
If and when a nanotechnology-based industry will be developed, its products will have to be powered by renewable energy sources because it has become clear that the problem of energy supply is a crucial one for human civilization for the years ahead.39 In this frame, the construction of nanodevices, including natural–artificial hybrids, that harness solar energy in the form of visible or near-UV light is of the highest importance.40
The first attempts aimed at using light to power artificial molecular machines involved the assembly–disassembly of host–guest complexes triggered by photoinduced electron-transfer processes.41 On the basis of the experience gained with these model systems, the bistable rotaxane 66+ (Fig. 6) was specifically designed42 to achieve photoinduced ring shuttling in solution.43 This compound has a modular structure; its ring component R is a π-electron-donating bis-p-phenylene[34]crown-10, whereas its dumbbell component is made of several covalently linked units. They are a Ru(II) polypyridine complex (P2+), a p-terphenyl-type rigid spacer (S), a 3,3′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium (A22+) and a 4,4′-bipyridinium (A12+) π-electron-accepting station, and a tetraarylmethane group as the terminal stopper (T). The Ru-based unit plays the dual role of a light-fueled power station and a stopper, whereas the mechanical switch consists of the two electron-accepting stations and the electron-donating macrocycle. Six PF6− ions are present as the counteranions of the positively charged rotaxane. The stable translational isomer of rotaxane 66+ is the one in which the R component encircles the A12+ unit, in keeping with the fact that this station is a better electron acceptor than A22+.
 Fig. 6  Structural formula of rotaxane 66+ and schematic representation of its working mechanism as an autonomous ‘four stroke’ molecular shuttle powered by visible light. 
The strategy devised in order to obtain the photoinduced shuttling movement of R between the two stations A12+ and A22+ is based on a ‘four stroke’ synchronised sequence of electron transfer and molecular rearrangement processes, as illustrated in Fig. 6.44 Light excitation of the photoactive unit P2+ (Fig. 6a, process 1) is followed by the transfer of an electron from this unit to A12+ (process 2) which competes with the intrinsic decay of the P2+ excited state (process 3). After the reduction of A12+, with the consequent ‘deactivation’ of this station, the ring moves (Fig. 6b, process 4) by 1.3 nm to encircle A22+, a step that is in competition with the back electron transfer from A1+ (still encircled by R) to the oxidised unit P3+ (process 5). Eventually, a back electron transfer from the ‘free’ reduced station A1+ to the oxidised unit P3+ (Fig. 6c, process 6) restores the electron acceptor power to this radical cationic station. As a consequence of the electronic reset, thermally activated back movement of the ring from A22+ to A12+ takes place (Fig. 6d, process 7).
Steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopic experiments complemented by electrochemical measurements in acetonitrile solution showed44 that the absorption of a visible photon by 66+ causes the occurrence of the forward and backward ring movement, that is, a full mechanical cycle according to the mechanism illustrated in Fig. 6. The somewhat disappointing quantum yield for shuttling (2%) is compensated by the fact that the investigated system gathers together the following features: (i) it is powered by visible light (in other words, sunlight); (ii) it exhibits autonomous behaviour, like motor proteins; (iii) it does not generate waste products; (iv) its operation can rely only on intramolecular processes, allowing in principle operation at the single-molecule level;45 (v) it can be driven at a frequency of about 1 kHz; (vi) it works in mild environmental conditions (i.e., fluid solution at ambient temperature); and (vii) it is stable for at least 103 cycles.
A thorough computational investigation on 66+ revealed46 that the rate limiting step for the shuttling motion (process 4 in Fig. 6) could be related to the detachment of the PF6− counteranions from the station that has to receive the ring (A22+). If such a station were not hindered by anions, the shuttling motion would be almost barrierless and occur with a time constant as fast as 20 ns at 300 K. Hence, the shuttling quantum yield of 66+ could be substantially improved by adopting weakly coordinating counteranions or by changing the solvent. The latter choice, however, would also affect the energetics and kinetics of the electron-transfer processes. Unfortunately, experiments in these directions are not easy because of difficulties related to counteranion exchange for 66+, and solubility issues. Systems related to 66+ in which the position of either the A12+ or A22+ station is exchanged with respect to the P2+ unit,47 a different Ru-based moiety is employed,48 or the photosensitiser is connected noncovalently to an electron-accepting station49,50 have also been investigated.
More recently, the second-generation molecular shuttle 74+ (Fig. 7) was designed and constructed.51 The system is composed of two devices: a bistable redox-driven molecular shuttle, and a module for photoinduced charge separation. In the stable translational isomer the electron-accepting ring R4+, which is confined in the region of the dumbbell delimited by the two stoppers T1 and T2, encircles the better electron-donor tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) station. The operation scheme of 74+ is similar to that of 66+ (Fig. 6): in solution, excitation of the porphyrin unit with visible light should cause an electron transfer to C60. Then, an electron shift from TTF to the oxidised porphyrin is expected to destabilise the original structure, causing the displacement of R4+ from the oxidised TTF unit to the dioxynaphthalene (DNP) station. Subsequent back electron transfer (from C60− to TTF+) and macrocycle replacement (from DNP to TTF) regenerate the starting isomer.
 Fig. 7  Structural formula of rotaxane 74+ designed to work as a photochemically driven molecular shuttle. 

Rotaxane
74+ is expected to exhibit better performance as a light-driven autonomous molecular shuttle compared with the first-generation compound 66+ for the following three reasons. First, by using a triad approach,22,52 a relatively long lived charge-separated state should be obtained with a high efficiency. Second, the electrostatic repulsion between the photo-oxidised TTF+ station and the R4+ ring is expected to speed up the displacement of the latter. Third, the hampering effect of the counteranions discussed for 66+ is not expected to be dramatic in the case of 74+ because the stations are originally uncharged.
Spectroscopic and voltammetric experiments revealed51 remarkable electronic interactions between the various units of 74+, pointing to the existence of folded conformations in solution. Interestingly, the TTF unit can be electrochemically oxidised only in a limited fraction of the rotaxane molecules; in these species, TTF oxidation causes the shuttling of the R4+ ring away from this station. Most likely, 74+ occurs as conformations in which the electroactive TTF unit is buried inside a complex molecular structure and is therefore protected against oxidation performed by an electric potential applied externally. Such behaviour limits the efficiency for the operation of 74+ as a redox-driven molecular shuttle. The possibility of oxidizing TTF by an electric potential generated internally through intramolecular photoinduced electron transfer is currently under investigation.
In general terms, these results indicate that, as the structural complexity increases, the overall properties of the system cannot be easily rationalised solely on the basis of the type and sequence of the functional units incorporated in the molecular framework—that is, its ‘primary’ structure. Higher-level conformational effects, which are reminiscent of those related to the secondary and tertiary structure of biomolecules,2 have to be taken into consideration. The comprehension of these effects constitutes a stimulating scientific problem, and a necessary step for the design of novel artificial molecular devices and machines.
3. Systems working on surfaces
Despite extensive efforts in the past decade,20c–f,22,53 the identification of viable strategies for depositing molecular machines onto solid supports has proven to be challenging. It is even more difficult to find reliable methods that allow full characterization of their state and the direct observation of the stimuli-induced motions on surfaces or other solid-state interfaces. The main problem, however, is to ensure that the mechanical switching properties observed in the solution phase are preserved in such environments.54–57
In this section we describe the two main strategies employed to anchor molecular shuttles on solid surfaces. Bistable rotaxanes embedded in polymer matrices,55,56,58,59 liquid crystals60 and gels61 have also been reported.
3.1. Langmuir–Blodgett films
The Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique constitutes an efficient means of transferring organised monolayers from the air–water interface onto a solid substrate.62 A series of investigations63,64 showed that cationic catenanes and rotaxanes such as 33+ (Fig. 5a) can be used to obtain ordered films on the air–water interface when the PF6− counterions are replaced by amphiphilic counterions such as the dihexadecylphosphate anion (DHP−).64 These anions align in a parallel manner at the interface, with the phosphate portion pointing toward the aqueous substrate. To balance this high negative charge density, a layer of cationic rotaxanes associates near the surface as an ordered, reproducible monolayer, possibly stabilised by stacking interactions between adjacent molecules. For instance, the 33+-DHP− films were transferred onto ITO supports for spectroscopic and electrochemical investigations. Reversible switching of the potential values for the reduction processes of the bipyridinium unit of 33+ upon cyclic exposure of the films to vapors of HCl and NH3 was observed.64 A comparison of the behaviour of the rotaxane-containing films with that of films containing its dumbbell-shaped component suggested that the switching process is mainly related to a rearrangement of the multilayer upon protonation-deprotonation of the ammonium centre. However, the occurrence of a ring shuttling motion in the case of the rotaxane-containing films could not be excluded. Nonetheless, the examined thin films may be useful for sensing purposes because they provide a reversible electrical output signal in response to acid–base input stimuli.
Amphiphilic bistable TTF-DNP rotaxanes such as 84+ were synthesised and investigated65 in order to obtain stable and well organised LB films (Fig. 8).66 The occurrence of ring shuttling in 84+ embedded in closely packed LB films on solid substrates, induced by chemical oxidation of the TTF station, was observed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).66a In XPS, the photoemission intensity of each element attenuates exponentially with the depth at which the electron is emitted. The switching behaviour was monitored by using XPS to track nitrogen, which is present solely in the moving macrocyclic component of the rotaxane. Upon oxidation of the rotaxane molecules in a silica-supported monolayer, the photoemission intensity for the nitrogen 1s electrons was significantly decreased with respect to the starting state. This observation, together with the results of quantitative data analyses and independent control experiments, confirmed that in the film the ring components move from the upper station (TTF) to the lower one (DNP) upon oxidation of the former (Fig. 8b).66
 Fig. 8  Structure formula of the amphiphilic TTF-DNP rotaxane 84+ (a) and scheme of the redox switching of its LB monolayer (b). 
3.2. Self-assembled monolayers
The formation of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on metallic gold is an effective yet simple method to attach molecules to surfaces.67 Rotaxanes with suitable functionalization have been extensively employed to prepare Au-SAMs.68 The first studies on mechanical shuttling in a SAM, however, were carried out on systems in which the molecular components became mechanically interlocked as a consequence of surface immobilization.69 In this setting the metal surface plays the dual role of a stopper and an interface (electrode).
A monolayer of the rotaxane 94+ (Fig. 9), consisting of an electron accepting cyclophane threaded on a molecular axle which includes an electron donating diiminobenzene unit and is stoppered by an adamantane moiety, was assembled on a gold electrode.69b The tetracationic ring, which is originally located on the diiminobenzene unit (Fig. 9a) by virtue of electron donor–acceptor interactions, is displaced towards the electrode upon one-electron reduction of its two bipyridinium units at −0.53 V versus the saturated calomel electrode (SCE), owing to disruption of the donor–acceptor interactions and electrostatic attraction to the electrode (Fig. 9b). Reoxidation of the reduced cyclophane at −0.33 V vs. SCE causes ring shuttling to the original diiminobenzene site.
 Fig. 9  The electrochemically driven ring shuttling of rotaxane 94+ incorporated into an Au-SAM. 
The positions of the tetracationic and dicationic (reduced) cyclophane rings and the shuttling rate constants (80 s−1 and 320 s−1 at 298 K for reduction- and reoxidation-induced processes, respectively) were determined by chronoamperometry and impedance measurements. Investigation of the temperature dependence of the shuttling rates showed69c that the reduction-induced shuttling is an energetically downhill process with no measurable activation barrier, whereas reoxidation-induced shuttling requires thermal activation. The lack of an energy barrier in the former case is in agreement with the fact that the shuttling is mainly driven by coulomb attraction of the still positively charged cyclophane towards the negatively polarised electrode. Therefore, ring shuttling does not need assistance by thermal energy, in contrast with the typical operation of molecular motors.20–23
Another clever approach involves the immobilization of bistable molecular shuttles containing a pyridine residue in the macrocyclic component onto an Au-SAM of 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid.70 The grafting is achieved because of the formation of hydrogen bonds between the pyridine unit of the rotaxane molecules and the carboxylic groups at the top of the SAM (see, e.g., Fig. 10). Electrochemically driven shuttling in one of these systems was recently shown to occur on the millisecond time scale by chronoamperometry.70b The redox-controlled mechanical switching in SAMs of disulfide-functionalised bistable TTF-DNP rotaxanes analogous to 84+ (Fig. 8a) was also extensively investigated.68a,b
 Fig. 10  (a) Structural formula of rotaxane 10 and its operation as a photocontrolled molecular shuttle. (b) Schematic representation of the photoinduced change of the hydrophobic–hydrophilic character of a gold surface covered with a SAM of rotaxane 10 and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (about 50% of the fumaramide units are isomerised in the photostationary state). 
4. Towards functional materials and devices
4.1. Switching surface properties
It is well known71 that changes in molecular properties of bistable species (e.g., photochromic compounds) mounted on surfaces can strongly affect surface macroscopic properties such as wettability. To this aim, depositing and operating molecular shuttles on surfaces is indeed a promising strategy.
In a pioneering study it was shown72 that light excitation of the bistable rotaxane 10 (Fig. 10a) hydrogen-bonded on an Au-SAM of 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (Fig. 10b) can cause the displacement of a small (ca. 1 µL) liquid droplet across the surface. The system comprises a ring that can move along an axle which contains a photoactive fumaramide (FUM) station and a tetrafluorosuccinimide (TFS) station. The former station has a high binding affinity for the ring, which can be switched off by photoisomerisation to the maleamide (MAL) isomeric form. Therefore, in the dark the ring surrounds the fumaramide station, but on light excitation it moves to surround the tetrafluorosuccinimide station (Fig. 10a). The shuttle movement is thus used to expose or conceal the fluorinated moiety of the dumbbell, thereby changing the surface tension (Fig. 10b). When an area next to the droplet of liquid is switched, the liquid is attracted to the irradiated zone and therefore moves across the surface. The collective action of a monolayer of these molecular shuttles causes a microliter droplet of diiodomethane to move for about one millimetre up to a 12° incline. Although this effect is not the result of a directed amplification of motion from the nano- to the macroscale, it is fascinating because a millimetre-size displacement is ultimately a consequence of submolecular motions in molecular machines. Liquid transportation using photo-responsive surfaces may prove useful for delivering analytes in lab-on-a-chip environments, or for performing chemical reactions on a tiny scale without reaction vessels by bringing individual drops containing different reactants together.
Also in the case of rotaxane 94+ (Fig. 9) the electrochemically driven translocation of the cyclophane along the axle enables reversible control the wetting properties of the surface and displacement of a water droplet, as revealed by in situ electrochemical-contact angle measurements.69b
4.2. Nanovalves
A macroscopic valve is a machine constructed by combining a controllable component that regulates the flow of gases or liquids with a reservoir which can also serve as a supporting platform for the movable element. Construction of such a device at the molecular scale requires the integration of a stable and inert nanocontainer with an appropriate moving part that can act as a gatekeeper to regulate the molecular transport in to and out of the container. The construction of functioning nanovalves73 can be useful for controlling drug delivery, signal transduction, nanofluidic systems, and sensors.
A recently investigated approach is based on the use of the mechanical motion of molecular shuttles to regulate the access to nanocontainers.16,74,75 A redox switchable TTF-DNP bistable rotaxane structurally similar to 84+ (Fig. 8a) was covalently attached to mesoporous silica nanoparticles. As shown schematically in Fig. 11, the silica nanopores can be closed and opened by moving the mechanically interlocked ring component of the rotaxane closer to and away from the pores' orifices, respectively.74 When the ring sits on the preferred TTF station, access to the interior of the nanoparticles is unrestricted and diffusion of the solute (a luminescent iridium complex) from the surrounding solution can occur. Chemically induced oxidation of the TTF unit results in a shuttling of the ring closer to the solid surface, thereby blocking the access to the pores and trapping any solute molecules inside. Back reduction of the TTF unit reverses the mechanical motion, thus releasing the guest molecules and returning the system to its initial state. More recently, it has been shown that the properties of these rotaxane-based valves can be fine tuned by changing the length of the linkers between the surface and the rotaxane molecules and the location of the movable components on the nanoparticles.75a pH-Driven75b and enzyme-responsive75c nanovalves have also been constructed.
 Fig. 11  Operation scheme of a molecular valve based on redox-switchable rotaxanes attached to silica nanopores. 
4.3. Microcantilever bending by molecular muscles
As discussed in section 2.1 an exciting development in the field of molecular machines has been the construction of molecular muscles based on rotaxane dimer topology which can undergo contraction and stretching movements in solution.15,35,36 Cumulative nanoscale movements within surface-bound molecular muscles based on rotaxanes have been harnessed to perform large-scale mechanical work.
The investigated system76 consists of the palindromic bistable rotaxane 118+ with two rings and four stations, namely two TTF and two oxynaphthalene (ONP) moieties (Fig. 12). Tethers attached to each ring anchor the whole rotaxane system as a SAM to a gold surface deposited on silicon microcantilever beams. Each microcantilever (500 × 100 × 1 µm) is covered with approximately 6 billion randomly oriented rotaxane molecules. The setup was then inserted into a fluid cell. Oxidation of the ring-preferred TTF station with iron(III) perchlorate results in shuttling of the two rings onto the ONP stations, significantly shortening the inter-ring separation (from 4.2 to 1.4 nm). This change in the inter-ring distance induces a tensile stress on the gold surface of the microcantilever which causes an upward bending of the beam by about 35 nm. Under the same conditions a monolayer of the dumbbell alone is inactive. Back reduction of the TTF station with ascorbic acid returns the cantilever to its original position. The process can be repeated over several cycles, albeit with gradually decreasing amplitude. Indeed, this important experiment demonstrates the possibility of harnessing cumulative nanoscale movements within surface-bound molecular shuttles to perform larger-scale mechanical work.77
 Fig. 12  A molecular muscle based on a SAM of the palindromic rotaxane 118+ (a) anchored on the gold surface of microcantilever beams (b). 
4.4. Solid-state electronic circuits
The redox switching behaviour observed for solid-supported thin films of bistable catenanes63 and rotaxanes66,68a,b (see section 3) encouraged attempts to incorporate such molecules in electrically addressable solid-state devices.78
A Langmuir monolayer of the TTF-DNP rotaxane 124+ (Fig. 13a) was transferred onto a photolithographically patterned polycrystalline silicon electrode.79 The patterning was such that the film was deposited along several parallel lines of poly-Si on the electrode. A second set of orthogonally oriented wires was then deposited on top of the first set such that a ‘crossbar’ architecture is obtained. This second set of electrodes consisted of a 5 nm thick layer of Ti, followed by a 100 nm thick layer of Al. By this approach, an array of junctions, each one addressable individually, was constructed (Fig. 13b). In the first setup the wire electrodes were a few µm wide, but the scalability of the fabrication method allowed the construction of wires less than 100 nm in width, yielding junctions with areas of 0.005 to 0.01 µm2 and containing about 5000 rotaxane molecules.78
 Fig. 13  Structural formula of bistable rotaxane 124+ (a) and schematic representation of solid-state junctions consisting of a monolayer of 124+ sandwiched between poly-Si and Ti-Al crossbar electrodes (b). 
The mechanism for conduction is by electron tunneling through the single-molecule thick layer between the junction electrodes. Thus, any change in the electronic characteristics of the inter-electrode medium is expected to affect the tunneling efficiency and change the resistance of the junction. It should be noticed that such devices are conductors, not capacitors. Experiments were carried out by applying a series of voltage pulses (between +2.0 and −2.0 V) and reading, after each pulse, current through the device at a small voltage (between +0.2 and −0.2 V) that does not affect switching. The current(read)–voltage(write) curve displays a highly hysteretic profile, making the rotaxane junction device interesting for potential use in random access memory (RAM) storage.
The current–voltage curve was interpreted on the basis of the mechanism illustrated in Fig. 14, which is derived from the behaviour of the same rotaxane in solution.58 Co-conformation A is the ‘switch open’ state and co-conformation D the ‘switch closed’ state of the device. When the TTF unit of 124+ is oxidised (+2 V, state B), a coulombic repulsion inside the tetracationic cyclophane component is generated. This results in the displacement of the latter and formation of state C in which the ring encircles the DNP unit (note that, in solution at +2 V vs. SCE, TTF undergoes two-electron oxidation and DNP is also oxidised65). When the voltage is reduced to near-zero bias, a metastable state D is obtained which, however, does not return to state A (see also Fig. 4). The initial co-conformation can in fact be restored only via states E and F in which the bipyridinium units of the cyclophane component are reduced (in solution, at the potential value used, −2 V, each bipyridinium unit undergoes two-electron reduction65). Most likely, the reduction of the bipyridinium units weakens the charge-transfer interaction with the DNP unit, thereby decreasing the barrier that hinders the replacement of the cyclophane on the TTF site. An analogous mechanism was used to interpret the behaviour of solid-state devices containing other TTF-based bistable interlocked molecules.78–80 The metastable state corresponding to co-conformation D (Fig. 14) was in fact observed for a number of different bistable rotaxanes and catenanes in a variety of environments (solution, self-assembled monolayer, solid-state polymer matrix).56
 Fig. 14  Operation mechanism of solid-state molecular electronic switching devices based on bistable molecular shuttles like 124+. 
More recently, by use of the same paradigms described above, a molecular electronic memory with an amazingly high density of 1011 bits cm−2 was constructed by sandwiching a monolayer of the bistable rotaxane 84+ (Fig. 8a) between arrays of nanoelectrodes in a crossbar arrangement.81 The realization of this device relies on a novel method for producing ultra-dense, highly aligned arrays and crossbars of metal or semiconductor nanowires with high aspect ratios.82 It was estimated that each junction acting as a memory element consists of approximately 100 rotaxane molecules. For practical reasons, only 128 (16 × 8 contacts) of the 160000 memory cells (400 × 400 nanowires) contained in the circuit were tested.81 The measurements showed that 25% of the tested cells displayed good and reproducible switching, whereas 35% failed because of bad contacts or shorts, and the remaining 40% showed poor switching. This work is a compelling demonstration that the combination of top-down and bottom-up nanofabrication methods can lead to outstanding technological achievements. However, several aspects—such as stability, reliability and ease of fabrication—need to be optimised before these systems can find real industrial applications.83
5. Summary and outlook
Investigations on molecular shuttles in solution are of fundamental importance to understand their operation mechanisms. It seems reasonable, however, that before such systems can find applications in many fields of technology, they have to be interfaced with the macroscopic world by ordering them in some way so that they can behave coherently and can be addressed in space. Viable possibilities include deposition on surfaces, incorporation into polymers, organization at interfaces, or immobilization into membranes or porous materials.
The recent achievements in this direction, some of which have been reviewed here, seem to indicate that useful materials and devices based on artificial molecular machines will see the light in the not too distant future. For example, the construction of artificial muscles based on polymeric materials capable of amplifying contraction–extension nanoscale motions (Fig. 15) is a task that can nowadays be undertaken. Molecular shuttles could also be employed for sensing and processing chemical information,59 and as components of electrochromic materials.58 Other stimulating challenges involve the use of molecular machines for directing flows in microfluidic networks,84 operating drug delivery systems,16,73 transporting and sorting nanoobjects,85 and controlling chemical86 and biochemical87 processes. To this aim, collaborative efforts from experts in different disciplines such as chemistry, physics, materials science and engineering—and possibly biology and medicine—are mandatory. Certainly, many problems related to the complex synthesis and operation of these systems, together with issues such as stability and reproducibility, remain to be solved.
 Fig. 15  Amplification of molecular shuttling motions in a rotaxane-based switchable polymer. 
Apart from foreseeable applications related to the development of nanotechnology,88 investigations on molecular machines in heterogeneous environments are important to increase the basic understanding of the processes that determine the behaviour of nanoscale objects, as well as to develop reliable theoretical models. This research has also the important merit of stimulating the ingenuity of chemists, thereby conveying new incitements to chemistry as a scientific discipline.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Ministero dell'Università e della Ricerca (PRIN 2006034123_003) and Università di Bologna is gratefully acknowledged.
References

  (a) 
            R. A. L. Jones, Soft Machines, Nanotechnology and Life, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            D. S. Goodsell, Bionanotechnology – Lessons from Nature, Wiley, Hoboken,  2004 Search PubMed .
S. Mann, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2–17 CrossRef .
S. Shinkai, T. Nakaji, T. Ogawa, K. Shigematsu and O. Manabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 111 CrossRef .
J. Frey, C. Tock, J.-P. Collin, V. Heitz and J.-P. Sauvage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4592 CrossRef CAS .
H. Iwamura and K. Mislow, Acc. Chem. Res., 1988, 21, 175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shinkai, M. Ikeda, A. Sugasaki and M. Takeuchi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 494 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Bedard and J. S. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10662 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Shima, F. Hampel and J. A. Gladysz, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5537 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. A. Garcia-Garibay, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2005, 102, 10771 CrossRef CAS .
N. Koga, Y. Kawada and H. Iwamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 5498 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kelly, M. C. Bowyer, K. V. Bhaskar, D. Bebbington, A. Garcia, F. Lang, M.-H. Kim and M. P. Jette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 3657 CrossRef CAS .
T. Muraoka, K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Nature, 2006, 440, 512 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kelly, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 514 CrossRef CAS .

Molecular Switches, ed. B. L. Feringa, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. D. Badjic, V. Balzani, A. Credi, S. Silvi and J. F. Stoddart, Science, 2004, 303, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Jiménez-Molero, C. Dietrich-Buchecker and J.-P. Sauvage, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3284 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, K. C.-F. Leug, T. D. Nguyen, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 685 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thordarson, E. J. A. Bijsterveld, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Nature, 2003, 424, 915 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Sherman and N. C. Seeman, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1203 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Paxton, A. Sen and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Eur. J., 2005, 11, 6462 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.

  (a) V. Balzani, A. Credi, F. M. Raymo and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3348 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. C. Simmel and W. U. Dittmer, Small, 2005, 1, 284 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. S. Kottas, L. I. Clarke, D. Horinek and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1281 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1377 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, Nature Nanotech., 2006, 1, 25 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) E. R. Kay, D. A. Leigh and F. Zerbetto, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 72 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) J. Bath and A. J. Turberfield, Nature Nanotech., 2007, 2, 275 Search PubMed ; 
  (h) B. Champin, P. Mobian and J.-P. Sauvage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 358 RSC ; 
  (i) A. Mateo-Alonso, D. M. Guldi, F. Paolucci and M. Prato, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8120 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
Acc. Chem. Res.,  2001, 34(6): special issue on Molecular Machines, ed. J.F. Stoddart Search PubMed; 
  (b) 
Struct. Bond.,  2001, 99: special volume on Molecular Machines and Motors, ed. J.-P. Sauvage Search PubMed; 
  (c) 
Top. Curr. Chem.,  2005, 262: special volume on Molecular Machines, ed. T.R. Kelly Search PubMed; 
  (d) 
Adv. Funct. Mater.,  2007, 17(5): special issue on Molecular Machines and Switches, eds. A. Credi and H. Tian Search PubMed.

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Molecular Devices and Machines – Concepts and Perspectives for the Nanoworld, 2nd Ed., Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .

Molecular Motors, ed. M. Schliwa, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .

Catenanes, Rotaxanes and Knots, eds. J.-P. Sauvage and C. Dietrich-Buchecker, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. C. T. Fyfe and J. F. Stoddart, Acc. Chem. Res., 1997, 30, 393 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. L. Anelli, N. Spencer and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 5131 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P. L. Anelli, M. Asakawa, P. R. Ashton, R. A. Bissell, G. Clavier, R. Górski, A. E. Kaifer, S. J. Langford, G. Mattersteig, S. Menzer, D. Philp, A. M. Z. Slawin, N. Spencer, J. F. Stoddart, M. S. Tolley and D. J. Williams, Chem. Eur. J., 1997, 3, 1113 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Bissell, E. Córdova, A. E. Kaifer and J. F. Stoddart, Nature, 1994, 369, 133 CrossRef .

  (a) For recent examples see:  F. Durola and J.-P. Sauvage, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3537 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Zhu, X. Ma, F. Ji, Q. Wang and H. Tian, Chem. Eur. J., 2007, 13, 9216 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. Zhou, J. Li, X. He, C. Li, J. Lv, Y. Li, S. Wang, H. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 754 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. E. Dawson, S. Maniam, S. F. Lincoln and C. J. Easton, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 1814 RSC ; 
  (e) Y.-L. Zhao, W. R. Dichtel, A. Trabolsi, S. Saha, I. Aprahamian and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11294 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M. J. Barrell, D. A. Leigh, P. J. Lusby and A. M. Z. Slawin, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8036 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) T. Umehara, H. Kawai, K. Fujiwara and T. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13981 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Chatterjee, E. R. Kay and D. A. Leigh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4058 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Jiang, J. Okano, A. Orita and J. Otera, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N.-C. Chen, C.-C. Lai, Y.-H. Liu, S.-M. Peng and S.-H. Chiu, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 2904 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) V. Serreli, C.-F. Lee, E. R. Kay and D. A. Leigh, Nature, 2007, 445, 523 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Hirose, Y. Shiba, K. Ishibashi, Y. Doi and Y. Tobe, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3427 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Astumian and P. Hänggi, Phys. Today, 2002, 55, 33 CrossRef .
P. R. Ashton, R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, I. Baxter, A. Credi, M. C. T. Fyfe, M. T. Gandolfi, M. Gómez-López, M.-V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Piersanti, N. Spencer, J. F. Stoddart, M. Venturi, A. J. P. White and D. J. Williams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 11932 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garaudée, S. Silvi, M. Venturi, A. Credi, A. H. Flood and J. F. Stoddart, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 2145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, K. C.-F. Leung, D. Benitez, J.-Y. Han, S. J. Cantrill, L. Fang and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7470 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Dawson, S. F. Lincoln and C. J. Easton, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3980 RSC .
V. Balzani, M. Clemente-Léon, A. Credi, J. N. Lowe, J. Badjić, J. F. Stoddart and D. J. Williams, Chem. Eur. J., 2003, 9, 5348 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Badjic, C. M. Ronconi, J. F. Stoddart, V. Balzani, S. Silvi and A. Credi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1489 CrossRef CAS .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, A. Credi, M. T. Gandolfi and M. Venturi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 445 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Ashton, R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, A. Credi, R. Dress, E. Ishow, C. J. Kleverlaan, O. Kocian, J. A. Preece, N. Spencer, J. F. Stoddart, M. Venturi and S. Wenger, Chem. Eur. J., 2000, 6, 3558 CrossRef .
For a related example of a photochemically driven molecular shuttle, see:   A. M. Brouwer, C. Frochot, F. G. Gatti, D. A. Leigh, L. Mottier, F. Paolucci, S. Roffia and G. W. H. Wurpel, Science, 2001, 291, 2124 Search PubMed .
V. Balzani, M. Clemente-León, A. Credi, B. Ferrer, M. Venturi, A. H. Flood and J. F. Stoddart, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2006, 103, 1178 CrossRef CAS .
Single-molecule imaging of rotaxanes immobilised on glass substrates, evidencing the thermally driven rotation of the ring around the axle, has recently been reported:   D. Nishimura, Y. Takashima, H. Aoki, T. Takahashi, H. Yamaguchi, S. Ito and A. Harada, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6077 Search PubMed .
P. Raiteri, G. Bussi, C. S. Cucinotta, A. Credi, J. F. Stoddart and M. Parrinello, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3536 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, M. Clemente-León, A. Credi, M. Semeraro, M. Venturi, H.-R. Tseng, S. Wenger, S. Saha and J. F. Stoddart, Aust. J. Chem., 2006, 59, 193 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. E. Davidson, S. J. Loeb, P. Passaniti, S. Silvi and A. Credi, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 3233 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rogez, B. Ferrer Ribera, A. Credi, R. Ballardini, M. T. Gandolfi, V. Balzani, Y. Liu, B. H. Northrop and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4633 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ferrer, G. Rogez, A. Credi, R. Ballardini, M. T. Gandolfi, V. Balzani, Y. Liu, H.-R. Tseng and J. F. Stoddart, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2006, 103, 18411 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, A. H. Flood, J. F. Stoddart, S. Impellizzeri, S. Silvi, M. Venturi and A. Credi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12159 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 202 CrossRef .
T. Y. Huang, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 226 CAS .
L. Raehm, J.-M. Kern, J.-P. Sauvage, C. Hamann, S. Palacin and J.-P. Bourgoin, Chem. Eur. J., 2002, 8, 2153 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. H. Flood, A. J. Peters, S. A. Vignon, D. W. Steuerman, H.-R. Tseng, S. Kang, J. R. Heath and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Eur. J., 2004, 10, 6558 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. W. Choi, A. H. Flood, D. W. Steuerman, S. Nygaard, A. B. Braunschweig, N. N. P. Moonen, B. W. Laursen, Y. Luo, E. DeIonno, A. J. Peters, J. O. Jeppesen, K. Xu, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 261 CrossRef CAS .
Unexpected, potentially useful properties inherent to surface deposition of rotaxanes have also been observed. See:   J.-F. Moulin, J. C. Kengne, R. Kshirsagar, M. Cavallini, F. Biscarini, S. Leon, F. Zerbetto, G. Bottari and D. A. Leigh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 526 Search PubMed .
D. W. Steuerman, H.-R. Tseng, A. J. Peters, A. H. Flood, J. O. Jeppesen, K. A. Nielsen, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6486 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Leigh, M. A. F. Morales, E. M. Pérez, J. K. Y. Wong, C. G. Saiz, A. M. Z. Slawin, A. J. Carmichael, D. M. Haddleton, A. M. Brouwer, W. J. Buma, G. W. H. Wurpel, S. Leon and F. Zerbetto, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3062 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) I. Aprahamian, T. Yasuda, T. Ikeda, S. Saha, W. R. Dichtel, K. Isoda, T. Kato and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4675 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Kidowaki, T. Nakajima, J. Araki, A. Inomata, H. Ishibashi and K. Ito, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6859 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. L. Zhu, C. Ma, F. Y. Ji, Q. C. Wang and H. Tian, Chem. Eur. J., 2007, 13, 9216 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y.-L. Zhao, I. Aprahamian, A. Trabolsi, N. Erina and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6348 CrossRef CAS .

          M. C. Petty, Langmuir-Blodgett Films – An Introduction, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1996 Search PubMed .
M. Asakawa, M. Higuchi, G. Mattersteig, T. Nakamura, A. R. Pease, F. M. Raymo, T. Shimidzu and J. F. Stoddart, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1099 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.
M. Clemente-León, A. Credi, M.-V. Martínez-Díaz, C. Mingotaud and J. F. Stoddart, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1291 CrossRef CAS .
H.-R. Tseng, S. A. Vignon, P. C. Celestre, J. Perkins, J. O. Jeppesen, A. Di Fabio, R. Ballardini, M. T. Gandolfi, M. Venturi, V. Balzani and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Eur. J., 2004, 10, 155 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. J. Huang, H.-R. Tseng, L. Sha, W. Lu, B. Brough, A. H. Flood, B.-D. Yu, P. C. Celestre, J. P. Chang, J. F. Stoddart and C.-M. Ho, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2065 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. S. Jang, Y. H. Jang, Y.-H. Kim, W. A. Goddard III, J. W. Choi, J. R. Heath, B. W. Laursen, A. H. Flood, J. F. Stoddart, K. Nørgaard and T. Bjørnholm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14804 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Guo, Y. Zhou, M. Feng, Y. Xu, D. Zhang, H. Gao, Q. Fan and D. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 763 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Ulman, Characterization of Organic Thin Films, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston,  1995 Search PubMed .

  (a) N. Weber, C. Hamann, J.-M. Kern and J.-P. Sauvage, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 6780 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H.-R. Tseng, D. Wu, N. Fang, X. Zhang and J. F. Stoddart, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 111 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. S. Jang, Y. H. Jang, Y.-H. Kim, W. A. Goddard III, A. H. Flood, B. W. Laursen, H.-R. Tseng, J. F. Stoddart, J. O. Jeppesen, J. W. Choi, D. W. Steuerman, E. DeIonno and J. R. Heath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1563 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. M. Whelan, F. Gatti, D. A. Leigh, S. Rapino, F. Zerbetto and P. Rudolf, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17076 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) K. Nikitin, E. Lestini, M. Lazzari, S. Altobello and D. Fitzmaurice, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12147 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) I. Willner, V. Pardo-Yssar, E. Katz and K. T. Ranjit, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 497, 172 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Katz, O. Lioubashevsky and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15520 CAS ; 
  (c) E. Katz, R. Baron, I. Willner, N. Richke and R. D. Levine, ChemPhysChem., 2005, 6, 2179 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Cecchet, P. Rudolf, S. Rapino, M. Margotti, F. Paolucci, J. Baggerman, A. M. Brouwer, E. R. Kay, J. K. Y. Wong and D. A. Leigh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 15192 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Fioravanti, N. Haraszkiewicz, E. R. Kay, S. M. Mendoza, C. Bruno, M. Marcaccio, P. G. Wiering, F. Paolucci, P. Rudolf, A. M. Brouwer and D. A. Leigh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2593 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Rosario, D. Gust, M. Hayes, F. Jahnke, J. Springer and A. A. Garcia, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 8062 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S.-K. Oh, M. Nakagawa and K. Ichimura, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2262 RSC ; 
  (c) R. Rosario, D. Gust, A. A. Garcia, M. Hayes, J. L. Taraci, T. Clement, J. W. Dailey and S. T. Picraux, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12640 CrossRef CAS .
J. Berna, D. A. Leigh, M. Lubomska, S. M. Mendoza, E. M. Pérez, P. Rudolf, G. Teobaldi and F. Zerbetto, Nature Mater., 2005, 4, 704 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Kocer, M. Walko, W. Meijberg and B. L. Feringa, Science, 2005, 309, 755 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Vögtle, L. De Cola and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6589 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Nguyen, H.-R. Tseng, P. C. Celestre, A. H. Flood, Y. Liu, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2005, 102, 10029 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. D. Nguyen, Y. Liu, S. Saha, K. C.-F. Leug, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 626 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. D. Nguyen, K. C.-F. Leug, M. Liong, C. D. Pentecost, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 3363 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Patel, S. Angelos, W. R. Dichtel, A. Coskun, Y. W. Yang, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2382 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. J. Huang, B. Brough, C.-M. Ho, Y. Liu, A. H. Flood, P. A. Bonvallet, H.-R. Tseng, J. F. Stoddart, M. Ballaer and S. Magonov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5391 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, A. H. Flood, P. A. Bonvallet, S. A. Vignon, B. H. Northrop, H.-R. Tseng, J. A. Jeppesen, T. J. Huang, B. Brough, M. Ballaer, S. Magonov, S. D. Solares, W. A. Goddard III, C.-M. Ho and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9745 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) For recent examples of amplification of molecular motions in systems different than rotaxanes, see:   R. Eelkema, M. M. Pollard, N. Katsonis, J. Vicario, D. J. Broer and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14397 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) V. Ferri, M. Elbing, G. Pace, M. D. Dickey, M. Zharnikov, P. Samorì, M. Mayor and M. A. Rampi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3407 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) V. Percec, J. G. Rudick, M. Peterca and P. A. Heiney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7503 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. P. Collier, G. Mattersteig, E. W. Wong, Y. Luo, K. Beverly, J. Sampaio, F. M. Raymo, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Science, 2000, 289, 1172 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. P. Collier, J. O. Jeppesen, Y. Luo, J. Perkins, E. W. Wong, J. R. Heath and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12632 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Luo, C. P. Collier, J. O. Jeppesen, K. A. Nielsen, E. Delonno, G. Ho, J. Perkins, H.-R. Tseng, T. Yamamoto, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 519 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. R. Pease, J. O. Jeppesen, J. F. Stoddart, Y. Luo, C. P. Collier and J. R. Heath, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 433 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. R. Stewart, D. A. A. Ohlberg, P. A. Beck, Y. Chen, R. S. Williams, J. O. Jeppesen, K. A. Nielsen and J. F. Stoddart, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 133 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Green, J. W. Choi, A. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, E. Johnston-Halperin, E. DeIonno, Y. Luo, B. A. Sheriff, K. Xu, Y. S. Shin, H.-R. Tseng, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Nature, 2007, 445, 414 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Melosh, A. Boukai, F. Diana, B. Gerardot, A. Badolato, P. M. Petroff and J. R. Heath, Science, 2003, 300, 112 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ball, Nature, 2007, 445, 362 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Bachand, S. B. Rivera, A. Carroll-Portillo, H. Hess and M. Bachand, Small, 2006, 2, 381 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. L. van den Heuvel, M. P. de Graaff and C. Dekker, Science, 2006, 312, 910 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pijper and B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3693 CrossRef .
D. W. Wendell, J. Patti and C. D. Montemagno, Small, 2006, 2, 1324 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. L. van den Heuvel and C. Dekker, Science, 2007, 317, 333 CrossRef .

Footnotes† In consideration of the complex chemical formula of the species examined in this paper, we will make use of cartoons—such as those shown in Fig. 1—that allow a straightforward representation from topological, structural, and functional viewpoints. However, these illustrations can be somewhat misleading because they give the impression that rotaxanes are made of rigid molecular components, which is not the case for the vast majority of the systems reported so far. However, in order to obtain clear-cut mechanical movements the molecular components should exhibit at least some stiffness. As will be evidenced by the presented examples, this feature for molecular machines is most commonly fulfilled by utilizing molecular components that possess rigid subunits in their structures.‡ It is interesting to note that the dumbbell-shaped component of a molecular shuttle restricts the directional freedom of the moving ring, thereby playing a role similar to that of the polymer track for linear motor proteins.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
Serena Silvi	Serena Silvi was born in 1978. She received her “Laurea” in Chemistry in 2002 from the University of Bologna, where she also earned her Ph.D. in 2006 under the supervision of Professor Alberto Credi. In 2005 she spent a research period in the laboratory of Professor Angel E. Kaifer at the University of Miami, working on cucurbituril-based supramolecular species. In 2008 she became lecturer at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Bologna. Her research focuses on the design of artificial molecular machines and the investigation of their photochemical, photophysical and electrochemical behaviour in solution.
Margherita Venturi	Margherita Venturi is Professor of Chemistry at the University of Bologna, Italy. From 1972 to 1991 she worked at the National Research Council of Bologna where she mainly studied, by means of pulsed and continuous radiolytic techniques, the electron-transfer processes involved in model systems for the conversion of solar energy. In 1992 she moved to the group of Prof. Balzani, where she is still now. Her present research interests are in the field of supramolecular photochemistry and electrochemistry. She is co-author of more than 170 publications in international journals, including several reviews and a monograph entitled “Molecular Devices and Machines”.
Alberto Credi	Alberto Credi was born in 1970. He received his “Laurea” (1994) from the University of Bologna where, after a research period in the United States, he also earned his Ph.D. (1999). He is currently associate professor of chemistry at his Alma Mater. He received several scientific awards and co-authored more than 150 scientific papers in the fields of supramolecular chemistry, molecular devices, photochemistry and electrochemistry. He is the co-author of a monograph entitled “Molecular Devices and Machines”, and of a handbook of photochemistry.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the intercomponent motions that can occur in a rotaxane: ring shuttling (a) and rotation (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Operation of a two-station rotaxane as a degenerate molecular shuttle. (b) Idealised representation of the potential energy of the system as a function of the position of the ring relative to the axle. The number of circles in each potential well reflects the relative population of the corresponding co-conformation in a statistically significant ensemble.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structural formulae of two-station rotaxanes that behave as a degenerate molecular shuttle (a) and a non-degenerate controllable molecular shuttle (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic operation of a two-station rotaxane as a controllable molecular shuttle, and idealised representation of the potential energy of the system as a function of the position of the ring relative to the axle upon switching off and on station A. The number of dots in each position reflects the relative population of the corresponding co-conformation in a statistically significant ensemble. Structures (a) and (c) correspond to equilibrium states, whereas (b) and (d) are metastable states. An alternative approach would be to modify station B through an external stimulus in order to make it a stronger recognition site compared to station A.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structural formulae and operation of molecular shuttle 33+ (a), muscle 46+ (b) and lift 59+ (c) by acid–base inputs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structural formula of rotaxane 66+ and schematic representation of its working mechanism as an autonomous ‘four stroke’ molecular shuttle powered by visible light.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structural formula of rotaxane 74+ designed to work as a photochemically driven molecular shuttle.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure formula of the amphiphilic TTF-DNP rotaxane 84+ (a) and scheme of the redox switching of its LB monolayer (b).	 

 	Fig. 9  The electrochemically driven ring shuttling of rotaxane 94+ incorporated into an Au-SAM.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Structural formula of rotaxane 10 and its operation as a photocontrolled molecular shuttle. (b) Schematic representation of the photoinduced change of the hydrophobic–hydrophilic character of a gold surface covered with a SAM of rotaxane 10 and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (about 50% of the fumaramide units are isomerised in the photostationary state).	 

 	Fig. 11  Operation scheme of a molecular valve based on redox-switchable rotaxanes attached to silica nanopores.	 

 	Fig. 12  A molecular muscle based on a SAM of the palindromic rotaxane 118+ (a) anchored on the gold surface of microcantilever beams (b).	 

 	Fig. 13  Structural formula of bistable rotaxane 124+ (a) and schematic representation of solid-state junctions consisting of a monolayer of 124+ sandwiched between poly-Si and Ti-Al crossbar electrodes (b).	 

 	Fig. 14  Operation mechanism of solid-state molecular electronic switching devices based on bistable molecular shuttles like 124+.	 

 	Fig. 15  Amplification of molecular shuttling motions in a rotaxane-based switchable polymer.	 
Footnotes
† In consideration of the complex chemical formula of the species examined in this paper, we will make use of cartoons—such as those shown in Fig. 1—that allow a straightforward representation from topological, structural, and functional viewpoints. However, these illustrations can be somewhat misleading because they give the impression that rotaxanes are made of rigid molecular components, which is not the case for the vast majority of the systems reported so far. However, in order to obtain clear-cut mechanical movements the molecular components should exhibit at least some stiffness. As will be evidenced by the presented examples, this feature for molecular machines is most commonly fulfilled by utilizing molecular components that possess rigid subunits in their structures.
‡ It is interesting to note that the dumbbell-shaped component of a molecular shuttle restricts the directional freedom of the moving ring, thereby playing a role similar to that of the polymer track for linear motor proteins.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
