Phthalocyanines : old dyes , new materials. Putting color in nanotechnology  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B614234F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B614234F
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2007, 2000-2015Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhthalocyanines: old dyes, new materials. Putting color in nanotechnology

        
          
            Gema 
            de la Torre
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christian G. 
            Claessens
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tomás 
            Torres
          
          
        
      *
      Departamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: tomas.torres@uam.es;  Fax: +34-91-4973966;   Tel: +34-91-4974151
Received 
       (in Cambridge, UK) 
      2nd October 2006
    , Accepted 24th November 2006First published on 13th December 2006AbstractPhthalocyanines are versatile building blocks for fabricating materials at the nanometer scale. These colored macrocycles exhibit fascinating physical properties which arise from their delocalized π-electronic structure. This article describes why these molecules are targets for different scientific purposes and technological applications.Gema de la TorreDr Gema de la Torre was born in Madrid, Spain, in 1969. She studied Chemistry at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM) and obtained her PhD in 1998 at the same University, working on the chemistry of phthalocyanines under the supervision of Professor T. Torres. Following two one-year postdoctoral stays with Professor W. Blau (Trinity College, Dublin, 2000–2001), working on the covalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes, and Professor N. Martín (Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 2001–2002), working on porphyrin–fullerene ensembles, she joined Professor T. Torres' group at UAM as Assistant Professor. Her current research interests are the synthesis, photo-physical and nonlinear optical properties of new phthalocyanine-based materials, including phthalocyanine–SWNT ensembles.Christian G. ClaessensChristian G. Claessens Born in Valenciennes, France, he graduated from the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Lyon, in 1990. He obtained his MSc in 1991 in the same Grande Ecole under the supervision of Prof. André Collet and Prof. Joëlle Vidal working on the N-amination of chiral secondary amines with N-methoxycarbonyloxaziridine. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Birmingham (UK) in February 1997 under the supervision of Prof. J. Fraser Stoddart working on the self-assembly and self-organization of π–π interacting compounds. He then joined Prof. André Collet's research group and worked on the synthesis and separation of the enantiomers of CHFClBr. At the end of 1997, he joined Prof. Tomás Torres' group in the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid as a Marie Curie research fellow. After a four years period as a Ramon y Cajal fellow he holds now an assistant professorship in the same research group. His main research interests include the synthesis, supramolecular aspects and nanotechnological applications of subphthalocyanines.Tomás TorresProf. Tomás Torres was born in Madrid. He is currently Full Professor and Head of the Department of Organic Chemistry at the Autonoma University of Madrid (UAM). He received his PhD (1978) at the same University, working at the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) in Madrid (Prof. Fariña). After two years (1978–1980) at the Department of Organic Chemistry and Spectroscopy of the Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, in Martinsried near Munich (Germany, Prof. Dr W. Schaefer) as a Max-Planck Society postdoctoral fellow, he joined (1981–1985) a private company, Abello/Merck, Sharp and Dohme, as Senior Researcher, in Madrid. In 1985 he was appointed to the staff of the Autónoma University of Madrid as an Associated Professor. In addition to various aspects of synthetic, heterocyclic and supramolecular chemistry, his current research interests include the synthesis of low-symmetry phthalocyanines and the preparation and study of the photophysical and nonlinear optical properties of molecular materials based on phthalocyanines and related compounds. Torres' Group at Madrid is currently exploring several areas of possible application including organic and hybrids solar cells and other phthalocyanine-based molecular devices. Prof. Torres is author or co-author of ca. 250 papers, reviews and patents. In 2001 he was distinguished as a Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). He has recently been awarded the JANSSEN CILAG prize for Organic Chemistry 2005 by the Royal Spanish Society of Chemistry.
Introduction
Phthalocyanines (Pcs)1 (Fig. 1) and related macrocycles have drawn considerable attention as molecular materials that give rise to outstanding electronic and optical properties.2,3 These properties arise from their electronic delocalization, and make these compounds applicable in different fields of materials science and particularly promising as building blocks in nanotechnology.4 In fact, phthalocyanines have been successfully incorporated as active components of semiconductor and electrochromic devices, information storage systems and liquid-crystal color displays, among others.
 Fig. 1  Metallophthalocyanine structure. 
The increasing interest in phthalocyanines during the last decade is clearly represented by the number of hits in the scientific literature dealing with this type of compounds (Chart 1). It is worth mentioning that 20% of the ca. 9000 documents published in the last five years are patents.
 Chart 1  Number of scientific documents on phthalocyanines. 
In this feature article, we first aim to give an overview of the most conventional aspects of the phthalocyanine field, such as their electrical and magnetic behavior and optical properties. Subsequently, we will focus on the state of the art in this area; starting from the single molecule investigations, essential to understand the inherent electronic structure of phthalocyanines, and going through the incorporation of Pc molecules into macromolecular structures, we will give outstanding examples of supramolecular architectures constructed with phthalocyanine building blocks, where a fine control of the macrocyclic arrangement is achieved. Finally, we will describe the formation of “nanostructures”, either mono-, bi- or three-dimensional, which are the basis for the control of the properties of phthalocyanines in practical devices. Some examples of these Pc-devices (solar cells, sensors, transistors, …) are also given at the end of the article, thus showing how basic research in this field may lead to practical applications.
General aspects
Phthalocyanines are planar aromatic macrocycles (Fig. 1), synthetic analogues of porphyrins, consisting of four isoindole units presenting an 18 π-electron aromatic cloud delocalized over an arrangement of alternated carbon and nitrogen atoms. The application of phthalocyanines in the industry began as a consequence of their inherent dark green–blue color;5 their absorption spectra show intense Q-bands in the visible region, usually centered at 620–700 nm. For this reason, phthalocyanines have been for years an important article of trade, as dyestuffs for textiles and inks.
Phthalocyanines are thermally and chemically stable, and can support intense electromagnetic radiation, but the most remarkable feature which makes these molecules play an exceptional role in the area of materials science, is their versatility. The two hydrogen atoms of the central cavity can be replaced by more than 70 central metals and a variety of substituents can be incorporated, both at the periphery of the macrocycle and at the axial positions, thus allowing fine-tuning of the physical properties. On the other hand, many modifications can be made over the phthalocyanine ring which furnishes the so-called Pc analogues. The most usual structural changes that provide Pc related compounds are the extension of the π-system, the variation in the number of isoindole units and the formal substitution of some of the isoindole moieties by another (hetero)aromatic ring.
A crucial issue to be addressed in order to incorporate phthalocyanines into devices is how to control the spatial arrangement of these macrocycles with respect to each other, in order to extend and even improve the phthalocyanines' chemical and physical properties from the molecular to the macroscopic level.6,7 Cofacial stacking of phthalocyanines is necessary to achieve some supramolecular properties, for example conductivity along the main axis of the stacked system by electron-delocalization through coplanar macrocycles. On the other hand, the formation of condensed phases is extremely important in terms of processibility for their incorporation in molecular devices.
Phthalocyanines can present several kinds of condensed phases such as monocrystals, polycrystalline films, discotic liquid crystals and Langmuir–Blodgett films, among others. Despite many reports about phthalocyanine organization, the use of Pcs bearing long, flexible hydrocarbon chains is one of the most effective ways towards this goal. These metallomesogens are indeed able to interact with each other via supramolecular interactions forming ordered columnar structures with a discotic mesomorphic behavior.8 Thin film formulations have been playing an important role in incorporating Pcs into devices.9 The Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique has proved to be particularly useful for the fabrication of organized thin films of Pcs.10 Other different techniques are being employed in order to form thin films with phthalocyanine derivatives: sublimation, evaporation, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), electrochemical deposition, spin-coating, thin film casting, self-assemble monolayers (SAMs) methodology, etc.
Conducting and magnetic properties
The conducting properties of phthalocyanines have been subject of a great deal of interest. Excellent reviews and articles about the properties of this class of organic molecular materials as low-dimensional metals and semiconductors have been published.2,11–13 Conductivity in metallophthalocyanine systems usually depends on the intrinsic properties of a particular kind of phthalocyanine, like the bis(phthalocyaninato)lutetium (Pc2Lu) and lithium phthalocyanine (PcLi), which are respectively typical narrow- and broad-band intrinsic molecular semiconductors and have been used for the preparation of devices such as field-effect transistors.14 Phthalocyanines can be also readily doped by electron acceptors to give p-type columnar semiconductors. Metallic conductivities close to 104 S cm−1 have been measured in ultrahigh-pure iodinated nickel and non-metallated phthalocyanines.15 Conductivities are also achieved in Pc-based polymers. Among the large variety of semiconducting polymers based on metallophthalocyanines, the most important families are the polyphthalocyaninato-metalloxanes [PcMO]n (M = Si, Ge, Sn), studied in detail by Kenney and Marks,16 and the self-assembled Pc coordination polymers [PcM(Ligand)]n developed by Hanack using the so-called “shish-kebab” approach.12 The powder conductivities of some doped bridged phthalocyaninato transition metal complexes [PcM(L)]n are in the range of 10−5–10−1 S cm−1. Discotic mesomorphism makes phthalocyanines also interesting one-dimensional conductors,17 in which the conducting wire would be formed by the spine of the central conjugated system surrounded by an insulating region of hydrocarbon chains.
The magnetic properties of phthalocyanines have been less studied. André and Simon have described the electrical and magnetic properties of liquid-crystalline lithium and lutetium phthalocyanine derivatives, and dimeric copper phthalocyanine.18 In recent years molecular and supramolecular magnetic properties of Pcs containing different central atoms have been reported.19 Taguchi et al. reported the first synthesis of Li-intercalated manganese-phthalocyanine (Lix[MnPc]) in the bulk form and the evolution of their structural and magnetic properties as a function of Li concentration (x).20 A crossover of the intrachain exchange interactions from ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic as the doping level (x) increases, coupled with a spin-state transition of the Mn2+ ions from intermediate spin, S = 3/2, to high spin, S = 5/2 has been observed.
Nonlinear and linear optical properties
Phthalocyanines and related compounds, with their extended two-dimensional π-electron delocalization, have been widely studied with regard to their nonlinear optical (NLO) properties.3,21 The tailorability and architectural flexibility of phthalocyanines allow the variation of the chemical structure and therefore the tuning of the NLO response. Moreover, non-resonant sub-picosecond response times and small absorption losses as well as thermal and environmental stability are important characteristics that make phthalocyanines promising candidates to be incorporated into nonlinear optical devices.
In the last two decades, there has been a continuous interest in the search for molecular materials exhibiting large macroscopic second-order nonlinearities22 because of their potential applicability in frequency doubling and high-speed light modulation. Second-order optical nonlinearity in organic compounds derives from a highly polarizable charge asymmetry of a π-conjugated system capped with groups of different electron affinities. Phthalocyanines are planar centrosymmetric molecules which, in principle, do not present second-order activity. For this reason, they have been mostly studied for their third-order optical properties.23 However, at the end of the 1980s, Marks and co-workers suggested24 that unsymmetrically substituted phthalocyanines with suitable donor and acceptor groups capable of displaying efficient intramolecular charge transfer should exhibit second-order NLO responses. Subsequently, much synthetic effort was carried out to obtain these push–pull phthalocyanines.25 Another strategy pursued to achieve efficient second-order nonlinear responses is the structural lowering of the Pc ring symmetry.26 The most remarkable example is that of subphthalocyanines (SubPcs),27 the lowest homologues of phthalocyanines. These macrocycles are composed of three isoindole units containing boron as central atom and present an aromatic delocalized 14 π-electron system. SubPcs with their intrinsically non-centrosymmetric C3v cone-shaped structure have emerged as excellent candidates for second-order NLO applications, owing to both the octupolar and dipolar character these compounds exhibit.28
Another NLO property that phthalocyanines exhibit is optical limiting (OL) behavior in the visible and NIR spectral range. A particular feature of these metallorganic materials as optical limiters is that the spectral bandwidth or window over which the limiter operates can be engineered by altering both the main ring and the peripheral substituents, permitting a fine tuning of the performance parameters. Some useful papers and reviews on the subject have been recently published.21,29
As far as their linear optical properties are concerned, phthalocyanines, when conveniently photoexcited, show a very short-lived singlet excited state that, through intersystem crossing, gives rise to a longer-lived triplet state. The efficient production of singlet oxygen from this triplet state has found applications in photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photocatalytic degradation of pollutants. Phthalocyanines were shown to present a special interest for PDT applications,30 following the demonstration in 1985 that one of its derivatives could photosensitize inactivation of mammalian cells.31 The silicon phthalocyanine (Pc4) has been approved as a sensitizer for photodynamic treatment of esophageal and early lung cancer in the United States, France, the Netherlands and Japan.32 Concerning Pc-related systems, subnaphthalocyanines, for example, possess very long-lived triplet states that are accessible in nearly quantitative quantum yields with a Q-band at approximately 650 nm, making them potential candidates for PDT applications.33
In a similar way, the singlet oxygen produced through photoexcitation of phthalocyanines has been applied to the catalytic oxidation and mineralization of toxic derivatives such as sulfur-containing compounds, phenols, and chlorinated phenols, among a number of other processes34 such as the oxidation of activated and non-activated secondary alcohols with molecular oxygen,35 allylic amination,36 epoxidation of olefins,37 or the heterogeneous oxidation of aromatic compounds catalyzed by MPcs functionalized silicas.38 Equally, water-soluble MPcs have been also widely and efficiently used in many electrocatalytic reactions.39
Single molecule investigations
Phthalocyanines (CuPc) were among the first molecules to be observed individually by scanning tunnelling microscopy in 1987.40 Two years later, STM images at ultra high vacuum (UHV) of isolated vapour deposited CuPc molecules on Cu(100) substrate exhibited subatomic scale features which agree well with molecular-orbital calculations (Fig. 2).41 It was the first time that the internal structure of a molecule could be observed by STM. The internal structure of Pcs is still the object of ongoing researches.42 On the other hand, single subphthalocyanine molecules were observed for the first time in 2000 at UHV on Si(111)–(7 × 7) substrates.43
 Fig. 2  Observation of individual phthalocyanine (top) and subphthalocyanine (bottom) molecules by STM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (top) and 43 (bottom). Copyright 1989 and 2000, American Physical Society 
STM and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) at single molecular level were used to investigate the charge-transfer effect at the molecule-substrate interface of substituted MPcs.44 STS quantitative results based on dI/dV measurements at various bias on highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) revealed that the apparent HOMO–LUMO gaps for halogenated Pcs, F16PcCu and Cl16PcCu, and unsubstituted CuPc are essentially the same, which agree well with hybrid density functional calculations.
Electron transport in single-molecule junctions has recently been the focus of many research efforts, in view of its importance for molecular electronics. Thus, the same kind of dI/dV measurements at single molecular level were performed with CuPc adsorbed on a thin insulating Al2O3 film grown on a NiAl(110) surface, hence realizing a double-barrier tunnel junction.45 This setup allows the visualization of single molecule charging by quantitatively determining the electron tunnelling rates at both STM tip/molecule and molecule/substrate interfaces.
Yang, Hou and co-workers have shown that the Kondo effect arising from magnetic CoPc ions on the surface of a nonmagnetic conductor such as Au(111) can be controlled by changing their chemical environment.46 Above all they show that Co ions, when adsorbed on a gold surface as CoPc, do not interact strongly with conduction electrons and therefore do not exhibit any Kondo effect. However, after cutting away eight hydrogen atoms from the molecule with voltage pulses from a STM tip and thereby chemically bonding the four orbitals of this molecule to the gold substrate, the single-molecular Kondo effect could be observed.
The observation of long magnetic relaxation times of bis(phthalocyaninato)lanthanide (LnPc2, Fig. 3) such as TbPc2 and DyPc2 at high temperature has led to a new category of magnets at the single-molecular level that are based on lanthanide phthalocyaninate complexes.47 The effect of the f–f orbitals interaction on the dynamic magnetism of a series of homo- and heterometallic triple-decker phthalocyanine complexes was also studied.48
 Fig. 3  Bis(phthalocyaninato)lanthanide as single molecular magnet. 
Pc-based polymers and dendrimers
This section of the article is devoted to the description of remarkable examples where phthalocyanines have been incorporated into macromolecular structures.49 The combination of phthalocyanines with macromolecules is a powerful tool for designing new materials with outstanding properties. Phthalocyanines have been incorporated into polymers as side group, in the main chain and in a polymeric network.49 The two latter approaches involve either polycyclotetramerization reactions of “bifunctional monomers” (namely, tetracarbonitriles) or the reaction of “face-to-face” tetra- or disusbstituted mononuclear phthalocyanine derivatives with another bifunctional compound.49,50 In general, this type of polymers shows high electrical conductivities but they are insoluble in organic solvents, which makes difficult their processing. A particular type of phthalocyanine-based polymers is that reported by McKeown et al.,51 who prepared microporous network polymers (based on phthalocyanines linked to each other through highly rigid and nonlinear linking groups to avoid the aggregation of the macrocycles and, therefore, to obtain microporous material with applicability in chemoselective adsorptions, separations and heterogeneous catalysis (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Microporous network polymer. 
An alternative method to obtain main-chain-type polymers based on phthalocyanine consists in a cofacial arrangement of the Pc molecules by means of connecting the metal ions inside the core through appropriate bivalent bridges. Phthalocyaninate metalloxanes16 and the so-called Shish-kebab approach,12 developed by Hanack and co-workers, are outstanding examples. A recent example on this type of rod-like polymers is a phthalocyaninato-polysiloxane whose Pc units contain crown ethers linked to chiral alkyl side chains that induce helicity of the columnar architecture (Fig. 5).52 The polysiloxane backbone passes through the center of the rings, imposing a tight stacking of the Pc molecules that allow electrical conductivity due to orbital overlapping, which can be further modulated through alkali-ion coordination. At the solid/liquid interface and in dry films, these polysiloxane phthalocyanines pack head-to-tail forming long multimolecular columnar structure, with potential application as nanowires for molecular scale electronics.
 Fig. 5  Main-chain polisiloxane polymer. 
A very striking example of Pc-based one-dimensional polymers is that reported by Armstrong and co-workers. They prepared the phthalocyanine which forms highly ordered rodlike aggregates at the air/water interface and onto solid supports.53 Every phthalocyanine molecule contains polymerizable sites along the side chain, which can react via phootostimulated [2 + 2] cycloaddition. Irradiation of thin films of the phthalocyanine affords macromolecules that were conveniently studied by MALDI-TOF spectrometry and AFM microscopy, the latter technique showing rods with lengths up to 290 nm.
Ordered stacked phthalocyanine polymers have also been prepared through metathesis reaction of long-chain octasubstitued phthalocyanines bearing terminate olefin groups.54 Metathesis polymerization has been also utilized as a tool for obtaining phthalocyanine-containing copolymers as pendant groups, namely with phthalocyanines containing one norbornene polymerizable subunit and a different norbornene-based monomer.55,56 Particularly, [60]fullerene–phthalocyanine-based copolymers56 are attractive as materials for photovoltaic applications since they allow an intimate contact between the electron-donor phthalocyanine rings and the electron-acceptor fullerene molecules for charge separation and, in the mean time, eliminate the typical phase separation problems in bulk-heterojunction devices. Statistical copolymerization of fullerene- and phthalocyanine-norbornene monomers using different monomer ratios afforded materials where the Pc rings strongly interact one with each other (Fig. 6), as concluded from UV-visible experiments. Photophysical studies in solution also confirm the excited state phthalocyanine annihilations, but additional interaction (electron transfer) between the chromophore and the fullerene units could be detected. A photophysical characterization of the copolymer in the solid state was also carried out, pointing out to the occurrence of photoinduced charge transfer.
 Fig. 6  Polynorbornene with phthalocyanine and fullerene pendant groups. 
On the way to find active materials for solar cell applications, a modified poly-3-alkylthiophene bearing pendant nickel phthalocyanines has been prepared.57 Polythiophenes are donor conjugated polymers, and the electronic character of the phthalocyanine core has been modulated (attaching electron-withdrawing groups) to achieve an electron-acceptor aromatic core, and therefore to obtain a material with charge-transfer capabilities: when the phthalocyanine moieties of the material are photoexcited, charge transfer occurs form the electron-donor polymer to the Pc units.
The incorporation of phthalocyanines to a polymeric backbone can be also tackled by grafting the phthalocyanine unit to a preformed polymer containing appropriate functional groups. A good example of this approach is that reported by Hanack, Blau and co-workers,58 who took advantage of the axial reactivity of some metallophthalocyanines (namely, In(III) phthalocyanines) to prepare a PcIn-polystyrene copolymer. The most remarkable feature of this material is that cofacial association between the macrocycles is fully prevented. Some applications of the phthalocyanines, such as optical limiting or photodynamic therapy (PDT), require prohibition of cofacial aggregation because it produces the quenching of the excited-states.
On the other hand, isolation of the phthalocyanine cores can be achieved by using dendrimers as substituents of the macrocycles. The steric isolation they afford can prevent unwanted interference of the Pc functionality. Some examples of dendritic substitution have been reported, either at the periphery of the macrocycle59–61 or at the axial sites.60–62 An interesting example of dendritic-type architectures using phthalocyanine as core is that reported by Majoral and co-workers, who constructed a phosphorus dendrimer, up to generation 5, from an octasubstituted metal-free phthalocyanine.63 UV-vis experiments show both a hyperchromic and bathochromic effect on the Q bands with increasing generation, indicating that the chromophore is more isolated and that the dendritic shell mimics a highly polar solvent.
A certain type of dendrimer-surrounded phthalocyanines can form spherical micelles by self-assembly.64 The key to obtain these giant architectures is to attach a simple hydrophobic alkyl chain to one of the axial positions of a silicon phthalocyanine and a hydrophilic poly(arylether)dendrimer to the other. The spherical self-assembly in aqueous solution originates from the mushroom shape of the molecule and, when hydrophobic molecules are present, the micelle includes them as guest molecules, acting as a molecular capsule.
Supramolecular organization of phthalocyanines
The controlled organization of functional molecules into highly ordered self-assembled arrays is expected to yield supramolecular architectures with unique properties. In the field of organic dyes, scientists have imitated the bottom-up approach in nature to obtain materials that exhibit improved photophysical and (opto)electronic properties as a result of excitonic interactions between chromophore units. To achieve this goal, the chromophore needs to have the capability of self-organizing into higher-ordered supramolecular structures through a highly efficient cooperation between the units based on non-covalent interactions. The successful transfer of the supramolecular assemblies to a substrate is also challenging.
The inherent π–π stacking abilities of phthalocyanines makes possible to obtain Pc-based supramolecules, but some structural modifications at the periphery of Pc rings may improve their inherent self-organization properties. Classically, the substitution with crown ether moieties6,7,65 has been used as a tool for achieving cofacial stacking of the macrocycles. In recent examples, the formation of long fibers in concentrated solutions has been described. Crowned phthalocyanines exhibit two driving forces for self-assembly: typical π–π interactions between aromatic cores and the cooperative complexation of alkali metal ions between peripheral crown ether moieties. A significant insight into the structural effects of self-assembly of crowned phthalocyanines in the presence or absence of alkali-metal ions at the mesoscopic level was reported by Nolte, Rowan and co-workers.6,66 The molecule represented in Fig. 7 forms micrometer-long fibers in chloroform solution. The molecules within a fiber are organized into a right-handed helix, which further self-assemble into left-handed twisted bundles. Upon the addition of alkali-metal ions the helices are transformed into straight fibers as a consequence of the necessary cofacial arrangement of the crown ether moieties for cooperative binding to the metals. An interesting variant of this derivative, reported by Rovira, Amabilino and co-workers, is a crowned phthalocyanine bearing four additional tetrathiofulvalene moieties.67 In this case, a gel is also formed in solution but columnar Pc fibers were not observed, thus suggesting that the stacking of these molecules occurs through TTF–TTF and TTF–Pc interactions.
 Fig. 7  Structure of a crowned phthalocyanine, and proposed model of hierarchical organization of the molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2003, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Pc-based helical motifs have been also found in homochiral nickel(II) phthalocyanine compounds bearing four enantiopure (p-tolyl)ethylaminocarbonyl groups.68 This compound strongly self-assembles into helical fibers in chloroform solution (ca. 70 nm long) and on hydrophilic/hydrophobic surfaces, where higher-order helical fibers (ca. 1 µm) are observed. The intermolecular interactions playing a crucial role in the formation of the nanoscopic and mesoscopic structures are quadrupole hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking and homochiral interactions of the enantiopure bulky entities. Long Pc fibers (ca. 1 µm) are formed as well by a covalent tetra(perylendiimide)phthalocyanine derivative (Fig. 8),69 where each moiety stacks in register with the same component in an adjacent molecule. Face-to-face aggregation is evidenced by its absorption spectrum. In this system, ultrafast energy transfer takes place from the perylendiimide aggregates to the phthalocyanine ones, followed by electron migration along the Pc-column. Phthalocyanine–anthraquinone (Pc–AQ) systems also form aggregates in solution through which the charge separated state Pc+–AQ− is stabilized.70
 Fig. 8  Tetra(perylendiimide)phthalocyanine. 
Another tool for the construction of Pc wires is that based on donor–acceptor supramolecular recognition motif. The groups of Torres and Nolte have reported a Pc dimer (Fig. 9), consisting of a donor ZnPc and an acceptor NiPc subunits that are covalently linked to a central p-cyclophane.71 The driving force for self-assembly in this molecule is based on donor–acceptor interactions between complementary Pc units, which result in the formation of long one-dimensional stacks. In butanol solution, these molecules form highly monodisperse aggregates. Taking advantage of this supramolecular tool, Torres and Guldi have recently reported new Pc–fullerene ensembles that are formed through supramolecular donor–acceptor interactions between a covalently linked dyad, consisting of a donor ZnPc and a fullerene, and an acceptor Pd(II) phthalocyanine, which yield a long-lived charge separated state.72
 Fig. 9  Structure of binuclear zinc(II) phthalocyanine–p-cyclophane–nickel(II) phthalocyanine (top). Proposed model of stacking based on donor–acceptor interactions (bottom). 
Metal-ligand interactions can be also used to construct supramolecular entities based on phthalocyanines.73 A well-established method in the field of porphyrin chemistry, developed by Kobuke and co-workers, is the preparation of imidazolyl-substituted porphyrins that can coordinate through the imidazolyl group to the central zinc(II) atom of a different porphyrin unit, therefore giving rise to linear and macrocyclic porphyrin arrays.74 This approach can be applied to the phthalocyanine field and, in fact, Kobuke and co-workers have reported that Pc molecules bearing one imidazolyl unit form dimers by means of a complementary coordination between the ligand and central zinc(II) and magnesium(II) ions with large association constants.75
In this regard, phthalocyaninatoruthenium(II) complexes were shown to be efficient building blocks for the preparation of supramolecular arrays.76,77 Ruthenium has the merit of either single or double ligation, the later allowing to attach non-identical ligands. The appropriate peripheral substitution of the aromatic cores with strongly Ru-coordinating pyridyl ligands may allow to construct high-order supramolecular arrays.76 An example on the mixed assembly of phthalocyanine and porphyrin molecules by means of this coordination methodology has been reported by Cammidge, Cook and co-workers (Fig. 10). In this regard, a supramolecular electron donor–acceptor hybrid has been assembled through axial coordination of a perylenebisimide moiety, bearing two 4-pyridyl substituents at the imido positions, to the ruthenium (II) metal centers of two phthalocyanines.77 On the other hand, metal–pyridine coordination has been also utilized to construct subphthalocyanine cages by palladium coordination with 3-pyridyl-substituted macrocycles.78 The subphthalocyanine cage was shown to encapsulate C60 within its aromatic walls.79
 Fig. 10  Supramolecular assembly of porphyrin and phthalocyanine molecules through pyridyl-ruthenium interactions. 
Ionic self-assembly has proved to be a powerful tool for the creation of nanostructures. Supramolecular arrays combining highly directional, non-covalent interactions with electrostatic coupling can be designed and prepared. This approach has been tested with a tetrasulphonate phthalocyanine (bearing four negative charges) and an ammonium-substituted perylenediimide (bearing two positive charges) (Fig. 11).80 The combination of charge-transfer interactions and discotic stacking allows the formation of irreversible one-dimensional polymeric stacks, which are further stabilized through electrostatic Coulomb coupling. The formation of a regular helical superstructure is proposed on the basis of the microscopic data, and rationalized in terms of a helically twisted triple stack (two perylenes per Pc core) model.
 Fig. 11  Triple stack of a positively charged perylendiimide (two units) and a negatively charged tetrasulfonate phthalocyanine (one unit). 
The formation of nanofibers can be also promoted through asymmetric functionalization of the phthalocyanine with one polymer chain. Kimura et al have described a metallophthalocyanine-terminated amphiphilic polymer with a narrow molecular-weight distribution, which has been prepared through atom-transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) of acrylate by using a phthalocyanine initiator.81 The material forms a gel in methanol solution where the phthalocyanine cores are stacked into one-dimensional columnar aggregates that are stabilized through both π-π and van der Waals interactions, the latter arising from the long polymeric alkyl chains. On the contrary, phthalocyanine-containing polymers synthesized from polymerization reactions at the axial positions of the metallomacrocycle (i.e. silicon phthalocyanine dihydroxide as initiator of the polymerization of ε-caprolactone)82 do not give rise to supramolecular stacking, but form nanoparticles through aggregation of the polymer chains.
Nanostructures
Observation of Pc nanostructures on surfaces
It is of utmost importance to understand the organization at the nanometre scale of phthalocyanines since their most relevant applications, i.e. photovoltaic cells, TFETs, gas sensors, etc, were obtained from thin films, whose intimate structure still remains unknown.
Phthalocyanines were recently shown to self-organize into well defined nanoribbons when deposited onto a variety of surfaces by chemical vapor deposition (CVD).83 The nature of the fibres was found to be very much dependent on the type of substrates and deposition conditions. In a similar way, phthalocyanine–fullerene covalent dyads were shown to self-organize into well-defined ca. 50 nm diameter nanotubules (Fig. 12).84 These 1-D Pc-based micelle-like structures display remarkable photophysical properties as a result of their nanometric organization.
 Fig. 12  Pc-based nanotubules observed by TEM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society. 
Another method for organizing Pcs into 1-D structure85 is to use 1-D templates such as multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). Thus, a MWCNT was enrobed with a donor layer of erbium Pc (ErPc2) and visualized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
The 1D CNT–ErPc2 nanowires exhibited an enhanced photosensitivity compared to pristine ErPc2: a contribution to this might come from the photoinduced charge transfer from ErPc2 excitons to CNTs.
The 3-D arrangement of most metal phthalocyanines has been determined from X-ray diffraction measurements.86 At least three polymorphic forms are known, the most prevalent ones being designed by the letters α, β and x depending on the type of intermolecular stacking between the Pc macrocycles. Amorphous (or quasi-amorphous) 2-D structures are usually observed at low temperature (liquid nitrogen)87 while 2-D crystallization to the α-phase occurs between 50 and 140 °C. Further heating at 200 °C irreversibly transforms the material into the β form as observed by TEM. From 1987 on,40 a variety of STM studies dealing with the self-assembly of phthalocyanines and their derivatives on surfaces have been carried out in ultra-high-vacuum (UHV), solid/liquid interface and in air. Unsubstituted, alkylated and hexadeca-halogenated phthalocyanines are usually well packed with their mean planes lying flat on the surface (Fig. 13).42,88 It was shown that the type of central metal atom does not have much influence over the organization of Pcs on surfaces; still each metal appears with a different contrast according to its dz2 orbital occupation.89
 Fig. 13  STM image of a CuPc adlayer on Au(111) (1 × 1) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
Two-dimensional bifunctional structures with a 1 : 1 composition of F16PcCo and TPPNi (Ni(II) tetraphenylporphyrin) were obtained by vapour deposition in UHV onto Au(111).90 When CuPc and C60 molecules are co-deposited onto Au(111) the main outcome is a demixing and the formation of well-ordered separated phases.91
The effect of the crystallographic orientation of the surface on the adlayer structure was investigated by Itaya and co-workers using electrochemical STM in solution.92 In their experiment, these authors found that a two-dimensional binary adlayer was formed by immersing an Au(100) single crystal into a benzene solution containing CoPc and CuTPP, while only the ordered adlayer of CuTPP was observed if Au(111) was used.
Vacuum deposition of subphthalocyanines onto silicon(111),43 silver,93–95 copper96 and gold97,98 substrates have been performed to yield highly ordered arrays that were studied by STM. The single molecules usually appear as doughnut-shaped spots (due to the fast rotation around the symmetry axis), arranged in hexagonal honeycomb patterns (Fig. 14).93–98
 Fig. 14  STM image of a 2-D “honeycomb” overlayer of SubPc on Ag(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
Co-deposition of chloro-subphthalocyanine and C60-fullerene on a silver surface led to the formation of stable and well-ordered intermixed monolayers (Fig. 15).94 The geometry of the self-assembled patterns is determined by the SubPc/C60 mixture proportion employed in the film preparation. Rationalization of this high degree of alternation in the layers formed was based on the electrostatic interactions between the strongly polarizable fullerene π-electron density and the polarized subphthalocyanine aromatic core.
 Fig. 15  STM image of a self-intermixed monolayer of SubPc and C60 on Ag(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2002, Wiley-VCH. 
The surface mobility and the molecular reorganization of CuTPP by CoPc on the Au(111) surface can be modulated by applying various electrode potentials; thus, different surface structures were produced at different electrode potentials. In a similar manner, Rabe and co-workers proved that the interplay of intramolecular, intermolecular, and interfacial forces can be used to construct highly organized two- and three-dimensional architectures from phthalocyanine building blocks on the HOPG surface.65 The switching between different nanostructures (Fig. 16) co-existing at the surface can be stimulated with the tip of the STM with a resolution at the molecular scale.
 Fig. 16  STM image of four co-existing Pc-phases on HOPG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2001, Wiley-VCH. 
Another example of nanostructure manipulation was recently given by Yanagi et al. in the case of a subphthalocyanine. When deposited on a Cu(100) surface,96 SubPcs monolayers arrange in square lattices, but more remarkably, they were found to align reversibly with Cl-up or Cl-down orientations, depending on the tunneling voltage applied between the STM tip and the metal surface. Control of these switching alignments would lead to an information density of around 60 Tbit cm−2.
Use of Pcs as templates for nanostructuration
It is possible to take advantage of the natural tendency of phthalocyanines to form π-stacks and to employ them as templates for the formation of highly-ordered 1-D structures. Thus, the alignment or patterning of carbon nanotubes was achieved by pyrolysis of iron(II) phthalocyanines on a quartz surface. This technique is potentially important for fabricating functional devices such as field emitters, nanophotonic, nanoelectronic and ultrahydrophobic materials.99 Although the growth mechanism for these patterns is not completely understood, it seems that pyrolysis of FePc leads to well-ordered metal carbide zones from which the CNT growth is quicker. Similarly, preorganization of a nickel naphthalocyanine into an inorganic template such as an alumina membrane prior to its pyrolysis and removal of the template led to well ordered nanotubes, as reported by Müllen and co-workers.100
3D Nanostructuration of Pcs into clathrates
Only very recently it has been possible to break the long standing tendency of phthalocyanines to crystallize into well-ordered stacks. Thus, the crystallization of phthalocyanines into cubic clathrate structures was achieved by introducing eight bulky 2,6-disopropylphenoxy groups in the periphery of the Pc macrocycle. The molecules of 1 pack to form cubes (Fig. 17), with an equivalent of two per unit cell and a molecule of phthalocyanine comprises each of the six faces. The diameter of the cube is ca. 2.3 nm, which gives a cavity volume of at least 8 nm3. Solvent exchange experiments show that nearly all of the previously included acetone is exchanged within 2 h by [D6]acetone. A similar experiment using methanol indicates that all of the included acetone can be replaced to give a crystal that contains a molar ratio of 1 : MeOH : H2O of 1:20:2, thus giving approximately 120 molecules of methanol in each void.101
 Fig. 17  Six phthalocyanines defining the walls of a cube in the solid state. 
Phthalocyanine devices
Organic field effect transistors
Organic field effect transistors (OFETs) have attracted much attention due to their potential applications in molecular electronics. Phthalocyanines have been largely used as active components of such devices.14 In former works, the active part of the Pc-based transistor was constituted of two layers of semiconducting (LuPc2) and insulating (ZnPc) phthalocyanines. Then, a unique active semiconducting phthalocyanine was used to build the FET (LuPc2, NiPc, CuPc, …), showing both p-type semiconduction (in the air) and n-type behavior (in vacuum). Usually, the phthalocyanine semiconductor (intrinsic semiconductors or doped insulators) layer is a thin film,102 which can contain a high density of defects leading to high threshold voltages. In order to reveal the intrinsic charge-transport properties of the phthalocyanines and, therefore, to obtain high mobilities, single-crystalline103 and single-crystalline submicrometer-sized104 ribbons of copper phthalocyanine have been synthesized and OFET devices have been fabricated. These devices showed lower threshold voltages and higher carrier mobility.
Sensors, light-emitting devices and optical information recording media
Phthalocyanine thin films conductivity has shown to be sensitive to low concentrations (in the order of 100 ppb) of gases such as NO2, O2 and NH3, among others. Both the sensitivity and the reversibility of the Pc-based detectors is, in most cases, satisfactory.14 Much work has been performed in order to understand the influence of the morphology,105 the temperature, the central metal and the peripheral substituents on the sensing ability of the phthalocyanine thin films. It is generally believed that a five or six-coordinate species very probably intervenes in the gas sensor properties of the devices. The most promising candidates as far as applications are concerned are based on double-decker phthalocyanines such as LuPc2,14 YPc2,14 RuPc2106 and TiPc2107 Efforts are being made to transform the present laboratory devices into real-world sensors especially with the development of phthalocyanine-based electronic noses.108
In the last few years, molecular receptors have attracted much attention as a consequence of their potential applications in the development of analytical devices. Among them, receptors for anionic species are of particular interest, because anions are involved in chemical, biological, and environmental processes of particular relevance. Selective colorimetric and fluorescent chemodosimeter for cyanide and fluoride based on subphthalocyanines were developed in three different laboratories.109–111 In aqueous solution, ppm levels of these anions could be detected selectively. This method is easy and allows detection “by the naked eye” of very low cyanide and fluoride concentrations.
The optical properties of phthalocyanines are also finding application in new areas of technological and industrial interest. The role of phthalocyanines in organic light emitting devices (LEDs) has been pointed out.112 Recently, a conductive polymer comprising a linear main chain and a plurality of carrier transport structures based on Pcs have been have been claimed for applications in light emitting devices or photoelectric transducers.113 On the other hand, phthalocyanine and subphthalocyanine dyes are critical components in CD and CVD technology. Most of the information on this regard is published in form of patents.114 Recently, an optical information recording medium with two different read/write wavelengths based on Pc related systems have been claimed. The invention aims at selecting a dye, which has an absorption peak further on a short wavelength side than a recording wavelength of a wavelength area of a blue laser and also has an absorption spectrum in a wavelength area of a red laser, as a photoabsorptive material.115
Low band gap molecular solar cells
Organic solar cells are a promising way towards efficient and low-cost production light-weight, photovoltaic (PV) systems that will allow the fabrication of foldable and flexible large area devices.116,117 PV cells employing polymer–fullerene heterojunctions have shown to have power conversion efficienies (ηP) approaching 5%.118 Because most of the available conjugated polymers were originally developed for visible-light-emitting diodes, they exhibit band gaps of ca. 2 eV. Hence, there is a clear mismatch between the absorption spectrum of these materials and the terrestrial solar spectrum, which extends to the near IR.
Phthalocyanines are perfectly suited for their integration in light energy conversion systems. They exhibit very high extinction coefficients around 700 nm (where the maximum of the solar photon flux occurs) for efficient photon harvesting, rich redox chemistry, and p-type semiconducting properties. Pcs have also excellent stability, high LUMO energy level, and relative high hole mobility. Therefore, they are among the most intensively studied dyes in this field. The incorporation of phthalocyanines as antennae into photovoltaic devices is usually performed in blends together with semiconductor polymers and/or acceptor molecules such as fullerenes.119 Power conversion efficiencies as high as 3.5%, under 4 suns simulated AM1.5G illumination in a double-heterostructured copper phthalocyanine (CuPc)/C60 thin-film cell with Ag as the metal cathode have been reported by Forrest and co-workers. PV cells such as these can be further enhanced by stacking two cells in series, yielding efficiencies exceeding 5.5%.120
The morphological problems of the so-called bulk heterojunctions have suggested the preparation of intrinsically bipolar materials, in which the donor and acceptor photoactive units are covalently linked within the same molecule. In this way, higher concentration of charges within the devices could be produced. In this connection, several examples of Pc–C60 dyads and Pc-based polymers56,57 have been described121 and some of them incorporated into conjugated polymer/fullerene blends, but efficiencies are still very low. The photovoltaic properties of cells containing soluble discotic liquid-crystalline phthalocyanines have been reported.122 Highly ordered structures were obtained by thermal annealing of spin-coated thin films. Bi-layer solar cells using C60 as an electron transport layer have been fabricated, in which the annealing of the phthalocyanine layer resulted in a 3.5 times increase of the short-circuit current density and a reduction of the series resistance.
Recently,123 it has been pointed out that a double-heterostructure boron-subphthalocyanine (SubPc)/C60 thin-film solar cell has a more than doubled open-circuit voltage (Voc) compared to a conventional CuPc/C60 cell under 1 sun AM1.5G simulated illumination. The lower oxidation potential of SubPc results in an increase in the energy difference between the LUMO of the acceptor-like material and the HOMO of the donor-like material, referred to as the interface gap, which is responsible for the increase of the open-circuit voltage.
In dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs),124 photons are collected using dye molecules which are placed over a layer of a wide band gap semiconducting material such as a mesoporous metal oxide. DSSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 have been an attractive alternative to the purely organic devices because of their huge interfacial area and high electron mobility in mesoporous titania. These cells, mainly developed by the group of Grätzel, show energy conversion efficiencies over 10% and good stability challenging the “classic” silicon solar cells. The efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells has been limited by the low optical absorbance in the red/near-infrared region of the dyes commonly used such as ruthenium bipyridyl, as well as their low extinction coefficient. Phthalocyanines which present intense absorption in the UV/blue and the red/near IR region spectral regions are suitable to be applied as sensitiser dyes in DSSCs.
However, the applications of Pc dyes in DSSC are restricted due to problems associated with aggregation of the dye on the metal oxide surface, resulting in rapid deactivation of the dye excited state and low sensitising efficiency. Near-IR sensitization of nanocrystalline TiO2 films by zinc, aluminium and ruthenium phthalocyanines have been described.125–127 Grätzel, Nazeeruddin et al. described, for the first time, a RuPc anchored to nanocrystalline TiO2 films through axial pyridine 3,4-dicarboxylic acid ligands as an efficient near IR sensitizer for photovoltaic injection cells. Photocurrents close to 10 mA cm−2 were readily obtained under simulated AM1.5 solar radiation.125 Akermark, Sun, Hagfeldt, Sundström, and co-workers have reported a monochromatic incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of approximately 24% at 690 nm. for a cell based on a ZnPcTyr-sensitized TiO2 electrode. An overall conversion efficiency (η) of 0.54% was achieved.126 Hybrid solar cells based on porous Si and copper phthalocyanine derivatives have also been described.128
Recently a new titanium phthalocyanine (TiPc) and its application to the sensitization of nanocrystalline, mesoporous TiO2 films have been reported.129 This work has shown an attractive new route to the development of efficient, red absorbing sensitiser dyes for DSSCs. A combination of the axial attachment via a carboxylated ligand and the added solubility gained by the tert-butyl peripheral groups allows the efficient sensitization of the TiO2 surface with no dye aggregation or co-adsorbents needed.
Conclusions
Phthalocyanines are particularly attractive molecular building blocks for their incorporation into molecular materials. The control of the nanometer-scale morphology is a promising aim to be achieved in a near future in order to fabricate higher-efficiency Pc-based devices. Supramolecular self-assembly71,72,84,130 could play an important role in this regard, particularly in the case of organic solar cells, in which the components could be assembled in a biomimetic fashion. On the other hand, the “color” of phthalocyanines is an intrinsically added value for many applications, namely, for photovoltaic devices where they function as antennae with a wider absorbing range of the solar terrestrial spectrum.
Finally, we would like to stress that although organic synthesis is not the subject of this article, it is here, like in other areas of materials chemistry and nanoscience, the key discipline between molecular design and the study of the properties of phthalocyanines. Their versatility from the synthetic point of view allows iterative processes for the optimization of their physical properties and, hence, of their applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the financial support of the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia and the Comunidad de Madrid (CTQ-2005-08933-BQU and S-0505/PPQ/000225). Grants from the EU, Networks “SolarNtype” (MRTN CT-2006-035533) and “HETEROMOLMAT” (STRP 516982) are also gratefully acknowledged.
References

Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH, Weinheim,  1989, 1993, 1996, vols. 1–4 Search PubMed ; 
          The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vols. 15–20 Search PubMed .

          N. B. McKeown, Phthalocyanine Materials: Synthesis, Structure and Function, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1998 Search PubMed ; 
          G. de la Torre, M. Nicolau and T. Torres, in Supramolecular Photosensitive and Electroactive Materials, ed. H. Nalwa, Academic Press, New York,  2001, pp. 1–111 Search PubMed .
G. de la Torre, P. Vázquez, F. Agulló-López and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 1671 RSC ; G. de la Torre, P. Vázquez, F. Agulló-López and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3723 CrossRef CAS .

Nanoscience is the study of phenomena and manipulation of materials at atomic, molecular and macromolecular scales, where properties differ significantly from those at a larger scale. Nanotechnologies are the design, characterization, production and application of structures, devices and systems by controlling shape and size at nanometer scale (From the Royal Society & the Royal Academy of Engineering Nanoscience and Nanotechnologies, July 2004) .
R. P. Linstead, J. Chem. Soc., 1934, 1016 RSC .
H. Engelkamp, S. Middelbeek and R. J. M. Nolte, Science, 1999, 284, 785 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. A. W. Elemans, R. van Hameren, R. J. M. Nolte and A. E. Rowan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1251 CrossRef CAS ; 
          P. Thordarson and R. J. M. Nolte, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol. 18, pp. 281–301 Search PubMed ; N. Kobayashi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 227, 129 Search PubMed .
M. J. Cook, Chem. Rec., 2002, 2, 225 CrossRef CAS ; 
          J. Simon and P. Bassoul, in Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH, Weinheim,  1993, vol. 2, ch. 6 Search PubMed ; J. A. Duro, G. de la Torre, J. Barberá, J. L. Serrano and T. Torres, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1061 Search PubMed ; A. N. Cammidge and H. Gopee, Chem. Commun., 2002, 966 CrossRef CAS ; M. Kimura, H. Ueki, K. Ohta, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5051 RSC .

          M. J. Cook and I. Chambrier, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol. 17, pp. 37–127 Search PubMed .
J.-P. Bourgoin, F. Doublet, S. Palacin and M. Vandevyver, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 6473 CrossRef CAS ; M. J. Cook, Pure Appl. Chem., 1999, 71, 2145 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Simon and T. Toupance, Comprehensive Supramolecular Chemistry, Vol. 10. Intrinsic molecular semiconductors: electronics and ionoelectronics finalities, ed. D. N. Reinhoudt, Pergamon, Exeter,  1996 Search PubMed ; M. F. Craciun, S. Rogge, M.-J. L. den Boer, S. Margadonna, K. Prassides, Y. Iwasa and A. F. Morpurgo, Adv. Mater, 2006, 18, 320 Search PubMed .
H. Schultz, H. Lehmann, M. Rein and M. Hanack, Struct. Bonding (Berlin), 1991, 74, 41–146 CAS ; 
          M. Hanack and L. R. Subramanian, in Handbook of Organic Conducting Molecules and Polymers, ed. H. S. Nalwa, John Wiley & Sons Ltd,  1997, vol. 1 Search PubMed ; 
          M. Hanack and D. Dini, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol. 18, pp. 251–280 Search PubMed .
D. Schlettwein, D. Wöhrle, F. Karmann and U. Melville, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 3 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guillaud, J. Simon and J. P. Germain, Coord. Chem.
Rev., 1998, 178–180, 1433 CrossRef CAS ; 
          M. Bouvet, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol. 19, p. 37 Search PubMed .
J. A. Thompson, K. Murata, D. C. Miller, J. L. Stanton, W. E. Broderick, B. M. Hoffman and J. A. Ibers, Inorg. Chem., 1993, 32, 3546 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Nohr, P. M. Kuznesof, K. J. Wynne, M. E. Kenney and P. G. Siebermann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 4371 CrossRef CAS ; T. J. Marks, Science, 1985, 227, 881 CrossRef CAS ; P. J. Toscano and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 437 CrossRef CAS ; B. Wehrle, H.-H. Limbach, T. Zipplies and M. Hanack, Angew. Chem., 1989, 101, 1783 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Schouten, J. M. Warman, M. P. de Haas, C. F. Van Nostrum, G. H. Gelick, R. J. M. Nolte, M. J. Copyn, J. W. Zwikker, M. K. Engel, M. Hanack, Y. H. Chang and W. T. Ford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 6880 CrossRef CAS ; J. Tant, Y. H. Geerts, M. Lehmann, V. De Cupere, G. Zucchi, B. W. Laursen, T. Bjørnholm, V. Lemaur, V. Marcq, A. Burquel, E. Hennebicq, F. Gardebien, P. Viville, D. Beljonne, R. Lazzaroni and J. Cornil, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20315 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Belarbi, C. Sirlin, J. Simon and J.-J. André, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 8105 CrossRef CAS ; D. Lelièvre, L. Bosio, J. Simon, J.-J. André and F. Bensebaa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 4475 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brinkmann and J.-J. Andre, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1511 RSC ; M. Matsuda, J.-I. Yamaura, H. Tajima and T. Inabe, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1524 CrossRef CAS ; M. I. Boamfa, P. C. M. Christianen, H. Engelkamp, R. J. M. Nolte and J. C. Maan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 261 CrossRef CAS ; M. Evangelisti, J. Bartolome, L. J. de Jongh and G. Filoti, Phys. Rev. B, 2002, 66, 144410/1 CAS ; J.-J. Andre and M. Brinkmann, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1359 CrossRef CAS ; T. Kodama, Kagaku Kogyo, 2004, 57, 527 Search PubMed .
Y. Taguchi, T. Miyake, S. Margadonna, K. Kato, K. Prassides and Y. Iwasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3313 CrossRef CAS .

          H. S. Nalwa and J. S. Shirk, in Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH Publishers (LSK) Ltd, Cambridge,  1996, vol. 4, p. 79 Search PubMed ; 
          S. R. Flom, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol. 19, pp. 179–190 Search PubMed .
I. Ledoux and J. Zyss, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 77 CrossRef CAS ; T. Verbiest, S. Houbrechts, M. Kauranen, K. Clays and A. Persoons, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 2175 RSC .
J. S. Shirk, J. R. Lindle, F. J. Bartoli, C. A. Hoffman, Z. H. Kafafi and A. W. Snow, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1989, 55, 1287 CrossRef CAS ; M. A. Díaz, I. Ledoux, J. A. Duro, T. Torres, F. Agulló and J. Zyss, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 8761 CrossRef CAS ; H. Kambara, T. Maruno, A. Yamashita, S. Matsumoto, T. Hayashi, H. Konami and N. Tanaka, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 3674 CrossRef ; M. A. Díaz-García, J. M. Cabrera, F. Agulló-López, J. A. Duro, G. de la Torre, F. Fernández-Lázaro, C. Mingotaud, P. Delhaes and T. Torres, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 295 .
D. A. Li, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 1707 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Xu, D. Zhu, T. Wada, H. Sasabe, X. Zhao and X. Xie, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 6957 CrossRef CAS ; A. Sastre, M. A. Díaz-García, B. del Rey, C. Dhenaut, J. Zyss, I. Ledoux, F. Agulló-López and T. Torres, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 9773 Search PubMed ; M. Tian, T. Wada, H. Kimura-Suda and H. Sasabe, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 861 RSC ; G. Rojo, G. de la Torre, J. García-Ruiz, I. Ledoux, T. Torres, J. Zyss and F. Agulló-López, Chem. Phys., 1999, 245, 27 CrossRef CAS ; G. Martín, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, G. de la Torre, I. Ledoux, T. Torres, F. Agulló-López and J. Zyss, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1481 CrossRef ; E. M. Maya, E. M. García-Frutos, P. Vázquez, T. Torres, G. Martín, G. Rojo, F. Agulló-López, R. H. Gonzalez-Jonte, V. R. Ferro, J. M. García de la Vega, I. Ledoux and J. Zyss, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 2110 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cabezón, S. Rodríguez-Morgade and T. Torres, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 1872 CrossRef CAS ; G. de la Torre and T. Torres, J. Org. Chem., 1996, 61, 6446 CrossRef CAS .
Seminal work in this area was made by N. Kobayashi. See, for example:   N. Kobayashi, R. Kondo, S. Nakajima and T. Osa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 9640 Search PubMed  . Relevant reviews can be found in:   C. G. Claessens, D. González-Rodríguez and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 835 CrossRef CAS ; T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 961 Search PubMed ; 
          N. Kobayashi, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, vol. 15, pp. 161 CrossRef CAS ; M. Geyer, F. Plenzig, J. Rauschnabel, M. Hanack, B. del Rey, A. Sastre and T. Torres, Synthesis, 1996, 1139 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Claessens, G. de la Torre and T. Torres, in Nonlinear Optical Properties of Matter: From Molecules to Condensed Phases, ed. M. G. Papadopoulos, J. Leszczynski and A. J. Sadlej, Springer-Verlag GmbH, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2006 Search PubMed ; A. Sastre, T. Torres, M. A. Díaz-García, F. Agulló-López, C. Dhenaut, S. Brasselet, I. Ledoux and J. Zyss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 2746 Search PubMed ; B. del Rey, U. Keller, T. Torres, G. Rojo, F. Agulló-López, S. Nonell, C. Martí, S. Brasselet, I. Ledoux and J. Zyss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 12808 CrossRef CAS ; G. Rojo, A. Hierro, M. A. Díaz-García, F. Agulló-López, B. del Rey, A. Sastre and T. Torres, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 1802 CrossRef CAS ; C. G. Claessens, D. González-Rodríguez, T. Torres, G. Martín, F. Agulló-López, I. Ledoux, J. Zyss, V. R. Ferro and J. M. García de la Vega, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 3800 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. O'Flaherty, S. V. Hold, M. J. Cook, T. Torres, Y. Chen, M. Hanack and W. Blau, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 19 CAS ; 
          J. W. Perry, in Nonlinear Optics of Organic Molecules and Polymers, ed. H. S. Nalwa and S. Miyata, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  1997, p. 813 Search PubMed ; M. Hanack, T. Schneider, M. Barthel, J. S. Shirk, S. R. Flom and R. G. S. Pong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 219–221, 235 Search PubMed ; M. Calvete, G. Y. Yang and M. Hanack, Synth. Met., 2004, 141, 231 CrossRef CAS ; E. M. García-Frutos, S. M. O'Flaherty, E. M. Maya, G. de la Torre, P. Vázquez, W. Blau and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 749 CrossRef CAS ; J. J. Doyle, B. Ballesteros, G. de la Torre, D. A. McGovern, J. M. Nelly, T. Torres and W. Blau, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 307 RSC .
N. Brasseur, Compr. Ser. Photochem. Photobiol. 2 (Photodyn. Ther.), 2003, 105, 107 Search PubMed ; 
          E. Ben-Hur and W.-S. Chan, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol. 19, pp. 1–35 Search PubMed ; A. C. Tedesco, J. C. G. Rotta and C. N. Lunardi, Curr. Org. Chem., 2003, 7, 187 Search PubMed ; N. Brauser, H. Ali, R. Langlois, R. Wagner, J. Rousseau and J. E. van Lier, Photochem. Photobiol., 1987, 45, 581 CAS ; M. Fournier, C. Pepin, D. Houde, R. Ouellet and J. E. van Lier, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2004, 120 Search PubMed .
E. Ben-Hur and I. Rosenthal, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1985, 47, 155 .
M. Hu, N. Brauser, S. Z. Yildiz, J. E. van Lier and C. C. Leznoff, J. Med. Chem., 1998, 41, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nonell, N. Rubio, B. del Rey and T. Torres, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2000, 1091 RSC .
G. Schneider, D. Wöhrle, W. Spiller, J. Stark and G. Schulz-Ekloff, Photochem. Photobiol., 1994, 60, 333 CrossRef CAS ; O. L. Kaliya, E. A. Lukyanets and G. N. Vorozhtsov, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 1999, 3, 592 CrossRef CAS ; M. Kimura, Y. Sugihara, T. Muto, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Eur. J., 1999, 5, 3495 CrossRef CAS ; K. Kasuga, A. Fujita, T. Miyazako, M. Handa and T. Sugimori, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2000, 3, 634 CrossRef CAS ; K. Ozoemena, N. Kuznetsova and T. Nyokong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 139, 217 CrossRef CAS ; R. Gerdes, O. Bartels, G. Schneider, D. Wöhrle and G. Schulz-Ekloff, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2001, 12, 152 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Sharma, S. L. Jain and B. Sain, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 22, 383 CrossRef ; D. Wöhrle, O. Suvorova, R. Gerdes, O. Bartels, L. Lapok, N. Baziakina, S. Makarov and A. Slodek, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2004, 8, 1020 CrossRef .
M. Johannsen and K. A. Jørgensen, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 5979 CrossRef CAS .
R. Belal and B. Meunier, J. Mol. Catal., 1988, 44, 187 CrossRef CAS ; N. Sehlotho and T. Nyokong, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 209, 51 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Sorokin and A. Tuel, New J. Chem., 1999, 23, 473 RSC ; A. B. Sorokin, S. Mangematin and C. Pergrale, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2002, 182–183, 267 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zagal, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1992, 119, 89 CrossRef CAS ; N. Kobayashi and A. Nevin, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1996, 10, 579 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Gimzewski, E. Stoll and R. R. Schlittler, Surf. Sci., 1987, 181, 267 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Lippel, R. J. Wilson, M. D. Miller, C. Wöll and S. Chiang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1989, 62, 171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoshimoto, A. Tada, K. Suto and K. Itaya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 5836 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yanagi, D. Schlettwein, H. Nakayama and T. Nishino, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 1959 CrossRef CAS .
S.-B. Lei, K. Deng, D.-L. Yang, Q.-D. Zeng and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1256 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Wu, G. V. Nazin, X. Chen, X. H. Qiu and W. Ho, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 236802 CrossRef CAS ; G. Mikaelian, N. Ogawa, X. W. Tu and W. Ho, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 131101 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhao, Q. Li, L. Chen, H. Xiang, W. Wang, S. Pan, B. Wang, X. Xiao, J. Yang, J. G. Hou and Q. Zhu, Science, 2005, 309, 1542 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ishikawa, M. Sugita, T. Ishikawa, S. Koshihara and Y. Kaizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8694 CrossRef CAS ; N. Ishikawa, M. Sugita, T. Ishikawa, S.-y. Koshihara and Y. Kaizu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11265 CrossRef CAS ; N. Ishikawa, M. Sugita and W. Wernsdorfer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3650–3651 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ishikawa, S. Otsuka and Y. Kaizu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 731 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wöhrle, Macromol. Rapid. Commun, 2001, 22, 68 CrossRef CAS ; 
          D. Wöhrle and G. Schnurpfeil, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol. 17, pp. 177–246 Search PubMed ; N. B. McKeown, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1979 Search PubMed .
N. Trombach, O. Hild, D. Schlettwein and D. Whörle, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 879 RSC .
N. B. McKeown, S. Makhseed and P. M. Budd, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2780 RSC ; N. B. McKeown, P. M. Budd, K. J. Msayib, B. S. Ghanem, H. J. Kingston, C. E. Tattershall, S. Makhseed, K. J. Reynolds and D. Fritsch, Chem. Eur. J., 2005, 11, 2610 CrossRef CAS .
P. Samorí, H. Engelkamp, P. A. J. De Witte, A. E. Rowan, R. J. M. Nolte and J. P. Rabe, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1265 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Drager, R. A. P. Zangmeister, N. R. Armstrong and D. F. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3595 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kimura, K. Wada, K. Ohta, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4706 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kimura, H. Ueki, K. Ohta, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7683 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, T. Torres, R. H. Grubbs, D. M. Guldi, H. Neugebauer, C. Zinder, M. Drees and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Asian J., 2006, 1–2, 148 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Martínez-Díaz, S. Esperanza, A. de la Escosura, M. Catellani, S. Yunus, S. Luzzati and T. Torres, Tetrahedron Lett., 2003, 44, 8475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, M. Hanack, S. O'Flaherty, G. Bernd, A. Zeug, B. Roeder and W. J. Blau, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 3786 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Kernag and D. V. McGrath, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1048 RSC .
M. Brewis, G. J. Clarkson, M. Helliwell, A. M. Holder and N. B. McKeown, Chem. Eur. J., 2000, 6, 4630 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brewis, M. Helliwell and N. B. McKeown, Tetrahedron, 2003, 59, 3863 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brewis, G. J. Clarkson, V. Goddard, M. Helliwell, A. M. Holder and N. B. McKeown, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1092 CrossRef CAS .
J. Leclaire, R. Dagiral, S. Fery-Forgues, Y. Coppel, B. Donnadieu, A.-M. Caminade and J.-P. Majoral, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15762 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uchiyama, K. Ishii, T. Nonomura, N. Kobayashi and S. Isoda, Chem. Eur. J., 2003, 9, 5757 CrossRef CAS .
P. Samorí, H. Engelkamp, P. de Witte, A. E. Rowan, R. J. M. Nolte and J. P. Rabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2348 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. A. W. Elemans, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2661 RSC .
J. Sly, P. Kasák, E. Gomar-Nadal, C. Rovira, L. Górriz, P. Thordarson, D. B. Amabilino, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1255 RSC .
R. Rai, A. Saxena, A. Ohira and M. Fujiki, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3957 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. E. Links, B. Rybtchinsky and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 100810 .
A. Gouloumis, D. González-Rodriguez, P. Vázquez, T. Torres, S. Liu, L. Echegoyen, J. Ramey, G. L. Hug and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12674 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, P. Thordarson, A. E. Rowan, R. J. M. Nolte and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12300 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4112 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ballesteros, G. de la Torre, T. Torres, G. L. Hug, G. M. Aminur Rahman and D. M. Guldi, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 2097 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogawa and Y. Kobuke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4070 CrossRef CAS ; R. Takahashi and Y. Kobuke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2372 CrossRef CAS ; H. Ozeki, A. Nomoto, K. Ogawa, Y. Kobuke, M. Murakami, K. Hosoda, M. Ohtani, S. Nakashima, H. Miyasaka and T. Okada, Chem. Eur. J., 2004, 10, 6393 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kameyama, M. Morisue, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4763 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Cammidge, G. Berber, I. Chambrier, P. W. Hough and M. J. Cook, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 4067 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, T. Torres, C. Atienza-Castellanos and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15145 CrossRef CAS  . For a related covalent perylenebisimide–phthalocyanine dyad see:   S. Fukuzumi, K. Ohkubo, J. Ortiz, M. Gutierrez, F. Fernandez-Lazaro and A. Sastre-Santos, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3814 Search PubMed .
C. G. Claessens and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14522 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Claessens and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1298 RSC .
Y. Guan, S.-H. Yu, M. Antonietti, C. Böttcher and C. F. J. Faul, Chem. Eur. J., 2005, 11, 1305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kimura, H. Ueki, K. Ohta, K. Hanabusa, H. Shirai and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Eur. J., 2004, 10, 4954 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. S. Lee, T. Ngai, J.-D. Huang, C. Wu, W.-P. Fong and D. K. P. Ng, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7527 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Tong, A. B. Djurišic, M. H. Xie, A. C. M. Ng, K. Y. Cheung, W. K. Chan, Y. H. Leung, H. W. Lin and S. Gwo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17406 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez, T. Torres, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5811 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, H.-Z. Chen, H.-B. Zhou, L. Zhu, J.-Z. Sun, X.-B. Zhang, J.-M. Xu and M. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 909 CrossRef CAS .

          M. K. Engel, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Elsevier Science, San Diego, CA,  2003, vol.
20, pp. 1–242 Search PubMed .
T. Kobayashi, Y. Fujiyoshi, F. Iwatsu and N. Uyeda, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A, 1981, 37, 692 CrossRef .
Z.-Y. Yang, S.-B. Lei, L.-H. Gan, L.-J. Wan, C. Wang and C.-L. Bai, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 65 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Barlow and K. W. Hipps, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5993 CrossRef CAS ; T. G. Gopakumar, M. Lackinger, M. Hackert, F. Müller and M. Hietschold, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 7839 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Hipps, L. Scudiero, D. E. Barlow and M. P. Cooke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stöhr, T. Wagner, M. Gabriel, B. Weyers and R. Möller, Adv. Mater., 2001, 11, 175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoshimoto, N. Higa and K. Itaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8540 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berner, M. Brunner, L. Ramoino, S. Suzuki, H.-J. Güntherodt and T. A. Jung, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 348, 175 CrossRef CAS .
M. de Wild, S. Berner, H. Suzuki, H. Yanagi, D. Schlettwein, S. Ivan, A. Baratoff, H.-J. Guentherodt and T. A. Jung, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 881 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berner, M. de Wild, L. Ramoino, S. Ivan, A. Baratoff, H.-J. Güntherodt, H. Suzuki, D. Schlettwein and T. A. Jung, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 68, 115410 CrossRef .
H. Yanagi, K. Ikuta, H. Mukai and T. Shibutani, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 951 CrossRef CAS .
H. Suzuki, H. Miki, S. Yokoyama and S. Mashiko, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3659 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mannsfeld, H. Reichhard and T. Fritz, Surf. Sci., 2003, 525, 215 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhi, T. Gorelik, J. Wu, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12792 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. McKeown, S. Makhseed, K. J. Msayib, L.-L. Ooi, M. Helliwell and J. E. Warren, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7546 CrossRef CAS .
Recent examples are:   T. Okuda, S. Shintoh and N. Terada, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 3586 Search PubMed ; J. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Wang and D. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 142 CrossRef CAS ; J. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yan, J. Wang, J. Shi and D. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1191 CrossRef CAS ; M. Ofuji, K. Ishikawa and H. Takezoe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 022103 CrossRef CAS ; T. Yasuda and T. Tsuitsui, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 402, 395 CrossRef .
R. Zeis, T. Siegrist and Ch. Kloc, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 062114 CrossRef .
Q. Tang, H. Li, M. He, W. Hu, C. Liu, K. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 65 CrossRef CAS .
F. Armand, H. Perez, S. Fouriaux, O. Araspin, J.-P. Pradeau, C. G. Claessens, E. M. Maya, P. Váquez and T. Torres, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 1476 CrossRef CAS ; Z. Wang, A.-M. Nygrd, M. J. Cook and D. A. Russell, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5850 CrossRef CAS .
A. Generosi, B. Paci, V. Rossi Albertini, P. Perfetti, G. Pennesi, A. M. Paoletti, G. Rossi, A. Capobianchi and R. Caminiti, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 114106 CrossRef .
A. Generosi, B. Paci, V. Rossi Abertini, P. Perfetti, A. M. Paoletti, G. Pennesi, G. Rossi and R. Caminiti, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 181904 CrossRef .
J. A. de Saja and M. L. Rodríuez-Méndez, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 116, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, K. Chen and H. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2676 RSC .
J. V. Ros-Lis, R. Martínez-Máñez and J. Soto, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5260 RSC .
E. Palomares, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, T. Torres and E. Coronado, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1166 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hohnholz, S. Steinbrecher and M. Hanack, J. Mol. Struct., 2000, 521, 231 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Uehara (Seiko Epson Coporation), Pat. Appl., WO2006/075724 A1,  July 20, 2006 Search PubMed .

          Y. Usami, T. Kakuta and T. Ishida (Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd., Japan), Eur. Pat. Appl., EP 1434207 A2,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
          A. Zafirov, S. Rakovski, J. Bakardjieva-Eneva, L. Prahov, L. Assenova and F. Marrandino (Vivastar Mastering & Materials A.-G., Switzerland), PCT Int. Appl., WO 2002080158 A1,  2002 Search PubMed .

          H. Shimizu and D. Morishita (Taiyo Yuden K. K.), Eur. Pat., EP1622138,  2006 Search PubMed .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498 CrossRef CAS ; M. Granstrom, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1998, 395, 257 CrossRef CAS ; W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS ; L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkötter, K. Müllen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Science, 2001, 293, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS ; H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924 CAS ; C. Winder and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1077 RSC ; N. S. Sariciftci, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 36 Search PubMed .
M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, J. Knol, J. C. Hummelen, P. A. van Hal and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3371 CrossRef CAS ; W. L. Ma, C. Y. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS ; D. Wöhrle and D. Meissner, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 129 CrossRef CAS ; J. Rostalki and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 37 CrossRef CAS ; R. Koeppe, N. S. Sariciftci, P. A. Troshin and R. N. Lyubovskaya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 244102 CrossRef .
J. G. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Ran and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3013 CrossRef CAS ; J. G. Xue, S. Uchida, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5757 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, H. Neugebauer, P. Denk, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 700 RSC ; A. Sastre, A. Gouloumis, P. Vaquez, T. Torres, V. Doan, B. J. Schwartz, F. Wudl, L. Echegoyen and J. Rivera, Org. Lett., 1999, 1, 1807 CrossRef CAS ; D. M. Guldi, J. Ramey, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. de la Escosura, T. Torres, T. Da Ros and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2774 RSC ; D. M. Guldi, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2056 RSC ; D. M. Guldi, I. Zilbermann, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez and T. Torres, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18485 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Kippelen, S. Yoo, J. A. Haddock, B. Domercq, S. Barlow, B. A. Minch, W. Xia, S. R. Marder and N. R. Armstrong, in Organic Photovoltaics: Mechanisms, Materials, and Devices, ed. S. Sariciftci and S. Sun, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2005 Search PubMed .
K. L. Mutolo, E. I. Mayo, B. P. Rand, P. Barry, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49 CrossRef CAS ; A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269 CrossRef CAS ; M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol. C, 2003, 4, 145 CrossRef CAS ; Q.-B. Meng, K. Takahashi, X.-T. Zhang, I. Sutanto, T. N. Rao, O. Sato, A. Fujishima, H. Watanabe, T. Nakamori and M. Uragami, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3572 CrossRef CAS ; N. Robertson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2338 CrossRef CAS .
Md. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel and B. A. Murrer, Chem. Commun., 1998, 719 RSC .
J. He, G. Benkoe, F. Korodi, T. Polivka, R. Lomoth, B. Akermark, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4922 CrossRef CAS .

          B. A. Murrer, M. Gratzel and Md. K. Nazeeruddin, PCT Int. Appl., WO 9903868 A1 19990128,  1999 Search PubMed ; Md. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Grätzel, D. Wöhrle, G. Schnurpfeil, G. Schneider, A. Hirth and A. N. Trombach, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 1999, 3, 230 Search PubMed ; V. Aranyos, J. Hjelm, A. Hagfeldt and H. Grennberg, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2001, 5, 609 CrossRef CAS ; J. He, A. Hagfeldt, S.-E. Lindquist, H. Grennberg, F. Korodi, L. Sun and B. Akermark, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 2743 CrossRef CAS ; C. L. Huisman, A. Goossens and J. Schoonman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10578 CrossRef CAS ; M. Yanagisawa, K. Masaru, F. Korodi, J. Bergquist, A. Holmberg, A. Hagfeldt, B. Akermark and L. Sun, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2004, 8, 1128 CrossRef .
I. A. Levitsky, W. B. Euler, N. Tokranova, B. Xu and J. Castracane, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 6245 CrossRef CAS .
E. Palomares, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, S. A. Haque, T. Torres and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2004, 18, 2112 RSC .
V. I. Prokhorenko, A. R. Holzwarth, M. G. Müller, K. Schaffner, T. Miyatake and H. Tamiaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5761 CrossRef CAS ; T. Polivka and V. Sundström, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 2021 CrossRef CAS ; T. S. Balaban, H. Tamiaki and A. R. Holzwarth, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 258, 1 CAS ; V. Huber, M. Katterle, M. Lysetska and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3147 CrossRef CAS ; M. J. Smith, W. Clegg, K. A. Nguyen, J. E. Rogers, R. Pachter, P. A. Fleit and H. L. Anderson, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2433 RSC ; D. M. Guldi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11432 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
Gema de la Torre	Dr Gema de la Torre was born in Madrid, Spain, in 1969. She studied Chemistry at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM) and obtained her PhD in 1998 at the same University, working on the chemistry of phthalocyanines under the supervision of Professor T. Torres. Following two one-year postdoctoral stays with Professor W. Blau (Trinity College, Dublin, 2000–2001), working on the covalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes, and Professor N. Martín (Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 2001–2002), working on porphyrin–fullerene ensembles, she joined Professor T. Torres' group at UAM as Assistant Professor. Her current research interests are the synthesis, photo-physical and nonlinear optical properties of new phthalocyanine-based materials, including phthalocyanine–SWNT ensembles.
Christian G. Claessens	Christian G. Claessens Born in Valenciennes, France, he graduated from the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Lyon, in 1990. He obtained his MSc in 1991 in the same Grande Ecole under the supervision of Prof. André Collet and Prof. Joëlle Vidal working on the N-amination of chiral secondary amines with N-methoxycarbonyloxaziridine. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Birmingham (UK) in February 1997 under the supervision of Prof. J. Fraser Stoddart working on the self-assembly and self-organization of π–π interacting compounds. He then joined Prof. André Collet's research group and worked on the synthesis and separation of the enantiomers of CHFClBr. At the end of 1997, he joined Prof. Tomás Torres' group in the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid as a Marie Curie research fellow. After a four years period as a Ramon y Cajal fellow he holds now an assistant professorship in the same research group. His main research interests include the synthesis, supramolecular aspects and nanotechnological applications of subphthalocyanines.
Tomás Torres	Prof. Tomás Torres was born in Madrid. He is currently Full Professor and Head of the Department of Organic Chemistry at the Autonoma University of Madrid (UAM). He received his PhD (1978) at the same University, working at the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) in Madrid (Prof. Fariña). After two years (1978–1980) at the Department of Organic Chemistry and Spectroscopy of the Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, in Martinsried near Munich (Germany, Prof. Dr W. Schaefer) as a Max-Planck Society postdoctoral fellow, he joined (1981–1985) a private company, Abello/Merck, Sharp and Dohme, as Senior Researcher, in Madrid. In 1985 he was appointed to the staff of the Autónoma University of Madrid as an Associated Professor. In addition to various aspects of synthetic, heterocyclic and supramolecular chemistry, his current research interests include the synthesis of low-symmetry phthalocyanines and the preparation and study of the photophysical and nonlinear optical properties of molecular materials based on phthalocyanines and related compounds. Torres' Group at Madrid is currently exploring several areas of possible application including organic and hybrids solar cells and other phthalocyanine-based molecular devices. Prof. Torres is author or co-author of ca. 250 papers, reviews and patents. In 2001 he was distinguished as a Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). He has recently been awarded the JANSSEN CILAG prize for Organic Chemistry 2005 by the Royal Spanish Society of Chemistry.

 	Fig. 1  Metallophthalocyanine structure.	 

 	Chart 1  Number of scientific documents on phthalocyanines.	 

 	Fig. 2  Observation of individual phthalocyanine (top) and subphthalocyanine (bottom) molecules by STM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (top) and 43 (bottom). Copyright 1989 and 2000, American Physical Society	 

 	Fig. 3  Bis(phthalocyaninato)lanthanide as single molecular magnet.	 

 	Fig. 4  Microporous network polymer.	 

 	Fig. 5  Main-chain polisiloxane polymer.	 

 	Fig. 6  Polynorbornene with phthalocyanine and fullerene pendant groups.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of a crowned phthalocyanine, and proposed model of hierarchical organization of the molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2003, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Tetra(perylendiimide)phthalocyanine.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of binuclear zinc(II) phthalocyanine–p-cyclophane–nickel(II) phthalocyanine (top). Proposed model of stacking based on donor–acceptor interactions (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 10  Supramolecular assembly of porphyrin and phthalocyanine molecules through pyridyl-ruthenium interactions.	 

 	Fig. 11  Triple stack of a positively charged perylendiimide (two units) and a negatively charged tetrasulfonate phthalocyanine (one unit).	 

 	Fig. 12  Pc-based nanotubules observed by TEM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  STM image of a CuPc adlayer on Au(111) (1 × 1) surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  STM image of a 2-D “honeycomb” overlayer of SubPc on Ag(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  STM image of a self-intermixed monolayer of SubPc and C60 on Ag(111). Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2002, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  STM image of four co-existing Pc-phases on HOPG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2001, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  Six phthalocyanines defining the walls of a cube in the solid state.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
