Recent progress and strategic perspectives of inorganic solid electrolytes: fundamentals, modifications, and applications in sodium metal batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS01029A View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS01029A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, Advance Article Recent progress and strategic perspectives of inorganic solid electrolytes: fundamentals, modifications, and applications in sodium metal batteries
Jiawen Huang

a, 
Kuan Wuab, 
Gang Xua, 
Minghong Wu

*ad, 
Shixue Dou

bc and 
Chao Wu

*ab
aSchool of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China. E-mail: mhwu@shu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Energy Materials Science (IEMS), University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, China. E-mail: chaowu@uow.edu.au
cInstitute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials, Australian Institute of Innovative Materials, University of Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia
dKey Laboratory of Organic Compound Pollution Control Engineering (MOE), School of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
Received 
11th April 2023
First published on 27th June 2023AbstractSolid-state electrolytes (SEs) have attracted overwhelming attention as a promising alternative to traditional organic liquid electrolytes (OLEs) for high-energy-density sodium-metal batteries (SMBs), owing to their intrinsic incombustibility, wider electrochemical stability window (ESW), and better thermal stability. Among various kinds of SEs, inorganic solid-state electrolytes (ISEs) stand out because of their high ionic conductivity, excellent oxidative stability, and good mechanical strength, rendering potential utilization in safe and dendrite-free SMBs at room temperature. However, the development of Na-ion ISEs still remains challenging, that a perfect solution has yet to be achieved. Herein, we provide a comprehensive and in-depth inspection of the state-of-the-art ISEs, aiming at revealing the underlying Na+ conduction mechanisms at different length scales, and interpreting their compatibility with the Na metal anode from multiple aspects. A thorough material screening will include nearly all ISEs developed to date, i.e., oxides, chalcogenides, halides, antiperovskites, and borohydrides, followed by an overview of the modification strategies for enhancing their ionic conductivity and interfacial compatibility with Na metal, including synthesis, doping and interfacial engineering. By discussing the remaining challenges in ISE research, we propose rational and strategic perspectives that can serve as guidelines for future development of desirable ISEs and practical implementation of high-performance SMBs.Jiawen HuangJiawen Huang is currently a PhD candidate in Shanghai University (SHU). He received his BS degree and MS degree from the University of Washington (UW), majorly investigating halide-based solid electrolytes in lithium-metal batteries. His current research interests focus on sodium-ion inorganic solid electrolytes and composite solid electrolytes for solid-state sodium-metal batteries, as well as other metal-based batteries.Minghong WuMinghong Wu is a Distinguished Professor at Shanghai University and the Academician of Chinese Academy of Engineering. She received her PhD in Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1999. After several years of postdoctoral research in Japan, she became a Professor at the School of Environmental and Chemical Engineering at SHU in 2002. Her research interest focuses on the fundamental study and application of environmental and energy functional materials. She has been consecutively selected as a global highly cited scholar since 2019.Shi-Xue DouShi Xue Dou is a Distinguished Professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, University of Wollongong (UOW) Research Ambassador Asia and the founding director of the Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials at UOW. He received his PhD at Dalhousie University, Canada in 1984, DSc at the University of New South Wales in 1998 and was elected as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering in 1994. He focuses on the research of energy and electronic materials. He is awarded the Australian Government's Centenary Medal in 2003 and Australian Order of Member in 2019 for his contribution to materials science and engineering, multiple Australian Professorial Fellowships from 1993 to 2011, the Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award in 2008, Outstanding Partnership Award in 2012, the ASTS Lifetime Achievement Award in 2018, Lifetime Achiever by Australian Research Magazine in 2020 and the ICMC Lifetime Achievement Award in 2021. He is named a highly cited researcher in materials science by Thomson Reuters since 2018 with 90000 citations and an h-index of 145.Chao WuChao Wu received his PhD from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2014, followed by postdoctoral research experience in the Department of Physical Chemistry of Solids at the Max-Planck-Institute for Solid State Research from 2014 to 2017, and later became a research fellow at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), University of Wollongong. He is currently a professor at the Institute of Energy Materials Science (IEMS), University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. His research interests emphasize high energy metal-based batteries, including Li, Na, and Zn, in different electrolyte systems.
1. Introduction
The rapid growth of economy and thriving industrial activities have led to increase in global energy demand, as well as concerns over deteriorating environmental damage. The conventional energy structure, mostly relying on consumption of fossil fuels, has become inadequate to support the sustainable future of humankind. Hence, a diversified energy portfolio is urgently required to ease the threat of environment deterioration and energy crisis, by developing renewable energy resources, such as wind power,1 solar power,2 hydro power,3 and nuclear power,4 as supplements or even replacements for the traditional thermal power.5 Nevertheless, it is difficult to integrate these renewable energy supplies into the power grid because they are inherently intermittent and non-programmable due to the limitation of season and region. In this regard, designing a reliable and cost-effective energy storage system becomes the key consideration for balancing the supplied power with the electricity demand in an eco-friendly manner. Among various energy storage technologies, electrochemical energy storage systems, represented by secondary batteries, are still the most appealing candidates owing to the balance of their specific energy capacity, responsiveness, mobility, efficiency, operating cost, and scalability. In the few past decades, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have dominated the market for consumer electronics and electric vehicles (EVs). In the grand scheme of accelerating the electrification process, global LIB production capacity for EVs has leapt from 20 GW h in 2010 to 747 GW h in 2020, and the growth is anticipated to continue to reach 2492 GW h by 2025.6,7 The furiously competitive market prompts the sophistication of LIBs in terms of material selection, energy density, power density, fast-charging capability, lifetime, and cost.8,9 Several years ago, the commercially available 18650-type cells could already achieve a gravimetric and volumetric energy density of 260 W h kg−1 and 770 W h L−1, respectively, at the cell level.10 However, the booming market for LIBs meanwhile raises anxiety upon lithium reserves and pricing, along with worries for resource nationalism and monopolistic behavior, especially considering that the bulk of lithium mines is located in only a few countries,11 as shown in Fig. 1a. Therefore, it is necessary to explore novel battery systems that are comparable to or even better than the existing LIBs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Distribution of identified lithium resources, (b) element abundance in the Earth's crust and (c) comparison between critical properties of Li and Na. 
Among different metal-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), which are also known as Na-ion batteries (NIBs), are considered as one of the most prominent alternatives to LIBs with a fair trade-off between energy density and cost.12–14 The sodium resource is evenly distributed in the crust of the Earth, with greater abundance than that of lithium (2.36% vs. 0.002%) (Fig. 1b), ensuring ample supply and low cost of raw materials.15–17 Noteworthily, this value can still be underrated as it does not take into account the element abundance in seawater. In fact, the price of sodium carbonate is below $400 per ton, which is tens to over a hundred times lower than that of lithium carbonate regardless of the volatile price in the commodity market.18 The cost advantage of SIBs also reflects in material selection for the current collector, where cheap aluminum current collectors can be used in SIBs at both anode and cathode terminals because sodium does not undergo alloying with aluminum at low potentials, in contrast to lithium, where the more expensive copper current collectors must be used in LIBs.19,20 Meanwhile, the standard electrode potential of sodium (−2.71 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)) is similar to that of lithium (−3.04 V vs. SHE), which guarantees the considerable cell voltage and energy density of SIBs comparable to those of LIBs (Fig. 1c).21 SIBs share almost the same battery configuration and working principle with LIBs, where alkali-metal ions shuttle between electrodes by a “rocking-chair” mechanism, while the Na+ storage mechanism depends on different electrode materials, such as intercalation, alloying, and conversion electrode materials. Taking advantage of the existing understanding and research routes for the LIB system owing to the similar chemical and electrochemical characteristics between Na and Li,22,23 the scientific research of SIBs has made substantial progress by developing a variety of material combinations, among which some of them have been successfully commercialized in stationary energy storage applications,15,24–26 e.g., high-temperature Na–S batteries27 and high-temperature Na–NiCl2 batteries.28
Unfortunately, room-temperature SIBs still suffer from undesirable specific capacity, low energy density, unpleasant rate capability and poor cycling performance due to the intrinsic properties of Na. Compared to Li, Na has larger atomic radius (1.06 Å vs. 0.76 Å), heavier atomic weight (23 g mol−1 vs. 6.9 g mol−1) and higher standard potential (Fig. 1c), which lead to the lower volumetric and gravimetric energy densities of SIBs than LIBs when the same battery chemistry is used.29 Meanwhile, the larger size of sodium results in worse cycling performance as electrodes experience larger volumetric changes that accumulate strain upon Na insertion and extraction, as well as worse rate capability due to the sluggish kinetics of the sodiation–desodiation process.30,31 Instead of graphite typically used as the anode in LIBs, hard carbon has been chosen for the anode of SIBs because of its larger layer spacing for reversible intercalation of Na+.32,33 Unfortunately, although the hard carbon anode displays a reversible sodium capacity of 300 mA h g−1, the wide voltage window to achieve this capacity renders a low overall working voltage and low energy density of SIBs.33–36 As the conversion-type and alloying-type anode materials exhibit specific capacities several times beyond that of hard carbon, they are readily prone to pulverization during the great volume change in the sodiation–desodiation process.37 Given these drawbacks of Na, the energy density of state-of-the-art room-temperature SIBs usually lies in the range of merely 75–165 W h kg−1 or 250–375 W h L−1.38
1.1. Emerging demand for SEs
In an attempt to enhance the energy density of SIBs, researchers are intrigued by sodium-metal batteries (SMBs) with metallic Na as the anode, by virtue of its superior theoretical specific capacity (1166 mA h g−1), low reduction potential (−2.71 V vs. SHE), abundance in nature, and low cost.39 As illustrated in Fig. 2, the superiority of the Na metal anode is demonstrated by comparing its specific capacity and plateau voltage with other commonly used anode materials in SIBs. The theoretical energy density of room-temperature SMBs, such as RT Na–S,40 RT Na–O2,41 and RT Na–CO242 batteries, can easily surpass 1000 W h kg−1.
 Fig. 2  Summary of common anode materials for sodium-ion batteries and the sodium metal anode by plotting their specific capacity and plateau voltage. Note that materials that are located closer to the upper left corner of the chart (high specific capacity and low plateau voltage) correspond to higher cell-level energy density, if the same cathode material is chosen, thereby becoming the most preferable. Data from ref. 35 and 43–183. 
However, the pursuit of high-energy-density SMBs has always been a rough journey, plagued by the low Coulombic efficiency (CE), poor cycle life, and questioned cell safety. Given the ultrahigh chemical and electrochemical reactivity of metallic Na, a rough and low-density solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer tends to in situ form because of the spontaneous and irreversible reaction between organic liquid electrolytes and Na metal. This unstable SEI layer is subjected to destruction under the repeated volume expansion of the host-less metallic anode, unceasingly depleting the electrolytes and active Na.184–186 Worse still, the inhomogeneous SEI layer, as well as the surface cracks after destruction, induces non-uniform surface electric field distribution and uneven Na deposition on the metal anode. In the repeated process of Na stripping and plating, the non-uniform electrodeposition of Na can gradually build up “needle-like” or “mossy” dendrites on the uneven patches, even at current densities well below the critical current density (CCD).187,188 On the one hand, when Na is stripped from the metal anode during battery discharging, these sodium dendrites easily “melt” and break off, then get trapped in the SEI wrap, becoming electrically insulated from the electrode mass, known as “dead Na”. These “dead Na” dispersed in the vicinity of the electrolyte/anode interface can largely increase the interfacial impedance and deplete the amount of reversible Na metal, emerging as the culprit of cell performance deterioration.189–192 On the other hand, as some of the sharp sodium dendrites grow constantly and uncontrollably in liquid electrolytes under the “tip effect”, that is, the strong electric field concentrates around their tips promoting further growth of dendrites, they will eventually penetrate the polymer separator and short-circuit the battery, causing thermal runaway.193,194 This is extremely dangerous in SMBs where the metallic Na anode and OLEs coexist, because the failed battery cells carry the risk of fire or even explosion due to the highly volatile and flammable OLEs. For example, the commonly used carbonate ester-based co-solvents diethyl carbonate (DEC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) have flash points of merely 31 °C and 18 °C, respectively, while the ether-based solvents that have been considered preferable for Na metal are not any better, e.g., diglyme (57 °C), 1,3-dioxolane (DOL) (1.7 °C), and dimethyl ether (DME) (0 °C).31,195–197 For reference, the commercially adopted carbonate-based OLE 1 M LiPF6/ethylene carbonate (EC):ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC), usually paired with the LiCoO2 cathode and graphite anode, also has a low flash point of 28 °C.198 Meanwhile, the use of OLEs can accelerate the cathode dissolution during the repeated charge–discharge cycling and shorten the cathode life.199 Moreover, the gas evolution of OLEs tends to become more obvious in Na-metal batteries, where the released CO2 and H2 may increase the risk of leakage and cause other safety hazards.200 A summative schematic of the major challenges in OLE-containing Na-metal batteries is given in Fig. 3. Thereby, the utilization of the unruly metallic Na anode highlights the safety concerns over the conventional organic liquid electrolytes. Several safer alternatives to organic electrolytes have been proposed, e.g., aqueous electrolytes201–204 and ionic liquids,205–208 but the former still exhibit an intrinsically narrow electrochemical stability window and the latter suffer from high viscosity and high cost.
 Fig. 3  Challenges in high-voltage sodium-metal batteries arising from organic liquid electrolytes. 
Solid-state batteries (SSBs) can be considered as a viable solution to the safety hazards as well as an effective approach to higher energy density. The schematic of a solid-state sodium-metal battery (SMB) is provided in comparison to that of a conventional SIB in Fig. 4. As the essential component of SSBs, the SE serves as an ion-conducting medium and a separator simultaneously by conducting Na+ and blocking electron exchange. The benefits of replacing OLEs with SEs are manifold in terms of safety, energy density, cost, and battery production. Most obviously, the incombustible SEs can guarantee the improved safety of SSBs and the ability to work at a wider range of temperatures. The use of electrical insulating SEs eliminates the need for separators which are regarded as the inactive mass of batteries, thus reducing the battery size and enhancing the energy density. The high thermal stability of SSBs, along with their nonfluidity, also allows specific designs for battery cell geometry, e.g. directly stacking cell units in a single battery package using bipolar electrodes.209,210 Such a bipolar stacking that connects single cells in series, as compared to the parallel connection in conventional liquid SIBs, can be used to effectively reduce the inactive volume and increase the voltage of a battery cell, as well as to achieve a higher module energy density. Some of the SEs are able to withstand higher voltages than liquid electrolytes, which enables higher energy density at the cell level by embracing high-capacity and high-voltage cathode materials, with the elimination of cathode dissolution.199,211 Conceptually, the formation of metal dendrites can also be inhibited by the ISEs due to their high mechanical strength, especially considering their much higher shear modulus compared to that of Na metal,212,213 though this principle may only work as a theoretical guide for practice.214–216 Moreover, for the possible industrial mass production up scaled from laboratory research, the solidification of electrolytes favors simpler assembling and integration processes at an industrial scale.217 However, despite the fascinating properties of SEs, their practical application is thwarted by some major challenges, mainly from the inherently poor room-temperature ionic conductivity and a series of electrode/electrolyte interfacial issues. Although some of the ISEs have already exhibited bulk ionic conductivity higher than that of commercial OLEs, most of the SEs still suffer from insufficient total ionic conductivity at room temperature, especially considering that the ideal ohmic loss in SSBs with the Na metal anode should be lower than 100 mV even at high current densities (3–10 mA cm−2), corresponding to the ionic conductivity above 0.4 mS cm−1 for a 25 μm-thick SE.218–220 Meanwhile, the inferior interfacial wettability between rigid solids, i.e., electrodes and SEs, especially ISEs, results in point contacts and large interfacial resistance, while the stiff SEs are incapable of buffering the infinite volume change during cycling.221–223 As the chemical and electrochemical stability of SEs against Na metal do not always exceed that of OLEs due to the complex interplay between thermodynamics and kinetic factors, the unstable solid–solid interface is still subject to a series of unpleasant interfacial issues.209,224 Recently, the rigid ISEs have been proven ineligible for eliminating the dendrite penetration, as the inferior interfacial contact and high electrical conductivity will promote the growth of dendrites along grain boundaries in polycrystalline SEs and lead to fast short-circuit. Therefore, many efforts have been devoted to enhance the total ionic conductivity of SEs and their interfacial stability/compatibility against metallic Na, among which ISEs manifest rather impressive advancements compared to others. In this regard, this review article will majorly focus on ISEs, while other related types of SEs may be briefly introduced.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the battery configuration of conventional sodium-ion batteries and solid-state sodium-metal batteries. 
1.2. Criteria for ideal SEs
As the key part of SSBs, SEs have decisive impacts on the performance of batteries from the aspects of operating voltage, cycling stability, rate capability, thermal stability, safety, etc. To ensure consistency in material design and evaluation, a lucid definition of ideal SEs must be established (Fig. 5), with some of the critical requirements listed as follows:212,225–229
 Fig. 5  Criteria for ideal solid electrolytes. 
• High ionic conductivity (ideally >1 mS cm−1) at ambient temperature for efficient ion transport.
• Extremely low electronic conductivity (<10−12 S cm−1) to prevent mixed-ion-electron conduction and dendrite formation.
• Wide electrochemical stability window (>5 V vs. Na+/Na) to raise the cell voltage and eliminate unwanted interfacial reactions with high-voltage cathodes and Na metal.
• High chemical stability and interfacial compatibility against electrodes, especially highly reactive metallic Na.
• Non-flammable, cost-effective, and non-toxic nature.
• High thermal stability for battery operation in a broad range of temperature.
• Sufficient mechanical strength to prevent cracking, fracture, deformation, or other damage.
• Facile synthesis and processing procedures for large-scale application.
In this review article, two of the most important aspects of the criteria for ideal SEs in SMBs will be mainly interpreted, viz. the total ionic conductivity and the interfacial stability against Na metal.
1.3. Classification of SEs
There are three main categories of Na-ion SEs, namely, ISEs (inorganic solid electrolytes), solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs), and composite solid electrolytes (CSEs). The discovery of SPEs, made by dispersing sodium salts in polymer host materials, can be traced back to as early as 1970s when ion conduction in polyethylene oxide (PEO) containing alkali metal salts was found.230–233 Since then, many recipes have been developed for SPEs, among which PEO, poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP), polyphosphazenes (PAN), poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) and poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) are the most commonly used polymer matrices, compatible with a variety of sodium salts.234 SPEs feature soft mechanical properties that offer intimate contact with electrodes and feasible processibility, benefiting the design of flexible SSBs or thin-film batteries. However, they usually exhibit low room-temperature ionic conductivity (≤10−6 S cm−1) and large ionic transfer resistance due to the insufficient amorphous regions with a high degree of crystallinity, as well as low oxidation voltage.235 Therefore, a common strategy to maximize the amorphous region, thus enhancing the ion conduction, is embedding inorganic fillers, such as SiO2, Al2O3, and ZrO2, into SPEs.236 The so-formed inorganic/organic composites are called CSEs, which tend to possess compensated advantages of both inorganic and organic materials, with higher ionic conductivity than that of SPEs but still lower than that of ISEs. On the other hand, compared to SPEs, ISEs usually exhibit much higher room-temperature ionic conductivity (≈1 mS cm−1), higher oxidative limit, better thermal stability, and single ion conduction. Some of the ISEs even have ionic conductivity higher than that of commercial OLEs. ISEs can be subcategorized into oxide-based, chalcogenide-based, halide-based, hydride-based, and antiperovskite-structured compounds (Fig. 6), while they can be further divided into crystalline materials and glass-based materials. Crystalline or ceramic electrolytes are represented by β-alumina and NASICON-type oxides, which manifest outstanding chemical stability but require harsh processing conditions to achieve the desired ionic conductivity. Meanwhile, their rigid and rough surfaces often lead to poor wettability of Na metal and insufficient contact with cathode materials.237,238 Glass-based electrolytes, including glass-ceramic and glassy electrolytes, represented by Na3PS4-type sulfides and some halides, have softer mechanical properties and less-developed grain boundaries due to the presence of amorphous phases, which allow better wetting of electrodes and facile preparation such as simple ball-milling and cold-pressing, while they are usually subject to poor thermodynamic stability as well as spontaneous decomposition forming an unstable SEI with the Na metal anode.239–242
 Fig. 6  Radar plot to compare the key properties of some major types of inorganic Na-ion solid electrolytes. 
Given the rapid iteration in the development of SEs, this review article aims to provide a comprehensive yet detailed elaboration on the recent progress of the state-of-the-art Na-ion ISEs, by unveiling the most updated understanding of their ion conduction mechanisms from the atomic level to the microstructure and macrostructure level, as well as their interfacial stability and compatibility against the metallic Na anode, followed by specific modification strategies for each material and exciting achievements made. From fundamental understanding and mechanistic study to material design and battery optimization, we hope to offer thorough understanding of sodium-ion ISEs and establish the general principles for future research in the related fields.
2. General principles of complex Na+ conduction
In crystalline ISEs, mobile Na+ ions usually reside at lattice sites with the lowest site energy, or known as ground-state sites, in the interstices of the skeletal framework. Driven by the spatial gradient in the electrochemical potential, they overcome the energy barriers and achieve ion diffusion by hopping between ground-state sites and/or transient-state sites, in the form of either single-ion or concerted-ion motion.243 The nature of Na+ conduction within ion conductors involves the continuous long-range movement of mobile Na+ along the inter-connected migration channels constructed by the framework anions, through the grain bulk and across the boundaries/interfaces. Therefore, Na+ conduction within ISEs is a complex function of different mechanisms and influencing factors at multiple scales, e.g., atomic interactions, lattice defects, disorder, crystal structure, lattice dynamics, etc.209,210,244–247 Overall, the ionic conductivity of ISEs (σ) in the simplest form is subject to two factors, namely the concentration of charge carriers (n) and the mobility of charge carriers (μ), as described by eqn (1): 
σ = qnμ
(1)
2.1. Atomic scale
Single-ion hopping. Everything starts with an individual mobile Na+ hopping from one site to another available one. At the atomic scale (or the so-called zero-dimensional scale), this short-range or local diffusion of Na+ is assisted by point defects and can be described by one of the three classical diffusion models: (1) vacancy mechanism, (2) interstitial mechanism, and (3) interstitialcy mechanism, though the last one is inherently correlated. As shown in Fig. 7, in the vacancy diffusion mechanism, an individual Na+ jumps to a neighboring intrinsic vacant site, meanwhile creating a new vacancy at its original position. In the interstitial mechanism, a Na+ located in the interstices of the matrix atoms travels to another adjacent interstices that is not fully occupied. Since Na+ migrates within the crystalline materials via point defects, e.g., vacancy and interstitial, the diffusion of charge carriers is identical to the diffusion of point defects. In other words, the concentration of charge carriers n is equivalent to the concentration of point defects and such a value is positively associated to the ionic conductivity of a solid. Noteworthily, the concentration of point defects is thermally controlled and is related to the defect formation energy in the intrinsic regime, such as the formation energy of Schottky and Frenkel disorders, or subject to the charge compensation mechanism induced by aliovalent ion doping in the extrinsic regime.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of ion diffusion at the atomic scale, including single-ion hopping and correlated-ion motion mechanisms, as well as the existence of grains and grain boundaries at the microstructural scale. 
To further explain this basic understanding of ion conduction, the simplified Arrhenius expression (eqn (2)) is given, 
(2)to describe the temperature dependence of ionic conductivity, where T, q, kB, σ0, and Ea represent the absolute temperature, elementary charge, Boltzmann constant, conductivity prefactor, and activation energy for ion conduction, respectively. Herein, as the conductivity prefactor σ0 takes into account all possible factors influencing the ionic conductivity,248 except activation energy, the activation energy Ea is negatively related to the ionic conductivity in an exponential manner and it is contributed by both defect formation enthalpy, ΔHf, and migration enthalpy, ΔHm, described by eqn (3), 
(3)or expressed in a simpler and more conventional form (eqn (4)), 
Ea ∝ Em + Ef
(4)where Ef is the energy required for defect formation and Em is the energy required to overcome the energy barrier in the migration process, viz. transient state.249–252 As mentioned above, Ef is a vital component of Ea that regulates the concentration of mobile defects in the intrinsic regime, thus affecting the ionic conductivity. On the other hand, regarding Na+ migration as continuous jumps between ground-state sites and transient-state sites, the highest site energy difference between these states, or the so-called energy barrier, is equally crucial in terms of mobility, as shown in Fig. 8a. In some cases, the activation migration barrier, Em, can be significantly lowered in certain ion sublattices and coordination environment, e.g., bcc-anion framework or triggered concerted ion motion.
 Fig. 8  The migration energy landscape of (a) single-ion hopping, i.e., vacancy and interstitial mechanisms, and (b) correlated-ion motion along Na+ migration paths. Adapted with permission from ref. 249 and 253. 

Concerted ion motion. Concerted ion motion is a very important mechanism in fast ion conductors. While the vacancy and interstitial mechanisms merely concern the jumping model of a single Na+ on an isolated sublattice, the ion hopping in ISEs is not necessarily limited to individual Na+. The Na+ motion via the interstitialcy mechanism, or called “knock-off” migration, is inherently correlated by involving two ions, where an interstitial Na+ replaces its neighboring lattice site occupied by another Na+ by pushing it to an interstices (Fig. 7). Interestingly, the concerted ion migration often results in much lower activation energy barriers or a flat energy landscape, compared to that of single-ion hopping, that originates from the local environment or bonding in coordination of the mobile charge carriers, as illustrated by Fig. 8b.249,253 For example, concerted ion migration with reduced migration energy is enabled by intentionally adding extra mobile ions until they outnumber the available ground-state sites in materials such as NASICONs.253,254 In this way, the metastable (high-energy) sites, e.g., octahedral sites, are occupied by the excess mobile ions as the low-energy sites, e.g., tetrahedral sites, are already filled to capacity. When the mobile ions at high-energy sites migrate downhill, they offset the energy required for the uphill-migrating ions at low-energy sites, triggering the low-energy-barrier concerted ion diffusion. The Nernst–Einstein relation (eqn (5)) relates the mobility to the self-diffusion coefficient D of charge carriers, 
μ = qD/kBT
(5)where D is defined by eqn (6), 
D = zNc(1 − c)a2v/kBT
(6)where z is the number of nearest neighbor sites of the charge carriers, viz. the coordination number, N is the density of possible sites for the charge carriers, c is the site fraction of the charge carrier on its sublattice, a is the distance of intersite hopping, and v is the hopping frequency. From this relation, the high diffusivity and high mobility of Na+ are closely related to c, the high density of charge carriers on its sublattice, and (1 − c), the high density of available sites accessible for mobile charge carriers.
2.2. Crystal structure scale
At a larger scale, the crystal structure of crystalline ISEs plays a significant role in Na+ conduction mechanisms related to the mobility of charge carriers, reflected by the parameters in Arrhenius and Nernst–Einstein expressions, such as hopping distance a, hopping frequency v, activation energy Ea, and local coordination environment including z, N, c, etc. Meanwhile, the concentration of mobile Na+ can also be influenced by the crystal structure as it determines the maximum accommodation. Considering Na+ conduction as an extremely complex process, all these structure-determined factors synergistically contribute to ion migration. As stated, Na+ conduction is a long-range movement along the available channel, so the ease of such migration is largely dependent on their local environment in the pathways. In the skeletal structure of crystalline ISEs, the constructing stationary anions possess considerable interactions, i.e., Coulombic force, with mobile Na+ during their shuttling, reflected in the Em part of Ea. Because it is strongly affected by their atom location, site occupation and local bonding, an ideal fast ion conducting structure should have sufficient wide conduction pathways for Na+ traverse, reduced interaction between Na+ and skeleton anions, and equal-energy hopping sites.
Lattice volume and bottleneck regions. The lattice volume reflects the size of free space for mobile Na+, that is, its hopping frequency and distance. In a similar manner, bottleneck regions (a triangle delineated by three framework anions) in the Na+ migration paths, with their size usually positively related to the lattice volume, represent the maximum energy barriers that mobile ions must overcome (Fig. 9a). Intuitively, larger lattice volume and bottlenecks should always result in a lower migration barrier of Na+ and reduced interactions with framework anions, thus achieving faster ion conduction. However, the truth is that ion migration can only be effectively facilitated by carefully tuning the lattice volume of the crystal structure and the size of bottlenecks with appropriate dopant ions, due to their complex impacts on the site energy of Na+,255,257–261 which will be specified in the sections for particular materials.262
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of influencing factors at the crystal structure scale, including (a) appropriate lattice volume and bottleneck size for successful ion hopping, (b) nearly equal-energy ion migration pathways with a minimal activation barrier in bcc-like anion arrangement compared to those in other typical anion configurations, reprinted with permission from ref. 255, (c) paddle-wheel mechanism of (PS4)3− polyanions promoting Na+ migration in Na3PS4 and (d) rotational motion of (PS4)3− polyanions enlarging the bottleneck regions in Na11Sn2PS12, reprinted with permission from ref. 256. 

Equal-energy conduction pathway. Na+ tends to occupy the preferred coordination, viz. low site energy, which means that it is prone to experience a high migration energy barrier if the local environment varies significantly in the conduction pathways.258 From this perspective, some types of crystal symmetries have been found to allow similar or equipotential Na+ sublattice configurations that require fairly low energy for rearrangement of these mobile Na+. For example, ion conduction in the body-centered cubic (bcc)-like anion framework was observed to be significantly faster compared to that in other close-packed frameworks (Fig. 9b), because of its interlinked energy-equivalent tetrahedral sites that allow Na+ to hop in a flattened energy landscape and with a lower activation barrier.255 Akin to the bcc-like lattice structure, the novel superionic conductor Na11Sn2PS12 also exhibits the quasi-isotropic fast diffusion of Na+ between equal-energy Na+ sites due to the effectively equivalent Na+–Na+ distance and the same coordination environment.263,264 Speaking of which, the structural frustration and disorder of the Na+ sublattice are promising mechanisms to reduce the activation energy barriers and facilitate ion conduction. In the frustrated structure, e.g., distorted polyhedral sites for mobile ion occupation, the ground state of Na+ can be destabilized creating a shallow potential well for Na+.265 For example, this frustration-induced superionic conduction has been demonstrated in composition-deviated Na8.5(AlS4)0.25(SiS4)0.75 as a result of low local coordination symmetry of Na+ and minimized Coulombic attraction.266 Meanwhile, frustration usually prompts disorder in the anion sublattice, as well as concerted ion motion, both facilitating ion conduction.
Lattice dynamics. In addition to the static structural factors of the skeletal framework, lattice dynamics further complicates the implementation of Na+ conduction based on the ion–phonon interactions. At a given temperature above absolute zero, atoms thermally oscillate around their equilibrium sites within the crystal lattice until they are able to jump with sufficient energy.267 This is usually associated to the reduced activation barrier of Na+ migration under the low average vibrational frequency and low phonon density of states, or a defined descriptor known as the “phonon band center”.268 The low phonon band center has been tightly correlated with fast Na+ ion conduction. On the other hand, the constant vibration of skeletal anions can also soften the framework structure and lower the activation energy for Na+ migration, which are especially obvious for the anions with high polarizability and large size.269–271 While replacing S2− with more polarizable Se2− seems to effectively soften the lattice and mitigate the Na+ migration energy barrier in Na3PS4, this ion–phonon coupling effect from lattice dynamics may not necessarily obey the rule of “soft lattices are always better” since the Arrhenius prefactor σ0 (eqn (2)) also decreases with the activation barrier for ion conduction. Meanwhile, the low anion band center seems to worsen the electrochemical oxidation stability.272 Taking into account that the comprehensive and in-depth understanding of ion–phonon interactions is still missing, the effect of lattice dynamics on Na+ conduction should be analyzed based on specific materials and may not be appropriate to act as a universal designing principle.Recently, a special model of lattice dynamics of polyhedra has been unveiled in various types of sodium-ion SEs, named the “paddle-wheel” mechanism,273–275 to significantly promote the Na+ migration by the rotational polyanions (Fig. 9c), such as (BH4)−,276 (BnHn)2−,277,278 (CBn−1Hn)−,279,280 (PS4)3−,256,281 and (SbS4)3−.256 As the superionic conduction in some of ISEs, e.g., Na2B10H10, may mainly stem from the paddle-wheel mechanism, the rotational dynamics of these polyhedra assist Na+ hopping to a greater or lesser extent, by either widening the bottleneck area (Fig. 9d) or dynamically frustrating the energy landscape and expediting the cation mobility.

2.3. Microstructure scale
Grain boundary effect. So far, the abovementioned Na+ conduction mechanisms merely concern the cases within the grain bulk of ISEs; nonetheless the effect of grain boundaries and pore surfaces cannot be neglected since most of the ISEs are polycrystalline materials with microscopic defects. In fact, these internal interfaces, e.g., pores, cracks, and grain boundaries, can deteriorate the Na+ conductivity by several orders of magnitude, depending on their densities, tilting angles, and segregated impurities, even in the same materials with identical composition and crystal structure.282 Among these microstructure defects, the grain boundary is regarded as the biggest barrier for Na+ conduction because the kinetics of ion flow across grain boundaries tend to become extremely sluggish, which largely increases the activation energy for Na+ migration and reduces the total ionic conductivity of polycrystalline SEs. This phenomenon has been commonly observed in oxide-based,283,284 chalcogenide-based,285–287 and antiperovskite ISEs,288–290 even though the blocking effect from grain boundaries is usually less obvious in sulfide based SEs compared to that in oxide based SEs.291 Despite the difficulty in complete interpretation of the grain boundary effect from its fundamental origin, due to the limited spatial resolution of modern experimental techniques,291–294 the impedance of grain boundaries may be ascribed to the following reasons: (1) the formation of poorly conductive secondary phases; (2) the structural distortion in their core region; and (3) the depletion of charge carriers as a result of the space charge effect in the vicinity of grain boundaries (Fig. 7).295,296From the atomic scale to the microstructure scale in the ISEs, the conduction of Na+ exhibits multi-scale characteristics, depending on both dynamic and static factors, as well as some mysterious influences awaited to be revealed. Meanwhile, the evaluation of ISEs within SMBs is subject to several considerations, mainly including ionic conductivity and interfacial stability against Na metal. These components are entangled together in an extremely complex and interrelated manner, resulting in profound and complicated effects on the ISEs.

3. General principles of interfacial compatibility
As some of the SEs have already exhibited sufficiently high ionic conductivity at room temperature, the limiting factor to the performance of full-cell batteries shifts to the compatibility between SEs and electrodes, i.e., the degree to which two materials can work together at their interface without significant degradation or failure. Since SEs have always been regarded as the finest and ultimate solution to the high-energy-density SMBs, their interfacial compatibility with the metallic Na anode is another very important indicator. The interfacial compatibility between ISEs and the Na metal anode consists of several contributions, namely, chemical and electrochemical stability (thermodynamic stability), formation of the SEI layer (kinetic stability), and physical contact of the solid–solid interface. In other words, the interfacial compatibility may be described as interfacial stability and interfacial resistance.
The chemical stability of SEs is the first prerequisite for their practical application considering the inevitable impurities and interference from the ambient environment during operation or production, such as O2 and H2O. The chemical instability can lead to severe chemical reactions of SEs, thus degrading the battery and causing safety issues. For example, sulfide-based SEs are typically sensitive to air and water, and can be hydrolyzed by moisture releasing toxic H2S gas, while oxide-based SEs generally exhibit less air- and water-sensitivity ensuring reliable operation under ambient conditions.297,298 The electrochemical stability window (ESW) refers to the potential range of an SE within which it is thermodynamically stable, that is neither oxidized nor reduced. As illustrated by Fig. 10a, the ESW of an SE is represented by the band gap, i.e., the distance from the top of its valence band (VB) to the bottom of its conduction band (CB), corresponding to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in OLEs.299,300 If the ESW of an electrolyte is narrower than the electrochemical potentials of the anode and cathode (μA and μC, respectively), it will be reduced by the anode (μA > CB) or oxidized by the cathode (μC < VB), unless a passivation layer is formed by the decomposition products to impede the electron transfer between them and induce a high overpotential. This explains the instability of the carbonate electrolyte in the Na metal anode, because its LUMO is approximately 1 V below the μA of metallic Na.212 The large ESW of an electrolyte is the key to the high operating voltage and high energy density of the SMBs, as it determines the thermodynamic stability of SEs against the high-voltage cathode and Na metal. However, the actual stability window of ISEs usually deviates from the theoretical thermodynamic stability window, in that some “true” stability windows are wider than the theoretical ones and some are narrower. In fact, the narrower “true” stability window of SEs in practical application usually occurs in sulfide-based ISEs, where their ESW can be significantly overestimated by the tricky characterization apparatus and experimental settings (Section 5.1.3).301 Instead, the “true” ESW of SEs must be evaluated by using more sensitive equipment (current detection with pA-grade resolution) or increasing the contact area between the electrolyte and the working electrode during the test.302,303 On the other hand, the wider experimental stability window may originate from the in situ formation of the SEI layer to maintain the kinetic stability of the interface after the initial decomposition, where the decomposition products can cause sluggish kinetics and high overpotentials for further reactions (Section 5.2.3), thereby expanding the “true” ESW to a wider range and allowing additional options for cathode and anode.303–307 Recently, a novel concept of critical interphase overpotential was defined as an intrinsic property of the interface as a function of electronic/ionic conductivity, metal-phobicity and mechanical strength, that represents the resistance to dendrite growth at the interface.308 To summarize the thermodynamic stability and kinetic stability of the interface, three types of electrolyte/metal anode interfaces are outlined as shown in Fig. 10b, which are (I) the intrinsically thermodynamically stable interface without interfacial reaction, (II) the reactive but passivating SEI layer that blocks electron transfer and maintains kinetic stability, and (III) the unstable and reactive interface conducting both ions and electrons (mixed ion-electronic conducting interface, MCI),309,310 among which the first one is always preferred but difficult to achieve, while the second one is acceptable for long-term interfacial stability.
 Fig. 10  (a) The electrochemical stability window or thermodynamic stability range of SEs corresponding to three types of electrolyte/anode interfaces. (b) Three common types of in situ formed interfaces between SEs and the Na metal anode, which are the (i) thermodynamically stable interface, (ii) kinetically stable SEI layer, and (iii) unstable MCI layer. (c) Loss of interfacial contact between SEs and the Na metal anode due to the poor initial wettability (left panel) and the voids formed during the Na plating/stripping process (right panel). 
Another essential aspect of interfacial compatibility is the interfacial resistance, which originates from the initial wettability of Na metal on the SEs and the physical contact between them during the stripping and plating process of Na (Fig. 10c). This is particularly important for rigid SE ceramics with Na metal at room temperature, where the inferior Na+ transmission through the point contacts can significantly restrict the capacity and rate performance of the batteries, or facilitate the undesired side reactions and growth of metal dendrites.39,311–313 On the one hand, the micro-contacts between rigid SEs and Na metal (point–point contacts) result in a very limited contact area for the flux of Na+ or electrons, thus inducing a significantly increased local electric field and current density at these regions, which act as the hotbed for metal dendrite growth (Fig. 10c, left). Although SPEs are inherently flexible that better interfacial wetting of Na metal may be ensured, they generally have rather low Na+ transference numbers (<1) at room temperature, easily leading to ion depletion at the electrolyte/anode interface and formation of a space charge layer, thus creating a high local electric field promoting dendrite growth. On the other hand, even though good initial wettability has already been established at the interface between Na and SEs, the repeated stripping and plating process of Na inevitably changes the surface morphology of the metallic Na anode, thereby influencing the interfacial contact (Fig. 10c right). For example, loss of contact and formation of pores tend to occur as a result of the unduly accumulation of vacancies, when the stripping current density of Na exceeds the limiting value of Na vacancy diffusion in its bulk metal. The loss of physical contact at the interface not only increases the interfacial resistance, but also worsens the interfacial stability by disturbing the Na deposition and facilitating the metal dendrite growth.314
4. Oxide-based ISEs
4.1. Na-β-alumina
The β phase of alkali-metal alumina, namely β-alumina (β-Al2O3), was first identified during the investigation of the ternary system Ca2O–Al2O3–MgO early in 1916, though it has been interpreted as merely an allotropic modification of alumina (α-Al2O3) since then.315 Until 1936, when the trace of alkali oxide, e.g., Na2O, was discovered in its composition, Na-β-Al2O3 was recognized as an alkali aluminate with the empirical formula of Na2O·11Al2O3.316,317 The β′′ phase, Na-β′′-Al2O3, yielding the empirical formula of Na2O·5Al2O3, was subsequently found in the study of the Na2O–Al2O3 system.318 Since fast ion conduction within β-Al2O3 was unveiled in 1967, β-Al2O3 SE has largely encouraged the development of Na–S and Na–Cl high-temperature batteries.27,319–322 Meanwhile, several other compositions were discovered in the β-Al2O3 family, such as β′ and β′′′-Al2O3. Due to the great similarity in the crystal structure and minimal difference in composition, the Na-β-Al2O3 family, often mentioned as Na2O·nAl2O3, is tentatively categorized into two crystal structures, Na-β-Al2O3 (Na2O·8–11Al2O3) and Na-β′′-Al2O3 (Na2O·5–7Al2O3).320,323,324 Both β- and β′′-Al2O3 exhibit layered structures composed of alternate stacking of conduction planes and non-conducting slabs, in which the conduction plane is made by loose-packed O2− and mobile Na+, while the non-conducting slab, referred to as the spinel block, is close-packed by corner-sharing AlO4 tetrahedra and AlO6 octahedra.325,326 Such a sandwich structure provides two-dimensional diffusion channels for anisotropic ion conduction of Na+ ions, so they can move freely within the ‘ab’ planes under an applied electric field while their movement along the c axis is blocked by the dense spinel block layers.
4.1.1. Ion conduction in β/β′′-Al2O3. As shown in Fig. 11a, β-Al2O3 (hexagonal; P63/mmc; a0 = 0.559 nm, c0 = 2.261 nm)316,327 and β′′-Al2O3 (rhombohedral; Rm; a0 = 0.560 nm, c0 = 3.395 nm)324,328 have different chemical stoichiometries and stacking sequences of oxygen ions. β-Al2O3 is constituted by one layer of conduction plane sandwiched between two non-conducting spinel blocks, where each conduction plane contains only one mobile Na+. The ion conduction in the β-Al2O3 structure contributes to two of its important features, viz. the off-stoichiometric composition and the high disorder of the mobile ions.
 Fig. 11  (a) Crystal structures of sodium-β-alumina and sodium-β′′-alumina, adapted with permission from ref. 329, (b) interstitial oxygen stabilized by the Frenkel defect, (c) Frenkel defect accommodating two Na+ ions, (d) interstitialcy mechanism in the conduction planes of β-Al2O3. 
There are three crystallographically distinct sodium sites within the conduction plane of β-Al2O3, namely the Beevers–Ross (BR) sites, the mid-oxygen (mO) sites, and the anti-Beevers–Ross (aBR) sites.325 Although Na+ preferably occupies the BR sites, β-Al2O3 typically contains 15–30% excess Na+ over its ideal composition, resulting in Na+ ions outnumbering the available BR sites, where the excess Na+ are accommodated in the interstitial sites, some occupying mO sites and a very small amount in aBR sites.333,334 Noteworthily, despite the preferable occupation of Na+ in different sites, the site energy difference among them is found to be rather small, indicating the flat potential surface for Na+ in “fluid-like” conduction planes.335 The charge neutralization for the extra cations from the off-stoichiometry is achieved by the charge compensation mechanism of interstitial oxygen. To stabilize the interstitial oxygen, a Frenkel defect is intrinsically formed by moving two adjacent Al3+ from their lattice sites in spinel blocks to the interstitial sites on both sides of the conduction plane, as illustrated by Fig. 11b.335,336 Such a unique Frenkel defect (Fig. 11c), denoted by VAlAli–Oi2−–AliVAl, which associates each Oi2− in the conduction plane with an Al3+ vacancy/Al3+ interstitial pair in the spinel block, can accommodate two excessive Na+ while maintaining the charge neutrality of β-Al2O3.330,337 Meanwhile, it tends to induce large ion relaxation and leads to local disorder in its vicinity.335
Initially, the ion conduction within β-Al2O3 is believed to follow the interstitialcy mechanism, where Na+ ions at an BR site and aBR site (BR-aBR interstitialcy configuration) hop together in a pairwise pattern.338 Nonetheless, the partial occupancy of mO sites suggests a rather complex ion transport mechanism instead, as shown in Fig. 11d, especially considering the excessive sodium content due to the almost unavoidable off-stoichiometry.339 At low temperatures, all excessive Na+ ions are trapped in the region around the charge-compensating interstitial oxygen, referred to as the associated region, and the ion movement is negligible (Fig. 11d, left panel). The ion conduction occurs at elevated temperatures, where the mobile ions are thermally activated to escape the associated regions.331 At the initial stage, a configuration of interstitial pairs is formed by an initially occupied BR site and an aBR site occupied later by an excess interstitial Na+ ion (Fig. 11d, left panel). Then, the BR–aBR pair performs an interstitialcy jump to the mO–mO configuration (Fig. 10d, middle panel), followed by a random jump to either the original BR–aBR position or another neighboring BR–aBR configuration (Fig. 10d, right panel).331,332 In this way, the concerted motion of interstitial pairs renders low energy barriers for Na+ ion diffusion, hence the high ionic conductivity.331,340,341 As a result of off-stoichiometry and formation of charge-compensating defects, Na+ ions are found to be highly disordered within the rigid lattice of β-Al2O3, and their atomic positions usually deviate from the theoretical ones. The conduction paths within the disordered structure create a honeycomb network in the conduction plane, which allows ion transport with low energy barriers.337
In the unit cell of β′′-Al2O3, there are two conduction planes separated by three spinel blocks, where each conduction plane has two mobile Na+ distributed among two types of crystallographic sites, BR sites and mO sites, constituting conduction pathways undulating slightly above and below the ab plane due the threefold symmetry of the spinel blocks.342 With similarity to β-Al2O3 in the basic constitution of the lattice framework, β′′-Al2O3 has a higher concentration of BR sites than β-Al2O3, leading to more vacant Na+ sites in β′′-Al2O3 (about 17%) even when considering the higher concentration of Na+ in its conduction planes, which means the ion conduction within β′′-Al2O3 is dominantly driven by the vacancy mechanism.343 Meanwhile, the correlated ion motion near the vacancies corresponds to an extremely low activation energy of diffusion with only 0.02 eV.344 In addition, the larger volume of the unit cell and higher Na+ concentration in β′′-Al2O3 benefit the facile ion transport. The single-crystal β′′-Al2O3 shows ionic conductivity as high as 0.1 S cm−1 at room temperature and 1 S cm−1 at 300 °C,345 while the more accessible and common polycrystalline β′′-Al2O3 typically exhibits an ionic conductivity of 0.22–0.33 S cm−1 at 300 °C due to the significant impedance from grain boundaries,346,347 but still about an order of magnitude higher than that of polycrystalline β-Al2O3.348 Speaking of which, the blocking effect of grain boundaries largely contributes to the total ionic conductivity of this polycrystalline material.349–351 As the grain size and porosity determine the path length of ion conduction, a longer distance must be crossed by ions within materials that have numerous small grains and pores. As a proof, the coarse-grained polycrystalline β′′-Al2O3 exhibits higher ionic conductivity than the fine-grained one due to the lower concentration of grain boundaries and less impedance to the ion transport within conduction planes.347 Moreover, the disordered arrangement of abnormally growing grains in polycrystalline β′′-Al2O3 ceramics can also result in both low mechanical strength and tortuous ion migration paths.352
Although the β′′ phase is preferred in terms of ionic conductivity, the practically used beta-alumina solid electrolyte, known as BASE, usually consists of both polycrystalline β and β′′ phases because the attempts to synthesize the homogeneous β′′ phase often end up with mixtures with β phase as well as other undesired phases as by-products. By a similar token, pure single-phase β′′-Al2O3 is not commercially appropriate due to its high cost of synthesis, thermal instability, poor mechanical strength and sensitivity to humidity.353 In fact, the ionic conductivity of β/β′′ phase-mixed BASE largely depends on several factors, i.e., composition, β/β′′ phase ratio, and microstructure. Therefore, the modification strategies and synthesis approaches to effectively enhance its ion conduction are based on composition optimization, β/β′′ phase ratio tuning, and microstructure refinement.

4.1.2. Modification strategies for ion conduction. 
Aliovalent doping and isovalent substitution. As the ionic conductivity of both β- and β′′-Al2O3 is closely related to the amount of excess Na+ ions accommodated in the interstitial sites, composition optimization of BASE is represented by increasing the solubility of Na+ within the conduction planes, hence increasing the effective concentration. Apart from the abovementioned intrinsic charge-compensating Frenkel defect that harbors two Na+ for each interstitial oxygen, incorporation of excess Na+ can be managed through aliovalent ion doping of Al3+ sites in the spinel blocks, by which the concentration of Na+ can be greatly altered to induce significant deviation of stoichiometry. Through doping lower-charge cations into the Al3+ sites, a charge imbalance initiates either less aluminum vacancies in the spinel block, or the accommodation of a much greater number of Na+ and the reduced amount of interstitial O2− in the conduction planes.354 Meanwhile, some of the dopant ions, either isovalent or aliovalent, can stabilize the β′′ structure and suppress the sodium loss during its high-temperature processing (T > 1600 °C) by filling the tetrahedral or octahedral voids in the spinel blocks, and thus are referred to as stabilizers. An ideal stabilizer ion should have ionic radius less than 0.97 Å because small cations (r < 0.97 Å) can enter the spinel block while large cations (r > 0.97 Å) are not capable of doing so and they may replace Na+ in the conduction planes or enlarge the area of ordered microdomains.355 Among numerous candidates, Li+ and Mg2+ are the most preferred choices to enrich the Na+ content, yielding the ideal composition of Na1.67Al10.33Mg0.67O17 and Na1.67Al10.67Li0.33O17.321,356 Several other dopants have also been validated to effectively enhance the ionic conductivity of BASE, such as divalent cations Cd2+,357 Co2+,358 Cu2+,359 Zn2+,360 Fe2+,361 and Mn2+,362 trivalent cation Cr3+,363 tetravalent cation Ti4+,361,364 pentavalent cation Ta5+,362 etc. For example, by doping 1.5%wt TiO2 in Li+-stabilized β′′-Al2O3, the β′′ phase can be increased to as high as 93.4% in Na-β′′-alumina and the ionic conductivity is increased from 0.2 S cm−1 to 0.3 S cm−1 at 300 °C.364 In this way, the properly selected dopants can simultaneously increase the concentration of Na+ and tune the β′′/β ratio, corresponding to faster ion conduction.The effects of ion doping in β′′-Al2O3 can go beyond the modification of its composition and phase ratio, in that its microstructure can also be regulated, including grain boundaries, porosity, crystallographic orientation, etc. Meanwhile, the grain size must be properly modified as excessive grain growth causes deterioration of mechanical strength.365,366 Some of the doping ions, such as Y3+367 and Ti4+,364 are prone to appear at the grain boundaries instead of the grain bulk and mitigate the grain boundary resistance. For example, on increasing the TiO2 doping amount, the intragranular ion conduction in β′′-Al2O3 remains unchanged, but the intergranular ionic conduction becomes much faster as the material is dominated by larger grains along with a reduced amount of grain boundaries. To modulate the grain size and porosity, a small amount of MgO was doped into β′′-Al2O3 ceramics, which not only retained up to 95% of the β′′ phase content after a high-temperature processing, but also densified the ceramics (relative density > 98.1%) by forming a second phase (MgAl2O4) at the grain boundaries, thus inhibiting the grain growth and lowering the porosity for a more homogeneous and compact microstructure.368 The higher densification and mechanical strength have also been achieved by doping ZrO2 and TiO2 into the pristine β′′-Al2O3 ceramics, which exhibited a mechanical strength of 192 MPa and an ionic conductivity of 2.8 × 10−1 S cm−1 at 350 °C.369 As a consequence, the improved mechanical strength allows the fabrication of thin-film BASE with a thickness of only 50 μm and an ionic conductivity of 5.4 mS cm−1, enabling the flat cell designs and room-temperature operations.370 A high degree of grain oriented alignment within BASE was accomplished by Ma et al., who synthesized Li-doped Na1.67Al10.67Li0.33O17 through the freeze-drying technique, ending in a high ionic conductivity of 1.852 × 10−1 S cm−1 at 350 °C.371 In this regard, the fabrication of a homogeneous, dense, compact, and well-oriented microstructure with refined grain size for faster ion conduction BASE is synergistically affected by the synthesis and processing conditions, which also determine the composition and phase ratio in the final products due to the inevitable sodium loss and β′′-structure instability at high temperature.
Optimizing the synthesis and processing conditions. Interestingly, as the ionic conductivity of β-Al2O3 ceramics depends on both mobile ion concentration and the strongly bonded ion conducting framework, these two important factors seem to be mutually conflicting and hardly achieved during the traditional synthesis process, i.e., the dense structure usually requires long-time high-temperature sintering while the sodium tends to evaporate at elevated temperatures. As the most common synthesis approach for industrialized BASE, the conventional solid-state reaction usually requires a sintering temperature of around 1600 °C, which facilitates the loss of sodium, decomposition of desired β′′-Al2O3 and formation of the undesired β phase and NaAlO2, as well as the abnormal grain growth with tortuous ion migration pathways, deteriorating both electrochemical and mechanical property.27,322,347,353,372–375 Thus, the optimization of synthesis routes and processing conditions should start off by either lowering the sintering temperature and shortening the sintering time, or orientally aligning the grains and refining their size. Inspired by the strategy of applying pressure to acquire densified and grain-oriented structures,376 β′′-Al2O3 ceramics with their flake-like crystals aligned in the direction of the c-axis were prepared via hot-pressing, which largely mitigated the ion migration energy and improved the ionic conductivity.377 However, as they still experienced the high-temperature sintering for a long time, the grains could hardly get away with the abnormal growth, ending up with a duplex microstructure containing mixed-size grains and grain matrix.326,346,347 To eliminate the undesired products and abnormal behaviors, the sintering temperature and time must be decreased (ideally < 1300 °C and <30 min, respectively). Freeze-drying and spark plasma sintering (SPS) methods have been adopted to overcome these concerns, as well as to achieve grain growth with preferential orientation. Without dopants or additives added, a highly grain-oriented β′′-Al2O3 ceramic was prepared via the SPS technique, which lowered the sintering temperature to 1300 °C (10 min), thus achieving an ionic conductivity of 1.83 × 10−1 S cm−1 at 350 °C with a bending strength of 250 MPa, almost double that of the ones with abnormal grain growth.352,368,378 Another c-axis oriented β′′-Al2O3 ceramic with anisotropic ionic conduction was obtained via the SPS method, resulting in a total ionic conductivity of 19 mS cm−1 at room temperature.379 Later, Li et al. adopted both freeze-drying and SPS techniques to synthesize BASE with both higher bending strength and ionic conductivity of 273 MPa and 2.39 × 10−1 S cm−1 at 350 °C, respectively, attributed to the formation of a “brick-bridge-mortar” crystal structure that provides better mechanical strength, in addition to the reduction of grain boundary resistance from larger-sized grain groups and shortened ion migration paths.380 Cold sintering dramatically lowered the sintering temperature below 400 °C for densification of BASE, which resulted in a theoretical density over 90% and an ionic conductivity of 7.6 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 300 °C, as the carbonates and water molecules contained in the sample could not be removed at such a low temperature which greatly deteriorated its room-temperature ionic conductivity.381 Another alternative preparation method, vapor-phase synthesis, was also demonstrated to benefit from the restrained sodium loss and full conversion of β′′-Al2O3 at lower temperature, as well as maintaning the grain size throughout the reactions.382–385 Impressively, the precursor has a huge impact on the product quality of BASE as well. By choosing precursors from the low-cost and more available hydroxyl alumina group, e.g., boehmite and bayerite, single-phase β′′-Al2O3 can be acquired through the solid state reaction, along with reduction of the sintering temperature and suppression of sodium loss.386,387In addition to the abovementioned attempts to optimize the preparation of BASE, a variety of approaches have been developed, including but not limited to the sol–gel process,388–390 co-precipitation technique,391 spray-freeze/freeze-drying method,392,393 microwave heating,374,394 and mechanochemical methods,395 though little effect was observed on the enhancement of ion conduction.

4.1.3. Compatibility with the Na metal anode. BASE is considered thermodynamically stable against the Na metal anode at 0 V vs. Na/Na+ according to density functional theory (DFT) calculations, except for NaAl11O17 that can be reduced into Al and NaAlO2 below 0.14 V, while its decomposition is rather slow with reaction energy <25 meV per atom.396 The oxidative limit of BASE is approximately 4 V, but the upper threshold shifts to lower values for increasing Na content. Its interfacial stability against the Na metal anode has been investigated in the symmetric Na/β′′-Al2O3/Na cell, where BASE exhibited extraordinary chemical and electrochemical stability against Na metal, without interfacial degradation or reaction products observed over a long time period.240 Such a remarkable interfacial stability of BASE is consistent with the previous literature and has been widely proved in numerous Na-BASE battery systems.397,398 Surprisingly, after delicate heat treatment that eliminated the hydroxyl groups and carbon contaminations on the surface of BASE, the symmetric Na/β′′-Al2O3/Na cell endured a CCD up to 12 mA cm−2 at room temperature, which was ten times as high as that of garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) from the same testing condition.399,400 Despite the wide ESW and compatibility with the Na metal anode, room-temperature-operated BASE is susceptible to penetration by sodium dendrites along grain boundaries when charged above a certain current density, where the rapid penetration, about 1 cm s−1, was observed when the current density was increased to 200 mA cm−2.214,401 On the other hand, compared to that in high-temperature operation with molten Na, sufficient wettability of Na metal on the surface of BASE may be harder to achieve at room temperature. The inadequately wetted surface may result in instability and high interfacial resistance, especially when impurities reside at the interface between BASE and the metallic Na anode, e.g., calcium, which tends to form an oxidized surface film impeding the ion transport.402,403 The penetration of metal dendrites and degradation of the interface between BASE and the metallic Na anode are mostly ascribed to the mechanical-stress-induced bulk deformation/cracks (Fig. 12a), poor initial wetting at room temperature (Fig. 12b) and gradual formation of voids during cycling (Fig. 12c).404–407 Moreover, BASE suffers from serious instability in humid air because of its sensitivity to water, which is especially obvious in β′′-Al2O3, thus forming a sodium oxide layer on the surface, deteriorating the interfacial wetting of Na. The occlusion of water and diffusion of hydronium ions occur in different time spans, and both greatly increase the ionic resistance of BASE.408–411 Meanwhile, the undesired by-product NaAlO2 commonly formed at the grain boundaries is also prone to react with water and carbon dioxide, thereby making BASE unstable under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 12  The most common cause of interface degradation and metal dendrite penetration at the interface between BASE and the Na metal anode. (a) The three-dimensional (3D) imaging of sodium dendrite penetration and pellet cracking in BASE after the rapid short-circuit of the symmetric Na/BASE cell, obtained by ex situ X-ray microcomputed tomography, reprinted with permission from ref. 404. (b) The solid–solid initial contact between rigid BASE and the Na metal anode at room temperature, compared to molten metallic Na intimately wetting the surface of BASE at elevated temperature, adapted with permission from ref. 407. (c) Asymmetric Na stripping and plating process gradually forming voids and causing loss of interface contact during the cycling of the Na anode with BASE, adapted with permission from ref. 406. 

4.1.4. Interfacial modification of BASE for the Na anode. The early commercialized Na–S batteries have already shown huge success operating at elevated temperature around 300 °C while using molten Na and S as electrodes and β′′-Al2O3 as the SE, which provides a theoretical capacity of 1672 mA h g−1 based on the complete reaction from S to Na2S.412,413 In the past few decades, various solid-state cell systems have been developed using BASE, including thin-film batteries414 and Na metal batteries, committed to achieve high energy density at lowered operating temperature. According to the previous section (Section 4.1.3), the major focus on the interfacial modification of BASE in the Na anode should emphasize on (1) reducing the bulk and surface defects, including grain boundaries, micro-cracks, surface impurities or contaminants; (2) improving the intimate interfacial contact between BASE and the Na anode at the initial stage and during cycling; (3) minimizing the interfacial impedance caused by the rigid interfaces and (4) avoiding water intake from the ambient environment.The interfacial modification of BASE and Na metal is mainly achieved by four strategies, which are heat treatment, surface coating, composite electrolytes and ultrasound welding. A simple heat treatment of BASE in an argon atmosphere removed the hydroxides and carbonate impurities on its surface, which effectively reduced the interfacial resistance in a symmetric Na/BASE/Na cell from ∼20 kΩ cm−2 to 8 Ω cm−2 and enabled the ultra-high CCD of 12 mA cm−2 at room temperature.399 Spencer et al. also validated this method to eliminate surface contaminants and reduce the interfacial impendence between Na and BASE through X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and AC impedance spectroscopy.406 Introducing a coating layer on the surface of the BASE has long been demonstrated to significantly mitigate the poor wetting of Na metal at lower temperatures,321,415–420 e.g., nanowire networks, Na alloys, thin films, carbon coating, and micron-sized particles. A novel inorganic/organic composite electrolyte was fabricated by compactly coating PVDF–HFP-based GPE on a cross-linked β/β′′-Al2O3 nanowire (AN) membrane to ensure a smooth electrolyte/Na interface and inhibited dendrite growth.421 The full cell battery using this composite BASE electrolyte with the Na3V2(PO4)3(NVP) cathode and the Na metal anode exhibited a long cycle life of 1000 cycles at 1C and 25 °C, with a capacity retention of 95.3%. Another composite electrolyte, consisting of β-Al2O3 nanoparticles embedded in the poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)/poly(methyl methacrylate)-based gel polymer electrolyte membrane (PVDF-HFP/PMMA-based GPE), was used in a full-cell battery with the NVP cathode and the Na metal anode, which exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 94.1 mA h g−1 with 85% of capacity retained after 300 cycles at 0.5C at room temperature.422 Deng et al. prepared a composite electrolyte by incorporating yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) into BASE, where the added YSZ phase assisted the formation of a stabilized YSZ@BASE/Na interface, meanwhile inducing an “interface anchoring effect” ensuring the strong contact between the Na metal anode and the SE. As a result, the quasi-solid-state battery NaNi0.45Cu0.05Mn0.4Ti0.1O2/YSZ@BASE/Na, with a trace amount of eutectic NaFSI–KFSI molten salt at the cathode surface, achieved a high initial capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at 1C and good cycling stability of 500 cycles at 4C, with the average Coulombic efficiency over 99.99% and a capacity retention of 73% at 80°C.423 Recently, the atomic-level ultrasound welding technique was applied to weld the rigid interfaces between BASE and the Na metal anode, ensuring a compact interface for lower interfacial impedance and suppressed dendrite growth.424 The seminal development of β/β′′-Al2O3, as one of the very earliest SEs, has unfolded the potential of SE systems and motivated the following research of room-temperature solid-state SMBs, which is continuously inspired by novel material fabrication and cell designs.425

4.2. NASICON
To overcome the restriction from anisotropic ion conduction in the layered structure of BASE, an ionic conductor with equivalently fast ion conduction in three dimensions is desired. In 1976, Goodenough et al. and Hong proposed a highly conductive skeletal structure, namely NASICON (Natrium(Na)Super(S)Ionic(I)Conductor(CON)), where alkali ions partially occupy the interconnected interstitial spaces, donating electrons to stabilize the skeletal array of atoms and constructing open 3D channels for Na+ ion transport.426,427 As the mobile ion is not limited to Na+, the empirical formula of NASICON-structured materials is denoted by AM2X3O12, where A can be alkali cations (Na, Li, K, etc.), alkaline earth ions (Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba, etc.) and other mobile ions, or it can be vacant; M can be multivalent transition metal ions maintaining charge balance; and X is usually P or partially replaced by Si or As. The rigid 3D covalent framework of NASICON is made of interconnected polyhedra, where the corner-sharing MO6 octahedra and XO4 tetrahedra constitute so-called lantern units and these XO4-linked lanterns form infinite ribbons along the c-axis, which creates interstitial sites enough to accommodate up to 5 alkali cations per structural formula, providing conduction tunnels for mobile ions.428 The crystal structure of NASICON varies with its composition, from rhombohedral, monoclinic, triclinic, orthorhombic, Langbeinite, Garnet, and SW type to corundum-like.429
4.2.1. Composition and crystal structure. The originally proposed and most widely studied NASICON-structured SE is NaxZr2Six−1P4−xO12 (NZSPO), where 1 ≤ x ≤ 4, which is derived from partial substitution of P5+ by Si4+ in NaZr2P3O12 and the subsequent addition of excess Na+ ions to compensate charge imbalance. As a solid solution of binary NaZr2P3O12–Na4Zr2Si3O12, NZSPO exhibits two distinct crystal structures depending on different compositions and temperatures. The rhombohedral structure with Rc symmetry presents at room temperature (ar = 8.815(1) Å, cr = 22.746(7) Å) except for the composition with 2.8 ≤ x ≤ 3.2, where a slight shear distortion occurs, turning the structure into a monoclinic structure with C2/c symmetry (am = 15.586(9) Å, bm = 9.029(4) Å, cm = 9.205(5) Å, β = 123.70(5)°).426,427 The monoclinic structure is considered as a low-temperature phase which experiences a phase transformation to the high-temperature phase of rhombohedral structure at elevated temperature above 150 °C.430 When the ionic conductivity of NASICON is plotted versus Na+ content, viz. the variable x, an occurrence of curvature is observed corresponding to the phase transformation, in that the monoclinic NZSPO exhibited a higher ionic conductivity of 0.67 mS cm−1 at room temperature and 0.2 S cm−1 at 300 °C when x = 3, i.e. Na3Zr2Si2PO12, despite its lower symmetry compared to that of the rhombohedral structure.426,427 Initially, this phenomenon was explained by the reduced energy barrier for Na+ ion conduction because of the stronger Na+ interaction, the presence of the high-energy Na+ site, and the enlarged cell volume in the monoclinic structure. In later research, this observation was challenged by discovering the higher room-temperature bulk ionic conductivity of 15 mS cm−1 and total ionic conductivity of 5 mS cm−1 in Na3.4Zr2Si2.4P0.6O12, due to a preferable ratio of occupied/vacant Na+ sites, as well as the activated correlated ion migration.431 In this case, the optimum Na+ content is determined as approximately 3.4 mol per formula unit in the equivalent system of Nax+yMx−1M′3−xSiyP3−yO12.431–437 This theory will be further expanded by elaborating the ion conduction mechanism within NASICON. Note that in this particular review article focusing on sodium-ion ISEs, the nomination of NASICON and NZSPO can be interchangeable considering the excessive variety of NASICON-structured materials.
4.2.2. Ion conduction in NASICON. In both rhombohedral and monoclinic phases, the (Zr2Si2PO12)3− framework is constructed by corner-linked ZrO6 octahedra and SiO4/PO4 tetrahedra, while Na+ ions reside in the cavities of the skeletal framework, as shown in Fig. 13a. The bulk ionic conductivity of NASICON relies on both concentration and mobility of effective charge carriers, where the former is determined by Na+ site occupation and the latter is mostly related to the structural geometry.
 Fig. 13  (a) The crystal structure of the rhombohedral (top panel) and monoclinic phase (bottom panel) of NZSPO, adapted with permission from ref. 438. (b) The ideal ratio of mobile Na+ ions and Na+ vacancies for fastest single-ion hopping, in which min(ΔE) represents the minimum absolute difference in electrostatic energies between the ground-state (GS) site and the excited state (ES), adapted with permission from ref. 439 and 440. (c) Correlated-ion motions in NZSPO with corresponding migration energy landscapes in comparison with that of single-ion hopping, adapted with permission from ref. 439. 
Concentration of mobile charge carriers. According to the common belief, there are two distinct Na+ sites in the rhombohedral structure, namely NaR1 (one per formula) and NaR2 (three per formula). NaR1 is coordinated by oxygen atoms from ZrO6 octahedra in an antiprism geometry, while NaR2 is coordinated to neighboring oxygen atoms from ZrO6 octahedra and SiO4/PO4 tetrahedra in a distorted cubic coordination, respectively.440 Driven by the Na-vacancy mechanism, ion conduction within NZSPO is attributed to the disordered distribution and well-balanced concentration of both mobile Na+ ions and available vacancies, where either overly excessive or insufficient sodium content in the NASICON structure results in deficient ionic conductivity.432 When only one Na+ is incorporated per formula, corresponding to NaZr2P3O12, merely the NaR1 site is occupied and all other NaR2 sites are left vacant, resulting in extremely high resistivity of ion conduction in this compound. When charge-compensating Na+ ions are introduced by substitution of Si for P in NASICON, the occupation shifts to NaR2 along with the variable x increasing in NaxZr2Six−1P4−xO12 as the partial site occupation of mobile Na+ ions distributes over several inequivalent Na+ sites in a disordered manner.426,427 Recently, an additional NaR3 site has been proposed as a metastable site for Na+ migration in the NaR1–NaR2 diffusion pathways where only very few Na+ ions occupy this type of site.436,439,441 As the concentration of mobile Na+ ions increases in the range of 1 ≤ x ≤ 3 in NaxZr2Six−1P4−xO12, the reduced site occupation of NaR1 induces stronger electrostatically repulsive force between the ZrO6 octahedra piled in the c-axis direction, leading to the expansion of cell volume alongside the room-temperature phase transition from rhombohedral to monoclinic.426,440 Due to the slight structure distortion in phase transition, those Na+ sites in the rhombohedral structure split into numerous inequivalent Na+ sites in the monoclinic structure, regardless of a great discrepancy still existing in the ambiguous Na+ site and migration pathways. In contrast to the previous assertion of three427,442–445 or four types of Na+ sites,441 five types of Na+ sites have been recognized after a detailed reexamination of the Na+ arrangement in the monoclinic phase,436 where each one of the NaR2 and NaR3 site is divided into NaM2 + NaM3 sites and NaM4 + NaM5 sites, respectively. All five occupied Na+ sites contribute to ion conduction, even including the high-energy NaM5 sites with the lowest occupation of 0.12 among all. An additional site NaM6 was found to be split from the NaR3 sites, but this empty interstitial NaM6 site only acts as an interstices allowing Na+ ions passing through, instead of an equilibrium site.438 As the Na+ content increases in NZSPO, followed by phase transition and cell volume expansion, as well as a redistribution of partially occupied Na+ sites, the ionic conductivity of NASICON increases to a limiting value until a certain amount of Na+. Based on the single-ion vacancy hopping mechanism, such a locally highest ionic conductivity of NZSPO is achieved when x = 3, i.e., Na3Zr2Si2PO12.440,446 At this Na+ concentration, the difference of site energy is minimized on the hopping path from the “start point” to the “end point”, indicating a flat electrostatic energy landscape and therefore a low migration barrier (Fig. 13b).However, as single-ion migrations dominate in the stoichiometries with the low range of Na+ concentrations, correlated ion migrations can be triggered when x reaches 3.4 in NaxZr2Six−1P4−xO12.431 Correlated ion migration that involves simultaneous collective motion of several atoms manifests a much lower energy barrier than single-ion migration (Fig. 13c). This correlated ion migration is activated by the stronger Coulombic repulsion between the migrating Na+ and the neighboring mobile Na+ in the environment of highly concentrated Na+ ions.292,447,448 Due to the necessary assistance from available vacancies to accomplish the correlated ion migration, the optimal sodium content is determined as 3.3–3.55 mol per formula unit.
Structure determined migration pathways and bottlenecks. The mobility of Na+ in NASICON is strongly related to its crystal structure considering that the mobile Na+ must move along the 3D migration channels scaffolded by the skeletal framework. The (Zr2Si2PO12)3− framework in NZSPO consists of octahedra and tetrahedra bridged by oxygen atoms, while every three oxygen atoms create a triangular area in the migration pathways that mobile ions must squeeze through. These triangular areas are called “bottlenecks”, as shown in Fig. 14a, and their size determines the difficulty, or the energy barrier, of inter-site Na+ migrations. In the rhombohedral structure, there are two bottlenecks in the NaR1–NaR2 pathway, viz. TR1 and TR2, corresponding to NaR1 and NaR2 sites, respectively, in the shape of rings circled by an edge of ZrO6 octahedra and two vertices of SiO4/PO4 tetrahedra. Later, an additional type of TR3 bottleneck emerges along with the presence of the NaR3 site. In this case, Na+ must pass through the TR1 bottleneck for NaR2–NaR3 migration, the TR2 bottleneck for NaR3–NaR1 migration, and the TR3 bottleneck for NaR3–NaR3 migration (Fig. 14b). These short-range segments constitute long-range ion conduction pathways, i.e. NaR1–NaR3–NaR2–NaR3–NaR1 and NaR2–NaR3–NaR3–NaR2 channels, among which the first is preferred.439 These bottlenecks represent the narrowest gate in the ion conduction pathways, thus requiring the smallest diameter of its area to be greater than twice the sum of anion and alkali-ion radii for unhindered ion hops, which is 4.7 Å in the case of Na+ conduction within an oxide.427,438 For example, the TR1 bottleneck is smaller than the other bottlenecks in rhombohedral NZSPO; therefore its size becomes the critical factor for Na+ ion conduction. It turns out that the activation energy of Na+ transport decreases in a linear manner with the increasing size of the TR1 bottleneck.449 The excessive Na+ sites in the monoclinic structure of NZSPO result in even more convoluted Na+ ion conduction pathways and more complex bottleneck regions. In each monoclinic cell, there are four equivalent NaM1–NaM6–NaM2–NaM6–NaM1 channels and eight equivalent NaM1–NaM4–NaM3–NaM5–NaM1 channels mainly responsible for long-range ion motions, as well as some relatively less conductive local channels around NaM1 sites such as NaM4–NaM5, NaM4–NaM6, and NaM5–NaM6 channels. Correspondingly, nine distinguishable bottlenecks are formed along these migration pathways, including four (two of them are identical) in each NaM1–NaM6–NaM2–NaM6–NaM1 channel, four in each NaM1–NaM4–NaM3–NaM5–NaM1 channel, and other three of them along the channels around NaM1 (Fig. 14c).438 One of the bottlenecks in the NaM1–NaM6–NaM2–NaM6–NaM1 channel, namely TMB, has a diameter of 4.46 Å which is smaller than twice the sum of O2− and Na+ radii, thus becoming the limiting factor for the ion jump events in this channel. On the other hand, the bottlenecks in the NaM1–NaM4–NaM3–NaM5–NaM1 channel have diameters larger than the appropriate size, with the smallest bottleneck TMD larger than 4.76 Å, thereby allowing Na+ migration through this tunnel and the occupancies of Na+ sites along this type of channel becoming important factors for fast ion conduction.
 Fig. 14  (a) The Na+ hopping determined by bottleneck size in the NASICON structure. Identified Na+ migration pathways and the corresponding bottlenecks in the (b) rhombohedral NZSPO anion framework, adapted with permission from ref. 439, and (c) monoclinic NZSPO anion framework, adapted with permission from ref. 438. 
To accurately measure the impact of skeletal framework geometry on the mobile Na+, a geometrical parameter reff is defined in a more general form of NASICON-structured materials Na1+2w+x−y+zM(II)x−1M(III)3−xM(V)yM(IV)2−w−x−y(SiO4)z(PO4)3−z, as the effective mean ionic radius of the cations M(II), M(III), M(V), and M(IV), calculated by eqn (7),449 
(7)The optimum value of reff has been determined as 0.72 Å, where the NASICON structure exhibits a higher ionic conductivity. This geometrical parameter is very important in the application of the aliovalent doping strategy in the pristine NZSPO structure for effective enhancement of bulk ionic conductivity, i.e., rMg2+ ≈ rZr4+ ≈ 0.72 Å.450
Blocking effect of grain boundaries. Akin to β-Al2O3 and all other oxide-based ISEs, grain boundaries and pores have non-negligible effects on the total ionic conductivity of NASICON-structured materials, especially at low temperatures (<100 °C), in that the grain boundary conductivity, σGB, becomes predominantly crucial compared to the bulk material conductivity.451 Meanwhile, the grain boundary impedance can be further escalated by the preferential formation of insulating impurity ZrO2 along the grain boundaries, because of the volatilization of sodium and phosphorus content after the high-temperature processing or low reactivity of monoclinic ZrO2 in precursors.452 Worse still, the presence of grain boundaries favors the rapid growth of sodium dendrites along the small crevices and eventually the penetration. As a matter of fact, it is this grain-boundary-dendrite-growth mechanism that overthrows the resistance to metal dendrite penetration by the rigid and stiff ceramics. After overviewing the limiting factors to ion conduction within NASICON, the enhancement of ionic conductivity should stress on (1) widening the bottleneck area to construct free ion migration pathways, (2) tuning the concentration of effective charge carriers or triggering the correlated ion migrations, (3) decorating the grain boundary facilitating total ion conduction, and (4) preparing fine-microstructure and dense ceramics.

4.2.3. Modification strategies for fast ion conduction. 
Aliovalent doping or isovalent substitution. To improve the bulk ionic conductivity of NASICON, charge carrier concentration tuning and bottleneck broadening are usually accomplished by directly adding excess sodium content and/or aliovalent/isovalent substitution of the skeletal atoms. For example, an addition of 10 at% excess sodium content into pristine Na3Zr2Si2PO12 substantially increases the total ionic conductivity to around 1.2 × 10−1 S cm−1 at 300 °C, by slightly enlarging the unit cell volume and expanding the smallest bottleneck TMB.451 As the most effective approach to simultaneously increase the concentration of charge carriers and tailor the bottleneck size, aliovalent or isovalent substitution typically happens at the Zr4+ site in NZSPO. The common dopants include divalent Mg2+,284,453,454 Co2+,455 Zn2+,455,456 Ni2+,284,455 and Ca2+;457 trivalent Y3+,455,456,458–460 La3+,434,458,460 and Sc3+;433,461–463 tetravalent Ti4+453,456 and Ce4+;464–466 or pentavalent V5+,453 Nb5+,467 and Ta5+,453 among which the Mg2+, Y3+, La3+ and Sc3+-doped NZSPO exhibit the most outstanding results in enhancing the ionic conductivity. On the one hand, aliovalent doping introduces excess sodium content in the crystal lattice under charge compensation, in that the influx of mobile Na+ in the conducting pathways evokes faster ion conduction. On the other hand, doping lower-charge cations at the Zr4+ site weakens the electrostatic interactions between stationary cations and mobile Na+, thereby reducing the migration energy required for Na+ hopping through bottlenecks.455 For example, through the substitution of Zr4+ by Zn2+, with similar ionic radii, Na3.4Zr1.8Zn0.2Si2PO12 exhibited a bulk ionic conductivity of 3.75 mS cm−1 at room temperature, which is approximately three times higher than that of the undoped NASICON.455 Another Zn2+-doped NZSPO, Na3.4Zr1.9Zn0.1Si2.2P0.8O12, exhibited an ultra-high ionic conductivity of 5.27 mS cm−1 at room temperature upon simultaneously increasing the Si/P ratio.468 The investigation of its structural geometry revealed that the substitution of Zn2+ for Zr4+ enlarged the bottlenecks in the main Na+ migration pathways. The size effect can be substantially obvious by doping ions with different sizes at the Zr4+ site, i.e., bottleneck expansion and creation of free space for ion migration, thus reducing the activation energy and facilitating ion conduction. As mentioned in Section 4.2.2, the ionic conductivity of the NASICON structure is optimized when the effective mean ionic radius reff is as close to 0.72 Å as possible. In NZSPO, this theory implies that the doping ions substituted at the Zr4+ (r = 0.72 Å) site should have the same or a little larger size for ideal structure adjustment, e.g. Mg2+ (r = 0.72 Å) and Sc3+ (r = 0.745 Å),449,454 and not much smaller sizes, such as Co2+ (0.65 Å, 0.16 mS cm−1) and Al3+ (0.54 Å, 0.44 mS cm−1).455 Song et al. demonstrated that doping Mg2+ into NZSPO not only increases the concentration of charge carriers, but also significantly enlarges the smallest bottleneck (in Mg2+-doped ∼6.522 Å2 vs. in undoped ∼5.223 Å2), resulting in a high total ionic conductivity of 3.5mS cm−1 for Na3.1Zr1.95Mg0.05Si2PO12 at room temperature.454 Nonetheless, this remarkable outcome of Mg2+ doping was doubted by later research, particularly with such a low doping level of 0.05 at% Mg, and replication of the same composition only delivered an ionic conductivity of 1.3 mS cm−1.284 Accordingly, the scandium-substituted NASICON Na3.4Sc0.4Zr1.6Si2PO12 exhibits a superior ionic conductivity of 4 mS cm−1 at room temperature,433 while another Mg2+-doped NZSPO, Na3.3Zr1.85Mg0.15Si2PO12, delivers an ionic conductivity of 3.54 mS cm−1 at room temperature.469 By isovalent replacement of Zr4+ with Hf4+, the as-synthesized Na3.2Hf2Si2.2P0.8O12 possessed a high ionic conductivity of 2.3 mS cm−1.470 Not so commonly, the ionic conductivity improvement was achieved by F− partially occupying the O2− sites via the NaF additive, which promoted the exsolution of Na3PO4 and ZrO2 and increased the Si/P ratio and Na+ concentration, leading to the high ionic conductivity of 4.98 mS cm−1, while the Hf-co-doped novel Na3.2Hf2Si2.2P0.8O11.85F0.3 displayed an ionic conductivity of 2.39 mS cm−1.471,472 Meanwhile, the Ca2+-doped Hf-based NASICON Na3.2Hf1.9Ca0.1Si2PO12 showed an ionic conductivity of 1.07 mS cm−1 with an ESW of 8.80 V.211Some of the doping ions, such as Mg2+, La3+, Nb5+ and F−, are proved to effectively decorate the grain boundaries in NASICON. For example, in addition to the enlarged bottlenecks and increased sodium concentration induced by Mg2+ doping, the enhanced ionic conductivity of Mg2+-doped NASICON is also attributed to the conducting secondary phase Na3PO4 formed at the grain boundaries to mitigate the grain boundary resistance.284 Likewise, doping La3+ into NZSPO has the same effect at grain boundaries with the formation of Na3La(PO4)2, La2O3 and LaPO4, which facilitate the ion conduction at grain boundaries and increase the density of ceramics, while Na3La(PO4)2 further raises the concentration of mobile Na+.434 As a result of both improved bulk and grain boundary conductivity, Na3.3Zr1.7La0.3Si2PO12 shows a preeminent total ionic conductivity of 6.7 mS cm−1 at room temperature.458 With the addition of NaF into the precursor, a “binder-like” Na–Si–P–O–F glassy phase forms in situ around the grains that modifies the grain boundaries and improves ionic conductivity.473 Meanwhile, F− doping facilitates the grain growth in NZSPO to minimize the grain boundaries for a dense microstructure, in that the NaF-assisted synthesized NZSPO exhibited a total ionic conductivity of 1.41–3.6 mS cm−1 at ambient temperature.473,474 Interestingly, as Al3+ tends to lower the bulk ionic conductivity of NZSPO due to the size effect, it can increase the relative density of the ceramic and contribute to the total ionic conductivity. Another high ionic conductivity achieved by the doping strategy of NZSPO is 5.51 mS cm−1 for Nb5+-doped Na3.3Zr1.9Nb0.1Si2.4P0.6O12, which increased both the bulk and grain boundary conductivity through alteration of sodium concentration as well as the local structure, while benefiting from reduced intergranular impedance due to increased ceramic density and depressed formation of impurities.467 A summary of the ionic conductivity and activation energy of the modified NASICON-type NZSPO is presented in Fig. 15, achieved by adopting different elemental doping strategies.
 Fig. 15  Summary of the ionic conductivity and activation energy of NASICON (NZSPO) doped with different elements. The shaded region is the corresponding activation energy for comparison. 
Optimizing the preparation conditions. Beyond ion doping strategies, optimizing the synthesis and processing conditions is essential to the enhancement of ionic conductivity in most of the oxide-based ISEs, and NASICON is no exception. Akin to BASE in Section 4.1, tuning the preparation conditions mostly influences the microstructure and density of NZSPO ceramics, hence alleviating grain boundary impedance and increasing total ionic conductivity.475 As a general principle for oxide-based fast ion conductors, the ionic conductivity is favored by high purity, high densification, and homogeneous grain size. Sintering the oxides at higher temperature and for longer time periods often results in the higher density of the ceramics and the larger grain sizes, respectively, which seem to benefit fast ion conduction.459,476 However, the high sintering temperature can cause volatilization of Na and P content, as well as a change in Si/P arrangement, which disturbs the formation of the phase-pure product. Meanwhile, some glassy and secondary phases with lower ionic conductivity may emerge in this process, such as ZrO2, Na2CO3 and NaOH, and they can greatly hinder Na+ ion transport.477 Although this problem can usually be solved by adding excessive amounts of sodium and phosphorus in precursors before high-temperature processing,451,478 it is still difficult to empirically determine the precise amount to be added and unexpected off-stoichiometry can exist in the final products. Some additives have been used in the synthesis of NZSPO to reduce the sintering temperature while maintaining the relative density of ceramics, such as Na3BO3 through liquid phase sintering (700 °C, 0.1 mS cm−1),479 Na2O–Nb2O5–P2O5 glass through SPS (1000 °C, 1 mS cm−1),480 antimony-tin oxide (ATO) through solid-state reaction (1100 °C, 1.43 mS cm−1),481 and Na2SiO3 through liquid phase sintering (1100 °C, 1.28 mS cm−1 and 1175 °C, 1.45 mS cm−1).482,483 A few other research studies are dedicated to optimizing the processing conditions. For instance, Chong et al. investigated the influence of ball-milling duration on the microstructure and conductivity properties of NASICON synthesized by the solid-state method, and found that varied milling durations formed different types of ZrO2 and caused different ionic conductivity.484 Niazmand et al. prepared NZSPO with a high ionic conductivity of 1.7 mS cm−1 by adopting the sol-gel method and SPS technique, which was improved compared to that from conventional solid-state sintering because of lower sintering temperature, shorter time, higher density and nano-particle size.485
High entropy alloying. To overcome the limited options for charge-compensating dopants and the complicated synthesis process, high-entropy metal cation mixing was recently demonstrated for effectively enhancing the room-temperature ionic conductivity of NASICON, via introducing local distortion and overlapping distribution of Na+ site energies, thus allowing Na+ ion migration with lower activation energy. According to theoretical calculations and experimental results, the high-entropy NASICON (Na(Ti,Zr,Sn,Hf)2(PO4)3) provided enhanced ionic conductivity in combination with the strategy of introducing excess Na+.486

4.2.4. Compatibility with the Na metal anode. As the thermodynamic stability is found to vary with the composition, NASICON-structured SEs generally have high oxidation potentials but become thermodynamically unstable at low potentials according to the theoretical calculations,242,396 as shown in Fig. 16a. For example, the ESW of stoichiometric NZSPO, Na3Zr2Si2PO12, was predicted to be 1.11–3.41 V vs. Na+/Na, while the slightly off-stoichiometric compositions exhibited shifted ESWs within this range.487 Despite the thermodynamic instability of NZSPO against metallic Na, the kinetics of the reduction reaction of NZSPO is relatively slow and an electronically insulating SEI layer forms at a rather small decomposition energy (−0.27 eV per atom) (Fig. 16b, upper panel). The large portion of electronic insulators, including Na4SiO4, Na2ZrO3, Na3P and ZrSi, in this SEI layer yields surface passivation and prevents further decomposition of bulk materials. This implies that NZSPO SEs can be kinetically stable against the metallic Na anode in practice, instead of being thermodynamically stable. Interestingly, the driving force for decomposition of NZSPO against metal Na tends to decrease as the Si/P ratio increases.487,488 Likewise, the oxidation overpotential of NZSPO can readily extend its stability above 5 V due to the formation of the insulating layer and the sluggish oxidation reaction kinetics, which is made possible by using a wide range of cathodes, including NVP,434,457,473,489–494 sulfur,454,495 NaTi2(PO4)3,238 Na2MnFe(CN)6,199 Na0.9Cu0.22Fe0.3Mn0.48O2,496 and NaxCoO2.497,498
 Fig. 16  (a) The thermodynamic stability of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and the decomposed products at different potentials and sodium content, reprinted with permission from ref. 487. (b) Reaction energy of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (upper panel) and volume change (bottom panel) with different cathode and anode materials, adapted with permission from ref. 242. (c) Optical imaging of the preferential growth of sodium metal dendrites along grain boundaries in the NASICON SE pellet, inducing dendrite penetration and ceramic cracking. 
Unfortunately, the pristine NASICON oxides are still considered incompatible with the metallic Na anode at room temperature due to the large interfacial resistance of the solid–solid interface between them, as well as the incapability of the rigid interface to buffer the significant volume change during cycling (Fig. 16b, bottom panel). The CCD of Na/pristine NZSPO/Na symmetric cells is usually reported in the range of 0.07–0.2 mA cm−2, without interfacial modification.215,487,499 The rigid nature of oxide ceramics may be insufficient to buffer the volume change of the metal anode during the sodiation–desodiation process, in that Noguchi et al. fabricated an all-solid-state battery NVP/Na3Zr2Si2PO12/Na exhibiting the rapid decay of cell capacity and loss of cycle life, with specific capacity declining from 80 mA h g−1 to 53 mA h g−1 within 50 cycles at 80 °C.491,492 Most recently, the interfacial stability of Na3.4Zr2Si2.4P0.6O12 with Na metal was investigated in detail by Janek et al., wherein several contribution factors to interfacial resistance were properly interpreted, i.e., charge transfer process, SEI formation, and current constriction (dynamic and static).500 Based on the in situ characterization and monitoring of the temporal evolution of the interface, it was found that the kinetically stabilized and inert SEI layer exhibited rather low charge transfer resistance, indicating that the large interfacial impedance attributes to current constriction from the insufficient physical contact at the interface, as well as the formation of the interfacial pore structure during anodic dissolution. Meanwhile, such a poor interfacial contact between NASICON and the sodium metal anode induces a non-uniform Na+ flux across the interface and uneven sodium plating that promotes growth of sodium dendrites. Regardless of the high shear modulus of NASICON, the sodium dendrites can grow rapidly along the grain boundaries where the electric field is enhanced locally during charging, and eventually induce bulk cracks and penetrate the SEs, which has been confirmed in our experimental demonstration (Fig. 16c).214,237,238
In practical application, NZSPO should be carefully handled in ambient air because it easily reacts with H2O and CO2, to form byproducts such as Na2CO3 and NaOH on the sample surface, causing significant interfacial resistance and poor wetting between NZSPO and electrodes, though this can be restored by a high-temperature treatment.501,502 Hence, different strategies have been developed to engineer the interfaces between NASICON and the Na metal anode, focusing on (1) enabling intimate contact of the electrolyte/anode interface and (2) protecting NASICON ceramics from dendrite penetration through grain boundaries or internal defects.

4.2.5. Modification strategies for a stable NASICON/Na metal interface. Before surface-treating the electrolyte/anode interface, the stability of NASICON against the metal Na anode can be improved by doping. For example, Zn-doped Na3.4Zr1.9Zn0.1Si2.2P0.8O12,468 Pr3+-doped Na3.3Zr1.7Pr0.3Si2PO12,503 and La-doped Na3.3Zr1.7La0.3Si2PO12434 demonstrated significantly improved CCD of 0.5, 0.9, and 1.1 mA cm−2, respectively, in Na symmetric cells at room temperature. On the other hand, interfacial modification between NASICON and the metallic Na anode can be achieved by addition of liquid electrolytes,454,495 in situ formation of the interlayer,238,490,504,505 introduction of a sandwich structure,238,457,506 use of a composite anode215 or a 3D Na metal anode,457 chemical plating,457,490,499 application of higher uniaxial compression,216 and ultrasound solid welding.507 By adopting diverse methods for interfacial modification, some all-solid-state or quasi-solid-state battery systems have been successfully fabricated. A Na–S battery was fabricated using the sulfur/carbon nanofiber (CNF) composite cathode, the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 solid electrolyte coated with a layer of polymer with intrinsic nanoporosity (PIN) on the anode side, and the sodium metal anode, and the full cell overcame the polysulfide-shuttle problem and provided a discharge capacity of 700 mA h g−1 at C/5 with 550 mA h g−1 maintained after 100 cycles.495 With a coating layer of AlF3 decorating the interface between Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and Na metal, NVP/Na3Zr2Si2PO12-AlF3/Na delivered an initial discharge capacity of 111.0 mA h g−1 at 1C, retaining a superior reversible capacity of 89.6 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles.499 By modifying the Na3.2Hf1.9Ca0.1Si2PO12 electrolyte pellet with SnO2 at the Na metal interface, a mixed-ion-electron layer of Na2O/NaxSn was in situ formed to ensure the intimate interface contact and regulated Na+ stripping/plating, and NVP/Na3.2Hf1.9Ca0.1Si2PO12–SnO2/Na maintained a capacity of 103.1 mA h g−1 at 0.5C for over 300 cycles with CCD up to 2.0 mA cm−2 without an obvious short circuit.211 Lu et al. developed a robust monolithic SSB with high rate capability and excellent cyclability, where the Na metal anode was integrated into the porous layer of the Ca2+-doped NASICON Na3.4Zr1.8Ca0.2Si2PO12 (Ca-NZSPO) SE with a sodiophilic surface created by impregnating with SnO2 particles, forming a monolithic electrolyte–anode architecture. The full cell exhibited specific capacities of 80.5 mA h g−1 at 4C and 96.7 mA h g−1 at 1C with retention of 94.9 mA h g−1 after 450 cycles at room temperature.457 By directly growing a graphene-like thin layer on the Na3Zr2Si2PO12 ceramic electrolyte, a uniform Na+ flux across the NASICON/Na interface was promised by the graphene defect network, leading to a reduced interfacial impedance by ten-fold and inhibited pervasion of sodium dendrites into grain boundaries. The full cell battery with the NVP cathode and the Na metal anode demonstrated a high reversible initial capacity of 108 mA h g−1 at 1C with 85% of the capacity retained after 300 cycles, while maintaining a CE of almost 100%.490 Most recently, Ma et al. proposed that the formation of sodium dendrites on the NZSPO surface can be prevented simply by blocking the atmosphere with a protective coating of sodium salts, such as NaNO3 or NaCl, where the CCD of the symmetric Na/NZSPO/Na cell reaches 14 mA cm−2.508
5. Chalcogenide-based ISEs
Chalcogenide-based SEs contain at least one or more chalcogens from group 16 elements, such as S and Se (but excluding O), that establish covalent bonding with the atoms from group 14 or 15 elements, e.g., P, Sb, Sn, etc. The formed polyanionic polyhedra, e.g., (PS4)3−, (SbS4)3−, and (SnS4)3−, build the skeletal framework of the ion conductors, with mobile Na+ residing at the interstices.509 The Na+ diffusion in this chalcogenide-based conducting framework is intrinsically faster than that in oxide-based ones, realized by the enlarged bottlenecks and migration channels in the Na+ transport pathways owing to the smaller ionic radius of S2 compared to that of O2−, as well as the weaker electrostatic force between the sulfide framework and Na+ ions because of the lower electronegativity of S2−. Moreover, chalcogenide SEs are known for their simple and low-temperature manufacturing requirements, along with their great deformability for both lower grain boundary resistance and more intimate contact with electrodes, thus lower interfacial resistance. However, it was found that mere cold pressing of chalcogenide SEs still leaves voids in their compact components, detrimental to their electrochemical properties.510 On the other hand, chalcogenide SEs are considered extremely unstable in air as they undergo hydrolysis on exposure to moisture which releases toxic gas H2S and results in a sharp drop of ionic conductivity. Based on preliminary cyclic voltammetry (CV), chalcogenide SEs generally exhibit a wide ESW ≥ 5 V,226 but such values may be overestimated because the conventional CV techniques fail to detect very small decomposition currents.209,239,303,305 The “true” ESW of chalcogenide-based SEs was found to be rather narrow, indicating the inevitable occurrence of serious side reactions and unstable SEI layers at the electrolyte/Na anode interfaces.240,241,511 Chalcogenide SEs can manifest glassy or glass-ceramics characteristics, in which the former exhibits an amorphous phase with the lack of long-range order and contains concentrated mobile Na+ within the sublattice, while the latter is crystallized from the glasses and exhibits both crystal-structure framework and glassy grain boundary, thus rendering lower ionic conductivity than its glassy precursors but meanwhile lower grain boundary resistance than the polycrystalline materials.225,512 Accordingly, ceramization and vitrification can usually be applied for tuning the ionic conductivity and electrolyte stability under harsh operation conditions, as well as for simplified battery packaging.513–516
5.1. Na3PS4-type
5.1.1. Ion conduction in Na3PS4. The most signature composition in chalcogenide-based SEs is the Na3PS4-type, with the general composition of Na3MX4 (M = P, Sb; X = S, Se), along with its isostructural compounds such as Na3PSe4, Na3SbS4, and Na3SbSe4. Na3PS4 exists in three crystal structures including the room-temperature tetragonal α-phase (P21c, a = 6.9520 Å, c = 7.0757 Å), the high-temperature cubic β-phase (I3m, a = 6.9965 Å), or the orthorhombic γ-phase (Fddd, a = 6.6055 Å, b = 11.7143 Å, and c = 20.7378 Å) which was recently found at even higher temperature.281 Inspired by the Li2S–P2S5 system, tetragonal-phase Na3PS4 (α-Na3PS4 or t-Na3PS4) was initially synthesized showing an inferior ionic conductivity of the order of magnitude of 10−6 S cm−1 at 50 °C.517 Later in 2012, the high-temperature cubic-phase Na3PS4 (β-Na3PS4 or c-Na3PS4) was crystallized from the glassy state and stabilized at room temperature, exhibiting a higher ionic conductivity of 2 × 10−4 S cm−1.301 Its room-temperature ionic conductivity was further enhanced to 4.6 × 10−4 S cm−1 using high-purity 99.1% crystalline Na2S as the precursor and the simple ball-milling process as the synthesis method.518 The cubic phase of β-Na3PS4 consists of (PS4)3− tetrahedra in a body-centered cubic (bcc) arrangement, where two types of Na+ sites are embodied within the lattice, namely Na(6b) and Na(12d), with the former locating at the face center and midpoint of the lattice edge of the unit cell, and the latter locating at the midpoint of two adjacent Na(6b) sites, as shown in Fig. 17a.513 While Na(6b) sites are predominantly occupied by Na+ ions (occ. ≈ 0.8), Na(12d) sites (occ. ≈ 0.1) are considered as metastable transition sites acting as interstices for Na+ pass-through. Through the interconnection of each Na(6b) to other four co-planar Na(6b) via intermediate Na(12d), the 3D diffusion channels are constructed for the inter-site hopping of Na+ in directions parallel to the lattice edges.517,519 The cubic-to-tetragonal phase transition occurs as the temperature drops below ca. 530 K, reflected by the converged lattice parameters, the slightly redistributed orientation of (PS4)3− polyhedra, and the minorly displaced Na+ ions.517,519 During the process of tetragonal distortion of the lattice, Na(6b) splits into Na(2a) and Na(4d), and the latter is shifted 0.5Å away from its original position in the cubic phase, making up three types of Na+ sites in α-Na3PS4, namely Na(2a), Na(4d) and Na(12d); however this has a negligible influence on Na+ ion distribution (Fig. 17b).520 In the temperature range of the α-to-β phase transition, the lattice volume of Na3PS4 changes linearly with the temperature. However, such a continuity of lattice volume–temperature relationship is broken by the β-to-γ phase transition, in that a sharp increase of the unit cell volume (≈10%) manifests at temperature above 773 K and the local structure of the γ-phase becomes “liquidized” with expanded vibrational freedom for the (PS4)3− polyanions.521 The volume expansion and “melting” of the Na+ sublattice destabilize the bcc-like packing of anionic units in the original α- or β-phase, which consists of a more complex arrangement of (PS4)3− tetrahedra and a lot of extra interstitial space for Na+ ions around these tetrahedra, resulting in a highly disordered arrangement of Na+ ions among multiple sites within the γ-Na3PS4 in lower symmetry, as shown in Fig. 17c.521,522
 Fig. 17  Crystal structure of stoichiometric Na3PS4 in (a) cubic phase (β-Na3PS4) and (b) tetragonal phase Na3PS4 (α-Na3PS4). (c) Calculated structure of the orthorhombic phase (γ-Na3PS4) with relative Na+ site occupation marked, reprinted with permission from ref. 281. 
Defect concentration determined ion diffusion. In α- and β-Na3PS4, there is only a minor difference in the lattice parameters (1.1%) and lattice volume (0.2%) between the cubic and tetragonal structures, where these two phases are easily interchangeable via element doping, and both can be expressed by the structural motifs of the tetragonal polymorph on a small length scale.521,523,524 Therefore, the huge disparity in the ionic conductivity of α-Na3PS4 and β-Na3PS4 is unlikely to be caused by crystal structures as initially assumed,301 but probably by the concentration of defects within the crystal lattice, especially the Na+ vacancies as their formation energy is substantially lower than the others.520,525 Highly conductive α-Na3PS4 with a tetragonal structure has been synthesized by adopting ball-milling methods in a similar way as the cubic-phase compounds prepared by Hayashi et al,518 showing ionic conductivity up to 3.39 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature.526 Herein, it highlights the effects of the mechanochemical synthesis routes, which not only introduce extra mobile Na+ defects into the crystal lattice of chalcogenide-based SEs, but also develop more homogeneous product powders with decreased particle sizes from the repeated impacts during ball-milling, favoring the following consolidation process for highly conductive pellets.519 Such an approach to reinforce the mobile ion conduction of SEs is particularly effective for mechanically soft materials, in that increased ionic conductivity has also been observed in mechanochemically synthesized Li3PS4,527 LiBH4,528 Ag3PS4,529 Na11Sn2PSe12,530 and Li3YCl6.531Regarding such a fact, the fast Na+ conduction within the Na3PS4 crystal structure is only permitted in the presence of point defects, in that inferior Na+ ion diffusivity is predicted in both pristine α- and β-Na3PS4 with the lack of point defects.520,532,533 According to molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, an introduction of 2% vacancies into the stoichiometric structure (Na2.94PS4) increases the Na(6b)–Na(6b) ion jump rate by a factor of 17, indicating significantly more frequent inter-site ion transitions and higher Na+ mobility (Fig. 18a), as well as the reduction of 0.12 eV on activation energies for the Na(6b)–Na(6b) transition, corresponding to a bulk ionic conductivity of 0.2 S cm−1 for the cubic phase and 0.14 S cm−1 for the tetragonal phase.520 When the vacancy concentration reaches 17% (Na2.50PS4), the bulk ionic conductivity of cubic and tetragonal phases is further increased to 0.42 S cm−1 and 0.43 S cm−1, respectively. In addition to Na+ vacancies, the existence of Na+ interstitials and Na+ disorders also contribute to the fast ion conduction of Na3PS4. For example, the adoption of the Na2S precursor with high purity yields improved ionic conductivity of β-Na3PS4 by virtue of the reduced likelihood of sodium deficiency and increased possibility of Na+ interstitial formation.518 In contrast, stoichiometric β-Na3PS4 shows poor ionic conductivity and relatively low occupancy of the Na(12d) transition sites, suggesting inactive Na+ transport. When the Na+ interstitials are introduced into the crystal lattice, the enhancements of both Na(12d) occupancy and Na+ conductivity can be observed experimentally. In practice, the introduction of Na+ interstitials is likely to cause a slight displacement of Na+ from their normal Na(6b) and Na(12d) sites because of the strengthened Coulombic repulsion between them, and this redistribution of Na+ creates a flat energy landscape triggering the correlated motion of Na+ with lower activation barriers and increased conductivity.534
 Fig. 18  (a) The Na+ distribution in pristine Na3PS4 (upper panel) and 2% vacancy added Na2.94PS4, showing drastically increased Na+ mobility, acquired from 100 ps. MD simulation at 525 K, adapted with permission from ref. 520. (b) Plot of ionic conductivity with temperature variation in Na3PS4, with a dramatic jump of ionic conductivity and reduction of activation energy corresponding to plastic transition from β to γ phase, adapted with permission from ref. 281. (c) Eigenvectors of two soft modes with different vibrational symmetry that couples Na+ transition and tilting of tetrahedra, computed by DFT calculations, adapted with permission from ref. 535. 
Lattice dynamics facilitated ion diffusion. The ionic conductivity of Na3PS4 is also observed to be positively correlated to temperature, where the unit cell lattice expansion creates extra free volumes around the mobile Na+ at elevated temperature. This trend is rather linear until the temperature is raised up to 773 K where a new γ phase forms and another ion conduction mechanism is involved.281 Akin to the amorphous or liquid systems, the new polymorph γ-Na3PS4 exhibits partially plastic crystal features as a result of the increased stiffness of the covalent intramolecular bonds in (PS4)3− tetrahedra and reduced ionic interaction between the (PS4)3− units and Na+ during the β-to-γ phase transition. Thereby, the “molten” Na+ sublattice upsets the bcc-like packing of anionic units as in the α- and β-phase to a lower-symmetry anionic arrangement, and the reorientational motion of (PS4)3− tetrahedra promotes the cationic diffusion, leading to a fast ion conduction about ten-fold higher than that in β-Na3PS4 (Fig. 18b).521,522 In fact, the lattice dynamics also manifest in α- and β-Na3PS4 and they are important structural factors for the promotion of Na+.269,535 Herein, a special anharmonic motion coupling mobile Na+ and the host lattice features soft mode motion, as illustrated by Fig. 18c. Instead of functioning in the manner of the paddle-wheel mechanism, this soft mode lattice dynamics facilitates the Na+ hopping through the dynamically altered bottlenecks.
Grain boundary effects. Although the blocking effect of grain boundaries in chalcogenide SEs may be considered minimal compared to that in oxide SEs due to the soft nature of chalcogenides and preferred intergranular ion conduction in Na3PS4,291,510 the influence of grain boundaries still cannot be completely neglected. The segregation of point defects, e.g., Na+ vacancies, at the vicinity of grain boundaries hampers the continuous ion conduction, especially when the ion conduction within Na3PS4 is dominantly mediated through defects. On the other hand, the grain boundary core may act as a trapping site for Na+ due to the change of the atomic environment around Na+ hopping in this region. As a result, the experimentally measured ionic conductivity of Na3PS4 is usually lower than the theoretical values by two orders of magnitude due to the grain boundary and interfacial resistance. Both increased fraction of the amorphous phase and enlarged grain sizes are proved to improve the total ionic conductivity of Na3PS4.532,536 Meanwhile, grain boundary engineering is regarded as beneficial for further enhancement of ion conductivity within Na3PS4, such as tuning the symmetric tilting angle of grain boundaries and doping elements to adjust energy variation in the grain boundary core.295,537

5.1.2. Modification strategies for fast ion conduction. 
Aliovalent doping for concentrated defects. Aliovalent doping is a direct approach to regulate defects in the crystalline solids, thereby promoting defect-mediated ion conduction in Na3PS4-type SEs. Based on the charge compensation mechanism, the introduction of vacancies in Na3PS4 is mostly accomplished by doping either higher-valent cations into the Na+ sites, e.g., Ca2+, or lower-valent anions into the S2− sites, e.g., Cl−. When doped Ca2+ replaces the Na(2a) site in cubic Na3PS4, the inter-site Na+ hopping is accelerated by the generated vacancies and the migration energy barrier is lowered from 0.21 eV to 0.19 eV, compared to the undoped phases.538 Moon et al. found that the experimentally prepared Na2.73Ca0.135PS4 exhibited a tetragonal-to-cubic phase transition upon doping a small amount of Ca2+, achieving a maximum ionic conductivity of 0.94 mS cm−1 at room temperature.539 Interestingly, the activation energy was observed to increase with the concentration of doped Ca2+, because the more positively charged Ca2+ can easily trap the Na+ vacancies nearby, leading to a high migration barrier. It implies that the enhancement of VNa concentration is so impactful for the ion conduction in Na3PS4 that it overcomes the impediment of the high energy barrier. The substitution of sulfide ions by halide ions has already been commonly utilized to introduce vacancies and improve ion conduction in lithium sulfide materials,540 and this strategy is also effective in Na3PS4. The effect of a series of halogen dopants (F, Cl, Br, I) has been investigated by Klerk et al. through ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations.520 The ionic conductivity of doped-Na3PS4 was found to increase with the increase of the ionic radii of halogen dopants going from F− to Cl− to Br−, except for the oversized I− for which its large ionic radius results in a long I−–P distance and a smaller bottleneck area. Among these halogen dopants, Cl− is considered the most preferable due to its closest ionic radius to S2− and avoidance of HF exposure in F− doping, as well as the preferred dopant formation energy, in that Na2.9375PS3.9375Cl0.0625 exhibited an ionic conductivity exceeding 1 mS cm−1 at room temperature,541 assisted by the spark plasma sintering technique that largely eliminated the grain boundary resistance and interparticle resistance.542,543 In later research, the maximum ionic conductivity of Cl− and Br−-doped Na3PS4 was determined to be 1.96 mS cm−1 and 2.37 mS cm−1 at room temperature, respectively.544,545 On the other hand, Na+ interstitials can be created by doping lower-valent cations into the P5+ sites, mostly tetravalent ions, including Ti4+, Si4+, Sn4+, and Ge4+. The effect of partial substitution of Si4+ for P5+ in beta-Na3PS4 was investigated by preparing a series of Na3PS4–Na4SiS4 glass ceramics, among which the 94Na3PS4–6Na4SiS4 glass ceramic SE exhibited the highest room-temperature ionic conductivity of 0.74 mS cm−1 and 90Na3PS4–10Na4SiS4 showed the widest ESW of 5 V as well as thermodynamic stability with metallic Na.513,546 Other tetravalent dopants, such as Ge4+,547 Ti4+, and Sn4+, can not only increase the concentration of Na+ interstitials, but also enlarge the lattice volume and broaden the Na+ diffusion channels, resulting in a lower effective migration barrier for interstitialcy-like motion at the cost of phase stability.548 The ionic conductivity of 6.25% Sn-doped β-Na3PS4 was predicted to be 10.7 mS cm−1 at room temperature according to AIMD simulations,534 while the experientially obtained 10% Sn-doped sample achieved the highest ionic conductivity of 0.25 mS cm−1 among the others, as well as superior full-cell SSB performance.548
Isovalent substitution for structure tuning. Isovalent substitution, mostly accomplished by replacing P or S with larger atoms, is another strategy to enhance the Na+ mobility in Na3PS4-type SEs, which may even benefit other electrochemical or chemical characteristics, such as ESW and air stability. Some of the representative compositions have shown outstanding outcomes, including Na3SbS4, Na3PSe4, and Na3SbSe4. Instead of changing the concentration of effective charge carriers, the substituted ions can manage the chemical and spatial environment of the skeletal structure, such as enlarging the crystal volume, widening the bottleneck area, and softening the anion framework. In Na3PS4, the average bond length of the Na–S at transition state is approximately 2.65 Å, significantly shorter than that of stable lattice sites (∼2.86 Å), which implies the necessity to expand the bottleneck to allow Na+ to hop through.519 For example, by replacing S2− with Se2−, the lattice structure was expanded to create extra free volume for Na+ transport because of the larger ionic radius of Se2− than S2−, while an uncommon electron-density distribution on Na(12d) was observed, which might be attributed to the insertion of interstitial Na+. As a result, the obtained cubic Na3PSe4 exhibited a higher room-temperature Na+ conductivity of 1.16 mS cm−1 with a reduced activation energy of 0.21 eV.549 Meanwhile, the more polarizable Se2− reduces the binding energy between the mobile Na+ and stationary anions in the skeleton, so that the mobile Na+ can move more easily within the softened framework.195,550 Likewise, substituting P5+ with Sb5+ or As5+ is also effective due to the lattice expansion and the weakened Sb–S or As–S bond strength. In addition, they are proven to improve the air stability of Na3PS4 (will be illustrated in Section 5.1.4). As a result, Na3SbS4 with tetragonal crystal structure (P21c; a = 7.15270 Å, c = 7.2874 Å) shows a remarkable ionic conductivity of 1.05 mS cm−1 and a low activation energy of 0.22 eV, as well as excellent air stability.551 Remarkably, these signature compositions obtained through isovalent substitution of Na3PS4 provide a cornerstone for the following aliovalent doping on top of them. By partially replacing Sb with Ge, Na3.1Ge0.1Sb0.9S4 exhibits a further improved ionic conductivity of 5.1 mS cm−1 at 25 °C and an activation energy of 0.156 eV, as well as enhanced air stability.552 The single-phase Na3SbSe4 polycrystalline compound was obtained by simultaneously substituting Sb5+ and Se2−, yielding an exceptionally high ionic conductivity of 3.7 mS cm−1 and a low activation energy of 0.19 eV.553 The best result came from Hayashi et al. by doping W6+ into Na3SbS4, where Na2.88Sb0.88W0.12S4 exhibited a superb ionic conductivity of 32 mS cm−1 at room temperature.554 Soon after, a series of W-doped solid solutions of Na3−xPn1−xWxS4 (Pn = P, Sb) were prepared by Fuchs et al. to systematically investigate their underlying structure–activity relationship.555 The incorporation of W6+ leads to the formation of vacancies, where the increasing W6+ content decreases the activation barriers for ionic transport by lowering the defect formation enthalpies. Meanwhile, the W6+ substitution reduces the tetragonal distortion and lowers the phase transition temperature, resulting in a structural change from the tetragonal to the cubic phase at room temperature. Correspondingly, the acquired Na2.9P0.9W0.1S4 and Na2.9Sb0.9W0.1S4 exhibited a superior ionic conductivity of 13 ± 3 mS cm−1 and 41 ± 8 mS cm−1, respectively, exceeding some of the commercialized OLEs. Surprisingly, the exceptional ionic conductivity of Na3−xSb1−xWxS4 (x = 0.125) does not involve the commonly believed paddlewheel effect (explained in Section 6) coupled to the rotational dynamics of complex anions (e.g., PS4),256,273,556–560 but merely the conventional vacancy diffusion mechanism accompanied by the strong overlapping from cation vibrational modes with anion vibrations.561

5.1.3. Interfacial stability and interface design in SMBs. Notwithstanding the facile processing and remarkable ionic conductivity, Na3PS4-type SEs are intrinsically incompatible with high-voltage cathode materials and the Na metal anode due to their high chemical reactivity and thermodynamic instability. Wenzel et al. investigated the interfacial stability of pristine Na3PS4 against the Na metal anode by performing in situ XPS and monitoring the interfacial impedance and polarization resistance through time, which revealed the thermodynamically unstable nature of the Na3PS4/Na metal anode interface.240 The formation of electronically insulating Na2S and Na3P at the interface strongly hinders the interfacial transfer kinetics, increasing the areal resistance of the SEI, deteriorating the cell performance. In fact, the commonly believed ESW of Na3PS4, as wide as 5 V determined by conventional CV analysis, is significantly overestimated,301 since the results are limited by the insensitivity of the analysis to detect slow decomposition reactions in full cells due to the very small currents generated. By combining computational and experimental tools, Na3PS4 was determined to be only stable from 1.55 V to 2.25 V vs. Na+/Na, and Na3PSe4 showed an even narrower ESW of 1.8–2.15 V vs. Na+/Na.239 As most of the intercalation-type cathodes (NaFeO4,562 NVP,434 NaCrO2,563 and Na2/3Co2/3Mn1/3O2564) have working voltages readily exceeding the decomposition potential of Na3PS4-type SEs, low-voltage conversion-type cathode materials are usually utilized, such as TiS2,565,566 FeS2,567 S,568 and Na2S,569 as well as some organic cathode materials,570,571 though the SSBs can still suffer from the large volume expansion of conversion-type cathodes and thereby show unsatisfactory cycling stability.Meanwhile, the practical application of sulfide-based SEs is hindered by their instability in the ambient environment with high sensitivity to water, due to which they can be hydrolyzed by moisture releasing toxic H2S gas,297,298 significantly deteriorating ionic conductivity and causing safety issues.510 The pristine phase of Na3PS4 is considered unstable in air because of the high affinity between S and O, which can be mitigated by replacing the “hard acid” P5+ with “soft acids”, e.g., Sb5+, As5+, and Sn4+. On the basis of the hard and soft acids and bases (HSAB), the soft acids preferentially react with the soft base S2− than the hard acid P5+, and the formation of stronger bonds between soft acids and soft base can partially compensate the S–O affinity.572 For example, the abovementioned Na3SbS4 manifested improved air stability compared to Na3PS4.551 By partially replacing P5+ with As5+, Na3P0.62As0.38S4 achieved an ionic conductivity of 1.46 mS cm−1, in addition to the improved moisture stability by shifting easy-forming reaction products to difficult-forming ones.573,574 Air stable Na4−xSn1−xSbxS4 (0.02 ≤ x ≤ 0.33) shows ionic conductivity up to 0.51 mS cm−1 at 30 °C, as well as excellent air stability and solution probability using water.575 Without the release of toxic H2S gases in contact with water, Na4−xSn1−xSbxS4 can reversibly precipitate from homogeneously dissolved aqueous solution, rendering the possibility of intimate contacts by SE coating on active materials and fabrication of thin-film electrodes by the infiltration method.
While alloy anodes are always chosen as anode materials owing to the instability of Na3PS4-type SEs against metallic Na,580 e.g., Na–Sn alloys,565,573,575,580–583 some efforts have been made to ameliorate the unstable interface between them, with common strategies summarized in Fig. 19. The typical approaches include doping elements (Cl− and Ca2+) to stabilize the interface,541,544,576 designing composite electrolytes,577,584,585 surface coating or interlayer insertion,566,578,579,586 and hydration-induced surface passivation.306 For example, by homogeneously coating the PEO layer on the surface of Na3PS4, its immediate contact metallic Na anode was artificially avoided, thus alleviating the unpleasant interfacial reactions between them. Using this strategy, the cycling stability of the solid-state SMB SnS2|Na3PS4@PEO|Na was largely improved compared to the pristine ones, delivering 230 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles.578 The Cl-doped Na3SbS4 was prepared using mechanochemical processes followed by heat treatment, and Na2.9375SbS3.9375Cl0.0625 displayed room-temperature ionic conductivity up to 2.9 mS cm−1, and the introduction of NaCl enhanced its electrochemical stability by suppressing the interfacial deterioration that accompanied stripping/plating.587,588 Another composite solid electrolyte was prepared by encapsulating BMPTFSI(IL)-coated Na3SbS4 powders in the vertical channels of the flexible PVDF membrane, which achieved an ultra-high ionic conductivity of 3.18 mS cm−1 at room temperature, and the full-cell battery NVP|PVDF-NSS-0.2IL|Na exhibited an improved cycling stability of 400 cycles at 1C and 50 °C with 80% capacity retention.577
 Fig. 19  Common modification strategies to stabilize the thermodynamically unstable interface between Na3PS4-type SEs and the metallic Na anode. Adapted with permission from ref. 306, 566 and 576–579. 

5.2. Na11Sn2PS12-type
Another iconic type of SE in the chalcogenide system is Na11Sn2PS12, where P and S can be replaced or partially substituted by Sb and Se, respectively. It was firstly inspired by the direct replacement of Na+ in the Li-ion superionic conductor Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS), intending to inherit its exceptionally fast ion conduction feature (σLGPS = 12 mS cm−1), by which Na10GeP2S12 and its analogous compositions indeed exhibited high room-temperature ionic conductivity (σNa10GeP2S12 = 4.7 mS cm−1, σNa10SnP2S12 = 0.94 mS cm−1, and σNa10SiP2S12 = 10.3 mS cm−1) according to first-principles calculations.589–591 However, the ionic conductivity of the experimentally obtained materials was rather disappointing, due to the huge amount of poorly conductive impurity phases existing in the final products.515,591 Therefore, efforts have been made to eliminate these low-conductivity impurities, particularly by increasing the sodium content and tuning the Sn/P ratio. In 2018, impurity-free Na11Sn2PS12 was successfully synthesized, exhibiting high ionic conductivity at room temperature, i.e., 1.4 mS cm−1 via cold-pressing and 3.7 mS cm−1 via annealing.264,592 Such a rapid ion conduction within Na11Sn2PS12 is attributed to the correlative Na+ motion along equipotential ion migration channels connected by equivalent Na+ sites in its unique structure, promoted by the paddle-wheel mechanism.
5.2.1. Unique equipotential pathways and isotropic conduction. The unit cell of Na11Sn2PS12 is indexed in the tetragonal space group of I41/acd:2 (a = 13.6148(3) Å, c = 27.2244(7) Å), as shown in Fig. 20a, in which the ordered arrangement of SnS4 and PS4 tetrahedra constitutes a unique chessboard-like 3D framework.264 In addition to the five already confirmed Na+ sites in the unit cell of Na11Sn2PS12, an additional interstitial site of Na(6) was later identified from its ambiguous existence concealed in a merohedrally twinning crystal;592,593 the six distinct Na+ sites create the Na+ migration channels along the c axis and within the ab planes. As illustrated in Fig. 20b, Na(1) to Na(5) are in the same coordination environment, where each one of them is square-planar coordinated by four other neighboring Na+ sites and octahedrally coordinated by six sulfur ions to construct face-sharing NaS6 octahedra establishing isotropic 3D ion diffusion pathways. The equivalent Na–Na atomic distance (approximately 3.41 Å) and virtually equipotential Na+ sites promote the low energetic inter-site ion hopping through a spacious iso-energetic pathway.263,264 Among these five sites, Na(3), Na(4) and Na(5) have nearly full occupation, i.e., occ. = 0.96, 0.97, and 0.95, respectively, while Na(1) and Na(2) are partially vacant, i.e., occ. = 0.87 and 0.78, respectively.264 The lower Na+ occupation of the latter two results from the stronger repulsion by P5+, compared to that of others by Sn4+, since Na(1) and Na(2) are placed at the nearest neighborhood of PS4 tetrahedra.263 Interestingly, the vacancy-rich Na+ sites (Na(1) and Na(2)) and fully occupied Na+ sites (Na(3), Na(4), and Na(5)) are arranged in an alternating pattern, creating chains of vacancy/full-occupation/vacancy, featuring low-energy ion hopping pathways in three directions. The isotropic conduction of Na+ is achieved with multiple ion transport pathways, including Na(4)–Na(1)–Na(3)–Na(1) in the c-axis direction, Na(4)–Na(2)–Na(4) or Na(3)–Na(2)–Na(3) within the ab plane at z = 0.25, and Na(5)–Na(1)–Na(5) within the ab plane at z = 0.125 (Fig. 20c). Although other possible pathways, e.g., Na(1)–Na(6)–Na(1) within the ab plane and Na(2)–Na(6)–Na(2) along the c axis, may be enabled due to the newly found Na(6) sites, Na(6) is believed to behave differently during ion conduction (Fig. 20d).592,593 Na(6) is loosely bonded to eight sulfur ions forming a quasi-cubic structure, with a much shorter distance of Na(6)–Na(other) than those among Na(1) to Na(5). The Na+ occupation of Na(6) sites has been a divisive issue, while it is closely related to the determination of the Na+ diffusion mechanism. Ramos et al. confirmed the site occupation of Na(6) being 0.22, but this non-negligible ion transport through Na(6) did not seem to govern ionic conductivity. Instead, the interstitial Na(6) site affects the ion conduction in a subtle way by only acting as a “parking” spot for the excess charge-compensating Na+ ions from adjacent Na(1) and Na(2) sites, which affords more vacancies within the primary ion transport pathways, thereby enhancing the fast ion conduction.593 However, Oh et al. suggested that the presence of Na(6) does not participate in the process of ion diffusion at all, based on the apparent vacancy of occ. = 0, observed even at temperature much higher than the operating temperature (700 K),263 which is opposite to the proposition by Duchardt et al. that the Na(6) vacancy is the key to high ionic conductivity.592 Following the discovery of Na11Sn2PS12 (NSPS), a series of Se-based NSPS and Sb-based NSPS were obtained by substituting S and/or P by Se and Sb, respectively. These varied compositions exhibit roughly similar properties yet slightly different characteristics, which will be further explained in the next section.
 Fig. 20  (a) Structure of Na11Sn2PS12 with different Na+ sites. Note that vacancies and Na(6) sites are not shown in the structure scheme for the purpose of visuality and simplicity, reprinted with permission from ref. 264. (b) The 3D isotropic Na+ conducting network built with Na+ sites in a similar coordination environment and atomic distance, reprinted with permission from ref. 592. (c) Na+ migration channels along the c axis and within the ab planes, enabled by interconnected Na+ sites in an alternating pattern of occupied sites and vacant sites, and (d) the additional migration channels allowed by the Na(6) sites, with their coordination environment and bottleneck size shown, reprinted with permission from ref. 593. 

5.2.2. Conduction mechanisms and modification strategies. In vacancy-driven chalcogenide-based ion conductors, such as Na3PS4-type SEs, introducing a very small number of additional vacancies or interstitials has been proved to drastically improve the ionic conductivity. Intuitively, this modification strategy would also be effective in Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs, considering that their fast ion conduction is enabled by the 3D chessboard-like ion migration pathways interspersed with vacancies. However, artificially shifting the stoichiometry or adding vacancies and Na+ interstitials seems unlikely to greatly influence the ionic conductivity of Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs, demonstrated by many failed attempts. Using AIMD simulations, Oh et al. predicted that the ionic conductivity of Na10.875Sn2PS12 and Na11.125Sn2PS12 is similar to that of stoichiometric Na11Sn2PS12.263 The slightly off-stoichiometric Na10.8Sn1.9PS11.8 was experimentally prepared by Yu et al. shortly after the discovery of Na11Sn2PS12, which exhibited an ionic conductivity of 0.67 mS cm−1 at 25 °C.594 In a series of solid solutions of Na11+xSn2P1−xMxS12 with aliovalent substitution of P by Sn or Ge, both reduced activation energy and intragranular ionic conductivity were observed in a trend with decreasing vacancy concentration.595 These attempts to introduce additional vacancies or Na+ interstitials to expedite Na+ conduction within Na11Sn2PS12 ended up with little impact on its ionic conductivity, probably ascribed to the abundant inherent Na+ disorders, as well as the already sufficient amount of charge carriers (vacancies), which made the additional point defects unnecessary.263
Paddle-wheel mechanism. According to AIMD simulations, the coupling between anion dynamics and cation diffusion was directly revealed, in that Na+ conduction within Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs is essentially encouraged by the paddle-wheel mechanism, viz., the facile dynamic rotation of the (PS4)3− and (PSe4)3− polyanions at room temperature.256 The rotational reorientation of the S ligands, which construct the skeletal framework, not only transiently widens the bottleneck area for Na+ migration, but also leads to instantaneous fluctuation of the local potential which lowers the energy barrier for Na+ escaping the shallow potential wells, thus facilitating their conduction.273,558 In contrast, this paddle-wheel phenomenon is rather trivial in Na11Sn2SbS12-based materials, where the Sb-based polyanions, e.g., (SbS4)3−, exhibit much slower or negligible rotation, even at elevated temperature. This is in good accordance with the experimental ionic conductivity and can be explained by the difference between the bonding nature of P–S, P–Se and Sb–S, in which the former two are nonpolar covalent resulting in a softer rotational mode and facile reorientation of polyanions, while the latter is virtually more ionic (polarized covalent) that the significant partial charge difference between the chalcogenide and the central atom in (SbS4)3− latches its rotation. Most recently, the origin of the paddle-wheel mechanism in Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs was further dug. The non-rotating atoms in Na11M2PS12 (M = Sn, Ge, Si, etc.) were deemed to be the driving force, which should have sufficient capacitance to accommodate the fluctuating potential from rotating anions and migrating Na+, by treating the (MS4)4− and (PS4)3− polyanions as a parallel plate capacitor constructed at a micro scale.596 Thereby, less polarizable atoms are preferred to be substituted into the Sn4+ site to trigger the paddle-wheel mechanism.
Isovalent substitution for tuning the lattice. Compared to the aliovalent-doping strategy for increasing the concentration of mobile charge carriers, tuning the lattice size by isovalent substitution seems to facilitate Na+ conduction in Na11Sn2M(S/Se)12 to a certain limited extent. Upon replacing S with Se, Na11.1Sn2.1P0.9Se12 exhibited a room-temperature ionic conductivity of 3 mS cm−1, which was similar to that of pristine Na11Sn2PS12, but a reduced activation energy of 0.3 eV as a result of the softer crystal lattice formed by Se.597 Changed Sn/P site occupation and rotational disorder of both (PSe4)3− and (SnSe4)4− tetrahedra were spotted in the slightly off-stoichiometric sample, causing different local structures and altered ion transport pathways. By substituting Sb into the P site, a series of analogous Na12−xSn3−xSbxS12 were reported, where the phase-pure Na11.25Sn2.25Sb0.75S12 reached the highest ionic conductivity of 0.51 mS cm−1 upon tuning the Sb content to x = 0.75 and increasing the annealing temperature to 550 °C, while higher Sb contents (x = 1.2 and 1.5) induced the formation of highly conductive Na3SbS4 as the secondary phase but a slightly decreased ionic conductivity of 0.3 mS cm−1 for Na10.8Sn1.8Sb1.2S4 (Sb content x = 0.4).575,598 The stoichiometric Na11Sn2SbS12 was reported by Ramos et al. with the ionic conductivity of 0.56 mS cm−1 at room temperature and they believed that such a lower value than that of Na11Sn2PS12 originated from the reduced population of Na(6), which may actually come from the absence of the paddle-wheel mechanism of (SbS4)3−.593,598 The effect of increased Na vacancy was also experimentally explored by introducing more Sb into Na11Sn2SbS12, and the results showed the formation of Na3SbS4 impurities and lower ionic conductivity of the Sb-rich sample, as suggested by Heo et al.575 Intuitively, the larger lattice volume (Na11Sn2SbS12 = 5235.5 Å3 vs. Na11Sn2PS12 = 5046.4 Å3) and the softer framework constituted by lower electronegativity Sb5+ (1.8 vs. P5+ = 2.1) would benefit fast ion conduction; however Sb-substituted samples tend to exhibit lower ionic conductivity. This phenomenon can be explained by the stronger Na+–S2− Coulombic attractions due to the higher electron density on S2− when lower electronegativity Sb5+ substituted P5+, and the lack of the paddle-wheel mechanism of irrotational (SbS4)3− polyhedra.256,593 Substitution of Sn by Ge and Si was predicted to reduce the ionic conductivity to 0.6 mS cm−1 and 0.3 mS cm−1, respectively, mostly due to the reduced crystal volume (5028 Å3 and 4962 Å3 for Ge and Si substitution), as well as the narrowed Na+ diffusion channels.263 By tuning the content of Si substituted into Na4−xSn1−xSbxS4, Jia et al. reported aliovalent substituted Na4−x(Sn0.67Si0.33)1−xPxS4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4) with enhanced sodium conductivity.599 With the crystal volume (= 5073 Å3) similar to that of Na11Sn2PS12, its highest ionic conductivity reached 1.6 mS cm−1 when x = 0.25, due to the change of vacancy population and weaker Coulombic attraction between Na+ and S2− induced by P site doping. Furthermore, halogen doping was developed based on this system, Na3.57(Sn0.67Si0.33)0.67P0.33S3.9X0.1 (X = Cl, Br, I), with more vacancies introduced and the energy barrier lowered because of the high polarizability of halogen atoms, in which the I-doped Na3.57(Sn0.67Si0.33)0.67P0.33S3.9I0.1 delivered the highest ionic conductivity of 1.08 mS cm−1 and the lowest activation energy of 0.24 eV.600 By replacing P with As, the predicted ionic conductivity of Na11Sn2AsS12 can reach 4.52 mS cm−1, along with improved moisture stability based on HSAB theory.601
Creating correlated-ion motion. The abovementioned doping strategies attempting to improve the ion conduction in Na11Sn2PS12, which typically work well with Na3PS4-type SEs, seem to cause negligible effects on its ionic conductivity. In this case, Oh and Kang proposed a novel conceptual strategy of planting large repulsive ions, such as Cs+, in the vicinity of the Na+-rich ion migration pathways in Na11Sn2PS12 to compel the mobile Na+ to cross the locally induced high-energy sites, thereby activating the correlated ion motion for fast ion conduction.602 According to the results of AIMD simulations, the ionic conductivity of Cs0.5Na10.5Sn2PS12 was increased by an order of magnitude to 19 mS cm−1 compared to that of pristine Na11Sn2PS12.

5.2.3. Electrochemical stability in solid-state SMBs. Despite the intrinsic fast ion conduction of Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs, their theoretical thermodynamic stability window is even narrower than that of Na3PS4-type SEs, e.g., 1.16–1.91 V for Na11Sn2PS12 and 1.15–1.59 V for Na11Ge2PS12.603 Na11Sn2PS12 can be reduced and decomposed into Na2S, N3P, and other Na–Sn alloys below the reduction limit, or oxidized to Na3PS4 at high voltages, as shown in Fig. 21a. Interestingly, some of these decomposition products are well known as Na-ion conductors,301,604 which means their “true” interfacial stability is probably widened under the action of the kinetically stable SEI layers. Based on CV measurements, Na11Sn2PS12 exhibited an ESW in the range of 0.3–3.2 V vs. Na+/Na (Fig. 21b),605 while the ESW of Na11Sn2PSe12 was determined to be 1.22–2.65 V vs. Na+/Na.606 Nevertheless, Na11Sn2PS12 is still unstable at the side of the Na metal anode, demonstrated by means of CV scanning and XPS analysis,594 where a reduction reaction between them was observed (Fig. 21c) in a similar manner to Na3PS4 and Li10GeP2S12.240,310 As a result, the solid-state SMB of TiS2/ball-milled Na11Sn2PS12/Na exhibited a rapid capacity decay from 220 mA h g−1 to 110.5 mA h g−1 within 10 cycles, with an initial CE of merely 50.9% at 20 mA g−1 and 25 °C. Akin to Na3PS4-type SEs, Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs are usually paired with the Na alloy anode, e.g., Na–Sn, for a more stable interface and longer cycling life,594,606 with very few research studies focused on the metallic Na anode. A representative work was done by Weng et al. where the liquid-phase synthesized nanosized Na11Sn2PS12 was assembled in the solid-state SMB with the TiS2 cathode and the Na metal anode.605 The TiS2/nanosized-Na11Sn2PS12/Na full cell, without any interfacial modification, delivered an initial discharge capacity of 231 mA h g−1 and an initial CE of 67.96%, with 142.4 mA h g−1 of the reversible capacity retained after 10 cycles. In future, it is important to develop interfacial modification strategies, e.g., formation of a protective interlayer, surface coating or other strategies employed in Na3PS4-type SEs as reference, to effectively mitigate the instability between Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs and the metallic Na anode, to live up to their high ionic conductivity and high energy density of the SMBs.
 Fig. 21  (a) Theoretically calculated ESW of Na11Sn2PS12 with possible decomposition products, reprinted with permission from ref. 603. (b) Experimentally obtained ESW of Na11Sn2PS12 by CV measurements, which is wider than the theoretically calculated value, reprinted with permission from ref. 605. (c) The reduction reaction observed in the Na/Na10.8Sn1.9PS11.8/Sn cell through CV scanning (0.1 mV s−1; −0.5 to 5 V) at 80 °C (upper left panel). Emerged new peak observed in the S 2p spectra via XPS depth profiling of the surface of Na10.8Sn1.9PS11.8 indicating the formation of decomposition products (bottom left panel). Appearance of new peaks detected in the XPS analysis of Na10.8Sn1.9PS11.8 before and after CV scanning, associated to reduced S species (middle panel) and Sn species (right panel), reprinted with permission from ref. 594. 

5.3. Other chalcogenide-based ISEs
5.3.1. Na7P3S11-type. Na7P3S11 is another type of chalcogenide-based SE, derived from its Li-ion counterpart Li7P3S11. In 2014, a sulfide superionic conductor Li7P3S11 glass-ceramic was reported with an extremely high ionic conductivity of 17 mS cm−1 and a low activation energy of 17 kJ mol−1 at room temperature, even superior to liquid ion conductors.607 The outstanding ionic conductivity of Li7P3S11 has motivated investigation into the topology of anion arrangement,607,608 and the underlying bcc-like anion sublattice is revealed to be responsible for the facile ion conduction.255 Among the representative anion sublattice arrangements, i.e., bcc, fcc, and hcp, the bcc-like anion framework has the minimized change of the coordination environment of mobile ions in their migration pathways. For example, the ion hopping paths in bcc-like arrangement are directly linked by adjacent tetrahedral sites, while mobile ions in the other anion frameworks must travel through an octahedral transition site to achieve site hopping from one tetrahedral site to another (Fig. 9). In this way, the energy landscape of mobile ion migration is largely flattened in the bcc-like framework, thus favoring minimized activation energy and facile ion conduction. Indeed, the bcc-like anion sublattice has been found in many sulfide fast ion conductors with high Li-ion conductivity and low activation energy, including Li10GeP2S12609,610 and Li10SnP2S12.611 Therefore, the room-temperature ionic conductivity of Na7P3S11 and Na7P3Se11 has been predicted to be as high as 10.97 mS cm−1 and 12.56 mS cm−1, respectively, on account of the similar bcc-type anion framework contained in their structure.612 According to DFT calculations, Na7P3(S/Se)11 should have a nearly identical crystal structure as that of Li7P3S11, in which Na+ ions are primarily tetrahedrally coordinated and located in seven distinct crystallographic Na+ sites, filling distorted tetrahedral cavities, while these interconnected Na+ sites build a 3D diffusion network. According to AIMD simulations, the evenly distributed probability densities and the smooth energy landscape along ion transport pathways within the bcc-like anion lattice allow unimpeded Na+ migration among the virtually equipotential Na+ sites (Fig. 22). Meanwhile, considering that the crystal structures of Na7P3(S/Se)11 are closely related to that of Li7P3S11, the Na+ sites should be fully occupied in these compounds, which implies highly collective ion motion.
 Fig. 22  The facile Na+ movements among seven Na+ sites with small site energy difference, within the bcc-like anion framework of Na7P3S11 (upper panel) and Na7P3Se11 (bottom panel), adapted with permission from ref. 612. 
Unfortunately, despite the tempting proposal of Na7P3S11-type SEs, their successful synthesis and practical performance have never been validated experimentally. Compared to the more stable Li counterparts, Na7P3S11-type SEs readily become thermodynamically unstable due to their comparably lower entropic free energy contribution.612 Therefore, the heat-treatment and quenching synthesis method for Na7P3(S/Se)11, proved effective in preparing Li7P3S11, tends to end up with decomposition products such as the more stable Na3P(S/Se)4, as well as some other ternaries or binaries.613 A credible strategy to improve the synthesizability of Na7P3(S/Se)11 is to induce site disorder via anion site doping, thereby enhancing the entropic contributions and stabilizing the desired phases.

5.3.2. Oxysulfide. Although many chalcogenide-based SEs have already exhibited sufficiently high ionic conductivity, most of them have rather poor thermodynamic stability and inferior interfacial stability towards the Na metal anode. To take advantage of highly conductive chalcogenide-based SEs while alleviating the unstable interface between them and metallic Na, sulfide electrolytes have been combined with chemically and electrochemically stable oxides, and the novel oxysulfide SE system Na3PS4−xOx was reported to be inherently unreactive to the metallic Na anode, at the expense of slightly lower ionic conductivity.614 Recently, a series of glassy Na3PS4−xOx (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.6) were prepared by facile mechanochemical milling, among which Na3PS3.85O0.15 showed the highest ionic conductivity of 0.27 mS cm−1 at 60°, while Na3PS3.4O0.6 provided better formability allowing for fabrication of thin-film SEs.615 The introduction of oxygen into sulfide glasses formed abundant bridging oxygen, reinforcing the glass network by replacing some of the P–S bonds with stronger P–O bonds. Thereby, homogeneous and defect-free glassy SEs with high densification and mechanical strength were obtained, which resisted the penetration of Na dendrites. Compared to the pure sulfide glassy materials that are unstable with Na metal, oxysulfide SEs established a self-passivating thin SEI layer at their interface with metallic Na, suppressing the decomposition of SEs and enabling the stable sodiation/desodiation processes. As a result, the sandwiched CSE Na3PS3.4O0.6|Na3PS3.85O0.15|Na3PS3.4O0.6 reached a high CCD of 2.3 mA cm−2, exceeding those of all other chalcogenide-based SEs reported so far, while maintaining cycling stability for up to 500 h at 0.2 mA cm−2 (0.2 mA h cm−2), or 240 h at 0.5 mA cm−2 (0.25 mA h cm−2). Impressively, such a sandwiched oxysulfide SE enabled the highest specific energy of the solid-state Na–S ever achieved. Another composite oxysulfide SE was prepared by dispersing Na4P2S4.5O2.5 (NPSO) in the Na3SbS4 (NSS) matrix for faster room-temperature ion conduction compared to the pristine oxysulfide, which indeed exhibited an improved ionic conductivity of 1.4 mS cm−1 (15%NPSO + NSS) and 0.7 mS cm−1 (30%NPSO + NSS).616 In this oxysulfide CSE, a self-passivating oxide interphase was in situ established at the electrolyte/anode interface because the deoxidized P2S7−aOa units in the oxysulfide could release free O2− to migrate through the SE and react with metallic Na, meanwhile the PS4−aOa units remained stable during the cycling and supported the ion transport network. Moreover, the Na dendrites grown in SEs were effectively suppressed and consumed by the NSS matrix. The NPSO + NSS oxysulfides achieved a CCD of 1.83 mA cm−2, where the Na‖Na symmetric cell exhibited soft short-circuit behavior instead of hard short-circuit behavior due to the reaction between the NSS matrix and the grown Na filaments. The stable anodic interface was demonstrated in the full cell SMB Se0.8S7.2@PAN|NPSO+NSS|Na, while the SIB Se0.8S7.2@PAN|NPSO+NSS|Na15Sn4 exhibited a high specific capacity and excellent stability over 1000 cycles at a high current density of 0.3 C at room temperature. Another oxysulfide SE, co-doped by tungsten and oxygen, Na2.95Sb0.95W0.05S3.9O0.1, showed a further enhanced room-temperature ionic conductivity of 8.49 mS cm−1.617 As the passivating decomposition products formed at the interface, from co-doped W and O, the highly conductive oxysulfide ensured excellent compatibility against the metallic Na anode, and the solid-state SMB TiS2/Na2.95Sb0.95W0.05S3.9O0.1/Na manifested both good cycling stability and rate performance by maintaining 115 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.1 C and 82 mA h g−1 at 0.5 C.So far, most of the research progress has come from the oxide-based SEs and chalcogenide-based SEs, despite their intrinsic flaws, e.g., the complex and strict fabrication procedures required for high ionic conductivity of oxide-based SEs, as well as their rigid nature that renders poor wettability of Na metal at room temperature,238,618 and the inferior thermodynamic stability and intrinsic interfacial stability of chalcogenide-based SEs towards metallic Na.239–242 Worse still, the high mechanical strength of oxide-based SEs may be inadequate to resist the penetration of sodium dendrites as theoretically predicted. Recent studies have revealed that metal dendrites preferentially form and propagate along the grain boundaries or interconnected pores, where the alkali metal ions combine with sufficient electrons under the locally concentrated electric field and directly plate within the material, which eventually causes a short circuit.504,619–621 These problems have greatly impeded their practical application in high-energy-density metal batteries. Therefore, the screening of SE material systems is still ongoing, dedicated to discovering materials that are balanced in terms of ionic conductivity, electrochemical/chemical stability, interfacial compatibility, and facile processing.

6. Halide-based ISEs
The research on halide-based SEs was delayed because of the insufficient room-temperature ionic conductivity of the early Li-ion compounds (<10−5 S cm−1), such as LiX (X = F, Cl, Br, I)622 and LiAlCl4.623,624 However, in the past few years, some new-found Li-ion halide SEs, including Li3MX6 (M = Y, Er, In, Sc, Yb; X = Cl, Br, I) and Li3−xM1−xPnxCl6 (M = Y, Er, Fe, In, Yb; Pn = Zr, Hf), have been discovered with adequate ionic conductivity (10−3 S cm−1) and high-voltage stability (>4 V vs. Li+/Li),531,625–636 thus igniting the resurgence of interest in Na-ion halide-based SEs. Along with the intrinsic flattened energy landscape confirmed in the halogen anion sublattice,260 the monovalent halide ions interact more weakly with the mobile ions compared to divalent sulfide ions or oxygen ions, meeting the prerequisite for fast ion conductors. Noteworthily, such a fast ion conduction in halide-based SEs does not necessarily require a bcc anion sublattice as in other superionic chalcogenide- or oxide-based SEs, leaving much more available choices for material design.260,637 Moreover, the group 17 elements (halogens) have a high value of electronegativity than group 16 elements (oxygen and chalcogens), which corresponds to better oxidative stability,638 with the general trend of oxidative stability following F > Cl > Br > I.638,639 Due to the larger ionic radii of halide ions compared to oxides and chalcogenides, their longer ionic bond length and higher polarizability are expected, thus resulting in facile ion motion and great deformability in halide-based SEs.625,640,641 Hence, halide-based SEs can be a competitive alternative to the existing oxide-based or chalcogenide-based SEs, owing to their fast-conducting characteristics, adequate thermodynamic stability, great deformability, and good oxidative stability. Meanwhile, unlike the chalcogenide-based SEs which are extremely sensitive to the ambient environment, halide-based SEs are generally stable against moisture owing to their positive hydrolysis reaction energy.297 Nevertheless, most of the studied halide-based SEs are based on the Li-ion system, with only a few based on the Na-ion system, e.g., Na2ZrCl6,642 Na3YX6 (X = Cl and Br),643 Na3XI6 (X = Sc, Y, La, and In),644,645 Na3MCl6 (M = In and Sc),646 Na3–xM1–xZrxCl6 (M = Y, Er),647,648 and NaAlCl4.649
6.1. Structural-related ion conduction
Halide-based Na-ion SEs have the general composition of Na3−xM1−xM′xX6 based on the research progress so far, where M can be chosen from 3d transition metals, rare-earth elements, icosagens (group 13 elements), pnictogens (group 15 elements), or lanthanides; M′ can be Zr for partial or full substitution of the M site; and X can be halogens Cl, Br, or I. Due to the difference in the ionic radius between Li+ and Na+, the Na-ion conducting halides can exhibit totally different structural features from their Li-ion equivalents. After the thorough screening of Cl-based and Br-based halide SEs, the common crystal structures include trigonal P1c, monoclinic P21/n, and trigonal R phases, largely depending on the type and ionic radius of the M cation in Na3MX6.650,651 However, there are still discrepancies in the determination of their exact crystal structures, particularly considering that most of the current studies are limited to the theoretical calculation without experimental verification, in that ambiguous results can be derived from the different starting model chosen for structure calculation. Herein, the Na+ ion conduction within halide-based SEs is closely related to the crystal structure and geometry.
Na3MCl6 and Na3MBr6. The crystal structure and ionic conductivity of the pristine Na3YCl6 and Na3YBr6 are widely divergent between the experimental value and calculated results, where the trigonal Na3YCl6 (space group R) exhibited a poor ionic conductivity of 10−3 mS cm−1 at 227 °C,652 while the optimized orthorhombic Na3YCl6 (space group D23), as well as the orthorhombic Na3YBr6 (space group C23), were predicted to have a high room-temperature ionic conductivity of 0.77 and 0.44 mS cm−1, respectively, based on first-principles theory.643 In such a calculated orthorhombic structure of Na3YCl6 and Na3YBr6, rigid NaX6 and YX6 octahedra are formed by six-fold coordination from X (halogen atoms Cl or Br) to Na and Y atoms, where two inherent cation vacancies locate in the neighborhood of the Y site in favor of enhanced ion mobility.625,643 Na3YCl6 and Na3YBr6 are different in the NaX6 octahedral stacking sequence, in which Na3YBr6 has edge-to-edge connected NaBr6 in three axis directions, while Na3YCl6 has NaCl6 stacked face-to-face along the c axis or linked edge-to-edge in the other directions (Fig. 23a). Thereby, the face-to-face stacked NaCl6 octahedra provide a fast track for direct hopping of Na+ between adjacent octahedral sites along the c axis, without migrating through the transitional tetrahedral sites as in a and b axis directions, especially considering that some of the tetrahedral sites are blocked under the repulsion from the neighboring Y3+. In this case, the anisotropic Na+ conduction in Na3YCl6 is preferred along the c-axis direction, in contrast to the 3D isotropic Na+ conduction in an octahedral-tetrahedral-octahedral manner within Na3YBr6. Not surprisingly, the direct hopping of Na+ along the c axis in Na3YCl6 ensured its higher ionic conductivity than that of Na3YBr6, as well as the smaller migration activation energy along the c axis (0.24 eV) compared to other directions in Na3YCl6 (0.33 eV) or all directions in Na3YBr6 (0.32 eV). Nonetheless, this theoretical structure calculation was challenged by the experimental report of crystallization in the space group of P21/n for Na3YBr6, as well as the inappropriate starting model simply imitating its Li-ion counterparts.650 In fact, the preferential stable phase of Na-ion halides can be largely different from their Li-ion counterparts, due to the inherent difference between Li and Na, which creates significantly distinct structural-related ion conduction.
 Fig. 23  (a) Theoretically calculated structure of Na3YCl6 (left panel) and Na3YBr6 (right panel), along with their Na+ diffusion pathways and corresponding activation energies acquired by AIMD simulations, adapted with permission from ref. 643. (b) Heat map of the energy above the convex hull (Ehull) for Na3MCl6 (left panel) and Na3MBr6 (right panel) to determine their preferred and stable phase (black box), where Ehull > 25 meV per atom indicates the spontaneous decomposition to phase equilibria, reprinted with permission from ref. 650 and 651. 
This prompts the thorough and systematic investigation of the crystallization of Na3M(Cl/Br)6 from a huge variety of options for M3+ elements, based on the assessment of their phase stability.650,651 The preferred crystal structure and phase stability were found to be correlated to the choice of the M-site cation, as shown in Fig. 23b. According to the combination of DFT calculations, AIMD simulations, and BVSE analysis, a revision of the crystallization of Na3YCl6 and Na3YBr6 was made, and it was established that the former should belong to the trigonal R phase while the latter should belong to the trigonal P1c phase. Among the three general phases, i.e., trigonal P1c, monoclinic P21/n, and trigonal R, the P1c phase was supposed to manifest faster Na+ conduction than the others, owing to the flat ion migration energy landscape and abundant energetically stable interstitial sites in the Na+ diffusion pathways. The ion migration pathways in trigonal phases (R and P1c) are both built in a similar manner as in D23-phase Na3YCl6, exhibiting anisotropic conduction along which the direction of c is different from the a and b axis direction, while the P1c exhibited the lowest migration energy barrier compared to that of others (0.41 eV in Na3MCl6 and 0.39 eV in Na3MBr6). According to these revised calculation results, even the highest ion-conducting compositions in P1c-Na3MCl6 (Na3CrCl6) and P1c-Na3MBr6 (Na3ScBr6) have rather inferior ionic conductivity of the order of magnitude of 10−7 and 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature, thereby making it indispensable to aliovalent substitute Zr4+ into the M site for ionic conductivity enhancement. Indeed, the experimentally synthesized Na3InCl6 was confirmed to be P1c via single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis, with a poor ionic conductivity of 2 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 500 K.653

Na3MI6. The phase-structure-dependent ion migration feature of halide-based SEs was corroborated by the significantly varying ionic conductivity in different crystal structures of Na3YBr6, in a broad range from 9.1 × 10−3 mS cm−1 to 0.35 mS cm−1.644 Among the three investigated space groups c2m, P3m1, and P31c, different Na+ diffusion mechanisms are involved, as well as distinct anion sublattice arrangement of symmetric fcc-like configuration in c2m-Na3YI6 and hcp-like configuration in P3m1 and P31c. The c2m and P3m1 phases provide 3D cross-linking networks for Na+ migration through hopping between equilibrium octahedral sites via transitional tetrahedral sites, while the anisotropic Na+ conduction in P31c-Na3YI6 is required to overcome a very high energy barrier to hop through the narrow triangular bottleneck formed by adjacent YI6 octahedra along the c-axis. As a result, despite the identical stoichiometry and similar formation energy, c2m-Na3YI6, P3m1-Na3YI6, and P31c-Na3YI6 exhibited a greatly distinct ionic conductivity of 0.35, 0.18 and 9.1 × 10−3 mS cm−1, respectively. To further probe into the structure–activity relationship of ion conduction in Na3MI6, where M is Sc, Y, La, and In, the c2m phase was anchored as the starting model according to the principle of minimized electrostatic energy.645 The steady anion framework of Na3MI6 can afford the facile Na+ motion in all three dimensions, taking advantage of partially vacant Na site occupation (1/3), except for unstable Na3InI6 which showed In3+ and I− shifting from their equilibrium site through time. Meanwhile, the direct octahedral–octahedral ion hoppings were again observed with much higher activation energy barriers than the octahedral–tetrahedral–octahedral pathways in all compositions, implying the limiting factor as the lattice geometry and the bottlenecks along the c axis. Furthermore, the lattice softness with weakened bond interactions between mobile Na+ and the skeletons was discovered in Na3MI6, as well as the angular rotation of (MI6)3− polyanions,644,645 both promoting the Na+ ion diffusion. Therefore, C2/m-Na3XI6 should possess a high ionic conductivity of 0.2, 0.35, and 0.36 mS cm−1 for Na3LaI6, Na3YI6, and Na3ScI6, respectively, at room temperature.Meanwhile, in an attempt to achieve the practical cost-effectiveness in terms of raw materials, the expensive rare-earth metals, e.g., Y, Sc, La, Er, etc., in halide-based SEs were replaced by the cheap and easily accessible Al, and the NaAlCl4 halide-based SE was successfully developed by facile mechanochemical ball-milling and was found to exhibit an ionic conductivity of 3.9 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 30 °C.649 Although this ball-milled and cold-pressed sample provided improved ionic conductivity compared to the annealed ones by an order of magnitude, owing to the cationic disorders531,654,655 and stacking faults,656 such a value is still undesirable for practical application.

6.2. Tuning the ionic conductivity
Regardless of the appealing value of theoretical ionic conductivity of halide-based SEs, e.g., C2/m-Na3XI6 with room-temperature ionic conductivity over 10−1 mS cm−1, the experimentally obtained samples usually result in significantly lower ionic conductivity at the level of 10−3 to 10−7 mS cm−1, as well as large deviation from the theoretical crystal structures calculated based on their Li-ion counterparts.627,649,652 For instance, the water-mediated synthesized Na3InCl6 had an ionic conductivity of merely 2.23 × 10−8 S cm−1 at 80 °C,627 in line with the experimentally reported ionic conductivity from the previous literature.653,657 As illustrated, the major determinant of the ion conduction within halide-based SEs is their structure and geometry. Therefore, designing optimized structural parameters becomes the key to superionic conduction in halide-based SEs. Furthermore, as the Na+ migration is still largely assisted by the inherent vacancies, another important strategy can be introducing the charge compensation mechanism to increase the concentration of vacancies in the Na+ diffusion pathways. Luckily, these two reasonable modification routes can be simultaneously accomplished by aliovalent doping into M sites, mostly achieved by Zr4+ due to its low dopant formation energy and low cost. Meanwhile, anion mixing and phase-structure design can also be rational strategies to enhance the ion conduction within halide-based SEs.
Zr4+ doping of M3+ cations. The aliovalent doping of Zr4+ into the M3+ site, with changed size, has been demonstrated to be effective in enhancing the ionic conductivity of quaternary sodium halide SEs, Na3−xM1−xZrxCl6 (M = Y or Er), by simultaneously altering the structural geometry of the pristine Na3YCl6 and Na3ErCl6 by inducing disorder of the diffusion paths,651 as well as increasing the concentration of charge carriers, as shown in Fig. 24a.647,648 In the pristine Na3ErCl6, the Na+ sites are fully occupied, leaving deficient adjacent vacancy for ion hopping, thereby negligible ionic conductivity. On the other hand, the pristine Na2ZrCl6 has a honeycomb-like lattice arrangement in the ab-plane by connecting the polyhedra in an edge-to-edge manner, with partial occupation of Na+, which was proved to favor facile ion conduction in its Li-ion counterparts, e.g., Li3ErCl6 and Li3YCl6.531,625,639 As the lattice structure of Na3−xM1−xZrxCl6 inherits the P21/n phase of the pristine Na3ErCl6, the polyhedral volume of (Er1−xZrxCl6)(3−x)− decreases with the increasing amount of Zr4+ due to its smaller size compared to Er3+ (72 pm vs. 89 pm) (Fig. 24a, upper left).450 Meanwhile, when the higher-valent Zr4+ partially substitutes Er3+, occupation in the octahedral polyhedron constantly decreases, indicating the formation of stable vacancies (Fig. 24a, bottom left). As a result, the ionic conductivity is enhanced with reduced activation barriers, until the impact of introduction of vacancies on ion conduction is overwhelmed by the shrunk polyhedral pathways (Fig. 24a, right). This balance between vacancy concentration and free ion migration volume was achieved up to nearly x = 0.6. After that, when Zr4+ substitution exceeds 0.6, a sharp reduction of lattice parameters following the decreased size of (NaCl6)5− polyhedra induces a highly complex interaction from charge carrier density, diffusion pathway, and local distortion, which results in a decrease of ionic conductivity and an increase of activation barriers. Herein, the optimum Na2.4Er0.4Zr0.6Cl6 exhibited a room-temperature ionic conductivity of 4 × 10−5 S cm−1, significantly improved from that of the pristine Na3ErCl6 (10−9 S cm−1). Later, Zr4+-doped Na3−xY1−xZrxCl6 was also reported with enhanced ionic conductivity up to 6.6 × 10−5 S cm−1 at ambient temperature, which was several orders of magnitude higher than that of the pristine Na3YCl6.647 However, the explanation to this improvement seems to be a far cry from that in Na3−xEr1−xZrxCl6, where Zr4+ was observed to increase the lattice volume and expand the bottleneck region with increasing doping concentration, meanwhile leading to extra vacancy formation. For the first time, the rotational motion of polyhedra, i.e., (YCl6)3− and (ZrCl6)2−, was spotted in the experimentally obtained single-ion Cl-based halide SEs, which facilitates Na+ diffusion in a synergistic manner with increased vacancy concentration (Fig. 24b). Noteworthily, in these Zr4+-doped halide-based SEs, the mechanochemical ball milling synthesis method was believed to enable faster ion conduction, by introducing disorders of the local Na+ environment and resulting in less crystallinity of the final products, which was supported by the three-orders-of-magnitude lower ionic conductivity of ball-milled Na2ZrCl6 after annealing.642
 Fig. 24  (a) The plot of change of the polyhedral volume of (Er1−xZrxCl6)(3−x)− (upper left), Na+ site occupation (bottom left), and total ionic conductivity with the amount of Zr4+ (right), where interconnected polyhedra and calculated lowest energy bond-valence landscape with Na+ sites are incorporated, adapted with permission from ref. 648. (b) The probability density of Na3YCl6 and Na2.25Y0.25Zr0.75Cl6 indicating octahedra rotation promoting Na+ diffusion, via 100 ps. AIMD simulation at 600 K (isosurface value = 5× 10−4), adapted with permission from ref. 647. (c) The probability density of Na3YBr3I3 and Na3GdBr3I3 indicating intensified anion vibration and facilitated Na+ diffusion upon anion mixing, through 50 ps. AIMD simulation at 800 K (isosurface value of 2P0), and (d) the improved ionic conductivity with reduced activation energy of anion-mixed Na3GdBr3I3 compared with pristine or other anion mixed halides, reprinted with permission from ref. 658. 

Anion mixing. Anion mixing of I− and Br− is an already well-known strategy to change the lattice parameters and chemical bonding, as well as the redistributed ion site occupation, in Li-ion halide-based SEs, thereby promoting the ion conduction.659–661 In a similar manner, this anion mixing strategy has been demonstrated to be effective in achieving faster Na+ ion conduction in Na-ion halide SEs. For example, by mixing I− with Br−, the room-temperature ionic conductivity of Na3YBr3I3 and Na3GdBr3I3 was found to be drastically improved to 3.3 and 7.5 mS cm−1, in addition to mitigation of the activation energy,658 due to the promoted Na+ diffusion (Fig. 24c and d). This is likely caused by the local disorder in the chemical bonding and intensified anion vibration in the crystal lattice, as shown in Fig. 24c. Surprisingly, an interesting phenomenon of improved ionic conductivity was observed by incorporation of oxyhydryl groups (–OH) in NaBi3O4Cl2 after absorbing water in a moist ambient environment, as the accumulated electrons around the (–OH)-absorption-induced Schottky defects facilitated Na+ diffusion by electrostatic interaction.662
Phase-structure design. On the other hand, applying phase-structure design of sodium halides may be also effective in guiding the experimental effort and improving the acquired ionic conductivity. For instance, the material screening of Cl-based halide SEs claimed that the stable phases P21/n and P1c of Na3ScCl6 and Na3InCl6, according to the principle of M cation dependent phase stability,651 are supposed to exhibit insufficient ionic conductivity. Nevertheless, when the Pm1 phase was adopted for them, Na3ScCl6 (metastable) and Na3InCl6 (stable) are expected to show an ultrahigh ionic conductivity of 11.54 and 3.09 mS cm−1, respectively. The theoretical calculation results demonstrated the two-dimensional diffusion channels along the a and b axis directions in the unique hcp-like sublattice configuration of Cl− anions.646 Moreover, these Pm1-Na3InCl6 and Na3ScCl6 were confirmed to be both dynamically and thermodynamically stable, even below room temperature, indicating their viable synthesizability from the corresponding phase equilibrium compounds. Unfortunately, there has not been experimental attempt to validate this theory.
6.3. Interfacial compatibility with Na metal
Na3YCl6 and Na3YBr6 are thermodynamically stable in a wide range of 0.51–3.75 V and 0.57–3.36 V vs. Na+/Na, respectively,643 in good agreement with the revised theoretical calculations by Zhang et al. and Yu et al.650,651 Although their sufficiently high oxidative limits and excellent chemical stability against cathode materials make it possible for their application with high-voltage cathodes, their reduction limits are still higher than the potential of the metallic Na anode, indicating the intrinsic thermodynamic instability against the Na anode. While the decomposition reaction energy at the SE/Na interface was claimed to be extremely small, i.e., 50 meV per atom for Na3YCl6 and 17 meV per atom for Na3YBr6, implying their sluggish kinetics or even reversible reactions towards Na metal in practice,643 some other work suggested that the Na metal/halide SE interface might require additional protection modification because of the much-higher-than-expected reduction reaction energy. Meanwhile, as Na3MCl6 and Na3MBr6 are reduced by the Na metal, the decomposition products should contain electron-conducting M metals, resulting in the unstable SEI layer and possible reduction reaction continuing into the SE bulk. Interestingly, the resistance to reduction reaction and hence the decomposition reaction energy are relevant to the M cations.297 As Zr4+ are doped into the M3+ site, the reduction limit of Na3−xY1−xZrxCl6 became even higher compared to that of Na3YCl6 (1.5–3.8 V vs. Na+/Na), in addition to the increased reaction energy with metallic Na (340 meV per atom), implying the impaired stability against the Na anode.647 Recently, the electrolyte/anode interface of Na2.25Y0.25Zr0.75Cl6 was examined against the Sn anode upon electrochemical cycling, and an electronically conducting and ionically insulating interface was found, indicating its reductive instability.663 I-based halide SEs usually have lower oxidation potentials of approximately 3 V, with a similar deficient thermodynamic stability against metal Na as Cl-based and Br-based halides.658 With such a concern, almost all the halide-based SEs are still using the Na alloy metal anode instead of metallic Na.642,647,649
6.4. Guidelines for future interfacial modification
Considering that halide-based SEs are intrinsically compatible with high-voltage cathodes, it would be a pity if the Na metal anode cannot be added into the combination. To the best of our knowledge, there has never been successful or even attempted trial of utilizing Na-ion halide SEs in room-temperature SMBs. Therefore, it is important to propose a strategic guideline for interfacial modification of Na-ion halide SEs against the metallic Na anode. Using their Li-ion counterparts for reference,664 the reasonable modification strategies include designing bilayer-structured SEs,665–668 introducing an electron-blocking interfacial interlayer,579 designing a quasi-binary composite electrolyte,669,670 and doping fluorine or nitrogen.666,671 For example, the bilayer-structured SE strategy was already proved effective in NASICON-based SMBs, by coating a composite polymer electrolyte on the NASICON ceramics to optimize the electrolyte/Na interface.672 In this way, an appropriate reduction-resisting layer can also be built on halide-based SEs to mitigate the interfacial instability between them and the Na metal anode. A similar strategy is to insert an electron-blocking but ion-conducting interlayer between halide-based SEs and the metallic Na anode, thereby stabilizing their interface. The quasi-binary composite electrolyte can be chosen from the compositional range between two phases that are intrinsically thermodynamically stable against Na metal (one of them is halide), such as Li3N–LiX (X = Cl, Br, and I) in the Li-ion counterparts.673 Doping fluorine or nitrogen into the halide-based SEs may favor the in situ formation of a fluorine/nitrogen-rich surface protection layer at the Na/electrolyte interface, which has been used in e lithium-ion solid-state SMBs666,674 and some sodium-ion liquid-electrolyte SMBs.675–677
7. Antiperovskite ISEs
Antiperovskites have been recently recognized as a new type of SEs, despite their common application in a wide range of research fields.678,679 In 2012, the Li+-rich antiperovskites Li3OCl and Li3OBr were discovered to provide 3D fast ion conduction with room-temperature ionic conductivity over 1 mS cm−1 and ultralow activation energies,680 followed by the later research further promoting their ionic conductivity to 25 mS cm−1 and demonstrating their great compatibility with the metallic Li anode.681–683 By sharing the same stoichiometry and topology with the conventional perovskite structure, the antiperovskite structure consists of inverted atomic positions (Fig. 25a), that is the center atom turns from a cation in perovskites into an anion in antiperovskites, while the outer atoms change from anions to cations. Thereby, antiperovskites are usually denoted by an inverse formula of perovskites, written as X3BA, where X is a monovalent cation (usually Li+ or Na+), B is usually a divalent chalcogenide or oxygen anion, and A is usually a monovalent halide or hydride anion, or it can be a polyanion cluster. With such a cation–anion inversion, the antiperovskite structure is intrinsically Na+-rich. Based on the selection of B and A anions, antiperovskite SEs can be categorized into (1) oxyhalide antiperovskites, (2) halide hydroxide antiperovskites,684 (3) cluster-based antiperovskites, (4) sodium hydride antiperovskites,685 or (5) double antiperovskites,686–688 and the current research on Na+ antiperovskite SEs mostly emphasizes on the oxyhalide-type and cluster-based-type.689 Similar to the successful Li-ion precedents, the Na-ion antiperovskite SEs are expected to exhibit high ionic conductivity, wide electrochemical stability, good compatibility with Na metal, and facile structure manipulation. Compared to the Li-ion oxyhalide antiperovskites that are thermodynamically metastable as suggested by first-principles DFT calculations,690 Na-ion antiperovskites favor thermodynamic stability at normal pressure and temperature and thus facile synthesis. However, the direct substitution of Li with Na in antiperovskites initially resulted in much lower ionic conductivity at room temperature,275,691–699 until the recent discovery of the superionic cluster-based Na+-antiperovskite,276 Na3OBH4, that inspired the subsequent research of more fast-conducting antiperovskite SEs. Herein, the ion conduction mechanism and Na metal compatibility of Na-ion antiperovskite SEs, as well as their unsolved mysteries, are thoroughly elucidated to guide their future research.
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of the (a) prototypical structure of an antiperovskite (left), sharing the same topology with the perovskite (right), (b) 3D cubic structure of the X3BA antiperovskite and (c) 2D layered structure of the Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase X4BA2 antiperovskite. 
7.1. Ion conduction mechanisms and modification strategies
Structure influenced conduction. Ideally, antiperovskite-type SEs have a 3D cubic structure with Pmm space group, or a 2D Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase, as shown in Fig. 25b and c. The standard cubic structure of Na3BA is assembled in a bcc-like lattice arrangement, well known as the fast ion conducting structure, where each divalent B anion at the cubic center is six-fold coordinated with the Na+ at the cubic faces, forming corner-sharing Na6B octahedra, while monovalent A anions reside at the cubic corners, being cuboctahedrally coordinated to 12 neighboring Na+. In this isostructural 3D ion-conducting framework, all Na+ ions locate at the crystallographically equivalent sites and mobile Na+ ions diffuse along the preferred migration channels along the octahedral edges depending on the formation of defects.696,700 Despite the poor ionic conductivity of pristine oxyhalide antiperovskites Na3OA (A = Cl, Br, I) with cubic structure Pmm,275,694,697,698,701 the incorporation of larger A anions seemed to generate a mismatching effect, which tailored the free volume for Na+ hopping through interstitials, i.e., Frenkel defects, while the introduction of higher-valent cations into Na+ sites induced charge-compensating vacancies, i.e., Schottky defects, thus both facilitating ion conduction.696 In fact, the facile structure manipulation of antiperovskites usually results in their tilted octahedra and distorted crystal structures from the perfect cubic structure, which is not only closely related to the ionic radii of X, B, and A ions, described by the Goldschidt's tolerance factor (t),700,702,703 but also affected by the external pressure and temperature. The trend of decreasing tolerance factor t with the decreasing size of the A anion in Na3OA (X = Cl, Br, I) continues in a wider range, indicating the crystal structure gradually shifting to lower symmetry (tetragonal or orthorhombic) with smaller A anions, or converting to a hexagonal phase with face-sharing octahedra when oversized A anions or undersized B anions are incorporated.276,693,695–697,699,701,704,705 With the increasing size of A anions, the Na+ ion migration tends to be facilitated, reflected by the quantitative trend of surging ionic conductivity with reduced activation energy. From the perspective of crystal structure and lattice interaction, this can be explained by the increasing effective Na–O bond length as the crystal volume and lattice symmetry shift to a higher value, which results in weaker electrostatic interaction with mobile Na+, while the more polarizable large A anions can soften the lattice. Similarly, replacing the B anion with more polarizable ones may also benefit the ion conduction, e.g., O2− by S2−. A similar trend was observed in Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) antiperovskites Na4BA2, with a layered structure consisting of inter-stacked antiperovskite slabs Na3BA and rock salt layer NaA, where the smaller size of the A anion led to a more compact layer structure and stronger electrostatic interaction with A anions, thus impeding the Na+ hopping.686,706 Although such a structural effect from A anions has been validated from theoretical calculations and experimental data, the room-temperature ionic conductivity of the obtained oxyhalide antiperovskites usually lies below 10−6 S cm−1.
Lattice dynamics. Interestingly, cluster-based antiperovskites with a superhalogen cluster anion at the A site were demonstrated with much higher ionic conductivity,275,694,707,708 particularly Na3O(BH4). Na3O(BH4) delivered a high ionic conductivity of 4.4 mS cm−1 at room temperature and low activation energy of 0.25 eV, several orders of magnitude higher than the oxyhalide antiperovskites,276 due to the slightly larger size of (BH4)− polyanion cluster (203 pm of (BH4)− vs. 196 pm of Br− or 220 pm of I−).450 In addition to the slightly expanded structure and ion hopping channel, such an abnormally high ionic conductivity of Na3O(BH4) was explained by the rotational motion of the polyanion clusters to a large extent, known as the “paddle-wheel” effect.709–711 As illustrated in the previous sections, the paddle-wheel mechanism kicks the surrounding mobile Na+ to achieve much faster ion motion. However, this assertion has been challenged by later research, which failed to reproduce the superionic Na3O(BH4) through either experiment or AIMD simulation.698
Defect concentration and mobility. As in any other solid ion conductor, the Na+ ion conduction in antiperovskite SEs requires the presence of defects, whereas the determination of their dominant charge carriers (vacancies or interstitials) has long been debated in both Li-rich and Na-rich antiperovskites. Compared to the heated haggle over the dominant charge carriers in Li-ion antiperovskites,680,690,712–718 as well as the extremely complex assertions, there has been significantly less detailed studies of this topic in Na-ion antiperovskites and most of the work still used their Li-ion counterpart for reference. By investigating the three common and plausible neutral defect pairs in pristine Na3OCl, i.e., Na Frenkel defect, NaCl Schottky defect pair, and Na2O Schottky pair, Ciucci et al. concluded that the vacancy hopping mechanism was dominant in the Na3OCl antiperovskite, considering the lowest formation energy of the NaCl Schottky defect pair (1.18 eV) with both the Na vacancy and Cl vacancy coexisting,719 while the activation energy of vacancy-mediated Na diffusion was estimated as 0.42 eV. This theory was supported by the recent investigation of the Na3OCl antiperovskite at the atomic scale. Meanwhile, this is different from the previous claim by Zhu et al. stating the Na2O Schottky defect as the dominant type in Na3OBr,697 which referred to the pair of two Na vacancies and one O vacancy. Although the underlying Na+ conduction mechanism in the Na-ion antiperovskite still remains unclear and the exact description may require case by case inspection, the ion hopping mechanism in the Na-ion antiperovskite seems to be mostly relevant to Na vacancies, corresponding to the modification strategies of aliovalent doping.
7.2. Modification strategies for fast ion conduction
Compared to the pristine Li+ oxyhalide antiperovskites with already high ionic conductivity, the Na+ antiperovskite SEs are still weak in room-temperature ion conduction,679,703 especially considering that the perfect antiperovskite structure with the lack of defects or charge carriers is unfavorable for ion conduction. Therefore, rational modification of the Na+ antiperovskite is necessary for fulfilling the requirement of sufficient ionic conductivity, and the common strategies are summarized in Fig. 26.
 Fig. 26  Four common modification strategies to promote Na+ conduction within antiperovskite SEs. 
Aliovalent doping for defect formation. By doping higher-valent cations into the Na+ site, the induced charge compensation can introduce higher concentration of Na+ vacancies, which is believed to be responsible for Na+ ion hopping in antiperovskites. A series of solid solutions of Na3OA (A = Cl, Br, I) were prepared to investigate the effect of aliovalent doping in the Na+ site.696 As a result, the ionic conductivity of Na2.9Sr0.05OBr0.6I0.4 was boosted to 1.89 mS cm−1 at 200 °C, benefited from the formation of Na+ vacancies by the doping of divalent Sr2+, largely improved from that of the pristine Na3OBr and Na3OCl with an ionic conductivity of approximately 10−2 mS cm−1 at 200 °C, or from that of halide-mixed Na3OBr0.6I0.4 of 0.43 mS cm−1. In a similar manner, larger substitutional defects and formation of Na vacancies are also favored by Ba2+ due to their lower substitutional solution energies.684,719 However, this strategy of creating Na vacancies by doping large-size higher-valent cations must take into account their binding energy with associated Na vacancies, since an adverse effect may emerge with the increasing activation energy of Na diffusion with stronger binding. In this way, Ca2+ can be a valid option to effectively improve the ionic conductivity of oxyhalide antiperovskite Na3OCl because of its weak binding with the adjacent Na vacancy.719 However, Islam et al. recently proposed another conclusion that Ca2+, Al3+, and Ga3+ tend to cause local defect clustering and high binding energy with associated Na vacancies, thus hindering the migration of mobile charge carriers.720 Instead, the Mg2+ dopant was affirmed with the weakest binding energy and became the most appropriate candidate for creating Na vacancies and enhancing Na+ conduction.
Isovalent substitution and anion mixing. The O2− anions at the B site in Na3BA or Na4BA2 antiperovskites can be commonly replaced by S2− anions, where such an isovalent substitution can facilitate the mobile Na+ motion due to the reduced electrostatic interaction from S2− compared to that from O2−, known as “lattice softening”.721,722 On the other hand, anion mixing of the A site can be regarded as another kind of isovalent substitution, where the halide ions can be mixed with each other, or with superhalogen polyanion clusters; however the contributing factor is not ion valence but the size effect. In this way, the ordered sublattice in the pristine antiperovskite structures is broken by the mismatch effect of different A anions, thereby inducing structure disordering, which almost always leads to extra free volume for mobile Na+ migration and thus the higher ionic conductivity and lower activation energy compared to the single-halide antiperovskite SEs.717 For instance, the ultrahigh room-temperature ionic conductivity of Na3S(BCl4) of 2.8 mS cm−1 as well as the minimized activation energy of 0.17 eV were shown by Fang and Jena, via the simultaneous isovalent substitution of the B site and A site by S2− and a polyanion cluster, respectively, where lattice softening and lattice dynamics both significantly promoted the Na+ migration.710 By anion mixing of (BCl4)− and I−, the ionic conductivity of Na3S(BCl4)0.5I0.5 was further increased to 3.8 mS cm−1 along with a reduced activation energy of 0.15 eV, attributed to the size effect of mixed A anions with a large size difference. Another example for successful isovalent substitution is presented by simultaneously substituting Li+ in the Na+ site and S2− in the O2− site, where the high ionic conductivity of Ruddlesden–Popper antiperovskite Na3LiS0.5O0.5I2 was predicted to be 6.3 mS cm−1 with 0.12 eV activation energy at room temperature, owing to the “knocking-on effects” of the smaller Li+ encouraging the long-distance migration of coexisting larger Na+.706 Recently, aliovalent doping of Mg2+ in the Na+ site and anion mixing of Cl− with F− in Na-rich fluorinated sulfate antiperovskite Na3SO4F resulted in several-orders-of-magnitude improvement in ionic conductivity, where Na2.98Mg0.01SO4F0.95Cl0.05 exhibited ionic conductivity close to 0.1 mS cm−1 at 60 °C, due to the synergistic effect of created Na vacancies and structure expansion.723 Goodenough et al. demonstrated the high room-temperature ionic conductivity of 10 mS cm−1 and the reduced activation energy of less than 1 eV in co-doped Na2.99Ba0.005OCl1−x(OH)x, in the glass-amorphous phase.684
Inserting the rotational polyanion cluster. Although Ahiavi et al. claimed that they were unable to reproduce the high ionic conductivity of Na3O(BH4) or identify the promoting effect of the rotational (BH4)− cluster,276,698 the rotational polyanion clusters still motivate the design of fast ion-conducting antiperovskites based on both experimental investigation and theoretical analysis. By simultaneously substituting the amide (NH2)− cluster at the B site and replacing the A site with (BH4)− in the Na3BA antiperovskite, a “double paddle-wheel” effect was proposed in Na3(NH2)(BH4) with both rotational cluster groups promoting Na+ conduction, in distinct ways.724 In this dual-cluster-based antiperovskite, as the slowly rotating amide cluster obeyed the “paddle-wheel mechanism”, the indirect correlation between the fast-rotating borohydride cluster and Na+ diffusion was observed for the first time, which may explain the failed attempt at the replication of fast-conducting Na3O(BH4). Meanwhile, by comparing the calculated jump attempt frequencies of carrier migrations in Na3OBr and Na3O(BH4), the (BH4)− cluster was proved to mitigate the activation energy and facilitate the ion hopping by a large margin.725 Even though the calculated ionic conductivity of cluster-based antiperovskites still cannot match the high value from the experimental result,276 such a difference can be interpreted by the overestimated migration barrier and underestimated defect concentration. In this manner, a variety of polyanion clusters were predicted to accomplish the high ionic conductivity and low activation energy of cluster-based antiperovskite SEs, such as (AlF4)−, (ClO4)−, (Icl4)−, and (IO4)−, among which Na3SAlF4 manifested the highest ionic conductivity of 65.5 mS cm−1 and the activation energy of 0.19 eV based on first-principles DFT calculations,726 due to the multifold optimizations including active lattice dynamics, widened diffusion channels and stabilized geometry structure. Doping of large polyanion units into the B site, e.g., (SO4)2− and (SeO4)2−, is also an effective way to improve ion transport. Theoretically formulated Na3(SO4)F0.5Cl0.5 and Na3(SeO4)F0.5Cl0.5 antiperovskite SEs exhibited a superior ionic conductivity of 1.09 mS cm−1 and 8.17 mS cm−1 at room temperature, respectively, as well as the activation energy down to 0.137 eV.727However, the summarized ion conduction mechanism and modification strategies are made up on an ideal scenario within the bulk grain of single-crystal antiperovskites, which only concerns point defects other than the microstructural defects. Regarding the oxygen backbone of antiperovskite SEs, they are supposed to feature similar characteristics as the conventional oxide SEs. This means the grain boundary effect might play an important role in their ion conduction in practical application, which has already been extensively studied in Li+ antiperovskites.289,728–732

7.3. Interfacial compatibility with Na
Antiperovskite SEs are known for their great thermodynamic stability against the metallic Na anode. As most of the SEs can be reduced in contact with Na metal (0V vs. Na+/Na) due to the reducible transition metal elements, prototypical antiperovskite SEs are considered robust against the Na metal anode with either no decomposition or an almost negligible driving force for reduction. For example, Na3OBr is considered thermodynamically stable in the range of 0–1.79 V vs. Na+/Na.396 The pristine Ruddlesden–Popper antiperovskites and double antiperovskites are also stable against the metallic Na anode, i.e., ESW of 0–1.66 V for Na4OI2 and 0–1.5 V vs. Na+/Na for Na6SOI2.686,733 This is ascribed to both the electronically insulating nature of the pristine antiperovskite structure and unreducible elements contained.689 For some of the modified antiperovskite SEs, the coating layer may be necessary for a thermodynamically unstable interface with the Na metal anode; e.g., Na3SeO4F0.5Cl0.5 and Na3SO4F0.5Cl0.5 have reductive limits of 0.954 V and 0.68 V vs. Na+/Na, respectively.687 Nonetheless, the formation of ionically conductive but electronically insulating NaF and NaCl might help their Na metal interface maintain kinetic stability in some way. On the other hand, the major obstacle for the practical application of antiperovskite SEs in high-energy-density batteries comes from their limited oxidative thresholds. Unfortunately, considering that the development of Na-rich antiperovskite SEs is still at its early stage, there has not been many SMBs fabricated based on them. In 2020, Fan et al. fabricated solid-state SIBs and SMBs using Na2.98Mg0.01SO4F0.95Cl0.05 SEs and the Prussian blue cathode, with the Na–Sn alloy anode and Na metal anode, respectively.723 The solid-state SMB exhibited a fast capacity decay from 83.3 mA h g−1 to 34.5 mA h g−1 within 10 cycles at 0.05 mA cm−2 and 60 °C, despite the use of an ionic liquid for wetting the electrode/electrolyte interface. In comparison, the cell with the Na–Sn alloy anode delivered a higher initial discharge capacity of 91 mA h g−1 with 77 mA h g−1 retained after 20 cycles.
8. Complex hydride ISEs
To optimize the application of solid-state SMBs, the development of SEs has been expanded beyond the typical ones, in which complex hydrides might be one of the most forefront categories. In the early 2010s, the research of Na+ ion conduction and electrochemical stability of complex hydrides sprang up,734–736 spurred by the studies of Li+-conducting complex hydride systems, e.g. complex anions (BH4)−, (NH2)−, (AlH4)−, (AlH6)3−, etc.670,737–742 Unfortunately, these Na+ pioneers of Na(BH4)-type complex hydrides tended to exhibit much lower room-temperature ionic conductivity compared to their successful Li-ion counterparts, e.g. 2.1 × 10−10 S cm−1 and 6.4 × 10−7 S cm−1 for NaAlH4 and NA3AlH6, respectively. Although the mechanochemically ball-milled Na(BH4)0.5(NH2)0.5 readily owns a high-temperature phase in the antiperovskite-like structure, with sufficient intrinsic Na+ vacancies, its ionic conductivity is still of the order of magnitude of 10−6 S cm−1, which is far from that of the highly conductive high-temperature phase in Li-ion complex hydrides after the order–disorder phase transition occurring at certain transition temperature.278,743–746 Even so, these complex hydrides were predicted to have wide electrochemical stability windows, high thermal stability, and great compatibility toward the Na metal anode. Luckily, a particular type of complex hydride, closo-borohydrides, emerged as a promising candidate for Na-ion SEs due to their vacancy-rich disordered structure above a relatively low phase transition temperature.
8.1. Ion conduction in borohydrides
closo-Borohydride SEs are written as Na2(BnHn) (usually 6 ≤ n ≤ 12), by incorporating large-size cage-like closo-borate anions, e.g. (B10H10)2− and (B12H12)2−, in which the spacious interstitial framework of gigantic anions favors Na+ migration compared to that constructed by much smaller polyanions like (BH4)− (Fig. 27a and b).747,749 In addition to the widened Na+ transport channels, the order–disorder phase transition was found to occur at relatively low temperatures, in addition to the “paddle-wheel” mechanism of these large polyanions, both promoting the Na+ diffusion. At low temperature, Na2B12H12 is ground-stable in the ordered monoclinic phase with P21/n symmetry, where eight Na+ locate around the (B12H12)2− icosahedron and each one of these Na+ coordinates with the four most adjacent (B12H12)2− icosahedra through nine H atoms, as shown in Fig. 27b and Fig. 27c (left).748 At high temperature near 529 K, Na2B12H12 undergoes phase transition to a disordered bcc polymorph with Pmn symmetry where the quasi-spherical (B12H12)2− anions arrange in bcc-like packing with substantial orientational disorder (Fig. 27c, center). The redistribution of partially occupied Na+ cations among a large amount of off-centered Na+ sites within the distorted tetrahedral interstices of the anion sublattice facilitates the facile hopping of mobile Na+, in contrast to the fully occupied Na+ sites in the ordered low-temperature phase.749,750 As the anion and cation disorder extends with increasing temperature, a second bcc phase with Imm symmetry appears at 545 K, in addition to a minor fraction of the high-temperature structure with the fcc pattern (Fig. 27c, right). Upon phase transition to the highly disordered high-temperature phases, the reinforced rotation of (B12H12)2− anions, indicated by a hundred-fold increase in reorientational jump rates, greatly promotes the mobile ion diffusion with the aid of large population of Na+ vacancies in the high-temperature phases.750,751 The ionic conductivity of high-temperature phase Na2B12H12 dramatically increases by nearly three orders of magnitude from that of its low-temperature phase, exceeding 0.1 S cm−1 at temperature between 540 K and 573 K.749 Compared to Na2B12H12, sodium decahydro-closo-decaborate Na2B10H10 has significantly lower phase transition temperature near 360 K, above which a greatly disordered fcc-type arrangement forms with a highly mobile vacancy-rich Na+ cationic sublattice within the large-size (B10H10)2− anionic framework, rendering a high ionic conductivity of 10 mS cm−1 at 383 K with a low activation energy of 0.47 eV, or 0.1 S cm−1 at 500 K.747 In a similar manner to Na2B12H12, by virtue of the large spheroidal polyanions and liquid-like Na+ cationic sublattice, mobile Na+ ions are allowed to migrate along the unrestricted pathways with a shallow migration energy landscape provided by the reduced occupation of Na+ over a variety of interstices in the high-temperature phase of Na2B10H10, while the paddle-wheeling polyanions further lubricate the Na+ hopping among the voids of the anion framework. Nevertheless, these fast ion conduction behaviors in closo-borohydride SEs only occur at temperatures above the phase transition temperature, which are still much higher than room temperature. To realize the superionic conducting borohydrides for room-temperature solid-state SMBs, efforts must be made to either lower or even eliminate the order–disorder transition temperature, or stabilize the highly conductive high-temperature disorder at room temperature.
 Fig. 27  (a) The top and side views of the geometry of cage-like closo-borate anions (B10H10)2− and (B12H12)2−, and polyanion (BH4)−, along with their relative sizes, reprinted with permission from ref. 747. (b) The unit cell framework of Na2B12H12 and Na+ interaction with neighboring atoms and polyanions, in the ordered low-temperature monoclinic phase (P21/n), from the view along the lattice direction of (100), reprinted with permission from ref. 748. (c) The order–disorder phase transition from the low-temperature monoclinic phase P21/n (left panel) to the partially disordered high-temperature Pmn phase (center panel), then to the fully disordered high-temperature cubic Imm phase (right panel), at different transition temperatures with hysteresis, from the view along the c axis, reprinted with permission from ref. 749 and 750. 
8.2. Modification strategies for room-temperature conduction
The principal modification methods for closo-borohydride SEs include chemical alteration of closo-borane, anion mixing, and crystalline nanosizing and disordering. As the order–disorder phase transition is driven by the structure entropy caused by cation and anion disorder, the transition temperature is supposed to be correlated with the variation of enthalpy during the process. The rational tuning of the size ratio between cation and anion or change of polyanion symmetry should adopt reduced phase transition temperature and enhanced ionic conductivity.
Chemical alteration/substitution within closo-borane. Chemical alteration of the closo-borate anion is commonly achieved by replacing one boron atom in (BnHn)2− with a carbon atom, resulting in monocarba-closo-borate anions, e.g., (CB9H10)− (Fig. 28a) and (CB11H12)− (Fig. 28b), and compositions such as NaCB9H10 and NaCB11H12. The carbon-substituted closo-borohydride SEs can manifest both enhanced Na+ conduction and declined phase transition temperature. For example, NaCB11H12 transforms from an ordered orthorhombic structure to a disordered face-centered-cubic phase near 380 K, which is substantially lower than that of its pristine material Na2B12H12 at near 529 K.752 Moreover, the ionic conductivity of NaCB11H12 is over 0.12 S cm−1 at T ≥ 383K with a low activation energy of 0.22 eV. The significant enhancement of ion conduction can be explained by multiple reasons, including the change of the anion valence, the orientational mobility of monocarba-closo-borane, the concentration of Na+ vacancies, and the alteration of the lattice constant. Compared to the divalent (B12H12)2− anion, the reduced anion charge of the monovalent (CB11H12)− anion results in weaker coulombic interaction between mobile Na+ cations and anion clusters, while the locally repulsive nature of the introduced carbon atom creates a dipole that drives local redistribution of cations in response to the fluctuating potential, both of which lead to facile ion conduction of Na+ ions.753 Notwithstanding the similar size and geometry of the carbon incorporated closo-borate cluster as its pristine counterpart, the slightly larger lattice constant of NaCB11H12 indicates more free space for Na+ ion transport.754 Additional Na+ vacancy sites are likely generated in the crystal lattice due to less charge compensation required for monovalent (CB11H12)− anions, providing more accessible ion diffusion pathways. In addition to the modification of the local static cation–anion interactions, the incorporation of the carbon atom further modifies the orientational preference and dynamics of the anion, producing frustration that hinders the formation of a stable ordered structure, hence lowering the phase transition temperature and enhancing Na+ diffusion. Impressively, the temperature for the onset of order–disorder transition was further reduced to 290 K for NaCB9H10.755 Once the high-temperature disordered phase forms above 310 K, it remains stable down to 285 K, which means that the room-temperature superionic disordered phase is available as long as it can be heated up to 310 K whenever the temperature happens to drop below 285 K. Consequentially, NaCB9H10 delivers a supreme ionic conductivity of 3 mS cm−1 at room temperature after the abovementioned initial activation cycle of heating and cooling. Likewise, the hydrogen atom can also be substituted by halides to adjust the relative enthalpies of the ordered and disordered state, thereby lowering the phase transition temperature.749 A series of Na2B12H12−xIx were obtained by partially substituting hydrogen by iodine, which delivered an ionic conductivity close to 0.1 S cm−1 at 360 K, where the phase transition temperature was found to lie between those of NaCB11H12 and NaCB9H10.756 However, full substitution of hydrogen with halogen atoms resulted in a rather high phase transition temperature for Na2B12X12 (X is halide ions), following a positive relationship with the increasing anion size and mass H < Cl < Br < I, which is ascribed to the increasing strength and directionality of Na–halogen interactions that restricted the reorientation disorder and dynamic motion until high temperature.757
 Fig. 28  The relative geometry of (a) (CB9H10)− by replacing one boron atom with a carbon atom from (B10H10)2−, reprinted with permission from ref. 755 and (b) (CB11H12)− from (B12H12)2−, reprinted with permission from ref. 752 with Mulliken charges marked on the structurally different atoms of the isolated anions. (c) The relative geometry of open-structure nest-like nido-poly(carba)borate anions, reprinted with permission from ref. 758. 

Reducing the symmetry of closo-borane. On the basis of quasi-spherical cage-like closo-polyborate and closo-polycarbaborate anion clusters, e.g., (B12H12)2−, (B10H10)2−, (CB11H12)−, and (CB9H10)−, a related type of nest-like nido-poly(carba)borate polyanion, i.e., (B11H14)−, (CB10H13)−, and (C2B9H12)−, was discovered to favor a room-temperature-stable and intrinsically disordered structure that exhibited high ionic conductivity and an unobvious order–disorder phase transition.758 The nido-structure is formed in a similar manner as the closo-structure, but one of the icosahedral cage atoms in the closo-structure is completely removed for forming the nido-structure.759–761 Thereby, the unity and symmetry of the closed and cage-like closo-structure is reduced, shifting to an open and nest-like nido-structure (Fig. 28c). Although the investigated nido-borane SEs generally exhibited lower ionic conductivity compared to that of closo-carbaborane SEs, most of them are still better than closo-borane SEs, among which Na3B11H14 delivers the highest ionic conductivity of 45 mS cm−1 at 413 K or approximately 1 mS cm−1 at room temperature. In the future, due to the similar size and geometry to closo-borane, nido-borane may be substituted into the closo-boranes to form anion-mixed solid solutions of borohydride SEs to acquire room-temperature-stable structures with intrinsic disorder.
Anion mixing. Anion mixing, or sectional substitution of the polyanion by another, has been the most promising approach to suppress or eliminate the phase transition temperature so far. Through the introduction of geometric frustration from mixed anions, the phase ordering can be restrained, and the desired disordered phase can be stabilized over a wide range of temperature from sub ambient temperature to high temperature. By ball-milling NaBH4 and Na2B12H12, borohydride and closo-borate anions were well mixed without reaction at high energies, where such a mixed-anion compound Na3(BH4)(B12H12) maintains stability in a broad range of temperature from 100 K to 653 K and does not require thermal activation for ionic motion once the structure has already been established in the synthesis process.711 Na3(BH4)(B12H12) presented a 2D conduction pathway constructed by alternating stacking of Na-rich slabs and Na-free layers, where mobile Na+ favored the superionicity in the Na-rich mixed-anion slabs in contrast to the impeded motion within the Na-free closo-borane slabs, resulting in the superior ionic conductivity of 0.5 mS cm−1 at room temperature as well as activation energy down to 0.34 eV. Prepared by drying aqueous solutions of equimolar amounts of NaCB9H10 and NaCB11H12, mixed-closo-polycarbaborate compound Na2(CB9H10)(CB11H12) adopted an intrinsically disordered hexagonal phase,762 which usually only exists in the high-temperature phase of pristine NaCB9H10,755 indicating the readily obtained highly conductive phase with a suppressed phase transition temperature. As a result, Na2(CB9H10)(CB11H12) delivered an ultrahigh ionic conductivity of 70 mS cm−1 at room temperature. Another pseudo-binary mixed-closo-polyborane SE Na2(B12H12)0.5(B10H10)0.5 also offered a high ionic conductivity of 0.9 mS cm−1 at 20 °C, while its excellent thermodynamic stability against Na metal made it practicable in solid-state SMBs.302 A similar result was obtained by varying the molar ratio of (B12H12)2− and (B10H10)2− to 3:1 in 0.25Na2B10H10–0.75Na2B12H12.763 A series of mixed-anion solid-solutions of Na2−x(CB11H12)x(B12H12)1−x and Na4(CB11H12)2(B12H12) have been presented with superior ionic conductivity within range of 1–2 mS cm−1 as well as high oxidative electrochemical stability above 4 V vs. Na+/Na.764–767 Most recently, a novel conjuncto-hydroborane SE Na3B24H23 was prepared by oxidizing closo-borate (B12H12)2−, where its composite electrolyte Na3B24H23–5Na2B12H12 exhibited a high room-temperature ionic conductivity and Na+ transference number of 1.43 mS cm−1 and 0.97, respectively, in low density, regardless of its more impressive electrochemical stability and compatibility with Na metal.768 With more superionic borohydride SEs being found, their compatibility in all-solid-state batteries with metallic Na as the anode was experimentally investigated.
Crystallite nanosizing and ball-milling disordering. While several material synthesis strategies have been proved to favor the formation of a conductive disordered phase,762,769–773 the most effective synthesis strategy to achieve fast ion conduction within borohydride SEs at room temperature is the introduction of crystallite nanosizing or disordering via mechanochemical ball-milling. With the continuous impact during mechanical ball-milling, the disordered phases, which should only form above the order–disorder phase transition temperature, can be generated and stabilized at room temperature.774 Moreover, unexpected compounds or alloy phases may also result from the ball-milling of the mixture of various precursors, resulting in surprising behaviors of mixed ion conduction. As a proof, the room-temperature ionic conductivity of ball-milled Na2B12H12 drastically increases by three orders of magnitude compared to that of the pristine material. While both low-conducting and superconducting phases coexisting in the ball-milled materials, superconducting nanocrystallites interconnect and randomly distribute in larger crystallites, largely promoting the ion conduction in bulk materials. More aggressive or well-designed milling conditions tend to result in more complete pulverization of particles, maximizing the necessary nanoparticulate morphologies. Revisiting the abovementioned anion-mixed Na3(BH4)(B12H12) and Na2(CB9H10)(CB11H12) by adopting the mechanical ball-milling synthesis method, their fast ion conduction is believed to be due to not only polyanion insertion, but also the effect of crystallite nanosizing and induced disordering.719,762 However, the low-temperature phase with sluggish ion conduction can probably recrystallize during thermal cycling, as found in Li2B12H12.774
8.3. Compatibility with the Na metal anode
The advantage of closo-borohydride SEs may include not only their high ionic conductivity, but also the wide ESW and interfacial compatibility with the Na metal anode.742,775,776 While the archetypical Na2B10H10 was proved to be stable up to 5 V vs. Na+/Na at 393 K according to preliminary CV measurements and air-stable at room temperature without noticeable degradation until 500 K, owing to the high stability of the closed and symmetric “aromatic-like” closo-borane, the rotational flexibility of large closo-borate anions also results in weaker mechanical strength, and their ductility in turn can make more intimate contact with electrodes and allow facile material processing.747,765,777,778 Considering the limitation of the disordered phase of pristine closo-borohydride SEs at high temperature, the Na compatibility of the room-temperature conductive variants becomes more important. Based on the CV measurement, Na2(B12H12)0.5(B10H10)0.5 was determined to be thermodynamically stable against the metallic Na anode without observing reduction currents down to 0 V vs. Na+/Na, while the compatibility was experimentally investigated in the symmetric Na|Na2(B12H12)0.5(B10H10)0.5|Na cell at 60 °C, which exhibited fully reversible Na stripping/plating and long-term stability at 0.1 mA cm−2.302 Later, a full-cell solid-state SMB was assembled using the Na2(B12H12)0.5(B10H10)0.5 SE, the NaCrO2 cathode and the Na metal anode, demonstrating a reversible capacity of 80 mA h g−1 and 68 mA h g−1 retained after 250 cycles at 0.2C and 60 °C. Meanwhile, 25Na2B10H10–0.75Na2B12H12 was used to fabricate a bulk-type all-solid-state SMB using the TiS2 cathode and the Na metal anode without interface modification, which delivered a high initial charge capacity of 237 mA h g−1, with 216 mA h g−1 retained at the 11th cycle at room temperature and 0.02C.763 Impressively, the highly conductive Na3(BH4)(B12H12) showed outstanding electrochemical stability up to 10 V and compatibility with metal Na based on CV measurements, despite the unfortunate miss-out on the cell testing.711 Due to the slightly lower room-temperature ionic conductivity of Na3(NH2)(B12H12), the all-solid-state SMB TiS2|Na3(NH2)(B12H12)|Na was cycled at 353 K and 0.1C, which demonstrated a discharge capacity of 146 mA h g−1 and stable cycling for more than 200 cycles, with a capacity retention of 77 mA h g−1.779 Recently, the mixed-anion closo-polycarbaborane SE Na4(CB11H12)2(B12H12) was found to be intrinsically stable with the Na metal anode while forming an in situ passivation layer to achieve dynamical stability against a high-voltage cathode. Thereby, a 4 V-class solid-state SMB Na3(VOPO4)2F|Na4(CB11H12)2(B12H12)|Na was successfully operated at room temperature and 0.2C, without interfacial modification or high cell pressure, which enabled a discharge capacity of 99 mA h g−1 with 76% of the capacity retained after 800 cycles.767 Most recently, the conjuncto-hydroborane Na3B24H23 was reported with the widest electrochemical stability in all hydroborate-type SEs so far, of 6.7 V vs. Na+/Na, while its composite conjuncto-closo-hydroborane SE Na3B24H23–5Na2B12H12 still exhibited a wide ESW of 5.8 V and great compatibility toward the Na metal anode, which was demonstrated by the CCD of 1 mA cm−2 and stable cycling over 100 h of the symmetric Na cell at 0.2 mA cm−2 and 60 °C, or CCD of 0.7 mA cm−2 at room temperature. Assembled with 4 V-class cathode Na(Ni1/3Fe1/3Mn1/3)O2, the solid-state SMB Na(Ni1/3Fe1/3Mn1/3)O2/Na3B24H23-5Na2B12H12/Na ensured good rate capability and cycling stability by providing an initial discharge capacity of 62.3 mA h g−1 with 84% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 60 °C and 0.1C.768 Coupled with wide electrochemical stability and chemical compatibility against various high-voltage cathodes and the Na metal anode, complex hydrides have great development potential in the research of ISEs. However, some of their electrochemical stabilities have also been doubted to be overestimated, as for chalcogenide SEs due to the very small oxidation currents and the artificial increase of the interfacial contact area.302 Meanwhile, as the soft and ductile mechanical properties of borohydrides endow them with intimate contact with electrode materials, their low shear modulus may be incapable of suppressing the growth of sodium dendrites.777
9. Outlook and perspective
After reviewing the long list of Na-ion ISEs, it is unfortunate that none of them, at least at this current stage, can simultaneously satisfy all of the expectations for an ideal SE in achieving high-energy-density and high-rate-capability SMBs. Interestingly, despite the intrinsic advantages owned by different types of ISEs, there seems always to be a tricky trade-off between fast ion conduction and thermodynamic stability.224 This phenomenon is best reflected by the oxide-based and chalcogenide-based ISEs, where the chalcogenide-based ISEs usually exhibit ultrahigh ionic conductivity, some exceeding 10 mS cm−1, owing to the shielding effect of highly polarizable S2− anions on the interactions between mobile cations and host structure or other cations. However, at the same time, the loosely bonded electrons in S2− anions are subject to electron extraction at high voltage, thereby resulting in a rather low oxidation limit, and vice versa for oxide-based SEs. A similar conflict also exists between the mechanical strength and interfacial wettability of SEs, where the softer nature favors the intimate contact with the Na metal anode, but at the same time sacrificing the mechanical stability. Nonetheless, we can still see great potential and a brilliant future in these promising candidates, in light of the unceasing improvement of the existing materials, as well as the exciting discoveries of novel materials or underlying mechanisms, by which a perfect balance on the teeter-totter between their properties is expected in the future. To realize the practical application of ISEs in SMBs, the most essential considerations are still their sufficiently high ionic conductivity and compatibility with the Na metal anode. In our review, the specific ion conduction mechanisms have been thoroughly elaborated in the given materials, as well as their thermodynamic stability and interfacial kinetics against the Na metal anode, which provided the fundamental understanding of the activities in solid-state SMBs. Based on these fundamentals, the rational modification strategies to improve Na+ conduction and stabilize the electrolyte/Na interfaces have been expounded.
Despite the widely different ion conduction mechanisms underlying the varying compositions and structures, and their extremely complex entanglement at multiple length scales, the general principles of future modification strategies for fast ion conductors can be concluded as in Fig. 29:
 Fig. 29  The general rules and designing principles for fast-ion-conducting solid electrolytes in the future. 
(1) To incorporate a high concentration of mobile charge carriers in the Na+ ion diffusion pathways, e.g., vacancies and interstitials (Fig. 29(i)). As a matter of fact, materials with flawless crystalline structure are essentially ion insulators because the ion hopping events are unlikely to happen if all Na+ ions are at their stable sites and the mobile Na+ ions have no landing point after jumping. In addition to the Schottky and Frenkel defects formed in the intrinsic regime, excess Na+ vacancies and interstitials can be introduced by the charge compensation mechanism, and they have been demonstrated to be effective in enhancing the ionic conductivity of a wide array of ISEs, e.g., NASICON,284,468 antiperovskites,720,723 and NPS.538,539
(2) To build isoenergetic Na+ ion migration pathways along the Na+ sites with similar site energies and local environment (Fig. 29(ii)). In solid ion conductors, the activation energy for Na+ migration is determined by the maximum energy barrier that mobile Na+ ions have to overcome in the ion transport channels. With virtually the same site energy and reduced migration bottlenecks, mobile Na+ should adopt a liquid-like flowing among the interconnected hopping sites, and thus facile ion transportation. For example, the bcc-like anion framework was validated as a faster ion-conducting structure owing to the interlinked energy-equivalent tetrahedral sites that allow mobile Na+ diffusion in a shallow energy landscape.255
(3) To trigger the concerted ion motion upon the single-ion movements (Fig. 29(iii)). Generally, the correlative motion of mobile Na+ exhibits a much lower activation barrier and faster ion conduction. This is usually achieved by adding a significantly excess number of mobile cations, i.e., Na+, into the SEs, which forces the excessive Na+ to occupy the high energy sites instead of ground-state sites, thereby igniting the correlative ion motion with high-site-energy Na+ ions flowing downhill and kicking the low-site-energy Na+ for continuous migration.253 The second approach is to intentionally create high-energy sites by implanting a large repulsive center, e.g., Cs+, in the regular Na+ diffusion pathways, thus facilitating the long-distance and facile Na+ concerted hopping under the action of Coulombic interaction.602
(4) To weaken the electrostatic interaction between mobile Na+ and the anion frameworks (Fig. 29(iv)). Intuitively, mobile Na+ ions moving in the 3D skeletons must be susceptible to their local environment, in that stronger electrostatic interaction from the stationary framework may largely cumber the free movement of mobile Na+. Such a theory has been reflected by the improvement of ionic conductivity by rationally increasing the lattice volume and bottleneck area in the NASICON structure.449,454,455 Akin to this theory, more polarizable anion frameworks should exhibit faster conducting features via lattice softening, where the softer bonding favors the facile transport of Na+, e.g. S2− compared to O2−.
(5) To induce lattice disorder and structure frustration. In the disordered lattice, Na+ ions tend to slightly shift from their ground-state equilibrium sites to locate at the so-called “destabilized” state, which favors their facile ion motion with shallow potential wells (Fig. 29(v)). For example, a trend of increasing ionic conductivity can be observed in Na8.5(AlS4)0.25(SiS4)0.75 with lower local coordination symmetry of Na+,266 while the disordered structure of complex hydrides also exhibited higher ionic conductivity than the ordered phase by several orders of magnitude.747,758,780
(6) To mitigate the grain boundary effect. The blocking effect of grain boundaries has often been neglected during the material design, despite its significant impact on polycrystalline ion-conducting ceramics in practice (Fig. 29(vi)). The optimization of the microstructure of SEs is usually associated with controlled synthesis and processing conditions or adding dopants to decorate the grain boundaries, in that the rapid and low-temperature sintering of oxide-based SEs manifests restricted abnormal grain growth as well as low concentration of grain boundaries, while the in situ formation of some secondary phases can mitigate the grain boundary resistance, thereby acquiring higher ionic conductivity in the polycrystalline final products.284,352,368,378,434,521
(7) To design the paddle-wheeling polyanion clusters (Fig. 29(vii)). The rotational dynamics of some of the polyanions have been revealed to be responsible for some of the superionic SEs,256,277–281 such as γ-Na3PS4,521,522 Na11Sn2PS12-type SEs,256 and Na3O(BH4).276
Likewise, the general rules for optimizing the interfacial compatibility between ISEs and the Na metal anode can be concluded as in Fig. 30:
 Fig. 30  The general rules and the designing principle for solid electrolytes with good interfacial compatibility towards the Na metal anode. 
(1) To investigate the thermodynamic stability of SEs with the Na metal anode through computational screening (Fig. 30(i)). To guide more efficient work on experimentally validating the compatibility of optimum SEs with the Na metal anode, a delicate and thorough theoretical calculation can be conducted in advance to investigate the intrinsic properties of a large variety of potential SE candidates, including their thermodynamic stability, structural preference, predicted decomposition reactions, calculated reaction energies, or even the optimum dopants to improve electrochemical stability, thus screening out the most reliable material designs. Benefited from the sophisticated modeling systems and advanced computing power nowadays, a credible and simple strategic guideline can be generated for the subsequent research, which has been widely used in the material design of both Na-ion and Li-ion SEs.650,651,781–784
(2) To lower the electronic conductivity (Fig. 30(ii)). While the research of SEs descends on the improvement of ionic conductivity, their electronic conductivity is usually overlooked. However, high electronic conductivity can be one of the origins of the unstable interface between SEs and the metallic Na anode, due to the proliferent growth of metal dendrites.228,467,785–787 In this case, eliminating the inherent impurities and formation of electronically conducting phases, as well as adopting appropriate dopants with lower electronegativity, becomes necessary.211,503
(3) To regulate the microstructural defects (Fig. 30(iii)). While the internal pores and grain boundaries have a huge impact on Na+ ion transport and growth of sodium dendrites, the microstructural characteristics determine the mechanical properties to a large extent, in that the bulk cracking and grain interstices expose plenty of unprotected electrochemically active surfaces. Therefore, tuning the microstructure of ISEs, e.g., density, mechanical stability, grain size, and grain boundary concentration, creates a profound influence on the interfacial stability and cycling stability with the Na metal anode. This strategy can be achieved mostly by the control of processing conditions, selection of precursors, and adding dopants or additives to decorate the grain boundaries.380,386,387,457,508
(4) To build a kinetically stable interface with a robust in situ formed SEI layer (Fig. 30(iv)). It is noteworthy that the interfacial stability between SEs and the Na metal anode depends not only on the thermodynamic aspects, but also on the kinetic stability of the in situ formed SEI layer; e.g., the true electrochemical stability window of some sulfide-based SEs was found to be wider than their thermodynamic stability window. By adding certain dopants or additives in the bulk materials or at the SE/anode interface, the ESW of the SEs can be expanded beyond their thermodynamic limits by maintaining a kinetically stable interface during the repeated plating and stripping of Na, e.g., the in situ formation of the fluorine/chorine-rich interface layer587,588,687,788,789 and the Na-K alloy interface layer.790
(5) To insert a thermodynamically stable interlayer between the unstable SEs and the Na metal anode (Fig. 30(v)). It is acknowledged that a highly conductive, yet electrochemically stable ISE hardly exists. To take advantage of the high ionic conductivity, the poor reduction stability or inferior compatibility with the metallic Na anode must usually be dealt with. In general, the polymer-based SEs have much better thermodynamic stability against the Na metal anode, despite their generally lower Na+ transference number, room-temperature ionic conductivity and oxidative stability compared to ISEs. Therefore, polymer-based SEs can be used a thermodynamic stable interlayer separating the unstable ISEs and the Na metal anode.578,672
(6) To reduce the interfacial resistance between SEs and the Na metal anode (Fig. 30(vi)). While the large interfacial resistance to Na+ conduction leads to large internal resistance deteriorating the battery performance, the unintimate interface contact between SEs and Na metal may significantly promote the unwanted interfacial reactions and notorious sodium dendrites.791 There have been many technical routes developed to reduce the interfacial resistance, e.g., coating the sodiophilic surface layer,215,792,793 constructing a sandwich structure with polymers,238 hunting interfacial impurities,794,795 or simply applying high pressure.216
(7) To design composite SEs composed of a polymer matrix and inorganic fillers (Fig. 30(vii)). Although the bilayer or sandwich structures of polymers and inorganic SEs have demonstrated a much more stable interface during cycling, the additional interfaces between these layered structures can impede the fast ion diffusion and increase the total resistance of the SEs. By adding inorganic fillers in the polymer matrix, composite SEs should exhibit merits from both highly conductive ISEs and interfacial compatible polymer SEs,796–800 which deserve future in-depth research for all-solid-state SMBs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22179079) and the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No. 20010500400). The authors gratefully acknowledge the efforts and contributions of Siqi Ma for organizing and formatting bibliographic references.
ReferencesT. Ackermann, Wind Power in Power Systems, Wiley,  2012 Search PubMed .C. J. Winter, R. L. Sizmann and L. L. Vant-Hull, Solar Power Plants: Fundamentals, Technology, Systems, Economics, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,  2012 Search PubMed .C. Simeons, Hydro-Power: The Use of Water as an Alternative Source of Energy, Elsevier Science,  2014 Search PubMed .W. J. Nuttall, Nuclear renaissance: technologies and policies for the future of nuclear power, CRC Press,  2022 Search PubMed .S. Kalaiselvam and R. Parameshwaran, Thermal Energy Storage Technologies for Sustainability: Systems Design, Assessment and Applications, Elsevier Science,  2014 Search PubMed .U.S. Department of Energy, National Blueprint for Lithium Batteries 2021–2030, https://www.energy.gov/eere/vehicles/articles/national-blueprint-lithium-batteries, accessed March, 2023.I. Tsiropoulos, N. Lebedeva, D. Tarvydas, C. E. C. C. d. Investigación and E. C. J. R. Centre, Li-ion Batteries for Mobility and Stationary Storage Applications: Scenarios for Costs and Market Growth, Publications Office of the European Union,  2018 Search PubMed .Y. Ding, Z. P. Cano, A. Yu, J. Lu and Z. Chen, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 1–28 CrossRef CAS .A. Tomaszewska, Z. Chu, X. Feng, S. O'kane, X. Liu, J. Chen, C. Ji, E. Endler, R. Li and L. Liu, ETransportation, 2019, 1, 100011 CrossRef .J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–4 CrossRef .H. Vikström, S. Davidsson and M. Höök, Appl. Energy, 2013, 110, 252–266 CrossRef .J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .J. Deng, W.-B. Luo, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701428 CrossRef .A. Rudola, R. Sayers, C. J. Wright and J. Barker, Nat. Energy, 2023, 8, 215–218 CrossRef .H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 RSC .F. Li, Z. Wei, A. Manthiram, Y. Feng, J. Ma and L. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9406–9431 RSC .W. M. Haynes, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, 97th edn,  2016 Search PubMed .Trading Economics, https://tradingeconomics.com/, accessed March, 2023.J. Peters, D. Buchholz, S. Passerini and M. Weil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1744–1751 RSC .P. C. Vesborg and T. F. Jaramillo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7933–7947 RSC .N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Fang, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 294–323 CrossRef CAS .R. Usiskin, Y. Lu, J. Popovic, M. Law, P. Balaya, Y.-S. Hu and J. Maier, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 1020–1035 CrossRef CAS .C.-H. Dustmann, J. Power Sources, 2004, 127, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3431–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B.
L. Ellis and L. F. Nazar, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 168–177 CrossRef CAS .T. Oshima, M. Kajita and A. Okuno, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2004, 1, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .R. Bones, D. Teagle, S. Brooker and F. Cullen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1274 CrossRef CAS .F. Xie, Z. Xu, Z. Guo and M.-M. Titirici, Prog. Energy, 2020, 2, 042002 CrossRef .S. P. Ong, V. L. Chevrier, G. Hautier, A. Jain, C. Moore, S. Kim, X. Ma and G. Ceder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3680–3688 RSC .A. Rudola, A. J. Rennie, R. Heap, S. S. Meysami, A. Lowbridge, F. Mazzali, R. Sayers, C. J. Wright and J. Barker, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8279–8302 RSC .H. Hou, X. Qiu, W. Wei, Y. Zhang and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602898 CrossRef .D. Stevens and J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1271 CrossRef CAS .K. Kubota and S. Komaba, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2538 CrossRef CAS .X. Chen, Y. Zheng, W. Liu, C. Zhang, S. Li and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22196–22205 RSC .M. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Wu, Y. Bai and C. Wu, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105738 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Shao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 RSC .K. Abraham, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3544–3547 CrossRef CAS .L. Ma, J. Cui, S. Yao, X. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Shen and J.-K. Kim, Energy Stor. Mater., 2020, 27, 522–554 Search PubMed .Y. Wang, D. Zhou, V. Palomares, D. Shanmukaraj, B. Sun, X. Tang, C. Wang, M. Armand, T. Rojo and G. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3848–3879 RSC .H. Yadegari, Q. Sun and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7065–7093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Mu, H. Pan, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903790 CAS .P. R. Abel, M. G. Fields, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15860–15867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. R. Abel, Y.-M. Lin, T. De Souza, C.-Y. Chou, A. Gupta, J. B. Goodenough, G. S. Hwang, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18885–18890 CrossRef CAS .P. Bai, Y. He, P. Xiong, X. Zhao, K. Xu and Y. Xu, Energy Stor. Mater., 2018, 13, 274–282 Search PubMed .Y. Bai, Y. Liu, Y. Li, L. Ling, F. Wu and C. Wu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 5519–5527 RSC .D. Chao, C. Zhu, P. Yang, X. Xia, J. Liu, J. Wang, X. Fan, S. V. Savilov, J. Lin, H. J. Fan and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Chen, Y. Meng, F. Xie, F. He, C. He, K. Davey, N. Zhao and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804116 CrossRef PubMed .C. Chen, Y. Dong, S. Li, Z. Jiang, Y. Wang, L. Jiao and H. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 320, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .J. Chen, X. Fan, X. Ji, T. Gao, S. Hou, X. Zhou, L. Wang, F. Wang, C. Yang and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1218–1225 RSC .S. Chen, Y. Pang, J. Liang and S. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13164–13170 RSC .Z. Chen, L. Lu, N. Li and C. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3085–3090 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1595–1603 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Choi and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3965–3970 RSC .S. H. Choi, Y. N. Ko, J. K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1780–1788 CrossRef CAS .J. Cui, Z.-L. Xu, S. Yao, J. Huang, J.-Q. Huang, S. Abouali, M. A. Garakani, X. Ning and J.-K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10964–10973 RSC .M. Dahbi, M. Kiso, K. Kubota, T. Horiba, T. Chafik, K. Hida, T. Matsuyama and S. Komaba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9917–9928 RSC .A. Darwiche, C. Marino, M. T. Sougrati, B. Fraisse, L. Stievano and L. Monconduit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20805–20811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Farbod, K. Cui, W. P. Kalisvaart, M. Kupsta, B. Zahiri, A. Kohandehghan, E. M. Lotfabad, Z. Li, E. J. Luber and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4415–4429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Gan, H. He, K. Zhao, Z. He, S. Liu and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7031–7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Gao, L. Wang, S. Dai, M. Cao, Z. Zhong, Y. Shen and M. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 344, 223–232 CrossRef CAS .Y. Han, N. Lin, T. Xu, T. Li, J. Tian, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3153–3158 RSC .G. Hasegawa, K. Kanamori, N. Kannari, J. I. Ozaki, K. Nakanishi and T. Abe, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1917–1920 CrossRef CAS .Y. He, P. Bai, S. Gao and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41380–41388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K.-l Hong, L. Qie, R. Zeng, Z.-Q. Yi, W. Zhang, D. Wang, W. Yin, C. Wu, Q.-J. Fan and W.-X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12733–12738 RSC .M. Hu, Y. Jiang, W. Sun, H. Wang, C. Jin and M. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19449–19455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Hu, L. Wang, K. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Cheng, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12794–12798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Hu, Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, K. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Chen and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1309–1316 RSC .J. Huang, Z. Wei, J. Liao, W. Ni, C. Wang and J. Ma, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 33, 100–124 CrossRef .S. Huang, L. Liu, Y. Zheng, Y. Wang, D. Kong, Y. Zhang, Y. Shi, L. Zhang, O. G. Schmidt and H. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706637 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Huang, J. Wang, L. Miao, Y. Jin, J. Peng, Q. Li, C. Fang, J. Han and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22208–22215 RSC .J.-Y. Hwang, H.-L. Du, B.-N. Yun, M.-G. Jeong, J.-S. Kim, H. Kim, H.-G. Jung and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 494–501 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Jangid, A. S. Lakhnot, A. Vemulapally, F. J. Sonia, S. Sinha, R. O. Dusane and A. Mukhopadhyay, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3422–3434 RSC .L. Ji, W. Zhou, V. Chabot, A. Yu and X. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24895–24901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Jiao, A. M. Hafez, D. Cao, A. Mukhopadhyay, Y. Ma and H. Zhu, Small, 2018, 14, 1800640 CrossRef PubMed .W. T. Jing, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2913–2933 RSC .W. P. Kalisvaart, B. C. Olsen, E. J. Luber and J. M. Buriak, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2205–2213 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kim, Y. Park, A. Choi, N.-S. Choi, J. Kim, J. Lee, J. H. Ryu, S. M. Oh and K. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Kong, Y. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Von Lim, J. Zhang, L. Sun, B. Liu, T. Chen, P. V. Y. Alvarado and H. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12751–12762 RSC .V. Lakshmi, Y. Chen, A. A. Mikhaylov, A. G. Medvedev, I. Sultana, M. M. Rahman, O. Lev, P. V. Prikhodchenko and A. M. Glushenkov, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8272–8275 RSC .B. Li, B. Xi, F. Wu, H. Mao, J. Liu, J. Feng and S. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803070 CrossRef .H. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8016–8025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Li, K. H. Seng, D. Li, Y. Xia, H. K. Liu and Z. Guo, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1466–1476 CrossRef CAS .S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu, L. Yang, Y. Guo, L. Cheng, M. Lei and W. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19438–19445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Li, C. Hu, M. Zhou, H. Tao, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, S.-H. Qi, W.-C. Zhang, Y.-Z. Feng and J.-M. Ma, Rare Met., 2020, 39, 1239–1255 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Y. S. Hu, M. M. Titirici, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600659 CrossRef .Y. Li, Y. Liang, F. C. R. Hernandez, H. D. Yoo, Q. An and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 453–461 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Y. Yuan, Y. Bai, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Li, F. Wu, K. Amine, C. Wu and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702781 CrossRef .Z. Li, J. Ding, H. Wang, K. Cui, T. Stephenson, D. Karpuzov and D. Mitlin, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 369–378 CrossRef CAS .Z. Li, L. Ma, T. W. Surta, C. Bommier, Z. Jian, Z. Xing, W. F. Stickle, M. Dolgos, K. Amine and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 395–401 CrossRef CAS .L. Liang, Y. Xu, Y. Li, H. Dong, M. Zhou, H. Zhao, U. Kaiser and Y. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1749–1755 RSC .Y.-M. Lin, P. R. Abel, A. Gupta, J. B. Goodenough, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8273–8277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liu, Y. Wen, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6387–6392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Liu, Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13046–13052 RSC .Y. Liu, X. He, D. Hanlon, A. Harvey, J. N. Coleman and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8821–8828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liu, H. Kang, L. Jiao, C. Chen, K. Cao, Y. Wang and H. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1325–1332 RSC .Y. Liu, H. Wei, C. Wang, F. Wang, H. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Yan, B. H. Kim and F. Ren, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 236 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Liu, F. Xin, M. Ge, J. Rong and C. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, Y. An, G. Pang, S. Dong, C. Xu, C. Mi and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 814–823 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, T. Lu, T. Song, X.-Y. Yu, X. W. D. Lou and U. Paik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1576–1580 RSC .Z. G. Liu, R. Du, X. X. He, J. C. Wang, Y. Qiao, L. Li and S. L. Chou, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 3724–3743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. M. Lotfabad, P. Kalisvaart, A. Kohandehghan, D. Karpuzov and D. Mitlin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19685–19695 RSC .Y. C. Lu, C. Ma, J. Alvarado, N. Dimov, Y. S. Meng and S. Okada, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16971–16977 RSC .L. Luo, J. Song, L. Song, H. Zhang, Y. Bi, L. Liu, L. Yin, F. Wang and G. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Luo, C. Bommier, Z. Jian, X. Li, R. Carter, S. Vail, Y. Lu, J.-J. Lee and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2626–2631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Ma, J. Wang, H. Gao, J. Niu, F. Luo, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, Energy Stor. Mater., 2018, 13, 247–256 Search PubMed .M. Mao, F. Yan, C. Cui, J. Ma, M. Zhang, T. Wang and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3830–3836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Ni, S. Fu, C. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. Maier, Y. Yu and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502568 CrossRef .Q. Ni, R. Dong, Y. Bai, Z. Wang, H. Ren, S. Sean, F. Wu, H. Xu and C. Wu, Energy Stor. Mater., 2020, 25, 903–911 Search PubMed .A. Nie, Y. Cheng, S. Ning, T. Foroozan, P. Yasaei, W. Li, B. Song, Y. Yuan, L. Chen, A. Salehi-Khojin, F. Mashayek and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2240–2247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Palaniselvam, M. Goktas, B. Anothumakkool, Y.-N. Sun, R. Schmuch, L. Zhao, B.-H. Han, M. Winter and P. Adelhelm, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900790 CrossRef .L. Pan, H. Huang, M. Zhong and M. Niederberger, Energy Stor. Mater., 2019, 16, 519–526 Search PubMed .L. Pei, Q. Zhao, C. Chen, J. Liang and J. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1652–1655 CrossRef CAS .S. Peng, X. Han, L. Li, Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, M. Srinivansan, S. Adams and S. Ramakrishna, Small, 2016, 12, 1359–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Qu, C. Ma, G. Ji, C. Xu, J. Xu, Y. S. Meng, T. Wang and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3854–3859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Ren, H. Zhang, C. Guan and C. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702116 CrossRef .B. Ruan, H.-P. Guo, Y. Hou, Q. Liu, Y. Deng, G. Chen, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu and J.-Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37682–37693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .O. Ruiz, M. Cochrane, M. Li, Y. Yan, K. Ma, J. Fu, Z. Wang, S. H. Tolbert, V. B. Shenoy and E. Detsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801781 CrossRef .S. Y. Sayed, W. P. Kalisvaart, E. J. Luber, B. C. Olsen and J. M. Buriak, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9950–9962 CrossRef CAS .M. Sha, H. Zhang, Y. Nie, K. Nie, X. Lv, N. Sun, X. Xie, Y. Ma and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6277–6283 RSC .F. Shen, H. Zhu, W. Luo, J. Wan, L. Zhou, J. Dai, B. Zhao, X. Han, K. Fu and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23291–23296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Song, S. Park, J. Gim, V. Mathew, S. Kim, J. Jo, S. Kim and J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7815–7822 RSC .J. Song, D. Xiao, H. Jia, G. Zhu, M. Engelhard, B. Xiao, S. Feng, D. Li, D. Reed and V. L. Sprenkle, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 348–355 RSC .J. Song, Z. Yu, M. L. Gordin, S. Hu, R. Yi, D. Tang, T. Walter, M. Regula, D. Choi, X. Li, A. Manivannan and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Song, Z. Yu, M. L. Gordin, X. Li, H. Peng and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11933–11941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Su, H.-J. Ahn and G. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3131–3133 RSC .D. Su, S. Dou and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401205 CrossRef .J. Sun, H.-W. Lee, M. Pasta, Y. Sun, W. Liu, Y. Li, H. R. Lee, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Energy Stor. Mater., 2016, 4, 130–136 Search PubMed .J. Sun, H.-W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. Yuan, G. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Sun, H. Liu and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20560–20566 RSC .Q. Sun, Q.-Q. Ren, H. Li and Z.-W. Fu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1462–1464 CrossRef CAS .W. Sun, X. Rui, D. Yang, Z. Sun, B. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Zong, S. Madhavi, S. Dou and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11371–11381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Sun, C. Wang, Y. Gong, L. Gu, Q. Chen and Y. Yu, Small, 2018, 14, 1802218 CrossRef PubMed .D. Wang, Q. Liu, C. Chen, M. Li, X. Meng, X. Bie, Y. Wei, Y. Huang, F. Du and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2238–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wang, C. Luo, T. Gao, A. Langrock, A. C. Mignerey and C. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 473–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Wang, J. Yang, W. Yin and S.-I. Hirano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20623–20630 RSC .N. Wang, Z. Bai, Y. Qian and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 447–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, D. Su, C. Wang and G. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 29, 8–11 CrossRef CAS .Y.-X. Wang, J. Yang, S.-L. Chou, H. K. Liu, W.-X. Zhang, D. Zhao and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Su, L. Miao, Y. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Qiu, Y. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 3116–3124 CrossRef PubMed .P. Wei, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, S. Sun, Y. Qiu, J. Peng and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27039–27046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Wu, M. Zhang, Y. Bai, X. Wang, R. Dong and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12554–12561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Wu, H. Lu, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5708–5713 RSC .T. Wu, H. Hou, C. Zhang, P. Ge, Z. Huang, M. Jing, X. Qiu and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26118–26125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Xia, F. Zhang, H. Liang and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 4368–4377 CrossRef CAS .J. Xia, H. Zhao, W. K. Pang, Z. Yin, B. Zhou, G. He, Z. Guo and Y. Du, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3421–3425 RSC .Q. Xia, Z. Lin, W. Lai, Y. Wang, C. Ma, Z. Yan, Q. Gu, W. Wei, J. Z. Wang and Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14125–14128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Xiao, F. A. Soto, M. Gu, K. S. Han, J. Song, H. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, V. Murugesan, K. T. Mueller and D. Reed, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801441 CrossRef .F. Xie, L. Zhang, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff, D. Chao and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15829–15833 RSC .F. Xie, L. Zhang, D. Su, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700989 CrossRef PubMed .X. Xiong, G. Wang, Y. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Ou, F. Zheng, C. Yang, J.-H. Wang and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10953–10959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Xiong, C. Yang, G. Wang, Y. Lin, X. Ou, J.-H. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Liu, Z. Lin and K. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1757–1763 RSC .G. Xu, Y. Tian, X. Wei, L. Yang and P. K. Chu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 180–188 CrossRef CAS .G. Xu, L. Yang, X. Wei, J. Ding, J. Zhong and P. Chu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 580–590 CrossRef CAS .G. Xu, L. Yang, X. Wei, J. Ding, J. Zhong and P. K. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3349–3358 CrossRef CAS .Z. L. Xu, K. Lim, K. Y. Park, G. Yoon, W. M. Seong and K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802099 CrossRef .H. Yang, M. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Jiang and Y. Yu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3844–3853 CrossRef CAS .J. Yang, H. Wang, P. Hu, J. Qi, L. Guo and L. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 3744–3749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Yang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Hou, M. Jing, Y. Zhu, L. Fang, Q. Chen and X. Ji, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 358–367 CrossRef CAS .H. Ying, S. Zhang, Z. Meng, Z. Sun and W.-Q. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8334–8342 RSC .D. Y. Yu, P. V. Prikhodchenko, C. W. Mason, S. K. Batabyal, J. Gun, S. Sladkevich, A. G. Medvedev and O. Lev, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2922 CrossRef PubMed .P. Yu, W. Tang, F.-F. Wu, C. Zhang, H.-Y. Luo, H. Liu and Z.-G. Wang, Rare Met., 2020, 39, 1019–1033 CrossRef CAS .S. Yuan, X. I. Huang, D. I. Ma, H. G. Wang, F. Z. Meng and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2273–2279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Zhang, C. M. Ghimbeu, C. Laberty, C. Vix-Guterl and J. M. Tarascon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501588 CrossRef .H. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Qi, X. Zhong and Y. Yu, Energy Stor. Mater., 2018, 12, 37–43 Search PubMed .L. Zhang, X. Hu, C. Chen, H. Guo, X. Liu, G. Xu, H. Zhong, S. Cheng, P. Wu and J. Meng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604708 CrossRef PubMed .N. Zhang, X. Han, Y. Liu, X. Hu, Q. Zhao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401123 CrossRef .Q. Zhang, P. Man, B. He, C. Li, Q. Li, Z. Pan, Z. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Wang and Z. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104212 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, H. Gao, J. Niu, W. Ma, Y. Shi, M. Song, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11678–11688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Zhao, P. Xue, H. Ge, L. Li and B. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A690 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhao and A. Manthiram, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13205–13208 RSC .Y. Zhao, C. Wei, S. Sun, L. P. Wang and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500097 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Zheng, T. Zhou, C. Zhang, J. Mao, H. Liu and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3408–3413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zhong, M. Tao, W. Tang, W. Gao, T. Yang, Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, S.-J. Bao and M. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122209 CrossRef CAS .P. Zhou, X. Wang, W. Guan, D. Zhang, L. Fang and Y. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6979–6987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Zhou, W. K. Pang, C. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Chen, H. K. Liu and Z. Guo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8323–8333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Zhu, S. Guo, J. Yi, S. Bai, Y. Wei, G. Chen and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22012–22016 RSC .M. Zhu, X. Kong, H. Yang, T. Zhu, S. Liang and A. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 428, 448–454 CrossRef CAS .Y.-E. Zhu, L. Yang, X. Zhou, F. Li, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9528–9532 RSC .C. Zhao, Y. Lu, J. Yue, D. Pan, Y. Qi, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1584–1596 CrossRef .Y. Zhao, K. R. Adair and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2673–2695 RSC .C. Bao, B. Wang, P. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Zhou, D. Wang, H. Liu and S. Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004891 CrossRef CAS .S. Choudhury, S. Wei, Y. Ozhabes, D. Gunceler, M. J. Zachman, Z. Tu, J. H. Shin, P. Nath, A. Agrawal and L. F. Kourkoutis, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 898 CrossRef PubMed .O. Crowther and A. C. West, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A806 CrossRef CAS .T. Wang, Y. Hua, Z. Xu and J. S. Yu, Small, 2022, 18, 2102250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Liu, P. Liu and D. Mitlin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002297 CrossRef CAS .B. Sun, P. Xiong, U. Maitra, D. Langsdorf, K. Yan, C. Wang, J. Janek, D. Schröder and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Fang, J. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Yang, J. Z. Lee, M.-H. Lee, J. Alvarado, M. A. Schroeder and Y. Yang, Nature, 2019, 572, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Liu, X.-B. Cheng, Z. Jin, R. Zhang, G. Wang, L.-Q. Chen, Q.-B. Liu, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100003 CrossRef .H. Wang, E. Matios, J. Luo and W. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3783–3805 RSC .Y. Huang, L. Zhao, L. Li, M. Xie, F. Wu and R. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808393 CrossRef PubMed .K. Li, J. Zhang, D. Lin, D.-W. Wang, B. Li, W. Lv, S. Sun, Y.-B. He, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Li, F. Wu, Y. Li, M. Liu, X. Feng, Y. Bai and C. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4484–4536 RSC .J.-K. Park, Principles and applications of lithium secondary batteries, John Wiley & Sons,  2012 Search PubMed .H. Gao, S. Xin, L. Xue and J. B. Goodenough, Chem, 2018, 4, 833–844 CAS .S. L. Dreyer, A. Kondrakov, J. Janek and T. Brezesinski, J. Mater. Res., 2022, 37, 3146–3168 CrossRef CAS .M. Liu, H. Ao, Y. Jin, Z. Hou, X. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 100432 CrossRef .T. Jin, X. Ji, P. F. Wang, K. Zhu, J. Zhang, L. Cao, L. Chen, C. Cui, T. Deng and S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11943–11948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Pahari and S. Puravankara, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 10613–10625 CAS .R.-S. Kühnel, D. Reber and C. Battaglia, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2005–2006 CrossRef .Q. Yang, Z. Zhang, X.-G. Sun, Y.-S. Hu, H. Xing and S. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2020–2064 RSC .H. Sun, G. Zhu, X. Xu, M. Liao, Y.-Y. Li, M. Angell, M. Gu, Y. Zhu, W. H. Hung and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3302 CrossRef PubMed .K. Matsumoto, J. Hwang, S. Kaushik, C.-Y. Chen and R. Hagiwara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3247–3287 RSC .I. Hasa, S. Passerini and J. Hassoun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, Y. Shao, B. Lotsch, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, J. Janek, L. F. Nazar, C.-W. Nan, J. Maier and M. Armand, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1945–1976 RSC .Q. Zhao, S. Stalin, C.-Z. Zhao and L. A. Archer, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 229–252 CrossRef CAS .H. Tian, S. Liu, L. Deng, L. Wang and L. Dai, Energy Stor. Mater., 2021, 39, 232–238 Search PubMed .B. Lee, E. Paek, D. Mitlin and S. W. Lee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5416–5460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Deng, Z. Wang, I.-H. Chu, J. Luo and S. P. Ong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 163, A67 CrossRef .A. V. Virkar and L. Viswanathan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1979, 62, 528–529 CrossRef CAS .H. Fu, Q. Yin, Y. Huang, H. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, Q. Yu, L. Gu, J. Duan and W. Luo, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 2, 127–132 CrossRef .Y. Uchida, G. Hasegawa, K. Shima, M. Inada, N. Enomoto, H. Akamatsu and K. Hayashi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2913–2920 CrossRef CAS .J. Schnell, T. Günther, T. Knoche, C. Vieider, L. Köhler, A. Just, M. Keller, S. Passerini and G. Reinhart, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 160–175 CrossRef CAS .V. Raj, N. P. B. Aetukuri and J. Nanda, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2022, 26, 100999 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu, Z. Bao, Y. Cui, E. J. Dufek, J. B. Goodenough, P. Khalifah, Q. Li, B. Y. Liaw, P. Liu and A. Manthiram, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .P. Albertus, S. Babinec, S. Litzelman and A. Newman, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 16–21 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhang, D. Schröder, T. Arlt, I. Manke, R. Koerver, R. Pinedo, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9929–9936 RSC .W. Zhang, D. A. Weber, H. Weigand, T. Arlt, I. Manke, D. Schröder, R. Koerver, T. Leichtweiss, P. Hartmann and W. G. Zeier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,  2017, 9, 17835–17845 Search PubMed .R. Koerver, I. Aygün, T. Leichtweiß, C. Dietrich, W. Zhang, J. O. Binder, P. Hartmann, W. G. Zeier and J. R. Janek, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5574–5582 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xiao, Y. Wang, S.-H. Bo, J. C. Kim, L. J. Miara and G. Ceder, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 105–126 CrossRef CAS .J. A. S. Oh, L. He, B. Chua, K. Zeng and L. Lu, Energy Stor. Mater., 2021, 34, 28–44 Search PubMed .C. Zhou, S. Bag and V. Thangadurai, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2181–2198 CrossRef CAS .N. J. Dudney, in Lithium Batteries: Science and Technology, eds. G.-A. Nazri and G. Pistoia, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2003, pp. 624–642 DOI:10.1007/978-0-387-92675-9_20 .F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. J. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .P. Gorai, T. Famprikis, B. Singh, V. Stevanovic and P. Canepa, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 7484–7498 CrossRef CAS .F. Gray and M. Armand, Handb. Battery Mater., 2011, 627–656 CAS .D. Fenton, Polymer, 1973, 14, 589 CrossRef CAS .P. V. Wright, Br. Polym. J., 1975, 7, 319–327 CrossRef CAS .J. R. MacCallum and C. A. Vincent, Polymer Electrolyte Reviews, Springer Netherlands,  1989 Search PubMed .H. Yin, C. Han, Q. Liu, F. Wu, F. Zhang and Y. Tang, Small, 2021, 17, 2006627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Patel, K. G. Chandrappa and A. J. Bhattacharyya, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 844–848 CrossRef CAS .F. Gebert, J. Knott, R. Gorkin III, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, Energy Stor. Mater., 2021, 36, 10–30 Search PubMed .L. Viswanathan and A. V. Virkar, J. Mater. Sci., 1982, 17, 753–759 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhou, Y. Li, S. Xin and J. B. Goodenough, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 52–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Tian, T. Shi, W. D. Richards, J. Li, J. C. Kim, S.-H. Bo and G. Ceder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1150–1166 RSC .S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28216–28224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. A. Wu, C. S. Kompella, Z. Zhu, J. Z. Lee, S. C. Lee, I.-H. Chu, H. Nguyen, S. P. Ong, A. Banerjee and Y. S. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10076–10086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Tang, Z. Deng, Z. Lin, Z. Wang, I.-H. Chu, C. Chen, Z. Zhu, C. Zheng and S. P. Ong, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .S. W. Boettcher, S. Z. Oener, M. C. Lonergan, Y. Surendranath, S. Ardo, C. Brozek and P. A. Kempler, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .Y.-Y. Lin, A. X. B. Yong, W. J. Gustafson, C. N. Reedy, E. Ertekin, J. A. Krogstad and N. H. Perry, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2020, 24, 100875 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Wu, R. Zhang, Q. F. Fu, J. S. Zhang, X. Y. Zhou, P. Gao, C. H. Xu, J. Liu and X. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008165 CrossRef CAS .C. Wang, B. B. Xu, X. Zhang, W. Sun, J. Chen, H. Pan, M. Yan and Y. Jiang, Small, 2022, 18, 2107064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. C. Bachman, S. Muy, A. Grimaud, H.-H. Chang, N. Pour, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, F. Maglia, S. Lupart and P. Lamp, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 140–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. P. Kumar and S. Yashonath, J. Chem. Sci., 2006, 118, 135–154 CrossRef CAS .T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1278–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Tuller, in Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic Materials, ed. S. Kasap and P. Capper, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, p. 1 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-48933-9_11 .J. B. Goodenough, Proc. R. Soc. A, 1984, 393, 215–234 CAS .S. M. Nair, A. Yahya and A. Ahmad, J. Solid State Chem., 1996, 122, 349–352 CrossRef CAS .X. He, Y. Zhu and Y. Mo, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Burbano, D. Carlier, F. Boucher, B. J. Morgan and M. Salanne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 135901 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Wang, W. D. Richards, S. P. Ong, L. J. Miara, J. C. Kim, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhang, P.-N. Roy, H. Li, M. Avdeev and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19360–19372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. He, Q. Bai, Y. Liu, A. M. Nolan, C. Ling and Y. Mo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902078 CrossRef CAS .Z. Rong, R. Malik, P. Canepa, G. Sai Gautam, M. Liu, A. Jain, K. Persson and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6016–6021 CrossRef CAS .M. Liu, Z. Rong, R. Malik, P. Canepa, A. Jain, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 964–974 RSC .S. Wang, Q. Bai, A. M. Nolan, Y. Liu, S. Gong, Q. Sun and Y. Mo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8039–8043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Martinez-Juarez, C. Pecharromán, J. E. Iglesias and J. M. Rojo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 372–375 CrossRef CAS .C. Li, R. Li, K. Liu, R. Si, Z. Zhang and Y. S. Hu, Interdiscip. Mater., 2022, 1, 396–416 CrossRef .K. Oh, D. Chang, I. Park, K. Yoon and K. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6066–6075 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, E. Ramos, F. Lalère, A. Assoud, K. Kaup, P. Hartman and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 87–93 RSC .D. Di Stefano, A. Miglio, K. Robeyns, Y. Filinchuk, M. Lechartier, A. Senyshyn, H. Ishida, S. Spannenberger, D. Prutsch and S. Lunghammer, Chem, 2019, 5, 2450–2460 CAS .S. Harm, A.-K. Hatz, C. Schneider, C. Hoefer, C. Hoch and B. V. Lotsch, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Gordiz, S. Muy, W. G. Zeier, Y. Shao-Horn and A. Henry, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100431 CrossRef CAS .S. Muy, R. Schlem, Y. Shao-Horn and W. G. Zeier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002787 CrossRef CAS .T. Krauskopf, C. Pompe, M. A. Kraft and W. G. Zeier, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8859–8869 CrossRef CAS .T. Krauskopf, S. Muy, S. P. Culver, S. Ohno, O. Delaire, Y. Shao-Horn and W. G. Zeier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14464–14473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. Marple, B. G. Aitken, S. Kim and S. Sen, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5896–5903 CrossRef CAS .S. Muy, J. C. Bachman, L. Giordano, H.-H. Chang, D. L. Abernathy, D. Bansal, O. Delaire, S. Hori, R. Kanno and F. Maglia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 850–859 RSC .Z. Zhang and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2022, 7, 389–405 CrossRef .A. Lunden, Solid State Commun., 1988, 65, 1237–1240 CrossRef CAS .M. Jansen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1991, 30, 1547–1558 CrossRef .Y. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Liang, Y. Xia, L. Peng, H. Jia, H. Li, L. Bai, J. Feng and H. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5640–5644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Duchêne, S. Lunghammer, T. Burankova, W.-C. Liao, J. P. Embs, C. Copéret, H. M. R. Wilkening, A. Remhof, H. Hagemann and C. Battaglia, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3449–3460 CrossRef .K. E. Kweon, J. B. Varley, P. Shea, N. Adelstein, P. Mehta, T. W. Heo, T. J. Udovic, V. Stavila and B. C. Wood, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9142–9153 CrossRef CAS .W. S. Tang, M. Matsuo, H. Wu, V. Stavila, W. Zhou, A. A. Talin, A. V. Soloninin, R. V. Skoryunov, O. A. Babanova and A. V. Skripov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502237 CrossRef .J. B. Varley, K. Kweon, P. Mehta, P. Shea, T. W. Heo, T. J. Udovic, V. Stavila and B. C. Wood, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .T. Famprikis, J. A. Dawson, F. Fauth, O. Clemens, E. Suard, B. Fleutot, M. Courty, J.-N. Chotard, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 641–646 CrossRef CAS .T. Defferriere, D. Klotz, J. C. Gonzalez-Rosillo, J. L. Rupp and H. L. Tuller, Nat. Mater., 2022, 21, 438–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wang, Z. Sun, Y. Zhao, B. Wang, C. Shao, C. Sun, Y. Zhao, J. Li, H. Jin and L. Qu, Small, 2021, 17, 2103819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Samiee, B. Radhakrishnan, Z. Rice, Z. Deng, Y. S. Meng, S. P. Ong and J. Luo, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .H. Wan, J. P. Mwizerwa, F. Han, W. Weng, J. Yang, C. Wang and X. Yao, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104109 CrossRef CAS .C. Yu, K. Adair and X. Sun, NMR and MRI of Electrochemical Energy Storage Materials and Devices,  2021, pp. 364–390 Search PubMed .R. Stanton and H. Gorman, Econ. Geol., 1968, 63, 907–923 CrossRef CAS .H. Nguyen, S. Hy, E. Wu, Z. Deng, T. A. Yersak, S. P. Ong and Y. S. Meng, Novel Sodium-Rich Anti-Perovskites Via Conventional Sintering and Spark Plasma Sintering, The Electrochemical Society, Inc,  2016 Search PubMed .J. A. Dawson, P. Canepa, T. Famprikis, C. Masquelier and M. S. Islam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 362–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. J. Lee, B. Darminto, S. Narayanan, M. Diaz-Lopez, A. W. Xiao, Y. Chart, J. H. Lee, J. A. Dawson and M. Pasta, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 11574–11586 RSC .J. A. Dawson, P. Canepa, M. J. Clarke, T. Famprikis, D. Ghosh and M. S. Islam, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5296–5304 CrossRef CAS .Y. Gao, A. M. Nolan, P. Du, Y. Wu, C. Yang, Q. Chen, Y. Mo and S.-H. Bo, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 5954–6008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Shen, R. He, Y. Wang, C. Zhao and H. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 26241–26248 CrossRef CAS .Y. Meesala, A. Jena, H. Chang and R.-S. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2734–2751 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhu and Y. Mo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17472–17476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Nakano, T. Kimura, A. Sakuda, M. Tatsumisago and A. Hayashi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 7383–7389 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Xu, S. Tang, Y. Cheng, K. Wang, J. Liang, C. Liu, Y.-C. Cao, F. Wei and L. Mai, Joule, 2018, 2, 1991–2015 CrossRef CAS .A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 856 CrossRef PubMed .L. Duchêne, R.-S. Kühnel, D. Rentsch, A. Remhof, H. Hagemann and C. Battaglia, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4195–4198 RSC .F. Han, Y. Zhu, X. He, Y. Mo and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501590 CrossRef .Y. Zhu, X. He and Y. Mo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23685–23693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. K. Schwietert, V. A. Arszelewska, C. Wang, C. Yu, A. Vasileiadis, N. J. de Klerk, J. Hageman, T. Hupfer, I. Kerkamm and Y. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 428–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Tian, Y. Sun, D. C. Hannah, Y. Xiao, H. Liu, K. W. Chapman, S.-H. Bo and G. Ceder, Joule, 2019, 3, 1037–1050 CrossRef CAS .P. Peljo and H. H. Girault, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2306–2309 RSC .H. Wan, Z. Wang, S. Liu, B. Zhang, X. He, W. Zhang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2023, 8, 473–481 CrossRef CAS .S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. Krüger, J. Sann and J. Janek, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 278, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .S. Wenzel, S. Randau, T. Leichtweiß, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2400–2407 CrossRef CAS .S. Lou, F. Zhang, C. Fu, M. Chen, Y. Ma, G. Yin and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2000721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. V. Alexander and R. Murugan, Ionics, 2021, 27, 4105–4126 CrossRef CAS .Z. Jiang, Q. Han, S. Wang and H. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2970–2983 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, L. Chen, H. Li and F. Wu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2023, e12613 CrossRef .G. Rankin and H. Merwin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1916, 38, 568–588 CrossRef CAS .C. Beevers and M. A. Ross, Z. Kristallogr. - Cryst. Mater., 1937, 97, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Ridgway, A. A. Klein and W. J. O'Leary, Trans. Electrochem. Soc., 1936, 70, 71 CrossRef .J. Théry and D. Briançon, C. R. Acad. Sci., 1962, 254, 2782–2784 Search PubMed .Y.-F. Y. Yao and J. Kummer, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1967, 29, 2453–2475 CrossRef CAS .J. Kummer, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1972, 7, 141–175 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Sudworth and A. R. Tiley, Sodium Sulphur Battery, Chapman and Hall, New York, NY,  1985 Search PubMed .K. B. Hueso, M. Armand and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 734–749 RSC .R. De Vries and W. Roth, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1969, 52, 364–369 CrossRef CAS .G. Yamaguchi and K. Suzuki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1968, 41, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Sudworth, P. Barrow, W. Dong, B. Dunn, G. C. Farrington and J. O. Thomas, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, J. P. Lemmon, V. Sprenkle and Z. Yang, JOM, 2010, 62, 31–36 CrossRef CAS .W. Bragg, C. Gottfried and J. West, Z. Kristallogr. - Cryst. Mater., 1931, 77, 255–274 CrossRef CAS .M. Bettman and C. R. Peters, J. Phys. Chem., 1969, 73, 1774–1780 CrossRef CAS .C. Chi, H. Katsui and T. Goto, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 1278–1283 CrossRef CAS .W. L. Roth, F. Reidinger and S. LaPlaca, in Superionic Conductors, ed. G. D. Mahan and W. L. Roth, Springer US, Boston, MA,  1976, pp. 223–241 DOI:10.1007/978-1-4615-8789-7_33 .D. Wolf, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1979, 40, 757–773 CrossRef CAS .Z. Skotniczny, J. Moscinski and Z. Rycerz, J. Phys. C-Solid State Phys., 1986, 19, 4781 CrossRef CAS .J. Newsam and B. Tofield, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 5, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .C. Peters, M. Bettman, J. T. Moore and M. Glick, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1971, 27, 1826–1834 CrossRef CAS .J. Walker and C. Catlow, Nature, 1980, 286, 473–474 CrossRef CAS .J. Boilot, A. Kahn, J. Thery, G. Collin and R. Comes, J. Phys., Colloq., 1977, 38(C7), 145–150 CrossRef .R. Collongues, D. Gourier, A. Kahn, J. Boilot, P. Colomban and A. Wicker, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1984, 45, 981–1013 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Whittingham and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1 CrossRef CAS .J. Sudworth and A. R. Tiley, Sodium Sulphur Battery, Chapman and Hall, London,  1985 Search PubMed .J. Wang, M. Gaffari and S. I. Choi, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 63, 772–778 CrossRef CAS .P. Vashishta, J. N. Mundy and G. K. Shenoy, Fast ion transport in solids: electrodes and electrolytes, Elsevier North Holland, New York,  1979 Search PubMed .B. Dunn, G. C. Farrington and J. O. Thomas, MRS Bull., 1989, 14, 22–30 CAS .J. Bates, H. Engstrom, J. Wang, B. Larson, N. Dudney and W. Brundage, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 5, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, J. Bates, N. Dudney and H. Engstrom, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 5, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .J. Briant and G. Farrington, J. Solid State Chem., 1980, 33, 385–390 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Youngblood, G. R. Miller and R. S. Gordon, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1978, 61, 86–87 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Virkar, G. R. Miller and R. S. Gordon, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1978, 61, 250–252 CrossRef CAS .A. Hooper, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1977, 10, 1487 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Heinz, M.-C. Bay, U. F. Vogt and C. Battaglia, Acta Mater., 2021, 213, 116940 CrossRef CAS .J. Dygas, G. Fafilek and M. Breiter, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 119, 115–125 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sheng, P. Sarkar and P. S. Nicholson, J. Mater. Sci., 1988, 23, 958–967 CrossRef CAS .K. Li, Y. Yang, X. Zhang and S. Liang, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 8435–8443 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, G. Xia, J. P. Lemmon and Z. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .R. Stevens and J. Binner, J. Mater. Sci., 1984, 19, 695–715 CrossRef CAS .J. Boilot, A. Kahn, J. Thery, R. Collongues, J. Antoine, D. Vivien, C. Chevrette and D. Gourier, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 741–745 CrossRef CAS .J. Boilot and J. Thery, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .J. Kirchnerova and C. Bale, Mater. Res. Bull., 1990, 25, 395–402 CrossRef CAS .G. May, J. Mater. Sci., 1978, 13, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .A. Imai and M. Harata, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1972, 11, 180 CrossRef CAS .W. Jakubowski and S. Biela, Solid State Ionics, 1984, 14, 41–44 CrossRef CAS .S.-T. Lee, D.-H. Lee, J.-S. Kim and S.-K. Lim, Met. Mater. Int., 2017, 23, 246–253 CrossRef CAS .D.-H. Lee, D.-G. Lee and S.-K. Lim, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 24743–24751 CrossRef CAS .J. Wu, J. Shi, Y. Hong and C. Zhu, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7, 105502 CrossRef CAS .C. Dirksen, K. Skadell, M. Schulz and M. Stelter, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 213, 88–92 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Virkar and R. S. Gordon, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1977, 60, 58–61 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Youngblood, A. V. Virkar, W. R. Cannon and R. S. Gordon, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 1977, 56, 206–210 CAS .W. L. Roth, I. Chung and H. Story, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1977, 60, 311–315 CrossRef CAS .G. Chen, J. Lu, X. Zhou, L. Chen and X. Jiang, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 16055–16062 CrossRef CAS .S.-J. Shan, L.-P. Yang, X.-M. Liu, X.-L. Wei, H. Yang and X.-D. Shen, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 563, 176–179 CrossRef CAS .E. Yi, E. Temeche and R. M. Laine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12411–12419 RSC .M. Ma, K. Li, Y. Yang, X. Zhang and S. Liang, J. Electron. Mater., 2022, 51, 3727–3735 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhang, Z. Wen, X. Wu, J. Zhang, G. Ma and J. Jin, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 613, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wen, Y. Hu, X. Wu, J. Han and Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1005–1018 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, X.-P. Jiang, X.-L. Wei, H. Yang and X.-D. Shen, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 497, 295–299 CrossRef CAS .A. Ray and E. Subbarao, Mater. Res. Bull., 1975, 10, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .J. Song, C. Chen, S. Zhu, M. Zhu, J. Dai, U. Ray, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, N. Quispe, Y. Yao, A. Gong, U. H. Leiste, H. A. Bruck, J. Y. Zhu, A. Vellore, H. Li, M. L. Minus, Z. Jia, A. Martini, T. Li and L. Hu, Nature, 2018, 554, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Barison, S. Fasolin, C. Mortalò, S. Boldrini and M. Fabrizio, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 2099–2107 CrossRef CAS .G. Chen, J. Lu, L. Li, L. Chen and X. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 673, 295–301 CrossRef CAS .K. Koganei, T. Oyama, M. Inada, N. Enomoto and K. Hayashi, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 267, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .K. Li, M. Ma, Y. Yang, S. Liang and X. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 15017–15022 CrossRef CAS .Z. Grady, A. Ndayishimiye and C. Randall, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22002–22014 RSC .T. D. Sparks and L. Ghadbeigi, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Virkar, J.-F. Jue and K.-Z. Fung, US Pat., US6117807A, 2000 Search PubMed.P. Parthasarathy, N. Weber and A. V. Virkar, ECS Trans., 2007, 6, 67 CrossRef CAS .A. Virkar, A high temperature electrochemical energy storage system based on sodium beta-alumina solid electrolyte (Base), Univ. of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT (United States),  2008 Search PubMed .A. Van Zyl, M. Thackeray, G. Duncan, A. Kingon and R. Heckroodt, Mater. Res. Bull., 1993, 28, 145–157 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, J. P. Lemmon, V. L. Sprenkle and Z. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .P. E. Morgan, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 233–241 CrossRef CAS .J.-H. Choy, J.-S. Yoo, Y.-S. Han and Y.-H. Kim, Mater. Lett., 1993, 16, 226–230 CrossRef CAS .B. E. Yoldas and D. P. Partlow, Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 1980, 59, 640–642 CAS .T. Takahashi and K. Kuwabara, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1980, 10, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .A. Pekarsky and P. S. Nicholson, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 1517–1524 CrossRef CAS .D. Green and S. Hutchison, Solution spray-dried and freeze-dried sodium beta-alumina powders. Preparation And Hot Pressing, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1979 Search PubMed .H. C. Park, Y. B. Lee, S. G. Lee, C. H. Lee, J. K. Kim, S. S. Hong and S. S. Park, Ceram. Int., 2005, 31, 293–296 CrossRef CAS .J. Lin, Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Song and Y. Liu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1821–1827 CrossRef CAS .V. Lacivita, Y. Wang, S.-H. Bo and G. Ceder, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8144–8155 RSC .R. Richman and G. Tennenhouse, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1975, 58, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .R. Ansell, J. Mater. Sci., 1986, 21, 365–379 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Bay, M. Wang, R. Grissa, M. V. Heinz, J. Sakamoto and C. Battaglia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902899 CrossRef CAS .M. Wang, J. B. Wolfenstine and J. Sakamoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 842–847 CrossRef CAS .M. Brennan, Electrochim. Acta, 1980, 25, 621–627 CrossRef CAS .X. Lu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, D. Mei, J. P. Lemmon, V. L. Sprenkle and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. S. Demott, M. L. Wright and M. D. Hames, presented in part at the Ext. Abstr. No. 469, Electrochemical Society Meeting, Minneapolis, MN, 1981.R. Haas, C. Pompe, M. Osenberg, A. Hilger, I. Manke, B. Mogwitz, U. Maitra, D. Langsdorf and D. Schröder, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1801146 CrossRef .W. A. Khokhar, N. Zhao, W. Huang, H. Wang, Z. Bi and X. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 53781–53787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Spencer Jolly, Z. Ning, J. E. Darnbrough, J. Kasemchainan, G. O. Hartley, P. Adamson, D. E. Armstrong, J. Marrow and P. G. Bruce, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 678–685 CrossRef PubMed .D. Landmann, G. Graeber, M. Heinz, S. Haussener and C. Battaglia, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 100515 CrossRef CAS .F. Will, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 834 CrossRef CAS .T. Kaneda, J. Bates, J. Wang and H. Engstrom, Mater. Res. Bull., 1979, 14, 1053–1056 CrossRef CAS .G. Flor, A. Marini, V. Massarotti and M. Villa, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 2, 195–204 CrossRef CAS .S. Heavens, J. Mater. Sci., 1982, 17, 965–969 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Kummer and W. Neill, US Pat., US3413150A,  1968 Search PubMed.X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Wei, Y. Gong, X. Zhao and K. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5380–5384 CrossRef CAS .Y. Hu, Z. Wen, X. Wu and Y. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 786–795 CrossRef CAS .K. Ahlbrecht, C. Bucharsky, M. Holzapfel, J. Tübke and M. Hoffmann, Ionics, 2017, 23, 1319–1327 CrossRef CAS .D. Reed, G. Coffey, E. Mast, N. Canfield, J. Mansurov, X. Lu and V. Sprenkle, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 94–100 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Li, X. Lu, X. Zhan, M. H. Engelhard, J. F. Bonnett, E. Polikarpov, K. Jung, D. M. Reed, V. L. Sprenkle and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 45–48 RSC .H.-J. Chang, X. Lu, J. F. Bonnett, N. L. Canfield, K. Han, M. H. Engelhard, K. Jung, V. L. Sprenkle and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19703–19711 RSC .Y. Hu, Z. Wen, X. Wu and J. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .D. Lei, Y.-B. He, H. Huang, Y. Yuan, G. Zhong, Q. Zhao, X. Hao, D. Zhang, C. Lai and S. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4244 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Liu, X. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Tang, Z. Mao and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 623–632 CrossRef CAS .T. Deng, X. Ji, L. Zou, O. Chiekezi, L. Cao, X. Fan, T. R. Adebisi, H.-J. Chang, H. Wang and B. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 269–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Yu, Y. Yao, X. Wang, S. Cen, D. Li, H. Ma, J. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Mao and C. Dong, Energy Stor. Mater., 2023, 54, 221–226 Search PubMed .M. P. Fertig, K. Skadell, M. Schulz, C. Dirksen, P. Adelhelm and M. Stelter, Batteries Supercaps, 2022, 5, e202100131 CAS .J. B. Goodenough, H.-P. Hong and J. Kafalas, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 203–220 CrossRef CAS .H.-P. Hong, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .S. J. George, C. Narayana and C. N. R. Rao, Advances in the Chemistry and Physics of Materials: Overview of Selected Topics, World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd, Singapore,  2019 Search PubMed .N. Anantharamulu, K. Koteswara Rao, G. Rambabu, B. Vijaya Kumar, V. Radha and M. Vithal, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 2821–2837 CrossRef CAS .J. Boilot, J. Salanie, G. Desplanches and D. Le Potier, Mater. Res. Bull., 1979, 14, 1469–1477 CrossRef CAS .Q. Ma, C.-L. Tsai, X.-K. Wei, M. Heggen, F. Tietz and J. T. Irvine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7766–7776 RSC .Z. Deng, T. P. Mishra, E. Mahayoni, Q. Ma, A. J. K. Tieu, O. Guillon, J.-N. Chotard, V. Seznec, A. K. Cheetham and C. Masquelier, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Ma, M. Guin, S. Naqash, C.-L. Tsai, F. Tietz and O. Guillon, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4821–4828 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. Shi, Y. S. Chu, X. Yu, K. Xu, M. Ge, H. Yan, W. Li and L. Gu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601196 CrossRef .M. Guin, F. Tietz and O. Guillon, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 293, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, Z. Zou, K. Kaup, R. Xiao, S. Shi, M. Avdeev, Y. S. Hu, D. Wang, B. He and H. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902373 CrossRef CAS .P. P. Kumar and S. Yashonath, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7081–7089 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zou, N. Ma, A. Wang, Y. Ran, T. Song, B. He, A. Ye, P. Mi, L. Zhang and H. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107747 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zou, N. Ma, A. Wang, Y. Ran, T. Song, Y. Jiao, J. Liu, H. Zhou, W. Shi and B. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001486 CrossRef CAS .Z. Deng, G. Sai Gautam, S. K. Kolli, J.-N. Chotard, A. K. Cheetham, C. Masquelier and P. Canepa, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 7908–7920 CrossRef CAS .J. Boilot, G. Collin and P. Colomban, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 669–676 CrossRef CAS .P. Rudolf, A. Clearfield and J. Jorgensen, J. Solid State Chem., 1988, 72, 100–112 CrossRef CAS .P. Rudolf, A. Clearfield and J. Jorgensen, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 21, 213–224 CrossRef CAS .P. Rudolf, M. Subramanian, A. Clearfield and J. Jorgensen, Mater. Res. Bull., 1985, 20, 643–651 CrossRef CAS .W. Baur, J. Dygas, D. Whitmore and J. Faber, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18, 935–943 CrossRef .J.-P. Boilot, G. Collin and P. Colomban, J. Solid State Chem., 1988, 73, 160–171 CrossRef CAS .J. Schuett, F. Pescher and S. Neitzel-Grieshammer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 22154–22167 RSC .M. Xu, J. Ding and E. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 031901 CrossRef .M. Guin and F. Tietz, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 1056–1064 CrossRef CAS .R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .H. Park, K. Jung, M. Nezafati, C.-S. Kim and B. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27814–27824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Naqash, D. Sebold, F. Tietz and O. Guillon, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 102, 1057–1070 CrossRef CAS .T. Takahashi, K. Kuwabara and M. Shibata, Solid State Ionics, 1980, 1, 163–175 CrossRef CAS .S. Song, H. M. Duong, A. M. Korsunsky, N. Hu and L. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef .A. G. Jolley, G. Cohn, G. T. Hitz and E. D. Wachsman, Ionics, 2015, 21, 3031–3038 CrossRef CAS .D. Chen, F. Luo, W. Zhou and D. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 757, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, J. A. Alonso, Q. Yi, L. Lu, Z. L. Wang and C. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901205 CrossRef .Q. Zhang, F. Liang, T. Qu, Y. Yao, W. Ma, B. Yang and Y. Dai, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, 423, 012122 Search PubMed .R. Fuentes, F. Figueiredo, F. Marques and J. Franco, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 140, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ruan, S. Song, J. Liu, P. Liu, B. Cheng, X. Song and V. Battaglia, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 7810–7815 CrossRef CAS .M. Subramanian, P. Rudolf and A. Clearfield, J. Solid State Chem., 1985, 60, 172–181 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Pal, R. Saha, G. V. Kumar and S. Omar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9161–9169 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wang, C. Yu, L. Li, X. Liu, X. Zhang, G. Gao, Y. Wang and G. Li, Energy Stor. Mater., 2023, 54, 135–145 Search PubMed .Z. Khakpour, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 337–347 CrossRef CAS .S. Liu, C. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Pei, J. Kieffer and R. M. Laine, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 3502–3509 CrossRef PubMed .B. Xie, D. Jiang, J. Wu, T. Feng, J. Xia and H. Nian, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2016, 88, 104–108 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, L. Liu, J. Peng, X. Zhou, D. Liang, L. Zhao, J. Su, B. Zhang, S. Li and N. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2022, 518, 230765 CrossRef CAS .J. Yang, G. Liu, M. Avdeev, H. Wan, F. Han, L. Shen, Z. Zou, S. Shi, Y.-S. Hu and C. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2835–2841 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhang, Q. Zhou, Y. Lu, Y. Shao, Y. Qi, X. Qi, G. Zhong, Y. Yang, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Engineering, 2022, 8, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .E. Vogel, R. Cava and E. Rietman, Solid State Ionics, 1984, 14, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .Q. Sun, L. Dai, Y. Tang, J. Sun, W. Meng, T. Luo, L. Wang and S. Liu, Small Methods, 2022, 6, 2200345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Liu, D. Liang, X. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Su, Y. Xu and J. Peng, J. Mater. Sci., 2022, 57, 11774–11782 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shao, G. Zhong, Y. Lu, L. Liu, C. Zhao, Q. Zhang, Y.-S. Hu, Y. Yang and L. Chen, Energy Stor. Mater., 2019, 23, 514–521 Search PubMed .S. He, Y. Xu, Y. Chen and X. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12594–12602 RSC .S. Naqash, Q. Ma, F. Tietz and O. Guillon, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 302, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .S. Narayanan, S. Reid, S. Butler and V. Thangadurai, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 331, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Rao, K. K. Bharathi and L. Patro, Solid State Ionics, 2021, 366, 115671 CrossRef .S. Naqash, F. Tietz, E. Yazhenskikh, M. Müller and O. Guillon, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 336, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .K. Suzuki, K. Noi, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Scr. Mater., 2018, 145, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, K. Okubo, M. Inada, G. Hasegawa, N. Enomoto and K. Hayashi, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 322, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .X. G. Cao, X. H. Zhang, T. Tao and H. Y. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 8405–8412 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, G. Zhao, S. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Mei, Q. An, J. Jiang and H. Guo, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 823–832 RSC .J. A. S. Oh, L. He, A. Plewa, M. Morita, Y. Zhao, T. Sakamoto, X. Song, W. Zhai, K. Zeng and L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40125–40133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. K. Chong, Z. Zainuddin, F. S. Omar and M. H. H. Jumali, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 22147–22154 CrossRef CAS .M. Niazmand, Z. Khakpour and A. Mortazavi, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 798, 311–319 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zeng, B. Ouyang, J. Liu, Y.-W. Byeon, Z. Cai, L. J. Miara, Y. Wang and G. Ceder, Science, 2022, 378, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhang, S. Wenzel, Y. Zhu, J. Sann, L. Shen, J. Yang, X. Yao, Y.-S. Hu, C. Wolverton and H. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7427–7437 CrossRef CAS .J. Maier, U. Warhus and E. Gmelin, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18, 969–973 CrossRef .T. Lan, C.-L. Tsai, F. Tietz, X.-K. Wei, M. Heggen, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, R. Wang, Y. Xiao, Q. Ma and O. Guillon, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104040 CrossRef CAS .E. Matios, H. Wang, C. Wang, X. Hu, X. Lu, J. Luo and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5064–5072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Noguchi, E. Kobayashi, L. S. Plashnitsa, S. Okada and J.-I. Yamaki, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 101, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .F. Lalère, J.-B. Leriche, M. Courty, S. Boulineau, V. Viallet, C. Masquelier and V. Seznec, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 975–980 CrossRef .Y. Ruan, F. Guo, J. Liu, S. Song, N. Jiang and B. Cheng, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 1770–1776 CrossRef CAS .H. Gao, L. Xue, S. Xin, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 5633–5637 CrossRef .X. Yu and A. Manthiram, Matter, 2019, 1, 439–451 CrossRef .J. Yang, H.-L. Wan, Z.-H. Zhang, G.-Z. Liu, X.-X. Xu, Y.-S. Hu and X.-Y. Yao, Rare Met., 2018, 37, 480–487 CrossRef CAS .P. Kehne, C. Guhl, Q. Ma, F. Tietz, L. Alff, R. Hausbrand and P. Komissinskiy, J. Power Sources, 2019, 409, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .P. Kehne, C. Guhl, Q. Ma, F. Tietz, L. Alff, R. Hausbrand and P. Komissinskiy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A5328 CrossRef CAS .X. Miao, H. Di, X. Ge, D. Zhao, P. Wang, R. Wang, C. Wang and L. Yin, Energy Stor. Mater., 2020, 30, 170–178 Search PubMed .T. Ortmann, S. Burkhardt, J. K. Eckhardt, T. Fuchs, Z. Ding, J. Sann, M. Rohnke, Q. Ma, F. Tietz and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, Adv. Energy Mater., 2023, 13, 2202712 CrossRef CAS .M. Guin, S. Indris, M. Kaus, H. Ehrenberg, F. Tietz and O. Guillon, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 302, 102–106 CrossRef CAS .Z. Gao, J. Yang, H. Yuan, H. Fu, Y. Li, Y. Li, T. Ferber, C. Guhl, H. Sun and W. Jaegermann, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3970–3979 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Mao and D. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 130899 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhang, Y. Lu, W. Guo, Y. Shao, L. Liu, J. Lu, X. Rong, X. Han, H. Li and L. Chen, Energy Mater. Adv., 2021, 2021 DOI:10.34133/2021/9870879 .H. Tian, L. Dai, L. Wang and S. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 7500–7507 CrossRef CAS .X. Yu, L. Xue, J. B. Goodenough and A. Manthiram, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2002144 CrossRef CAS .X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Wang and Z. Mao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 7109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Ma, T. Ortmann, A. Yang, D. Sebold, S. Burkhardt, M. Rohnke, F. Tietz, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, J. Janek and O. Guillon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2201680 CrossRef CAS .H. Jia, L. Peng, C. Yu, L. Dong, S. Cheng and J. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5134–5148 RSC .H. Dai, W. Xu, Z. Hu, Y. Chen, X. Wei, B. Yang, Z. Chen, J. Gu, D. Yang and F. Xie, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8, 97 CrossRef .L. Zhang, D. Zhang, K. Yang, X. Yan, L. Wang, J. Mi, B. Xu and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600089 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Ma, H.-G. Xue and S.-P. Guo, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 3927–3938 CrossRef CAS .N. Tanibata, K. Noi, A. Hayashi, N. Kitamura, Y. Idemoto and M. Tatsumisago, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1130–1132 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Park, D. H. Kim, H. Kwak, S. H. Jung, H.-J. Lee, A. Banerjee, J. H. Lee and Y. S. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17192–17200 RSC .F. Tsuji, N. Tanibata, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Chem. Lett., 2018, 47, 13–15 CrossRef CAS .B. Ma, Q. Jiao, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, G. Yin, X. Zhang, H. Ma, X. Liu and S. Dai, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 6544–6549 CrossRef CAS .M. Jansen and U. Henseler, J. Solid State Chem., 1992, 99, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .A. Hayashi, K. Noi, N. Tanibata, M. Nagao and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 420–423 CrossRef CAS .T. Famprikis, O. U. Kudu, J. A. Dawson, P. Canepa, F. Fauth, E. Suard, M. Zbiri, D. Dambournet, O. J. Borkiewicz and H. Bouyanfif, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18422–18436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. J. De Klerk and M. Wagemaker, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3122–3130 CrossRef CAS .T. Famprikis, H. Bouyanfif, P. Canepa, M. Zbiri, J. A. Dawson, E. Suard, F. Fauth, H. Y. Playford, D. Dambournet and O. J. Borkiewicz, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 5652–5667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Sau and T. Ikeshoji, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 20671–20681 CrossRef CAS .T. Krauskopf, S. P. Culver and W. G. Zeier, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 4739–4744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, US Pat., 20170222259A, 2017 Search PubMed.S.-H. Bo, Y. Wang, J. C. Kim, W. D. Richards and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 252–258 CrossRef CAS .S. Takeuchi, K. Suzuki, M. Hirayama and R. Kanno, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 265, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .Ö. U. Kudu, T. Famprikis, B. Fleutot, M.-D. Braida, T. Le Mercier, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, J. Power Sources, 2018, 407, 31–43 CrossRef .S. Breuer, M. Uitz and H. Wilkening, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2093–2097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Qiao, H. Tao and Y. Yue, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2019, 521, 119476 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Rao, X. Zhang, K. C. Phuah and S. Adams, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20790–20798 RSC .R. Schlem, S. Muy, N. Prinz, A. Banik, Y. Shao-Horn, M. Zobel and W. G. Zeier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903719 CrossRef CAS .C. Yu, S. Ganapathy, N. J. De Klerk, E. R. van Eck and M. Wagemaker, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15095–15105 RSC .S.-H. Bo, Y. Wang and G. Ceder, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9044–9053 RSC .Z. Zhu, I.-H. Chu, Z. Deng and S. P. Ong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8318–8325 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Brenner, M. Grumet, P. Till, M. Asher, W. G. Zeier, D. A. Egger and O. Yaffe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 5938–5945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, G. Li, K. Shen and E. Tian, Mater. Res. Express, 2021, 8, 025508 CrossRef CAS .R. He, Z. Hu, J. Gao, G. Zhang and K. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 10593–10600 CrossRef CAS .B. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, X. Lu, J. Zhang, B. Chen, J. Zhou and R. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 19816–19822 RSC .C. K. Moon, H.-J. Lee, K. H. Park, H. Kwak, J. W. Heo, K. Choi, H. Yang, M.-S. Kim, S.-T. Hong and J. H. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2504–2512 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Rao and S. Adams, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 1804–1807 CrossRef CAS .I.-H. Chu, C. S. Kompella, H. Nguyen, Z. Zhu, S. Hy, Z. Deng, Y. S. Meng and S. P. Ong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Aboulaich, R. Bouchet, G. Delaizir, V. Seznec, L. Tortet, M. Morcrette, P. Rozier, J. M. Tarascon, V. Viallet and M. Dollé, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 179 CrossRef CAS .R. Kali and A. Mukhopadhyay, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 920–931 CrossRef CAS .X. Feng, P. H. Chien, Z. Zhu, I. H. Chu, P. Wang, M. Immediato-Scuotto, H. Arabzadeh, S. P. Ong and Y. Y. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807951 CrossRef .H. Huang, H.-H. Wu, X. Wang, B. Huang and T.-Y. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 20525–20533 RSC .N. Tanibata, K. Noi, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 17120–17123 RSC .N. Tanibata, K. Noi, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 320, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Rao, H. Chen, L. L. Wong and S. Adams, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3377–3388 RSC .L. Zhang, K. Yang, J. Mi, L. Lu, L. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201570133 .Z. Hu, Q. Liu, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700606 CrossRef PubMed .H. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. D. Hood, G. Sahu, A. S. Pandian, J. K. Keum, K. An and C. Liang, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 8693–8697 CrossRef .L. Yu, Q. Jiao, B. Liang, H. Shan, C. Lin, C. Gao, X. Shen and S. Dai, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 913, 165229 CrossRef CAS .N. Wang, K. Yang, L. Zhang, X. Yan, L. Wang and B. Xu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 1987–1994 CrossRef CAS .A. Hayashi, N. Masuzawa, S. Yubuchi, F. Tsuji, C. Hotehama, A. Sakuda and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Fuchs, S. P. Culver, P. Till and W. G. Zeier, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 5, 146–151 CrossRef .I. Hanghofer, B. Gadermaier and H. M. R. Wilkening, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4591–4597 CrossRef CAS .J. G. Smith and D. J. Siegel, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhang, H. Li, K. Kaup, L. Zhou, P.-N. Roy and L. F. Nazar, Matter, 2020, 2, 1667–1684 CrossRef .M. Brinek, C. Hiebl, K. Hogrefe, I. Hanghofer and H. Wilkening, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 22934–22940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wilmer, H. Feldmann, J. Combet and R. Lechner, Phys. B, 2001, 301, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .J. G. Smith and D. J. Siegel, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 4166–4171 CrossRef CAS .J.-K. Kim, Y. J. Lim, H. Kim, G.-B. Cho and Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3589–3596 RSC .A. Banerjee, K. H. Park, J. W. Heo, Y. J. Nam, C. K. Moon, S. M. Oh, S. T. Hong and Y. S. Jung, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 9786–9790 CrossRef .Y. L. Ni'mah, M.-Y. Cheng, J. H. Cheng, J. Rick and B.-J. Hwang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 375–381 CrossRef .H. Nguyen, A. Banerjee, X. Wang, D. Tan, E. A. Wu, J.-M. Doux, R. Stephens, G. Verbist and Y. S. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2019, 435, 126623 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, L. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Li, J. Liang, W. Li, Q. Sun and C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001118 CrossRef CAS .H. Wan, J. P. Mwizerwa, X. Qi, X. Liu, X. Xu, H. Li, Y.-S. Hu and X. Yao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2809–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Tanibata, M. Deguchi, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5232–5238 CrossRef CAS .J. Yue, F. Han, X. Fan, X. Zhu, Z. Ma, J. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4885–4891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Hao, X. Chi, Y. Liang, Y. Zhang, R. Xu, H. Guo, T. Terlier, H. Dong, K. Zhao and J. Lou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1349–1359 CrossRef CAS .X. Chi, Y. Liang, F. Hao, Y. Zhang, J. Whiteley, H. Dong, P. Hu, S. Lee and Y. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2630–2634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. G. Pearson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1963, 85, 3533–3539 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yu, S. L. Shang, J. H. Seo, D. Wang, X. Luo, Q. Huang, S. Chen, J. Lu, X. Li and Z. K. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605561 CrossRef PubMed .S.-L. Shang, Z. Yu, Y. Wang, D. Wang and Z.-K. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16261–16269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. W. Heo, A. Banerjee, K. H. Park, Y. S. Jung and S. T. Hong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702716 CrossRef .H. Li, Z. Zhang, B. Liu, J. Liu, B. Chen and J. Zhou, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2023, 216, 111848 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Shang, W. Wang, X. Yan, C. Yu and L.-M. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 132094 CrossRef CAS .X. Xu, Y. Li, J. Cheng, G. Hou, X. Nie, Q. Ai, L. Dai, J. Feng and L. Ci, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 41, 73–78 CrossRef .P. Hu, Y. Zhang, X. Chi, K. Kumar Rao, F. Hao, H. Dong, F. Guo, Y. Ren, L. C. Grabow and Y. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9672–9678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Liu, X.-B. Cheng, J.-Q. Huang, S. Kaskel, S. Chou, H. S. Park and Q. Zhang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 217–229 CrossRef CAS .D. Zhang, X. Cao, D. Xu, N. Wang, C. Yu, W. Hu, X. Yan, J. Mi, B. Wen and L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .J. Yue, X. Zhu, F. Han, X. Fan, L. Wang, J. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39645–39650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. L. Santhosha, L. Medenbach, T. Palaniselvam and P. Adelhelm, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 10298–10305 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, H. Cao and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 10565–10574 CrossRef CAS .B. Tang, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Tseng, L. Li, Y. Guo, Z. Zhou and S.-H. Bo, eScience, 2021, 1, 194–202 CrossRef .P. Aswathy, S. Suriyakumar, S. A. Kumar, M. S. Oliyantakath Hassan, V. Vijayan and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 12592–12601 CrossRef CAS .F. Tsuji, S. Yubuchi, A. Sakuda, M. Tatsumisago and A. Hayashi, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 128, 641–647 CrossRef CAS .H. Gamo, N. H. H. Phuc, H. Muto and A. Matsuda, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 6125–6134 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Ong, Y. Mo, W. D. Richards, L. Miara, H. S. Lee and G. Ceder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 148–156 RSC .V. S. Kandagal, M. D. Bharadwaj and U. V. Waghmare, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12992–12999 RSC .W. D. Richards, T. Tsujimura, L. J. Miara, Y. Wang, J. C. Kim, S. P. Ong, I. Uechi, N. Suzuki and G. Ceder, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Duchardt, U. Ruschewitz, S. Adams, S. Dehnen and B. Roling, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1351–1355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. P. Ramos, Z. Zhang, A. Assoud, K. Kaup, F. Lalere and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7413–7417 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yu, S.-L. Shang, Y. Gao, D. Wang, X. Li, Z.-K. Liu and D. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 325–330 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Kraft, L. M. Gronych, T. Famprikis and W. G. Zeier, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 7250–7258 CrossRef CAS .L. Hu, J. Yang, Y. Zhai, J. Yang and H. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 7634–7641 RSC .M. Duchardt, S. Neuberger, U. Ruschewitz, T. Krauskopf, W. G. Zeier, J. Schmedt auf der Günne, S. Adams, B. Roling and S. Dehnen, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4134–4139 CrossRef CAS .A. Sorkin and S. Adams, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 184–196 RSC .H. Jia, Y. Sun, Z. Zhang, L. Peng, T. An and J. Xie, Energy Stor. Mater., 2019, 23, 508–513 Search PubMed .H. Jia, X. Liang, T. An, L. Peng, J. Feng and J. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4065–4071 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhu, H. Tang, J. Qi, X. G. Li and S. P. Ong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003196 CrossRef CAS .K. Oh and K. Kang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 18615–18620 CrossRef .J. Liu, Z. Lu, M. B. Effat and F. Ciucci, J. Power Sources, 2019, 409, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .H. K. Patel and S. W. Martin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 10292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Weng, H. Wan, G. Liu, L. Wu, J. Wu and X. Yao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1467–1473 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yu, S.-L. Shang, D. Wang, Y. C. Li, H. P. Yennawar, G. Li, H.-T. Huang, Y. Gao, T. E. Mallouk and Z.-K. Liu, Energy Stor. Mater., 2019, 17, 70–77 Search PubMed .Y. Seino, T. Ota, K. Takada, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 627–631 RSC .H. Yamane, M. Shibata, Y. Shimane, T. Junke, Y. Seino, S. Adams, K. Minami, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 1163–1167 CrossRef CAS .N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama and K. Kawamoto, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Kuhn, V. Duppel and B. V. Lotsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3548–3552 RSC .P. Bron, S. Johansson, K. Zick, J. Schmedt auf der Günne, S. Dehnen and B. Roling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15694–15697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, W. D. Richards, S.-H. Bo, L. J. Miara and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7475–7482 CrossRef CAS .D. Houtarde, Master thesis, University of Waterloo,  2015 .M. Lazar, S. Kmiec, A. Joyce and S. W. Martin, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 11559–11569 CrossRef CAS .X. Chi, Y. Zhang, F. Hao, S. Kmiec, H. Dong, R. Xu, K. Zhao, Q. Ai, T. Terlier and L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Li, R. Xu, L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, M. Yang, D. Liu, X. Yan and A. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2203095 CrossRef CAS .W. Weng, G. Liu, Y. Li, L. Shen and X. Yao, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 27, 101448 CrossRef .S. M. Kim, S. M. Lee, K. Jung, Y. C. Park, N. U. Cho, J. H. Choi and H. S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2015, 36, 2869–2874 CrossRef CAS .L. Porz, T. Swamy, B. W. Sheldon, D. Rettenwander, T. Frömling, H. L. Thaman, S. Berendts, R. Uecker, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701003 CrossRef .S. Yu and D. J. Siegel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38151–38158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Song, L. Yang, W. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, Q. Zhao, H. Liu and F. Pan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900671 CrossRef .D. Ginnings and T. Phipps, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1930, 52, 1340–1345 CrossRef CAS .W. Weppner and R. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 35 CrossRef CAS .W. Weppner and R. Huggins, Phys. Lett. A, 1976, 58, 245–248 CrossRef .T. Asano, A. Sakai, S. Ouchi, M. Sakaida, A. Miyazaki and S. Hasegawa, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803075 CrossRef PubMed .X. Li, J. Liang, J. Luo, M. N. Banis, C. Wang, W. Li, S. Deng, C. Yu, F. Zhao and Y. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2665–2671 RSC .X. Li, J. Liang, N. Chen, J. Luo, K. R. Adair, C. Wang, M. N. Banis, T. K. Sham, L. Zhang and S. Zhao, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 16579–16584 CrossRef .S. Muy, J. Voss, R. Schlem, R. Koerver, S. J. Sedlmaier, F. Maglia, P. Lamp, W. G. Zeier and Y. Shao-Horn, iScience, 2019, 16, 270–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K.-H. Park, K. Kaup, A. Assoud, Q. Zhang, X. Wu and L. F. Nazar, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 533–539 CrossRef CAS .R. Schlem, T. Bernges, C. Li, M. A. Kraft, N. Minafra and W. G. Zeier, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3684–3691 CrossRef CAS .J. Liang, X. Li, S. Wang, K. R. Adair, W. Li, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Hu, L. Zhang and S. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7012–7022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Zhou, C. Y. Kwok, A. Shyamsunder, Q. Zhang, X. Wu and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2056–2063 RSC .J. Park, D. Han, H. Kwak, Y. Han, Y. J. Choi, K.-W. Nam and Y. S. Jung, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 130630 CrossRef CAS .B. Helm, R. Schlem, B. Wankmiller, A. Banik, A. Gautam, J. Ruhl, C. Li, M. R. Hansen and W. G. Zeier, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4773–4782 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Kim, K. Kaup, K.-H. Park, A. Assoud, L. Zhou, J. Liu, X. Wu and L. F. Nazar, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 930–938 CrossRef CAS .H. Kwak, D. Han, J. Lyoo, J. Park, S. H. Jung, Y. Han, G. Kwon, H. Kim, S. T. Hong and K. W. Nam, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003190 CrossRef CAS .H. Kwak, S. Wang, J. Park, Y. Liu, K. T. Kim, Y. Choi, Y. Mo and Y. S. Jung, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 1776–1805 CrossRef CAS .J. Cheng, E. Sivonxay and K. A. Persson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35748–35756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Xu, X. Chen, K. Liu, R. Chen, X. Zeng and H. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS .N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York,  1976 Search PubMed .L. Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of Molecules and Crystals: An Introduction to Modern Structural Chemistry, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 3rd edn,  1960 Search PubMed .H. Kwak, J. Lyoo, J. Park, Y. Han, R. Asakura, A. Remhof, C. Battaglia, H. Kim, S.-T. Hong and Y. S. Jung, Energy Stor. Mater., 2021, 37, 47–54 Search PubMed .Y. Qie, S. Wang, S. Fu, H. Xie, Q. Sun and P. Jena, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 3376–3383 CrossRef PubMed .H. Huang, H.-H. Wu, C. Chi, Y. Yang, J. Zheng, B. Huang and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26256–26265 RSC .H. Huang, C. Chi, J. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Wu, J. Shen, X. Wang and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 36864–36874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Lian, M. Wu, B. Xu, B. He, G. Liu, J. Shi, Q. Kuang, H. Wang and C. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 1906–1919 RSC .E. A. Wu, S. Banerjee, H. Tang, P. M. Richardson, J.-M. Doux, J. Qi, Z. Zhu, A. Grenier, Y. Li and E. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Schlem, A. Banik, M. Eckardt, M. Zobel and W. G. Zeier, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10164–10173 CrossRef CAS .J. Park, J. P. Son, W. Ko, J.-S. Kim, Y. Choi, H. Kim, H. Kwak, D.-H. Seo, J. Kim and Y. S. Jung, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 3293–3301 CrossRef CAS .R. Li, K. Xu, K. Liu, R. Si and Z. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 8356–8365 CrossRef CAS .D. Park, K. Kim, G. H. Chun, B. C. Wood, J. H. Shim and S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23037–23045 RSC .F. Stenzel and G. Meyer, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1993, 619, 652–660 CrossRef CAS .K. Yamada, K. Kumano and T. Okuda, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 823–829 CrossRef CAS .H. Ito, K. Shitara, Y. Wang, K. Fujii, M. Yashima, Y. Goto, C. Moriyoshi, N. C. Rosero-Navarro, A. Miura and K. Tadanaga, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2101413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liu, S. Wang, A. M. Nolan, C. Ling and Y. Mo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002356 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Plass, S. Bette, R. E. Dinnebier and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 3227–3235 CrossRef CAS .H. J. Steiner and H. Lutz, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1992, 613, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .S. Yu, K. Kim, B. C. Wood, H.-G. Jung and K.
Y. Chung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 24301–24309 RSC .K. Kim, D. Park, H.-G. Jung, K. Y. Chung, J. H. Shim, B. C. Wood and S. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 3669–3677 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, S. Ma, J. Liu, S. Xiong, Y. Ma and H. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 298–304 CrossRef .A. Zevgolis, B. C. Wood, Z. Mehmedović, A. T. Hall, T. C. Alves and N. Adelstein, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 047903 CrossRef .J. Sun, Q. Sun, A. Plewa, Y. Wang, L. He, F. Zheng, C. Chen, W. Zajac, J. Molenda and K. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8991–8997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Deysher, Y.-T. Chen, B. Sayahpour, S. W.-H. Lin, S.-Y. Ham, P. Ridley, A. Cronk, E. A. Wu, D. H. Tan and J.-M. Doux, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 47706–47715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wang, J. Liang, J. T. Kim and X. Sun, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eadc9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Ji, D. Zheng, X. Zhang, T. Ding and D. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15012–15018 RSC .T. Yu, J. Liang, L. Luo, L. Wang, F. Zhao, G. Xu, X. Bai, R. Yang, S. Zhao and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101915 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Doux, H. Nguyen, D. H. Tan, A. Banerjee, X. Wang, E. A. Wu, C. Jo, H. Yang and Y. S. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903253 CrossRef CAS .H. Jiang, Y. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Liu, L. Wang, X. Yao and H. Xiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 640, 119840 CrossRef CAS .V. Landgraf, T. Famprikis, J. de Leeuw, L. J. Bannenberg, S. Ganapathy and M. Wagemaker, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2023, 6, 1661–1672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Maekawa, M. Matsuo, H. Takamura, M. Ando, Y. Noda, T. Karahashi and S.-I. Orimo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 894–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhu, X. He and Y. Mo, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600517 CrossRef PubMed .H. Wang, Y. Sun, Q. Liu, Z. Mei, L. Yang, L. Duan and H. Guo, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 74, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .W. Weppner, P. Hartwig and A. Rabenau, J. Power Sources, 1981, 6, 251–259 CrossRef CAS .Y. Jin, Q. He, G. Liu, Z. Gu, M. Wu, T. Sun, Z. Zhang, L. Huang and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2023, 2211047,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202211047 .M. Xu, Y. Li, M. Ihsan-Ul-Haq, N. Mubarak, Z. Liu, J. Wu, Z. Luo and J. K. Kim, Energy Stor. Mater., 2022, 44, 477–486 Search PubMed .Z. W. Seh, J. Sun, Y. Sun and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 449–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Dai, W. Wu, Y. Huang, H. Fu, Y. Huang and W. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103522 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Lü, S. Li, R. Zou and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. A. Dawson, T. Famprikis and K. E. Johnston, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 18746–18772 RSC .Y. Zhao and L. L. Daemen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15042–15047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Yin, H. Yuan, L. Kong, Z. Lu and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1251–1254 RSC .Z. D. Hood, H. Wang, A. Samuthira Pandian, J. K. Keum and C. Liang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1768–1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Braga, J. A. Ferreira, V. Stockhausen, J. Oliveira and A. El-Azab, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5470–5480 RSC .M. H. Braga, A. J. Murchison, J. A. Ferreira, P. Singh and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 948–954 RSC .S. Gao, C. Tassel, S. Fujii, H. Ubukata, T. Zhu, D. Zhang, T. Broux, T. Saito, C. Zhong and E. Yoruk, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 6815–6823 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yu, Z. Wang and G. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19843–19852 RSC .Y. Yu, Z. Wang and G. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21985–21996 RSC .U. Rani, Y. Soni, P. K. Kamlesh, S. Pachori and A. S. Verma, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 13442–13460 CrossRef CAS .Z. Deng, D. Ni, D. Chen, Y. Bian, S. Li, Z. Wang and Y. Zhao, InfoMat, 2022, 4, e12252 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao and C. Chen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 134303 CrossRef .E. Zintl and W. Morawietz, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1938, 236, 372–410 CrossRef CAS .A. Klemenc and V. Gutmann, Monatshefte für Chemie und verwandte Teile anderer Wissenschaften,  1950, vol. 81, pp. 361–371 Search PubMed .M. Jansen, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1977, 435, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .M. Jansen, C. Feldmann and W. Müller, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1992, 611, 7–10 CrossRef CAS .W. Müller and M. Jansen, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1990, 591, 41–46 CrossRef .Y. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, S. Li, J. Zhu, R. Zou, Y. Wang, J. Lin and Y. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 735–740 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhu, Y. Wang, S. Li, J. W. Howard, J. r Neuefeind, Y. Ren, H. Wang, C. Liang, W. Yang and R. Zou, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 5993–5998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Ahiavi, J. A. Dawson, U. Kudu, M. Courty, M. S. Islam, O. Clemens, C. Masquelier and T. Famprikis, J. Power Sources, 2020, 471, 228489 CrossRef CAS .S. Gao, T. Broux, S. Fujii, C. Tassel, K. Yamamoto, Y. Xiao, I. Oikawa, H. Takamura, H. Ubukata and Y. Watanabe, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zheng, B. Perry and Y. Wu, ACS Mater. Au, 2021, 1, 92–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Nguyen, S. Hy, E. Wu, Z. Deng, M. Samiee, T. Yersak, J. Luo, S. P. Ong and Y. S. Meng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A2165 CrossRef CAS .V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .W. Xia, Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, K. Adair, R. Zhao, S. Li, R. Zou, Y. Zhao and X. Sun, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 3763–3819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Sabrowsky, K. Paszkowski, D. Reddig and P. Vogt, Z. Naturforsch. B, 1988, 43, 238–239 CrossRef CAS .H. Sabrowsky, K. Hippler, S. Sitta, P. Vogt and L. Walz, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1990, 46, 368–369 CrossRef .Y. Yu, Z. Wang and G. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10483–10493 RSC .L. Gao, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Li, R. Zhao, Y. Wang, S. Gao, L. He, H.-F. Song and R. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21265–21272 RSC .H. Fang, S. Wang, J. Liu, Q. Sun and P. Jena, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13373–13381 RSC .H. Fang and P. Jena, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 11046–11051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Fang and P. Jena, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 963–972 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Sadikin, M. Brighi, P. Schouwink and R. Černý, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501016 CrossRef .A. Emly, E. Kioupakis and A. Van der Ven, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4663–4670 CrossRef CAS .R. Mouta, M. A. B. Melo, E. M. Diniz and C. W. A. Paschoal, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7137–7144 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lu, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, X. Chen, C. Niu and F. Ciucci, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 32547–32555 RSC .S. Stegmaier, J. Voss, K. Reuter and A. C. Luntz, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4330–4340 CrossRef CAS .R. Mouta, E. Diniz and C. Paschoal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1586–1590 RSC .J. A. Dawson, H. Chen and M. S. Islam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 23978–23984 CrossRef CAS .Z. Deng, B. Radhakrishnan and S. P. Ong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3749–3755 CrossRef CAS .T. H. Wan, Z. Lu and F. Ciucci, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Goldmann, M. J. Clarke, J. A. Dawson and M. S. Islam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2249–2255 RSC .Z. Wang and G. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21846–21857 RSC .M. Xuan, W. Xiao, H. Xu, Y. Shen, Z. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Wang and G. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19231–19240 RSC .S. Fan, M. Lei, H. Wu, J. Hu, C. Yin, T. Liang and C. Li, Energy Stor. Mater., 2020, 31, 87–94 Search PubMed .P. C. Tsai, S. Mair, J. Smith, D. M. Halat, P. H. Chien, K. Kim, D. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Yin and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 13, 2203284 CrossRef .Q. Zhao, J. Guo, M. Su, B. Suo, H. Zhu, B. Zhou, Z. Zhang and Q. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 16546–16555 CrossRef CAS .Z. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Sun, X. Xie, X. Guan, C. Chen, P. Lu and X. Ma, J. Solid State Chem., 2022, 316, 123643 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yu, H. Xu, Z. Wang and G. Shao, Batteries Supercaps, 2021, 4, 1096–1107 CrossRef CAS .K. Shen, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Zong, G. Li, C. Zhao and H. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 3030–3036 RSC .B. Chen, C. Xu and J. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A3946 CrossRef CAS .H. Xu, M. Xuan, W. Xiao, Y. Shen, Z. Li, Z. Wang, J. Hu and G. Shao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6288–6294 CrossRef CAS .G. Schwering, A. Hönnerscheid, L. van Wüllen and M. Jansen, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 343–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. H. Braga, N. S. Grundish, A. J. Murchison and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 331–336 RSC .S.-H. Choe, W.-H. Hong, K.-C. Kim and C.-J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 8544–8555 RSC .M. Matsuo, H. Oguchi, T. Sato, H. Takamura, E. Tsuchida, T. Ikeshoji and S.-I. Orimo, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 580, S98–S101 CrossRef CAS .H. Oguchi, M. Matsuo, S. Kuromoto, H. Kuwano and S. Orimo, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 036102 CrossRef .M. Matsuo, S. Kuromoto, T. Sato, H. Oguchi, H. Takamura and S.-I. Orimo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 203904 CrossRef .M. Matsuo, T. Sato, Y. Miura, H. Oguchi, Y. Zhou, H. Maekawa, H. Takamura and S.-I. Orimo, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2702–2704 CrossRef CAS .M. Matsuo, A. Remhof, P. Martelli, R. Caputo, M. Ernst, Y. Miura, T. Sato, H. Oguchi, H. Maekawa and H. Takamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16389–16391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Oguchi, M. Matsuo, J. S. Hummelshøj, T. Vegge, J. K. Nørskov, T. Sato, Y. Miura, H. Takamura, H. Maekawa and S. Orimo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 141912 CrossRef .M. Matsuo, H. Takamura, H. Maekawa, H.-W. Li and S.-I. Orimo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 084103 CrossRef .M. Matsuo and S. I. Orimo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 161–172 CrossRef CAS .P. E. de Jongh, D. Blanchard, M. Matsuo, T. J. Udovic and S. Orimo, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2016, 122, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .F. Cuevas, M. B. Amdisen, M. Baricco, C. E. Buckley, Y. W. Cho, P. De Jongh, L. M. De Kort, J. B. Grinderslev, V. Gulino and B. C. Hauback, Prog. Energy, 2022, 4, 032001 CrossRef .A. Unemoto, M. Matsuo and S. I. Orimo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2267–2279 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Hansen, M. Paskevicius, H.-W. Li, E. Akiba and T. R. Jensen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 323, 60–70 CrossRef CAS .R. Mohtadi and S.-i Orimo, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 2, 1–15 Search PubMed .T. J. Udovic, M. Matsuo, W. S. Tang, H. Wu, V. Stavila, A. V. Soloninin, R. V. Skoryunov, O. A. Babanova, A. V. Skripov and J. J. Rush, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7622–7626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J.-H. Her, W. Zhou, V. Stavila, C. M. Brown and T. J. Udovic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11187–11189 CrossRef CAS .T. J. Udovic, M. Matsuo, A. Unemoto, N. Verdal, V. Stavila, A. V. Skripov, J. J. Rush, H. Takamura and S.-I. Orimo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3750–3752 RSC .N. Verdal, J.-H. Her, V. Stavila, A. V. Soloninin, O. A. Babanova, A. V. Skripov, T. J. Udovic and J. J. Rush, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 212, 81–91 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Skripov, O. A. Babanova, A. V. Soloninin, V. Stavila, N. Verdal, T. J. Udovic and J. J. Rush, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25961–25968 CrossRef CAS .W. S. Tang, A. Unemoto, W. Zhou, V. Stavila, M. Matsuo, H. Wu, S.-I. Orimo and T. J. Udovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3637–3645 RSC .M. Dimitrievska, P. Shea, K. E. Kweon, M. Bercx, J. B. Varley, W. S. Tang, A. V. Skripov, V. Stavila, T. J. Udovic and B. C. Wood, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703422 CrossRef .H. Wu, W. S. Tang, W. Zhou, V. Stavila, J. J. Rush and T. J. Udovic, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 3533–3540 RSC .W. S. Tang, M. Matsuo, H. Wu, V. Stavila, W. Zhou, A. A. Talin, A. V. Soloninin, R. V. Skoryunov, O. A. Babanova, A. V. Skripov, A. Unemoto, S.-I. Orimo and T. J. Udovic, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502237 CrossRef .Y. Sadikin, P. Schouwink, M. Brighi, Z. Łodziana and R. Cerny, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 5006–5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. R. Hansen, M. Paskevicius, M. Jørgensen and T. R. Jensen, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3423–3430 CrossRef CAS .W. S. Tang, M. Dimitrievska, V. Stavila, W. Zhou, H. Wu, A. A. Talin and T. J. Udovic, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10496–10509 CrossRef CAS .R. N. Grimes, Carboranes, Academic Press, London, 3rd edn,  2016 Search PubMed .N. S. Hosmane, J. R. Wermer, Z. Hong, T. D. Getman and S. G. Shore, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26, 3638–3639 CrossRef CAS .P. Maitre, O. Eisenstein, D. Michos, X. L. Luo, A. R. Siedle, L. Wisnieski, K. W. Zilm and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 7747–7751 CrossRef CAS .W. S. Tang, K. Yoshida, A. V. Soloninin, R. V. Skoryunov, O. A. Babanova, A. V. Skripov, M. Dimitrievska, V. Stavila, S.-I. Orimo and T. J. Udovic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .K. Yoshida, T. Sato, A. Unemoto, M. Matsuo, T. Ikeshoji, T. J. Udovic and S.-I. Orimo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 103901 CrossRef .M. Brighi, F. Murgia, Z. Łodziana, P. Schouwink, A. Wołczyk and R. Cerny, J. Power Sources, 2018, 404, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .M. Brighi, F. Murgia and R. Černý, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100217 CrossRef CAS .F. Murgia, M. Brighi and R. Černý, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 106, 106534 CrossRef CAS .R. Asakura, D. Reber, L. Duchêne, S. Payandeh, A. Remhof, H. Hagemann and C. Battaglia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 5048–5058 RSC .M. Jin, S. Cheng, Z. Yang, Y. Luo and Y. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 455, 140904 CrossRef CAS .L. He, H.-W. Li, S.-J. Hwang and E. Akiba, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6084–6089 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Teprovich, H. Colón-Mercado, A. L. Washington II, P. A. Ward, S. Greenway, D. M. Missimer, H. Hartman, J. Velten, J. H. Christian and R. Zidan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22853–22859 RSC .L. He, H.-W. Li, H. Nakajima, N. Tumanov, Y. Filinchuk, S.-J. Hwang, M. Sharma, H. Hagemann and E. Akiba, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5483–5486 CrossRef CAS .A. Unemoto, K. Yoshida, T. Ikeshoji and S.-I. Orimo, Mater. Trans., 2016, 57, 1639–1644 CrossRef CAS .R. Moury, A. Gigante and H. Hagemann, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 22417–22421 CrossRef CAS .W. S. Tang, M. Matsuo, H. Wu, V. Stavila, A. Unemoto, S.-I. Orimo and T. J. Udovic, Energy Stor. Mater., 2016, 4, 79–83 Search PubMed .T. He, H. Cao and P. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Monnier, J. Zhang, F. Cuevas and M. Latroche, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2022, 32, 100921 CrossRef CAS .Z. Lu and F. Ciucci, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9308–9319 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen and T. Hong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A493 CrossRef CAS .L. He, H. Lin, H.-F. Li, Y. Filinchuk, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Yang, Y. Hou, Y. Deng and H.-W. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 574–579 CrossRef CAS .Y.-R. Dong, Z.-Y. Jiang, X.-D. Zhang, Q. Song, B. Zhou and Z.-Y. Zhang, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 124, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhao, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Tang, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2625–2631 RSC .S. Wang, Y. Wu, H. Li, L. Chen and F. Wu, InfoMat, 2022, 4, e12316 CAS .A. D. Sendek, E. D. Cubuk, E. R. Antoniuk, G. Cheon, Y. Cui and E. J. Reed, Chem. Mater., 2018, 31, 342–352 CrossRef .Z. Ahmad, T. Xie, C. Maheshwari, J. C. Grossman and V. Viswanathan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 996–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Ping, C. Wang, Z. Lin, E. Hitz, C. Yang, H. Wang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000702 CrossRef CAS .B. Tang, P. W. Jaschin, X. Li, S.-H. Bo and Z. Zhou, Mater. Today, 2020, 41, 200–218 CrossRef CAS .J. Yue and Y.-G. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 174–175 CrossRef .Q. Liu, J. Yu, W. Guo, Y. Pan, C. Han, H. B. Liu and B. Li, EcoMat, 2023, e12322 CrossRef CAS .X. Fan, X. Ji, F. Han, J. Yue, J. Chen, L. Chen, T. Deng, J. Jiang and C. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau9245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Ni, Y. Xiong, Z. Sun, C. Sun, Y. Li, X. Yuan, H. Jin and Y. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2023, 13, 2300271 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhao, Y. Peng and F. Ran, Energy Stor. Mater., 2023, 58, 48–73 Search PubMed .X. Chi, F. Hao, J. Zhang, X. Wu, Y. Zhang, S. Gheytani, Z. Wen and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 718–724 CrossRef CAS .T. Wu, Z. Wen, C. Sun, X. Wu, S. Zhang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12623–12629 RSC .W. Zhou, H. Gao and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501802 CrossRef .J. A. S. Oh, Y. Wang, Q. Zeng, J. Sun, Q. Sun, M. Goh, B. Chua, K. Zeng and L. Lu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 601, 418–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Shen, S. Deng, R. Jiang, G. Liu, J. Yang and X. Yao, Energy Stor. Mater., 2022, 46, 175–181 Search PubMed .S. Bublil, G. Peta, H. Alon-Yehezkel, Y. Elias, D. Golodnitsky, M. Fayena-Greenstein and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 020504 CrossRef CAS .X. Xu, Y. Wang, Q. Yi, X. Wang, R. A. P. Camacho, H. Kungl, R. Eichel, L. Lu and H. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2023, 16, e202202152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Lai, Y. Lu, W. Zha, Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, X. Wu and Z. Wen, Energy Stor. Mater., 2023, 54, 478–487 Search PubMed .X. Yang, J. Liu, N. Pei, Z. Chen, R. Li, L. Fu, P. Zhang and J. Zhao, Nano-Micro Lett., 2023, 15, 1–37 CrossRef PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Jiawen Huang	Jiawen Huang is currently a PhD candidate in Shanghai University (SHU). He received his BS degree and MS degree from the University of Washington (UW), majorly investigating halide-based solid electrolytes in lithium-metal batteries. His current research interests focus on sodium-ion inorganic solid electrolytes and composite solid electrolytes for solid-state sodium-metal batteries, as well as other metal-based batteries.
Minghong Wu	Minghong Wu is a Distinguished Professor at Shanghai University and the Academician of Chinese Academy of Engineering. She received her PhD in Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1999. After several years of postdoctoral research in Japan, she became a Professor at the School of Environmental and Chemical Engineering at SHU in 2002. Her research interest focuses on the fundamental study and application of environmental and energy functional materials. She has been consecutively selected as a global highly cited scholar since 2019.
Shi-Xue Dou	Shi Xue Dou is a Distinguished Professor at the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, University of Wollongong (UOW) Research Ambassador Asia and the founding director of the Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials at UOW. He received his PhD at Dalhousie University, Canada in 1984, DSc at the University of New South Wales in 1998 and was elected as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering in 1994. He focuses on the research of energy and electronic materials. He is awarded the Australian Government's Centenary Medal in 2003 and Australian Order of Member in 2019 for his contribution to materials science and engineering, multiple Australian Professorial Fellowships from 1993 to 2011, the Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award in 2008, Outstanding Partnership Award in 2012, the ASTS Lifetime Achievement Award in 2018, Lifetime Achiever by Australian Research Magazine in 2020 and the ICMC Lifetime Achievement Award in 2021. He is named a highly cited researcher in materials science by Thomson Reuters since 2018 with 90000 citations and an h-index of 145.
Chao Wu	Chao Wu received his PhD from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2014, followed by postdoctoral research experience in the Department of Physical Chemistry of Solids at the Max-Planck-Institute for Solid State Research from 2014 to 2017, and later became a research fellow at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM), University of Wollongong. He is currently a professor at the Institute of Energy Materials Science (IEMS), University of Shanghai for Science and Technology. His research interests emphasize high energy metal-based batteries, including Li, Na, and Zn, in different electrolyte systems.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Distribution of identified lithium resources, (b) element abundance in the Earth's crust and (c) comparison between critical properties of Li and Na.	 

 	Fig. 2  Summary of common anode materials for sodium-ion batteries and the sodium metal anode by plotting their specific capacity and plateau voltage. Note that materials that are located closer to the upper left corner of the chart (high specific capacity and low plateau voltage) correspond to higher cell-level energy density, if the same cathode material is chosen, thereby becoming the most preferable. Data from ref. 35 and 43–183.	 

 	Fig. 3  Challenges in high-voltage sodium-metal batteries arising from organic liquid electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the battery configuration of conventional sodium-ion batteries and solid-state sodium-metal batteries.	 

 	Fig. 5  Criteria for ideal solid electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Radar plot to compare the key properties of some major types of inorganic Na-ion solid electrolytes.	 

σ = qnμ
	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of ion diffusion at the atomic scale, including single-ion hopping and correlated-ion motion mechanisms, as well as the existence of grains and grain boundaries at the microstructural scale.	 

	(2)

	(3)

Ea ∝ Em + Ef
	(4)

 	Fig. 8  The migration energy landscape of (a) single-ion hopping, i.e., vacancy and interstitial mechanisms, and (b) correlated-ion motion along Na+ migration paths. Adapted with permission from ref. 249 and 253.	 

μ = qD/kBT
	(5)

D = zNc(1 − c)a2v/kBT
	(6)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of influencing factors at the crystal structure scale, including (a) appropriate lattice volume and bottleneck size for successful ion hopping, (b) nearly equal-energy ion migration pathways with a minimal activation barrier in bcc-like anion arrangement compared to those in other typical anion configurations, reprinted with permission from ref. 255, (c) paddle-wheel mechanism of (PS4)3− polyanions promoting Na+ migration in Na3PS4 and (d) rotational motion of (PS4)3− polyanions enlarging the bottleneck regions in Na11Sn2PS12, reprinted with permission from ref. 256.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The electrochemical stability window or thermodynamic stability range of SEs corresponding to three types of electrolyte/anode interfaces. (b) Three common types of in situ formed interfaces between SEs and the Na metal anode, which are the (i) thermodynamically stable interface, (ii) kinetically stable SEI layer, and (iii) unstable MCI layer. (c) Loss of interfacial contact between SEs and the Na metal anode due to the poor initial wettability (left panel) and the voids formed during the Na plating/stripping process (right panel).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Crystal structures of sodium-β-alumina and sodium-β′′-alumina, adapted with permission from ref. 329, (b) interstitial oxygen stabilized by the Frenkel defect, (c) Frenkel defect accommodating two Na+ ions, (d) interstitialcy mechanism in the conduction planes of β-Al2O3.	 

 	Fig. 12  The most common cause of interface degradation and metal dendrite penetration at the interface between BASE and the Na metal anode. (a) The three-dimensional (3D) imaging of sodium dendrite penetration and pellet cracking in BASE after the rapid short-circuit of the symmetric Na/BASE cell, obtained by ex situ X-ray microcomputed tomography, reprinted with permission from ref. 404. (b) The solid–solid initial contact between rigid BASE and the Na metal anode at room temperature, compared to molten metallic Na intimately wetting the surface of BASE at elevated temperature, adapted with permission from ref. 407. (c) Asymmetric Na stripping and plating process gradually forming voids and causing loss of interface contact during the cycling of the Na anode with BASE, adapted with permission from ref. 406.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The crystal structure of the rhombohedral (top panel) and monoclinic phase (bottom panel) of NZSPO, adapted with permission from ref. 438. (b) The ideal ratio of mobile Na+ ions and Na+ vacancies for fastest single-ion hopping, in which min(ΔE) represents the minimum absolute difference in electrostatic energies between the ground-state (GS) site and the excited state (ES), adapted with permission from ref. 439 and 440. (c) Correlated-ion motions in NZSPO with corresponding migration energy landscapes in comparison with that of single-ion hopping, adapted with permission from ref. 439.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The Na+ hopping determined by bottleneck size in the NASICON structure. Identified Na+ migration pathways and the corresponding bottlenecks in the (b) rhombohedral NZSPO anion framework, adapted with permission from ref. 439, and (c) monoclinic NZSPO anion framework, adapted with permission from ref. 438.	 

	(7)

 	Fig. 15  Summary of the ionic conductivity and activation energy of NASICON (NZSPO) doped with different elements. The shaded region is the corresponding activation energy for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The thermodynamic stability of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 and the decomposed products at different potentials and sodium content, reprinted with permission from ref. 487. (b) Reaction energy of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 (upper panel) and volume change (bottom panel) with different cathode and anode materials, adapted with permission from ref. 242. (c) Optical imaging of the preferential growth of sodium metal dendrites along grain boundaries in the NASICON SE pellet, inducing dendrite penetration and ceramic cracking.	 

 	Fig. 17  Crystal structure of stoichiometric Na3PS4 in (a) cubic phase (β-Na3PS4) and (b) tetragonal phase Na3PS4 (α-Na3PS4). (c) Calculated structure of the orthorhombic phase (γ-Na3PS4) with relative Na+ site occupation marked, reprinted with permission from ref. 281.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The Na+ distribution in pristine Na3PS4 (upper panel) and 2% vacancy added Na2.94PS4, showing drastically increased Na+ mobility, acquired from 100 ps. MD simulation at 525 K, adapted with permission from ref. 520. (b) Plot of ionic conductivity with temperature variation in Na3PS4, with a dramatic jump of ionic conductivity and reduction of activation energy corresponding to plastic transition from β to γ phase, adapted with permission from ref. 281. (c) Eigenvectors of two soft modes with different vibrational symmetry that couples Na+ transition and tilting of tetrahedra, computed by DFT calculations, adapted with permission from ref. 535.	 

 	Fig. 19  Common modification strategies to stabilize the thermodynamically unstable interface between Na3PS4-type SEs and the metallic Na anode. Adapted with permission from ref. 306, 566 and 576–579.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Structure of Na11Sn2PS12 with different Na+ sites. Note that vacancies and Na(6) sites are not shown in the structure scheme for the purpose of visuality and simplicity, reprinted with permission from ref. 264. (b) The 3D isotropic Na+ conducting network built with Na+ sites in a similar coordination environment and atomic distance, reprinted with permission from ref. 592. (c) Na+ migration channels along the c axis and within the ab planes, enabled by interconnected Na+ sites in an alternating pattern of occupied sites and vacant sites, and (d) the additional migration channels allowed by the Na(6) sites, with their coordination environment and bottleneck size shown, reprinted with permission from ref. 593.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Theoretically calculated ESW of Na11Sn2PS12 with possible decomposition products, reprinted with permission from ref. 603. (b) Experimentally obtained ESW of Na11Sn2PS12 by CV measurements, which is wider than the theoretically calculated value, reprinted with permission from ref. 605. (c) The reduction reaction observed in the Na/Na10.8Sn1.9PS11.8/Sn cell through CV scanning (0.1 mV s−1; −0.5 to 5 V) at 80 °C (upper left panel). Emerged new peak observed in the S 2p spectra via XPS depth profiling of the surface of Na10.8Sn1.9PS11.8 indicating the formation of decomposition products (bottom left panel). Appearance of new peaks detected in the XPS analysis of Na10.8Sn1.9PS11.8 before and after CV scanning, associated to reduced S species (middle panel) and Sn species (right panel), reprinted with permission from ref. 594.	 

 	Fig. 22  The facile Na+ movements among seven Na+ sites with small site energy difference, within the bcc-like anion framework of Na7P3S11 (upper panel) and Na7P3Se11 (bottom panel), adapted with permission from ref. 612.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Theoretically calculated structure of Na3YCl6 (left panel) and Na3YBr6 (right panel), along with their Na+ diffusion pathways and corresponding activation energies acquired by AIMD simulations, adapted with permission from ref. 643. (b) Heat map of the energy above the convex hull (Ehull) for Na3MCl6 (left panel) and Na3MBr6 (right panel) to determine their preferred and stable phase (black box), where Ehull > 25 meV per atom indicates the spontaneous decomposition to phase equilibria, reprinted with permission from ref. 650 and 651.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) The plot of change of the polyhedral volume of (Er1−xZrxCl6)(3−x)− (upper left), Na+ site occupation (bottom left), and total ionic conductivity with the amount of Zr4+ (right), where interconnected polyhedra and calculated lowest energy bond-valence landscape with Na+ sites are incorporated, adapted with permission from ref. 648. (b) The probability density of Na3YCl6 and Na2.25Y0.25Zr0.75Cl6 indicating octahedra rotation promoting Na+ diffusion, via 100 ps. AIMD simulation at 600 K (isosurface value = 5× 10−4), adapted with permission from ref. 647. (c) The probability density of Na3YBr3I3 and Na3GdBr3I3 indicating intensified anion vibration and facilitated Na+ diffusion upon anion mixing, through 50 ps. AIMD simulation at 800 K (isosurface value of 2P0), and (d) the improved ionic conductivity with reduced activation energy of anion-mixed Na3GdBr3I3 compared with pristine or other anion mixed halides, reprinted with permission from ref. 658.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of the (a) prototypical structure of an antiperovskite (left), sharing the same topology with the perovskite (right), (b) 3D cubic structure of the X3BA antiperovskite and (c) 2D layered structure of the Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase X4BA2 antiperovskite.	 

 	Fig. 26  Four common modification strategies to promote Na+ conduction within antiperovskite SEs.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) The top and side views of the geometry of cage-like closo-borate anions (B10H10)2− and (B12H12)2−, and polyanion (BH4)−, along with their relative sizes, reprinted with permission from ref. 747. (b) The unit cell framework of Na2B12H12 and Na+ interaction with neighboring atoms and polyanions, in the ordered low-temperature monoclinic phase (P21/n), from the view along the lattice direction of (100), reprinted with permission from ref. 748. (c) The order–disorder phase transition from the low-temperature monoclinic phase P21/n (left panel) to the partially disordered high-temperature Pmn phase (center panel), then to the fully disordered high-temperature cubic Imm phase (right panel), at different transition temperatures with hysteresis, from the view along the c axis, reprinted with permission from ref. 749 and 750.	 

 	Fig. 28  The relative geometry of (a) (CB9H10)− by replacing one boron atom with a carbon atom from (B10H10)2−, reprinted with permission from ref. 755 and (b) (CB11H12)− from (B12H12)2−, reprinted with permission from ref. 752 with Mulliken charges marked on the structurally different atoms of the isolated anions. (c) The relative geometry of open-structure nest-like nido-poly(carba)borate anions, reprinted with permission from ref. 758.	 

 	Fig. 29  The general rules and designing principles for fast-ion-conducting solid electrolytes in the future.	 

 	Fig. 30  The general rules and the designing principle for solid electrolytes with good interfacial compatibility towards the Na metal anode.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
