Materials design using genetically engineered proteins  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM12238J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM12238J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18868-18876Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsMaterials design using genetically engineered proteins

        
          
            Liming 
            Shen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ningzhong 
            Bao
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Ziyou 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peter E. 
            Prevelige
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Arunava 
            Gupta
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Materials for Information Technology, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487, USA. E-mail: agupta@mint.ua.edu
bState Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Technology, Nanjing, 210009, P. R. China. E-mail: nzhbao@njut.edu.cn
cDepartment of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA
Received 
      19th May 2011
    , Accepted 10th October 2011First published on 26th October 2011AbstractA variety of inorganic materials with amazingly complex structures and morphologies are produced by natural organisms. The fundamental mechanism underlying the natural biological synthesis of inorganic materials can be ascribed to the unique recognition and interaction of proteins with specific inorganic species. By mimicking natural biomineralization, genetically engineered proteins have in recent years been successfully utilized as platforms for the synthesis of inorganic nanostructures of various compositions under mild reaction conditions. Moreover, the precisely oriented assembly of genetically engineered proteins offers flexibility in designing inorganic nanostructures with desired complex architecture. This short review summarizes the recent progress in materials design using genetically engineered protein templates.
1. Introduction
An emerging field of considerable interest in materials design is the fabrication of advanced materials with multiple components, complex structure, and integrated functionality for a wide range of applications.1 Traditional materials design is based on top-down physical and chemical methods, including physical and chemical vapor deposition processes followed by lithographic patterning, and different bottom-up chemical synthesis approaches.2 These methods enable us to fabricate nanoparticles, nanostructures, and hierarchically organized materials for device fabrication, catalysis, composites, etc.3 In general, top-down approaches involve multiple steps and are difficult to scale down to dimensions below 10–20 nm, especially for three-dimensional structures. Bottom-up chemical approaches on the other hand are more amenable to producing nanoscale materials and are cheaper to implement, but usually can generate only simple shapes and structures.2,3 Therefore, the ability of natural organisms to control the formation of inorganic materials with complex nanoarchitectures has provided an impetus in recent years for exploring biomimetic approaches for the design of advanced materials.4 Biomimetics refers to chemical synthetic methods inspired by biologically related processes. The interest in this interdisciplinary research field stems from the fact that bio-systems often use relatively simple building blocks to self-assemble structures displaying a very high degree of organization.5 A wide range of biological matter, ranging from individual biomolecules (DNA, peptides, proteins, etc.) to biological entities (bacteria, phages, fungi, etc.) has been utilized as scaffoldings or templates for the directed synthesis of nanostructured materials.6 Biomolecules, in particular proteins, are capable of self-assembling into a wide range of structures from the molecular to the nano-, micro-, and macroscale.7 Moreover, these structures can be readily manipulated and functionalized utilizing standard molecular biology techniques.8 Thus, a variety of materials with desired compositions, structures, and complex assemblies can potentially be prepared using biomolecular templates.5–8
The basic molecular biology principles regarding the synthesis of nanomaterials using genetically engineered biomolecules have been discussed in detail in some recent review papers.7a,7g,8d,8e In this short review, we primarily focus on recent advances in the design of technologically important nanostructured materials using genetically engineered proteins and protein assemblies as templates; in particular, structural design over different length scales.
2. Protein templates
Proteins/peptides are polymeric biomolecules composed of amino acids. There are twenty-two standard amino acids, which are classified by the properties of their side chains into four groups (weak acidic, weak basic, hydrophilic, and hydrophobic). Peptide refers to a short polymer chain of amino acids linked together by covalent peptide bonds. Both naturally occurring and artificially synthesized peptides, often exhibiting highly specific recognition capability for inorganic components, have been used to template or catalyze the formation of nanomaterials. The morphology of inorganic products that are produced include nanoparticles and short nanowires. Complex nanostructured materials synthesized using peptides are however limited, likely because of the short length and relatively simple structure of peptides. The use of peptides in the design of inorganic nanomaterials has been discussed in some earlier reviews.7a,7g,8d,8e An attractive feature of peptides with specific recognition capability for inorganic components is that genetic modification of proteins and protein assemblies (such as virus, bacterium, etc.) by molecular biology techniques enable us to design a broad range of nanostructures with complex architectures and multiple components.7,8
Proteins are composed of polypeptides, exhibiting complex structures and preferred conformations. In natural systems, proteins often serve as scaffolds for controlling the nucleation, growth, and structural attributes of functional inorganic materials. These include single-domain and crystallographically aligned magnetite nanoparticles produced by the magnetotactic bacterium (Aquaspirillum magnetotacticum); hard, wear-resistant crystalline hydroxyapatite with highly ordered micro/nano architecture formed in tooth; diatom silica cell walls with highly ordered nanostructures and patterns found in several different diatom organisms, etc.4 Some naturally occurring proteins have been utilized for biomimetic synthesis. For example, ferritin, composed of twenty-four polypeptide subunits, is one of the better investigated protein template for biomimetic synthesis.6g,9 The size of the inner cavity of this spherical protein is about 8 nm and the outer diameter is about 12 nm. A range of nano-sized materials have been produced by growth within the cavity of apoferritin. Kim et al. proposed that the shell wall of apoferritin has channels through which ions and small molecules can move in and out, resulting in the formation of shape- and size-controlled monodisperse nanoparticles.7d
Naturally evolved proteins are known to control the nucleation and growth of only a limited class of inorganic materials, such as calcium carbonate, silica, iron oxide, etc. Surface modification of proteins by genetic methods has therefore been investigated for selective nucleation and growth of a wider range of inorganic materials and also to aid in the construction of complex nanostructures.8d,8e,10,11 In this approach, specific peptides screened from a combinatorial cell or phage library for binding to specific inorganic targets are displayed on the surface of biological systems such as proteins, phages, yeasts and bacteria.5a,5b,6g,12 For example, peptides that have an affinity to bind to various technologically important materials including metals, oxides, and sulfides, have been rapidly screened and selected by bio-panning; a commonly used technique in the pharmaceutical industry for the rapid identification, selection, and evolution of peptide sequences against organic targets.12 The selected peptides are often observed not only to control the nucleation of desired components but also preferentially direct the subsequent growth of crystal phase and structure, and enable stabilization of metastable phases utilizing simple room-temperature chemical reactions in solution.13 After genetically engineering the selected peptides into proteins and protein assemblies (such as phages), the engineered proteins bear specific recognition motifs capable of organizing and directing the growth of nanomaterials to produce a broad range of complex nanostructures.6e,6f,8a,8c,11,14 The peptides and engineered peptides for biomimetic synthesis of inorganic materials, primarily in the form of simple nanostructures, have been discussed quite extensively in several reviews.7a,7g,8e,8d,15 Thus we limit our review primarily to work carried out using genetically engineered proteins and protein assemblies for the design of complex nanostructures.
3. Genetically engineered protein-templated nanostructures
As mentioned earlier, the use of natural occurring peptides, proteins, and protein assemblies can effectively direct the growth of only a limited set of inorganic materials. This limitation can be addressed through the expression of specific peptides exhibiting binding affinity to the surface of a wider range of materials, onto various forms of proteins and protein assemblies. It is often observed that the engineered protein templates possess unique capabilities for spatially controlling the synthesis and assembly of the screened material of choice with desired components and structures.
3.1 One-dimensional protein-templated nanostructures
The commonly used one-dimensional protein templates include protein TraI, tubular tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), M13 bacteriophage, bacterial flagella, etc. These filamentous or rod-shaped protein templates have been used for the synthesis of nanowires of a variety of metallic, semiconducting, and magnetic materials. The resulting inorganic nanostructures are mostly limited to nanoparticles and nanoparticle hybrids with simple structures replicating the basic shape and structure of the template.

Protein TraI. 
Dai et al. engineered a Cu2O-precipitating peptide sequence into the primary structure of protein TraI.16 TraI is a DNA binding protein consisting of 1756 amino acids. While protein TraI does not possess intrinsic inorganic synthetic activity, on exposure to an aqueous precursor solution a TraI derivative (TraIi1753::CN225) engineered to possess a cysteine-constrained 12-residue Cu2O binding sequence designated CN225, is observed to induce the formation of a Cu2O nanoparticle coating on the protein shell. Control experiments confirm that Cu2O formation is controlled by inclusion of the CN225 binding sequence. As seen in Fig. 1, the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a core-shell structure for non-equilibrium nanoparticles shows a 2 nm Cu2O core surrounded by an adsorbed protein shell. Quantitative protein adsorption studies suggest that the unexpected stability of Cu2O is imparted by the nanoscale surface binding affinity of TraIi1753::CN225 for Cu2O, which provides favorable interfacial energetics for the core-shell configuration. The protein shell retains the DNA-binding traits of TraI, as evidenced by the spontaneous organization of nanoparticles onto circular double-stranded DNA.
 Fig. 1  TEM image of Cu2O nanoparticles synthesized and assembled on engineered TraI protein. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Different from relatively small size protein monomers, protein assemblies have large sizes of up to a few tens of nanometres, or even micrometres when assembled as viral capsids or bacterial flagella. The commonly used one-dimensional protein assemblies include TMV, M13 bacteriophage, bacterial flagella, etc. These rod-shaped protein templates have been used for the synthesis of nanowires of a variety of metallic, semiconducting and magnetic materials.


Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). 
TMV is a rod-shaped virion, composed of 2130 identical protein subunits arranged in a helical motif around a single strand of RNA to form a tubular shaped structure that is 300 nm long and 18 nm wide, with a central cavity 4 nm in diameter.17a Both the internal and external surfaces of the protein tube consist of repeating patterns of charged amino acid residues, such as glutamate, aspartate, arginine, and lysine. These charged groups, in principle, offer a wide selection of nucleation sites for surface-controlled inorganic deposition. Thus, the use of the TMV capsid as a template is advantageous for the production of narrow, high-aspect ratio composites and protein-confined inorganic nanowires.17,7e As seen in Fig. 2, TMV has indeed proven to be an effective template for facile synthesis of a variety of materials by simple reactions such as co-crystallization (CdS and PbS), oxidative hydrolysis (iron oxides), and sol–gel condensation (SiO2). The surface chemistry of TMV, coupled with the unusually high stability (∼60 °C and pH 2–10) of the protein assembly, provides a structured template for the site-specific nucleation of a variety of inorganic solids over a range of pH values and reaction conditions. Nanoscale Pt conductors have been fabricated using genetically engineered TMV templates through Pt cluster deposition on the outer surface.17e For this work, Lee et al. utilized genetically modified TMV capsids that were engineered to display cysteine residues on the outer surface of the virus particles. The addition of the cysteine residues was intended to promote the adhesion of Pt nanoparticles to the TMV capsid following their synthesis through the chemical reduction of protein-chelated ions. The specific binding between Pt clusters and the engineered TMV template was examined using UV/Vis spectrophotometry and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) analysis.
 Fig. 2  Schematic structure of TMV with coat proteins (green) and RNA (red) used for the templating synthesis of nanotube composites of (a) iron oxide synthesized by oxidative hydrolysis of Fe2+ and Fe 3+ at pH = 9; (b) silica synthesized by sol–gel condensation using tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) reactant at pH = 2.5; (c) CdS nanocrystal assemblies synthesized by co-precipitation of Cd2+ in the presence of H2S at pH = 7; and (d) PbS nanocrystal assemblies synthesized by co-precipitation of Pb2+ in the presence of H2S at pH = 5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17b. Copyright 1999 WILEY-VCH, Weinheim. 


Filamentous bacteriophage M13 (M13). 
Genetically engineered filamentous M13 is one of the most well studied phage for materials design utilizing molecular biology and phage display techniques. This is in large part due to the extensive work done by the group of A. Belcher over the past decade.6e,6f,8a,8c,14a,15,18 M13 is approximately ∼860 nm long and ∼6.5 nm wide, with 5 copies of its minor coat protein (pIII) and ∼15% of the 2400 copies of its main coat protein (pVIII) capable of displaying a foreign peptide. As seen in Fig. 3, specific binding peptides can be screened from a combinatorial library of random peptide 12-mers fused to pIII proteins (at the tips) of M13 against different inorganic targets of interest using the phage display biopanning technique. After inserting the encoding DNA of the selected peptide to pIII or pIX and/or pVIII region of the viral DNA, the peptide can be expressed as a fusion protein on the surface of M13. Such engineered M13 with specific binding peptides can then be used as biotemplates for the synthesis of inorganic nanowires. Belcher's group was one of the first to express specific peptides, screened out using combinatorial phage display library, on filamentous M13 for materials synthesis. They genetically engineered peptides, specific to desired inorganic materials, to be inserted into the main coat protein (pVIII) of M13. Genetically engineered M13 with specific binding peptides on the coat proteins have been used for templating inorganic nanowires of a variety of materials, including FePt, ZnS, CdS, and Co3O4.6e,8a,18
 Fig. 3  Schematic structures of filamentous bacteriaphage M13 and the genetically engineered version. The phage DNA is encased in a capsid consisting of four minor coat proteins (pIII, pIX, pVI, and pVII) located at one of the two distal ends of the phage and one major coat protein (pVIII), several thousand copies of which constitute the side wall of the phage. One, two, or three foreign peptides or proteins can be displayed on the surface of the phage by genetically manipulating the phage DNA. The foreign peptide or protein fused to the coat protein is highlighted in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26a. Copyright 2009 WILEY-VCH, Weinheim. 
Besides single phase materials, various heterogeneous nanoarchitectures can also be fabricated utilizing appropriately engineered M13 bacteriophage as templates. The genome of M13 phage can be rationally engineered to produce viral particles with distinct substrate-specific peptides expressed on the filamentous capsid and the ends, providing a generic template for programmable assembly of complex nanostructures. As an example, Huang et al. genetically engineered a gold binding peptide sequence on the major coat protein PVIII while simultaneously displaying a streptavidin-binding peptide on the end protein pIII (Fig. 4a).18c Phage clones with gold-binding motifs on the capsid and streptavidin-binding motifs at one end were used to assemble Au and CdSe nanocrytals into ordered one-dimensional arrays and other more complex geometries (Fig. 4b–f). These results suggest a generic approach that can be extended to program the assembly of a variety of material systems with nanoscale precision. Various substrate-specific motifs can be independently selected from type 8 (inserted sequence is carried in Gene VIII) and type 3 (inserted sequence is carried in Gene III) libraries and then genetically incorporated into M13 - to produce highly decoratable viral templates with good control. Overall, the work of Belcher et al. demonstrates the great promise of bottom-up assembly of sophisticated electronic and optoelectronic systems from biotemplated materials, and therefore opens up exciting opportunities for the assembly of a variety of nanoscale heterostructures.
 Fig. 4  (a) Scheme for genetic engineering the M13 phage (termed type 8–3 phage). The genome of the engineered phage bears insertions both in Gene VIII and Gene III, which leads to motif expressions on pVIII and pIII proteins, respectively. Gene insertions and the correspondingly expressed motifs are highlighted in yellow and red. (b–f) TEM images of various nanoarchitectures templated by the engineered phage. Gold nanoparticles (∼5 nm) bind to pVIII proteins along the virus axis to form 1D array, while streptavidin binding motif on pIII protein simultaneously binds to streptavidin-coated nanoparticles. Arrows highlight the streptavidin-conjugated gold nanoparticles (∼15 nm) or CdSe quantum dots bound to pIII proteins. The insets show the assembly schemes of observed structures. White represents the M13 structure, yellow dots represent gold nanoparticles, the green dot represents a CdSe quantum dot, and red represents the streptavidin coating around gold or CdSe particles. (d, inset) The enlarged image of the CdSe quantum dot attached to the end of the virus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18c. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Filamentous viruses have the ability to assemble into liquid crystalline phases, which are controllable by factors such as concentration of the virus suspension, ionic strength of the solution, application of external field, etc.19 Belcher et al. observed that the M13 phage suspension transforms from the smectic phase (in which the molecules have the general orientational order of nematic phase, but also tend to align themselves in layers or planes) to cholesteric (a form of nematic phase in which the molecules twist slightly from one layer to the next, resulting in a spiral formation) and nematic phases (in which the molecules that have no positional order but tend to self-align along the same direction with their long axes roughly parallel) with decreasing concentrations, or by application of a magnetic field. Phage suspension with the smectic phase was explored for the formation of solid-phase films and one dimensional fibers.20 They engineered M13 with specificity for ZnS at the pIII protein site, and utilized the engineered-M13 liquid crystal system to arrange the ZnS nanocrystals into ordered nano- and microscale domains with application of an external magnetic field. This resulted in the formation of a self-supporting biological-semiconducting hybrid films.18b Furthermore, by conjugating the virus and the nanoparticles utilizing the streptavidin-biotin interaction, self-supporting Au-virus films exhibiting smectic order were fabricated.20a The method can be extended to align other streptavidin-modified nanomaterials (e.g., magnetic nanoparticles and II–VI semiconductor nanoparticles) using anti-streptavidin viruses like biotin-modified M13 as building blocks.14a The approaches for developing biological templates of the virus liquid crystalline phases are compatible with aqueous and ambient conditions, thus making them attractive as possible environmentally benign synthetic routes for technologically important nanomaterials.


Bacterial flagella. 
Most bacteria have flagella that are composed of the protein flagellin. The protein arranges itself into a hollow cylinder with helical shape, which is essential to its function.11 Genetically modified bacterial flagella have been utilized to synthesize and linearly align different metallic nanoparticles, including Pd and Ag. Kumara et al. determined that peptide loops, composed of alternating aspartic and glutamic acid residues engineered into the E. coli flagellum, can act as templates for the synthesis of continuous silver nanowires.12 In addition to Pd and Ag nanowires, highly ordered flagella nanotubes assembled from flagellin proteins have been explored for the organization of Cu nanoparticles and for the templated formation of Cu nanotubes.11 The flagellin proteins utilized for this work were engineered to display peptides with sequences highly enriched in histidine residues. The flagella nanotubes were sequentially exposed to copper ion and sodium borohydride-containing solutions. Thereby, flagella could be decorated with Cu nanoparticles or encased by Cu nanotubes depending on the Cu2+ ion solution concentration.


Potential applications. 
Besides use for materials design, genetically engineered proteins have been investigated for various applications, such as nanoparticle separation, quantum dot purification, design of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent, etc.21 TMV and bacterial flagella can also be used for designing materials for high performance digital memory device, and for catalysis.22 Belcher's group has pioneered the design of high-performance battery materials using genetically engineered M13. They have shown that M13 can be used for fabricating batteries with improved performance by synthesizing electrochemically active anode nanowires on the virus and then organizing the virus on a polymer surface.18a,23 In more recent work, they have gone on to demonstrate the use of genetically programmed multifunctional M13 as a versatile scaffold for the synthesis and assembly of materials for high-power batteries.24 As seen in Fig. 5, by manipulating two genes, they engineered viruses with peptide groups having affinity for single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) on one end and peptides fused to the viral major coat protein that are capable of nucleating amorphous iron phosphate (a-FePO4). The virus clone with the highest affinity for SWNTs enabled power performance of a-FePO4 comparable to that of crystalline lithium iron phosphate (c-LiFePO4) and showed excellent capacity retention upon cycling at 178 mAh/g. The biomolecular recognition and attachment to the conducting SWNT network provides efficient nanoscale electrical wiring to the active nanomaterials, enabling high power performance. These hybrid materials were assembled as the positive electrode in a lithium-ion battery using lithium metal foil as the negative electrode to power a green light-emitting diode (LED). This environmentally benign, low-temperature biological scaffold could facilitate fabrication of electrodes from materials previously excluded because of extremely low electronic conductivity. Very recently, Belcher's group has also reported significant improvements in the power-conversion efficiency of solar cells by utilizing viruses to perform detailed assembly at the microscopic level.25 They synthesized single-walled carbon nanotube-TiO2 nanocrystal core-shell nanocomposites utilizing a genetically engineered M13 virus as a template. By using the nanocomposites as photoanode in a dye-sensitized solar cell, they demonstrated that even a small fraction of nanotubes can help improve the power conversion efficiency by increasing the electron collection efficiency. They also showed that both the electronic type and degree of bundling of the nanotubes in the nanotube/TiO2 complex are critical factors in determining device performance. Using this approach, dye-sensitized solar cells with a power conversion efficiency as high as 10.6% has been achieved. Biomedical applications of genetically engineered M13 bacteriophage has also emerged as an interesting field of research.26 For example, by conjugating with nanomaterials and then immobilizing them on a transducer surface the bio-inorganic hybrids can be used as a sensor.26a
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of multifunctional M13 with the capsid protein pVIII and a minor protein pIII genetically engineered. The pVIII capsid protein of the virus is modified to serve as a template for a-FePO4 growth, and pIII protein is further engineered to have a binding affinity for single-walled carbon nanotubes. (b) Schematic diagram for fabricating high-power lithium-ion battery cathodes using the genetically engineered multifunctional viruses and a photograph of the battery used to power a green light-emitting diode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2009 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In summary, one dimensional protein templates have been exploited through the development of protein scaffolds as a means of templating or directing the nucleation and assembly of inorganic materials. The unique protein assemblies of viruses offer interesting opportunities for the templated growth and organization of nanocrystals for a variety of applications. Additionally, the hierarchical structures of protein assemblies, such as cage proteins described below, have received considerable attention as scaffolds for materials design.

3.2 Cage protein-templated nanostructures
Cage-like protein architectures provide three surfaces, namely interior, exterior, and subunit interfaces to which one can impart function by design. Atomic resolution structural information, in conjunction with genetic and chemical modification, permits the rational incorporation of small molecules, peptides or metallic particles at precise locations on the protein cage in a spatially selective manner.27 Protein cages have been utilized as spatially constrained reaction vessels for materials synthesis.6d,6g,7b,7c,17a Their interior cavities can be used as a confined space for nanomaterial synthesis. Simultaneously, both interior and exterior protein surfaces can be genetically engineered for designing multi-component nanoarchitectures.

Cowpea chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV). 
Douglas et al. have used CCMV, which forms a self-assembling cage-like protein shell, for the growth of materials.7b,7c,28a,28b The CCMV protein cages are composed of 180 identical 20 kDa subunits that self-assemble into an empty virion having icosahedral symmetry. Structural analysis indicates that the viral protein cage should provide access to small molecules through pores created at the protein subunit interfaces.25 Structural analysis of CCMV has demonstrated that the highly basic N-termini (6 Arg, 3 Lys) project into the interior of the protein cage. These 180 N-termini are required to package and condense the anionic RNA viral genome. However, genetic analysis has demonstrated that the N-terminus is not essential for the self-assembly of the empty protein cage in vitro. Thus, it is practical for the chemical properties of the protein cage to be altered through rational design as well as by genetically engineering the N-terminus of the protein without disrupting the overall architecture of the cage. Consequently, the electrostatic characteristics of the interior surface of the cage can be changed from cationic to anionic. This favors strong interaction with ferrous and ferric ions for promoting oxidative hydrolysis and consequently leading to size-constrained iron oxide formation within the viral protein cage, while maintaining the overall cage architecture of the cage. In the work by Douglas et al. the CCMV coat protein was genetically modified by replacing 9 basic residues at the N-terminal with glutamic acid (subE mutant). The mutant assembled readily into a cage-like architecture, similar to the wild type. This electrostatically altered viral protein cage catalyzed the rapid oxidation of Fe(II) leading to the formation of spatially constrained iron oxide nanoparticles within the cage.28c Moreover, the viral cage exhibits pH-dependent gating mechanism that triggers a contraction/expansion of the viral structure, which can be used to selectively terminate crystal growth.7c Along with the gating ability, the electrostatic interior can induce spatially directed mineralization of materials, including iron oxide and polyoxometalate species controlled by a change in pH (vanadate, molybdate and tungstate).


Ferritin. 
Ferritin is another naturally occurring protein assembly with a uniform size that stores iron and releases it in a controlled fashion. There are a number of advantages to using ferritin as a protein cage for constrained nanomaterial synthesis. These include the ease and rapidity of recombinant expression in bacteria to produce large quantities of the protein, the relatively straightforward purification procedure, along with particle size distribution and stability. Douglas' group has used this cage protein to grow very uniform nanoparticles of iron oxide, cobalt oxide, and metals.10b,29 Naik et al. introduced peptide sequences on the interior surface or exterior surface of the protein cages of ferritin to create new functionalities.30 Ferritin can be genetically engineered to display both peptides and proteins on its inner and outer core by fusing the polypeptides to the C- and N-termini, respectively.30 Thereby, Ag nanoparticles have been biomimetically synthesized by fusing Ag-binding specific peptides to the C-terminus of the L subunit of ferritin as a template for controlling the inorganic nucleation, growth and eventual size distribution for nanoparticle formation within the confines of the chimeric protein cage.


Bacteriophage P22. 
The bacteriophage P22 is ∼60 nm in diameter and exists in two forms, the prohead and mature head. In both types, the outer icosahedral procapsid shell is composed of 420 chemically identical subunits arranged on a symmetric T = 7 sub-triangulated lattice. The procapsid form contains an internal scaffold composed of approximately 300 molecules of scaffolding protein anchored to the inner surface of the procapsid shell via a C-terminal helix-loop-helix binding motif. These scaffolding proteins can diffuse into or out of the shell.31
We have demonstrated a controllable approach for the construction of ordered ZnS and CdS nanostructures over genetically engineered P22 coat protein assemblies using a two-step procedure: (1) the self-assembly of spherical protein templates from the genetically engineered P22 coat protein; and (2) the nucleation and growth of nanocrystals on the self-assembled protein templates. The high affinity ZnS- and CdS-binding peptides, identified from a phage display library, enable the selective nucleation and growth of sulfides over the complex protein assemblies, as seen in Fig. 6.32 The synthetic strategy is quite general and can be extended to the fabrication of a variety of other nanostructures. Other peptide sequences with the ability to produce nanometre-sized particles of CdS, ZnS, SiO2, CoPt, and other metals have already been identified.6e,18b,33 These identified peptide sequences can be genetically engineered to protein templates to create controlled nano-environments that are suitable for the generation of monodisperse inorganic nanoparticles with similar composition and crystallographic properties. Douglas's group has recently engineered the inner scaffolding protein of P22 with a polyanionic peptide which enables the oxidative mineralization of Fe(II) to form homogenously sized Fe2O3 nanoparticles constrained inside P22.34
 Fig. 6  (a) Three-dimensional surface representation of P22 procapsid viewed along a 3-fold axis. (b) TEM image of genetically engineered P22 coat protein assemblies (stained). (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of ordered nanocrystal assemblies over self-assembled genetically engineered P22 coat proteins. Step 1: assembly of P22 coat proteins (gray) genetically engineered with specific peptide (red). Step 2: protein-directed nucleation and growth of nanocrystals (yellow) on the protein assembly. (d and e) Sulfide nanocrystal assemblies grown on the self-assembled protein templates shown in Fig.6b. All scale bars represent 50 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 


Protein-templated hierarchical nanostructures. 
The controlled organization of inorganic materials into multidimensional addressable arrays forms the basis for device fabrication. In addition to directing the synthesis of nanoparticles on the surface of peptides/proteins, the engineered peptides/proteins can also organize materials by specifically binding to a surface and then directing the localized synthesis of nanoparticles, forming ordered two- and three-dimensional arrays. The critical challenges are in identifying the compatibilities and combinations of protein-inorganic materials, synthesis of the appropriate building blocks, and understanding and controlling the building block interactions and self-assembly processes.
McMillan et al. have fabricated nanoscale ordered arrays of metal and semiconductor quantum dots by binding preformed nanoparticles onto crystalline protein templates prepared from genetically engineered hollow double-ring structures called chaperonins.35 Using structural information as a guide, a thermostable recombinant chaperonin subunit was modified to assemble into chaperonins with either 3 nm or 9 nm apical pores surrounded by chemically reactive thiols. These engineered chaperonins were crystallized into two-dimensional templates up to 20 μm in diameter. The periodic solvent-exposed thiols within these crystalline templates were used to size-selectively bind and organize either gold (1.4, 5 or 10 nm) or CdSe–ZnS semiconductor (4.5 nm) quantum dots into arrays. The order within the arrays was defined by the lattice of the underlying protein crystal. By combining the self-assembling properties of chaperonins with mutations guided by structural modeling, quantum dots can be manipulated using modified chaperonins and organized into arrays for potential use in next-generation electronic and photonic devices.
Sano et al. have constructed three-dimensional nanoparticle arrays using apoferritin protein cages genetically engineered with three peptides with binding affinities to titanium metal, TiO2, and SiO2, respectively. By initially exposing the engineered apoferritin cages to reaction solutions resulted in the formation of cadmium selenide, iron oxide, or cobalt oxide nanoparticles within the cavity of the protein cages. These nanoparticle-filled proteins were then bound to a titanium metal substrate by incubation. The subsequent addition of silicic acid or TiBALDH to this immobilized layer of engineered apoferritin proteins resulted in the deposition of a silica or titania layer that serves to encapsulate the proteins. The deposited mineral layer could then be utilized to bind an additional monolayer of engineered apoferritin protein that can in turn be utilized to synthesize an additional mineral coating. The process can be repeated to build up thick, multifunctional nanoparticle composites, which the authors refer to as “biomimetic layer-by-layer assembly” (Fig. 7).36
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the “biomimetic layer-by-layer assembly” process. (b) Elemental mapping of a cross section of synthesized composite containing stacked layers of iron oxide, cadmium selenide, and cobalt oxide filled chimeric proteins. TMOS represents tetramethylorthosilicate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36b. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 

Summary and outlook
In this short review we have discussed recent progress in the fabrication of artificial nanostructured materials using genetically engineered proteins and protein assemblies as templates; in particular, the structural design over different length scales. Various types of proteins and protein assemblies, such as short peptides/proteins, protein assemblies, virus capsids, and bacterial flagella, have effectively been utilized as structural templates. As compared to traditional chemical and physical synthetic methodologies used for the synthesis of nanomaterials with simpler structure, the genetic flexibility and structural versatility of engineered proteins can be exploited for the rational design and assembly of materials with complicated architectures, specific functions, and tunable structures. However, because of the limited thermal stability of the biotemplates, the inorganic synthesis often has to be carried out under mild conditions, often at room temperature. As in nature, this can limit the choice of materials and the kinetics of reaction. Although there have been significant advances in developing protocols for the expression of selected binding onto various bio-entities for synthesis of single component materials, the field is still in its infancy. Much more work is needed in terms of genetic and materials design, understanding the growth mechanism, and developing synthetic routes for scale-up of the designed functional materials, in particular multi-component nanoarchitectures. Thus, future advances in the field will likely occur and can benefit from: (1) improved fundamental understanding of the protein-material interactions, (2) new methods for the synthesis of inorganic materials at low temperatures, (3) strategies for fabrication of multi-component and heterostructured nanoarchitectures, (4) construction of hierarchical materials systems with integrated functions at the nanoscale with molecular precision, and (5) design and exploration of practical application of the materials and systems. With future advances it is expected that the initial commercialization of the designed materials will be in the fields of energy (lithium ion battery, solar cells, and photocatalysis), biomedicine, and medical diagnostics.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Award No. DE-FG02-08ER46537.
References

  (a) S. Zhou, K. McIlwrath, G. Jackson and B. Eichhorn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1780 CrossRef ; 
  (b) K. Cheng, S. Peng, C. Xu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10637 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Xu, B. Wang and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4216 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S.-H. Choi, H. B. Na, Y. Park, K. An, S. G. Kwon, Y. Jang, M.-H. Park, J. Moon, J. S. Son, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15573 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. Ge, Y. Hu and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7428 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Y. Xia and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 351 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) C.-L. Sun, L.-C. Chen, M.-C. Su, L.-S. Hong, O. Chyan, C.-Y. Hsu, K.-H. Chen, T.-F. Change and L. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3749 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) Y. S. Nam, A. P. Magyar, D. Lee, J.-W. Kim, D. S. Yun, H. Park, T. S. Pollom, Jr, D. A. Weitz and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 340 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) S. N. Kim, Z. Kuang, J. M. Slocik, S. E. Jones, Y. Cui, B. L. Farmer, M. C. McAlpine and R. R. Naik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14480 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Martinu and D. Poitras, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2000, 18, 2619 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. K. Erhardt and R. G. Nuzzo, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2188 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. T. Ng, M. L. Foo, A. Fang, J. Li, G. Xu, S. Jaenicke, L. Chan and S. F. Y. Li, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. I. Martin, J. Nogues, K. Liu, J. L. Vicent and I. K. Schuller, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2003, 256, 449 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) I. W. Hamley, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 39 ; 
  (f) B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) Y. Li, H. Zhong, R. Li, Y. Zhou, C. Yang and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1705 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) N. Bao, L. Shen, Y.-H. A. Wang, J. Ma, D. Mazumdar and A. Gupta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12900 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) L. Shen, N. Bao, Y. Zheng, A. Gupta, T. An and K. Yanagisawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8809 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) K. R. Brown and M. J. Natan, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 726 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12663 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Takagaki, M. Sugisawa, D. Lu, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, K. Domen and S. Hayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5479 CrossRef ; 
  (c) N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 110 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) K. Ramanathan, M. A. Contreras, C. L. Perkins, S. Asher, F. S. Hasoon, J. Keane, D. Young, M. Romero, W. Metzger, R. Noufi, J. Ward and A. Duda, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2003, 11, 225 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) L. Murphy, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2006, 10, 177 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) S. Guo and S. Dong, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2009, 28, 96 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) R. Hanson and D. D. Awschalom, Nature, 2008, 453, 1043 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
Biomineralization, Progress in Biology, MolecularBiology, and Application, ed. E. Baeuerlein, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
Handbook of Biomineralization, Biological Aspects and Structure Formation, ed. E. Baeuerlein, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2007 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Söllner, M. Burghammer, E. Busch-Nentwich, J. Berger, H. Schwarz, C. Riekel and T. Nicolson, Science, 2003, 302, 282 CrossRef ; 
  (d) 
The Diatoms: Biology and Morphology of the Genera, ed. F. E. Round, R. M. Crawford and D. G. Mann, Cambridge University Press: New York,  1990 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) M. Sumper and N. Kröger, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2059 RSC ; 
  (f) M. Hildebrand, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 4855 CrossRef ; 
  (g) W. J. Crookes-Goodson, J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2403 RSC .

  (a) M. Sarikaya, C. Tamerler, A. K.-Y. Jen, K. Schulten and F. Baneyx, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 577 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Sanchez, H. Arribart and M. M. G. Guille, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 277 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Sharma, R. Chhabra, Y. Liu, Y. Ke and H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 730 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C.-L. Chen and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6902 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1674 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) T. Douglas and M. Young, Science, 2006, 312, 873 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Mao, D. J. Solis, B. D. Reiss, S. T. Kottmann, R. Y. Sweeney, A. Hayhurst, G. Georgiou, B. Iverson and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2004, 303, 213 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) R. Y. Sweeney, C. Mao, X. Gao, J. L. Burt, A. M. Belcher, G. Georgiou and B. L. Iverson, Chem. Biol., 2004, 11, 1553 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) T.-X. Fan, S.-K. Chow and D. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2009, 54, 542 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) V. Zorbas, A. L. Smith, H. Xie, A. Ortiz-Acevedo, A. B. Dalton, G. R. Dieckmann, R. K. Draper, R. H. Baughman and I. H. Musselman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12323 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) C. Mi, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Huang, L. Xu, S. Wang, X. Fang, J. Fang, C. Mao and S. Xu, J. Biotechnol., 2011, 153, 125 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) C. M. Soto and B. R. Ratna, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 426 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3454 RSC ; 
  (b) M. L. Flenniken, M. Uchida, L. O. Liepold, S. Kang, M. J. Young and T. Douglas, Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol., 2009, 327, 71 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Douglas and M. Young, Nature, 1998, 393, 152 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. W. Kim, S. H. Choi, P. T. Lillehei, S.-H. Chu, G. C. King and G. D. Watt, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4101 RSC ; 
  (e) E. Dujardin, C. Peet, G. Stubbs, J. N. Culver and S. Mann, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 413 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C.-L. Chen and N. L. Rosi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1924 CAS ; 
  (g) M. B. Dickerson, K. H. Sandhage and R. R. Naik, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 4935 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. E. Flynn, C. Mao, A. Hayhurst, J. L. Williams, G. Georgiou, B. Iverson and A. M. Belcher, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2414 RSC ; 
  (b) M. T. Klem, D. Willits, M. Young and T. Douglas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10806 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Mao, C. E. Flynn, A. Hayhurst, R. Sweeney, J. Qi, G. Georgiou, B. Iverson and A. M. Belcher, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 6946 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. Merzlyak and S.-W. Lee, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2006, 10, 246 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Tamerler and M. Sarikaya, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2009, 367, 1705 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) R. L. Koder, J. L. Ross Anderson, L. A. Solomon, K. S. Reddy, C. C. Moser and P. Leslie Dutton, Nature, 2009, 458, 305 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Wang, S. A. Lea and Y. Lin, ChemBioChem, 2006, 7, 1315 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. L. Flenniken, L. O. Liepold, B. E. Crowley, D. A. Willits, M. J. Young and T. Douglas, Chem. Commun., 2005, 447 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Uchida, M. L. Flenniken, M. Allen, D. A. Willits, B. E. Crowley, S. Brumfield, A. F. Willis, L. Jackiw, M. Jutila, M. J. Young and T. Douglas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16626 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Kumara, B. C. Tripp and S. Muralidharan, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2056 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. P. Smith and V. A. Petrenko, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 391 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. H. Hoess, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3205 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Sano and K. Shiba, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14234 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Heinz, B. L. Farmer, R. B. Pandey, J. M. Slocik, S. S. Patnaik, R. Pachter and R. R. Naik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9704 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Khoo, P. Hamilton, G. A. O'Toole, B. D. Snyder, D. J. Kenan and M. W. Grinstaff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10992 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. R. Whaley, D. S. English, E. L. Hu, P. F. Barbara and A. M. Belcher, Nature, 2000, 405, 665 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Li, G. P. Whyburn and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15998 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. Zhou, D. T. Schwartz and F. Baneyx, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4731 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C.-L. Chen, P. Zhang and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13555 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) I. A. Banerjee, L. Yu and H. Matsui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16002 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Flynn, S.-W. Lee, B. R. Peelle and A. M. Belcher, Acta Mater., 2003, 51, 5867 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Dai, W.-S. Choe, C. K. Thai, M. Sarikaya, B. A. Traxler, F. Baneyx and D. T. Schwartz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15637 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Douglas and M. Young, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 679 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Shenton, T. Douglas, M. Young, G. Stubbs and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 253 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Knez, A. M. Bittner, F. Boes, C. Wege, H. Jeske, E. Maiß and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1079 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Knez, M. Sumser, A. M. Bittner, C. Wege, H. Jeske, T. P. Martin and K. Kern, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 116 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S.-Y. Lee, J. Choi, E. Royston, D. B. Janes, J. N. Culver and M. T. Harris, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 974 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. T. Nam, D.-W. Kim, P. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Chiang, N. Meethong, P. T. Hammond, Y.-M. Chiang and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2006, 312, 885 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S.-W. Lee, C. Mao, C. E. Flynn and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2002, 296, 892 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Huang, C.-Y. Chiang, S. K. Lee, Y. Gao, E. L. Hu, J. De Yoreo and A. M. Belcher, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1429 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Dogic and S. Fraden, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 2417 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Dogic and S. Fraden, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7820 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Dogic and S. Fraden, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 11, 47 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S.-W. Lee, S.-K. Lee and A. M. Belcher, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 689 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S.-W. Lee, B. M. Wood and A. M. Belcher, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 1592 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S.-W. Lee and A. M. Belcher, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 387 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Vreuls, A. Genin, G. Zocchi, F. Boschini, R. Cloots, B. Gilbert, J. Martial and C. Van De Weerdt, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13841 RSC ; 
  (b) S.-Y. Ding, M. Jones, M. P. Tucker, J. M. Nedeljkovic, J. Wall, M. N. Simon, G. Rumbles and M. E. Himmel, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1581 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) L. S. Karfeld, S. R. Bull, N. E. Davis, T. J. Meade and A. E. Barron, Bioconjugate Chem., 2007, 18, 1697 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S. Varjonen, P. Laaksonen, A. Paananen, H. Valo, H. Hähl, T. Laaksonen and M. B. Linder, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 2402 RSC .
R. J. Tseng, C. Tsai, L. Ma, J. Ouang, C. S. Ozkan and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 72 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Nam, R. Wartena, P. J. Yoo, F. W. Liau, Y. J. Lee, Y.-M. Chiang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 17227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W.-J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2009, 324, 1051 CAS .
X. Dang, H. Yi, M.-H. Ham, J. Qi, D. S. Yun, R. Ladewski, M. S. Strano, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 377 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Mao, A. Liu and B. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6790 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. He, G. Abbineni, B. Cao and C. Mao, Small, 2010, 6, 2230 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Merzlyak, S. Indrakanti and S.-W. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 846 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S. Y. Yoo, W.-J. Chung, T. H. Kim, M. Le and S.-W. Lee, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 363 RSC ; 
  (e) J. Y. Mao, A. M. Belcher and K. J. Van Vliet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 209 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Q. Wang, T. Lin, J. E. Johnson and M. G. Finn, Chem. Biol., 2002, 9, 813 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Gillitzer, D. Willits, M. Young and T. Douglas, Chem. Commun., 2002,(20), 2390 RSC ; 
  (c) J. M. Hooker, E. W. Kovacs and M. B. Francis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3718 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. L. Flenniken, D. Willits, S. Brumfield, M. J. Young and T. Douglas, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1573 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. T. Klem, M. Young and T. Douglas, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3821 RSC ; 
  (b) C. Jolley, M. Klem, R. Harrington, J. Parise and T. Douglas, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1004 RSC ; 
  (c) T. Douglas, E. Strable, D. Willits, A. Aitouchen, M. Libera and M. Young, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 415 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H.-A. Hosein, D. R. Strongin, M. Allen and T. Douglas, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10283 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. T. Klem, D. A. Resnick, K. Gilmore, M. Young, Y. U. Idzerda and T. Douglas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 197 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Douglas and V. T. Stark, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 1828 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Kramer, C. Li, D. C. Carter, M. O. Stone and R. R. Naik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13282 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. A. Thuman-Commike, B. Greene, J. Jakana, B. V. Prasad, J. King, P. E. Prevelige and W. Chiu, J. Mol. Biol., 1996, 260, 85 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Kang, G. C. Lander, J. E. Johnson and P. E. Prevelige, ChemBioChem, 2008, 9, 514 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. C. Lander, L. Tang, S. R. Casjens, E. B. Gilcrease, P. Prevelige, A. Poliakov, C. S. Potter, B. Carragher and J. E. Johnson, Science, 2006, 312, 1791 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, N. Bao, P. E. Prevelige and A. Gupta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17354 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Naik, S. E. Jones, C. J. Murray, J. C. McAuliffe, R. A. Vaia and M. O. Stone, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 25 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reichhardt, M. Uchida, A. O'Neil, R. Li, P. E. Prevelige and T. Douglas, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6326 RSC .
R. A. McMillan, J. Howard, N. J. Zaluzec, H. K. Kagawa, R. Mogul, Y.-F. Li, C. D. Paavola and J. D. Trent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2800 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K.-I. Sano, S. Yoshii, I. Yamashita and K. Shiba, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3200 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K.-I. Sano, H. Sasaki and K. Shiba, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1717 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  TEM image of Cu2O nanoparticles synthesized and assembled on engineered TraI protein. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic structure of TMV with coat proteins (green) and RNA (red) used for the templating synthesis of nanotube composites of (a) iron oxide synthesized by oxidative hydrolysis of Fe2+ and Fe 3+ at pH = 9; (b) silica synthesized by sol–gel condensation using tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) reactant at pH = 2.5; (c) CdS nanocrystal assemblies synthesized by co-precipitation of Cd2+ in the presence of H2S at pH = 7; and (d) PbS nanocrystal assemblies synthesized by co-precipitation of Pb2+ in the presence of H2S at pH = 5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17b. Copyright 1999 WILEY-VCH, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic structures of filamentous bacteriaphage M13 and the genetically engineered version. The phage DNA is encased in a capsid consisting of four minor coat proteins (pIII, pIX, pVI, and pVII) located at one of the two distal ends of the phage and one major coat protein (pVIII), several thousand copies of which constitute the side wall of the phage. One, two, or three foreign peptides or proteins can be displayed on the surface of the phage by genetically manipulating the phage DNA. The foreign peptide or protein fused to the coat protein is highlighted in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26a. Copyright 2009 WILEY-VCH, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scheme for genetic engineering the M13 phage (termed type 8–3 phage). The genome of the engineered phage bears insertions both in Gene VIII and Gene III, which leads to motif expressions on pVIII and pIII proteins, respectively. Gene insertions and the correspondingly expressed motifs are highlighted in yellow and red. (b–f) TEM images of various nanoarchitectures templated by the engineered phage. Gold nanoparticles (∼5 nm) bind to pVIII proteins along the virus axis to form 1D array, while streptavidin binding motif on pIII protein simultaneously binds to streptavidin-coated nanoparticles. Arrows highlight the streptavidin-conjugated gold nanoparticles (∼15 nm) or CdSe quantum dots bound to pIII proteins. The insets show the assembly schemes of observed structures. White represents the M13 structure, yellow dots represent gold nanoparticles, the green dot represents a CdSe quantum dot, and red represents the streptavidin coating around gold or CdSe particles. (d, inset) The enlarged image of the CdSe quantum dot attached to the end of the virus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18c. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic structure of multifunctional M13 with the capsid protein pVIII and a minor protein pIII genetically engineered. The pVIII capsid protein of the virus is modified to serve as a template for a-FePO4 growth, and pIII protein is further engineered to have a binding affinity for single-walled carbon nanotubes. (b) Schematic diagram for fabricating high-power lithium-ion battery cathodes using the genetically engineered multifunctional viruses and a photograph of the battery used to power a green light-emitting diode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2009 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Three-dimensional surface representation of P22 procapsid viewed along a 3-fold axis. (b) TEM image of genetically engineered P22 coat protein assemblies (stained). (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of ordered nanocrystal assemblies over self-assembled genetically engineered P22 coat proteins. Step 1: assembly of P22 coat proteins (gray) genetically engineered with specific peptide (red). Step 2: protein-directed nucleation and growth of nanocrystals (yellow) on the protein assembly. (d and e) Sulfide nanocrystal assemblies grown on the self-assembled protein templates shown in Fig.6b. All scale bars represent 50 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the “biomimetic layer-by-layer assembly” process. (b) Elemental mapping of a cross section of synthesized composite containing stacked layers of iron oxide, cadmium selenide, and cobalt oxide filled chimeric proteins. TMOS represents tetramethylorthosilicate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36b. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
