Biomimetic hybrid membranes: incorporation of transport proteins/peptides into polymer supports  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8SM02513D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8SM02513D
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 2722-2736Biomimetic hybrid membranes: incorporation of transport proteins/peptides into polymer supports

        
          
            Anna 
            Puiggalí-Jou
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Luis J. 
            del Valle
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Carlos 
            Alemán
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartament d’Enginyeria Química, EEBE, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, C/Eduard Maristany, 10-14, Ed. I2, 08019, Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: anna.puiggali@upc.edu; carlos.aleman@upc.edu
bBarcelona Research Center for Multiscale Science and Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, C/Eduard Maristany, 10-14, Ed. C, 08019, Barcelona, Spain
Received 
      12th December 2018
    , Accepted 4th March 2019First published on 5th March 2019AbstractMolecular sensing, water purification and desalination, drug delivery, and DNA sequencing are some striking applications of biomimetic hybrid membranes. These devices take advantage of biomolecules, which have gained excellence in their specificity and efficiency during billions of years, and of artificial materials that load the purified biological molecules and provide technological properties, such as robustness, scalability, and suitable nanofeatures to confine the biomolecules. Recent methodological advances allow more precise control of polymer membranes that support the biomacromolecules, and are expected to improve the design of the next generation of membranes as well as their applicability. In the first section of this review we explain the biological relevance of membranes, membrane proteins, and the classification used for the latter. After this, we critically analyse the different approaches employed for the production of highly selective hybrid membranes, focusing on novel materials made of self-assembled block copolymers and nanostructured polymers. Finally, a summary of the advantages and disadvantages of the different methodologies is presented and the main characteristics of biomimetic hybrid membranes are highlighted.
Anna Puiggalí-Jou
Anna Puiggalí-Jou received her BSc degree in Biochemistry (2013) at the Universitat de Barcelona (UB) and her MSc degree in Biomedical Research (2014) at the Universitat Pompeu i Fabra (UPF). She presented her PhD in Biomedical Engineering at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) under the supervision of Prof. Carlos Aleman and Dr Luis Javier del Valle in March 2019. Her research focuses on the design of biointerfaces based on the combination of synthetic polymers and biomolecules.
Luis J. del Valle
Luis J. del Valle is Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering Department (EEBE Campus) at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC). His work focuses specifically on the development of new materials based on biodegradable polymers and their applications in biomedicine.
Carlos Alemán
Carlos Alemán received his BSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Barcelona (Spain). He then joined the Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC) and worked on computer simulations of polyamides, receiving a PhD degree in Chemistry in 1994. Since 2003, he has been the leader of the “Innovation in Materials and Molecular Engineering” (IMEM) group in the Chemical Engineering Department of UPC, where he is Full Professor of Physical Chemistry. Current research activities include experimental and computer simulation studies on organic polymers with applications in biomedicine and energy. He has co-authored around 550 scientific papers in peer refereed journals.
Introduction
An ambitious goal of today's synthetic biology, nanotechnology, and bioengineering is to build constructs analogous to natural systems for tuning and manipulating their complex physical and biological properties. Within this framework, protein-based nanomaterials offer countless potential for biophysical and nanobiomedical applications and serve as new tools for investigating essential biological questions.
In particular, membrane proteins (MPs) are important key regulators in many biological processes, such as ion transportation, generation of energy and transduction of signals across cell membranes.1 Besides, MPs constitute about one third of all protein coding genes and are the targets of a huge amount of pharmacological agents.2,3 Although knowledge about their structure and function is crucial for the proper interpretation of numerous biologically relevant phenomena, these investigations are often very difficult due to the great complexity of cell membranes. Therefore, there is a continuously growing interest in the development of model systems able to offer suitable platforms to address the above mentioned issues. The most popular models include proteoliposomes, lipid monolayers, and solid/supported lipid bilayers. Beyond the use of natural products, it is also possible to incorporate MPs into artificial materials, such as synthetic polymers, which can provide new properties (e.g. easiness of handling, robustness, and functionalization). Thus, the biological molecules can bring specificity and efficiency, while the robustness and the possibility of tailoring materials to improve the final functionality can be added by the synthetic polymer. As a result, a wide range of applications have been investigated, including, DNA sequencing,4 drug delivery,5 sensors,6 water desalination,7,8 and bioelectronics.9
Although in the last decade some general reviews on biomimetic membranes have been reported,1,10–13 in this work we offer a new perspective. More specifically, in this review we discuss recent developments and advancements from a processing point of view. Thus, the classification of the different approaches used to incorporate MPs onto artificial polymeric supports has been our primary focus, also giving special emphasis to the analysis of the achieved applications.
Membrane proteins (MPs)
The structure of biological membranes is mainly driven by the lipid bilayer, even though the majority of its particular functions are played by the proteins embedded in it.
Lipid bilayers allow facile and rapid diffusion of small non polar molecules such as O2 (2.3 × 101 cm s−1)14 and CO2 (3.7 × 10−1 cm s−1),15 and slower diffusion of small polar but not charged molecules like H2O (3.7 × 10−3 cm s−1),16 urea and glycerol (∼10−6 cm s−1).17 On the other hand, biological membranes are reluctant to allow the diffusion of charged molecules (ions) no matter how small they are, because of the charge and their elevated hydration level. For example, the permeability coefficient of Na+ and K+ is ∼10−14 cm s−1.18
Although lipids constitute a great part of the membrane of biological cells, the high efficiency of the latter for selectively transporting materials across the bilayers is due to the presence of MPs.
The numbers in the protein data bank (PDB) reveal that, in comparison with soluble proteins, the quantity of MP structures analysed is much lower. This feature can reflect the extra difficulties related to the purification and refolding process of MPs.19 The proteins of interest can rarely be purified from the original membrane because usually their concentrations are not enough.20 For that reason, MPs need to be overexpressed, which is performed in different host cells, purified, and refolded.
The proteins that are currently attracting considerable interest for preparing hybrid membranes due to their functions and easy overproduction are:
• Water channel MPs, known as aquaporins (Aq), are very attractive because of their high water transport rate and selectivity that can be used for water purification and desalination. The structure of Aq monomers consists of six transmembrane helices and two short helical segments (Fig. 1a), which surround the cytoplasmic and extracellular regions, connected by a narrow aqueous pore.21 When located in lipid membranes, Aq monomers associate to form tetramers, each monomer functioning independently. Nevertheless, a few unsolved questions still remain: is the protein capable of withstanding certain conditions (e.g. high salinity pressure)? and how can the size of the membranes be increased without any rupturing? In the last five-six years, this field of study has increased considerably.22–30
 Fig. 1  (a) Membrane topography of the Aq monomer (left) and the crystal structure (side view, left; top view, right) with four water molecules (red balls) shown in the aqueous pore region. Helices are labelled as H1–H8. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. (b) Strand-sequencing using ionic current blockage. A typical trace of the ionic current amplitude (left) through an α-HL pore clearly differentiates between an open pore (top right) and one blocked by a strand of DNA (bottom right) but cannot distinguish between the ∼12 nucleotides that simultaneously block the narrow transmembrane channel domain (red brackets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. (c) Top view of the gA channel as a space-filling model (color code: white, carbon atoms; blue, nitrogen atoms; red, oxygen atoms) using coordinates from PDB 1MAG. It should be noted how the alternating L–D arrangement allows all amino acid side chains to project outward from the channel lumen and the channel lumen is lined by the peptide backbone. (d) Axial and equatorial views of crystallized OmpF, a representative MP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. 
• α-Hemolysin (α-HL) is a protein found in the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus bacterium, which is secreted by most strains and acts as a toxin producing haemolysis. However, in the field of nanotechnology, recently, it has been reported as a useful component for sensors since it allows the facile translocation of single stranded DNA unravelling its coiled structure. When molecules pass through the nanopore they block it reducing the ionic current and each nucleotide provokes a particular reduction.31,32 This porin is very stable and its functionality prevails at temperatures close to 100 °C.33 Because the interior diameter is similar to the diameter of a single nucleic acid strand, the current of ions through the nanopore is partially blocked when the translocation occurs (Fig. 1b). More specifically, as each nucleotide produces a different reduction in the ionic current,34 the incorporation of α-HL into artificial polymer membranes could be employed to detect DNA sequences through this signal.35
• Gramicidin (gA), a hydrophobic pentadecapeptide with a length of 22 Å (Fig. 1c),36–38 organizes in an ion channel that is specific for monovalent cations. This biomolecule has been extensively used as a model to study the organization and function of channel-containing membranes.38
• Outer membrane proteins (OMPs) are typically employed for the fabrication of hybrid biomimetic membranes. The outer membrane is a protecting barrier of Gram-negative bacteria. Unlike the MPs located at other systems, the structure of OMPs does not contain α-helices but instead anti-parallel β-barrels (Fig. 1d).39 OMPs allow the unspecific passive diffusion of ions and molecules across the membrane. The driving-force is the concentration gradient, whereas the limitation lies in the molecular size since the diffused species needs to be smaller than the pore.
Incorporation onto polymeric substrates
Within the field of biomimetic membranes there are a wide range of strategies and materials studied until now. The modification of artificial membranes with functional molecules within their pores or onto their surfaces, as well as the preparation of artificial channels embedded into block copolymers or lipid bilayers, has already been extensively reviewed by other researchers.10 Here, we focus on the group that involves the complete incorporation of proteins into hybrid polymeric systems. Thus, our main objective is to illustrate the synthetic processes and the materials used for the development of biomimetic hybrid membranes. Table 1 summarizes the different approaches employed until now that, from the perspective of the employed materials, have been categorized as those based on the utilization of amphiphilic copolymers and nanostructured polymers.
Table 1 Summary of the most important characteristics (i.e. the preparation method, polymer, protein and activity) of biomimetic membranes made of polymers




Type
Support
Polymer
Protein
Functionality
Permeability
Ref.




Free-standing
—
PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA
OmpF and maltoporin
Electrophysiological studies

σ increment of 6 nS (OmpF) and 4 nS (maltoporin)

60



—
PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA
OmpG and Alamethicin
Electrophysiological studies

σ = 0.72 ± 0.06 nS (OmpG) and σ = 0.3, 1.1, 2.22 and 3.34 nS (alamethicin)

61



Air–water interface
PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA
OmpF
Mechanical studies
Shorter copolymer chains possess enhanced biomimicry of natural lipid-based membranes

62



Solid supported
Au
PB-PEO-OH and PB-PEO-LA
Polymyxin B
Peptide effect on the membrane resistance
Reduction of the resistance from 4.4 to 1.2 MΩ cm2

66



SiO2 wafers, glass and Au
PDMS-b-PMOXA with amino-linkers
MloK1
Ion flow

σ = 39.5 ± 7.5 nS

67



Au
Functionalized PB-PEO
αHL
Ion flow

σ = 31 ns

35



Porous solid support-polymersome spanning
PCTE
PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA
AqpZ
Water purification
Maximum water flux 16.4 ± 1.5 L m−2 h−1 (LMH) with a salt rejection of 98.8%

22



Commercially available CA with pores
PMOXA-b-PDMS–PMOXA
AqpZ
Water purification
Maximum water flux 34.19 ± 6.90 LMH/bar with a 200 ppm NaCl salt rejection of 32.86 ± 9.12%

69



Porous alumina
functionalized PMOXA-PDMS-PMOXA
AqpZ
Water nanofiltration
Maximum water flux of 8 LMH/bar with a salt rejection of 45.1 ± 4.2%

27



Tefzel ethylene tetrafluoroethylene (ETFE)
PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA
gA
Electrophysiological studies
gA is inserted and is functional

68



Porous solid support-polymersome intrusion
Au-coated PCTE
PMOXA-PDMS-PMOXA functionalized with end groups
AqpZ
Seawater desalination and water reuse
Water flux 17.6 LMH with a high salt rejection 91.8%

29



CA membrane with pore size of ∼25 nm and functionalized surface
PMOXA-PDMS-PMOXA
AqpZ
Nanofiltration or forward osmosis
5.58 ± 0.97 LMH with a salt rejection of 50.7%

30



Immobilized polymersome
Glass surfaces chemically modified with amino groups
PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA
GlpF
Selective detection of sugar alcohols
The lowest concentration of ribitol detected was 200 nM

72



Glass slide with BSA-biotin–streptavidin–biotin-nanoreactor link
PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA
OmpF
Nanoreactors for studying model enzymatic reactions
The Km value of the enzyme entrapped on the immobilized polymersome was 46 mM

58



Protein confinement in the porous insulating polymer
The PET film tuned by the atomic layer deposition of Al2O3/ZnO
PET
gA
Study of protein selectivity to ions
Conductance is one order of magnitude bigger when gA is inserted. Cl− permeability is higher than Na+

76



Free-standing
PCTE covered with PVP
gA
Study of protein selectivity to ions
No significant ion selectivity is observed between the mono and divalent cations

73



Free-standing
PCTE covered with PVP and treated with ethanol
gA
Study of protein selectivity to ions
Enhanced conductivity of K+vs. Na+

75



Free-standing/ITO
PLA with nanoperforations
Omp2a
Study of protein selectivity to ions
Enhanced conductivity of K+vs. Na+

81



Solid membrane conducting polymers
CP film supported onto steel
PPy
Omp2a
Study of protein selectivity to ions
Enhanced conductivity of K+vs. Na+

80





Amphiphilic copolymers
This is the most extensive kind of material employed for manufacturing biomimetic hybrid membranes. Amphiphilic block copolymers can act as artificial building blocks for the generation of membranes capable of incorporating proteins, as do the lipid bilayers. However, the former presents other important advantages, such as long-term mechanical stability, tailorable structural parameters and versatile chemical functionality. In dilute aqueous solution, they self-assemble by hydrophobic driving forces, forming different morphologies, such as spheres, cylinders or lamellas.40 Amphiphilic copolymers are mostly prepared as diblock copolymers with one hydrophobic and one hydrophilic block or as triblock copolymers with two hydrophilic blocks separated by one hydrophobic block, the latter being usually named as ABA block copolymers. Although membranes made of amphiphilic copolymers present high mechanical and chemical stability, low water and gas permeability, and customizable properties (e.g. a wide range of membrane thickness), they exhibit some drawbacks with regard to lipid membranes: lower dynamics/fluidity of the bilayer, higher thickness, and lower flexibility. Overall, amphiphilic copolymers hold great potential over lipids as building blocks.35,41–45
A large variety of amphiphilic copolymers have been designed using different monomers and applying diverse synthetic techniques,45 such as anionic46 and cationic polymerizations,47 controlled radical polymerization,48,49 ring-opening polymerization,50 and “click” chemistry.51,52 Furthermore, advanced individual properties can be added to the building blocks, such as for example the regulation of hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of the blocks, block lengths and length ratios, the functionalization of the polymer blocks,53 the addition of stimuli-responsive polymer blocks,54,55 and the use of biodegradable polymers.56 Two of the most interesting modifications reported in the literature are based on the addition of: (i) methacrylate units to stabilize the membrane by cross-linking;57 and (ii) dyes for imaging.58
In order to mimic cell membranes, block copolymers can be used without any support (free-standing or self-supported), spread and non-covalently or covalently tethered onto solid supports, spread onto porous solid supports, and bound as polymer vesicles onto a 2D surface.
Free-standing block copolymers
One of the most straightforward methodologies to study the transport across a membrane is having it as a separator of two media and to investigate the exchange of solute and ion concentrations between them. The experimental set-up required for such studies typically includes free-standing membranes. Although a number of studies have been reported, these are mainly based on free-standing lipid bilayers while only a few of them involve block copolymers. This has been attributed to their lower lateral tension, which could lead to rapid membrane rupture.59 In an early study, artificial and stable giant free-standing monomolecular films of functionalized poly(2-methyloxazoline)-block-poly(dimethylsiloxane)-block-poly(2-methyloxazoline) triblock copolymer, named PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA, were prepared for the first time.43 These copolymer films, which exhibited areas of up to about 1 mm2 and a thickness of 10 nm, were post-polymerized by UV light using the methacrylate groups found at both chain ends. The reconstitution of a porin in the preformed layer was achieved by adding a certain amount of the protein to each side of the chamber and, in particular, the incorporation was favoured by applying a potential of 20 mV across the membrane. Despite the high thickness of the polymer membrane compared to lipid ones, the protein was successfully incorporated, leading to an enhancement in the conductance across the layer.60
More recently, Wong et al.61 used PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA copolymers to compare the voltage gating ability and threshold voltages of OmpG and alamethicin embedded in lipid bilayers and polymer membranes, which were used to separate two solutions. The molecular properties of the protein (i.e. conductance, voltage gating and mobility) were similar for polymer- and lipid-based systems.61 Ho et al.62 studied the effect of the length of PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA on protein insertion at the air/water interface. Wilhelmy surface pressure measurements (mN m−1) revealed greater OmpF insertion for shorter copolymer chains, which was attributed to their enhanced biomimicry of natural lipid-based membranes.62
Block copolymers immobilized onto solid supports
Obviously, the use of solid supports for membrane immobilization provides mechanical stability at the air/water interface and even in the dry state monolayers and or free-standing membranes.63 The easiest procedure to obtain synthetic solid-supported membranes is the fusion and spreading of polymersomes onto the support (i.e. gold or glass surfaces). Moreover, in order to attain stronger fixation it is interesting to promote the chemical bond formation between reactive groups on the surface and reactive end groups of the polymer, or by physisorption of block copolymers with ‘sticky’ segments.64 Furthermore, increasing functional group density on the substrate could lead to high area coverage.
Dorn et al.65 formed polymersomes with poly(butadiene)-b-poly(ethylene oxide), PB-PEO, which were subsequently spread into glass and gold substrates. For the chemical immobilization onto the gold surface, PB-PEO was functionalized with sulfur-containing lipoic acid (LA), which binds properly to the gold surface (Fig. 2a). Covalently bound layers were further incubated with polymyxin B, a peptide able to disrupt lipid membranes.66 The resistance of the membranes without and with the peptide, as determined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), was 4.4 and 1.2 MΩ cm2, respectively, evidencing that the peptide was successfully embedded. Nevertheless, after 7 hours the resistance increased again due to the loss of the peptide.67
 Fig. 2  (a) Lipoic acid (LA)-functionalized PB-PEO vesicles spread onto a bare gold surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. (b) PB-PEO-OH and PB-PEO-LA were transferred onto gold substrates by applying consecutively the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) and Langmuir–Schaefer (LS) techniques to form a polymer tethered bilayer (left), where the protein was inserted (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. 
In comparison to the previous example, Zhang et al.35 combined two methodologies to obtain a defect-free layer onto a gold substrate. More specifically, Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) and Langmuir–Schaefer (LS) deposition techniques were applied using different terminated polymers: LA functionalized linear PB-PEO (PB-PEO-LA) and hydroxyl-functionalized linear PB-PEO (PB-PEO-OH), respectively (Fig. 2b). Both techniques enabled strict control of the layer density by regulating the surface pressure of the molecular assembly. Moreover, the combination of both methods led to the achievement of large-area, homogeneous, defect-free layers, which were closer to cell membranes. Again, the protein was added after the layer formation and was monitored by measuring the conductance through the PB-PEO layer before and after the addition of α-haemolysin (αHL), at a voltage of 40 mV. A significant increase in conductance was observed after 20 min of protein addition.
The same two-step methodology was employed by Kowal et al.67 to generate defect-free layers on solid supports. In this case the PDMS-b-PMOXA di-block copolymer with aldehyde ending groups was used to promote the covalent attachment of the polymer membrane by the formation of an imine bond with an amino modified gold substrate. More specifically, these authors studied the effectiveness of bio-beads (BBs) (i.e. non-polar polystyrene adsorbent materials) as facilitators of protein incorporation (Fig. 3a). Their high surface adsorbing area for organic molecules with a MW lower than 2000 KDa allows the proper removal of the detergent used for protein solubilization, thus promoting the incorporation of the protein onto the polymeric bilayer due to its hydrophobicity. Changes in the conductance of gold substrates were recorded to examine the effects associated with the attachment of the polymer layer and the incorporation of the protein and bio-beads. Results showed an increase in the substrate conductance when the protein was incubated with bio-beads, whereas no significant increase was found when the protein was incubated without bio-beads, demonstrating that the latter is necessary to incorporate the protein (Fig. 3b). Thus, bio-beads act as a driving force for the insertion of MPs into polymer membranes attached to solid substrates.
 Fig. 3  (a) Representation of MP insertion by using Bio-Beads (BBs) into solid-supported polymer membranes. (b) Conductance measured at a voltage of 40 mV is applied on bare Au, the bilayer, the bilayer with the protein incorporated using Bio-Beads (bilayer + MloK1 + BB), the bilayer with the protein (bilayer + MloK1), and the bilayer with the Bio-Beads (bilayer + BB). Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. 
Block copolymers suspended onto porous solid supports
Due to the low stability and difficulty in handling free-standing copolymer membranes and due to the limitations presented by solid supported layers, the field evolved towards copolymer films suspended onto porous solid membranes. In this approach, some zones of the membrane are still free-standing, allowing molecular diffusion without any disturbance.
In a pioneering study, González-Pérez et al.68 obtained stable triblock copolymer membranes using scaffolds containing 64 apertures of 300 μm diameter each. The membranes showed high stability, which was evidenced by a long life-time when high polymer concentrations were used (i.e. it was stable for several days). In order to incorporate ion channels, GA was reconstituted on these membranes and assembled into dimeric channels.
More recently, Wang et al.22 presented a new strategy to produce planar pore-spanning biomimetic membranes using proteopolymersomes made of PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA and aquaporin Z (AqpZ) (Fig. 4a). Poly(carbonate) tracked-etched (PCTE) membranes with average pore sizes of 50, 100 or 400 nm were modified using a thin gold layer (60 nm thickness). Then, cysteamine was deposited through chemisorption over the gold surface and the amine residues were transformed into acrylate residues via conjugation of acrylic acid (Fig. 4b). Proteopolymersomes were spanned over the surface (Fig. 4c) and covalent-conjugation-driven vesicle rupture occurred (Fig. 4d). Although all the substrates were covered by adapting the pressure to the pore size, membranes with 50 nm pores had much fewer defects compared to the supports with bigger pores.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the pore-spanning membrane on the PCTE: design and synthesis. (a) Incorporation of AqpZ in PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA (ABA copolymer) vesicles. (b) Surface modification of the PCTE membrane support in a two-step process: (i) coating with a monolayer of cysteamine through chemisorption; and (ii) the primary amine is converted to acrylate residues via conjugating with acrylic acid. (c) Pressure-assisted vesicle adsorption on the PCTE support. (d) Covalent-conjugation-driven vesicle rupture and pore-spanning membrane formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. 
Duong et al.27 spanned polymersomes over porous alumina substrates of different pore diameters, 55 and 100 nm, covered with gold. Substrates with resulting pores of 100 nm were uncovered by the membrane film because the spacing was too large, which supported the findings of Wang et al.22 However, the authors successfully deposited AqpZ-containing proteopolymersomes onto alumina with pores of 55 nm, preserving the natural functionality of the protein (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (a–c) and atomic force microscopy images (d–f) of the gold coated alumina substrate (a and d), the substrate covered with the polymer membrane (b and e), and the substrate covered with the AqpZ-incorporated polymer membrane (c and f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. 
Following this approach but using new materials, planar biomimetic membranes composed of AqpZ embedded into PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA layers were fabricated upon a cellulose acetate (CA) substrate functionalized with methacrylate end groups.69 Proteopolymersomes were spanned over the CA surface and photocross-linked using UV radiation. The resulting bioinspired device consisted of a selective layer upon the substrate for nano-filtration (Fig. 6). Although this technique presents advantages over the previous ones, it still shows many limitations, such as poor area coverage, membrane defects and difficult scalability to support industrial applications. A similar but at the same time different strategy consists of depositing undisrupted proteopolymerosomes onto the porous substrate. Hence, solutes need to cross the whole vesicle and then go through the substrate pore.
 Fig. 6  Field-emission scanning electron microscopy of (a) CA, (b) silanized CA, and (c) AqpZ-containing PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA triblock copolymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. 
Wang et al.29 constructed a new design based on a PCTE membrane (pore size: 50 nm and porosity: 20%) coated with a 50 nm gold layer by vapour deposition. Then, UV cross-linked vesicles were dropped onto the PCTE surface under vacuum conditions. This allowed a certain pressure to be exerted, facilitating the intrusion of the vesicles. The bare gold surface, which was not occupied by protein containing polymersomes, was further functionalized with a self-assembled monolayer of cysteamine. Later on, vesicles were immobilized on the membrane through an optimized layer-by-layer polydopamine (PDA)–histidine (His) coating process (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Schemes of AqpZ-embedded vesicular membranes at the top: (a) AqpZ reconstitution into the vesicles formed from ABA block copolymer blends. DDM stands for dodecyl-b-D-maltoside, a detergent for protein stabilization; (b) immobilization of the vesicles onto the substrate by pressure; (c) addition of the self-assembled monolayer of cysteamine; and (d) PDA-His coating on top of the membrane. (e–h) Field-emission scanning electron microscopy micrographs at the bottom: (e) gold-coated PCTE membrane with a self-assembled monolayer of cysteamine (a pore size of 50 nm); (f) PCTE membrane with 3-cycle coating of PDA–His on top of chemisorbed cysteamine (control); and (g) vesicles immobilized on the PCTE membrane with 3-cycle coating of PDA–His on top. The micrograph displayed in (h) corresponds to a zoomed-in view of (g). Adapted with permission from ref. 29. 
A similar methodology but using CA with an average pore size of approximately 25 nm as a solid support was reported by Xie et al.30 The UV-crosslinked Aqpz-polymer vesicles were covalently immobilized onto the CA membrane through an amidation reaction between the amino groups on the CA membrane surface and the carboxyl groups on the vesicle surface. Finally, a dense hydrophobic polymer layer was generated by in situ “surface imprinting” polymerization (Fig. 8). This innovative membrane, which presented pores smaller than the perforated PCTE membrane,29 exhibited good and controlled selectivity together with high mechanical strength and stability during nanofiltration.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the Aqpz-vesicle imprinted membrane preparation: (1) Aqpz-polymer vesicles, (2) porous CA membrane substrate, (3) Aqpz vesicles immobilized on the porous membrane, (4) the Aqpz-vesicle-imprinted membrane, and (5) the cross-section of the Aqpz-vesicle-imprinted membrane. (b–g) Field-emission scanning electron microscopy micrographs displaying the membrane morphologies: (b and c) top surface and cross-section of the porous substrate CA membrane; (d and e) non-vesicle-imprinted membrane; and (f and g) Aqpz-vesicle-imprinted membrane. Adapted with permission from ref. 30. 
Proteopolymersomes covalently bound to a solid support
The last methodology reviewed in this section is the covalent attachment of proteopolymersomes onto a solid surface, which has also been previously employed for lipids.70 In order to obtain nanoreactors that could carry out conversions at a precise location for sensor development, Grzelakowski et al.58 applied this approach using block copolymers. For this purpose, an acid phosphatase was encapsulated and the intrusion of the substrate inside the vesicle was provided by the reconstitution of OmpF onto the polymersome membrane. The resulting proteopolymersomes were immobilized onto the substrate (i.e. glass) by employing the receptor–ligand pair, biotin– streptavidin.71 The de-phosphorylation of the fluorogenic substrate ELFTM 97 by acid phosphatase was monitored. It was observed that the reaction did not occur when OmpF was not reconstituted, confirming the importance of the protein for the diffusion of certain molecules across the membrane.
More recently, Zhang et al.72 developed “active surfaces” for selective biosensing of sugar alcohols with time and space precision (Fig. 9). This bioactive platform was based on the immobilization of nanoreactors with specific MPs inserted in their membranes and sugar alcohol sensitive enzymes encapsulated in their cavities. Interestingly, the artificial surrounding within such a copolymer membrane and the high membrane thickness did not affect the functionality of the reconstituted glycerol facilitator (GlpF), which allowed the selective flux of sugar alcohols into the inner cavity of the polymer nanoreactors where the encapsulated enzymes acted as biosensing entities. An advantage of encapsulating the enzymes inside polymersomes was their protection from a potentially harmful environment, while retaining their catalytic activity. Thus, this smart approach prolonged the life-time of the enzymatic biosensor. The selective permeability of such interesting protein–polymer nanoreactors offers the opportunity of monitoring the concentration of biologically relevant sugar alcohols since GlpF is able to conduct other sugar alcohols.
 Fig. 9  (a) GlpF molecular representation (green) together with ribitol, as a model sugar alcohol (red). Side (right) and front (left) views are represented. (b) Schematic representation of a functionalized surface serving as a sugar alcohol biosensor based on immobilized proteopolymersome nanoreactors with selective transport due to the GlpF presence and detection of sugar alcohols due to the encapsulated enzymes. Adapted with permission from ref. 72. 
Nanostructured polymers
Researchers have focused on amphiphilic polymers for mimicking biological membranes. However, an inconvenience of amphiphilic polymer membranes is that, although the system turns out to be more stable than biological membranes, it is not strong enough to endure many practical applications.73 In this section we discuss the use of confined biological ion channels prepared by incorporating proteins into pores of nanostructured polymers. A common methodology to control the pore size is the track-etch technique.74 More specifically, polymer membranes are perforated when heavy ions go through the film and create damage zones on the latent track. Then, these can be converted into a pore by employing the right solution. The size and shape of the pore are regulated by varying the chemical etching conditions (e.g. time, temperature and solution concentration).
Balme et al.73,75 developed hybrid nanoporous membranes handling commercial track-etched poly(carbonate) (PC) films of 5 μm thickness covered with poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP). The resulting nanopores, which exhibited a diameter of 15 nm, were filled with gA. Protein confinement was facilitated by the hydrophobicity of the inner parts of the membrane. Later on, the ion flux passing through the resulting hybrid membrane was evaluated by placing it between two compartments filled with a given electrolyte and pure water, respectively. Although results on the selectivity of the protein were unclear, ion diffusion was significantly higher when the protein was loaded inside the nanopores of the membrane.
The effect of the pore size was studied in a more complex system in which nanostructured polymer membranes were obtained by track etching poly(ethyleneterephthalate) (PET) films. This was followed by the deposition of a multilayer of aluminium oxide/zinc oxide to decrease the initial diameter of the pores from 36 nm to 10.6, 5.7 and 2 nm on demand (Fig. 10).76 Results evidenced that the relative contribution of the ion transport using gA increases with decreasing pore diameter. However, this effect was accompanied by a loss of specificity due to the disassembling of the head–head dimer structure.
 Fig. 10  Procedure scheme for the fabrication of nanoperforated membranes, the modification of the nanopore size by atomic layer deposition (ALD), the creation of hydrophobic pore surfaces by vapour exposure treatment with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), and the immobilization of gA. Adapted with permission from ref. 76. 
In this context, an interesting OMP, named Omp2a,77–79 was embedded in a supported poly(N-methylpyrrole) (PNMPy) membrane.80Fig. 11a illustrates how the incorporation of the protein caused significant changes in the surface morphology of PNMPy. Thus, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs of PNMPy–Omp2a present elements of both submicrometric and micrometric dimensions with a very homogeneous and smooth texture, whereas the nodular outcrops typically found in PNMPy films (Fig. 11b) are not detected. These features, which reflected the presence of the protein, were correlated with EIS measurements. It was observed that Omp2a promotes preferentially the passive transport of K+ with respect to Na+ in solutions with relatively high ionic concentrations. Nevertheless, the PNMPy membrane was electrochemically synthesized onto the electrode (i.e. stainless steel), which represented a disadvantage for possible future applications because the membrane cannot be detached from the electrode due to its high fragility.
 Fig. 11  Surface morphology of (a) PNMPy–Omp2a, (b) PNMPy and (c) nanoperforated PLA membranes: low- and high-magnification SEM micrographs are displayed at the left and the right, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 80 and 81. (d) 3D AFM phase images of the skin surfaces of nanoperforated PLA nanomembranes before (left) and after (right) incubation with a 0.5 mg mL−1 Omp2a solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. 
More recently, instead of using conducting polymers as the support for the protein, nanoperforated biodegradable poly(lactic acid) (PLA) nanomembranes were used.81 These membranes, which were self-standing, were prepared by spin-coating a mixture of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and PLA, which are immiscible polymers. Nanoperforations with a diameter of 51 ± 22 nm resulted from the combination of nanophase segregation processes and selective solvent etching (Fig. 11c).82 In order to confine the protein into the nanopores, these membranes were incubated in protein solutions and, subsequently, washed many times. Contrast 3D AFM height images painted with phase skin surfaces of samples before and after incubation confirmed the presence of adsorbed oval protein aggregates around and inside the nanopores (Fig. 11d). Specifically, the phase channel allowed the differentiation of Omp2a domains (i.e. dark purple aggregates with an average diameter of 27 ± 5 nm) from the PLA substrate (coloured in green) that they are adsorbed onto. Moreover, EIS assays showed an increase in conductivity and selectivity against some ions when the protein was confined onto the nanopores.81
The thermomechanical properties of this OMP were also characterized by immobilizing it on microcantilevers.83 It was found that heat promotes local orientation of the immobilized biomolecules. Thus, appropriate thermal treatments could be employed to enhance the selective ion transport of the substrate since more proteins would be correctly oriented with the required thermal treatment. More interestingly, its functionality onto lipid bilayers, which represents an environment closer to the one under biological conditions, has also been characterized.84 The resistance of 40 w/w lipid-to-protein ratio supported lipid bilayers (1.5 kΩ cm2) was found to be similar to that of nanoperforated Omp2a-filled PLA membranes81 (1.9 kΩ cm2) and higher than that of PPy-Omp2a80 (243 Ω cm2). As it was expected, the resistance of all systems decreased when the protein was incorporated, this effect being more pronounced for KCl electrolytic solutions. Besides, the resistance variation and the selective ion diffusion unambiguously evidenced the successful incorporation of bioactive porin.
Recent applications of hybrid membranes
Water purification is the greatest and most advanced application associated with biomimetic membranes, AqpZ being the broadest investigated protein for such function due to its high stability, large water permeability and selectivity. However, the use of amphiphilic bilayers can obscure its selectivity because of the macroscopic defects within the layers producing low salt rejections between 20 and 60%.85 Ongoing membranes consist of thin-film composites made of polyamides with a salt rejection of 99.85% salt and with a water permeability of 1–3 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 (LMH/bar) in reverse osmosis. If we compare these values to the hybrid membranes described in this review, used in forward osmosis, it is possible to observe that they have higher water flux (from 5.5 to 17.6 LMH or 8 to 34 LMH/bar) but less salt rejection (from 34 to 98.8%).22,27,29,30,69 Therefore, there is still space for improvements. Of utmost relevance is to attain higher rejection of boron and chloride reducing the number of times that actual membranes need to be used. More demanding is to upgrade hydrophobic molecule rejection. This includes many organic micropollutants which can rapidly go through the biomimetic layer. In order to overcome this issue Werber et al. proposed to form biomimetic selective layers on top of the typical employed membrane for reverse osmosis.86 Therefore, this composite would benefit from the advantages of each component leading to membranes with acute ion rejection without losing the removal of hydrophobic neutral micropollutants. One pending issue associated with the newly generated biomimetic membranes is their long term performance, stability and reusability.
Another new and original application to harvest solar energy for direct electrical power, sensing, or chemical production is the use of photosynthetic proteins.87 Photosystem I has been immobilized in a layer composed of poly(butadiene)12-poly(ethylene oxide)8 (PB12-PEO8). In order to connect these membranes with the electrodes, conjugated oligoelectrolytes were intercalated within the PB12-PEO8 layer.
Single molecule detection also offers great potential because of the channels’ intrinsic characteristics. Since when a molecule is translocated it disturbs the ionic current through the channels, this leads to a unique fingerprint for facile detection.
Conclusions and outlook
Biological membranes are complex systems with many molecules exhibiting crucial interactions, which allow communication between different compartments or directly permit cell–cell contacts. The study of these events is complicated and, therefore, artificial model membranes play an important role in unravelling the chemical and physical characteristics of the embedded proteins together with their functionality.
In early studies, phospholipid bilayers deposited onto solid substrates (so-called solid-supported membranes) were commonly used as experimental cell-surface models to gain insight into immune reactions and cell adhesion.88–95 Eventually, mimicking properties of biological elements to prepare functional hybrid materials based on polymers started to be an attractive alternative to the use of lipid bilayers. Polymer membranes under a variety of conditions (i.e. free standing films, solid-supported membranes, membranes spanned over porous supports, and proteopolymersomes embedded onto porous substrates) were used to insert membrane proteins not only for understanding their biofunctionality in synthetic templates but also for developing active surfaces for translational applications, such as water purification, molecule biosensing, DNA sequencing, and ion transport.
In this context, block copolymers have frequently been used to prepare bilayers supported on a material surface. Such block copolymer-based supramolecular assemblies exhibit many interesting properties, such as for example stability, robustness, and tunability. However, many of the proteins employed for basic biophysical studies or for sensor applications are known to protrude from the bilayer. These protruded parts may give rise to strong interactions with the substrate, leading to a partial loss of functionality or even to a complete denaturation.96 For that reason, different attempts have been made to maintain the distance between the substrate and the proteins, such as the use of nanoperforations on suspended bilayers, the addition of polymer cushions, or the study of proteopolymersomes covalently linked to a solid support. A summary of the advantages and drawbacks of each system is depicted in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the advantages and disadvantages encountered during the preparation and application of the different types of biomimetic membranes made of polymers




Technique
Sub-technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Amphiphilic polymers/block copolymers
Free standing
No influence of the substrate. Direct measure.
Low stability. No more than 1 mm2 in area. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications

60–62



Solid supported
Increased stability. Easy to measure the influence of the protein if the substrate is a conductive material.
Interactions with the substrate can induce the denaturation of the protein. Poor area coverage. Membrane defects. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.

35, 65 and 67



Porous solid support-polymersome spanning
The protein is not in direct contact with the substrate. There is more than enough space for the solutes to cross the membrane.
The porous substrate normally needs a pre-treatment to facilitate proteopolymersome spanning. Poor area coverage. Membrane defects. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.

22, 27, 68 and 69



Porous solid support-polymersome intrusion
Easier to cover all the perforations. The protein is not in direct contact with the substrate. The final material is more selective and sensible since the electrolyte needs to cross the membrane two times.
Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.

29 and 30



Polymersomes covalently linked to the surface
The proteopolymersomes are covalently linked to the substrate, providing stability.
Indirect measurement. Need to encapsulate enzymes inside the proteopolymersomes.

58 and 72



Nanostructured solid-state membrane
Insulating polymers
The scalability is higher. There are commercial membranes that can be used. The stability is higher and can be employed for actual applications
Fine tune on the pore size realized on the membrane is needed. Difficult to control the correct deposition of the membrane protein on the pore.

73, 75, 76 and 81



Conducting polymers
The polymerization can take place at the same time that the protein is embedded applying low voltages.
Influence of the polymer on the electrical measurements. High roughness and thickness which makes the protein localization on the membrane difficult. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.

80





The approach based on the confinement of the protein on nanostructured polymers is particularly interesting. Polymeric membranes with nanopores and nanoperforation can be prepared by track-etching and by phase segregation, the latter offering better outlook for practical use. However, huge challenges still lie ahead both in terms of “on demand” inducing properties whilst the architecture of the membrane is preserved and in terms of multi-functionality, which can be reached by inserting different MPs or by inserting the MPs at specific locations.
It is worth mentioning that in terms of applicability, it is difficult to scale-up the production of these membranes because above all the production and folding of ion-channels are time consuming and expensive. However, over more than three decades the production of synthetic ion channels has been growing. Nowadays, there are many approaches based on chemical synthesis and supramolecular assembly to biomimick macromolecules.97,98 For example, chloride selective channels were prepared via directional assembly of electron-deficient iodine atoms, which create a transmembrane pathway for facilitating anion transport,99 potassium ion channels by means of aromatic stacking of helical oligomers,100 or even artificial channels sensitive to external stimuli.101
Overall, the integration of biological and synthetic materials is still a promising area of research that awaits further developments. There are many different proteins with useful and accurate functions that upon incorporation into stable polymer membranes could proportionate many unique and beneficial applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge MINECO/FEDER (MAT2015-69367-R) and the Agència de Gestió d'Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca (2017SGR359). Support for the research of C. A. was received through the prize “ICREA Academia” for excellence in research funded by the Generalitat de Catalunya.
References
S. Demarche, K. Sugihara, T. Zambelli, L. Tiefenauer and J. Vörös, Analyst, 2011, 136, 1077 RSC .
E. Wallin and G. Von Heijne, Protein Sci., 2008, 7, 1029–1038 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Fiori, Y. Jiang, W. Zheng, M. Anzaldua, M. J. Borgnia, G. A. Altenberg and H. Liang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 15227 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Clarke, H. C. Wu, L. Jayasinghe, A. Patel, S. Reid and H. Bayley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mura, J. Nicolas and P. Couvreur, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 991–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Kim, S. Jung, H. Ryu, Y. E. Yoo, S. M. Kim and T. J. Jeon, Sensors, 2012, 12, 9530–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–15 CrossRef .
A. G. Fane, R. Wang and M. X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3368–3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ren, M. Erbakan, Y. Shen, E. Barbieri, P. Saboe, H. Feroz, H. Yan, S. McCuskey, J. F. Hall, A. B. Schantz, G. C. Bazan, P. J. Butler, M. Grzelakowski and M. Kumar, Adv. Biosyst., 2017, 1, 1700053 CrossRef .
Y. X. Shen, P. O. Saboe, I. T. Sines, M. Erbakan and M. Kumar, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 454, 359–381 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Palivan, R. Goers, A. Najer, X. Zhang, A. Car and W. Meier, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 377–411 RSC .
S. W. Kowalczyk, T. R. Blosser and C. Dekker, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 607–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Garni, S. Thamboo, C. A. Schoenenberger and C. G. Palivan, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 2017, 1859, 619–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Subczynski, J. S. Hyde and A. Kusumi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1989, 86, 4474–4478 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gutknecht, J. Gen. Physiol., 1988, 69, 779–794 CrossRef .
A. Walter and J. Gutknecht, J. Membr. Biol., 1986, 90, 207–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Orbach and A. Finkelstein, J. Gen. Physiol., 1980, 75, 427–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Yang and M. J. Hinner, Methods Mol. Biol., 2015, 29–57 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Freigassner, H. Pichler and A. Glieder, Microb. Cell Fact., 2009, 8, 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kistler and R. M. Stroud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1981, 78, 3678–3682 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Verkman, Curr. Biol., 2013, 23, 52–55 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, T. S. Chung, Y. W. Tong, K. Jeyaseelan, A. Armugam, Z. Chen, M. Hong and W. Meier, Small, 2012, 8, 1185–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, T. S. Chung, Y. W. Tong, W. Meier, Z. Chen, M. Hong, K. Jeyaseelan and A. Armugam, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7274–7280 RSC .
H. X. Gan, H. Zhou, Q. Lin and Y. W. Tong, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Chou, R. Wang, L. Shi, W. Fang, G. Chaitra, C. Y. Tang, J. Torres, X. Hu and A. G. Fane, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 494, 68–77 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Tang, Y. Zhao, R. Wang, C. Hélix-Nielsen and A. G. Fane, Desalination, 2013, 308, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. H. Duong, T. S. Chung, K. Jeyaseelan, A. Armugam, Z. Chen, J. Yang and M. Hong, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 409–410, 34–43 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, T. S. Chung, K. Jeyaseelan and A. Armugam, Colloids Surf., B, 2013, 102, 466–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, T. S. Chung, Y. W. Tong, K. Jeyaseelan, A. Armugam, H. H. P. Duong, F. Fu, H. Seah, J. Yang and M. Hong, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 434, 130–136 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, F. He, B. Wang, T.-S. Chung, K. Jeyaseelan, A. Armugam and Y. W. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7592–7600 RSC .
D. Branton, D. W. Deamer, A. Marziali, H. Bayley, S. A. Benner, T. Butler, M. Di Ventra, S. Garaj, A. Hibbs, X. Huang, S. B. Jovanovich, P. S. Krstic, S. Lindsay, X. S. Ling, C. H. Mastrangelo, A. Meller, J. S. Oliver, Y. V. Pershin, J. M. Ramsey, R. Riehn, G. V. Soni, V. Tabard-Cossa, M. Wanunu, M. Wiggin and J. A. Schloss, Nat. Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 1146–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Braha, B. Walker, S. Cheley, J. J. Kasianowicz, L. Song, J. E. Gouaux and H. Bayley, Chem. Biol., 1997, 4, 497–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Kang, L. Q. Gu, S. Cheley and H. Bayley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1495–1499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Meller, L. Nivon, E. Brandin, J. Golovchenko and D. Branton, PNAS, 2000, 97, 1079–1084 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Fu, C. G. Palivan and W. Meier, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2196 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Urry, M. C. Goodall, J. D. Glickson and D. F. Mayers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1971, 68, 1907–1911 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Elliott, D. Needham, J. P. Dilger and D. A. Haydon, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 1983, 735, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Kelkar and A. Chattopadhyay, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 2007, 1768, 2011–2025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Koebnik, K. P. Locher and P. Van Gelder, Mol. Microbiol., 2000, 37, 239–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Discher and A. Eisenberg, Science, 2002, 297, 967–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hauser, M. C. Phillips and M. Stubbs, Nature, 1972, 239, 342–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bermudez, A. K. Brannan, D. A. Hammer, F. S. Bates and D. E. Discher, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 8203–8208 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nardin, M. Winterhalter and W. Meier, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7708–7712 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Discher, Y. Y. Won, D. S. Ege, J. C. M. Lee, F. S. Bates, D. E. Discher and D. A. Hammer, Science, 1999, 284, 1143–1146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kowal, X. Zhang, I. A. Dinu, C. G. Palivan and W. Meier, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kaditi, G. Mountrichas and S. Pispas, Eur. Polym. J., 2011, 47, 415–434 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gress, B. Smarsly and H. Schlaad, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 304–308 CrossRef CAS .
M. Obeng, A. H. Milani, M. S. Musa, Z. Cui, L. A. Fielding, L. Farrand, M. Goulding and B. R. Saunders, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 2228–2238 RSC .
Z.-C. Li, Y.-Z. Liang, G.-Q. Chen and F.-M. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2000, 21, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Yu, S.-H. Wen, S.-H. Yu and C.-C. Wang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2018, 56, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Xiong, Z. Binkhathlan, O. Molavi and A. Lavasanifar, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 2017–2033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. van Dijk, D. T. S. Rijkers, R. M. J. Liskamp, C. F. van Nostrum and W. E. Hennink, Bioconjugate Chem., 2009, 20, 2001–2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Pawar, S. V. Gohil, J. P. Jain and N. Kumar, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 3160–3176 RSC .
M.-H. Li and P. Keller, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 927–937 RSC .
F. Schacher, M. Ulbricht and A. H. E. Müller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1040–1045 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, F. Meng, Z. Wang, Y. Zhong, M. Zheng, H. Liu and Z. Zhong, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2012, 82, 103–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nardin, T. Hirt, J. Leukel and W. Meier, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzelakowski, O. Onaca, P. Rigler, M. Kumar and W. Meier, Small, 2009, 5, 2545–2548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winterhalter, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 5, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nardin, M. Winterhalter and W. Meier, Angew. Chem., 2000, 39, 4599–4602 CrossRef .
D. Wong, T. J. Jeon and J. Schmidt, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3710–3717 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ho, S. Chang and C. D. Montemagno, Nanomedicine, 2006, 2, 103–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Belegrinou, J. Dorn, M. Kreiter, K. Kita-Tokarczyk, E.-K. Sinner and W. Meier, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 179–186 RSC .
S. Edmondson, V. L. Osborne and W. T. S. Huck, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 14–22 RSC .
J. Dorn, S. Belegrinou, M. Kreiter, E. K. Sinner and W. Meier, Macromol. Biosci., 2011, 11, 514–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Dixon and I. Chopra, J. Antimicrob. Chemother., 1986, 18, 557–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Kowal, J. K. Kowal, D. Wu, H. Stahlberg, C. G. Palivan and W. P. Meier, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 7286–7294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. González-Pérez, K. B. Stibius, T. Vissing, C. H. Nielsen and O. G. Mouritsen, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10447–10450 CrossRef PubMed .
P. S. Zhong, T. S. Chung, K. Jeyaseelan and A. Armugam, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 407–408, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vermette, L. Meagher, E. Gagnon, H. J. Griesser and C. J. Doillon, J. Controlled Release, 2002, 80, 179–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Stamou, C. Duschl, E. Delamarche and H. Vogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5580–5583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Lomora, T. Einfalt, W. Meier, N. Klein, D. Schneider and C. G. Palivan, Biomaterials, 2016, 89, 79–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balme, J. M. Janot, L. Berardo, F. Henn, D. Bonhenry, S. Kraszewski, F. Picaud and C. Ramseyer, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 712–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, S. R. Park and X. S. Ling, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2571–2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balme, F. Picaud, S. Kraszewski, P. Déjardin, J. M. Janot, M. Lepoitevin, J. Capomanes, C. Ramseyer and F. Henn, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3961–3968 RSC .
A. Abou Chaaya, M. Le Poitevin, S. Cabello-Aguilar, S. Balme, M. Bechelany, S. Kraszewski, F. Picaud, J. Cambedouzou, E. Balanzat, J. M. Janot, T. Thami, P. Miele and P. Dejardin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15306–15315 CrossRef CAS .
G. Roussel, A. Matagne, X. De Bolle, E. A. Perpète and C. Michaux, Protein Expr. Purif., 2012, 83, 198–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Roussel, E. A. Perpète, A. Matagne, E. Tinti and C. Michaux, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2013, 110, 417–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lopes-Rodrigues, J. Triguero, J. Torras, E. A. Perpète, C. Michaux, D. Zanuy and C. Alemán, Biophys. Chem., 2018, 234, 6–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, L. J. del Valle, E. Armelin, C. Michaux, G. Roussel, E. A. Perpète and C. Alemán, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1632–1643 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Puiggalí-Jou, M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, L. J. del Valle, E. Armelin, M. T. Casas, C. Michaux, E. A. Perpète, F. Estrany and C. Alemán, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16922–16935 RSC .
A. Puiggali-Jou, J. Medina, L. J. Del Valle and C. Alemn, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 75, 552–564 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lopes-Rodrigues, A. Puiggalí-Jou, D. Martí-Balleste, L. J. Del Valle, C. Michaux, E. A. Perpète and C. Alemán, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 7856–7867 CrossRef CAS .
A. Puiggalí-jou, J. Pawlowski, L. J. Valle, E. A. Perpète, S. Sek and C. Alemán, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 9003–9019 CrossRef .
J. R. Werber and M. Elimelech, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. R. Werber, C. J. Porter and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 10737–10747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Saboe, E. Conte, S. Chan, H. Feroz, B. Ferlez, M. Farell, M. F. Poyton, I. T. Sines, H. Yan, G. C. Bazan, J. Golbeck and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15457–15463 RSC .
M. Tanaka and E. Sackmann, Nature, 2005, 437, 656–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Brian and H. M. McConnell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1984, 81, 6159–6163 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Erb, K. Tangemann, B. Bohrmann, B. Muller and J. Engel, Biochemistry, 1997, 36, 7395–7402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kloboucek, A. Behrisch, J. Faix and E. Sackmann, Biophys. J., 1999, 77, 2311–2328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Qi, J. T. Groves and A. K. Chakraborty, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 6548–6553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Grakoui, S. K. Bromley, C. Sumen, M. M. Davis, A. S. Shaw, P. M. Allen and M. L. Dustin, Science, 1999, 285, 221–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Tamm and H. M. McConnell, Biophys. J., 1985, 47, 105–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Chan, M. B. Lawrence, M. L. Dustin, L. M. Ferguson, D. E. Golan and T. A. Springer, J. Cell Biol., 1991, 115, 245–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. K. Sinner and W. Knoll, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2001, 5, 705–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sakai and S. Matile, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9031–9040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Matile, A. Vargas Jentzsch, J. Montenegro and A. Fin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2453–2474 RSC .
C. Ren, X. Ding, A. Roy, J. Shen, S. Zhou, F. Chen, S. F. Yau Li, H. Ren, Y. Y. Yang and H. Zeng, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4044–4051 RSC .
C. Lang, X. Deng, F. Yang, B. Yang, W. Wang, S. Qi, X. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Dong and J. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12668–12671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Muraoka, K. Umetsu, K. V. Tabata, T. Hamada, H. Noji, T. Yamashita and K. Kinbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18016–18023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Anna Puiggalí-Jou
	Anna Puiggalí-Jou received her BSc degree in Biochemistry (2013) at the Universitat de Barcelona (UB) and her MSc degree in Biomedical Research (2014) at the Universitat Pompeu i Fabra (UPF). She presented her PhD in Biomedical Engineering at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) under the supervision of Prof. Carlos Aleman and Dr Luis Javier del Valle in March 2019. Her research focuses on the design of biointerfaces based on the combination of synthetic polymers and biomolecules.

Luis J. del Valle
	Luis J. del Valle is Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering Department (EEBE Campus) at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC). His work focuses specifically on the development of new materials based on biodegradable polymers and their applications in biomedicine.

Carlos Alemán
	Carlos Alemán received his BSc degree in Chemistry from the University of Barcelona (Spain). He then joined the Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC) and worked on computer simulations of polyamides, receiving a PhD degree in Chemistry in 1994. Since 2003, he has been the leader of the “Innovation in Materials and Molecular Engineering” (IMEM) group in the Chemical Engineering Department of UPC, where he is Full Professor of Physical Chemistry. Current research activities include experimental and computer simulation studies on organic polymers with applications in biomedicine and energy. He has co-authored around 550 scientific papers in peer refereed journals.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Membrane topography of the Aq monomer (left) and the crystal structure (side view, left; top view, right) with four water molecules (red balls) shown in the aqueous pore region. Helices are labelled as H1–H8. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. (b) Strand-sequencing using ionic current blockage. A typical trace of the ionic current amplitude (left) through an α-HL pore clearly differentiates between an open pore (top right) and one blocked by a strand of DNA (bottom right) but cannot distinguish between the ∼12 nucleotides that simultaneously block the narrow transmembrane channel domain (red brackets). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. (c) Top view of the gA channel as a space-filling model (color code: white, carbon atoms; blue, nitrogen atoms; red, oxygen atoms) using coordinates from PDB 1MAG. It should be noted how the alternating L–D arrangement allows all amino acid side chains to project outward from the channel lumen and the channel lumen is lined by the peptide backbone. (d) Axial and equatorial views of crystallized OmpF, a representative MP. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79.	 

Free-standing	—	PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA	OmpF and maltoporin	Electrophysiological studies	
σ increment of 6 nS (OmpF) and 4 nS (maltoporin)	
60

—	PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA	OmpG and Alamethicin	Electrophysiological studies	
σ = 0.72 ± 0.06 nS (OmpG) and σ = 0.3, 1.1, 2.22 and 3.34 nS (alamethicin)	
61

Air–water interface	PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA	OmpF	Mechanical studies	Shorter copolymer chains possess enhanced biomimicry of natural lipid-based membranes	
62

Solid supported	Au	PB-PEO-OH and PB-PEO-LA	Polymyxin B	Peptide effect on the membrane resistance	Reduction of the resistance from 4.4 to 1.2 MΩ cm2	
66

SiO2 wafers, glass and Au	PDMS-b-PMOXA with amino-linkers	MloK1	Ion flow	
σ = 39.5 ± 7.5 nS	
67

Au	Functionalized PB-PEO	αHL	Ion flow	
σ = 31 ns	
35

Porous solid support-polymersome spanning	PCTE	PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA	AqpZ	Water purification	Maximum water flux 16.4 ± 1.5 L m−2 h−1 (LMH) with a salt rejection of 98.8%	
22

Commercially available CA with pores	PMOXA-b-PDMS–PMOXA	AqpZ	Water purification	Maximum water flux 34.19 ± 6.90 LMH/bar with a 200 ppm NaCl salt rejection of 32.86 ± 9.12%	
69

Porous alumina	functionalized PMOXA-PDMS-PMOXA	AqpZ	Water nanofiltration	Maximum water flux of 8 LMH/bar with a salt rejection of 45.1 ± 4.2%	
27

Tefzel ethylene tetrafluoroethylene (ETFE)	PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA	gA	Electrophysiological studies	gA is inserted and is functional	
68

Porous solid support-polymersome intrusion	Au-coated PCTE	PMOXA-PDMS-PMOXA functionalized with end groups	AqpZ	Seawater desalination and water reuse	Water flux 17.6 LMH with a high salt rejection 91.8%	
29

CA membrane with pore size of ∼25 nm and functionalized surface	PMOXA-PDMS-PMOXA	AqpZ	Nanofiltration or forward osmosis	5.58 ± 0.97 LMH with a salt rejection of 50.7%	
30

Immobilized polymersome	Glass surfaces chemically modified with amino groups	PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA	GlpF	Selective detection of sugar alcohols	The lowest concentration of ribitol detected was 200 nM	
72

Glass slide with BSA-biotin–streptavidin–biotin-nanoreactor link	PMOXA-b-PDMS-b-PMOXA	OmpF	Nanoreactors for studying model enzymatic reactions	The Km value of the enzyme entrapped on the immobilized polymersome was 46 mM	
58

Protein confinement in the porous insulating polymer	The PET film tuned by the atomic layer deposition of Al2O3/ZnO	PET	gA	Study of protein selectivity to ions	Conductance is one order of magnitude bigger when gA is inserted. Cl− permeability is higher than Na+	
76

Free-standing	PCTE covered with PVP	gA	Study of protein selectivity to ions	No significant ion selectivity is observed between the mono and divalent cations	
73

Free-standing	PCTE covered with PVP and treated with ethanol	gA	Study of protein selectivity to ions	Enhanced conductivity of K+vs. Na+	
75

Free-standing/ITO	PLA with nanoperforations	Omp2a	Study of protein selectivity to ions	Enhanced conductivity of K+vs. Na+	
81

Solid membrane conducting polymers	CP film supported onto steel	PPy	Omp2a	Study of protein selectivity to ions	Enhanced conductivity of K+vs. Na+	
80


 	Fig. 2  (a) Lipoic acid (LA)-functionalized PB-PEO vesicles spread onto a bare gold surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. (b) PB-PEO-OH and PB-PEO-LA were transferred onto gold substrates by applying consecutively the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) and Langmuir–Schaefer (LS) techniques to form a polymer tethered bilayer (left), where the protein was inserted (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Representation of MP insertion by using Bio-Beads (BBs) into solid-supported polymer membranes. (b) Conductance measured at a voltage of 40 mV is applied on bare Au, the bilayer, the bilayer with the protein incorporated using Bio-Beads (bilayer + MloK1 + BB), the bilayer with the protein (bilayer + MloK1), and the bilayer with the Bio-Beads (bilayer + BB). Reproduced with permission from ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the pore-spanning membrane on the PCTE: design and synthesis. (a) Incorporation of AqpZ in PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA (ABA copolymer) vesicles. (b) Surface modification of the PCTE membrane support in a two-step process: (i) coating with a monolayer of cysteamine through chemisorption; and (ii) the primary amine is converted to acrylate residues via conjugating with acrylic acid. (c) Pressure-assisted vesicle adsorption on the PCTE support. (d) Covalent-conjugation-driven vesicle rupture and pore-spanning membrane formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22.	 

 	Fig. 5  Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (a–c) and atomic force microscopy images (d–f) of the gold coated alumina substrate (a and d), the substrate covered with the polymer membrane (b and e), and the substrate covered with the AqpZ-incorporated polymer membrane (c and f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 27.	 

 	Fig. 6  Field-emission scanning electron microscopy of (a) CA, (b) silanized CA, and (c) AqpZ-containing PMOXA–PDMS–PMOXA triblock copolymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schemes of AqpZ-embedded vesicular membranes at the top: (a) AqpZ reconstitution into the vesicles formed from ABA block copolymer blends. DDM stands for dodecyl-b-D-maltoside, a detergent for protein stabilization; (b) immobilization of the vesicles onto the substrate by pressure; (c) addition of the self-assembled monolayer of cysteamine; and (d) PDA-His coating on top of the membrane. (e–h) Field-emission scanning electron microscopy micrographs at the bottom: (e) gold-coated PCTE membrane with a self-assembled monolayer of cysteamine (a pore size of 50 nm); (f) PCTE membrane with 3-cycle coating of PDA–His on top of chemisorbed cysteamine (control); and (g) vesicles immobilized on the PCTE membrane with 3-cycle coating of PDA–His on top. The micrograph displayed in (h) corresponds to a zoomed-in view of (g). Adapted with permission from ref. 29.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the Aqpz-vesicle imprinted membrane preparation: (1) Aqpz-polymer vesicles, (2) porous CA membrane substrate, (3) Aqpz vesicles immobilized on the porous membrane, (4) the Aqpz-vesicle-imprinted membrane, and (5) the cross-section of the Aqpz-vesicle-imprinted membrane. (b–g) Field-emission scanning electron microscopy micrographs displaying the membrane morphologies: (b and c) top surface and cross-section of the porous substrate CA membrane; (d and e) non-vesicle-imprinted membrane; and (f and g) Aqpz-vesicle-imprinted membrane. Adapted with permission from ref. 30.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) GlpF molecular representation (green) together with ribitol, as a model sugar alcohol (red). Side (right) and front (left) views are represented. (b) Schematic representation of a functionalized surface serving as a sugar alcohol biosensor based on immobilized proteopolymersome nanoreactors with selective transport due to the GlpF presence and detection of sugar alcohols due to the encapsulated enzymes. Adapted with permission from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 10  Procedure scheme for the fabrication of nanoperforated membranes, the modification of the nanopore size by atomic layer deposition (ALD), the creation of hydrophobic pore surfaces by vapour exposure treatment with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), and the immobilization of gA. Adapted with permission from ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 11  Surface morphology of (a) PNMPy–Omp2a, (b) PNMPy and (c) nanoperforated PLA membranes: low- and high-magnification SEM micrographs are displayed at the left and the right, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 80 and 81. (d) 3D AFM phase images of the skin surfaces of nanoperforated PLA nanomembranes before (left) and after (right) incubation with a 0.5 mg mL−1 Omp2a solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 81.	 

Amphiphilic polymers/block copolymers	Free standing	No influence of the substrate. Direct measure.	Low stability. No more than 1 mm2 in area. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications	
60–62

Solid supported	Increased stability. Easy to measure the influence of the protein if the substrate is a conductive material.	Interactions with the substrate can induce the denaturation of the protein. Poor area coverage. Membrane defects. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.	
35, 65 and 67

Porous solid support-polymersome spanning	The protein is not in direct contact with the substrate. There is more than enough space for the solutes to cross the membrane.	The porous substrate normally needs a pre-treatment to facilitate proteopolymersome spanning. Poor area coverage. Membrane defects. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.	
22, 27, 68 and 69

Porous solid support-polymersome intrusion	Easier to cover all the perforations. The protein is not in direct contact with the substrate. The final material is more selective and sensible since the electrolyte needs to cross the membrane two times.	Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.	
29 and 30

Polymersomes covalently linked to the surface	The proteopolymersomes are covalently linked to the substrate, providing stability.	Indirect measurement. Need to encapsulate enzymes inside the proteopolymersomes.	
58 and 72

Nanostructured solid-state membrane	Insulating polymers	The scalability is higher. There are commercial membranes that can be used. The stability is higher and can be employed for actual applications	Fine tune on the pore size realized on the membrane is needed. Difficult to control the correct deposition of the membrane protein on the pore.	
73, 75, 76 and 81

Conducting polymers	The polymerization can take place at the same time that the protein is embedded applying low voltages.	Influence of the polymer on the electrical measurements. High roughness and thickness which makes the protein localization on the membrane difficult. Difficult scalability to support industrial applications.	
80


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
