Carbon foams: 3D porous carbon materials holding immense potential  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08749A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08749A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23699-23723Carbon foams: 3D porous carbon materials holding immense potential

        
          
            Heguang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shaoqing 
            Wu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Na 
            Tian
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fuxue 
            Yan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Caiyin 
            You
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an University of Technology, Xi'an, 710048, China. E-mail: heguangliu@xaut.edu.cn
bNanoScience Technology Center, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Energy Conversion and Propulsion Cluster, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32826, USA. E-mail: Yang.Yang@ucf.edu
Received 
      5th September 2020
    , Accepted 26th October 2020First published on 26th October 2020AbstractCarbon foam is a representative porous-structured carbon material. It has attracted increasing attention from academic communities and industry because of its unique 3D porous structure and excellent performance, such as low density with high mechanical strength, high electrical conductivity, tailorable thermal conductivities, high adsorption, electromagnetic shielding, ablation resistance, and large surface area. Tremendous achievements have been made in its synthesis and applications in the past few years. However, little effort has been devoted to providing a comprehensive review of recent progress. In the present review, the typical microstructure of carbon foam is firstly illustrated, which includes the open-cell structure and closed-cell structure. Secondly, advances in its synthesis approaches are summarized, according to the utilized precursors involving polymers, pitches, and biomass materials. Thirdly, the promising applications (e.g., thermal management, adsorption, energy storage, electromagnetic shielding, catalyst support, and sensors) are comprehensively reviewed. Among them, its applications for energy storage are systematically introduced, as this application has been extensively developed in recent years. In particular, the strategies for controlling its properties are mentioned. Finally, some critical issues and challenges that need to be tackled are discussed, like precise fabrication, scaling up production, etc. Besides this, the research prospects of carbon foam are proposed.Heguang LiuHeguang Liu earned a master's degree in materials physics and chemistry from the Xi'an University of Technology in 2011. He received a Ph.D. degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University in materials science in 2017. He is currently an associate professor at the Xi'an University of Technology. His research interest mainly focuses on the design, fabrication, and applications of carbon materials and their composites.Shaoqing WuShaoqing Wu received her BS degree from the Xi'an University of Technology in 2019. She is currently a graduate student in Materials Science at the Xi'an University of Technology. Her research interests are related to the design and applications of carbon foam materials.Na TianNa Tian obtained her BS degree in 1998, MS degree in 2001, and Ph.D. degree in 2007 from Xi'an University of Technology. She worked as a visiting scientist at the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan from 2003 to 2005. Now, she is an associate professor at the school of materials science and engineering at the Xi'an University of Technology and her research mainly focuses on the design, synthesis, and characterization of functional materials.Fuxue YanFuxue Yan received his MS degree (2005) in Materials Science and Engineering and obtained a Ph.D. degree (2014) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Xi'an University of Technology, respectively. He is currently an associate professor at the Xi'an University of Technology. His research focuses on developing and fabricating functional materials, as well as the characterization of those materials.Caiyin YouCaiyin You obtained his BS degree from the Xi'an University of Technology in 1997 and his Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2003. Then he worked as a post-doc researcher at the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan and a research assistant at Oxford University in the UK from 2003 to 2009. Now, he is a professor in the school of materials science and engineering at the Xi'an University of Technology and his academic interests are mainly related to the investigation of functional materials and battery materials.Yang YangYang Yang obtained his Ph.D. from Tsinghua University in 2010. From 2010 to 2012 he was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship and worked with Prof. Patrik Schmuki at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. From 2012 to 2015 he was supported by the Peter M. & Ruth L. Nicholas Postdoctoral Fellowship and worked with Prof. James M. Tour at Rice University. Since 2015 he has been an assistant professor at the University of Central Florida. His current research interests cover nanostructured thin-film materials, electrochemical energy generation and storage, and plasmonic photocatalysis. http://www.yangyanglab.com/.
1. Introduction
As a non-metal element, carbon is abundant on earth and plays an important role in energy and environmental applications. Carbon materials, which are primarily composed of carbon atoms, exhibit rich diversity in terms of their morphologies, microstructures, and specialties. For instance, graphite is soft and shows high electrical conductivity comparable to that of metallic copper. However, diamond consists of the same element and is an ultrahard insulator. In past decades, carbon materials have been extensively investigated and great efforts have been made in terms of their development and diversity. They are a big family, including carbon quantum dots, mesoporous carbon, fullerene, carbon nanotubes, carbon fiber, graphene, carbon foam, and graphite.1–10 In this big carbon family, carbon foam, featuring a 3D interconnected porous structure, was first reported by Ford in the 1960s11 when it was prepared from the pyrolysis of resin. Since then, it became known as an important member of the carbon family and has attracted great interest from both academic and industrial communities because of its unique structure and extraordinary performance.12–14
Benefiting from its adjustable 3D porous architecture, carbon foam possesses many extraordinary physical and chemical properties, which are unachievable in other types of material, such as high strength, tunable thermal conductivity, good thermal stability, high electrical conductivity, corrosion resistance, a large specific surface area, oxidation resistance, and being lightweight.15–23 These merits endow carbon foam with diverse application possibilities in many science and engineering fields, including the chemical industry, electronics, renewable energy, light industry, aerospace, and biomedicine.24–31 Thanks to the efforts from many research groups all over the world, tremendous developments have been achieved over the past years with regards to the synthesis and applications of carbon foam. However, little attention has been paid to making a comprehensive review of the recent progress of carbon foam. In 2015, Inagaki, Qiu, and Guo presented a review on the synthesis and applications of carbon foam.32 The synthesis strategies of carbon foam have been classified into four types, which were the assembly of graphene nanosheets, compression of exfoliated graphite, template carbonization, and blowing of carbon precursors. This review just focused on the application of carbon foam in thermal energy storage, electrodes, and adsorption. In the past five years, great advances have been made in the synthesis, properties, and applications of carbon foam.
Given the great achievements in the research field of carbon foam and the fact that it is playing an irreplaceable role in high tech and emerging modern applications, it is notably important to review the recent advances of carbon foam, summarize the existing challenges and propose research prospects for the future. Therefore, the present review will provide an overview of porous-structured carbon foam material regarding its synthesis, properties, and applications (see Fig. 1). Firstly, the conventional pore structure of carbon foam, namely, the open-cell and closed-cell structure, will be illustrated. Secondly, the synthesis approaches of carbon foam will be summarized with regards to the starting materials (e.g. polymer, coal tar pitch, and biomass material) and synthesis methods. Subsequently, the diverse applications of carbon foam in thermal conduction, adsorption, energy storage, electromagnetic interference shielding, catalyst support, and sensors will be demonstrated. Finally, the existing challenges and perspectives of carbon foam will be discussed and proposed.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the microstructure, synthesis, properties, and applications of carbon foam. 
2. The microstructure of carbon foam
As is well-known, the size of porous carbon can be classified into three categories, micropores (<2 nm), mesopores (2–50 nm), and macropores (>50 nm).33,34 Different from conventional porous carbon materials represented by activated carbon, the pore size of carbon foam can usually be tailored over a wide range, from the nanometer to micrometer level. Normally, carbon foam possesses two kinds of pore structure, as shown in Fig. 2. The first one is an open-cell structure, in which the cell unit consists of ligaments and joints (Fig. 2(a)). The ligament denotes the edge of the cell, which connects the two neighboring cells. The location where the ligaments meet is named the joint. For carbon foam with an open-cell structure, cells are interconnected with each other, exhibiting an ultra-high porosity of even up to 99%.
 Fig. 2  Modeling of the typical microstructure of carbon foam: (a) open-cell and (b) closed-cell. 
The other type is the closed-cell cellular structure, which is composed of the cell wall, ligament, and joint (Fig. 2(b)). Compared with the first type, carbon foam with this type of structure generally shows a lower porosity and a higher mechanical strength. This results from the existence of the cell wall, which improves the solid content of the carbon foam. It can be concluded that carbon foam is composed of two parts, pores and solid components. Hence, it is necessary to note that the vital feature of carbon foam is the relative density, ρv/ρs, where ρv is the bulk density (apparent density) and ρs is the true density (solid density).35,36 The calculation of bulk density involves the volume of pores and solid, while the true density only corresponds to the volume of the solid. Because of the existence of numerous pores, carbon foam inherently shows a relative density below 1.
Generally speaking, the size of porous carbon can be classified into three categories.37,38 They are micropores (<2 nm), mesopores (2 nm–50 nm), and macropores (>50 nm). Different from conventional porous carbon materials represented by activated carbon, the pore size of carbon foam can usually be tailored over a wide range, from the nanometer to the micrometer level. At the same time, the cell morphology (open-cell or closed-cell) of carbon foam can also be tailored. Both the cell size and cell morphology of carbon foam are mainly decided by the raw materials, blowing agents, and the synthesis process. Among these three parameters, the synthesis process plays a critical role in controlling the cell size and cell morphology of carbon foam. Therefore, the synthesis process will be further discussed in the next section.
3. Synthetic approaches of carbon foam
Carbon foam can be synthesized from diverse carbonaceous precursors, including polymers, pitches, and biomass materials. The polymer sources include resin, tannins, polyurethane, urethane, etc.39–55 Pitches mainly include coal tar pitch, petroleum asphalt, and naphthalene-based pitch.55–66 They are abundant on earth and cost-economic. Moreover, biomass materials, such as flour, sucrose, bread, coconut shell, and wood, can be utilized as the carbonaceous precursor of carbon foam.67–75
For the synthesis of carbon foam, no matter what kind of precursors are used, they usually need to be treated with a carbonization treatment, which can remove impurity atoms (such as H, S, N, O) and form the structure and morphology of the carbon matrix. The selection of carbonaceous precursors is critical to the graphitization treatment, which is usually higher than 2100 °C. With polymer and biomass precursors, the carbon crystallites exhibit a disordered arrangement and cannot tolerate the graphitization treatment. Hence their mechanical strength is relatively poor, as well as having limited electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity. Carbon foam prepared by pitches possesses carbon crystallites with an ordered arrangement and can withstand the ultrahigh temperature of the graphitization treatment. It possesses a graphite-like crystal structure, which naturally leads to high electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, mechanical strength, etc.76–78 The specific synthesis precursors and methods for carbon foam will be discussed in detail as follows.
3.1 Carbon foam derived from polymers
Organic polymers are one of the most prevalent precursors for the synthesis of carbon foam.79 During the typical preparation process, condensation polymerization of the organic polymer will occur under heat treatment (>200 °C). At the same time, the organic polymer releases hydrogen and becomes dark in color. In general, the methods for synthesizing polymer-based carbon foam mainly include the blowing agent method, templating replica method, and direct carbonization technique. Some thermosetting polymers can generate bubbles with the help of a blowing agent (for example, Tween 80) under high temperature. Carbon foam can also be prepared by direct carbonization of polymers like melamine foam and cyanate ester resin. Moreover, polymers with a porous structure can be used as a template to synthesize carbon foam, such as polyurethane foam. They offer a framework for loading carbonaceous precursors, and after high-temperature heat treatment, they decompose.
Yamamoto and co-workers reported a method for fabricating carbon foam using polymer precursors with the help of a blowing agent.80 In their experiment, resorcinol-formaldehyde solution and cyclohexane were used as the aqueous phase and oil phase, respectively, Tween 80 was selected as the blowing agent, and formaldehyde and sodium carbonate were used as catalysts. The oil phase and water phase were mixed using ultrasound. After pretreatment under different temperatures, the sample underwent a carbonization process at 1000 °C and carbon foam was obtained. The obtained carbon foam exhibited a bulk density of 0.17 g cm−3 and a porosity of 93.2%. Park's group also developed a synthesis strategy employing Tween 80 as a blowing agent to prepare phenolic-based carbon foam.81 They noted that several advantages of the phenolic foam made it a good precursor for fabricating carbon foam. Firstly, the phenolic molecules have a large number of benzenes composed of two benzene rings and a single methylene, which naturally lead to a high carbon content, high molecular chain cohesive energy, and high atom bond energy. Secondly, the phenolic foam exhibits a low generation of toxic gases and excellent flame resistance during the pyrolysis process. Thirdly, the structure of carbon foam can be adjusted within a wide range via controlling phenolic resins and adjusting foaming conditions. Moreover, the synthesis of phenolic foam is scalable, mature, and low-cost.
Li's group reported the two-step fabrication of magnetic carbon foam using phenolic resin as a carbonaceous precursor.82 This facile fabrication process involves in situ polymerization and carbonization processes (1000 °C, N2 atmosphere) using iron acetylacetonate, phenolic resin, and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution. Fig. 3 presents the microstructure and morphology of the fabricated carbon foam. As exhibited in Fig. 3(A), the obtained carbon foam was very light and its bulk density was around 0.4 g cm−3. It can also be seen that the obtained carbon foam possesses a solid 3D foam structure composed of interconnected cells with narrow ligaments.
 Fig. 3  (A) Photograph of carbon foam. (B and C) SEM and HR SEM images of the cross-section of carbon foam. (D) EDS mapping images. Reproduced from ref. 82 with the permission of Elsevier. 
A template replica method has also been utilized to obtain porous materials with a controlled pore structure and size distribution, and it was also reported in the synthesis of polymer-based carbon foam.83–86 Shim's group synthesized microporous carbon foam using a polyurethane foam template replica method.87 Polyurethane foam was chosen as a sacrificial template, while phenol–resorcinol–formaldehyde resins, phenol–formaldehyde, and resorcinol–formaldehyde were selected as the carbon precursors. Polyurethane foam was soaked with mixed solutions composed of these three aqueous resins, followed by carbonization treatment at 830 °C for 3 h. At the same time, Wilson and co-workers developed an interesting templating method using NaCl as a template.88 In a typical process, a hot blending method was used to obtain pastes of NaCl powder in molten sucrose. Then, pastes were treated in a steel mold through hot processing at 160 °C. Subsequently, the samples were pyrolyzed and washed with water to obtain carbon foam. For the growth mechanism of pores of carbon foam, they disclosed that the macropores of the as-prepared carbon foam was raised from the entrapped water vapor generated during caramelization, and micropores were derived from the reaction of oxygen retained in the structure with the carbon.
Moreover, the direct pyrolysis method was developed for the synthesis of carbon foam.89,90 For example, Lin's group published a report about the facile preparation of carbon foam from bisphenol A cyanate ester.91 In their work, cyanate ester prepolymer was first obtained via the stirring of bisphenol A cyanate ester at 140 °C. Then, the prepolymer was subjected to a series of heat treatments for polymerization. Finally, the carbon foam was obtained after pyrolysis at 900 °C. Yang's group reported carbon foam with ultrahigh porosity via the direct pyrolysis of melamine foam.92 Melamine foam is a type of sustainable organic source with a low cost. In particular, carbon foam can be efficiently fabricated via the direct carbonization of melamine foam at 1000 °C under an inert atmosphere. The resultant carbon foam can be loaded many nanomaterials after hydrophilic treatment. In their work, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and WS2 nanosheets were loaded on the surface of carbon foam to construct a self-supporting electrode. As presented in Fig. 4, the obtained carbon foam was composed of interconnected carbon networks, and it shows good flexibility.
 Fig. 4  (a) An image of carbonized carbon foam (black) and melamine foam (white). (b) An image of the final GQDs-WS2/carbon foam sample. (c) Low- and (d) high-magnification SEM images of the carbon foam. SEM images of (e) WS2/carbon foam and (f) GQDs-WS2/carbon foam samples. (g) EDX mapping of GQDs-WS2/carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 92 with the permission of the RSC. 
Besides this, some advance techniques have also been employed to synthesize polymer-based carbon foam, such as hydrothermal and microwave foaming methods. Karthik's group explored the application of the hydrothermal method for the preparation of carbon foam.93 Formaldehyde and resorcinol were used as carbon precursors, while polyurethane foam and Pluronic F127 were selected as the sacrificial polymer and mesoporous structure-directing template, respectively. Initially, resorcinol and Pluronic F127 were mixed with the addition of formaldehyde. Then, this solution with introduced polyurethane foam was placed in a Teflon-lined autoclave, and the autoclave was heated at 50 °C for 48 h. After that, the sample was collected and went through a carbonization process at 800 °C for 1 h. Finally, the obtained sample was graphitized at 1000 °C for 1 h, followed by washing with hydrochloric acid.
Kim's group introduced a novel and facile foaming method to synthesize phenolic carbon foam, namely, the microwave foaming technique.94 The merit of this method is that it can be used make phenolic foams without any foaming agent in a short time. They fabricated an activated carbon (AC) reinforced phenolic foam using this method.
In summary, the pore structure of polymer-based carbon foam is related to the polymer precursors, the porous structure of the template, or the intrinsic pore structure of polymer precursors. The carbonization process is an essential step in obtaining carbon foam from polymer precursors. Among the aforementioned strategies, the direct carbonization method possesses more advantages, such as high applicability and high efficiency, than other methods. No blowing agent is needed for this method. Nevertheless, it is difficult to realize precise control of the morphology of the pore structure via this method, as the synthesis process does not involve the formation of pores. In this respect of controlling the pore structure, the blowing agent method is more advantageous because the pore structure of the resultant carbon foam mainly depends on the blowing agent and the temperature. Hence, if a blowing agent method is used to synthesize polymer-based carbon foam, it is feasible to control the pore structure of the carbon foam by adjusting the type and amount of the blowing agent, as well as the treatment temperature.
3.2 Carbon foam derived from pitches
As a common carbonaceous precursor used for the production of carbon materials, pitches are economical and easy to obtain.95–101 They are mainly composed of hydrocarbon compounds and their by-products. Commonly, pitches used for the preparation of carbon foam include three types, coal tar pitch, petroleum asphalt, and natural bitumen. Compared with the other two types of pitches, coal tar pitch is more commonly used for the preparation of carbon foam.
When preparing carbon foam from pitch, the pitch usually needs to undergo pretreatment to form a mesophase pitch. A mesophase pitch, a kind of nematic liquid crystal showing optical anisotropy (which can be detected by optical microscopy) and magnetic anisotropy, is considered as the ideal precursor for the production of diverse carbon products.102,103 It possesses a layer-structure and can be graphitized. Mesophase pitch can be acquired by heating pitches up to a certain temperature higher than 350 °C. During this process, the dominant chemical reactions are polymerization and condensation, and the key factor is the removal of volatile matter.104 The formation of mesophase from pitch can be concluded as follows.105 Firstly, planar polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon molecules will be formed through the heat treatment of pitch. Those planar molecules tend to stack in a parallel fashion into planar layers, which will spontaneously switch to mesophase spherules with a minimum surface energy. Consequently, the size of those mesophase spherules will consistently grow. When their size is large enough, two adjacent spherules will contact each other and then begin to coalesce. As time goes by, the surface energy of the mature spherules will not be able to keep their shape. Eventually, a bulk mesophase will be formed after the disintegration of the mesophase spherules.
The intriguing feature of preparing carbon foam from pitch is that it usually does not need any foaming agent. A typical synthesis process involves foaming, carbonization, and graphitization. At first, the mesophase pitch will go through the foaming process and a green foam is obtained. Foaming strategies include blowing and spontaneous foaming. In this step, the mesophase pitch releases light components and generates small molecules. The volatiles from the light fractions as well as the thermally decomposed fractions will serve as “foaming agents” to form foam cells, this is why no foaming agent is required.106 Next, the green foam will undergo the carbonization process (750–1400 °C) and graphitization process (at >2100 °C, this step endows the carbon foam with a graphite-like structure), and the final carbon foam will be gained.
Chen and co-workers synthesized a series of carbon foams by a pretreatment, foaming, and carbonization process, using bituminous coal, coal tar pitch, and petroleum pitch as precursors.107 These raw materials were firstly heat-treated to 200–400 °C in an autoclave under a N2 atmosphere. Then, the obtained foaming precursors were foamed in a pressure vessel of 500 °C under 3.5 MPa N2 pressure. Finally, the green foams were heated up to 1000 °C in an inert atmosphere. The morphology of the resultant carbon foams is exhibited in Fig. 5. They claimed that the fluidity and dilatation of the precursors at the foaming temperature had a significant effect on the foaming performance and foam structure. It was also noted that the size of the pores could be controlled by releasing the appropriate amount of volatiles.
 Fig. 5  SEM photos of carbon foam prepared from (a) raw coal, (b) coal solvent-extracts, (c) coal solvent-extracts, (d) petroleum pitch, (e) QI-free coal tar pitch, and (f) QI containing coal tar pitch. Reproduced from ref. 107 with the permission of Elsevier. 
As mentioned above, the performance of the mesophase pitch (e.g., fluidity and surface tension) has a remarkable influence on the final microstructure of the obtained carbon foam. Therefore, it is feasible to tune the microstructure of the carbon foam by modifying the performance of the mesophase pitch. Guo's group researched the synthesis of carbon foam via foaming, carbonization, and graphitization processes, using Mitsubishi naphthalene based mesophase pitch and pitch fluoride as precursors.108 The foaming process of the mixture was conducted in a pressure vessel with 3 MPa N2, and the foaming temperature was 460 °C. Then, the green carbon foam was carbonized at 1300 °C for 2 h. The resultant carbon foam was obtained after the sample was graphitized at 2600 °C for 30 min. The results demonstrated that the addition of pitch fluoride could influence the microstructure and properties of the resultant carbon foam by reducing the surface tension of the molten mesophase pitch. Also, we reported the synthesis of carbon foam from modified coal tar pitches.109 In this work, a modified mesophase pitch was derived from coal tar pitches modified by cinnamaldehyde and boric acid. We found that the morphology and thermal characteristics of the mesophase pitch were adjusted, which naturally leads to the variation in the microstructure of the obtained carbon foam. Hence, it can be deduced that carbon foam with the desired performance (such as mechanical strength) can be realized by modifying the precursors.
Molina's group presented a novel method for the fabrication of carbon foam by the replication technique.110 The replication method has been widely used for the preparation of metallic foams, owing to its merits of precise control of the pore structure of resultant foams (such as size distribution and pore shape). In their research, Mitsubishi AR24 naphthalene-based synthetic pitch was selected as a carbonaceous precursor.
Besides, some other methods were also reported for the synthesis of pitch-based carbon foam. For example, Zhan's group successfully fabricated carbon foam by utilizing the supercritical foaming method.111 Toluene was used as a supercritical agent and mesophase pitch was chosen as the precursor. Briefly, mesophase pitch and toluene were mixed in a cylindrical stainless-steel reactor and then heated up to a supercritical temperature and pressure (320 °C and 12 MPa). The critical step was the quick pressure relief in 20 s. Consequently, the green foam went through the oxidation and carbonization process. In this case, carbon foam with a pore size of 20–200 μm could be obtained. Dhakate's group reported a template method for the preparation of carbon foam.112 Coal tar pitch was used as the precursor and polyurethane foam was selected as a sacrificial template. The coal tar pitch impregnated polyurethane was converted into the final carbon foam by multi-step heat treatments up to 2500 °C. Lee's group presented a novel method by adding pitch to a polyvinyl alcohol–acrylic acid solution.113 The hydrogel was obtained via mixing pitch powder with the polyvinyl alcohol–acrylic acid solution, and then it was cured and dried at different temperatures. Finally, carbon foam was obtained after the carbonization of the as-prepared gel.
3.3 Carbon foam derived from biomass materials
In recent years, many scientists and engineers have devoted extensive attention to carbon foam derived from biomass materials, inspired by environmentalism and waste utilization. Biomass materials usually possess high carbon yields like coal tar pitch and polymers, and they also exhibit many other good characteristics, such as being eco-friendly, renewable, and abundant in nature.114–120 Generally, the prevalent biomass materials used for the synthesis of carbon foam mainly include lignin, cotton, plant organs, biomass tar, sucrose, flour and its products, etc.
Initially, Liu et al. prepared carbon foam using a coconut shell as a carbon precursor.121 Firstly, the wet-impregnation method was employed to impregnate coconut shell powder with an iron nitrate solution. Then, the impregnated samples were directly carbonized using a two-step heat treatment process in a vacuum. The results indicated that the obtained carbon foam exhibits a 3D interconnected network featuring a hierarchical porous structure. Then, Liu's group developed the preparation of a carbon foam by selecting larch sawdust as a precursor.122 In their work, larch sawdust was mixed with phenol, formaldehyde, sodium hydroxide, and distilled water. The obtained solution was firstly reacted and then heat-treated at different temperatures. Then it was dried by vacuum distillation, and the obtained mixture was converted into resin foam with the help of Tween 80, n-pentane, and sulfuric acid. Next, the as-prepared resin foams were immersed in a KOH aqueous solution, followed by the drying and carbonization process. At last, the final carbon foams were gained by activating the carbonized foams at 500–800 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere.
Zeng and co-workers synthesized honeycomb-like carbon foams using alkali lignin as a starting material, via unidirectional ice-templating combined with freeze-drying and carbonization.123 Concerning the synthesis process, a lignin aqueous solution was firstly fabricated by dispersing alkaline lignin in water. Then, the suspension was cast in a Teflon container with a metal base, followed by immersion in liquid nitrogen for the freezing process. Subsequently, samples were transferred to a freeze-drying vessel for 24 h. Finally, carbon foams were acquired after the carbonization treatment at 900 °C. Their investigation revealed that the lignin concentration had no obvious influence on the crystal growth rate, which was similar to polymer-based carbon foams.124,125
Besides this, Yuan et al. proposed a green and low-cost strategy utilizing bread as a carbonaceous precursor, and the obtained carbon foam showed a hierarchical porous structure.126 As illustrated in Fig. 6, firstly, bread was obtained from yeast, flour, and water. Then, the dry bread was transferred to a tube furnace to carbonize at a temperature higher than 500 °C. The investigation suggested that the pore structure of the carbon foam was tunable by controlling the yeast and water content.
 Fig. 6  Raw diagrams for the fabrication of carbon foam derived from bread. Reproduced from ref. 126 with the permission of the ACS. 
He and co-workers explored the application of taro stems in carbon foam's fabrication.127 In a typical preparation process, taro stem powder with potassium hydroxide added was pyrolyzed at 800 °C for 2 h. The obtained products were immersed in a hydrochloric acid solution and then freeze-dried for a certain time. Finally, the nitrogen-doped carbon foam was acquired from the heat treatment of carbon foam and melamine at 800 °C.
Fan's group established a new and facile method using alkali-treated wheat flour as the starting material.128 Wheat flour and potassium hydroxide were mixed in distilled water. Then, the dried sample was carbonized at 700 °C for 2 h, followed by a washing process (with dilute hydrochloric acid and distilled water) and drying process. Finally, a carbon foam with a honeycomb-like porous structure (HPC) was gained, as shown in Fig. 7. They explained that the formation of the porous structure was because potassium hydroxide not only acted as a template for the development of macropores but also played the role of activating agents for the development of micropores and mesopores.
 Fig. 7  (a) A photo of a wheat field and wheat flour. (b–d) Low and high-resolution SEM images of HPC. (e–h) A SEM image of HPC and the corresponding elemental mapping images of C, N, and O. Reproduced from ref. 128 with the permission of Elsevier. 
Recently, Lei and co-workers developed a viable strategy for preparing carbon foam using corn starch as a carbonaceous material.129 Firstly, corn starch was dissolved in an aqueous acid mixture containing H2SO4 and H3PO4, followed by a vacuum filtration process. The obtained starch was sandwiched between two filter papers and then was set on a sand bath. Subsequently, a quartz tube and nickel foam were assembled. Carbon foam was obtained after the temperature reached around 470 °C. In this work, they introduced carbon nanotubes into the resultant carbon foam and explored the application of this composite for strain sensing.
As discussed above, carbon foam can be synthesized from diverse biomass materials. Compared with polymer and pitches precursors, biomass materials are natural, low-cost, eco-friendly, and easy to obtain. Nevertheless, the wide utilization of biomass materials is hindered by some drawbacks. For example, biomass materials generally have an uneven carbon distribution and a low carbon yield. Therefore, it is difficult to obtain homogenous pore morphologies (such as pore size). At the same time, owing to the high content of impurities, most biomass materials need to undergo pretreatment before carbonization (e.g., modification or purification by organic reagents). Besides, the 3D porous structures derived from biomass precursors are more fragile than pitch-based carbon foam, arising from their open-cell geometric features.
3.4 Carbon foam from other precursors
Moreover, besides the synthesis approaches mentioned above, some novel approaches have also been developed in the past few years. For example, He and co-workers described a protein foaming method with delayed coke and mesocarbon microbeads as precursors.130 The egg white protein solution was mixed with delayed coke and mesocarbon microbeads to form a slurry. Then, carbon foam was fabricated after the drying consolidation and carbonization treatment of the slurry. Zani's group published a report on the carbon foam layers fabricated from pulsed laser deposition using pyrolitic graphite as a carbonaceous precursor.131 They found that the pulsed laser deposition method showed an effective and independent control of the thickness and mean density, via exploiting an unexplored combination of the most relevant deposition. Tao and co-workers developed a cost-effective and facile Pechini method for the synthesis of carbon foam.132 For a typical preparation process, citric acid was used as the starting material and magnesium nitrate was chosen as the foaming agent. Moreover, the mixture of starch and polyvinylpyrrolidone was also investigated as a precursor for the fabrication of carbon foam, via freeze-drying and carbonization process.133
4. Properties and applications of carbon foam
Compared with traditional materials, carbon foam possesses unique physical and chemical characteristics, as well as the merits of being environmentally friendly and economical. Some representative performances of carbon foam are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the typical performance of carbon foam materials




Performance
Reported value
Material
Carbonaceous precursor
Reference




Thermal conductivity (at room temperature)
0.043–150 W m−1 K−1
Carbon foam
Sucrose; mesophase pitch

134 and 135



Porosity
∼99.6%
Carbon foam
Melamine foam

136



Specific surface area
∼2630 m2 g−1
Carbon foam
Glucose

137



Bulk density
0.005 g cm−3
Carbon foam
Melamine foam

136



Electromagnetic shielding effectiveness
∼85 dB (8.2–12.4 GHz)
Multi-wall carbon nanotubes/carbon foam composite (thickness is 2.75 mm)
Coal tar pitch

138



Electrical conductivity
28.89 × 103 S m−1
Multi-wall carbon nanotubes/carbon foam composite
Coal tar pitch

139



Compressive strength
∼42 MPa
Carbon fiber/carbon foam composite
Phenolic resin

140



Flexure strength
∼62 MPa
Carbon microspheres/carbon foam composite
Phenolic resin

141



Fracture toughness
∼170 J m−2
Carbon fiber/polyether ether ketone/carbon foam composite
Unknown (commercial KFOAM from Koppers)

142



Anti-ablation
2560 °C (oxy-acetylene flame)
Carbon fibrils/carbon foam composite
Polyurethane + novolac resin + coal tar pitch

143





As listed in Table 1, carbon foam possesses many excellent properties, including adjustable thermal conductivity, large surface area, low density, high electromagnetic shielding effectiveness, high electrical conductivity, high mechanical strength, anti-ablation, etc. Achieving mastery over the properties of carbon foam is significantly beneficial to promoting its applications. Generally, these properties can be tailored by adjusting the porous structure of carbon foam, via selecting various precursors and synthesis techniques.
To obtain the desired properties, it is important to understand what roles the characteristics of porous structures (porosity, pore geometry, pore size, etc.) play in influencing the specific properties. For example, the surface area of carbon foam mostly depends on its porosity, high porosity usually corresponds to a large surface area. That is to say, the open-cell carbon foam possesses a larger surface area than the closed-cell carbon foam. The mechanical strength of carbon foam is determined by ligaments and cell walls (as illustrated in Fig. 2). Specifically, the mechanical strength is influenced by the combined effect of its relative density, the degree to which the cells are open or closed, and the shape anisotropy ratios of the cells. Closed-cell carbon foam normally exhibits better mechanical strength than open-cell carbon foam. For thermal conductivity, it can be tailored by controlling the density of cells, that is to say, high porosity leads to low thermal conductivity. This is why open-cell carbon foam intrinsically exhibits good thermal insulation properties. In contrast to open-cell carbon foam, closed-cell carbon foam often presents high thermal conduction properties. Moreover, carbon foam shows high electrical conductivity because of the intrinsic features of most carbon materials. It is believed that the electrical conductivity increases linearly with relative density. The treatment temperature also affects its electrical conductivity via influencing its crystalline degree. The carbon foam treated with a higher temperature easily forms a graphite-like structure, therefore it possesses higher electrical conductivity.
Over the past decades, carbon foam has been explored for many potential applications and has proven to be one of the most promising carbon materials. Next, we will discuss the versatility of carbon foam in thermal management, adsorption, energy storage, electromagnetic shielding, catalyst support, sensors, and so on.
4.1 Thermal management
Because of its specific porous structure, carbon foam exhibits good thermal stability and thermal conduction/insulation performance. In particular, the thermal performance of carbon foam can be adjusted via the control of the cellular structure. To the best of our knowledge, more carbon foam is utilized for thermal conduction/insulation than any other purpose. There are three main factors that influence the heat flow in carbon foam, including the volume fraction of the solid phase (such as ligament and cell wall), the poor conductivity of the enclosed gas, as well as the cell size (it could restrain convection or reduce radiation through repeated absorption and reflection). It is worth mentioning that the application of carbon foam in the thermal field depends on its cellular structure. Generally, carbon foam with a closed-cell structure usually shows good thermal conduction performance. This is owing to the high fraction of the solid phase, which can efficiently transmit the heat flow. In particular, graphitized carbon foam with a closed-cell structure always possesses a graphite-like lattice parameter, which naturally leads to high thermal conductivity. Nevertheless, carbon foam with an open-cell structure exhibits good thermal insulation performance, which arises from the interconnected porous structure with extra-high porosity.
Initially, Burchell's group disclosed that carbon foam with a graphitic network could result in a thermal conductivity of 150 W m−1 K−1, which was suitable for thermal management applications.135 Subsequently, with regards to thermal conduction applications, researchers usually introduce a material with a high thermal conductivity to further enhance the inherent thermal conductive performance of carbon foam. For example, we proposed a strategy using carbon nanotubes as reinforcement. This indicated that the addition of carbon nanotubes efficiently improved the thermal conductivity of carbon foam.139 Sihn's group established a sandwich construction composed of a carbon foam core and unidirectional graphite/epoxy composite facesheets as a thermal management system.144 They noted that the thermal transport in the composite is dominated by phonon transport. Additionally, research from Celzerd's group demonstrated that the thermal conduction performance of carbon foam was significantly improved by the addition of graphite fillers, which makes carbon foam an interesting and cheap candidate for thermal storage applications.145,146
There are more studies about the thermal insulation applications of carbon foam. Theoretically, the value of thermal conductivity (λ) of carbon foam is composed of four parts, conduction through the solid (λs), radiation through the cell walls and across the cell voids (λr), convection within the cells (λc), and conduction through the gas (λg). These four contributions mean that non-graphitizing carbon foam has low thermal conductivity, which is supposed to be a good candidate for thermal insulation applications. Some numerical studies also predicted that carbon foam was suitable for thermal insulation applications.147–149 Concerning the experimental studies, Zhan's group presented research on the thermal insulation performance of carbon foam.150 The obtained carbon foam possessed a thermal conductivity of 0.06 W m−1 K−1. It could be fired under an acetylene flame (1200 °C), exhibiting good potential as a thermal insulating material for energy-saving buildings. Farhan and co-workers explored the fireproofing application of carbon foam, which was prepared from precursors consisting of coal tar pitch, novolac resin, and waste rigid polyurethane.143 The thermal conductivity of the obtained carbon foam was around 0.06 W m−1 K−1. Oxy-acetylene ablation testing (2560 °C) was performed and the results showed that the carbon foam was a reliable material for thermal protection systems. Zhao and co-workers designed a carbon foam composite from polypropylene and polytetrafluoroethylene.151 The obtained carbon foam not only reached a thermal conductivity of as low as 0.0365 W m−1 K−1 but also exhibited good mechanical strength. Hence, it was thought to be a good candidate for a novel thermal insulation material. Furthermore, Chen's group investigated the thermal insulation application of carbon foam synthesized from melamine foam.152 They noted that the value of the thermal conductivity was closely related to the diameter of the pores, and a smaller pore diameter corresponded to a lower thermal conductivity. This paves the way for the design of novel thermal insulation materials based on carbon foam.
4.2 Adsorption
Adsorption is a physicochemical phenomenon that universally exists in the natural world. The fundamental principle of the adsorption process is that the adsorbent can selectively adsorb one or more components from the multicomponent gas or solutions, via the interactive forces between them. As is well-known, materials used for adsorption applications usually need to have a porous structure with a large surface area and good selectivity.153–158 As a representative carbonaceous material with a 3D porous architecture, carbon foam is composed of numerous foam cells and ligaments, which naturally lead to a high specific surface area. Especially, polymer-based carbon foam with an open-cell structure can achieve an ultrahigh surface area and excellent super-hydrophobicity. Therefore, carbon foam is deemed as a promising adsorbent. In the past few years, carbon foam has been extensively reported as an absorbent for organic pesticides, gas, oil, organic solvents, sound, etc.
A comprehensive study on the adsorption of N2, CH4, and CO2 by carbon foam was reported by Rufford's group.159 The carbon foam was derived from banana peel and possessed a specific surface area of 1426 m2 g−1. The results showed that the adsorption capacities at 4000 kPa and 298 K were N2 3.29 mmol g−1, CH4 5.29 mmol g−1, and CO2 9.21 mmol g−1. Prabhakaran's group investigated carbon foam for CO2 capture. Traditional materials used for CO2 capture commonly possess drawbacks such as poor capacity at low pressure, sensitivity to moisture, and instability in the long term.160 Owing to its unique performance, carbon foam could overcome these drawbacks, showing a high CO2 adsorption capacity, low regeneration temperature, good recyclability, and high CO2/N2 selectivity.
At the same time, the inherent hydrophobic nature of carbon foam endows it with promise for applications in adsorption and separation of oil or organics from water. For example, research from Hou's group and their co-workers revealed that carbon foam showed attractive potential as efficient adsorbents for removing organic solvents from water.161 The obtained carbon foam exhibited excellent absorptive performance towards a wide range of organic chemicals and super-hydrophobicity. Fig. 8(A) shows that the absorbed ethanol in carbon foam could be burnt in the air without destroying its 3D porous structure. Fig. 8(B) and (C) indicate that the carbon foam was able to efficiently remove oil and benzene films from water.
 Fig. 8  (A) Digital images of (1) carbon foam immersed in ethanol, (2) burning of ethanol in carbon foam, (3) carbon foam after burning of adsorbed ethanol. (B) Carbon foam put in oil and water. (C) Removal of benzene from the water surface using carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 161 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Carbon foam could be utilized for the removal of hazardous contaminants from wastewater. Choi's group explored the removal of chromium mixtures, nickel, and copper from wastewater by adsorption with Fe2O3/carbon foam.162 The test results showed that the adsorption capacities for copper, nickel, and chromium were 12.0, 9.5, and 33.0 mg g−1, respectively. Dhakate's group designed a graphite intercalation compound (GIC) functionalized carbon foam for the removal of pentavalent arsenic from wastewater.163 The obtained carbon foam could be recycled after treatment with mixed acid. The effect of GIC in carbon foam on the removal of As(V) and the mechanism of As(V) adsorption were investigated. The calculation by the Langmuir isotherm showed that the adsorption capacity was 62.5 μg g−1. Accordingly, carbon foam was thought to be a promising candidate for the treatment of wastewater.
Also, the application of carbon foam for sound absorbing has been developed. Celzard's group presented research on the acoustic properties of carbon foam prepared from flavonoid tannins.164 As carbon foam had a high airflow resistivity which resulted in a poor sound absorption performance, they proposed a strategy to design a material with the desired resistivity via choosing the density of the carbon foam. To make carbon foam an excellent sound-absorbing material, they claimed that the double porosity concept should be applied to improve the sound absorption coefficient.
4.3 Energy storage
With the rapid consumption of fossil fuels, environmental pollution and the exhaustion of energy resources have become ubiquitous in the past years; hence, renewable and clean energy has gained substantial attention from all over the world. Substantial efforts have been made to explore novel energy storage materials, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), lithium–sulfur batteries (Li–S batteries), fuel cells, supercapacitors, solar cells, hydrogen energy, and so on.165–182 Carbon materials, including carbon nanotubes, graphene, carbon nanofibers, carbon foam, etc., have been endowed with great expectations because of their unique advantages.183–188 Among these various carbon materials, carbon foam not only shows a high specific area and electrical conductivity but also possesses good thermal stability, high strength, and excellent corrosion resistance while being lightweight. Moreover, because of its unique 3D porous microstructure, carbon foam could offer spatial networks for electron and ion pathways. Therefore, carbon foam is considered to be a promising material for energy storage and exhibits prospective applications in this field.189–206

4.3.1 Lithium batteries. 
As regards lithium batteries, carbon foam could be applied as a free-standing electrode or current collector. Lee's group investigated the application of a Fe3O4/carbon foam composite as an anode material for LIBs.207 In this work, mesocellular carbon foam was used as a host material to accommodate the volume expansion of Fe3O4 nanoparticles during the cycling process and enable high electronic conductivity. The experimental results showed that the as-prepared sample could effectively mitigate durability issues, leading to an excellent rate performance. In particular, the electrode with 45 wt% Fe3O4 presented a first charge capacity of 1007 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 (∼0.1C rate) with 111% capacity retention at the 150th cycle and retained 37% capacity at 7 A g−1 (∼7C rate). Wei and co-workers reported their work on 3D nitrogen-doped carbon foam@CNTs hybrid hosting TiO2 nanoparticles as a free-standing electrode for LIBs.208 Doping with nitrogen can endow carbon foam with enhanced electron transfer and excellent wettability, hence nitrogen-doped carbon foam (NCF) is prevalent in applications of energy storage.209 In this work, a flexible and free-standing electrode composed of carbon foam and CNTs-TiO2 was fabricated by a facile method using melamine as the starting material for the carbon framework. The results showed that the as-prepared electrode exhibited excellent lithium storage performance and ultra-long cycling stability. Fig. 9 shows the synthesis route and cycling performance of the as-fabricated electrode at 10C.
 Fig. 9  A schematic diagram of the synthesis process of NCF@CNTs-TiO2 and its long cycling performance at 10C. Reproduced from ref. 208 with the permission of Elsevier. 
Due to their extra high theoretical capacity and energy density, Li–S batteries have drawn intensive attention in the past years. However, the commercialization of Li–S batteries is hindered by some issues, including the volume expansion of sulfur during the charge–discharge process, the poor conductivity of sulfur, and the shuttle effect.210 Introducing carbon foam was thought to be an efficient solution to address the aforementioned issues of Li–S batteries via constructing a conductive framework and improving sulfur loading. Yang's group studied the synthesis and performance of Li–S batteries using carbon foam as a current collector.211 It is worthy of note that the nitrogen element was doped in carbon foam to form nitrogen-doped carbon foam (NCF). The resulting batteries presented a large reversible capacity of 1124 mA h g−1 and retained a high specific capacity of 902.8 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.5C. The good cycling performance and rate capability were attributed to the high porosity and conductive 3D network of NCF.
Xiang and co-workers found that carbon foam@CNTs decorated MgO nanoparticles could be used as an efficient cathode for high-performance Li–S batteries.212 The investigation revealed that nitrogen-doped carbon foam not only offered an interconnected conductive framework but also played a critical role in suppressing the shuttling effect via the enhanced chemisorption of lithium polysulfides. Because of these advantages, the corresponding electrode had a high initial areal capacity (10.4 mA h cm−2) and still retained 8.8 mA h cm−2 over 50 cycles. Moreover, Fong's group presented a study on N-doped carbon foam decorated with MoO2/Mo2C nanocrystals for lithium-oxygen batteries.213 The investigation indicated that the as-prepared MoO2/Mo2C@carbon foam electrode exhibited an excellent overall rate performance and good cyclability in a lithium-oxygen battery (see Fig. 10). This excellent electrochemical performance was contributed to by the 3D porous carbon framework of carbon foam.
 Fig. 10  A schematic of the synthesis of MoO2/Mo2C@carbon foam and the first discharge/charge profiles for the as-prepared cathodes (100 mA g−1). Reproduced from ref. 213 with the permission of the ACS. 


4.3.2 Supercapacitors. 
Carbon foam also shows potential for applications in supercapacitors with high energy density and high specific capacitance. Zhang's group designed a novel flexible electrode composed of NiCo2S4 nanosheets and nitrogen-doped carbon foam (NCF) to improve the energy density of the supercapacitor.214 Thanks to the compositional features and the electrode with 3D architecture, the supercapacitor exhibited excellent cycling stability and ultrahigh capacitance (877 F g−1 at 20 A g−1).
The application of carbon foam for all-solid-state supercapacitors (SSCs) was also investigated. Wang's group developed a new type of compressible SSCs using carbon foam as a high-performance electrode.215 The investigation demonstrated that this electrode possessed ultra-high wettability and the corresponding SSC could retain a stable electrochemical performance (see Fig. 11) even under 60% strain, owing to the rich nitrogen content and robust interconnected network of the carbon foam.
 Fig. 11  A photo of an SSC device (a). Volumetric capacitance and specific capacitance (b). Photos showing compressibility of the device (c). Capacitance retention at different degrees of compression (d). An LED illuminated by using the PVA/LiCl-NCF electrode as the connecting wire without strain and with compression (e). Reproduced from ref. 215 with the permission of Wiley. 


4.3.3 Fuel cells. 
Furthermore, carbon foam has been reported for applications in fuel cells. Gérard Perrier's group explored the application of carbon foam for microbial fuel cells (MFCs).216 MFCs can be utilized to reduce the organic charge in wastewater and economically produce electrical energy.217 Their electricity production capacity mainly depended on the density and growth status of biofilms on the anodes. Composites consisted of a porous structure and nanostructured materials have been widely explored as anodes of MFCs because this kind of architecture is advantageous for biofilm propagation and electron transfer from the bacteria to the electrode. The researchers set up an MFC using reticulated vitreous carbon foam as the electrode and this MFC reached a power density of 40 W m−3. Moreover, Hou's group conducted research on utilizing reticulated carbon foam as an anode for MFCs.218 The results indicated that a high projected current density (>4.0 mA cm−1) and a volumetric current density (18.7 mA cm−2) could be achieved.


4.3.4 Solar cells and others. 
Due to the advantages of being abundant, clean, and economical, solar cells have been highly rated since they were invented by researchers. Recently, carbon foam was demonstrated to be an efficient solution for solving issues related to electron transfer kinetics and thermal conductivity. Lee's group and Kang's group established quantum-dot sensitized solar cells using mesocellular carbon foam as a counter electrode.219 The average pore size of the obtained carbon foam was ∼25 and 4 nm, and the designed counter electrode quantum-dot sensitized solar cells had a maximum energy conversion efficiency of 1.75% after 48 h. This efficiency was much higher than that of quantum-dot sensitized solar cells employing Pt or commercial carbon as counter electrodes. Additionally, Zhang's group investigated the paraffin/carbon foam composite phase change material for latent thermal energy storage.220 Latent thermal energy storage using a phase change material is an attractive technique which can realize high energy storage density.
Moreover, Froudakis's group reported that carbon foam could also be employed for enhancing hydrogen storage.221 It demonstrated that carbon foam was helpful in the context of H2 storage via spillover because its surface was extremely active, bearing carbon-based radicals near the edges, oxygen-containing groups, and defect-sites. The obtained composite exhibited a high H2 sorption capacity of 5 wt%, at RT and 2 MPa.

4.4 Electromagnetic interference shielding
Owing to the rapid increase in the use of mobile electronic devices (e.g. laptops, cell phones, and digital cameras), electromagnetic wave pollution has become a severe problem that threatens the environment and health of human beings. To address this problem, electromagnetic interference shielding materials have emerged, which play a critical role in protecting sensitive information and improving the electromagnetic immunity of apparatus systems against external fields.222–227 Furthermore, they are also capable of reducing the electromagnetic emissions of single devices or apparatus and improving electromagnetic compatibility performance. Common electromagnetic shielding materials involve ferromagnetic materials, conductive polymers, carbon, ferroelectric materials, and so on. Among them, carbon foam boasts promising applications in the electromagnetic shielding field, because of its remarkable performance including high electrical conductivity, high mechanical strength, light weight, easy workability, low cost, resistance to corrosion, and good thermal stability.228–237
The parameter used for evaluating the electromagnetic shielding effect is shielding effectiveness (SE), which can be calculated from the logarithm of the ratio of the incident wave power (Pi) to the transmitted wave power (Pt) through the material, i.e., SE = 10log(Pi/Pt). Generally, the typical electromagnetic shielding mechanism includes three processes: absorption, reflection, and multiple-reflection. Recently, extensive efforts have been devoted to the electromagnetic shielding application of carbon foam or carbon foam-based composites. According to these experimental and simulation results, carbon foam or carbon foam-based composites usually exhibit an electromagnetic shielding mechanism which is dominated by absorption or reflection.
Micheli's group firstly systematically revealed the electromagnetic shielding property of commercial carbon foam (GRAFOAM®FPA) in the frequency band 1–4 GHz.238 In their study, the measurement of SE was performed using the reverberation chamber technique. This technique could simulate an electromagnetic field in a complex real-life environment well. The measurement results indicated that the carbon foam possessed a high SE value. Then, they further used the same technique to investigate the relationship between the electrical contact of carbon foam with a metallic surface and its electromagnetic shielding performance.239 Results demonstrated that a not perfect metal-to-foam contact determined a leakage and reduced the SE, especially at high frequency. It was proved that a precise metal-to-foam contact was mandatory to obtain satisfactory electromagnetic shielding properties. Their work initiated extensive research on the electromagnetic shielding applications of carbon foam. However, owing to the complexity of setup and measuring errors, this reverberation chamber technique was not widely adopted to measure SE in the following research.
To enhance the electromagnetic shielding performance of carbon foam, an effective way is to construct a carbon foam-based composite with the addition of materials with high electrical conductivity or high magnetic permeability. Kumar and co-workers demonstrated the SE of lightweight carbon foam with ferrocene accumulation.240 In this work, carbon foam was synthesized from coal tar pitch and nanosized ferrocene. The measurement of the electromagnetic shielding performance was conducted by the waveguide method using a VNA (vector network analyzer). It is important to note that VNA is a prevalent technique to measure the electromagnetic performance of materials. The experimental results indicated that the carbon foam with 10 wt% ferrocene exhibited an excellent SE value of ∼81 dB, and the thickness was 2.7 mm. They also noted that the high conductivity had a positive influence on the electromagnetic shielding property of the carbon foam. This work implies that carbon foam is a particularly promising electromagnetic shielding material.
Furthermore, Prabhakaran's group presented a study on the electromagnetic shielding property of carbon foam prepared from sucrose and sawdust particles.241 In the frequency range of 8–12 GHz (X-band), the largest SE value of the obtained carbon foam was 53 dB (see Fig. 12(a)), exhibiting an excellent electromagnetic shielding performance. The effect of carbon foam density on the SE value was evaluated, the result is presented in Fig. 12(b).
 Fig. 12  The representative EMI SE of carbon foam as a function of frequency (a) and the EMI SE of carbon foam as a function of foam density (b). Reproduced from ref. 241 with the permission of Elsevier. 
As related to magnetic fillers, we investigated the carbon foam composite obtained from coal tar pitch and Ni–Zn ferrite.242 Ni–Zn ferrite is widely used for electromagnetic interference shielding purposes because of its high magnetic permeability and magnetic loss. We introduced Ni–Zn ferrite into coal tar pitch, and the mixture precursor experienced foaming and carbonization processes. It was demonstrated that the Ni–Zn ferrite filler could improve the complex relative permittivity and permeability of carbon foam. The results revealed that the electromagnetic shielding mechanism was dominated by absorption, and the obtained carbon foam composite reached a high SE of 42 dB (X-band).
4.5 Catalyst support
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are two of the most critical chemical processes in renewable energy storage and conversion systems like fuel cells, water splitting systems, and metal–air batteries.243–248 Noble metal-based materials are the most popular catalysts for the OER and ORR, but their high cost and moderate durability have restricted their real-world applications. Owing to its advantages in mechanical strength, such as its compressive strength and 3D electroconductive network, carbon foam is suitable for application as the structural material for catalysts.249–254 Moreover, benefiting from its 3D porous structure, carbon foam can prevent the aggregation of nanosized catalysts, which naturally leads to effective contact with an aqueous electrolyte. At the same time, doped carbon foam is advantageous to form more effective active catalytic sites and to offer an interconnected network structure for rapid interfacial electron charge transfer.
Du's group reported an efficient electrode for the OER composed of CeO2 and Ni(OH)2, using carbon foam as the substrate.255 In their study, carbon foam was doped by the S, O, and N elements and was proven to enhance the OER activity. During the OER process, the formation of NiOOH intermediates was facilitated because of the abundant CO groups in the substrate. The testing results indicated that the designed electrode exhibited a significantly improved OER performance with an onset potential of 240 mV and had a small Tafel slope of 57 mV dec−1 (see Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  (a) CV curves and (b) polarization curves of different samples. (c and d) The corresponding onset potential and Tafel curves for the samples derived from (b). (e) Stability test by continuous OER recorded on a CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF electrode. NOSCF: N, O, and S doped carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 255 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Jiang and co-workers reported Co nanoparticles embedded in carbon foam as bifunctional electrocatalysts for rechargeable long-life Zn–air batteries.256 The bifunctional activity parameter of the representative Co/carbon foam was as low as 0.84 V. They claimed that the long-term durability and remarkable bifunctional activity toward both the ORR and OER of Co/carbon foam catalysts were attributed to their 3D porous architecture. Furthermore, when Co/carbon foam was used as an air electrode catalyst in rechargeable Zn–air batteries, an excellent performance was realized. Fig. 14 presents the performance comparison of the air cathode using the Co/carbon foam catalyst and Pt/C + RuO2 catalyst. It can be observed that the performance of batteries equipped with Co/carbon foam was comparable to that of a noble metal Pt/C + RuO2 catalyst.
 Fig. 14  Performance of the corresponding Zn–air battery: open-circuit plots (a), discharge polarization (V–j) curves and the corresponding power density curves (b), charge and discharge polarization (V–j) curves (c), specific capacities (d), energy density plots (e), long-term stability (f), and galvanostatic discharge and charge cycling curves (g). A photo of a red LED (2.0 V) powered by two Zn–air batteries (h). Reproduced from ref. 256 with the permission of Wiley. 
4.6 Sensors
As a kind of typical detecting device, sensors have drawn much attention because of their wide applications in medicine, chemistry, biology, and wearable electronic fields.257–261 Generally, materials used for sensors always require high sensitivity, electrical conductivity, and biocompatibility, for instance, platinum, transition metal oxides, gold, conductive polymers, and carbon.262–266 Recently, much effort has been devoted to carbon foam for sensors, owing to its extraordinary performance, including high electrical conductivity, high mechanical strength, large surface area, and good biocompatibility.267–272 Firstly, the large surface area of carbon foam makes it suitable for loading abundant active materials. Secondly, the high mechanical strength and electrical conductivity of carbon foam could provide conductive scaffolds to support active materials and improve the electrical conductivity of sensing materials. Last but not least, the good biocompatibility of carbon foam can remarkably enlarge the scope of the applications of sensing materials. Up to now, diverse electrochemical and gas sensors with high performance such as a low detection limit, wide linear range, and short response time, have been achieved by using platforms fabricated from carbon foam-based composites.
Initially, Lee and Park's group designed a novel and efficient electrochemical biosensing platform using a composite system composed of Fe3O4 nanoparticles, oxidative enzymes, and carbon foam.273 Electrochemical biosensors employing enzymes have been widely used in biotechnology fields, such as immunoassays, clinical monitoring, and environmental control. As is well-known, the properties of enzyme biosensors are dominated by the intrinsic characteristics of the electrode materials. In this study, the authors fabricated a convenient electrochemical glucose biosensor via incorporating magnetic nanoparticles and glucose oxidase into carbon foam. Thanks to the unique properties of carbon foam including high conductivity and large specific surface area, the constructed biosensor showed a high sensitivity of 19–36 nA mM−1 in a broad detection range (0.5–10 × 10−3 M), as depicted in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  The current response curves of the nanocomposite-based paste electrodes in different concentrations of glucose: (a) the nanocomposite using carbon foam with 10 wt% of magnetite and (b) the nanocomposite using carbon foam with 20 wt% of magnetite. Reproduced from ref. 273 with the permission of Wiley. 
At the same time, Chen's group also published some work on the application of carbon foam as sensors.274 They firstly studied a Co3O4 nanowire/carbon foam composite as an electrochemical sensing platform for efficient H2O2 detection. H2O2 shows wide applications in many fields including clinical studies, direct borohydride-H2O2 fuel cells, environmental protection, textiles, and food manufacturing. The electrochemical technique is deemed as an efficient approach for H2O2 analysis, owing to its satisfying selectivity, facile operation, and good sensitivity. Nevertheless, for electrochemical analysis, the oxidation or reduction of H2O2 at normal solid electrodes are hindered by a high overpotential and slow electrode kinetics, leading to the deterioration in the sensing properties. In their work, they designed and fabricated new electrocatalysts with a 3D porous architecture. The composite is composed of Co3O4 nanowires and N-doped carbon foam. The results showed that H2O2 could be detected with a good linear response (R2 = 0.9939), a wide detection range of 0.01–1.05 mM, and a low detection limit, using the Co3O4 nanowires/carbon foam as an electrochemical sensing platform.
Then, they reported the application of Co3O4@carbon foam for ethanol gas sensing.275 Ethanol sensing has drawn tremendous attention because of its wide application such as monitoring biomedical and chemical processes and detecting ethanol vapor in drivers' breath. Co3O4 is a promising material for use in ethanol sensors. However, this material has an inherently large resistance. Hence, they designed a Co3O4@carbon foam composite, aiming to obtain an efficient ethanol gas sensor. This architecture ingeniously utilizes the large surface area and high conductivity of carbon foam, that is, carbon foam not only provides mechanical support for Co3O4 but also improves the electron mobility of the composite. The results showed that the Co3O4@carbon foam composite presented excellent sensing performance, such as low resistance, fast response and recovery time, high sensitivity, and a limit of detection as low as 15 ppm.
Also, Liu's group found that carbon foam could also be used as a pressure sensor.276 Flexible piezoresistive sensors play a critical role in wearable electronic devices, and they usually possess the advantages of high sensitivity to pressure and deformation and easy signal collection. In this study, researchers fabricated a promising piezoresistive sensor using carbon foam and an interdigital electrode (see Fig. 16). According to the test results, the fabricated sensors possessed an ultrahigh sensitivity of 100.29/kPa and were able to distinguish pressure ranging from 3 Pa to 10 KPa.
 Fig. 16  The fabrication process for the pressure sensor using carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 276 with the permission of the RSC. 
4.7 Other applications
Aside from the aforementioned applications, the application of carbon foam in other fields such as the medical acoustics field has also been reported. For instance, Czarnecki's group conducted a study about bone growth on a carbon foam scaffold.277 Scaffold constructs are basic structures for tissue repair and regeneration; nevertheless, their development is commonly hindered by the complexity of tissue, the occurrence of adverse reactions, and moderate biocompatibility. Inspired by the merits of carbon foam, the researchers designed a new scaffold based on a carbon foam skeleton. It was proven that this foam scaffold possessed a high capacity to maintain collagen production and bone growth, resulting from the fact that the carbon foam could provide a good balance of formability, biocompatibility, and mechanics.
5. Challenges, perspectives, and outlooks
To sum up, in this paper, we reviewed the microstructure, synthesis, and applications of carbon foam. Owing to its unique 3D porous structure, carbon foam exhibits superior properties which make it suitable for versatile applications including thermal management, adsorption, energy storage, electromagnetic shielding, catalyst support, and sensors. The synthetic approaches of carbon foam from carbonaceous materials including polymers, pitches, and biomass were summarized. Normally, carbon foam derived from polymers easily obtains flexibility and an open-cell structure. It usually exhibits good thermal insulation properties. Hence it is suitable for catalyst support, energy storage, and adsorption. However, the shortcoming of this kind of carbon foam is poor mechanical strength (e.g. compressive strength). Carbon foam obtained from pitches generally possesses a closed-cell structure, exhibiting a high mechanical strength. Specifically, graphitized carbon foam obtained from pitches has high thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity. In this case, it is suitable for thermal management and electromagnetic shielding. When carbon foam is synthesized from biomass materials, its microstructure and properties mainly depend on the characteristics of the biomass materials. Based on the reported research, the major applications of carbon foam for thermal management, energy storage, adsorption, electromagnetic shielding, catalyst support, and sensors were also demonstrated.
Furthermore, in this section, the challenges and perspectives of carbon foam are discussed. To date, although remarkable progress has been made, the study of carbon foam still faces some critical issues and challenges to be addressed.
5.1 Compatibility with different materials
The compatibility of carbon foam with other kinds of materials requires further enhancement. This is because carbon foam is hardly ever utilized in its pristine form, that is, the feasible applications of carbon foam usually involve introducing different materials with special performances. In this way, the performance of carbon foam will be significantly enhanced by the synergistic effect, which relies on the compatibility between carbon foam and the introduced materials. For instance, when preparing a composite from carbon foam and graphene, the component distribution and interfacial interaction between graphene and the precursor of carbon foam (such as pitches) are difficult to handle. However, these two points are critical to the performance of the resultant material. This means that fundamental research on the compatibility of carbon foam precursors with introduced materials is essential and could offer a guide to the synthesis and design of carbon foam composites.
5.2 Controllable design and precise fabrication
The precise fabrication and controllable design of carbon foam is critical to its practical application. As is well-known, the unique performance of carbon foam mainly results from its 3D porous structure including the pore size, pore shape, and pore density. Meanwhile, its applications undoubtedly depend on its unique performance. Therefore, significant improvement in the performance of carbon foam could be achieved by rational tailoring of the pore structure and morphology. However, the existing research only involves the control of pore size in a limited range, and precise fabrication and controllable design of carbon foam has not been realized. In this case, it is essential to devote much more effort to computational modeling, to understand the fundamental principles of the formation and evolution process of pore structure. Computational modeling has contributed a lot to predicting new materials with extraordinary properties, and it is believed to be an efficient tool for calculation and simulation of molecular dynamics. Hence, it is feasible to realize the controllable fabrication of carbon foam with the guidance of computational modeling results.
5.3 A facile and cost-effective technique for scaling up production
Considering industrial applications always require a large amount of carbon foam, it is necessary to develop a facile and cost-effective technique for scaling up production. At present, the synthesis techniques (e.g., the templating method) mostly focus on the fabrication of carbon foam with sizes at the centimeter level. It is impractical to realize large-scale production via simply increasing the size of the reaction vessel and maintaining the molar ratio of precursors since the reaction kinetics will be significantly altered. In a word, to tackle these challenges, tremendous future efforts should be focused on comprehensive and systematic research into the architecture design of carbon foam, as well as the better understanding of its fundamental mechanism.
5.4 3D structured carbon frameworks
Very recently, Hou's group reported a freestanding anode composed of SnO2 nanoparticles and carbon foam for high-performance potassium-ion batteries.278 In their work, SnO2 was anchored on carbon foam using electrodeposition. The 3D conductive carbon frame of the electrode could not only facilitate electrolyte infiltration and K ion transfer but could also prevent SnO2 nanoparticles from losing electrical contact after large volume changes. The results indicated that this freestanding electrode delivered a high K storage-specific capacity, outstanding cycling stability, and excellent rate performance.
Fu's group designed Co3Fe7@Co5.47N/carbon foam air cathodes used for flexible Al–air batteries.279 The fabricated electrodes could enhance the electrochemical performance and stability and facilitate fast mass transport and electron transfer, which was attributed to the unique interfacial structure between Co3Fe7 and Co5.47N supported by carbon foam. The results showed that the corresponding Al–air batteries exhibited good flexibility and excellent power density.
We believe that the potential of carbon foam for state-of-the-art electronics such as potassium-ion batteries, zinc–air batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and wearable electronics will be further explored, by making full use of its merits including large surface area, high electrical conductivity, and light weight with high mechanical strength.280–286 All in all, it is believed that with further research and continuous efforts, carbon foam will offer more possibilities for modern applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
H. L., S. W., N. T., F. Y., and C. Y. thank the supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51802258), project funded by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2020T130525), the Shaanxi Province Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2018BSHEDZZ113), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51771145), ISF-NSFC Joint Research Program (No. 51961145305), and the Shaanxi Natural Science Basic Research Plan, China (No. 2020JM-464).
References
P. Avouris and C. Dimitrakopoulos, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 86–97 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin and J. M. Berlin, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Zhu, C. L. Xu and D. H. Wu, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2002, 296, 884–886 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Kuan, C. M. Ma and W. P. Chang, 
            et al.
          , Compos. Sci. Technol., 2005, 65, 1703–1710 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, K. Q. Lu and Z. R. Tang, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3717–3734 RSC .
Y. G. Ko, U. S. Choi and J. S. Kim, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2002, 40, 2661–2672 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terrones, A. R. Botello-Méndez and J. Campos-Delgado, 
            et al.
          , Nano Today, 2010, 5, 351–372 CrossRef .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696–3717 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1959–1963 RSC .
K. Umemoto, S. Saito and S. Berber, 
            et al.
          , Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 193409 CrossRef .

          W. Ford, US Pat., 3121050,  1964 .

          M. Inagaki, F. Kang and M. Toyoda, et al., Advanced materials science and engineering of carbon, Butterworth-Heinemann, Massachusetts,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. V. Rode, S. T. Hyde and E. G. Gamaly, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Phys. A, 1999, 69, S755–S758 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bruneton, C. Tallaron and N. Gras-Naulin, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2002, 40, 1919–1927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Song and Y. Song, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2007, 45, 2092–2097 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Li, H. B. Zhang and X. Xiong, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2010, 527, 2993–2997 CrossRef .
S. Sihn, S. Ganguli and D. P. Anderson, 
            et al.
          , Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 767–773 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tsyntsarski, B. Petrova and T. Budinova, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2010, 48, 3523–3530 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Liu and L. Gan, 
            et al.
          , New Carbon Mater., 2010, 25, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou and Q. L. Chen, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2016, 122, 370–376 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Y. Li and T. Chen, 
            et al.
          , J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2016, 117, 290–295 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Liu and M. Fang, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2011, 49, 1782–1786 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narasimman and K. Prabhakaran, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1999–2009 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narasimman and K. Prabhakaran, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5583–5593 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, H. Park and K. Shin, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2014, 76, 357–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Q. Zhao and C. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Des., 2017, 131, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, L. Liu and M. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2017, 123, 223–232 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, J. Zhao and G. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 95, 382–393 CrossRef CAS .
A. Septevani, D. A. C. Evans and P. K. Annamalai, 
            et al.
          , Ind. Crops Prod., 2017, 107, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Alshaer, M. A. Rady and S. A. Nada, 
            et al.
          , Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 53, 569–579 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Wang and L. Zhan, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 26, 415–420 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inagaki, J. Qiu and Q. Guo, Carbon, 2015, 87, 128–152 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi and B. V. Sankar, J. Compos. Mater., 2003, 37, 2101–2116 CrossRef CAS .
A. Celzard, W. Zhao and A. Pizzi, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2010, 527, 4438–4446 CrossRef .
G. Chollon, S. Delettrez and F. Langlais, Carbon, 2014, 66, 18–30 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, Z. Chen and S. Ai, 
            et al.
          , J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2019, 142, 104619 CrossRef CAS .
L. Borchardt, Q. L. Zhu and M. E. Casco, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 592–610 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, X. Zhuang and C. Lei, 
            et al.
          , Nano Today, 2019, 24, 103–119 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ohta, Y. Nishi and T. Morishita, 
            et al.
          , New Carbon Mater., 2008, 23, 216–220 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. C. Basso and F. L. Braghiroli, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2012, 50, 2026–2036 CrossRef CAS .
G. Amaral-Labat, E. Gourdon and V. Fierro, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2013, 58, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tondi, V. Fierro and A. Pizzi, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2009, 47, 1480–1492 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiong, M. Liu and L. Gan, 
            et al.
          , Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 411, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mei, G. Zhao and G. Liu, 
            et al.
          , J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 35, 4431–4435 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, M. Zhou and Y. Le, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118689 CrossRef CAS .
F. Canencia, M. Darder and P. Aranda, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 11269–11281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Chen and J. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , J. Porous Mater., 2019, 26, 1305–1312 CrossRef CAS .
R. Luo, Y. Ni and J. Li, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2011, 528, 2023–2027 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, H. Li and K. Li, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 286, 421–427 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zegeye, A. K. Ghamsari and E. Woldesenbet, Composites, Part B, 2014, 60, 268–273 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Song, Y. S. Chung and S. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 103, 85–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhan and R. M. Wang, J. Porous Mater., 2015, 22, 897–906 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhan, R. Wang and H. Jiang, 
            et al.
          , Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 8980–8989 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Song, Y. Lee and Y. S. Kim, 
            et al.
          , Compos. Struct., 2017, 173, 1–8 CrossRef .
X. Qian, M. Ren and D. Yue, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 212, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
T. Beechem, K. Lafdi and A. Elgafy, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1055–1064 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Q. Guo and Y. Song, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2010, 48, 1316–1318 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Li, H. B. Zhang and X. Xiong, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 1143–1146 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Li, H. B. Zhang and X. Xiong, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2011, 528, 2999–3002 CrossRef .
A. Yadav, R. Kumar and G. Bhatia, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2011, 49, 3622–3630 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tsyntsarski, B. Petrova and T. Budinova, 
            et al.
          , Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 154, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xiao, Y. Zhou and Z. Ling, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2013, 59, 530–536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao and P. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 451–461 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhan, R. M. Wang and H. Jiang, 
            et al.
          , J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 110, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim and Y. S. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 30, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, C. Y. Wang and T. Q. Li, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2008, 46, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narasimman, S. Vijayan and K. Prabhakaran, Mater. Lett., 2015, 144, 46–49 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wilson, S. Vijayan and K. Prabhakaran, Carbon, 2017, 118, 545–555 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Huang and Y. Wu, 
            et al.
          , Ind. Crops Prod., 2015, 64, 215–223 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Fan, W. L. Song and X. Li, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2017, 111, 658–666 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, H. Deng and Q. Su, 
            et al.
          , Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 19–24 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hua, S. Wan and L. Sun, 
            et al.
          , J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2018, 93, 3044–3055 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lei and Q. Cheng, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 12860–12870 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, D. Yuan and R. Liu, 
            et al.
          , J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2020, 95, 1348–1360 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, W. Li and S. Liu, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chuang, P. Lei and S. Zhen-hai, 
            et al.
          , Results Phys., 2019, 14, 102448 CrossRef .
J. Marx, S. Roth and A. Brouschkin, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2019, 142, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Marx, M. R. D. Lewke and D. Smazna, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 535–542 CrossRef CAS .
E. Aram and S. Mehdipour-Ataei, Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater., 2016, 65, 358–375 CrossRef CAS .
N. Thongprachan, T. Yamamoto and J. Chaichanawong, 
            et al.
          , Adsorption, 2011, 17, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, Y. Zeng and G. Wang, 
            et al.
          , RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 20643–20651 RSC .
Z. Lou, R. Li and P. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123571 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, H. Yang and D. Zhao, Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 423–432 CrossRef CAS .
O. Klepel, M. Erlitz and A. Garsuch, 
            et al.
          , Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 224, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, X. Liu and H. Meng, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4577–4586 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Meng and L. Chen, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17491–17502 RSC .
G. Nam, S. Choi and H. Byun, 
            et al.
          , Macromol. Res., 2013, 21, 958–964 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wilson, S. Vijayan and K. Prabhakaran, Mater. Des., 2018, 139, 25–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, G. S. Park and S. T. Kim, 
            et al.
          , Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1026–1030 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, H. Zhang and S. Liu, 
            et al.
          , ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 807–812 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, B. Luo and L. Qu, 
            et al.
          , J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2013, 104, 714–717 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Kong and S. Huang, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10813–10824 RSC .
M. Karthik, A. Faik and S. Doppiu, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2015, 87, 434–443 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Song, H. J. Oh and B. G. Kim, 
            et al.
          , Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 76, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Mu and Y. S. Hu, 
            et al.
          , Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 139–145 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. S. Hu and H. Li, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 96–104 RSC .
H. M. Lee, L. K. Kwac and K. H. An, 
            et al.
          , Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 125, 347–352 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma and R. H. Patel, Composites, Part B, 2019, 174, 106943 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Li and Y. Li, 
            et al.
          , Chemosphere, 2019, 216, 379–386 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Park, D. S. Jung and J. K. Lee, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 382–392 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, C. Liu and M. Wu, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8587–8596 CAS .
I. Mochida, Y. Korai and C. H. Ku, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2000, 38, 305–328 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiao, A. Guo and F. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Fuel, 2020, 262, 116671 CrossRef CAS .
R. García, J. L. Crespo and S. C. Martin, 
            et al.
          , Energy Fuels, 2003, 17, 291–301 CrossRef .
H. Liu, T. Li and Y. Shi, 
            et al.
          , J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 108, 310–315 CrossRef CAS .
M. Calvo, R. Garcia and A. Arenillas, 
            et al.
          , Fuel, 2005, 84, 2184–2189 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, E. B. Kennel and A. H. Stiller, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2006, 44, 1535–1543 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Tian and Y. Zhong, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2011, 49, 618–624 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, T. Li and X. Wang, 
            et al.
          , J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 110, 442–447 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prieto, E. Louis and J. M. Molina, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1904–1912 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. Wang and L. Zhan, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2009, 47, 1204–1206 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, S. R. Dhakate and T. Gupta, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5727–5735 RSC .
J. H. Kim and Y. S. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 30, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rios, M. Martinez-Escandell and M. Molina-Sabio, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2006, 44, 1448–1454 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, X. Li and S. Fan, 
            et al.
          , ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5057–5064 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, L. Wang and K. Huo, 
            et al.
          , J. Power Sources, 2019, 430, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
C. Quan, R. Su and N. Gao, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 4335–4351 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, B. Y. Guan and S. Gao, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 648–655 RSC .
P. Kaur, G. Verma and S. Sekhon, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 102, 1–71 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Alonso, S. H. Hakim and S. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1603301 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, J. Gu and W. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21183–21188 RSC .
S. Liu, Z. Huang and R. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 2437–2441 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, Y. Zhang and X. Y. D. Ma, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2018, 140, 227–236 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, H. Jin, M. Chen, W. Li, L. Zhou and Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 303e310 Search PubMed .
Z. Zeng, H. Jin, M. Chen, W. Li, L. Zhou and X. Xue, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2017, 13, 1701388 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, Y. Ding and C. Wang, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16852–16861 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, W. Zhao and P. Li, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 465, 303–312 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, L. Jiang and C. Long, 
            et al.
          , Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 527–536 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lei and Q. Cheng, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 12860–12870 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, Z. Tang and Y. Zhu, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Lett., 2013, 94, 55–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zani, D. Dellasega and V. Russo, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2013, 56, 358–365 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tao, X. Chen and Y. Xia, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3295–3301 RSC .
T. Wang, C. Zhu and L. Song, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 122, 110697 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narasimman and K. Prabhakaran, Carbon, 2013, 55, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Klett, R. Hardy and E. Romine, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2000, 38, 953–973 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, G. He and H. Hu, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2435–2439 RSC .
L. Ni, R. Wang and H. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2018, 139, 1152–1159 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, S. R. Dhakate and T. Gupta, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5727–5735 RSC .
H. Liu, T. Li and T. Huang, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 7583–7590 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, R. Luo and Y. Ni, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 25–27 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and J. Ma, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1451–1456 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reyes and S. Rangaraj, Composites, Part A, 2011, 42, 1–7 CrossRef .
S. Farhan, R. Wang and H. Jiang, 
            et al.
          , Design, 2016, 101, 332–339 CAS .
S. Sihn, S. Ganguli and D. P. Anderson, 
            et al.
          , Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 767–773 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jana, V. Fierro and A. Celzard, Ind. Crops Prod., 2016, 89, 498–506 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jana, V. Fierro and A. Pizzi, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Des., 2015, 83, 635–643 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elgafy and S. Mishra, Heat Mass Transfer, 2014, 50, 545–557 CrossRef .
S. A. Nada and W. G. Alshaer, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 105, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Alshaer, S. A. Nada and M. A. Rady, 
            et al.
          , Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 89, 873–884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. He and L. Zhan, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Lett., 2016, 169, 95–98 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Q. Zhao and C. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Mater. Des., 2017, 131, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Z. Chen and Y. Wang, 
            et al.
          , J. Porous. Mat., 2018, 25, 527–536 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ben-Mansour, M. A. Habib and O. E. Bamidele, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Energy, 2016, 161, 225–255 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Gao and A. E. Creamer, 
            et al.
          , J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 338, 102–123 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Burakov, E. V. Galunin and I. V. Burakova, 
            et al.
          , Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2018, 148, 702–712 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiu, L. Xiao and M. L. Sushko, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700403 CrossRef .
M. H. Sun, S. Z. Huang and L. H. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3479–3563 RSC .
M. Witman, S. Ling and S. Jawahery, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5547–5557 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arami-Niya, T. E. Rufford and Z. Zhu, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 7298–7309 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narasimman, S. Vijayan and K. Prabhakaran, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 578–582 RSC .
S. Chen, G. He and H. Hu, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2435–2439 RSC .
C. G. Lee, S. Lee and J. A. Park, 
            et al.
          , Chemosphere, 2017, 166, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Agrawal, N. Singh and S. Kumari, 
            et al.
          , J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 377, 274–283 CrossRef .
G. Amaral-Labat, E. Gourdon and V. Fierro, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2013, 58, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef .
V. Khare, S. Nema and P. Baredar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 23–33 CrossRef .
X. Zuo, J. Zhu and P. Müller-Buschbaum, 
            et al.
          , Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 113–143 CrossRef CAS .
W. Niu, S. Pakhira and K. Marcus, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800480 CrossRef .
E. A. Olivetti, G. Ceder and G. Gaustad, 
            et al.
          , Joule, 2017, 1, 229–243 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Kong and S. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602543 CrossRef .
X. Fang, W. Weng and J. Ren, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 491–496 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gueon, J. T. Hwang and S. B. Yang, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 226–233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna and R. Attias, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang and G. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907284 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3560–3573 RSC .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki and W. Yoshida, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Cano, D. Banham and S. Ye, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279–289 CrossRef .
H. Li, N. Xiao and Y. Wang, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18852–18860 RSC .
H. Xu, L. Ma and Z. Jin, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 146–160 CrossRef .
G. Zhu, T. Chen and L. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 246–252 CrossRef .
G. Zhu, L. Ma and H. Lv, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1237–1243 RSC .
H. Lu, R. Chen and Y. Hu, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1972–1977 RSC .
K. Aitola, K. Domanski and J. P. Correa Baena, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606398 CrossRef .
Q. Ji, X. Gao and Q. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904961 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna and R. Attias, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
Z. L. Xu, J. K. Kim and K. Kang, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 84–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, J. Ma and G. Corre, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2889–2912 RSC .
W. Niu, Z. Li and K. Marcus, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701642 CrossRef .
T. Yoon, C. Chae and Y. K. Sun, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17325–17330 RSC .
Y. Kim, C. Jo and J. Lee, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1453–1458 RSC .
S. Kumar, S. Ghosh and N. Munichandraiah, 
            et al.
          , Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 235101 CrossRef .
S. He and W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, J. Shao and X. Xiao, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18367–18374 RSC .
H. D. Asfaw, M. R. Roberts and C. W. Tai, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8804–8813 RSC .
S. Jeong, S. An and J. Jeong, 
            et al.
          , J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 245–254 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lin, F. Liu and F. Xu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25306–25312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, H. D. Asfaw and K. Edström, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, Z. Tong and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 322, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiang, L. Yang and Y. Zheng, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18020–18028 RSC .
Z. Zhou, H. Zhang and Y. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef .
K. Xiao, Y. Zeng and J. Long, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15477–15483 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, X. Song and X. Ge, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4726–4736 RSC .
Z. Liu, S. Bai and B. Liu, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13168–13175 RSC .
X. Tao, Y. Liu and W. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2967–2972 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, S. He and C. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 290, 98–108 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Wang and C. Zhong, 
            et al.
          , J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2020, 85, 208–218 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kang, Y. S. Jung and A. S. Cavanagh, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2430–2438 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yuan, B. Wang and H. Wu, 
            et al.
          , J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 10–19 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Z. Fan and M. Q. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202–5206 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T. Lei and T. Qian, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702889 CrossRef .
Z. Cao, J. Zhang and Y. Ding, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8636–8644 RSC .
M. Xiang, H. Wu and H. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702573 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, H. Ang and Q. Yan, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5743–5752 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, J. Wang and G. Xu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Energ. Mater., 2015, 5, 1400977 CrossRef .
K. Xiao, L. X. Ding and G. Liu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5997–6002 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lepage, F. O. Albernaz and G. Perrier, 
            et al.
          , Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 124, 199–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kramer, S. Soukiazian and S. Mahoney, 
            et al.
          , J. Power Sources, 2012, 210, 122–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Q. Liu and G. He, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18609–18613 RSC .
P. Sudhagar, E. Ramasamy and W. H. Cho, 
            et al.
          , Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 34–37 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao and P. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 451–461 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Psofogiannakis, T. A. Steriotis and A. B. Bourlinos, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 933–936 RSC .
D. Jiang, V. Murugadoss and Y. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Polym. Rev., 2019, 59, 280–337 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb and C. B. Hatter, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Z. Wang and X. Liu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9059–9069 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, H. Jin and M. Chen, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
H. Abbasi, M. Antunes and J. I. Velasco, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 103, 319–373 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yuchang, W. Qinlong and L. Fa, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 371–375 RSC .
S. Gupta and N. H. Tai, Carbon, 2019, 152, 159–187 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kuzhir, A. G. Paddubskaya and M. V. Shuba, 
            et al.
          , J. Nanophotonics, 2012, 6, 061715 CrossRef .
R. Kumar, S. Kumari and S. R. Dhakate, Appl. Nanosci., 2015, 5, 553–561 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, N. Xiao and Y. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2016, 105, 224–226 CrossRef .
Q. Li, L. Chen and J. Ding, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2016, 104, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. Liu and S. Roy, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7422–7430 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Shen and X. Pei, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2016, 100, 375–385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Luo and H. Sun, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2018, 136, 299–308 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pastore, A. Delfini and D. Micheli, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2019, 144, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, A. Gupta and S. R. Dhakate, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 20256–20264 RSC .
F. Moglie, D. Micheli and S. Laurenzi, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2012, 50, 1972–1980 CrossRef CAS .
D. Micheli, R. B. Morles and M. Marchetti, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2014, 68, 149–158 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, S. R. Dhakate and P. Saini, 
            et al.
          , RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4145–4151 RSC .
A. Chithra, P. Wilson and S. Vijayan, 
            et al.
          , Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 145, 112076 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Wu and Q. Zhuang, 
            et al.
          , J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 36, 3939–3946 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2275–2309 RSC .
G. L. Chai, K. Qiu and M. Qiao, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1186–1195 RSC .
X. Li, Y. Fang and X. Lin, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17392–17402 RSC .
P. Strasser, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2658–2668 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ding, K. Shen and X. Chen, 
            et al.
          , ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7879–7888 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, C. Zhao and Y. Qu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808043 CrossRef .
W. Niu, K. Marcus and L. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1926–1931 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chun, H. Lee and S. H. Lee, 
            et al.
          , Chemosphere, 2012, 89, 1230–1237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Nie and Z. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3283–3288 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhou and C. Li, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2015, 95, 388–395 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Pham, A. Samikannu and A. R. Rautio, 
            et al.
          , Top. Catal., 2016, 59, 1165–1177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, S. W. Zhang and R. Shi, 
            et al.
          , Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 33, 73–81 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, N. Li and H. Zhao, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3211–3217 RSC .
H. Jiang, Y. Liu and W. Li, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2018, 14, 1703739 CrossRef .
T. M. Swager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4248–4257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ramakrishnan, G. Rajan and Y. Semenova, 
            et al.
          , Sensors, 2016, 16, 99 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, Q. J. Zhang and J. H. He, 
            et al.
          , Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS .
T. Palomäki, E. Peltola and S. Sainio, 
            et al.
          , Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 118, 23–30 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, X. Liu and G. Neri, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 795–831 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Lim, H. S. Kim and R. Qazi, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901924 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Omar, N. Duraisamy and K. Ramesh, 
            et al.
          , Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 763–775 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Huang and X. Zhu, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703192 CrossRef .
M. D. Ho, Y. Ling and L. W. Yap, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700845 CrossRef .
Y. Mao, Q. Zhao and T. Pan, 
            et al.
          , New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 5429–5435 RSC .
S. He, B. Zhang and M. Liu, 
            et al.
          , RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 49315–49323 RSC .
D. Lin, J. Wu and H. Ju, 
            et al.
          , Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, L. Miao and Y. Song, J. Mol. Recognit., 2020, 33, e2820 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Zhang and R. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 244, 664–672 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahanbakhshi, Microchim. Acta, 2018, 185, 121 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, M. Yu and J. Liu, 
            et al.
          , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27127–27134 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Kim, Y. Ye and B. Y. Won, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2868–2875 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, S. He and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11769–11776 RSC .
L. Li, M. Liu and S. He, 
            et al.
          , Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 7996–8002 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, N. Liu and Y. Yue, 
            et al.
          , J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1451–1458 RSC .
J. S. Czarnecki, M. Blackmore and S. Jolivet, 
            et al.
          , Carbon, 2014, 79, 135–148 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiu, L. Zhao and M. Asif, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 571–578 RSC .
M. Jiang, C. Fu and R. Cheng, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Sci., 2020, 2000747 CrossRef .
Y. Feng, S. Chen and J. Wang, 
            et al.
          , J. Energy Chem., 2020, 43, 129–138 CrossRef .
L. Gao, M. Zhang and H. Zhang, 
            et al.
          , J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227577 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Wang, X. L. Wang and Z. J. Yao, 
            et al.
          , J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 560, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cai, X. Xu and W. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808138 CrossRef .
W. Niu and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2440–2445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Yu and K. Zhou, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122985 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. V. M. Gopi, R. Vinodh and S. Sambasivam, 
            et al.
          , J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101035 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Heguang Liu	Heguang Liu earned a master's degree in materials physics and chemistry from the Xi'an University of Technology in 2011. He received a Ph.D. degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University in materials science in 2017. He is currently an associate professor at the Xi'an University of Technology. His research interest mainly focuses on the design, fabrication, and applications of carbon materials and their composites.
Shaoqing Wu	Shaoqing Wu received her BS degree from the Xi'an University of Technology in 2019. She is currently a graduate student in Materials Science at the Xi'an University of Technology. Her research interests are related to the design and applications of carbon foam materials.
Na Tian	Na Tian obtained her BS degree in 1998, MS degree in 2001, and Ph.D. degree in 2007 from Xi'an University of Technology. She worked as a visiting scientist at the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan from 2003 to 2005. Now, she is an associate professor at the school of materials science and engineering at the Xi'an University of Technology and her research mainly focuses on the design, synthesis, and characterization of functional materials.
Fuxue Yan	Fuxue Yan received his MS degree (2005) in Materials Science and Engineering and obtained a Ph.D. degree (2014) in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Xi'an University of Technology, respectively. He is currently an associate professor at the Xi'an University of Technology. His research focuses on developing and fabricating functional materials, as well as the characterization of those materials.
Caiyin You	Caiyin You obtained his BS degree from the Xi'an University of Technology in 1997 and his Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2003. Then he worked as a post-doc researcher at the National Institute for Materials Science in Japan and a research assistant at Oxford University in the UK from 2003 to 2009. Now, he is a professor in the school of materials science and engineering at the Xi'an University of Technology and his academic interests are mainly related to the investigation of functional materials and battery materials.
Yang Yang	Yang Yang obtained his Ph.D. from Tsinghua University in 2010. From 2010 to 2012 he was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship and worked with Prof. Patrik Schmuki at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. From 2012 to 2015 he was supported by the Peter M. & Ruth L. Nicholas Postdoctoral Fellowship and worked with Prof. James M. Tour at Rice University. Since 2015 he has been an assistant professor at the University of Central Florida. His current research interests cover nanostructured thin-film materials, electrochemical energy generation and storage, and plasmonic photocatalysis. http://www.yangyanglab.com/.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the microstructure, synthesis, properties, and applications of carbon foam.	 

 	Fig. 2  Modeling of the typical microstructure of carbon foam: (a) open-cell and (b) closed-cell.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Photograph of carbon foam. (B and C) SEM and HR SEM images of the cross-section of carbon foam. (D) EDS mapping images. Reproduced from ref. 82 with the permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) An image of carbonized carbon foam (black) and melamine foam (white). (b) An image of the final GQDs-WS2/carbon foam sample. (c) Low- and (d) high-magnification SEM images of the carbon foam. SEM images of (e) WS2/carbon foam and (f) GQDs-WS2/carbon foam samples. (g) EDX mapping of GQDs-WS2/carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 92 with the permission of the RSC.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM photos of carbon foam prepared from (a) raw coal, (b) coal solvent-extracts, (c) coal solvent-extracts, (d) petroleum pitch, (e) QI-free coal tar pitch, and (f) QI containing coal tar pitch. Reproduced from ref. 107 with the permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Raw diagrams for the fabrication of carbon foam derived from bread. Reproduced from ref. 126 with the permission of the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A photo of a wheat field and wheat flour. (b–d) Low and high-resolution SEM images of HPC. (e–h) A SEM image of HPC and the corresponding elemental mapping images of C, N, and O. Reproduced from ref. 128 with the permission of Elsevier.	 

Thermal conductivity (at room temperature)	0.043–150 W m−1 K−1	Carbon foam	Sucrose; mesophase pitch	
134 and 135

Porosity	∼99.6%	Carbon foam	Melamine foam	
136

Specific surface area	∼2630 m2 g−1	Carbon foam	Glucose	
137

Bulk density	0.005 g cm−3	Carbon foam	Melamine foam	
136

Electromagnetic shielding effectiveness	∼85 dB (8.2–12.4 GHz)	Multi-wall carbon nanotubes/carbon foam composite (thickness is 2.75 mm)	Coal tar pitch	
138

Electrical conductivity	28.89 × 103 S m−1	Multi-wall carbon nanotubes/carbon foam composite	Coal tar pitch	
139

Compressive strength	∼42 MPa	Carbon fiber/carbon foam composite	Phenolic resin	
140

Flexure strength	∼62 MPa	Carbon microspheres/carbon foam composite	Phenolic resin	
141

Fracture toughness	∼170 J m−2	Carbon fiber/polyether ether ketone/carbon foam composite	Unknown (commercial KFOAM from Koppers)	
142

Anti-ablation	2560 °C (oxy-acetylene flame)	Carbon fibrils/carbon foam composite	Polyurethane + novolac resin + coal tar pitch	
143


 	Fig. 8  (A) Digital images of (1) carbon foam immersed in ethanol, (2) burning of ethanol in carbon foam, (3) carbon foam after burning of adsorbed ethanol. (B) Carbon foam put in oil and water. (C) Removal of benzene from the water surface using carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 161 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  A schematic diagram of the synthesis process of NCF@CNTs-TiO2 and its long cycling performance at 10C. Reproduced from ref. 208 with the permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  A schematic of the synthesis of MoO2/Mo2C@carbon foam and the first discharge/charge profiles for the as-prepared cathodes (100 mA g−1). Reproduced from ref. 213 with the permission of the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 11  A photo of an SSC device (a). Volumetric capacitance and specific capacitance (b). Photos showing compressibility of the device (c). Capacitance retention at different degrees of compression (d). An LED illuminated by using the PVA/LiCl-NCF electrode as the connecting wire without strain and with compression (e). Reproduced from ref. 215 with the permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  The representative EMI SE of carbon foam as a function of frequency (a) and the EMI SE of carbon foam as a function of foam density (b). Reproduced from ref. 241 with the permission of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) CV curves and (b) polarization curves of different samples. (c and d) The corresponding onset potential and Tafel curves for the samples derived from (b). (e) Stability test by continuous OER recorded on a CeO2/Ni(OH)2/NOSCF electrode. NOSCF: N, O, and S doped carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 255 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Performance of the corresponding Zn–air battery: open-circuit plots (a), discharge polarization (V–j) curves and the corresponding power density curves (b), charge and discharge polarization (V–j) curves (c), specific capacities (d), energy density plots (e), long-term stability (f), and galvanostatic discharge and charge cycling curves (g). A photo of a red LED (2.0 V) powered by two Zn–air batteries (h). Reproduced from ref. 256 with the permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 15  The current response curves of the nanocomposite-based paste electrodes in different concentrations of glucose: (a) the nanocomposite using carbon foam with 10 wt% of magnetite and (b) the nanocomposite using carbon foam with 20 wt% of magnetite. Reproduced from ref. 273 with the permission of Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  The fabrication process for the pressure sensor using carbon foam. Reproduced from ref. 276 with the permission of the RSC.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
