Desalination as a negative emissions technology  - Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EW00502D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EW00502D
(Paper)
Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2018, 4, 839-850Desalination as a negative emissions technology

        
          
            P. A. 
            Davies
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Q. 
            Yuan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            R. 
            de Richter
          
        
      b
aAston Institute of Materials Research, School of Engineering and Applied Science, Aston University, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK. E-mail: p.a.davies@aston.ac.uk
bTour-Solaire.fr, 8 Impasse des Papillons, 34090 Montpellier, France
Received 
      17th November 2017
    , Accepted 18th April 2018First published on 19th April 2018AbstractTo limit global warming, governments and industries are engaged in reducing emissions of CO2. There is increasing evidence, however, that it may be necessary to go a step further by removing CO2 already emitted. For the purpose of carbon dioxide removal (CDR), a number of negative emissions technologies (NET) have been proposed. These generally make extensive usage of land, energy and water – if they are to be implemented at the large scales needed. It is therefore important to seek, investigate and compare alternative approaches to NET. Desalination plants, though normally seen as sources rather than sinks of CO2, could be modified to provide a new type of NET. In this study, we propose treating desalination reject brine by electrolysis to form Mg(OH)2 and thus absorb CO2via the oceans. The energy and water penalties associated with the electrolysis are calculated as 1.8 GJ per tCO2 and 13.7 m3 per tCO2 respectively, making it an interesting option in comparison with some other types of NET. However, NET-modification more than doubles the specific energy consumption of a reverse-osmosis desalination plant. It is concluded that NET-desalination has potential to contribute to CDR in arid countries (especially if solar energy is used) thus helping to meet Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) following the COP21 summit.

Water impact
Whereas many earlier studies focused on reducing the environmental impact of CO2 emissions from desalination, we propose here to reverse this impact. Recent advances in electrolysis technology are very promising to convert brine discharged from desalination into Mg(OH)2 suspension for CO2 absorption, thus transforming desalination into a negative emissions technology (NET). For arid regions, NET-desalination compares well against other NETs.

1. Introduction
1.1 The growing importance of carbon dioxide removal
At the Conference of the Parties (COP21) summit of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change held in Paris (2015), 195 nations agreed in principle to take actions limiting global warming to 1.5–2 °C.1 In an attempt to avoid exceeding this limit, nations drew up Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC). Currently, however, there is a gap between the INDC commitments and the emission reductions really required to avoid warming of more than 2 °C.2 For the world to meet the <2 °C target, it is estimated that greenhouse gas emissions should peak before 2030 and then reduce rapidly to zero.3 Because of the very long time taken for atmospheric CO2 levels to decrease naturally, there is effectively a cap on the cumulative emissions allowable to stay within the limit, such that failure to reduce emissions short term will necessitate even more onerous commitments later on. This situation introduces doubts about whether the target is indeed achievable.4
Such doubts have prompted researchers and policymakers to consider other approaches to avoid catastrophic climate change, beyond simply reducing emissions. In particular, removal of greenhouse gases (especially carbon dioxide) from the environment, is considered an increasingly relevant and important option. Technologies that achieve such removal, in some cases meeting other aims simultaneously, have been termed negative emissions technologies (NETs).4–7 Broadly they include technologies that remove CO2 directly from the atmosphere (e.g. direct air capture, DAC;8–11 and bioenergy and carbon capture and storage, BECCS12) and those that remove CO2via the hydrological cycle and oceans (e.g. accelerated weathering, AW;13,14 ocean liming and alkalinisation15–18). With regard to the potential of the oceans to absorb CO2, a recent review by Renforth and Henderson has highlighted the very large capacity of this natural sink and therefore the importance of accelerating its uptake.18
All these NETs would, however, require large commitments of infrastructure, capital equipment, and running costs. For example, accelerated weathering may demand mining and transportation of quantities of rock exceeding the mass of the CO2 removed, i.e. running into billions of tonnes per year in order to have a significant effect on atmospheric concentrations.13 It is important therefore to compare NETs with regard to overall biophysical and economic limits5,7 – thus helping to assess whether they can make a significant and practical contribution to tackling climate change alongside more conventional approaches based on mitigation.
1.2 Desalination as a negative emissions technology
Driven by the soaring demand for freshwater, seawater desalination is growing in capacity worldwide. Alongside this, its environmental impacts are growing also.19,20 Global capacity roughly doubled from 2007–2017 and is estimated at 100 million m3 per day output today.21 The impacts result mainly from the substantial energy usage and associated CO2 emissions, and from the brine that desalination plants discharge to the ocean. On the other hand, seawater brine contains significant amounts of metal ions which have potential to combine with and sequester CO2 as carbonate or bicarbonate.
A number of authors have investigated potential of brine from seawater to absorb CO2 through various combinations of process steps. For example, Ferrini et al.22 showed that adding CO2 to magnesium chloride in the presence of ammonia precipitated magnesium carbonate as nesquehonite (MgCO3·3H20), producing ammonium chloride as a by-product. Nesquehonite could be used as a structural material for building, in the form or aggregate, concrete or cement. Benyahia23 has proposed a process that reacts CO2 with sodium chloride, also in the presence of ammonia, to produce sodium bicarbonate. In this case, the by-product of ammonium chloride is regenerated by lime (CaO) to give calcium chloride, releasing ammonia which is reutilised in the process. Indeed it is interesting to note that the Solvay process and Hou's process also involve similar steps to react CO2 with ammonia and sodium chloride.24
Nonetheless, the above methods rely on a supply of pure or concentrated CO2 to the process, making them suited to absorption of CO2 from point sources such as flue stacks. They are not intended for removal of CO2 that has been diluted in the atmosphere and ocean; and would thus only be suitable for CDR if preceded by another process that captures and concentrates the diluted CO2. The above methods do not by themselves, therefore, constitute NET.
House et al.17 identified that the chloralkali process could be used to render sodium chloride solution alkaline for addition to the oceans. The chloralkali process requires electrical energy, some of which can be recovered by reacting the evolved hydrogen and chlorine in a fuel cell. The resulting hydrochloric acid can be reacted with silicate rocks. This would be similar to accelerated weathering of rocks by carbonic acid, although hydrochloric acid will react with silicate rocks much more quickly than carbonic acid.25,26 House et al.17 discussed the application of such an alkalinisation process to seawater, but without discussing desalination brines specifically. They calculated electrical energy penalties in the range 100–400 kJ per molCO2 (2.3–9.1 GJ per tCO2).
A related approach is to convert the magnesium chloride in seawater brine to magnesium oxide or hydroxide, which has similar absorptive capacity for CO2 as calcium oxide as proposed for ocean liming. Magnesium (hydr)oxide may be obtained from magnesium chloride present in seawater and brine. The established technologies for doing so involve liming out the MgO by addition of alkaline substances. These accounted for about 70% of the 330000 tonnes of MgO produced in the US in 2017, while other sources were from mining of magnesite.27
To produce MgO from brine using renewable energy, Davies28 investigated the potential of solar thermal energy to convert magnesium chloride to magnesium oxide through decomposition at 300–600 °C. He concluded that the process is feasible in principle, but the energy consumption is high on account of the large latent heat of dewatering the brine before decomposition begins. Even though it should be possible to recover some of this latent heat, electrical and thermal energy consumptions (per gross tonne of CO2 removed) remain somewhat high at 0.8 GJ per tCO2 and 13 GJ per tCO2 respectively. As with the chloralkali process, hydrochloric acid arises as a by-product, and approaches to geological disposal were discussed.28
Electrochemical treatment may be more promising than thermal treatment to alkalinise brine. Recently, advanced electrochemical methods have been developed to improve seawater brine electrolysis.29,30 Fernandez-Gonzalez et al.29 used a bipolar membrane to decompose seawater brine into acids and bases, with the emphasis on the economic value of these products. Xie et al.30 introduced a new way of decomposing magnesium chloride by an electrolysis process incorporating a gas diffusion anode (GDA), yielding magnesium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid. This process was intended to be used for carbon capture and storage (CCS) of flue gases. Though neither of these electrochemical processes was intended for use as NET specifically, both studies imply the feasibility of creating a NET if the alkaline discharge is directed to the ocean. Among these two processes, the electrolysis-GDA method is particularly appealing in terms of its potentially low energy consumption and simpler configuration of the electrolysis cells. These would be the key factors in keeping both capital and operational costs low for large scale processing.
Building on these recent works, this study considers the conversion of desalination to a negative emissions technology (NET-desalination). It is proposed that the electrolysis-GDA method be developed for continuous processing of brine at the outlet of existing or new desalination plants, to create magnesium hydroxide for discharge to the ocean. The main objective is to estimate the energy and water requirements of such NET-desalination, and to compare these penalties to the other NETs based on values provided in the literature.5,15,28 The NETs chosen for comparison include BECCS, DAC, ocean liming and the chloralkali process. Energy and water penalties are chosen as the main focus for the study, because they are considered fundamental in constraining the feasibility and scalability of the proposal. We also compare the specific energy consumption (per unit of freshwater produced) of the desalination plant, before and after adding the electrochemical process, to assess the preliminary feasibility of such a modification from the point of view of the operators of desalination plants whose primary objective is to provide freshwater to consumers.
This paper presents a theoretical and conceptual study, drawing on and comparing against results provided in the literature. First the electrolysis-GDA process will be considered, then the whole NET-desalination system including this process will be analysed in different cases to provide results and conclusions dependent on the input parameters and scope of the analysis.
2. Analysis of the electrolysis-GDA process
As electrolysis is energy-intensive, its energy requirement will be one of the key factors determining the feasibility in turning desalination into a NET. To determine the energy requirement, a thermodynamic analysis has been carried out to provide the minimum cell voltage of membrane electrolysis with GDA as shown in Fig. 1. The electrolyser is of a flow-through type with two compartments separated by an anion exchange membrane.30 The left compartment has fresh water flowing in and hydrochloric acid flowing out. In the case of the right compartment, desalination reject brine flows in and magnesium hydroxide, suspended in the brine, flows out. The GDA allows hydrogen generated at the cathode to react with chloride ions, yielding hydrochloric acid as a by-product.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of electrolyser with gas diffusion anode (GDA) for splitting brine containing magnesium chloride into HCl and Mg(OH)2. Modified from ref. 30. 
With use of the GDA, the two half-cell reactions are: Cathode Mg2+(aq) + 2H2O(l) + 2e → Mg(OH)2(s) + H2(g)(1) Anode H2(g) + 2Cl−(l) − 2e → 2HCl(aq)(2)
The overall electrolysis reaction is accordingly: MgCl2(aq) + 2H2O(l) → Mg(OH)2(s) + 2HCl(aq)(3)
Using the standard enthalpy and entropy of each component in this reaction equation, the enthalpy and Gibbs free energy change of the reaction at standard conditions have been calculated based on standard thermochemical data31 as:  
Converting these into voltages, we obtain thermo-neutral (adiabatic) and reversible voltages for the reaction as respectively: (4)where F is the Faraday constant (F = 9.649 × 104 C mol−1) and n is the number of moles of electrons transferred per mole of Mg2+ precipitated (n = 2).
When the working conditions differ from the standard ones, the voltage needed for the electrolysis will vary. The Gibbs free energy change under given working conditions can be calculated by means of the Nernst-type equation: (5)
The concentration of the magnesium chloride in the brine will depend on the concentration of the incoming seawater and the recovery ratio of the plant. The rejection fraction of modern seawater desalination plants is very high (>98%), such that virtually all the salts end up in the reject brine. Assuming standard practical salinity of 35 and density of 1027 kg m−3, results in [MgCl2] = 0.05424 M increased by the factor 1/(1 − r) according to the recovery ratio r. At 25 °C, eqn (5) thus becomes (in units of kJ mol−1): ΔG = 102.96 + 4.96ln[HCl] + 2.48ln(1 − r)(6)
We note that seawater desalination plants typically operate in hot climates, taking in seawater at temperature in the range 15–35 °C according to location and season. Therefore, 25 °C is a representative assumption for temperature, especially since a change of 10 °C will only alter the above Gibbs energy by about 0.3%. The concentration [HCl] will evidently influence the energy consumption and values in the range 1–10 M are considered.
The Gibbs free energy calculated by the Nernst equation represents an ideal minimum energy requirement of the electrolysis process under reversible isothermal conditions. But more realistically the cell may operate under adiabatic conditions requiring slightly greater voltage and work input. An efficiency η is introduced to estimate the real energy consumption accounting for practical losses: ΔG′ = ΔG/η(7)
The cell electrolysis efficiency is estimated based on experimental evidence30 where V = 0.60 V was reported, close to the thermo-neutral potential of Vth = 0.59 V and suggesting that an efficiency of η = 0.50/0.60 = 83.3% relative to Vrev could be achieved. Accordingly, we assume a nominal efficiency of η = 80% in this study, with a range of 60–90% being considered as part of the sensitivity analsyis.
Magnesium hydroxide reacts stoichiometrically with CO2 in seawater to form magnesium carbonate: Mg(OH)2(s) + CO2 → MgCO3 + H2O(8)
Further reaction to form magnesium bicarbonate absorbs in total of up to 2 moles of CO2 per mole of magnesium: MgCO3 + H2O + CO2 ↔ Mg(HCO3)2(9)
Nonetheless, due to the reversible nature of this second reaction, the ratio achieved in practice is less than 2, estimated in the range 1.4 to 1.7 according to conditions of CO2 concentration, temperature, and salinity. Renforth and Henderson have calculated a ratio of 1.66 which is adopted in this study.18 The energy per mole of CO2 to be removed will accordingly be 1/1.66 = 60% that calculated by eqn (7).
We note that an alternative electrolysis process involving sodium chloride could in principle occur: NaCl(aq) + H2O(l) → NaOH(aq) + HCl(aq)(10)
However, since the associated Vrev = −0.83 V is higher in magnitude than that for MgCl2, eqn (3) will proceed in preference.
3. Analysis of the NET-desalination system
The next step is the analysis of the desalination system including the electrolysis process. The system studied (Fig. 2) consists of a state-of-the art reverse osmosis (RO) desalination plant, a power generation plant, and the concentrate brine electrolysing unit. The discharge of the desalination plant passes through the electrolyser, where MgCl2 in the brine is split into magnesium hydroxide suspension and hydrochloric acid, as described above. The magnesium hydroxide suspension discharged into the sea will absorb CO2.
 Fig. 2  The system under study consists of a state-of-the art reverse osmosis (RO) desalination plant with the brine discharge passing through an electrolysis unit. Case 1 considers only the processes inside the dashed box, whereas case 2 considers the whole system. 
The study comprises two cases each of different scope. Case 1 considers only the additional processes (inside the dashed box, Fig. 2) of the NET-desalination relative to those of the unmodified plant. The NET modification requires additional inputs of electricity and freshwater, penalties that will be evaluated in relation to the CO2 absorbed to enable comparison with other NETs. Case 2 considers the whole system (entire Fig. 2) to examine the net emission taking into account the operation of the desalination plant and associated power generation.
Case 1 is appropriate for assessing the benefits and penalties of electrolysis as an add-on to desalination plants already existing or planned, where the energy consumption of the desalination plant is not counted as a penalty of the NET – because this penalty is considered unavoidable in the sense that it would occur anyway even if the NET-modification were not implemented.
Case 2 would be more appropriate if the energy consumption of the desalination plant is not considered unavoidable. For example, the NET aspect might be used as a partial justification for building new desalination plants – helping to favour desalination over other ways to meet increased water demand (e.g. water transfers, increased water re-use, or demand side measures). Then, arguments, against desalination would most likely point to the overall penalties, and not just the additional ones of NET modification. The same scope would apply if in the future there was a decision to be made about whether to continue to operate a NET-desalination plant or replace it with alternative systems to provide the same services.
Because it includes the whole system, case 2 is also useful to compare how the specific energy consumption (SEC, per unit of freshwater output) of desalination compares with and without NET. This will require assumptions to be made about the energy consumption of the basic desalination plant and the carbon-intensity of electricity generation powering the system. Case 2 is also useful for making preliminary comparisons with other NET where there are additional valuable outputs to consider. Thus, BECCS is not just a system for removing CO2 – it is also a system for providing an energy service. Similarly, NET-desalination is intended not only to remove CO2 but also to provide clean water.
Note that in neither case do we consider the emissions, energy or water penalties associated with construction of the plant. Only operational penalties are considered. This is because it is typically stated that energy during operation is the dominant contribution to costs and, by extension, emissions.32 The land usage of a desalination plant is assumed very small (compared to, say, BECCS) and considered negligible. The brine input is not considered as a penalty, because brine is considered a waste product from the desalination plant.
Cases 1 and 2 enable different questions to be answered regarding negative emissions, as summarised in Table 1.
Table 1 Scope and purpose of the two cases analysed






Case


1. NET modification only
2. Whole system




Electrolysis add-on to desalination plant for brine treatment
Included
Included


Desalination plant
Excluded
Included


Power generation and emissions for desalination plant
Excluded
Included


Questions that can be answered
1. If brine treatment is added to existing desalination plants, or to plants that will be built anyway, how does it compare to other types of NET taking into account only the additional inputs required?
If new desalination plants are built with brine treatment included: 1. Could they provide negative emissions (NET)? 2. How does the system as a whole compare to an unmodified desalination plant? 3. How does the system as a whole compare to other types of NET taking into account the additional outputs in each case e.g. water and energy services? In this case all inputs and outputs should be included, and not just the additional ones associated with the electrolytic brine treatment





Table 2 summarises the values of baseline parameters used in this study as well as their ranges for the sensitivity analysis. For the whole system (case 2), input parameters include the specific energy consumption (SEC) of the RO desalination plant, and the carbon intensity associated with the energy supply. For the SEC, we assume a nominal value of 3 kW h m−3 representing a modern state-of-the art plant.33 In addition, we consider sensitivity to SEC in the range 1–4 kW h m−3. The lower limit of 1 kW h m−3 corresponds approximately to the thermodynamic minimum possible SEC;34 while 4 kW h m−3 may be a representative figure for a plant with slightly elevated energy requirements due, for example, to the need to cope with more difficult feedwater, thus requiring more treatment stages.32
Table 2 Assumed baseline values and ranges of parameters used in this study. The baseline values apply by default to the results






Baseline value
Range
Notes and sources




Density of seawater
1027 kg m−3
—
Typical value from ref. 37


Concentration of magnesium in seawater
1.2837 g kg−1
—
Millero et al.,38 for standard seawater at practical salinity of 35


0.05424 M


Temperature of seawater
25 °C
—
Desalination plants typically take in water at 15–35°C (ref. 21)


Efficiency of electrolysis process
0.8
0.6–0.9
Xie et al.30 (see discussion in section 4)


Concentration hydrochloric acid at outlet
2 M
1–10 M
See ref. 29


Specific energy consumption (SEC) of basic RO plant
3 kW h m−3
1–4 kW h m−3
Per m3 of freshwater produced. Typical practical value for state-of-art RO plant.33 Specific examples in the literature refer to values as low as 2 kW h m−3;39 with other plants reporting closer to 4 kW h m−3.21 1 kW h m−3 approximates a thermodynamic minimum34


(10.8 MJ m−3)


Carbon intensity of electricity generation
0.5 kgCO2 per kW h
0–1 kgCO2 per kW h
0.5 is a nominal value of generation based on natural gas:35,36 range represents ‘ideal zero-carbon renewables’ to ‘high-carbon fossil fuel’


Recovery ratio (r)
0.5
0.4–0.8
RO desalination plants typically operate in the range 0.4 to 0.5 though higher recoveries are possible with higher energy expenditure32




For the carbon intensity, we use a baseline figure of 0.5 kgCO2 per kW h of electricity generated – corresponding to efficient electricity generation by relatively clean fossil fuel in the form of natural gas.35,36 To provide a sensitivity analysis, we consider also values in the range 0 and 1 kgCO2 per kW h respectively, corresponding respectively to ideal zero-carbon generation from renewables and to more carbon intensive generation by fossil fuel (e.g. coal instead of gas). The recovery ratio of the plant is taken as 0.5, with a range 0.4 to 0.8 also considered (Table 2).
We also consider the effect of varying the recovery ratio r of the RO plant around the baseline value of 0.5. The effect on SEC is modelled by assuming that SEC varies in constant proportion to the minimum thermodynamic energy of desalination,40i.e. (11)
With the constant of 2.164 kW h m−3 chosen such that SEC = 3 kW h m−3 at r = 0.5.
4. Results
The results in this section use the baseline values of Table 2 unless stated otherwise. Calculated results for the penalties of energy, water and land for cases 1 and 2 are presented in Table 3, compared against results (from the literature) for other NET options.
Table 3 NET-desalination using electrolysis of brine with GDA, against other options presented in the literature




NET option
Ref.
Energy penalty (GJ per tCO2)
Water penalty m3 per tCO2
Land penalty ha per tCO2 per year


Thermal
Electrical




NET-desalination (brine electrolysis with GDA): Case 1, NET-modification only
This study
0
1.8
13.7
Negligible


NET-desalination (brine electrolysis with GDA): Case 2, whole system
This study
0
5.6
−206
Negligible


Chloralkali process

17

0
2.3–9.1
No data
Negligible


NET-desalination (brine thermal decomposition)

28

13
0.8
0
Negligible


Ocean liming

15

0.6–5.6
0.1–1.2
0.5–1.2
No data


Crop bio-energy + CCS (BECCS)

5

+2.4 to −24
500
270–1600


Direct air capture (DAC)

5

0.7–12.5
25
1.5




4.1 Case 1: NET modification only
In this case, the energy penalty is predicted as 1.8 GJ per tCO2 and water penalty as 13.7 m3 per tCO2. The concentration of hydrochloric acid discharged has a small effect on energy penalty but a large effect on water penalty which goes down to 2.2 m3 per tCO2 at 10 M (Fig. 3a). This is because less water is used to carry away the HCl at higher concentrations. Nonetheless, the review of Fernandez-Gonzalez et al.29 suggests that a concentration above 2 M is rarely achieved in practice. This could be attributed to the difficulty of overcoming back diffusion of chloride ions against the steep concentration gradient across the anion exchange membrane.
 Fig. 3  Sensitivity of energy and water penalties to concentration of hydrochloric acid discharged: higher concentration saves water but requires more energy (case 1 and case 2). 
Nevertheless, this water penalty compares generally well with the more widely studied options of DAC and BECCS (Table 3). The value of 13.7 m3 per tCO2 at 2 M HCl is about half the water penalty of DAC, and less than 3% that of BECCS. However, it appears to be over 10 times higher than the water penalty estimated for ocean liming.15 The previously studied option of brine thermal decomposition28 does not incur any such water penalty (in fact water is recovered from the decomposition process); whereas in the current proposal, about 10% of the desalinated output is sacrificed for the electrolysis process; this means that a desalination plant with initial recovery 50% would achieve a reduced recovery of 45% after NET modification, with HCl produced at 2 M.
As regards energy penalty, the result of 1.8 GJ per tCO2 falls within the rather large range quoted for DAC (0.7 to 12.5 GJ per tCO2). The DAC figures do not distinguish between thermal and electrical energy penalty. However, such a distinction is available for ocean liming, suggesting that electrolysis-GDA is disadvantageous as regards electrical energy penalty (1.8 vs. 0.1–1.2 GJ per tCO2); but it avoids altogether the rather high thermal energy associated with ocean liming (up to 5.6 GJ per tCO2). Similarly it avoids the even higher thermal energy penalty of up to 13 GJ per tCO2 associated with brine thermal decomposition for NET-desalination.28 Nonetheless, all options including electrolysis-GDA have worse energy penalty than BECCS, because BECCS is designed as an energy-producing system thus having negative energy penalty.
The energy penalty varies in inverse proportion to the efficiency of the electrolysis process. If the efficiency goes down from the 80% baseline to 60%, the penalty will go up from 1.8 to 2.4 GJ per tCO2. Water penalty is, however, unaffected.
Compared to the chloralkali process,17 which may be considered the most similar option to the current one among those described in the literature, we calculate a significant lowering of energy penalty (by a factor of about 1.5–5) using electrolysis-GDA. This is consistent with the value Vrev = −2.19 V of the reversible cell potential associated with the chloralkali process: NaCl(aq) + 2H2O(l) → NaOH(aq) + H2(g) + Cl2(g)(12)which is as such more than four times greater than Vrev associated with eqn (3).
4.2 Case 2: whole system
Expansion of the scope of the analysis to include the whole system, and not just the NET-modification, increases the overall electrical energy penalty ∼3-fold to 5.6 GJ per tCO2 with the energy to run the RO process now included. Nonetheless, this penalty is still in the range reported for DAC. Since desalination produces net water output, with the desalination plant included the water penalty becomes negative at −206 m3 per tCO2. The whole desalination plant (including associated power generation and NET-modification) provides overall negative emissions at −5 kgCO2 per m3 of net water output (Fig. 4). This compares with positive emissions of 1.5 kgCO2 per m3 for an unmodified desalination plant. As in case 1, similar comments apply about the effect of [HCl] which would improve the water output still further if increased but with a slight adverse effect on energy penalty (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 4  Comparison of desalination with and without NET modification using the electrolysis-GDA process (case 2). Net emissions per net water output (kgCO2 per m3) increase with the carbon intensity of the electricity used, the values of which encompass generation from renewables, cleaner fossil fuel (gas), and high-carbon fossil fuel (coal) respectively. 
With regard to the effect of carbon intensity, running the plant from zero-emissions renewables improves the net emissions still further to −8.9 kgCO2per m3. Considering that renewables have a finite emission due to embodied energy (reported intensities are in the range of 0.029–0.045 kgCO2 per kW h for monocrystalline silicon PV41 and 0.006–0.046 kgCO2 per kW h for wind energy42) we predict more realistically about −8.5 kgCO2 per m3. Even if the plant is run from carbon-intensive coal-fired generation, emissions remain negative at around −1 kgCO2 per m3 (Fig. 4).
NET-desalination incurs a considerable energy penalty when a direct comparison is made to an unmodified plant. If, as assumed here, all water brine output from the desalination plant is diverted to the electrolysis-GDA cell for full conversion of MgCl2 into Mg(OH)2 this will more than double the electricity consumption of the plant; and – if all the energy penalty is accounted for against the freshwater output – this will result in a SEC increased from 3 to 7.8 kW h m−3 (Fig. 5, at basic SEC of 3 kW h m−3). Fig. 6 shows that lower overall SEC is achieved at higher HCl concentrations, though above 2 M the dependence is weak, such that at 10 M the SEC reduces by only 5% to 7.4 kW h m−3. On the other hand, improved RO technology with basic SEC of 2 kW h m−3 reduces overall SEC after modification to 6.6 kW h m−3 (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Dependence of the overall SEC after modification (case 2), and negative emissions achieved per net m3 of water output, on the SEC of the basic desalination plant before modification. 
 Fig. 6  Specific energy consumption of the NET-desalination plant decreases with the concentration of the hydrochloric acid produced, due to lower sacrifice of water at higher concentrations, but is always much higher than that of a standard desalination plant (SEC = 3 kW h m−3). 
The efficiency of the electrolysis process also has a significant effect on the results. As shown in Fig. 7, if the electrolysis were 60% efficient (as opposed to the 80% baseline value) the negative emissions achieved would be only −4.25 kgCO2 per m3 instead of −5 kgCO2 per m3 and SEC increases to 9.2 kW h m−3.
 Fig. 7  Increasing the efficiency of the electrolysis process improves both SEC and the negative emissions achieved by the modified desalination plant. 
Increase in the recovery ratio of a RO plant normally results in increased SEC due to the increased osmotic pressure of the exiting brine. However, this trend is offset by the decreased electrical demand to electrolyse the brine based on the Nernst equation (eqn (5)). Fig. 8 shows a minimum SEC of 7 kW h m−3 occurring at recovery r = 0.7. On the other hand, with the ratio of freshwater to brine increasing, the higher recovery ratio actually increases the total energy penalty of CO2 removal, such that the emission per m3 of water output becomes less negative. This suggests that the higher recovery ratio operation is only justified when the priority is to lower SEC and not to maximise performance as a NET. It is not possible to determine a true optimum without introducing some cost model including value of the water produced and cost penalty of carbon emission.
 Fig. 8  Effect of recovery ratio on SEC, net CO2 emitted per net m3 of freshwater produced, and energy penalty of CO2 removal – for the whole system of Fig. 2 (case 2). 
To put these values in the context of a real desalination plant, we cite the example of the Carlsbad plant commissioned in 2015 in San Diego Country, United States. This plant has a freshwater output of 204390 m3 per day, taking in feedwater with 34500 mg L−1 total dissolved solids, and has recovery r = 0.5. The energy consumption is cited as <3.3 kW h m−3.21 In these respects, the plant conforms quite closely to the baseline parameters used in this study. Electricity generated in the State of California is, however, relatively low carbon at 0.24 kgCO2 per kW h, coming primarily from natural gas, with large contributions also from hydroelectric, solar, wind and geothermal. From Fig. 4, the net emissions per m3 will correspondingly be −7 kgCO2 per m3 – i.e. about 1.4 ktCO2 per day and 500 ktCO2 per year.
To speculate on the future potential of NET-desalination, we could suggest a doubling of the current global desalination capacity of the 100 million m3 per day with all the new plants being installed to the specifications of the Carlsbad plant (i.e. a further 500 such plants) with the electrolysis units added, absorbing altogether 0.25 GtCO2 per year. If desalination continues to grow at an exponential rate, removal of 1 GtCO2 per year appears plausible by mid-century – thus potentially making a small but significant contribution to the required total removal rate estimated at 10–20 GtCO2 per year to stay within the Paris COP21 targets.4 It should be noted that the scalability to meet desired targets is a difficult challenge for all NETs and not only for NET-desalination as proposed here.43
5. Discussion
The calculated energy penalty of about 1.8 GJ per tCO2 for the NET-desalination modification, besides comparing quite well against other NET, compares favourably against other carbon abatement measures such as injecting renewable electricity to the grid. Substitution of fossil-fuel based generation of grid power (at carbon intensity of 0.5 kgCO2 per kW h) by renewables (at nominally zero carbon intensity) provides carbon abatement with an energy penalty of 7.8 GJ per tCO2, suggesting that it would be 4 times better to use renewable energy in the electrolysis-GDA process compared to grid injection for fossil fuel saving. If, however, we have to introduce a new desalination plant (and not just modify an existing one), the corresponding ratio will be decreased from 4 to just 1.4 taking into account extra emissions associated with the new plant.
A possible objection to the current proposal is that, by absorbing CO2 from the ocean, we introduce a long delay of many decades before this CO2 is absorbed from the atmosphere because of the relatively slow mixing between these two compartments.44 If additional fossil fuel is burnt to power NET-desalination, CO2 will be emitted in the short term to achieve a predicted longer term absorption effect as regards the atmosphere. This time lag is undesirable, because global warming could be intensified in the short term. Therefore, the authors believe that, if NET-desalination is introduced, it must be powered renewably to achieve negative net emissions with nearly zero gross emissions. Alternatively, the NET-desalination technology could incorporate capture at source of CO2 emissions from associated fossil power generation, by reacting flue gases with the Mg(OH)2 on site as in,30 thus achieving negative net emissions even without use of renewables.
This time lag can also be used as an argument in favour of NET-desalination against atmospheric removal (e.g. DAC) as regards ocean acidification (a secondary effect of CO2 accumulation). NET-desalination could deliver a relatively rapid neutralisation effect and this should be explored with regard to relatively confined seas, such as the Mediterranean, Red Sea, or Gulf, where many desalination plants are already installed – giving prospects to provide local remediation of acidification over relatively short time scales on account of the smaller volume of seawater to be processed compared to the open oceans. In fact, it is also notable that desalination may currently contribute to ocean acidification because acid is used as anti-scalant to prevent carbonate precipitation on RO membranes.32 As NET-desalination with electrolysis produces HCl, this could be recycled to the inlet of the plant for this purpose, with neutralisation subsequently occurring at the outlet.
Another important objection relates to the disposal or management of the hydrochloric acid produced by the process. For every 1.66 moles of gross CO2 absorbed, 2 moles of HCl are produced – corresponding to a 1:1 mass ratio. With about 100 litres of 2 M hydrochloric acid produced per m3 of desalinated water, the Carlsbad case above would produce about 8 Mt per year of acid per year containing 0.6 Mt per year HCl. The world market for HCl is estimated at 20 Mt per year; however, much of this is met by production close to the point of use, such that the open market demand is only about 5 Mt per year.45 As the conventional production of hydrochloric acid is in itself energy intensive, its substitution could provide an additional carbon benefit.28 Nevertheless, scale up of the NET desalination concept would saturate the world market – besides which the logistics and hazards of moving around such large quantities of acid are daunting.
The most promising solution would seem to be geological disposal of hydrochloric acid by injection into silicate rocks that can neutralise it. It turns out that several silicate rock formations are available in the vicinity of desalination plants, e.g. the Samail ophiolite in Oman and Troodos ophiolite in Cyprus, as well as laval outflows of mafic rocks towards the Red Sea coast in Saudi Arabia.28 Of related interest are studies on recycling of acids including hydrochloric acid into silicate rocks, extracting MgCl2 for splitting into Mg(OH)2 and HCl on site.46 The energy requirements for electrolysis should be similar to those here, while the need for HCl transport is avoided; however, the reverse logistics of transport and ocean distribution of Mg(OH)2 would then need to be addressed. Concepts incorporating the silicate minerals (wollastonite or ultramafic rock) directly into an electrolytic process (also generating hydrogen fuel) have also been investigated.47
Even though the use of renewable electricity for future CO2 removal benefit may seem expensive and hard to justify on account of the increased SEC of the desalination plant (more than doubled), it is worth pointing out that NET-desalination also provides a readily deferrable load such that brines may be readily stored for use in the electrolysis process that can be switched on any time of day or night, thus providing a kind of virtual energy storage. The process could thus serve as a useful dump for excess renewable electricity arising at times of high supply and low demand.
The electrolysis-GDA process could be applied not just to desalination reject brine but also to raw seawater. Nevertheless, we see advantages in using reject brine. Firstly, the infrastructure of power supply and brine discharge is already in place. Secondly, the higher concentration of salts in the brine gives higher conductivity which could assist the electrolysis process, as well as resulting in slightly lower electrical consumption according to the Nernst equation.
Future studies could include aspects of embodied energy in the desalination plants and electrolysis equipment, notwithstanding the methodological issues highlighted in existing life cycle assessments (LCA) of RO plants.48 Another aspect to consider will be the environmental impacts of consumables such as anti-scaling and anti-fouling chemicals, and membrane replacements, as needed for the reverse osmosis and electrolysis processes.
6. Conclusions
This study has shown the potential to transform reverse osmosis (RO) desalination into a negative emissions technology (NET) by the addition of electrolysis to treat the reject brine. Electrolysis with GDA splits the concentrated brine at a low voltage generating magnesium hydroxide that acts as a sink for CO2 in the ocean. Accompanying this process, high quality hydrochloric acid is also produced. Theoretical calculations show that:
1. The whole system could absorb 2.3 times the amount of CO2 emitted when powering the desalination plant by electricity generated from natural gas.
2. About 5 kg of net CO2 can be absorbed per net m3 of freshwater output from such a desalination plant, improving to 8.5 kgCO2 per m3 when powered from renewables.
3. Modification of existing plants for NET-desalination will incur an energy penalty of 1.8 GJ per tCO2 and a water penalty of 13.7 m3 per tCO2 removed.
4. The energy penalty increases the overall SEC of the RO desalination plant considerably from 3 to 7.8 kW h m−3.
Though the energy and water penalties compare quite well against other NETs presented in the literature, the high SEC could make the technology seem unattractive to desalination plant operators unless there is an incentive to compensate for the increased economic cost. The technology is more likely to be introduced if subsidies are offered, perhaps linked to the achievement of INDCs, whereby the relatively modest energy penalty would make it economically attractive against other carbon abatement measures including injection of renewable energy to electricity grids.
NET-desalination can avoid excessive penalties of land or water. It could be more attractive for arid countries where water is unavailable to cultivate biomass at the scales needed for BECCS, and for island or city states that do not have much available land for cultivation (e.g. Dubai or Singapore). In this way, such countries could make a contribution to CO2 removal based on their existing or planned desalination infrastructure and this could be counted towards their INDC.
We foresee many challenges in implementing the electrolysis process reliably at scale, such as longevity of the systems, use of an economic and effective catalyst in the GDA, and maintaining uniform current densities in large systems as needed for today's desalination plants discharging approaching 1000000 m3 per day of brine. For this reason, we believe that a multi-disciplinary effort is important to research and scale up the approach from bench to pilot and then full scale, at the same time investigating broader effects such as ecological and economic impacts. Another related area for further research is to harvest the required energy input from salinity gradient power, or from wastewater treatment processes by means of microbial fuel cells, thus further improving the energy balance of the proposed NET-desalination.49,50
Abbreviations

AWAccelerated weathering
BECCSBioenergy with carbon capture and storage
CDRCarbon dioxide removal
DACDirect air capture
GDAGas diffusion anode
INDCIntended Nationally Determined Contributions
NETNegative emissions technology
OLOcean liming
ROReverse osmosis
SECSpecific energy consumption

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References

          UNFCCC, Report of the Conference of the Parties on its 21st session, part 2,  2015 Search PubMed.
J. Rogelj, M. Den Elzen, N. Höhne, T. Fransen, H. Fekete, H. Winkler, R. Schaeffer, F. Sha, K. Riahi and M. Meinshausen, Paris Agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep warming well below 2°C, Nature, 2016, 534, 631–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. K. Pachauri, M. R. Allen, V. Barros, J. Broome, W. Cramer, R. Christ, J. Church, L. Clarke, Q. Dahe and P. Dasgupta, Climate change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of working groups I, II and III to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change, IPCC,  2014 Search PubMed.
S. Fuss, J. G. Canadell, G. P. Peters, M. Tavoni, R. M. Andrew, P. Ciais, R. B. Jackson, C. D. Jones, F. Kraxner, N. Nakicenovic, C. Le Quere, M. R. Raupach, A. Sharifi, P. Smith and Y. Yamagata, Betting on negative emissions, Nat. Clim. Change, 2014, 4, 850–853 CrossRef CAS .
P. Smith, S. J. Davis, F. Creutzig, S. Fuss, J. Minx, B. Gabrielle, E. Kato, R. B. Jackson, A. Cowie and E. Kriegler, Biophysical and economic limits to negative CO2 emissions, Nat. Clim. Change, 2016, 6, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
N. McGlashan, N. Shah, B. Caldecott and M. Workman, High-level techno-economic assessment of negative emissions technologies, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2012, 90, 501–510 CrossRef CAS .
D. McLaren, A comparative global assessment of potential negative emissions technologies, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2012, 90, 489–500 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zeman, Energy and Material Balance of CO2 Capture from Ambient Air, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 7558–7563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Z. House, A. C. Baclig, M. Ranjan, E. A. van Nierop, J. Wilcox and H. J. Herzog, Economic and energetic analysis of capturing CO2 from ambient air, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 20428–20433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Lackner, Capture of carbon dioxide from ambient air, Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top., 2009, 176, 93–106 CrossRef .
R. Kiesgen de Richter, T. Ming and S. Caillol, Fighting global warming by photocatalytic reduction of CO2 using giant photocatalytic reactors, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 19, 82–106 CrossRef .
C. Gough and P. Upham, Biomass energy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS or BioCCS), Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 324–334 CrossRef CAS .

          National Research Council, Climate Intervention: Carbon Dioxide Removal and Reliable Sequestration, The National Academies Press, Washington, DC,  2015 Search PubMed .
R. Schuiling and P. de Boer, Rolling stones; fast weathering of olivine in shallow seas for cost-effective CO2 capture and mitigation of global warming and ocean acidification, Earth Syst. Dynam. Discuss., 2011, 2, 551–568 CrossRef .
P. Renforth, B. G. Jenkins and T. Kruger, Engineering challenges of ocean liming, Energy, 2013, 60, 442–452 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kheshgi, Sequestering atmospheric carbon dioxide by increasing ocean alkalinity, Energy, 1995, 20, 915–922 CrossRef CAS .
K. Z. House, C. H. House, D. P. Schrag and M. J. Aziz, Electrochemical acceleration of chemical weathering as an energetically feasible approach to mitigating anthropogenic climate change, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 8464–8470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Renforth and G. Henderson, Assessing ocean alkalinity for carbon sequestration, Rev. Geophys., 2017, 55(3), 636–674 CrossRef .
N. Ghaffour, J. Bundschuh, H. Mahmoudi and M. F. Goosen, Renewable energy-driven desalination technologies: A comprehensive review on challenges and potential applications of integrated systems, Desalination, 2015, 356, 94–114 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Gude, Desalination and sustainability–an appraisal and current perspective, Water Res., 2016, 89, 87–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          IDA, IDA Yearbook - Water Desalination Report, 2016–2017 Search PubMed.
V. Ferrini, C. De Vito and S. Mignardi, Synthesis of nesquehonite by reaction of gaseous CO2 with Mg chloride solution: Its potential role in the sequestration of carbon dioxide, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 168, 832–837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Benyahia, Carbon dioxide mineralization using reject brine, US Pat., 20160074806,  2016 Search PubMed .

          WOC, http://www.worldofchemicals.com/440/chemistry-articles/manufacturing-of-sodium-carbonate-by-solvay-process.html, accessed 26 March 2018 .
C. A. Summers, D. C. Dahlin, G. E. Rush, W. K. O'Connor and S. J. Gerdemann, Grinding methods to enhance the reactivity of olivine, Miner. Metall. Process., 2005, 22, 140–144 CAS .

          S. J. Gerdemann, D. C. Dahlin, W. K. O'Connor and L. R. Penner, Carbon dioxide sequestration by aqueous mineral carbonation of magnesium silicate minerals. Report No. DOE/ARC-2003-018, Albany Research Center (ARC), Albany, OR,  2003 Search PubMed.

          USGS, https://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/magnesium/mcs-2018-mgcom.pdf, accessed 26 March 2018 .
P. A. Davies, Solar thermal decomposition of desalination reject brine for carbon dioxide removal and neutralisation of ocean acidity, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2015, 1, 131–137 CAS .
C. Fernandez-Gonzalez, A. Dominguez-Ramos, R. Ibañez and A. Irabien, Electrodialysis with Bipolar Membranes for Valorization of Brines, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2016, 45, 275–287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, Y. Wang, W. Chu and Y. Ju, Mineralization of flue gas CO2 with coproduction of valuable magnesium carbonate by means of magnesium chloride, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2014, 59, 2882–2889 CrossRef CAS .

          W. M. Haynes, CRC handbook of chemistry and physics, CRC press,  2014 Search PubMed .
C. Fritzmann, J. Löwenberg, T. Wintgens and T. Melin, State-of-the-art of reverse osmosis desalination, Desalination, 2007, 216, 1–76 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Shahzad, M. Burhan, L. Ang and K. C. Ng, Energy-water-environment nexus underpinning future desalination sustainability, Desalination, 2017, 413, 52–64 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, The future of seawater desalination: energy, technology, and the environment, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Allen, C. Pentland and A. Korre, Carbon Footprint of Electricity Generation. PostNote Update, No. 383, June 2011, The Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology, London,  2011, p. 4 Search PubMed.

          IEA, How much carbon dioxide is produced per kilowatthour when generating electricity with fossil fuels?, www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=74&t=11, accessed 25 March 2018 .

          J. Wright and A. Colling, Open University Course Team, Seawater: Its Composition, Properties and Behavior, Pergamon-Elsevier, Oxford,  1995 Search PubMed.
F. J. Millero, R. Feistel, D. G. Wright and T. J. McDougall, The composition of Standard Seawater and the definition of the Reference-Composition Salinity Scale, Deep Sea Res., Part I, 2008, 55, 50–72 CrossRef .
B. Salgado, J. M. Ortega, J. Blazheska, J. Sanz and V. García-Molina, High-permeability FILMTEC™ SEAMAXX™ reverse osmosis elements: a success story in the Canary Islands, Desalin. Water Treat., 2015, 55, 3003–3011 CAS .
T. Qiu and P. A. Davies, Comparison of Configurations for High-Recovery Inland Desalination Systems, Water, 2012, 4, 690 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, L. Lu and H. Yang, Review on life cycle assessment of energy payback and greenhouse gas emission of solar photovoltaic systems, Desalination and Water Treatment, 2013, 19, 255–274 CAS .
F. Asdrubali, G. Baldinelli, F. D'Alessandro and F. Scrucca, Life cycle assessment of electricity production from renewable energies: Review and results harmonization, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 1113–1122 CrossRef .
P. Williamson, Scrutinize CO2 removal methods: the viability and environmental risks of removing carbon dioxide from the air must be assessed if we are to achieve the Paris goals, Nature, 2016, 530, 153–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Harvey, Mitigating the atmospheric CO2 increase and ocean acidification by adding limestone powder to upwelling regions, J. Geophys. Res.: Oceans, 2008, 113, C04028 Search PubMed .

          R. C. Ropp, Encyclopedia of the alkaline earth compounds, Newnes,  2012, p. 34 Search PubMed .

          G. R. Rau, US Pat., 20140234193A9,  2014 Search PubMed .
G. H. Rau, S. A. Carroll, W. L. Bourcier, M. J. Singleton, M. M. Smith and R. D. Aines, Direct electrolytic dissolution of silicate minerals for air CO2 mitigation and carbon-negative H2 production, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 10095–10100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, V. W. C. Chang and A. G. Fane, Life Cycle Assessment for desalination: A review on methodology feasibility and reliability, Water Res., 2014, 61, 210–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Cipollina and G. Micale, Sustainable Energy from Salinity Gradients, Woodhead Publishing,  2016 Search PubMed .
L. Lu, Z. Huang, G. H. Rau and Z. J. Ren, Microbial electrolytic carbon capture for carbon negative and energy positive wastewater treatment, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 8193–8201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Water impact
Whereas many earlier studies focused on reducing the environmental impact of CO2 emissions from desalination, we propose here to reverse this impact. Recent advances in electrolysis technology are very promising to convert brine discharged from desalination into Mg(OH)2 suspension for CO2 absorption, thus transforming desalination into a negative emissions technology (NET). For arid regions, NET-desalination compares well against other NETs.


 	Fig. 1  Illustration of electrolyser with gas diffusion anode (GDA) for splitting brine containing magnesium chloride into HCl and Mg(OH)2. Modified from ref. 30.	 
Cathode Mg2+(aq) + 2H2O(l) + 2e → Mg(OH)2(s) + H2(g)	(1)
Anode H2(g) + 2Cl−(l) − 2e → 2HCl(aq)	(2)
MgCl2(aq) + 2H2O(l) → Mg(OH)2(s) + 2HCl(aq)	(3)

 		 
	(4)
	(5)
ΔG = 102.96 + 4.96ln[HCl] + 2.48ln(1 − r)	(6)
ΔG′ = ΔG/η	(7)
Mg(OH)2(s) + CO2 → MgCO3 + H2O	(8)
MgCO3 + H2O + CO2 ↔ Mg(HCO3)2	(9)
NaCl(aq) + H2O(l) → NaOH(aq) + HCl(aq)	(10)

 	Fig. 2  The system under study consists of a state-of-the art reverse osmosis (RO) desalination plant with the brine discharge passing through an electrolysis unit. Case 1 considers only the processes inside the dashed box, whereas case 2 considers the whole system.	 


Electrolysis add-on to desalination plant for brine treatment	Included	Included
Desalination plant	Excluded	Included
Power generation and emissions for desalination plant	Excluded	Included
Questions that can be answered	1. If brine treatment is added to existing desalination plants, or to plants that will be built anyway, how does it compare to other types of NET taking into account only the additional inputs required?	If new desalination plants are built with brine treatment included: 1. Could they provide negative emissions (NET)? 2. How does the system as a whole compare to an unmodified desalination plant? 3. How does the system as a whole compare to other types of NET taking into account the additional outputs in each case e.g. water and energy services? In this case all inputs and outputs should be included, and not just the additional ones associated with the electrolytic brine treatment

Density of seawater	1027 kg m−3	—	Typical value from ref. 37
Concentration of magnesium in seawater	1.2837 g kg−1	—	Millero et al.,38 for standard seawater at practical salinity of 35
0.05424 M
Temperature of seawater	25 °C	—	Desalination plants typically take in water at 15–35°C (ref. 21)
Efficiency of electrolysis process	0.8	0.6–0.9	Xie et al.30 (see discussion in section 4)
Concentration hydrochloric acid at outlet	2 M	1–10 M	See ref. 29
Specific energy consumption (SEC) of basic RO plant	3 kW h m−3	1–4 kW h m−3	Per m3 of freshwater produced. Typical practical value for state-of-art RO plant.33 Specific examples in the literature refer to values as low as 2 kW h m−3;39 with other plants reporting closer to 4 kW h m−3.21 1 kW h m−3 approximates a thermodynamic minimum34
(10.8 MJ m−3)
Carbon intensity of electricity generation	0.5 kgCO2 per kW h	0–1 kgCO2 per kW h	0.5 is a nominal value of generation based on natural gas:35,36 range represents ‘ideal zero-carbon renewables’ to ‘high-carbon fossil fuel’
Recovery ratio (r)	0.5	0.4–0.8	RO desalination plants typically operate in the range 0.4 to 0.5 though higher recoveries are possible with higher energy expenditure32
	(11)


NET-desalination (brine electrolysis with GDA): Case 1, NET-modification only	This study	0	1.8	13.7	Negligible
NET-desalination (brine electrolysis with GDA): Case 2, whole system	This study	0	5.6	−206	Negligible
Chloralkali process	
17
	0	2.3–9.1	No data	Negligible
NET-desalination (brine thermal decomposition)	
28
	13	0.8	0	Negligible
Ocean liming	
15
	0.6–5.6	0.1–1.2	0.5–1.2	No data
Crop bio-energy + CCS (BECCS)	
5
	+2.4 to −24	500	270–1600
Direct air capture (DAC)	
5
	0.7–12.5	25	1.5

 	Fig. 3  Sensitivity of energy and water penalties to concentration of hydrochloric acid discharged: higher concentration saves water but requires more energy (case 1 and case 2).	 
NaCl(aq) + 2H2O(l) → NaOH(aq) + H2(g) + Cl2(g)	(12)

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of desalination with and without NET modification using the electrolysis-GDA process (case 2). Net emissions per net water output (kgCO2 per m3) increase with the carbon intensity of the electricity used, the values of which encompass generation from renewables, cleaner fossil fuel (gas), and high-carbon fossil fuel (coal) respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Dependence of the overall SEC after modification (case 2), and negative emissions achieved per net m3 of water output, on the SEC of the basic desalination plant before modification.	 

 	Fig. 6  Specific energy consumption of the NET-desalination plant decreases with the concentration of the hydrochloric acid produced, due to lower sacrifice of water at higher concentrations, but is always much higher than that of a standard desalination plant (SEC = 3 kW h m−3).	 

 	Fig. 7  Increasing the efficiency of the electrolysis process improves both SEC and the negative emissions achieved by the modified desalination plant.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effect of recovery ratio on SEC, net CO2 emitted per net m3 of freshwater produced, and energy penalty of CO2 removal – for the whole system of Fig. 2 (case 2).	 
AW	Accelerated weathering
BECCS	Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage
CDR	Carbon dioxide removal
DAC	Direct air capture
GDA	Gas diffusion anode
INDC	Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
NET	Negative emissions technology
OL	Ocean liming
RO	Reverse osmosis
SEC	Specific energy consumption

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
