Ionic liquid-induced in situ deposition of perovskite quantum dot films with a photoluminescence quantum yield of over 85%   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR05528C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR05528C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 20067-20077Ionic liquid-induced in situ deposition of perovskite quantum dot films with a photoluminescence quantum yield of over 85%†

        
          
            Qiugui 
            Zeng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Luo
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yiying 
            Du
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiexuan 
            Jiang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Yang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Zhao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Heping 
            Shi
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Yanbo 
            Li
          
        
      *ab
aYangtza Delta Region Institute (Huzhou), University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Huzhou 313001, China. E-mail: yanboli@uestc.edu.cn
bInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China
cSchool of Chemical Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
dSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China
Received 
      23rd August 2021
    , Accepted 8th November 2021First published on 10th November 2021AbstractMetal halide perovskite quantum dots (QDs) hold great promise as building blocks for next-generation light emitting devices (LEDs). The preparation of perovskite QD films with high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) is the key to realizing efficient LEDs. However, the conventional deposition method of spin-coating of pre-synthesized QD ink solutions results in perovskite QD films with low PLQY (typically <45%) due to non-radiative recombination centers induced in the deposition process. Here, by utilizing the ionic nature and steric hindrance effect of the ionic liquid, we demonstrate an in situ deposition method for perovskite QD films with high PLQY by directly spin-coating precursor solutions containing an ionic liquid. Furthermore, mechanistic study reveals that the ionic liquid not only induces the formation of QDs but also suppresses defect-related recombination through the interaction with uncoordinated metal atoms on the surface of the QDs. As a result, the in situ deposited CsPbBr3 QD film with a PLQY as high as 85.2% and long-term air stability is achieved. These findings demonstrate that the introduction of an ionic liquid provides an effective strategy to enhance the performance of in situ formed perovskite QD films, which could benefit the development of efficient LEDs and other optoelectronic devices.
Introduction
Metal halide perovskites have captured tremendous attention in recent years as a promising semiconductor material for next-generation optoelectronic devices, due to their high color purity with narrow spectral linewidth, color tunability, high defect tolerance, excellent charge-carrier mobilities, and simple solution-processability at room temperature.1–7 In particular, all-inorganic cesium lead halide perovskites, namely CsPbX3 (X = I, Br, Cl), are widely used in perovskite light-emitting diodes (PeLEDs) exhibiting novel properties and additionally offer better stability.8,9 One of the prerequisites for realizing efficient PeLEDs is to prepare perovskite light-emitting layers with high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY). Unfortunately, solution-processed polycrystalline CsPbBr3 films exhibit a low PLQY of approximately 1% due to trap-assisted non-radiative recombination and low exciton binding energy, leading to a low carrier capture rate for radiative recombination and low electroluminescence efficiency in PeLEDs.10,11 To achieve high-efficiency PeLEDs, extensive efforts have been devoted to the preparation of high-quality perovskite light-emitting layers with a small grain size and low density of trap states, including solvent engineering, vapor-assisted sequential deposition, antisolvent dropping, additive engineering, composition tuning of perovskite precursors, and interfacial energy transfer engineering.12–19 Despite all these efforts, the PLQY of polycrystalline CsPbBr3 perovskite films is always limited to around 50%. Perovskite QDs with PLQY approaching 100% in colloidal solution have shown great potential for application in PeLEDs.20–23 However, perovskite QD light-emitting layers deposited by spin-coating of pre-synthesized QD colloidal solutions suffer from degraded PLQY (typically <45%).24 The typical fabrication process of CsPbBr3 QD films is shown in Scheme 1a. The QD ink solution is pre-synthesized through a ligand-assisted reprecipitation (LARP) method, purified, and then spin-coated onto the substrate.25 Unfortunately, the purification process, which is necessary to remove the residual ligands, would induce nonradiative recombination centers due to the weakening of dynamic interaction between the surface of QDs and the organic ligands. To address these challenges, in situ deposition methods are proposed for the preparation of QD films, which not only simplify the fabrication process but also retain the high PLQY of the as-prepared QDs. In situ deposited perovskite QD films with a PLQY of ∼80% were achieved by introducing a polymer matrix to induce the growth of QDs.26–28 Despite the high PLQYs, the use of polymer matrix would cause a high turn-on voltage and low power efficiency in PeLEDs due to the high injection barrier and low carrier mobility.28 Therefore, chemical molecules that not only promote the in situ preparation of perovskite QD films with high PLQY but also support essential carrier injection are urgently required for the fabrication of efficient QD-based PeLEDs.
 Scheme 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the LARP method for the perovskite QD ink film. (b) Schematic diagram of the BMIMBF4-induced in situ deposition of perovskite QD films. 
Ionic liquids (ILs), low-melting salts comprising bulky organic cations and inorganic/organic anions, exhibit a steric hindrance effect in organic chemical reactions.29–33 For instance, by utilizing the steric hindrance effect of an IL to control the polymerization of asphaltenes, the size of asphaltenes could be reduced.34 Recently, Snaith et al. have introduced ILs into polycrystalline perovskite light-absorbing layers resulting in great enhancement of the power conversion efficiency and long-term stability of perovskite solar cells, demonstrating that ILs can reduce perovskite crystal defects and suppress the degradation of the perovskite active layer.35 Motivated by these results, we have developed a simple, one-step in situ method for perovskite QD films in the presence of ILs. Briefly, highly luminescent CsPbBr3 perovskite QD films are deposited on a substrate by spin-coating the perovskite precursor solutions (CsBr and PbBr2) along with the IL, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4), using antisolvent engineering, as shown in Scheme 1b. The BMIMBF4 IL helps to glue the QDs together in these perovskite QD films. The size of the QD film can be effectively modulated in the range of 52.9–16.8 nm by careful adjustment of the BMIMBF4 amount in precursor solutions. Under optimal conditions, the in situ deposited CsPbBr3 QD film achieves a PLQY as high as 85.2%, which, to the best of our knowledge, is the highest reported so far for the CsPbBr3 perovskite QD films without embedded QDs in a polymer matrix. Photoluminescence, time-resolved photoluminescence, excitation intensity-dependent photoluminescence spectroscopy and other studies were performed to understand the optical properties of films and the cause of their high PLQYs. These studies reveal that the exciton binding energy (Eb) is significantly increased and the nonradiative recombination is suppressed in the BMIMBF4-induced QD films. The long-term stability of these films concerning their PL properties is further studied under ambient conditions. Our results show the BMIMBF4-induced QD films exhibit excellent air stability due to the passivation effect of the IL and the formation of a protective Cs4PbBr6 shell. These results show that the IL-induced QD films have great potential as building blocks in light-emitting and backlight display devices.
Experimental section
Materials
Cesium bromide (CsBr, 99.999%), lead bromide (PbBr2, 99.9999%), oleic acid (OA, 90%), oleylamine (OAm, 90%) and n-hexane (>99%) were purchased from Aladdin. N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.9%), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and toluene (analytical reagent) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium (BMIMBF4, >99%) was purchased from Damas-Beta. Methyl acetate (99%) and ethyl acetate (99%) were purchased from Alfa-Aesar. All chemicals were used as received without any purification.
BMIMBF4-induced QD film fabrication
The precursor solutions are prepared through mixing 0.275 M CsBr, 0.25 M PbBr2 and different amounts of BMIMBF4 IL in DMSO and stirring at 60 °C for 6 h. Then the precursor solutions are filtered through a 0.22 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) syringe filter and stored in a N2-filled glove box. The glass substrates (15 × 16 × 1 mm) are successively cleaned with detergent (Alconox), deionized water, acetone and ethanol for 15 min, and dried using a nitrogen gas flow. Ultraviolet ozone treatment is applied for 15 min to further clean the substrates. The precursor solutions are spin-coated onto the substrates using a one-step spin-coating method in a N2-filled glove box. In detail, 50 μL precursor solution is dropped on the substrate and spin-coated at 2500 rpm for 15 s and 5000 rpm for 45 s. As an anti-solvent, 100 μL of toluene is added to the spinning substrates 5 s after the beginning of the second step. Finally, the samples are annealed on a hotplate at 80 °C for 10 min.
QD ink film fabrication
Firstly, CsPbBr3 QD ink solution is synthesized according to the previously reported method. In detail, CsBr (0.4 mmol), PbBr2 (0.4 mmol), 1 mL OA and 0.5 mL OAm are dissolved in 10 mL DMF. Then 1 mL precursor solution is rapidly added into 10 mL toluene with a stirring speed of 700 rpm. A mixed solvent of ethyl acetate/methyl acetate (volume ratio 2:1) is then added into the crude solution at a volume ratio of 2:1, and the precipitate is collected through centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 5 min and dispersed in hexane. The purification process is repeated twice. Finally, QD ink solution with a concentration of approximately 10 mg mL−1 is obtained and stored in a N2-filled glove box. The prepared QD ink solution is deposited onto the cleaned glass substrate by the one-step spin-coating method at 2000 rpm for 40 s and then the film is annealed at 60 °C for 5 min.
Characterization
The surface morphology of samples is characterized by SEM (ZEISS NVision 40). TEM images of samples in situ deposited on copper grids are taken with a JEOL-JEM-1400 plus electron microscope using a 120 kV electron source. The crystal structures of samples are measured by XRD (Thermo Scientific ARL EQUINOX 1000) using a Cu Kα source operated at 40 kV and 30 mA. UV-vis absorption spectra of the samples deposited on quartz substrates are characterized using a UV-1900 spectrophotometer. The FTIR spectra of the films are measured with a Thermo Fisher Scientific IS 50 R. A Thermo Nicolet Avatar 370 is used to characterize the FTIR spectra of the solutions. The room-temperature PL spectra are measured using a PicoQuant FluoTime 300 equipped with a 420 nm pico-second pulsed laser as the excitation light source. The temperature-dependent PL spectra are obtained by controlling the temperature of the samples in a closed-cycle He cryostat (ARS-DE-202) in the range from 10 to 300 K. TRPL spectra are characterized using the same PL spectrometer using a time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique with 1 nm bandwidth under a 420 nm picosecond pulsed laser excitation. The absolute PLQY of the samples is measured using the same PL spectrometer equipped with an integrating sphere and with a 405 nm laser as the excitation light source. 1H NMR spectra are recorded on the Bruker AV III HD 400 MHz NMR spectrometer and DMSO-d6 is used as the solvent. XPS measurements were performed using a KratosAxis Supra system with a monochromatized Al Ka X-ray source.
Results and discussion
PL properties of the IL-induced CsPbBr3 QD films
Herein, we prepared BMIMBF4-induced CsPbBr3 perovskite QD films by the in situ spin-coating method. Briefly, cesium bromide (CsBr), lead bromide (PbBr2), and different concentrations of BMIMBF4 IL are dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as the precursor solution. Anti-solvent exchange is performed by dropping toluene during a one-step spin-coating process, resulting in the supersaturation of the perovskite precursor. The concentration of BMIMBF4 IL, i.e. the molar ratio of MBMIMBF4/MPbBr2, plays an important role in determining the optical properties. As shown in Fig. 1a, the thin films gradually change from deep yellow to light yellow-green under ambient light. Meanwhile, the BMIMBF4-induced QD films display brilliant green emission under UV irradiation, in sharp contrast to the polycrystalline perovskite film without the addition of BMIMBF4 IL (Fig. 1b). To investigate the photophysical properties of the BMIMBF4-induced QD films, we conducted steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and PLQY measurements. The emission intensities of the films enhance significantly with the introduction of BMIMBF4 IL and reach the maximum at a concentration of 75% (Fig. 1c). We notice that the peaks of the emission spectra slightly blue-shift and the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) decreases from 18.3 nm to 16.6 nm with increasing concentration of BMIMBF4 IL, which indicates that the size of QDs gradually decreases and the size distribution of QDs is more uniform. Furthermore, the outstanding PL properties of BMIMBF4-induced QD films are supported by the PLQY results (Fig. S1†). The change of the PLQY values (Fig. 1d) shows a similar trend to PL intensity (Fig. 1c), with a peak value of 85.2% for a 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. For comparison, we also prepared a QD ink solution by the conventional LARP method, and the QD ink solution possesses similar properties to that in the previous works (Fig. S2†).25 The red-shift of the emission peak, the increase of the FWHM value, and the decrease of PLQY for the conventional QD film demonstrate that the QDs aggregate and form a nonradiative recombination center during the fabrication process of the QD film, leading to a low PLQY of less than 35% (Fig. S3†). Fig. 1e shows the histogram of the PLQY values for 15 samples of 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD films. The average PLQY of the films reaches as high as 83%, indicating the good reproducibility of the in situ deposition method. Therefore, our in situ deposition method may pave a new way for the preparation of CsPbBr3 QD films with high luminescence performance.
 Fig. 1  (a) Optical images of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations (from 0% to 100%) under ambient light. (b) Optical images of the same samples under 365 nm UV illumination. (c) Room-temperature PL spectra of the samples. The dashed line shows the PL spectrum of conventional QD ink film for comparison. (d) Evolution of the FWHM of the PL spectra and PLQY of samples. The solid circle and square represent the FWHM and PLQY values of the conventional QD ink film, respectively. (e) Histogram of the PLQY value for 15 samples with 75% BMIMBF4 concentration. 
Structural properties of the IL-induced CsPbBr3 QD films
To confirm that high-quality CsPbBr3 QD films are indeed formed by adding BMIMBF4 IL, we performed scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterization of samples deposited on indium-tin oxide (ITO) coated glass substrates. The SEM image of the sample without BMIMBF4 IL shows a typical polycrystalline microstructure with poor surface coverage and random grains (Fig. 2a), which agrees with previous reports.2 In contrast, samples with BMIMBF4 IL consist of cube-like QDs with uniform coverage (Fig. 2d and S4†). Moreover, the grain/QD size of films gradually decreases from several hundreds to tens of nanometers with increasing concentration of BMIMBF4 IL. Although small QDs are obtained at 100% BMIMBF4 concentration, impurities with a large particle size are observed, whose composition will be identified later. To further visualize the microstructural properties of these samples, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to characterize QDs in situ formed on copper grids. The sample without BMIMBF4 IL shows a large grain size with a random shape (Fig. 2b and c), consistent with the SEM observation. With the addition of BMIMBF4 IL, QDs with a cubic shape are observed and their sizes decrease with increasing BMIMBF4 concentration (Fig. S5†). At an optimum BMIMBF4 concentration (75%), the average size of the QDs is 17.7 nm (Fig. 2e and f). The formation of cube-shaped QDs is likely due to surface stabilization as a result of acid–base pairs and the steric hindrance effect of the BMIMBF4 IL. Acid (carboxylic acid) and base (amine) interactions play a crucial role in the nucleation and growth of perovskite structures as revealed by previous studies.36,37 In our case, the IL serves as an electronically compatible ligand and also serves as a charged molecule to initiate the formation of perovskite structures. Meanwhile, in the nucleation stage the available reactive species are confined due to the steric hindrance of the bulky organic cations and anions of the BMIMBF4 IL, resulting in massive nucleation sites. In the crystal growth stage, the steric hindrance effect increases the reaction activation energy, resulting in the retardation of crystal growth and small crystalline grains.30,33
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the polycrystalline perovskite film. (c) Histogram of grain size of the sample in b. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. (f) Histogram of the QD size of the sample in e. 
Growth mechanism of IL-induced CsPbBr3 QD films
To unveil the interaction between BMIMBF4 IL and the perovskite QDs, we prepared solutions of BMIMBF4 IL, CsBr, BMIMBF4·CsBr mixture, PbBr2, and BMIMBF4·PbBr2 mixture in the DMSO solvent. While precipitants are observed in CsBr·DMSO solution, the other solutions are fully clear without precipitant (Fig. S6†), which indicates the interaction between BMIMBF4 IL and CsBr. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was carried out for different solution samples to reveal the interaction of BMIMBF4 IL with different metal ions. As shown in Fig. S7,† the CN stretching vibration peak of the imidazole ring located at 1170 cm−1 shifts to a lower wavenumber for the BMIMBF4·CsBr·DMSO, BMIMBF4·PbBr2·DMSO, and BMIMBF4·CsBr·PbBr2·DMSO solutions, which reveals the weakened CN bond energy for these solutions. Furthermore, the FTIR spectrum of the corresponding films was characterized. The vibrations of the butyl chain attached on the imidazolium ring in the range from 2800 to 3000 cm−1 remain unchanged and this feature originating from the C–H stretching vibrational mode of the imidazolium ring (3155 and 3114 cm−1) slightly shifts to a lower wavenumber in BMIMBF4·CsBr, BMIMBF4·PbBr2, and the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD films (Fig. 3a). These results reveal that acidic hydrogen from the imidazolium ring interacts with electronegative halides and uncoordinated metal ions interact with the N atoms of the imidazolium ring, which are consistent with the 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) results (Fig. S8†). Furthermore, the XPS spectra indicate that the BMIMBF4-induced perovskite QD film possesses shorter Pb–Br bonds and higher binding energy for Pb 4f and Br 3d, demonstrating that the formed perovskite QDs have a more stable crystal structure (Fig. S9†).
 Fig. 3  (a) FTIR spectra of the BMIMBF4 IL, BMIMBF4·CsBr film, BMIMBF4·PbBr2 film, 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film, and polycrystalline perovskite film. (b) Absorption spectra of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations (from 0% to 100%). (c) Logarithm plots of the integrated PL intensity against laser intensity. (d) TRPL spectra of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations. 
To further investigate whether BMIMBF4 IL reacts with CsBr/PbBr2 and forms new phases, ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization studies were performed. From the UV-vis spectra (Fig. S10a†), it is noticed that the CsBr·BMIMBF4 and PbBr2·BMIMBF4 films show similar absorption features to CsBr and PbBr2 samples. The XRD results reveal that no new crystal phase is formed in the presence of BMIMBF4 IL (Fig. S10b†) but the preferred orientation of crystallization is altered. Therefore, it is speculated that the addition of BMIMBF4 IL would not affect the crystal phase of perovskite QDs, but could alter the preferred orientation of the QDs. XRD results of QD films with different BMIMBF4 concentrations confirm that all the samples maintain a cubic phase (Pm3m) but the relative intensities of the diffraction peaks are changed (Fig. S11†). For the polycrystalline perovskite film (0% sample), there are multiple diffraction peaks along the (100), (110), (200), (211), and (220) orientations, indicating that the polycrystalline perovskite film possesses crystals with random shapes. By adding BMIMBF4, the peaks along the (211) and (220) gradually diminish, and at 75% BMIMBF4 concentration only the (100), (110), and (200) peaks are observed, which indicate the formation of the cubic perovskite QDs with a cubic shape under the induction of BMIMBF4. These results are consistent with the TEM observations (Fig. S5†). However, at 100% BMIMBF4 concentration, a new diffraction peak appears at 18.45°, which is identified as the (020) peak of PbBr2. Therefore, the impurity phase observed by SEM likely consists of PbBr2. This result suggests that excessive addition results in the separation of the PbBr2 phase from the perovskite, which could explain the decreased PL performance of the 100% BMIMBF4-induced QD film.
Mechanism of the high PLQY of IL-induced CsPbBr3 QD films
To gain insights into the high PL performance of BMIMBF4-induced QD films, we performed in-depth spectroscopy characterization of the samples. UV-vis spectroscopy of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations shows that the sub-bandgap absorption decreases with increasing BMIMBF4 concentration (Fig. 3b). The sub-bandgap tail is known as the Urbach tail and the Urbach energy (Eu) is defined as kBT/σ(T) to reflect the degree of crystal disorder. Eu can be obtained by fitting the exponential absorption of the Urbach tail according to the following equation:25 (1)where α, E, T, σ, and kB are the absorption coefficient, the photon energy, the absolute temperature, the steepness parameter, and the Boltzmann constant, respectively. The calculated Eu values of different samples are shown in Fig. S12.† The value of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film is as low as 26.2 meV, which is significantly lower than that of the polycrystalline perovskite film (72.1 meV). This result demonstrates the high degree of crystal order in the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. The absorption peaks blue-shift slightly with increasing BMIMBF4 concentration, which is consistent with the blue-shift of the PL peaks observed in Fig. 1c, likely due to the reduced QD sizes. Besides, the absorption spectra show a strong excitonic feature in all samples, indicating the formation of excitons under photoexcitation. However, it is uncertain whether there is exciton emission at room temperature, due to thermal quenching of the excitons. The recombination mechanism of near-band-edge emission in semiconductors consists of free carrier recombination, exciton recombination, free-to-bound, and donor–acceptor pair recombination.38 Under non-resonant excitation conditions, the integrated PL intensity of the direct semiconductors (IPL) is a power-law function of excitation density (IEX) IPL ∼ IEXk(2)where k is power-law exponent with k < 1 for free-to-bound recombination and donor–acceptor pair transition, 1 ≤ k < 2 for exciton recombination (including free exciton (k = 1) and bound exciton recombination), and k = 2 for free carrier recombination.39 Therefore, we performed the excitation intensity-dependent PL measurements (Fig. S13†) to determine the emission mechanism at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 3c, the integrated PL intensities exhibit power-law dependence on the laser intensity and the k values obtained from the fitted curves are in the range of 1 to 2, indicating that the carrier recombination in these samples is governed by exciton recombination. Moreover, the k value drops significantly from 1.81 in a polycrystalline perovskite film to 1.01 in the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. With the k value approaching 1, the radiative recombination mechanism in the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film is dominated by free exciton recombination.
Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy was employed to characterize the dynamics of exciton recombination. The TRPL spectra of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations are measured at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 3d. The PL decay curves are fitted with a thermalized stretching exponential function which accounts for free excitons (FEs) and the bound excitons (BEs):39,40 (3)where τfree and τbound are lifetimes of FEs and BEs, while Afree and Abound are the corresponding weight fractions, and β is the stretching exponent (0 ≤ β ≤ 1). The average lifetimes, 〈τ〉, which are calculated from the fitted parameters of the thermalized stretching exponential decays are listed in Table S1.† We observe that the polycrystalline perovskite film without BMIMBF4 IL possesses a short average lifetime of 3.3 ns. In contrast, the average lifetimes of the BMIMBF4-induced QD films significantly increase. However, a longer lifetime does not directly translates into a higher PLQY in the BMIMBF4-induced QD films. For instance, the average lifetime of the 25% BMIMBF4-induced QD film (87.6 ns) is longer than that of the 75% sample (30.7 ns), while the PLQY values of corresponding samples are 15.7% and 85.2%. This finding is contrary to previous studies that reported a positive correlation between the lifetime and PLQY.2,13,40–42 In addition, the fitted weight fractions (Afree and Abound) listed in Table S1† show that the decays are dominated by the BEs, which is contrary to the results of the excitation intensity dependent PL in Fig. 3c. In order to clarify these discrepancies and to explain the high PLQY achieved by our sample, temperature-dependent PL spectroscopy was employed to study samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations.
The possible recombination processes of the FEs and BEs are illustrated in Fig. 4a. Under the above-band excitation, FEs are formed due to the electrostatic Coulomb force in photogenerated electron–hole pairs. These FEs can be dissociated into free electrons and holes by thermal disturbance or trapped by the shallow defect states and form BEs.40 The excitons in the BE state can de-trap and return to the FE state under thermal excitation. Radiative recombination can occur in both FEs and BEs, albeit the emission characteristics are different. The BE emission exhibits a broader PL peak and much longer PL lifetime compared with the FE emission.43,44 At room temperature BE emission is hardly observed due to the thermal dissociation of BEs. By lowering the sample temperature, the thermal energy can be lowered below the dissociation energy of BEs and emission from both FEs and BEs can be observed. Indeed, with decreasing temperature the PL intensity is gradually enhanced and a new shoulder peak at a low energy side is observed for all samples (Fig. 4b, c, and S14–S16†). In order to identify the origin of the two PL peaks, TRPL spectroscopy for the two peaks of the 50% BMIMBF4-induced QD film was performed at 10 K. As shown in Fig. 4d, the emission at ∼536 nm exhibits a short PL lifetime of 8.7 ns, which is consistent with the fast recombination rate of FE emission. Meanwhile, the emission at ∼540 nm possesses a significantly longer PL lifetime of 420.7 ns, indicating that the shoulder peak could originate from BE emission. Furthermore, the excitation intensity dependent PL measurement was performed for samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations at 10 K (Fig. S17†). With increasing excitation intensity, the relative intensity of the shoulder peak gradually decreases. This result further supports the assignment of the shoulder peak to BE emission. Under intense excitation, the density of BEs is eventually saturated because of the limited density of shallow defect states (Br vacancies), resulting in a decreased relative intensity of the BE emission. In order to resolve the FE and BE emission peaks, we analyzed the PL spectra of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations at 10 K under a low excitation intensity of 0.19 mW cm−2. As shown in Fig. S18,† the spectra are fitted with a Gaussian peak for the FE emission and an asymmetric double sigmoidal peak for the BE emission to account for the spatial potential fluctuations of the BEs.43,45 With increasing BMIMBF4 concentration from 25% to 75%, the relative intensity of BE emission decreases from 100% to 47.4%. However, further increasing the BMIMBF4 concentration to 100% leads to an increase in the relative intensity of BE emission to 81.9%. These results could help us understand the seemingly abnormal change of the PL lifetime observed in Fig. 3d. The decreasing PL lifetime in samples with increasing BMIMBF4 concentration from 25% to 75% is due to the decreasing relative intensity of BE emission, while the increased PL lifetime in the 100% sample is due to the increased relative intensity of BE emission. In contrast to the observed correlation between the relative intensity of BE emission and PL lifetime, the sample without BMIMBF4 IL exhibits only BE emission while its PL lifetime is extremely short. Another important factor, that is, the nonradiative recombination process, should be taken into consideration to explain the result. The extremely low PLQY (Fig. 1d) and significantly lower PL intensity (Fig. S19†) indicate that the carrier recombination is dominated by nonradiative processes in the polycrystalline perovskite film without BMIMBF4 IL. Therefore, the extremely low PL lifetime is due to nonradiative recombination. These results also indicate the passivation effect of the BMIMBF4 IL on nonradiative recombination centers in BMIMBF4-induced QD films. The above analyses show that there is no direct correlation between the PL lifetime and PLQY. Care should be taken in analyzing the PL decay by making clear the recombination processes in the sample.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic drawing of the possible recombination processes of free excitons and bond excitons. (b) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the polycrystalline perovskite film. (c) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. (d) TRPL spectra obtained from the emission peaks at 534 and 540 nm with 1 nm bandwidth (as indicated in the inset) for the 50% BMIMBF4-induced QD film at 10 K. (e) Low-temperature PL spectra at 10 K and their fitted peaks for the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. (f) Temperature-dependent integrated PL intensity of the polycrystalline perovskite film and the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. The dashed curves show the fitting of data by the Arrhenius equation. 
The binding energy of the exciton to the shallow defects, which is equivalent to the thermal dissociation energy (Ebx) of BEs, is an important parameter to judge the thermal dissociation probability of BEs. The Ebx can be obtained from the energy difference between the peak positions of FE emission and BE emission.46,47 As shown in Fig. 4e, the FE emission is centered at 2.327 eV and the BE emission is at 2.305 eV for the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film, affording an Ebx value of approximately 22 meV. Therefore, the BEs could be completely dissociated into FEs at room temperature because the Ebx is lower than the thermal energy (∼26 meV). Temperature-dependent PL spectroscopy indeed shows that the relative intensity of BE emission gradually declines and completely disappears at room temperature (Fig. 4b, c, and S12–S14†). Interestingly, it is also noticed that the integrated PL intensity does not decrease with increasing temperature from 10 to 100 K (Fig. 4c). This result demonstrates that the excitons in the BE state can be thermally de-trapped and contribute to FE emission. This could help us understand the discrepancy between the k value (k = 1.01, indicating a FE-dominated emission process) shown in Fig. 3c and the BE-dominated PL decay process shown in Table S1.† At room temperature, the trap and de-trap processes of the excitons lead to a long BE-dominated PL decay process. However, the PL emission is dominated by FE emission because of the de-trap of BEs, leading to a near unity k value. Furthermore, the free exciton binding energy (Eb) is obtained by fitting the temperature-dependent integrated PL intensity with the Arrhenius function:47,48 (4)where I0, A, kB and T are the integrated PL intensity at 0 K, the pre-exponential constant, the Boltzmann constant, and the absolute temperature, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4e, the fitted Eb value of the polycrystalline perovskite film without BMIMBF4 IL is 26.9 meV, which is consistent with previous reports.8,47 The Eb values of the BMIMBF4-induced QD films are significantly increased and a maximum value of 70.3 meV is achieved in the 75% sample (Fig. S20†). The high Eb value suggests the low dissociation possibility of excitons under thermal disturbance, leading to high PLQY in samples with a low defect density. The high Eb value of the film is also beneficial for its application in PeLEDs because the electrically generated excitons in PeLEDs are also less susceptible to thermal disturbance.
Stability of the IL-induced CsPbBr3 QD films
The passivation effect of BMIMBF4 IL on the surface defects is further revealed by measuring the PL spectra of samples without and with BMIMBF4 IL in air and a vacuum. As shown in Fig. 5a, the PL emission of the polycrystalline perovskite film without BMIMBF4 IL is almost completely quenched in a vacuum due to the removal of oxygen and water molecules that have a passivation effect on surface defects. This result is consistent with what has been reported for perovskite films and single crystals.49,50 In contrast, the PL intensity of a 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film in a vacuum is ∼90% of that in air (Fig. 5b). Combining this with the PL results shown in Fig. S19,† we conclude that massive surface defects which are non-radiative recombination centers exist in the polycrystalline perovskite film and BMIMBF4 IL effectively suppresses the surface defects in the BMIMBF4-induced QD films. Finally, the stability of the BMIMBF4-induced QD films was tested by recording the PL intensity of the films stored in air over an extended period of time (43 days). As shown in Fig. S21,† the PL intensity of the polycrystalline perovskite film keeps declining over time. Interestingly, the PL intensity of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced film slightly decreases in the first few days and then gradually increases afterwards (Fig. 5c and d). In order to understand this interesting phenomenon, XRD measurement was carried out for both samples, the polycrystalline perovskite film and the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film after 43 days of exposure to air. As shown in Fig. S22,† the diffraction intensity of the polycrystalline perovskite film after exposure to air is lower than before, although the crystal phase is unchanged. While the diffraction intensity of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film also decreases after exposure to air, a new set of peaks belonging to the Cs4PbBr6 phase is observed. In addition, we performed TEM characterization for samples exposed to air for 43 days. As shown in Fig. S23,† the sample without BMIMBF4 IL shows the amorphization and aggregation of the particles. In contrast, the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD sample maintains the QD structure after air exposure, while the crystalline edges of QDs are unclear. Combining the XRD and TEM results, we speculate that the continuously decreasing PL intensity of the polycrystalline perovskite film without BMIMBF4 IL could be attributed to the gradual decomposition of the perovskite into amorphous hydrated compounds by water/oxygen in the air. The initial decrease of the PL intensity of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film indicates that a similar degradation process also occurs on the surface of the QDs. However, in the presence of the BMIMBF4 IL a Cs4PbBr6 shell is formed, which prevents further degradation of the CsPbBr3 core. In previous works, the Cs4PbBr6 shell was intentionally grown on the CsPbBr3 QDs to improve the PL performance and the stability of the QDs, which was ascribed to the passivation effect of the isolated [PbBr6]4− octahedra in the Cs4PbBr6 crystal.51 Reversible transformation from CsPbBr3 into Cs4PbBr6 can be achieved via the control of the Brønsted acid–base type ligands.36 The detailed mechanism for the formation of the Cs4PbBr6 shell in the presence of the BMIMBF4 IL requires further study, nevertheless, this could explain the improved PL performance of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film over time.
 Fig. 5  (a) PL spectra of the polycrystalline perovskite film in air and under vacuum. (b) PL spectra of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film in air and under vacuum. (c) PL spectra of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film stored in air for over 43 days. (d) Temporal evolution of the integrated PL intensity. 
Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrate an effective strategy for in situ deposition of air-stable CsPbBr3 QD films with a PLQY of over 85% by directly depositing the precursor solution containing BMIMBF4 IL. The BMIMBF4 IL not only induces the formation of QDs due to its ionic nature and hindrance effect but also enhances the PL performance of the QDs through its interaction with metal ion defects. Combining TRPL, temperature-dependent PL, and excitation intensity-dependent PL spectroscopy, we reveal that the high PLQY of the BMIMBF4-induced QD films at room-temperature is because the PL is dominated by efficient free exciton emission, while the bound excitons serve as a source for the free excitons through a thermal de-trapping process. Furthermore, the BMIMBF4-induced QD films show excellent air stability, which is ascribed to the passivation effect of the IL and the formation of a protective Cs4PbBr6 shell. These results demonstrate that the IL-induced in situ deposition method provides an effective strategy to prepare efficient and stable perovskite QD films, which could serve as promising materials for the fabrication of efficient PeLEDs and other optoelectronic devices.
Author contributions
Y. L. and Q. Z. proposed the project and designed the experiments. Q. Z. carried out the materials synthesis and characterization with assistance from the other authors. Y. L. and Q. Z. analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed, commented on and revised the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Sichuan Science and Technology Foundation (No. 2018JY0137) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21872019).
References
M. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Guo, W. W. William and A. L. Rogach, Metal Halide Perovskite Light–Emitting Devices: Promising Technology for Next–Generation Displays, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902008 CrossRef .
M. Ban, Y. Zou, J. P. H. Rivett, Y. Yang, T. H. Thomas, Y. Tan, T. Song, X. Gao, D. Credgington, F. Deschler, H. Sirringhaus and B. Sun, Solution-Processed Perovskite Light Emitting Diodes with Efficiency Exceeding 15% through Additive-Controlled Nanostructure Tailoring, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3892 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Solution-Processed Self-Organized Multiple Quantum Wells, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Yang, Q. Jiang, P. Wang, Z. Yin, X. Zhang, H. Tan, Y. Yang, M. Wei, B. R. Sutherland, E. H. Sargent and J. You, Ultra-Bright and Highly Efficient Inorganic Based Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Bright Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Organometal Halide Perovskite, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rong, M. B. Faheem and Y. Li, Perovskite Single Crystals: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, J. Electron. Sci. Technol., 2021, 19, 100081 CrossRef .
H. Huang, M. I. Bodnarchuk, S. V. Kershaw, M. V. Kovalenko and A. L. Rogach, Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals in the Research Spotlight: Stability and Defect Tolerance, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2071–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Faheem, B. Khan, C. Feng, M. U. Farooq, F. Raziq, Y. Xiao and Y. Li, All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells: Energetics, Key Challenges, and Strategies toward Commercialization, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 290–320 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zeng, Y. Du, J. Jiang, Q. Yu and Y. Li, Revealing the Aging Effect of Metal-Oleate Precursors on the Preparation of Highly Luminescent CsPbBr3 Nanoplatelets, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 2668–2675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and Z. Wei, Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes with External Quantum Efficiency Exceeding 20 per cent, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, M. Chen, S. Yang, X. Shen, Y. Liu and D. Cao, Exciton Recombination Mechanisms in Solution Grown Single Crystalline CsPbBr3 Perovskite, J. Lumin., 2020, 117471 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, D. W. Kim, D. B. Kim, E. D. Jung, K. S. Lee, S. Lee, D. D. Nuzzo, J. S. Kim and M. H. Song, Effect of the Solvent Used for Fabrication of Perovskite Films by Solvent Dropping on Performance of Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2088–2094 RSC .
W. Xu, Q. Hu, S. Bai, C. Bao, Y. Miao, Z. Yuan, T. Borzda, A. J. Barker, E. Tyukalova, Z. Hu, M. Kawecki, H. Wang, Z. Yan, X. Liu, X. Shi, K. Uvdal, M. Fahlman, W. Zhang, M. Duchamp, J.-M. Liu, A. Petrozza, J. Wang, L.-M. Liu, W. Huang and F. Gao, Rational Molecular Passivation for High-Performance Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ji, Z. Shi, X. Sun, Y. Li, S. Li, L. Lei, D. Wu, T. Xu, X. Li and G. Du, Vapor-Assisted Solution Approach for High-Quality Perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3 Thin Films for High-Performance Green Light-Emitting Diode Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42893–42904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Solvent Engineering for High-Performance Inorganic-Organic Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, J. S. Kim, C. Wolf, Y. H. Kim, H. J. Yun, S. H. Jeong, A. Sadhanala, V. Venugopalan, J. W. Choi, C. L. Lee, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, High-Efficiency Polycrystalline Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Mixed Cations, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2883–2892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, H. Tian, J. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Chen, Y. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. Fu, D. Kong, D. Dai, Y. Jin, G. Li, H. Li, Q. Peng, J. Wang and W. Huang, Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Spontaneously Formed Submicrometre-Scale Structures, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, F. Cao, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Ning, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, Y. Yan, S. V. Kershaw, L. Zhang, A. L. Rogach and X. Yang, Trifluoroacetate Induced Small-grained CsPbBr3 Perovskite Films Result in Efficient and Stable Light Emitting Devices, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kong, X. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Jiang, S. Wang, M. You, C. Zhang, T. Zhang, S. V. Kershaw, W. Zheng, Y. Yang, Q. Lin, M. Yuan, A. L. Rogach and X. Yang, Smoothing the Energy Transfer Pathway in Quasi-2D Perovskite Films Using Methanesulfonate Leads to Highly Efficient Light-emitting Devices, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, X. Li, W. Zhou, S. Zhang, C. Meng, Y. Wu, Y. Wang and H. Zeng, CsPbBr3 Quantum Dots 2.0: Benzenesulfonic Acid Equivalent Ligand Awakens
Complete Purification, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900767 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Wei, X. Li, Y. Li, S. Qiu, W. Shen, B. Cai, Z. Sun, D. Yang, Z. Deng and H. Zeng, In Situ Passivation of PbBr64− Octahedra toward Blue Luminescent CsPbBr3 Nanoplatelets with Near 100% Absolute Quantum Yield, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2030–2037 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chiba, Y. Hayashi, H. Ebe, K. Hoshi, J. Sato, S. Sato, Y.-J. Pu, S. Ohisa and J. Kido, Anion-Exchange Red Perovskite Quantum Dots with Ammonium Iodine Salts for Highly Efficient Light-Emitting Devices, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 681–687 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, J. Li, L. Xu, J. Li, F. Zhang, B. Han, Q. Shan and H. Zeng, Room-Temperature Triple-Ligand Surface Engineering Synergistically Boosts Ink Stability, Recombination Dynamics, and Charge Injection toward EQE-11.6% Perovskite QLEDs, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800764 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zheng, C. Bi, F. Huang, D. Binks and J. Tian, Stable and Strong Emission CsPbBr3 Quantum Dots by Surface Engineering for High-Performance Optoelectronic Films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25410–25416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song and H. Zeng, CsPbX3 Quantum Dots for Lighting and Displays: Room-Temperature Synthesis, Photoluminescence Superiorities, Underlying Origins and White Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2435–2445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Z.-K. Wang, M.-P. Zhuo, Q.-S. Tian, Y. Jin and L.-S. Liao, Self-Assembled High Quality CsPbBr3 Quantum Dot Films toward Highly Efficient Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9541–9548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, J. M. Yang, S. Ham, S. K. Jeon, J. Y. Lee, Y.-H. Song, E. K. Ji, D. H. Yoon, S. Seo, H. Shin, G. S. Han, H. S. Jung, D. Kim and N. G. Park, In-Situ Formed Type I Nanocrystalline Perovskite Film for Highly Efficient Light-Emitting Diode, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3311–3319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, Y. W. Yeh, N. L. Tran, F. Wu, Z. Xiao, R. A. Kerner, Y. L. Lin, G. D. Scholes, N. Yao and B. P. Rand, In Situ Preparation of Metal Halide Perovskite Nanocrystal Thin Films for Improved Light-Emitting Devices, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3957–3964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang and G. Cai, Steric Hindrance Effect and Kinetic Investigation for IL Catalyzed Synthesis of 4-Hydroxy-2-Butanone via Aldol Reaction, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 116089 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moreno, E. Simonetti, G. B. Appetecchi, M. Carewska, M. Montanino, G. T. Kim, N. Loeffler and S. Passerini, IL Electrolytes for Safer Lithium Batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 164, A6026–A6031 CrossRef .
S. T. Keaveney, R. S. Haines and J. B. Harper, IL Solvents: The Importance of Microscopic Interactions in Predicting Organic Reaction Outcomes, Pure Appl. Chem., 2017, 89, 745–757 CAS .
Z. He and P. Alexandridis, IL and Nanoparticle Hybrid Systems: Emerging Applications, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 244, 54–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pinter, T. Fievez, F. M. Bickelhaupt, P. Geerlings and F. De Proft, On the Origin of the Steric Effect, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9846–9854 RSC .
D. Subramanian, K. Wu and A. Firoozabadi, Ionic Liquids as Viscosity Modifiers for Heavy and Extra-Heavy Crude Oils, Fuel, 2015, 143, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai, J. Wang, T. S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Planar Perovskite Solar Cells with Long-term Stability Using ionic liquid Additives, Nature, 2019, 571, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Udayabhaskararao, L. Houben, H. Cohen, M. Menahem, I. Pinkas, L. Avram, T. Wolf, A. Teitelboim, M. Leskes, O. Yaffe, D. Oron and M. Kazes, A Mechanistic Study of Phase Transformation in Perovskite Nanocrystals Driven by Ligand Passivation, Chem. Mater., 2017, 30, 84–93 CrossRef .
T. Udayabhaskararao, M. Kazes, L. Houben, H. Lin and D. Oron, Nucleation, Growth, and Structural Transformations of Perovskite Nanocrystals, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1302–1308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schmidt, K. Lischka and W. Zulehner, Excitation-Power Dependence of the Near-Band-Edge Photoluminescence of Semiconductors, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 8989–8994 CrossRef PubMed .
H. He, Q. Yu, H. Li, J. Li, J. Si, Y. Jin, N. Wang, J. Wang, J. He, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Ye, Exciton Localization in Solution-Processed Organolead Trihalide Perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dey, P. Rathod and D. Kabra, Role of Localized States in Photoluminescence Dynamics of High Optical Gain CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800109 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, C. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, C. Ji, Y. Chuai, P. Wang, S. Wen, C. Zhang and W. W. Yu, Bright Perovskite Nanocrystal Films for Efficient Light-Emitting Devices, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4602–4610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Gong, D. Zhao, Y.-B. Zhao, S. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Kong, B. Wei, R. Quintero-Bermudez, O. Voznyy, Y. Shang, Z. Ning, Y. Yan, E. H. Sargent and X. Yang, A Multi-Functional Molecular Modifier Enabling Efficient Large-Area Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes, Joule, 2020, 4, 1977–1987 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rong, Y. Xiao, J. Jiang, Q. Zeng and Y. Li, Strongly Enhanced Photoluminescence and Photoconductivity in Erbium-Doped MAPbBr3 Single Crystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 8992–8998 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shan, X. C. Xie, J. J. Song and B. Goldenberg, Time–Resolved Exciton Lluminescence in GaN Grown by Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 2512–2514 CrossRef CAS .
J. Krustok, H. Collan, M. Yakushev and K. Hjelt, The Role of Spatial Potential Fluctuations in the Shape of the PL Bands of Multinary Semiconductor Compounds, Phys. Scr., 1999, T79, 179–182 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Wolford, Z. C. Feng, G. D. Gilliland, S. J. Chua and D. Wolford, Donor-Hydrogen Bound Exciton in Epitaxial GaN, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 15890–15894 CrossRef .
D. G. Chtchekine, G. D. Gilliland, Z. C. Feng, S. J. Chuab, D. J. Wolford, S. E. Ralph, M. J. Schurman and I. Fergusone, Temperature Dependence of Bound Exciton Emissions in GaN, MRS Internet J. Nitride Semicond. Res., 1999, 4, 733–738 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, X. Wang and A. Pan, Properties of Excitons and Photogenerated Charge Carriers in Metal Halide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brenes, D. Guo, A. Osherov, N. K. Noel, C. Eames, E. M. Hutter, S. K. Pathak, F. Niroui, R. H. Friend, M. S. Islam, H. J. Snaith, V. Bulović, T. J. Savenije and S. D. Stranks, Metal Halide Perovskite Polycrystalline Films Exhibiting Properties of Single Crystals, Joule, 2017, 1, 155–167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Li, M. Yuan and X. Yang, Fast Postmoisture Treatment of Luminescent Perovskite Films for Efficient Light-Emitting Diodes, Small, 2018, 14, 1703410 CrossRef PubMed .
M. He, W. Chunyun, J. Li, J. Wu, S. Zhang, H.-C. Kuo, L. Shao, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, F. Kang and G. Wei, CsPbBr3-Cs4PbBr6 Composite Nanocrystals for Highly Efficient Pure Green Light Emission, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22899–22906 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr05528cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the LARP method for the perovskite QD ink film. (b) Schematic diagram of the BMIMBF4-induced in situ deposition of perovskite QD films.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Optical images of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations (from 0% to 100%) under ambient light. (b) Optical images of the same samples under 365 nm UV illumination. (c) Room-temperature PL spectra of the samples. The dashed line shows the PL spectrum of conventional QD ink film for comparison. (d) Evolution of the FWHM of the PL spectra and PLQY of samples. The solid circle and square represent the FWHM and PLQY values of the conventional QD ink film, respectively. (e) Histogram of the PLQY value for 15 samples with 75% BMIMBF4 concentration.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the polycrystalline perovskite film. (c) Histogram of grain size of the sample in b. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. (f) Histogram of the QD size of the sample in e.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) FTIR spectra of the BMIMBF4 IL, BMIMBF4·CsBr film, BMIMBF4·PbBr2 film, 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film, and polycrystalline perovskite film. (b) Absorption spectra of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations (from 0% to 100%). (c) Logarithm plots of the integrated PL intensity against laser intensity. (d) TRPL spectra of samples with different BMIMBF4 concentrations.	 
	(1)
IPL ∼ IEXk	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic drawing of the possible recombination processes of free excitons and bond excitons. (b) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the polycrystalline perovskite film. (c) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. (d) TRPL spectra obtained from the emission peaks at 534 and 540 nm with 1 nm bandwidth (as indicated in the inset) for the 50% BMIMBF4-induced QD film at 10 K. (e) Low-temperature PL spectra at 10 K and their fitted peaks for the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. (f) Temperature-dependent integrated PL intensity of the polycrystalline perovskite film and the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film. The dashed curves show the fitting of data by the Arrhenius equation.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  (a) PL spectra of the polycrystalline perovskite film in air and under vacuum. (b) PL spectra of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film in air and under vacuum. (c) PL spectra of the 75% BMIMBF4-induced QD film stored in air for over 43 days. (d) Temporal evolution of the integrated PL intensity.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr05528c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
