Heavily-doped colloidal semiconductor and metal oxide nanocrystals: an emerging new class of plasmonic nanomaterials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60417A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60417A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3908-3920Heavily-doped colloidal semiconductor and metal oxide nanocrystals: an emerging new class of plasmonic nanomaterials

        
          
            Xin 
            Liu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Mark T. 
            Swihart
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University at Buffalo (SUNY), 310 Furnas Hall, Buffalo, New York, 14260-4200 USA. E-mail: swihart@buffalo.edu;  Fax: +1 (716)645-3822;   Tel: +1 (716)645-1181
Received 
      16th November 2013
    First published on 24th February 2014AbstractThe creation and study of non-metallic nanomaterials that exhibit localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) interactions with light is a rapidly growing field of research. These doped nanocrystals, mainly self-doped semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) and extrinsically-doped metal oxide NCs, have extremely high concentrations of free charge carriers, which allows them to exhibit LSPR at near infrared (NIR) wavelengths. In this tutorial review, we discuss recent progress in developing and synthesizing doped semiconductor and metal oxide nanocrystals with LSPR, and in studying the optical properties of these plasmonic nanocrystals. We go on to discuss their growing potential for advancing biomedical and optoelectronic applications.

Key learning points
(1) Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) has been demonstrated in several types of heavily-doped colloidal semiconductor and metal oxide nanocrystals.
(2) Nanocrystals exhibiting LSPR can be classified as intrinsically-doped or extrinsically-doped.
(3) Lower free carrier concentrations in plasmonic semiconductor NCs, compared to noble metals, produce LSPR at longer wavelengths.
(4) Plasmonic semiconductor NCs have particularly high potential for biomedical applications in which strong NIR absorbers are needed.
(5) Potential applications of these nanocrystals are also emerging in photonics, optoelectronics, and nanoelectronics.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of nanotechnology, many classes of nanomaterials with unique physical and chemical properties have been created and are beginning to be used in practical applications. Among the unique phenomena observed in nanoscale materials, surface plasmon resonance (SPR)1 and localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)1 are particularly important optical properties that are increasingly playing important roles in theranostics,2 nanophotonics3 and nanoelectronics.3 LSPR is commonly observed in noble metal nanostructures. It arises from the resonant interaction of their free electrons with the oscillating electromagnetic field of light. The first scientific reports on synthesis and optical properties of metal nanostructures, specifically colloidal gold, were made by Faraday more than 150 years ago.4 Progress in this field accelerated dramatically over the past two decades, and many methods for synthesizing noble metal nanostructures with well-defined morphology and uniform size have been developed.2,5,6 Gold (Au) nanostructures are the most systematically investigated, due to their chemical inertness and relative synthetic accessibility. Spherical gold nanoparticles from about 3 to 50 nm in diameter exhibit LSPR at visible wavelengths. Hollow or anisotropic gold nanostructures can exhibit multiple LSPR modes over visible to near infrared (NIR) wavelengths.2 Anisotropic structures (e.g. nanorods) can support multiple LSPR modes along different axes of the nanostructure.5,6 In hollow nanostructures (e.g. in nanoshells) plasmons at the inner and outer surface can couple to produce LSPR at longer wavelength. Such NIR absorbance is extremely useful for theranostic applications such as photothermal therapy (PTT) and bio-imaging, because the interaction of tissue with light at these wavelengths is relatively weak.2
Excitation of LSPR fundamentally relies on the interaction between free charge carriers and light.1 Noble metal nanostructures exhibit this strong light-matter interaction due to their high density of free electrons. In the past five years, LSPR has been observed in heavily-doped semiconductor and metal oxide nanocrystals (NCs), where it is attributed to the high density of free charge carriers introduced by doping. Generation of free charge carriers in colloidal semiconductor or metal oxide NCs mainly involves two different doping pathways: (i) “intrinsic” formation of cation vacancies, also called self-doping, and (ii) “extrinsic” substitutional doping with heterovalent dopant atoms, also called exotic-doping. The density of free charge carriers achievable in these doped NCs is lower than that of noble metals and, as a result, their LSPR is at lower energy or longer wavelength. The chemical synthesis of these new plasmonic nanomaterials, fundamental studies of their photophysics, and exploration of their applications in theranostics, nanophotonics and nanoelectronics are rapidly emerging research fields.
The origins and underlying physics of LSPR in nanoparticles of noble metals and heavily-doped semiconductors are the same – a resonant interaction of free charge carriers with the oscillating electromagnetic field of light. However, the systems differ in important practical respects. In particular, the charge carriers in noble metals are electrons, while in heavily-doped semiconductor or metal oxide NCs the free charge carriers can be electrons or holes. The LSPR frequency depends upon the density of free charge carriers, the charge carrier effective mass, and geometric factors. Heavily-doped semiconductor and metal oxide NCs generally have lower density of free charge carriers than noble metal NPs, and as a result exhibit lower energy (longer-wavelength) LSPR. Moreover, in heavily-doped semiconductors, the density of free charge carriers can vary with changes in degree of doping or even with changes in surface ligands. In metals, this is not possible; for a given metal, the charge carrier density is nearly fixed. In what follows, we mainly focus on the influence of the density of free charge carriers on the LSPR frequency of doped NCs, as this is the parameter most strongly affecting the LSPR wavelength.
In this tutorial review, we provide a comprehensive overview of progress in this rapidly expanding research field. We classify these plasmonic semiconductor nanomaterials as (1) intrinsically-doped NCs, which are mainly colloidal self-doped copper chalcogenide NCs, and (2) extrinsically-doped NCs, mainly consisting of indium tin oxide (ITO), aluminium doped zinc oxide (AZO), doped silicon (Si) and other doped metal oxide NCs. We review chemical methods for tuning LSPR in these NCs, which include stepwise reaction, in situ control during synthesis, and adjustment of LSPR by combining two types of plasmonic colloidal NCs. Finally, we discuss progress toward application of these new types of plasmonic nanomaterials in biomedical, electrochromic and optoelectronic fields.
2. Self-doped copper chalcogenide colloidal NCs with LSPR
In plasmonic semiconductor nanostructures, the free charge carriers responsible for LSPR can be either electrons or holes, depending upon the nature of the dopants. In this section, we focus on a group of doped semiconductor NCs in which free holes result from the presence of cation vacancies. These are often called self-doping or self-doped NCs. These intrinsically-doped materials are mainly copper-deficient copper chalcogenide NCs, including copper sulfide (Cu2−xS), copper selenide (Cu2−xSe), copper telluride (Cu2−xTe) and the related alloy NCs. Here, we summarize advances in chemical synthesis of these materials and studies of LSPR in them.
2.1. Cu2−xS colloidal NCs with LSPR
LSPR is not observed in stoichiometric Cu2S NCs due to the absence of free charge carriers. Despite many earlier papers on the synthesis and characterization of copper sulfide NCs, the NIR LSPR in copper-deficient Cu2−xS NCs was first observed and identified as plasmonic absorbance by Zhao et al. in 2009.7 They proposed that the free charges in Cu2−xS NCs are free holes associated with cation vacancies. Upon increasing the degree of copper deficiency, the plasmonic resonance peak shifts to higher frequency (i.e., blue shifts). The LSPR frequency is correlated with the charge carrier density in the NCs, as shown in Fig. 1. Luther et al. developed a method to synthesize colloidal dispersions of monodisperse Cu2−xS NCs.8 The density of the free holes in the self-doped Cu2−xS NCs was estimated to be near ∼2 × 1021 cm−3, corresponding to a LSPR frequency in the mid-IR to NIR spectral region.
 Fig. 1  Dependence of localized surface plasmon resonance frequency on the density of free carriers. Reproduced with permission from Luther et al.8 Copyright © 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
In the classical Drude model, charge carriers are treated as a system of non-interacting “quasi-particles” that move freely within the material, interacting with the lattice of nuclei only through instantaneous collisions. It provides a relatively simple basis for understanding the LSPR phenomenon and relating LSPR energy to the free carrier density.1Eqn (1) shows the Drude model for the dielectric function of a material with free charge carriers. The dielectric function is composed of a real part (ε1) and an imaginary part (ε2), i.e. ε(ω) = ε1(ω) + iε2(ω). In eqn (1), ωp is the bulk plasmon frequency, γ is a damping frequency, reflecting the plasmon bandwidth, n is the density of free charge carriers, e is the charge of the electron, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity and meff is the effective mass of the charge carriers (electrons or holes). In cation-deficient copper chalcogenides, the free charge carriers are holes that arise from copper deficiency. Note that interband transition or excitonic transition terms are not included in this model. The real part of the dielectric function is shown in eqn (2), obtained by simplifying eqn (1). The polarizability (α) of a sub-wavelength nanoparticle is described by the Clausius–Mossotti relation1,8 shown in (3), where V is the volume of the NP and εm is the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium in which the NPs are dispersed. The polarizability exhibits a resonant enhancement when the denominator in eqn (3) approaches zero, i.e. when ε1(ω) = −2εm, provided that the imaginary component of the dielectric function, ε2(ω) has weak frequency dependence. Based on the Drude model, the concentration of free holes in Cu2−xS NCs can be estimated from the peak LSPR absorbance wavelength and correlated with the copper deficiency (x).8 In principle, one can simply set the denominator of eqn (3) equal to zero and, using eqn (1) for the frequency-dependent dielectric function, obtain the carrier concentration from the measured LSPR frequency. However, factors including the polydispersity of NCs and non-uniform elemental distribution may limit the applicability of this simple analysis. The damping frequency, γ, must be estimated from the width of the LSPR absorbance, and the effective mass of the carriers may not be known. This quasistatic approximation can also be applied to ellipsoidal and spheroidal shapes, such as Cu2−xS nanodisks,9 by including a shape factor in the equations. Eqn (4) shows the polarizabilities, αi, along the different axes (i = 1,2,3) in ellipsoidal coordinates, where Li is a geometrical factor. Cu2−xS nanodisks exhibited two LSPR peaks, attributed to the in-plane and out-of-plane plasmon modes, respectively, which is consistent with the prediction of the Drude model described above. (1) (2) (3) (4) Several chemical methods including organic-phase synthesis, hydrothermal synthesis and sonoelectrochemical synthesis have been developed for preparing colloidal Cu2−xS NCs with appreciable copper deficiency, in addition to the many protocols developed for synthesizing stoichiometric or near-stoichiometric Cu2S NCs. Monodisperse Cu2−xS quantum dots (QDs) 2.4, 3.6, and 5.8 nm in average diameter were prepared by reacting copper(II) acetylacetonate with ammonium diethyldithiocarbamate in the presence of dodecanethiol (DDT) and oleic acid (OA).8 Cu2−xS NCs with an elemental composition of Cu1.93S exhibited a LSPR absorbance peak around 0.69 eV (∼1800 nm wavelength, Fig. 2A). Cu2−xS nanodisks9 were synthesized by combustion of copper alkanethiolate precursor which was prepared by reacting copper nitrate with dodecanethiol. The Cu2−xS nanodisks exhibit two plasmonic bands attributed to in-plane and out-of-plane modes, respectively (Fig. 2B). Because these methods were originally developed for synthesis of stoichiometric Cu2S NCs, they produce Cu2−xS NCs with relatively low copper deficiency (small x) and corresponding low LSPR energy. A reaction model was later developed specifically to synthesize high-quality Cu2−xS NCs with greater copper deficiency, and therefore strong LSPR at higher energy.10 The copper precursor was made by dissolving copper(I) chloride (CuCl) in coordinating solvents, oleylamine (OAm) or a mixture of OAm and oleic acid (OA). The sulfur precursor was also prepared by reacting sulfur powder with coordinating solvents, including OAm and OA.10 Monodisperse Cu2−xS NCs with controllable and tunable size were synthesized by varying the reaction conditions, particularly reaction temperature and the aging time for crystal growth. The resulting Cu2−xS NCs can exhibit an LSPR absorbance peak at wavelengths as short as 975 nm,11 because this synthesis method can produce large copper deficiency, up to x ≈ 1 (Fig. 3). This progress in synthesis of Cu2−xS NCs with plasmonic absorbance over the spectral region from 800 nm to 1200 nm favors development of biomedical applications, as specifically discussed in Section 5.
 Fig. 2  (A) The evolution of LSPR energy with increasing size of Cu2–xS NCs. Adapted from Luther et al.8 Copyright © 2011 Nature Publishing Group, (B) LSPR in disk-shaped Cu2–xS NCs, showing two plasmon modes whose positions depend upon the aspect ratio of the nanodisks. Adapted from Hsu et al.9 Copyright © 2011 ACS Publications. 
 Fig. 3  (A) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of Cu2–xS NCs with average sizes of 6.8, 8.8, 11.5, and 13.5 nm, respectively. Adapted from Liu et al.10 Copyright © 2013 Wiley VCH, (B) LSPR in Cu2–xS NCs synthesized using CuCl-OAm and OA-S as the precursors show a sharp peak centered at 975 nm. Adapted from Liu et al.11 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications. 
2.2. Cu2−xSe colloidal NCs with LSPR
Cu2Se has been studied as an absorber in photovoltaic devices because its band gap (1.1–1.5 eV) is well matched to the solar spectrum. To synthesize Cu2Se NCs, an organo-selenium precursor is typically prepared by dissolving Se powder in trioctylphosphine (TOP) or tributylphosphine (TBP).12 Stoichiometric Cu2Se NCs synthesized using TOP-Cu and TOP-Se as the precursors show negligible LSPR. Their absorbance at NIR wavelengths increased slightly after exposing the Cu2Se NCs to air for 1 day, but did not show obvious additional changes upon further air exposure for up to 2 weeks.12 The emergence of NIR absorbance following air exposure can be attributed to LSPR that, in turn, results from copper deficiency arising from oxidation of Cu2Se NCs in air. However, the LPSR in these lightly-doped Cu2−xSe NCs is weak compared with that of Cu2−xSe NCs directly synthesized with large copper deficiency.
High-quality Cu2−xSe NCs with significant cation vacancy were produced using a phosphine-free reaction system. Three types of phosphine-free selenium precursors including octadecene (ODE)-Se,13 OAm-Se10 and OA-Se10 were produced by dissolving Se powder in ODE, OAm and OA, respectively. Copper precursors were prepared by dissolving inorganic copper halides in coordinating ligands/solvents. Nucleation was initiated at appropriate temperature followed by aging the colloidal dispersion for a time optimized for growing Cu2−xSe NCs. Deka et al. synthesized monodisperse Cu2−xSe NCs with a hexagonal shape using ODE-Se precursor (Fig. 4).13 The Cu2−xSe NCs synthesized using ODE-Se are composed of a primary berzelianite crystal phase and a smaller fraction of a hexagonal crystal phase. Moreover, using the ODE-Se precursor, Cu2−xSe nanocubes could be obtained in the presence of Al ions.14 OAm-Se and OA-Se precursors were studied for synthesizing monodisperse Cu2−xSe NCs with tunable size.10 The nucleation and NC growth were investigated by combining experimental results and a theoretical model. The average size of Cu2−xSe NCs was tuned from ∼6.2 to ∼16.5 nm (Fig. 5A–D). Mixed crystal phases were observed in the Cu2−xSe NCs synthesized using OAm-Se precursor, while pure berzelianite crystal phase was obtained using OA-Se precursor. The Cu2−xSe NCs synthesized using these phosphine-free Se precursors all exhibited strong LSPR at higher energy (Fig. 5E) than that in Cu2−xSe NCs with nearly perfect stoichiometry or Cu2−xSe NCs obtained by slightly oxidizing Cu2Se NCs in air. Moreover, a red-shift in the LSPR of Cu2−xSe NCs was observed with increasing concentration of OA employed in the synthesis. Further details of this method for tuning LSPR in Cu2−xSe NCs are discussed in Section 3.2.
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of ∼16 nm Cu2–xSe NCs synthesized using ODE-Se precursor. (b) HRTEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of Cu2–xSe NCs. Adapted from Deka et al.13 Copyright © 2010 ACS Publications. 
 Fig. 5  (A), (B), (C) and (D) representative TEM images of Cu2–xSe NCs with mean size ∼7.2 nm, ∼8 nm, ∼6.2 nm and ∼16.5 nm synthesized using OAm-Se and OA-Se precursors. (E) Tunable LSPR in Cu2–xSe NCs by changing the concentration of ligands present during synthesis. Adapted from Liu et al.10 Copyright © 2013 Wiley VCH. 
2.3. Cu2−xTe colloidal NCs with LSPR
Following the development of self-doped Cu2–xS and Cu2–xSe NCs with strong LSPR, synthesis of self-doped Cu2–xTe NCs with diverse shapes and strong LSPR was studied. Colloidal Cu2–xTe nanospheres,15 nanorods,16 nanocubes16 and nanoplates16 (Fig. 6A) have been produced by controlling the reaction temperature, reaction time and the concentrations of Cu and Te precursors. An alternative approach to prepare Cu2–xTe NCs involves cation exchange of pre-synthesized CdTe NCs to obtain the Cu2–xTe NCs.17 The resulting Cu2–xTe NCs maintain the morphology of the templating CdTe NCs, allowing control of the morphology of Cu2–xTe NCs by adjusting the shape of CdTe NCs. Using this methodology, Cu2–xTe NCs with spherical, rod-like and tetrapod-like shapes can be obtained. The shape-dependent plasmonic absorbance in these self-doped Cu2–xTe NCs was studied, demonstrating the presence of different plasmon modes in the Cu2–xTe NCs with anisotropic morphologies.
 Fig. 6  (A) TEM and HRTEM images of Cu2–xTe nanocubes (top) and nanoplates (bottom), and (B) UV/vis spectra of Cu2–xTe nanorods (orange), nanoplates (green) and nanocubes (blue). Adapted from Li et al.16 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications. 
2.4. Cu2–xSySe1−y alloy NCs with LSPR
Self-doped Cu2–xSySe1−y alloy NCs with LSPR have also been synthesized and studied.11,18 Simply combining the chalcogenide precursors used for synthesis of Cu2–xS and Cu2–xSe NCs may result in polydisperse Cu2–xSySe1−y NCs, due to differences in reactivity of the S and Se precursors. Balancing the reactivity of the chalcogenide precursors and optimizing the reaction temperature are the key factors in adjusting elemental compositions to tune the LSPR energy, while achieving uniform NC composition, size and shape in the Cu2–xSySe1−y NCs. Several combinations including OA-Se–OAm-S, OA-S–OAm-Se, and ODE-S–ODE-Se have been studied.11,18 The combination of OA-Se–OAm-S allowed tuning of the S:Se ratio over a relatively wide range.11 Strong LSPR was observed in these Cu2–xSySe1−y NCs due to the presence of copper deficiency. The LSPR frequency blue shifted with increasing elemental fraction of Se in the Cu2–xSySe1−y NCs. It also red-shifted with increasing concentration of OA used in synthesis, as discussed further in Section 3.2.
3. Tuning of the LSPR in self-doped NCs
Manipulating optical properties in nanomaterials is of great interest, and many methods have been developed to tune the LSPR in metal nanostructures. In metals, this is mainly done by varying the nanostructure morphology, as the carrier density in metals is not readily tuned. In contrast, the LSPR in self-doped semiconductor NCs can be tuned by varying the free charge carrier density, which depends not only on the doping level, but also on the NC composition and the nature of the ligands on the NC surface. This allows broad tuning of the LSPR wavelength without dramatic changes in NC size or shape. In this section, we briefly introduce several strategies to manipulate LSPR in self-doped semiconductor NCs, mainly copper chalcogenide NCs.
3.1. Tuning LSPR in Cu2–xE (E = S, Se, Te) NCs by stepwise reaction
The copper deficiency in Cu2–xE (E = S, Se, Te) NCs can be increased by oxidation in air8,19 or by intentional stepwise oxidation–reduction reactions using other reagents.15,19 Dorfs et al. observed that the copper deficiency was apparently increased in Cu2–xSe NCs upon exposing sample to air, and LSPR was dramatically blue-shifted from 1700 nm to 1150 nm (Fig. 7a).19 The Cu2–xSe NCs synthesized by Kriegel et al.15 exhibited a lower LSPR energy after exposure of the sample to air than that reported by Dorfs et al., although the copper deficiency in these Cu2–xSe NCs was almost the same. This again demonstrates that LSPR in Cu2–xSe NCs depends not only on the cation vacancy concentration, but also on other parameters such as NC size and shape and the nature of ligands on the NC surface. These factors, in turn, depend on the synthesis method. The copper deficiency in Cu2–xS NCs increased only slightly upon oxidization in air, suggesting that air exposure is not equally effective for increasing the carrier concentration in each type of copper chalcogenide NCs.8 A larger cation vacancy concentration in Cu2–xSe NCs was achieved using solution-phase oxidizing reagents, including a Ce(IV) complex, compared to that achieved using air oxidation.19
 Fig. 7  (a) Time-dependent evolution of the LSPR in Cu2–xSe NCs upon exposure to air. (b) Tuning LSPR through stepwise reduction using Cu(CH3CN)4PF6 solution to reduce the cation vacancy concentration in Cu2–xSe NCs. (c) Reversible tuning of LSPR by gradual oxidation in air. (d) Theoretical calculation of extinction spectra of Cu2–xSe NCs with different copper deficiency (x value). Reproduced with permission from Dorfs et al.19 Copyright © 2011 ACS publications. 
The reversible reduction of copper deficiency and adjustment of LSPR wavelength in copper chalcogenide NCs can be accomplished by sequential addition of reducing and oxidizing agents. It was first accomplished by adding Cu(I)(CH3CN)4PF6 into a Cu2–xSe NC dispersion to reduce the copper deficiency in Cu2–xSe NCs (Fig. 7b).19 The addition of Cu+ ions was considered to play a key role in reducing the copper deficiency in that work. Kriegel et al. suppressed the LSPR in oxidized copper chalcogenide NCs using diisobutylaluminium hydride (DIBAH), a copper-free reducing agent.15 They concluded that Cu(II) did not leave the NCs and go into solution upon oxidation. Instead, the Cu(II) may stay on the surface of oxidized copper chalcogenide NCs and can then reinsert into the crystal lattice upon electron injection from a reducing agent. Other reducing reagents, for example Li(C2H5)3BH, were also used to tune the LSPR in copper chalcogenide NCs.14 By combining stepwise oxidation and reduction reactions, one can tune the LSPR in self-doped copper chalcogenide NCs and study the behavior of Cu(II)/Cu(I) and the optical properties during the oxidation–reduction process.
3.2. 
          In situ tuning of LSPR in colloidal NCs by choice of ligand
An alternative means of tuning LSPR in copper chalcogenide NCs is to vary the surface ligands and the elemental composition in alloy NCs, so called in situ tuning of LSPR. In colloidal synthesis using OA and OAm-based precursors, the LSPR in Cu2–xS NCs and Cu2–xSe NCs was red-shifted upon increasing the concentration of OA present during the NC synthesis.10 This was attributed to the deprotonated carboxyl group coordinating to the NC surface, which may act as a hole trap, decreasing the effective density of free holes. The LSPR peaks in Cu2–xS NCs and Cu2–xSe NCs were observed to redshift by 110 nm and 270 nm, respectively, using this approach.10 In Cu2–xSySe1−y alloy NCs, the LSPR can shift more significantly than in binary Cu2–xS or Cu2–xSe NCs due to the cooperative effects of elemental composition and surface ligands.11 The LSPR was observed to blue shift with increasing Se fraction in Cu2–xSySe1−y NCs and red shift with increasing concentration of OA used in the synthesis. The blue-shift with increasing Se concentration can be attributed to the lower hole effective mass in Cu2–xSe, which is roughly a factor of two smaller than in Cu2–xS.8 As seen in eqn (1), lower carrier mass produces a higher bulk plasmon frequency and, in turn, shorter LSPR wavelength. These factors simultaneously influence the LSPR energy in the Cu2–xSySe1−y alloy NCs and provide the capability of tuning LSPR over a broad spectral range, from 975 nm to 1650 nm, without relying on any post-synthesis chemical reaction (Fig. 8).11 These in situ approaches provide colloidally-stable, ligand-capped NCs that are stable in air and therefore relatively easily to use in subsequent applications.
 Fig. 8  
In situ tuning of LSPR in Cu2–xSySe1−y (0 < x < 1, 0.4 < y ≤ 1) NCs by controlling the elemental composition and surface ligands. The LSPR wavelength can be tuned from 975 nm to 1650 nm. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.11 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications. 
3.3. LSPR in heterogeneous NCs
Multicomponent heterogeneous colloidal NCs can potentially integrate the properties of different classes of materials into a single nanostructure. A prototypical example is the combination of a semiconductor QD with a noble metal NC. Various semiconductor–metal NCs, such as CdSe–Au, with different morphologies and composition have been reported.20,21 The optical properties of these semiconductor–metal heterogeneous NCs differ substantially from the sum of their components. For example, the photoluminescence (PL) of the semiconductor QD was quenched by the presence of the metal NC domain.20 Recently, heterogeneous NCs composed of a heavily-doped semiconductor (Cu2–xSe) NC and a metal (Au) NC were synthesized and studied (Fig. 9A and B).22 In contrast to conventional semiconductor NCs or QDs these heavily doped Cu2–xSe NCs do not exhibit appreciable photoluminescence. Instead, as discussed in detail in previous sections, these self-doped Cu2–xSe NCs exhibit LSPR due to the presence of free holes. The Au NC exhibits LSPR at much shorter wavelength, due to its high concentration of free electrons. The direct integration of these two types of plasmonic NCs produces LSPR absorbance over a very broad spectral region from visible to NIR wavelengths. The LSPR in these heterogeneous dimer nanoparticles not only differs from the LSPR of each individual NC (Au and Cu2–xSe) but is also not a linear combination of the spectra of the separate NCs (Fig. 9C and D).22 The heterodimer NCs exhibit strong absorbance from 650 to 900 nm where the parent NCs both have much weaker absorbance. The LSPR absorbance may be influenced by charge carrier redistribution in the heterogeneous Au-Cu2–xSe NCs, with free holes diffusing from Cu2–xSe to Au and electrons delocalized from Au to Cu2–xSe. These two effects reduce the free carrier concentration in both domains. Each of the resonances is also influenced by the frequency-dependent dielectric properties of the adjacent domain. Further studies will be required to provide full understanding of the optical properties of these heterogeneous NCs. Nonetheless, this approach offers a new strategy for engineering LSPR in small colloidal NCs by coupling two different types of plasmonic NCs without relying on much larger hollow or anisotropic structures (e.g. gold nanoshells, nanorods, and nanocages) to achieve NIR absorbance. The small size of these structures facilitates their use for in vivo applications. Their broad absorbance, spanning the visible and NIR spectral ranges, allows flexibility in choice of wavelengths for imaging and phototherapy applications.
 Fig. 9  (A) TEM and (B) HRTEM of Au-Cu2–xSe NCs. (C) LSPR in Au-Cu2–xSe NCs compared with that in Au nanoseeds used for the synthesis. (D) LSPR in Au-Cu2–xSe NCs compared with self-doped Cu2–xSe NCs. Adapted from Liu et al.22 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications. 
4. Extrinsically-doped colloidal NCs with LSPR
4.1. Colloidal indium tin oxide (ITO) NCs
Tin (Sn)-doped indium oxide (In2O3) is a prototypical transparent conductive oxide (TCO) material, which consists of a metal oxide semiconductor, In2O3, doped with a group IV element, Sn. The crystalline In2O3 host matrix has a large band gap, and is therefore optically transparent. The Sn dopants provide free charge carriers that are largely responsible for the conductivity. Thin films of ITO and related transparent conductive oxides are widely used in photovoltaics, touch screens, LCD displays, and many other applications. Based on the high concentration of free charge carriers in ITO, ITO NCs can be expected to exhibit LSPR. Formation of high-quality colloidal ITO NCs with tunable composition using solution-phase chemical synthesis was demonstrated by Kanehara et al.23 The LSPR in these colloidal ITO NCs could be tuned from 1618 nm to >2200 nm by controlling the Sn concentration (Fig. 10). The colloidal dispersibility of ITO NCs provides promise for fabricating transparent conductive films/electrodes based on solution-phase processing technologies including coating, printing, spraying and blading. Moreover, dynamic modulation of surface plasmon resonance in ITO NC thin films using electrochemical control has been reported.24 The charge carrier density in ITO NCs can be manipulated by applying a bias voltage, which in turn influences the frequency of the surface plasmon resonance. These methods of manipulating plasmonic absorbance in ITO NCs provide the possibility of using the ITO NCs for electrochromic24 and optoelectronic applications, as discussed in Sections 5.3 and 5.4.
 Fig. 10  Extinction spectra showing (A) the decrease of LSPR wavelength with increasing dopant concentration (%Sn) up to 10% Sn, and (B) increase of LSPR wavelength with increasing dopant concentration beyond 15% Sn. Adapted from Kanehara et al.23 Copyright © 2009 ACS Publications. 
4.2. ZnO NCs doped with group III elements
Similar to ITO NCs, ZnO NCs doped with group III elements have considerable density of free charge carriers. Relative to ITO, doped ZnO has the advantage of being based upon relatively low-cost, earth abundant elements. This could be important for long-term viability in photovoltaics, displays, etc. High-quality n-type colloidal ZnO NCs have been produced by chemical solution methods. Buonsanti et al. reported colloidal aluminium (Al)-doped ZnO (AZO) NCs with controlled doping level and NC size.25 The dopant concentration and average size were tuned from 1.4% to 7.3% and from 5 to 20 nm, respectively, by varying the temperature for nucleation and NC growth as well as the Al precursor concentration. The AZO NCs synthesized by this method exhibit LSPR at NIR wavelengths, which is enhanced with increased dopant concentration. Della Gaspera et al. developed a method for synthesis of colloidal gallium (Ga)-doped ZnO (GZO) NCs.26 The incorporation of Ga3+ ions into ZnO NCs resulted in NIR LSPR, which was attributed to the presence of free electrons from hypervalent doping. Moreover, a small increase in LSPR was observed in Ga-doped ZnO NCs treated with hydrogen although the mechanism of this change was not entirely clear.
4.3. LSPR in other metal oxide and doped metal oxide NCs
Beyond ITO and AZO NCs, which are the dominant TCO materials used in industry, some other metal oxide and doped metal oxide NCs have also exhibited LSPR. Tungsten oxide (WO3−δ) is an electrochromic material with potential applications in fabrication of smart windows. The free carriers responsible for the electrochemically-tunable optical absorbance arise from the presence of oxygen vacancies in non-stoichiometric WO3−δ. This effect is somewhat similar to self-doped copper chalcogenide NCs. Colloidal WO3−δ nanorods (Fig. 11A) were synthesized by decomposition of tungsten(V) ethoxide in the presence of OA and trioctylamine (TOA).27 The resulting NCs had a WO2.83 composition and a well-defined rod-like morphology. The WO2.83 nanorods exhibit a strong LSPR with a peak centered near 900 nm (Fig. 11B), arising from the outer-d valence electrons in the transition metal oxide. The LSPR spectrum was modelled using Mie–Gans theory which was remarkably consistent with the experimental observation.27 In addition, heating the WO2.83 nanorods in air induced a red shift of the LSPR due to a decrease in the density of oxygen vacancies. This provides a simple method of tuning the LSPR in oxygen-deficient metal oxide NCs. Rhenium (Re) has only one more outer-d valence electron than W. The optical properties of rhenium oxide (ReO3) NCs were studied by Biswas and Rao.28 The colloidal ReO3 NCs exhibited LSPR in the visible spectral region from 488 to 534 nm. The very high energy LSPR, comparable to that of gold, reflects the metallic behavior of ReO3.
 Fig. 11  (A) TEM images of WO2.83 nanorods. (B) Experimental measurement and theoretical simulation of LSPR in WO2.83 nanorods. Adapted from Manthiram et al.27 Copyright © 2012 ACS Publications. 
Colloidal oxygen-deficient molybdenum trioxide (MO3−x) NCs provide another example of plasmonic transition metal oxide nanomaterials.29 MO3−x nanosheets with ∼3.3 nm thickness were synthesized by hydrothermal decomposition of ammonium molybdate in an oil/water emulsion. The nanosheets display LSPR ranging from 600 nm to 1200 nm. Upon oxidation, MO3−x nanosheets with a blue color evolved to nanosheets that were white in color. The original LSPR in MO3−x nanosheets was gradually depressed with increasing oxidization time and diminished after 24 hours. This was attributed to conversion of MoV to MoVI.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is a semiconductor with a wide band gap that is widely used in paper, cosmetics and coatings as well as more recent applications such as photocatalysis and dye-sensitized solar cells. Gordon et al. reported a post-synthetic protocol to produce TiO2 nanostructures with tailorable morphology by seed growth.30 The TiO2 nanostructures synthesized using TiF4 as the precursor showed a blue color rather than the typical white color of TiO2. This blue color, also observed in titania produced by high-temperature flame-based processes, is associated with oxygen deficiency and the presence of Ti3+ ions in the TiO2 lattice.31 Gordon et al. observed LSPR at mid-IR wavelengths in TiO2 NCs synthesized using TiF4 but not in that prepared from TiCl4.30 The LSPR was attributed to oxygen vacancies induced by fluorine doping as well as the presence of Ti3+, demonstrated by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The presence of oxygen vacancies was also experimentally confirmed by annealing the samples at 300 °C in air, which decreased the oxygen vacancy concentration and converted the blue TiO2 to ordinary white TiO2. In addition to the LSPR observed in oxygen-deficient TiO2 nanostructures, extrinsic doping of TiO2 nanostructures can provide an appreciable density of free charge carriers, sufficient to generate LSPR. Niobium (Nb)-doped TiO2 NCs were synthesized and studied by Trizio et al.32 A broad LSPR from the visible to mid-IR wavelengths was observed, which increased in intensity with increasing concentration of dopants (Nb5+). The substitution of Ti4+ by Nb5+ provides free electrons in the conduction band that lead to the observed LSPR.
Other extrinsically doped metal oxide NCs include cadmium oxide (CdO) doped with indium. Indium cadmium oxide (ICO) NCs with well-defined size and controlled morphology, including rods, plates, and octahedra, were obtained by organic solution-phase synthesis.33 The free conduction electrons in ICO NCs, which result from the heavy doping, lead to LSPR (Fig. 12). The high extinction coefficient in the range from 108 M−1 cm−1 to 109 M−1 cm−1 (calculated at λmax) shows that the absorbance cross-sections of these ICO NCs are comparable to that of metal NPs of similar size. Three-dimensional (3-D) superlattice ICO films were formed by self-assembly of ICO NCs from their colloidal dispersion (Fig. 12). This provides a potential path to metamaterials fabricated by self-assembly of colloidal NC building blocks.33
 Fig. 12  (a) and (b) SEM images of self-assembled ICO octahedral NCs forming a superlattice. (c) Long range [001] projection of the MgZn2-type binary NC superlattice. (d) and (e) unit cell and [001] projection of the MgZn2-type binary NC superlattice. (f) TEM images of ICO superlattice. (g) Evolution of LSPR in colloidal ICO NCs with increasing dopant concentration. Adapted with permission from Gordon et al.33 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications. 
4.4. LSPR in doped silicon NCs
Silicon (Si) is the primary material used in the microelectronics industry. The abundance of Si and its current role in integrated circuits and photovoltaics help to make nanostructured Si a promising material for next-generation nanoelectronics and nano-optoelectronics. Developing methods for synthesizing and modifying the surface of Si nanostructures, studying their physical and chemical properties, and exploring their potential applications have attracted substantial attention over the past two decades. In microelectronics applications of silicon, group III and V elements are generally used to achieve p- and n-type doping. Phosphorous (P) is the prototypical n-type dopant for silicon. The presence of free charges in heavily-doped Si provides the possibility of generation of LSPR.
P-doped Si NCs have been synthesized by radio-frequency (RF) nonthermal plasma pyrolysis of silane (SiH4) diluted in hydrogen, with a small amount of phosphine (PH3) as the dopant precursor.34 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) revealed a broad absorbance with sharp peaks, corresponding to vibrational modes of surface species, superimposed on it (Fig. 13C). The broad absorbance resulted from the free charge carriers contributed by the P dopants, which produce a LSPR. The absence of the broad absorbance in undoped Si NCs supports the interpretation of the absorbance as arising from a LSPR.34 Moreover, the absorbance blue-shifted with increasing dopant concentration, due to the dependence of LSPR on the concentration of free charge carriers, as discussed above. Note that the dopant concentrations in Fig. 13 are much higher than those typically used in microelectronics. A blue shift of the LSPR was also achieved by annealing the doped Si NCs. This was attributed to passivation of the surface, freeing charge carriers from surface traps associated with surface “dangling bonds” or other defects. Surface doping of Si NCs through hypervalent interaction between the Si NC surface and donor molecules was subsequently reported by the same group.35 In this case, the Si NCs were synthesized by pyrolysis of silicon tetrachloride (SiCl4) gas in a nonthermal plasma reactor. The resulting chlorine (Cl)-terminated Si NCs can be dispersed in ketones, aldehydes and nitriles which have –CO or –CN groups that stabilize the Si NC surface by hypervalent interaction and, simultaneously, act as electron donors. The nominally undoped silicon NCs passivated by these molecules exhibit LSPR, the intensity of which decreases upon evaporation of the solvent molecules. This suggests that the doping is associated with these organic molecules, which can provide electrons to the Si NC surface.35
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic of LSPR of P-doped Si NCs. (B) HRTEM of a single P-doped Si NC. (C) FTIR spectrum of P-doped Si NCs. The broad absorbance band corresponds to the LSPR in P-doped Si NCs. Reproduced with permission from Rowe et al.34 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications. 
4.5. Summary of plasmonic semiconductor and metal oxide NCs

Table 1 summarizes the varieties of heavily-doped semiconductor and metal oxide NCs with LSPR.
Table 1 Summary of reported semiconductor and metal oxide plasmonic NCs




Materials (nanocrystals)
LSPR peak wavelength (nm)
Ref.




Cu2–xS
975–1800

7–10,15



Cu2–xSe
940–1700

10,13–15,19,45



Cu2–xTe
900–1103

15–17



Cu2–xSySe1−y
975–1650

11,18



Au-Cu2–xSe
Broad LSPR

22



ITO
1618–>2200

23,24



Al-doped ZnO
>2500

25



Ga-doped ZnO
>2500

26



WO3−δ
∼900

27



ReO3
488–534

28



MO3−x
∼900

29



TiO2
∼3400

30



Nb-doped TiO2
>2500

32



ICO
1800–3500

33



P-doped Si
>2500

34



GeTe
∼2500

36





5. Applications of NCs with LSPR
5.1. Bioimaging
Nanoparticle-based bioimaging has attracted considerable attention over the past fifteen years.2,37 Plasmonic nanostructures2,38 and photoluminescent QDs37 have been used as contrast agents and fluorescent biomarkers for many in vivo and in vitro imaging modalities including fluorescence imaging,37 photoacoustic imaging,39 photothermal imaging,38 dark field imaging,40etc. Plasmonic nanomaterials used for biomedical applications should ideally exhibit LSPR in the NIR spectral region where tissue and biomolecules exhibit relatively weak scattering and absorbance, allowing deep penetration of light in vivo.41 Conventional colloidal Au NPs with spherical shape and diameter of 20 nm or less generally have LSPR near 530 nm. To achieve NIR absorbance, anisotropic or hollow Au nanostructures have been developed and synthesized by numerous methods2,6 involving growth of Au nanorods based on Au nanoseeds, creation of Au nanocages by titrating silver nanocubes with auric chloride, growth of Au nanoshells on silica microsphere templates, etc. These Au nanostructures with NIR plasmonic absorbance have been widely studied as contrast agents for bioimaging. Progress in developing plasmonic heavily-doped NCs over the past few years provides an alternative to Au nanostructures. Due to their lower density of free charge carriers, these colloidal doped semiconductor NCs can directly exhibit LSPR in the NIR spectral region despite their small size (≤10 nm). Doped NCs with NIR LSPR that does not rely on finely manipulating shape and size open up new possibilities for applications in plasmonic nanomaterials-based bioimaging.22,42,43 However, not all of the doped NPs with NIR LSPR can be used for these applications because the absorbance of water increases sharply at wavelengths above 1200 nm. Many of the extrinsically-doped NPs such as ITO and AZO have plasmonic absorbance with a peak wavelength longer than 1350 nm, where light absorbance by water severely limits the imaging depth.
Photoacoustic (PA) imaging, which includes photoacoustic tomography (PAT), is an emerging non-invasive and non-ionizing imaging modality that integrates the optical and ultrasound imaging methodologies to achieve high resolution at relatively deep tissue depth.41 In PA imaging, a laser pulse induces rapid heating of a structure to be imaged, and this heating generates a pressure wave, i.e., an acoustic signal. The acoustic signal is detected by a conventional ultrasound imaging system. PA imaging can be implemented by taking advantage of intrinsic optical contrast in biological systems, for example contrast arising from haemoglobin and melanin, which can absorb light and generate an acoustic signal.41 This makes PA imaging effective for imaging structures such as blood vessels without using any extrinsic contrast agents. These intrinsic contrast mechanisms generally produce absorbance in the visible spectral region that may limit the imaging depth. To facilitate deep tissue imaging, a strong, extrinsic NIR light absorber is desirable for use as a contrast agent.41 Such substances are also called exogenous contrast agents. Au nanostructures with NIR LSPR have shown significant promise as exogenous contrast agents for PA imaging. More recently, self-doped copper chalcogenide NCs with NIR LSPR have also emerged as promising exogenous contrast agents.
Ku et al. studied the use of self-doped Cu2–xS NPs as a contrast agent for brain and lymph node (LN) PA imaging.42 Because the lymphatic system is a pathway for cancer metastasis, lymph node mapping is important for diagnosing the metastatic stage of cancer. Cu2–xS NPs of 11 nm mean diameter were synthesized by reacting CuCl2 with Na2S in water at 90 °C. The Cu2–xS NPs had a broad NIR absorbance with a peak centered near 990 nm. This allows the use of the cost-effective Nd:YAG laser source (with a wavelength of 1064 nm) to excite the NPs. Cu2–xS NPs functionalized with polyethylene glycol (PEG) were used as the contrast agent for PA imaging. They diffused into the cerebral cortex and LNs of the rats following intracranial injection and interstitial injection into the front paw pad, respectively. The brain and LNs were monitored by PA imaging after NP injection. A LN 12 mm below the skin surface could be clearly visualized using Cu2–xS NPs as the contrast agent, excited by a Nd:YAG laser source with a power of 100 mJ cm−2, which is considered the maximum permissible exposure intensity for human skin at 1064 nm wavelength.
Cu2–xSe NPs were also studied as a contrast agent for PA imaging.43 Cu2–xSe NPs with a 7.6 nm mean size were synthesized in organic solvent. Then, aqueous Cu2–xSe NP micelles were formed by encapsulating Cu2–xSe NPs in polyethyleneglycol-grafted phospholipid (DSPE-PEG) through self-assembly. 180 min after injection of Cu2–xSe NP micelles into the left forearm of a rat, the accumulation of Cu2–xSe NP micelles in the sentinel lymph nodes (SLNs) provided clear visualization of SLNs by photoacoustic imaging.43 These results demonstrate that self-doped copper chalcogenide NPs are a promising alternative to anisotropic or hollow Au nanostructures as NIR contrast agents for PA imaging.
As discussed in Section 3.3 above, Au-Cu2–xSe heterogeneous NPs with ∼10 nm overall size have a broad absorbance spanning the visible and NIR spectral regions, offering the opportunity to use a cost-effective 1064 nm laser source for excitation, while also permitting use of existing instrumentation with laser sources at other NIR wavelengths. Their broad absorbance also enables multi-modal imaging using both PAT and dark-field optical imaging. Their absorbance in the range of 700–900 nm within the biological window of transparency is higher than that of the pure Cu2–xSe NCs. To investigate the Au-Cu2–xSe NPs for PA imaging, thiol–PEG was used to functionalize the Au-Cu2–xSe NPs and make them dispersible in water and biological media. The PEGylated Au-Cu2–xSe NPs prepared by ligand-exchange resisted aggregation and maintained their small size after dispersion in water. The time-dependent in vivo PA imaging of SLN was studied by monitoring the SLNs after injecting Au-Cu2–xSe NPs (Fig. 14). The SLN could be clearly visualized after accumulation of Au-Cu2–xSe NPs. Moreover, other draining LNs were delineated, indicating that the small Au-Cu2–xSe NPs can diffuse through the lymphatic system. The in vivo imaging depth using Au-Cu2–xSe NPs as contrast agents reached 17 mm. Because the depth of SLNs in human breasts is about 12 ± 5 mm below the skin surface and the laser power used here was only 1/10 of the ANSI safety limit, the Au-Cu2–xSe NPs with small particle size have significant clinical relevance from the perspective of imaging depth achieved, low intensity of laser power required and the expected biocompatibility of the materials.
 Fig. 14  
In vivo SLN photoacoustic images. PA images were acquired before (A) and after the injection of Au-Cu2–xSe NPs: (B) 68 min and (C) 251 min after injection. Three lymph nodes indicated with 1–3 are visible in the axillary region. (D) Depth-encoded PA coronal MAP image of (C). (E–G) Depth-resolved cross-sectional B-scan images of A–C, respectively. (H) Photograph of an animal with hair removed before PA imaging. (I) Time-dependent accumulation of Au-Cu2–xSe NPs in a SLN, in terms of the amplitude changes of PA signal. Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications, reproduced with permission from Liu et al.22 
5.2. Photothermal therapy
The photothermal effect refers to heat generated by absorption of light. In photothermal therapy, exogenous agents including plasmonic nanomaterials and organic dyes are introduced into a biological system for light absorption and heat generation. Here, we focus the use of plasmonic nanomaterials for photothermal therapy. Photothermal therapy refers to the use of optical heating of a targeted structure, e.g. a tumor, to kill diseased cells. Photothermal therapy employing metal nanostructures has reached clinical trials.44 Similar to NP-based bioimaging, anisotropic and hollow Au nanostructures with NIR plasmonic absorbance including nanoshells, nanocages, nanorods and nanostars have been proposed and studied as agents for photothermal therapy.2 Recently, use of the NIR LSPR in doped semiconductor NPs for photothermal therapy has attracted increased interest, again because it could allow strong NIR absorbance by very small nanoparticles with favourable in vivo circulation, biodistribution, and excretion profiles.45,46
Hessel et al. investigated the use of Cu2–xSe NPs for cancer cell photothermal therapy and compared their effectiveness to that of Au nanostructures with NIR plasmonic absorbance.45 Cu2–xSe NPs with ∼16 nm mean size and NIR LSPR centered at 970 nm were synthesized in organic solvent using CuCl and selenourea as the Cu and Se precursors, respectively. The colloidal Cu2–xSe NPs were functionalized by an amphiphilic polymer to provide aqueous dispersibility for studying the photothermal effect. The photo-induced heat generated in Cu2–xSe NPs was compared with that of Au nanorods and Au nanoshells after normalizing by the extinction of each dispersion. This study showed that photo-induced heat generated by Cu2–xSe NPs is comparable to that from Au nanorods and higher than that from Au nanoshells. Moreover, measurements of photothermal transduction efficiency, an important metric for photothermal therapy, indicated that the Cu2–xSe NPs photothermal efficiency (22%) was equal to or slightly greater than that of commercially-available Au nanorods (21%), and much higher than that of commercially available Au nanoshells (13%). The high photothermal transduction efficiency results from the fact that the small Cu2–xSe NPs have relatively low scattering contribution to optical extinction, and corresponding high absorption contribution. Scattered light does not contribute to the photothermal effect. In addition, the small size of the Cu2–xSe NPs may improve the in vivo blood circulation time. The ablation of HCT-116 cells was demonstrated using an 800 nm laser to irradiate the cells after uptake of the Cu2–xSe NPs.
The photothermal effect of copper chalcogenide NPs may be enhanced, relative to gold nanostructures, if a longer wavelength laser source is used for excitation. The plasmonic absorbance of most colloidal Au nanostructures tested for photothermal therapy to date decreases strongly at wavelengths beyond 950 nm. As shown in Section 2, self-doped copper chalcogenide NPs can have an LSPR peak at longer wavelengths, e.g. from 975 to 1650 nm for Cu2–xSySe1−y (Fig. 8). A recent report showed a slightly higher value of photothermal conversion efficiency (25.7%) in Cu9S5 NPs than in Au nanorods (23.7% in that study), using a 980 nm laser for excitation.46 Although the photothermal conversion efficiency of Au nanostructures tested in these studies was lower than that reported in some other papers, those differences may simply reflect the different measurement conditions. Accepted standard methods for measuring photothermal transduction efficiency are not yet well established. In any case, these studies clearly demonstrate that the self-doped copper chalcogenide NPs have strong photothermal conversion efficiency and merit further investigation as agents for photothermal therapy.

In vivo photothermal therapy was executed by irradiating a tumor injected with the Cu9S5 NPs using a 980 nm laser at an intensity of 0.51 W cm−2.46 Histopathology revealed that cancer cells were photothermally ablated. Moreover, use of copper telluride NPs for in vitro photothermal therapy was also reported.16 These investigations all demonstrate that self-doped copper chalcogenide NPs are viable alternatives to metal nanostructures for use in photothermal therapy.
5.3. Electrochromic materials for “smart windows” and related applications
Electrochromic materials are the class of materials whose optical properties can be reversibly tuned by an applied voltage. Transition metal oxides are very promising materials for electrochromic devices because they can form non-stoichiometric phases and exhibit electrochromism due to the intervalence charge-transfer optical transitions.47 Electrically-tunable LSPR can play a role in such materials.
Engineering NIR plasmonic absorbance in doped metal oxide NCs through electrochemical control has been reported.24 By manipulating the free charge carrier density in ITO NCs, the NIR LSPR was dynamically and reversibly modulated, shifting by up to 1200 nm without relying on ion intercalation. This demonstrates the promise of plasmonic nanomaterials in the field of electrochromism. Progress in NC-based electrochromism has shown that electrochromic optical switching behaviour can be manipulated over a wide spectral range from the visible to NIR spectral region by coupling plasmonic ITO NCs with amorphous niobium oxide glass (NbOx).48 ITO NCs encapsulated by polyniobate clusters (POMs) were formed chemically, then converted to nanocomposites of ITO NC in NbOx glass upon annealing. The NbOx glass with integrated ITO NCs shows considerable enhancement in optical contrast at visible wavelengths, compared to pure NbOx glass. The tunability of LSPR in ITO NCs through electrochemical control dramatically extends the electrochromic spectrum from the visible to the NIR spectral region (Fig. 15). NIR electrochromism is of particular interest for controlling heat transmission through “smart windows” independently of visible light transmission, for example blocking NIR wavelengths in the summer, and transmitting them in the winter. The electrochromic functionality in the ITO-NbOx glass composites can be tuned by controlling the content of ITO NCs in the composites and the bias voltage applied. This work presents a prototype and again illustrates the potential of plasmonic nanomaterials in electrochromic applications such as smart windows.48
 Fig. 15  (a)–(f) Transmittance spectra of ITO-in-NbOx with different ITO nanocrystal content under an applied electrochemical voltage (4 V in red, 2.3 V in blue and 1.5 V in cyan, versus Li/Li+). Adapted from Llordés et al.48 Copyright © 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
5.4. Solution-processed transparent conductive films
Doped metal oxides such as ITO and AZO are widely used to fabricate transparent electrodes in industry. The current fabrication techniques used in industry involve deposition from the vapour phase, which generally requires high energy input and large capital investment in high vacuum processing equipment. Colloidal dispersions of NCs provide the possibility of fabricating TCO films or electrodes by low-temperature atmospheric-pressure solution-phase processing technologies. Many studies have demonstrated production of high-quality colloidal ITO NCs by chemical solution methods.23,49 The ITO thin films fabricated from these NC dispersions exhibit high transmittance at visible wavelengths. Relatively high conductivity was observed in these ITO NC thin films due to the presence of the free charge carriers contributed by the dopants. This is consistent with the observation of LSPR in colloidal ITO NC dispersions, arising from the considerable density of free charge carriers. Herein, LSPR is actually another manifestation of the presence of the free charge carriers, but is not directly related to the application. However, the thin films assembled from ITO NC dispersions still show lower conductivity than those made by conventional methods such as sputtering.49 This can be attributed to the formation of defects in the film during the coating process as well as the small grain size of NC inducing charge carrier scattering. Similar investigations were also made for colloidal AZO25 and GZO26 NCs. The results show the potential of fabricating TCO thin films by solution-phase processing based on colloidal NCs, but further progress is needed for these films to match the performance of vacuum-deposited films.
An exciting new area of application of thin films and nanostructures of plasmonic semiconductors is in optical metamaterials. Several studies have shown that heavily-doped semiconductors can have important advantages over noble metals in these applications, as discussed in detail by Naik et al.50 and many references cited therein. To date, the plasmonic semiconductors used in metamaterial applications have been deposited and patterned by vacuum deposition methods and photolithography. However, here, as in other TCO applications, colloidal plasmonic semiconductors may eventually enable low-cost solution phase processing and patterning.
6. Conclusion and outlook
The study of heavily-doped semiconductor and metal oxide nanoparticles that exhibit LSPR is a relatively young and rapidly-advancing research field. This group of novel plasmonic nanomaterials provides a potential alternative to metal nanostructures in several applications, and opens up new applications where absorbance at NIR and mid-IR wavelengths is needed. Much research in this field to date has involved developing methods for synthesizing high-quality colloidal NCs, exploring new types of nanomaterials with LSPR, and fundamentally studying the optical properties of these nanomaterials. These materials have begun to be explored for varied applications, including theranostics, optoelectronics, and sensing. This tutorial review aims to summarize key aspects of this research field, comparing and contrasting the variety of materials and potential applications that are currently being considered. We hope this will help to guide researchers entering this research area. A great amount of work is still needed to develop practical applications of these novel types of plasmonic nanomaterials. For example, comprehensive analysis of cytotoxicity, biodistribution, and biodegradability of these materials, based on systematic investigations, will be required in order to move forward with their biomedical applications. The potential advantages of these materials such as small size also need to be further assessed, and the materials must be optimized to best exploit these advantages.
Notes and references

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer,  2007 Search PubMed .
E. C. Dreaden, A. M. Alkilany, X. H. Huang, C. J. Murphy and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2740–2779 RSC .
E. Ozbay, Science, 2006, 311, 189–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Faraday, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1857, 147, 145–181 CrossRef .
H. J. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
M. Grzelczak, J. Perez-Juste, P. Mulvaney and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1783–1791 RSC .
Y. X. Zhao, H. C. Pan, Y. B. Lou, X. F. Qiu, J. J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hsu, K. On and A. R. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19072–19075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, X. L. Wang, B. Zhou, W. C. Law, A. N. Cartwright and M. T. Swihart, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1256–1264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. L. Wang and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4402–4408 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Riha, D. C. Johnson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1383–1390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deka, A. Genovese, Y. Zhang, K. Miszta, G. Bertoni, R. Krahne, C. Giannini and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8912–8914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Li, R. Zamani, M. Ibanez, D. Cadavid, A. Shavel, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4664–4667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, C. Y. Jiang, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, R. D. Schaller, D. V. Talapin, E. da Como and J. Feldmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1583–1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Li, R. Zamani, P. R. Gil, B. Pelaz, M. Ibanez, D. Cadavid, A. Shavel, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, W. J. Parak, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7098–7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, A. Wisnet, H. Zhang, C. Waurisch, A. Eychmuller, A. Dubavik, A. O. Govorov and J. Feldmann, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4367–4377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dilena, D. Dorfs, C. George, K. Miszta, M. Povia, A. Genovese, A. Casu, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13023–13031 RSC .
D. Dorfs, T. Hartling, K. Miszta, N. C. Bigall, M. R. Kim, A. Genovese, A. Falqui, M. Povia and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11175–11180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg, I. Popov, R. Costi and U. Banin, Science, 2004, 304, 1787–1790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Shi, H. Zeng, Y. Sahoo, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, M. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 875–881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Lee, W.-C. Law, D. Zhu, M. Liu, M. Jeon, J. Kim, P. N. Prasad, C. Kim and M. T. Swihart, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4333–4339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kanehara, H. Koike, T. Yoshinaga and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17736–17737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Garcia, R. Buonsanti, E. L. Runnerstrom, R. J. Mendelsberg, A. Llordes, A. Anders, T. J. Richardson and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Buonsanti, A. Llordes, S. Aloni, B. A. Helms and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4706–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Della Gaspera, M. Bersani, M. Cittadini, M. Guglielmi, D. Pagani, R. Noriega, S. Mehra, A. Salleo and A. Martucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3439–3448 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 842–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Huang, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15283–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Teleki and S. E. Pratsinis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3742–3747 RSC .
L. De Trizio, R. Buonsanti, A. M. Schimpf, A. Llordes, D. R. Gamelin, R. Simonutti and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3383–3390 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Gordon, T. Paik, D. R. Klein, G. V. Naik, H. Caglayan, A. Boltasseva and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2857–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Rowe, J. S. Jeong, K. A. Mkhoyan and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1317–1322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Wheeler, N. R. Neale, T. Chen and U. R. Kortshagen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2197 Search PubMed .
M. J. Polking, P. K. Jain, Y. Bekenstein, U. Banin, O. Millo, R. Ramesh and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 037401 CrossRef .
M. Bruchez, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2016 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Yang, S. E. Skrabalak, Z. Y. Li, Y. N. Xia and L. H. V. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3798–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. West and N. J. Halas, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2003, 5, 285–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, C. Favazza and L. H. V. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2756–2782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ku, M. Zhou, S. L. Song, Q. Huang, J. Hazle and C. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7489–7496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. C. Law, M. Jeon, X. Wang, M. Liu, C. Kim, P. N. Prasad and M. T. Swihart, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 952–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lal, S. E. Clare and N. J. Halas, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1842–1851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hessel, V. P. Pattani, M. Rasch, M. G. Panthani, B. Koo, J. W. Tunnell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. W. Tian, F. R. Jiang, R. J. Zou, Q. Liu, Z. G. Chen, M. F. Zhu, S. P. Yang, J. L. Wang, J. H. Wang and J. Q. Hu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9761–9771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Mortimer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 147–156 RSC .
A. Llordés, G. Garcia, J. Gazquez and D. J. Milliron, Nature, 2013, 500, 323–326 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Lee, G. L. Li, M. A. Petruska, D. C. Paine and S. H. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13410–13414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Naik, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3264–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Key learning points
(1) Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) has been demonstrated in several types of heavily-doped colloidal semiconductor and metal oxide nanocrystals.
(2) Nanocrystals exhibiting LSPR can be classified as intrinsically-doped or extrinsically-doped.
(3) Lower free carrier concentrations in plasmonic semiconductor NCs, compared to noble metals, produce LSPR at longer wavelengths.
(4) Plasmonic semiconductor NCs have particularly high potential for biomedical applications in which strong NIR absorbers are needed.
(5) Potential applications of these nanocrystals are also emerging in photonics, optoelectronics, and nanoelectronics.


 	Fig. 1  Dependence of localized surface plasmon resonance frequency on the density of free carriers. Reproduced with permission from Luther et al.8 Copyright © 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 2  (A) The evolution of LSPR energy with increasing size of Cu2–xS NCs. Adapted from Luther et al.8 Copyright © 2011 Nature Publishing Group, (B) LSPR in disk-shaped Cu2–xS NCs, showing two plasmon modes whose positions depend upon the aspect ratio of the nanodisks. Adapted from Hsu et al.9 Copyright © 2011 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of Cu2–xS NCs with average sizes of 6.8, 8.8, 11.5, and 13.5 nm, respectively. Adapted from Liu et al.10 Copyright © 2013 Wiley VCH, (B) LSPR in Cu2–xS NCs synthesized using CuCl-OAm and OA-S as the precursors show a sharp peak centered at 975 nm. Adapted from Liu et al.11 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of ∼16 nm Cu2–xSe NCs synthesized using ODE-Se precursor. (b) HRTEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of Cu2–xSe NCs. Adapted from Deka et al.13 Copyright © 2010 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A), (B), (C) and (D) representative TEM images of Cu2–xSe NCs with mean size ∼7.2 nm, ∼8 nm, ∼6.2 nm and ∼16.5 nm synthesized using OAm-Se and OA-Se precursors. (E) Tunable LSPR in Cu2–xSe NCs by changing the concentration of ligands present during synthesis. Adapted from Liu et al.10 Copyright © 2013 Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) TEM and HRTEM images of Cu2–xTe nanocubes (top) and nanoplates (bottom), and (B) UV/vis spectra of Cu2–xTe nanorods (orange), nanoplates (green) and nanocubes (blue). Adapted from Li et al.16 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Time-dependent evolution of the LSPR in Cu2–xSe NCs upon exposure to air. (b) Tuning LSPR through stepwise reduction using Cu(CH3CN)4PF6 solution to reduce the cation vacancy concentration in Cu2–xSe NCs. (c) Reversible tuning of LSPR by gradual oxidation in air. (d) Theoretical calculation of extinction spectra of Cu2–xSe NCs with different copper deficiency (x value). Reproduced with permission from Dorfs et al.19 Copyright © 2011 ACS publications.	 

 	Fig. 8  
In situ tuning of LSPR in Cu2–xSySe1−y (0 < x < 1, 0.4 < y ≤ 1) NCs by controlling the elemental composition and surface ligands. The LSPR wavelength can be tuned from 975 nm to 1650 nm. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.11 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) TEM and (B) HRTEM of Au-Cu2–xSe NCs. (C) LSPR in Au-Cu2–xSe NCs compared with that in Au nanoseeds used for the synthesis. (D) LSPR in Au-Cu2–xSe NCs compared with self-doped Cu2–xSe NCs. Adapted from Liu et al.22 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 10  Extinction spectra showing (A) the decrease of LSPR wavelength with increasing dopant concentration (%Sn) up to 10% Sn, and (B) increase of LSPR wavelength with increasing dopant concentration beyond 15% Sn. Adapted from Kanehara et al.23 Copyright © 2009 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) TEM images of WO2.83 nanorods. (B) Experimental measurement and theoretical simulation of LSPR in WO2.83 nanorods. Adapted from Manthiram et al.27 Copyright © 2012 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) and (b) SEM images of self-assembled ICO octahedral NCs forming a superlattice. (c) Long range [001] projection of the MgZn2-type binary NC superlattice. (d) and (e) unit cell and [001] projection of the MgZn2-type binary NC superlattice. (f) TEM images of ICO superlattice. (g) Evolution of LSPR in colloidal ICO NCs with increasing dopant concentration. Adapted with permission from Gordon et al.33 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic of LSPR of P-doped Si NCs. (B) HRTEM of a single P-doped Si NC. (C) FTIR spectrum of P-doped Si NCs. The broad absorbance band corresponds to the LSPR in P-doped Si NCs. Reproduced with permission from Rowe et al.34 Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications.	 

Cu2–xS	975–1800	
7–10,15

Cu2–xSe	940–1700	
10,13–15,19,45

Cu2–xTe	900–1103	
15–17

Cu2–xSySe1−y	975–1650	
11,18

Au-Cu2–xSe	Broad LSPR	
22

ITO	1618–>2200	
23,24

Al-doped ZnO	>2500	
25

Ga-doped ZnO	>2500	
26

WO3−δ	∼900	
27

ReO3	488–534	
28

MO3−x	∼900	
29

TiO2	∼3400	
30

Nb-doped TiO2	>2500	
32

ICO	1800–3500	
33

P-doped Si	>2500	
34

GeTe	∼2500	
36


 	Fig. 14  
In vivo SLN photoacoustic images. PA images were acquired before (A) and after the injection of Au-Cu2–xSe NPs: (B) 68 min and (C) 251 min after injection. Three lymph nodes indicated with 1–3 are visible in the axillary region. (D) Depth-encoded PA coronal MAP image of (C). (E–G) Depth-resolved cross-sectional B-scan images of A–C, respectively. (H) Photograph of an animal with hair removed before PA imaging. (I) Time-dependent accumulation of Au-Cu2–xSe NPs in a SLN, in terms of the amplitude changes of PA signal. Copyright © 2013 ACS Publications, reproduced with permission from Liu et al.22	 

 	Fig. 15  (a)–(f) Transmittance spectra of ITO-in-NbOx with different ITO nanocrystal content under an applied electrochemical voltage (4 V in red, 2.3 V in blue and 1.5 V in cyan, versus Li/Li+). Adapted from Llordés et al.48 Copyright © 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
