Atomic layer deposited photocatalysts: comprehensive review on viable fabrication routes and reactor design approaches for photo-mediated redox reacti ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA04780H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04780H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17703-17734Atomic layer deposited photocatalysts: comprehensive review on viable fabrication routes and reactor design approaches for photo-mediated redox reactions

        
          
            N. K. R. 
            Eswar
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Satyapaul A. 
            Singh
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jaeyeong 
            Heo
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Optoelectronics Convergence Research Center, Chonnam National University, 77 Yongbongro, Bukgu, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jheo@jnu.ac.kr
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) – Pilani, Hyderabad Campus, Hyderabad 500078, India
Received 
      7th May 2019
    , Accepted 4th July 2019First published on 5th July 2019AbstractPhotocatalysis (PC) and photoelectrocatalysis (PEC) are attractive routes to utilize the abundant solar energy for energy- (H2 and photo-reformed organics) and environment- (water remediation) related applications. The fundamental challenges with PC and PEC are photon absorption, restricted charge diffusion lengths because of exciton recombination, photo-corrosion, and kinetics of the reactions. These limitations can be addressed by suitable catalyst design with precisely controlled morphology and active sites at the atomic precision. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is one such efficient route to establish thorough control of photocatalyst fabrication. Thanks to ALD, it is now feasible to synthesize particles, thin films, core–shell structures, and porous and membranous photocatalytic materials with the highest precision and homogeneity. One further challenge is understanding probable reactor designs when exploiting ALD-based coatings. Herein, we reviewed various possible routes to fabricate photocatalysts using ALD with insights of PC/PEC reactions based on particulate, thin film, core–shell, and porous photocatalytic materials. This review also discusses the importance of translating the underlying reaction mechanisms to scale-up the reactor design with respect to the ALD approach. Initially, basic PC and PEC mechanisms for energy and environmental applications using growth-controlled ALD catalyst systems are given attention. Subsequently, more insights on microscale reactor combinations with ALD over-coatings and the challenges in transforming such microscale systems to the macroscale are discussed. Finally, the prospects of ALD for large-scale systems and the corresponding influential factors, such as high residence time scales, bandgap engineering, light penetration, and deposition thickness for PC and PEC applications, are examined in detail.N. K. R. EswarDr Neerugatti Krishna Rao Eswar is currently working as a post-doctoral researcher at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He obtained his Bachelor and Master of Technology degrees in Bio-Technology and Nanotechnology respectively from Anna University, Chennai, India. He worked at IIT-Bombay, India for a brief period on developing mesoporous catalysts. Later, he joined for Ph. D. at IISc – Bangalore, India to work on designing and fabricating catalysts, reactors for energy and environmental applications. His research involves synthesizing nanomaterials and thin films fabrication for catalysis and solar cell applications.Satyapaul A. SinghDr Satyapaul A. Singh obtained his bachelor's degree from JNTU, and Master's., PhD from Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru respectively in chemical engineering. Further, he worked as a research assistant at IISc for a brief period to develop thermally stable catalysts for gas phase reactions. Since 2018, he is working as assistant professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) – Pilani, Hyderabad. His research interests are experimental and modelling of heterogeneous catalytic systems for thermo-catalytic and photocatalytic fields towards green energy applications.Jaeyeong HeoProf. Jaeyeong Heo is an associate professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He obtained his Ph. D. from Seoul National University. His research areas include atomic layer deposition, thin-film solar cells, and synthesis of nanomaterials for energy applications.
1. Introduction
1.1. Energy and environmental needs
Rapid urbanization and industrialization, energy needs, and environmental safety bind together to meet the demands of the global community. The world is moving toward alternative and sustainable fuels to prevent the catastrophic damage that leads to global warming. WHO fact-sheets say that climate change resulting from global warming may increase the death toll to approximately 250000 per year in the next two to three decades.1 Clean air, surplus drinking water, and clean energy are the three most important battlegrounds where rapid scientific discoveries are needed to tackle the onset of this serious problem. Air pollution is one of the serious concerns that must be kept under control for a breathable environment. Energy dependence on fossil fuels is the major reason for the decrease in air quality. Most developed countries follow strict standards to maintaining the carbon levels in the atmosphere; however, many developing countries still do not meet such standards while attempting to fulfill their own energy demands. In both cases, breathing contaminated air is a risk to human health. Among several other sources, industries and automobiles share a major responsibility for increasing the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.2 To mitigate air pollution, an enormous amount of effort has been invested into researching strategies and methods to directly address the immediate danger, while overlooking alternative sources to return Earth to a sustainable place for living. Similarly, improper waste segregation and treatment contaminates water bodies in undeveloped and developing countries. The WHO estimates that contaminated water contributes to a whopping 842000 deaths every year.3–5 Cleaning polluted water and finding a solution for efficient wastewater treatment is the main agenda for effectively mitigating water pollution.
Heterogeneous catalysis (HC) which dates back centuries was widely employed for making sulfuric acid, petrochemicals, dehydrogenation and oxidation of alcohols, decomposition of ammonia, methanation, and exhaust gas treatments etc.6,7 Catalysts have been predominantly employed at the industrial scale;8 however, thanks to nanotechnology, now most research utilizes catalytic nanomaterials either to change the course of reactions or to retrieve the desired product through a series of chemical reactions. Catalytic processes for small- or large-scale reactions often rely on the attributes of the catalyst, such as composition, structure, size, surface area, and morphology. Heterogeneous catalysts are highly stable, reproducible, reusable, and phase-independent, such that they can be treated with different phases of reactants, such as liquids and gases. Recent discoveries show that HC using nanomaterials is a possible sustainable solution to all of the energy and environmental concerns mentioned above.9,10 More research has been invested in developing suitable nanomaterials. Nanocatalysts offer a wide range of possibilities to interact with, investigate, and alter environmental hazards at the molecular level while also generating consumable energy with renewable sources of energy at disposal. In addition, several theoretical and computational methods can assist in the engineering of new nanomaterials and their application in catalysis.11
1.2. Necessity of nanomaterials for environmental catalysis
Industrial chemical research has now embarked on developing metal, metal oxide, and semiconductor nanomaterials as active surface catalyst particles to perform site-specific reactions. These reactions help in developing new methods of treating wastewater, converting global warming gases into fuels and chemicals, and also generating solar fuels through catalysis. Added to the growth in materials development, the enhancement of sophisticated technology aids in understanding and focusing on important aspects with respect to a catalyst's atomic nature and its ability to perform reactions. Metal oxides12 occupy a major share among the developed nanomaterials towards catalytic reactions, followed by metal sulfides, metals, and other non-metals. The enormous growth of interest in nanocatalysts is due to their physiochemical properties, which can be tuned according to the desired processes to subsequently improve the selectivity. The size, surface energy, and active surface area of nanomaterials allow them to perform even under low-temperature conditions. For example, gold nanoparticles can oxidize carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide at room temperature and can also catalyze the reaction without any supportive materials.13 Nanocatalysts are widely employed in redox reactions, electrocatalytic reactions, and as electrodes in photo-anodes, fuel cells, and batteries. The different synthesis approaches for nanocatalysts lead to varying properties as well as reaction ability. For example, the size of nanoparticles determines the adsorption and activation of carbon monoxide during the synthesis of hydrocarbons by the Fischer–Tropsch mechanism.14 With advancements in technology, more insights into the crucial factors that influence the catalytic ability of a nanomaterial, such as structure, facets, absorption, porosity, and the position of their band edges (conduction and valence bands), are being studied to understand the process in minute detail.15 These measures shed more light on the specific physiochemical properties of a catalyst and allow tweaking of material chemistry to achieve more surface area, a variety of structures, size-related confinement effects, and to enhance exciton transport of the catalyst or between the interfaces/junctions of catalytic composites to achieve maximum efficiency.16 Although it is widely believed that size reduction favors catalysis, there are also contradictions to this general notion, where size reduction may limit the reaction, either by distancing the ad-atom for adsorption or through the non-availability of high-surface energy sites for reaction.17,18 The criteria necessary for a nanocatalyst from the perspective of energy and environment can be summarized as follows. Nanocatalyst photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting reactions are a direct and major contribution to energy research, followed by nanocatalysts employed for conversion of carbon dioxide into useful hydrocarbons. Although heterogeneous catalysis is successful and used for more than 80% of chemical production industrially, because of the lack of viable and stable catalysts, it has seen little application in current research directions such as catalytic hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions; conversion of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide to alcohols, fuels, and other useful chemicals; and the oxidation reaction of methane.19 Most of these reactions are surface reactions that require catalysts with atomic precision which depends on the surface area and active sites of the catalysts. Therefore, a precise and facile method for developing these catalysts is preferred. Wrobleski et al.20 proposed some goals for synthesis of catalysts, of which most expected qualities are “high activity per unit weight of the active catalyst”, selectivity, and thermal stability. Several wet chemical synthesis approaches to nanomaterials often do not provide tight control with respect to monolayer formation or a thorough conformal deposition. This is due to the rapid nature of the reactions or requirement of multiple solvent and chelating agents to stabilize the nanomaterial; furthermore, some of the reactions are not fast and rather time-consuming.21 Another important drawback in conventional wet chemical synthesis is poor homogeneity in heterogeneous catalysts, i.e., non-uniform dispersion of active sites/active metal, which reduces the selectivity and in turn the efficiency of the catalytic process. In addition, it is often difficult to deduce or understand the reaction mechanism with micro or nano-size particles that support the active catalysts.22 High-temperature catalytic reactions often increase the grain size of the catalysts, the clustering of the active metals, and the formation of inessential by-products at improperly formed catalytic interfaces. These are some of the primary drawbacks in the catalytic process using nanomaterials. Similarly, stabilizing the catalyst particles with protective layers using traditional methods often results in either a decrease in charge conduction or an increase in the resistance of the mass transfer processes, photocorrosion, poor light optical absorption, and non-uniform heterojunctions resulting from large uncontrolled thickness.23,24 Colloidal wet chemical methods21 offer distinguishable size and morphology, which is considered to be beneficial for tuning the active sites and comprehending their effects; however, they are associated with many of the abovementioned drawbacks. Hence, an alternative approach to active nanomaterial synthesis has been sought. Heterostructure catalysts are combinations of two or more nanostructured materials, which brings synergism, compounding, and enhancement of individual and composite properties. However, imparting new properties to the parent/base material by forming secondary or tertiary composites on the scale of a few nanometers is often challenging.
Deposition procedures to develop such composite materials require that highest precision to embed the composite nanomaterials onto the parent/base without altering its properties. One such process that can perform deposition with the utmost precision at the monolayer scale is atomic layer deposition (ALD). ALD is a deposition process that operates based on the chemisorption between substrate–surface and surface–surface reactions26 as depicted in Fig. 1 which represents a typical ALD process for the deposition of a metal oxide using a metal–organic precursor and water molecules. The deposition occurs only when the surface groups are pacified with complimentary organic groups such as (in this case) hydroxyl groups. Because of the surface-oriented and self-limiting reactions, ALD can produce pinhole-free depositions of materials with Angstrom-level thickness, therefore offering superior conformal coatings.27 In addition to this, the precursor-ligands for ALD are designed and chosen based on their inability to adsorb on the deposited film or etch the grown film. They are highly volatile such that, after reaction, the by-products will either desorb or decompose leaving the deposited film intact. Temperature plays a crucial role here that influences the desorption or decomposition of the by-products based on the precursor-ligand's vapor pressures. Compared with other deposition processes such as molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), sputtering, evaporation, pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and other wet chemical depositions, ALD offers dense film deposition with uniform thickness, as well as better step coverage and interface quality at low temperature.28Table 1 compares the process parameters, advantages, and limitations for powder or thin film photocatalyst fabrication with ALD and other alternative techniques. Since the discovery and establishment of ALD, the process has been used for many industrial applications, especially electronics, solar cells and recently for catalysis. Most of the literature reports on ALD have discussed the process only from a mechanistic reaction approach.29–32 Similarly, employing ALD in the field of microelectronics, solar cells and other non photocatalytic reactions have been thoroughly reviewed.25,33–35 There are only a few detailed reports on significance of ALD for energy and environmental applications;36 in particular, a photocatalytic perspective is still lacking. ALD for solar fuel generation through water splitting has been surveyed.37,38 Therefore, this review article focuses on the past, present contributions of ALD and its future potential from the perspective of environmental photocatalysis (PC).
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a typical ALD process cycle of a metal oxide (zinc oxide). Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Table 1 Comparison of ALD with other alternative methods for photocatalyst fabrication




Parameter
ALD
Other alternative methods for photocatalyst fabrication


Wet chemical methods
Evaporation
Sputtering




Growth condition
Continuous film formation with surface specificity
Nucleation and growth
Low energy atoms from source to substrate
High energy atoms from target to substrate


Growth rate
Accurate (usually in Å per cycle)
Variable (nm to μm h−1)
Variable between 10–100 Å s−1
Variable between 10–100 Å s−1


Growth mode
Layer by layer approach
Growth from the nutrient solution
Evaporation and condensation
Continuous ad-atom deposition


Thickness/size
Measured by number of reaction cycles with high specificity
Can be controlled using concentration and time
Not easy to control with single deposition per charge
Can be controlled with high specificity


Synthesis temperature
Room temperature to 400 °C – ALD window
Room temperature to less than boiling point of solvent in reaction mixture
50 °C to 100 °C
Room temperature to 400 °C


Conformality
Highly conformal
Non-conformal
Mostly non-conformal
Conformality depends on substrate rotation and large area target


Film
Thin pinhole free films with minimal stress
Poor adhesion for films beyond
Thin films with pinholes and poor adhesion
Dense films with small grain size and compressive stress


Time
Slow
Fast
Fast
Fast


Precursor
Volatile chemical precursors
Cationic and anionic solution mixtures mostly within three precursors
Point source: metals and di-electrics
Parallel plate source


Substrate condition
Can be used for all types of substrates
Substrate stability in chemical solution is highly preferred
Temperature and vacuum withstanding substrates
Temperature and vacuum withstanding substrates


Reproducibility
Highly reproducible with window of scaling up
Low reproducibility (even slight variation in solution mixtures would not result the effective growth)
Reproducible but difficult to scale up
Reproducible and can be scaled up


Uniformity
Excellent
Poor
Poor
Good


Limitations
Designing of precursor is difficult, slow and expensive process
Improper film adhesion, particle agglomeration and homogeneous nucleation are major disadvantages. Improper surface coverage with large chemical footprint
Non-stoichiometric deposition, poor film density. High impurities (thermal evaporation). High decomposition. Poor step coverage
Expensive targets, film damage may occur due to ion bombardment and plasma. Not suitable for powder/polymer/biological substrates


Advantages
No impurities. High precision. Preserves surface area. Can be applied for both powders and films
Inexpensive and easier
Low cost (thermal evaporation). Inexpensive compared to sputtering
Deposition over large areas. Film properties can be tuned using several controlling parameters




2. Atomic layer deposited nanomaterials for heterogeneous photocatalytic water treatment
Semiconducting transition metal oxides,39 especially TiO2 and ZnO, have entered the spotlight of heterogeneous catalytic wastewater treatment as part of an advanced oxidation process called PC. PC is a century-old process,40 where active research between 1970 and the 1980s proved the effectiveness of ZnO as a photocatalyst for the oxidation of organic molecules.41 However, it has recently received the world's attention with Fujishima and Honda's experiment (Fujishima–Honda) on TiO2 (ref. 42) for photoelectrochemical water splitting43 from a dormant state. The principle of semiconductor PC44 can be described as follows: when a photon with an energy greater than the bandgap of a semiconducting nanoparticle interacts with it, charge carriers (electrons and holes) separate to their respective band edges to participate in a redox reaction with their surrounding medium. Although the discovery was reported with respect to the photolysis of water, it spread to the treatment of wastewater in the following years.45–47 Much research has been dedicated to PC, and photocatalytic nanomaterials have evolved from nanoparticles to films to membranes. Therefore, ALD on photocatalytic nanomaterials has been applied based on the current trends of research. Although a generalized survey on ALD for nanomaterials was conducted by Leskelä et al.,48 it discusses only the perspective of ALD coating onto porous and templated structures.
As the photocatalytic requirements vary, catalyst fabrication evolves to address their drawbacks. Hence, it would be appropriate to initially explore various ALD approaches to different photocatalytic entities that have been performed so far before discussing the photocatalytic processes using such catalysts. Fig. 2 presents a few strategies where ALD has improved the efficiency of photocatalysts. Catalyst design is crucial to develop a uniform size, desired structure, and composition to achieve maximum catalytic conversion.49 Conventional catalysts like TiO2 and ZnO have been well characterized using ALD. Initially, nanoparticles with photocatalytic ability were prepared using several wet chemical techniques. Similarly, many nano- or micro-adsorbent materials, such as Al2O3 and SiO2, have been explored for deposition as photocatalytic materials. Coating fine nanoparticles on a heterogeneous substrate with uniform dispersion of active material used to be a difficult task. In ALD, deposition begins at the Angstrom (Å) scale with the formation of many islands on the substrate and slow nucleation with continuing deposition cycles. This approach avoids the aggregation of active materials and allows even distribution of active materials on the surface of the support. In addition, embedding noble metals on base support materials or photocatalysts often occurs randomly, where irregular nucleation occurs in a non-homogeneous fashion, resulting in the loss of active surface area of the noble metals. Likewise, deposition of metallic nanoparticles such as silver and copper on active photocatalytic materials exhibits localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) near-field effects. To retrieve LSPR field effects, the particle size of the metal must be small and uniform because the collective oscillations of the metal nanoparticles vary with respect to their size, thereby changing the optical absorption and electrical properties. Therefore, ALD allows fine-tuning of the nanoparticle size by the slow and gradual control of thickness resulting from its self-limiting nature. It also assists in achieving maximum surface coverage on the support materials. Not only particles, but also planar supports like two-dimensional sheets of nanomaterials, such as graphene, graphene oxide, and graphitic nitride, can be subjected to ALD of nanoparticles. Rarely, the high surface area of the planar supports is retained after the deposition of active materials through other wet chemical methods. The surface area of planar supports tends to decrease upon heat treatment after deposition; hence, the available active surface area decreases. Because of its low-temperature deposition process, ALD often results in the retention of the planar materials' properties post-deposition.
 Fig. 2  Approaches using ALD to fabricate efficient photocatalysts. 
Because of their anisotropic nature, the orientation of nanomaterials plays a crucial role in determining the catalytic activity based on the exposure of high-energy facets to the reaction environment. However, as stated above, they lose their effectiveness either by photocorrosion or adsorption of intermediary products on the photocatalyst for the same reason. Conversely, formation of heterojunctions is crucial to retain the efficient charge transfer properties of photocatalysts. In both cases, deposition of a thin layer of nanomaterial is highly favorable. ALD enables passivation of the high-energy facets of nanomaterials to prevent photocorrosion and loss of photocatalytic ability upon prolonged reaction. The thickness of the passivation layer can be tuned to enable charge tunneling across the layer and thus interaction with the surrounding medium. Likewise, both excitation and charge transport properties between semiconductors can be modified based on the thickness of the interface across the semiconductors to improve the photocatalytic efficiency. In addition, various types of interfaces and charge transfer properties can occur with respect to the heterojunction forming catalysts, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Also, the built-in electric field varies with respect to the facet of the parent material with respect to deposited particles or layers, as shown in Fig. 3(b). In addition to top-layer passivation, embedding active photocatalysts into porous support materials has benefits in industrially significant catalytic processes. Mesoporous silica, electrospun supports, and porous membrane supports often contain a continuous or co-continuous matrix of pores to facilitate the diffusion of fluids. Conventional deposition methods limit the coating process to just the surface, where the active material and reactant interactions are minimized because of the self-enabled diffusion flux of the reactant into the porous matrix. In circumstances like these, ALD offers a better opportunity to deposit active photocatalytic material, either in the form of a nanoparticle or as a conformal coating across the membrane matrix. ALD helps to define the particle size with accuracy, such that embedded nanoparticles do not behave as clogs for the diffusion of reactants into the matrix. Therefore, from a photocatalytic perspective ALD can be applied to a wide range of photocatalyst fabrication approaches, either to improve or to retrieve physiochemical properties of the catalysts to achieve maximum efficiency.
 Fig. 3  (a) Possible fabrication of photocatalysts with varying interfaces and (b) possible routes for driving force in charge separation in interfaces with varied built-in electric fields ((A) photoelectrocatalysis, (B) photocatalysts with symmetric electric fields, (C) anisotropic electric fields with respect to facets, (D) asymmetric electric fields). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.1. Photocatalysis of organic dye compounds using ALD-based photocatalysts
ALD was initially used to develop photocatalytic semiconducting thin films or particles for treating aqueous solutions of textile dye (e.g., methylene blue) or organic fatty acids (stearic acid) as model pollutant compounds to study their catalytic ability. Although the chemical fate of the pollutant has very rarely been studied, it is worthwhile to mention the application of ALD for enhancement of PC, either in terms of novel material improvements or enhanced rates of reaction. Moreover, thin film PC requires a timely solution to reach commercial use. However, it is worthwhile to recap the initial developments of ALD for PC before continuing to describe its progress. TiO2 ALD on catalyst particles was first performed by King et al., where they deposited TiO2 on silica spheres and ZnO nanoparticles with sizes of 550 nm and 65 nm, respectively, in a fluidized bed reactor.51 Changes in the particle size and surface area were observed after growing TiO2 with titanium tetra-isopropoxide at growth rate of 1 × 10−2 and 4 × 10−2 nm per cycle using H2O and H2O2. Such controlled deposition can prevent the agglomeration of particles.
Often, PC relies on the effective surface area of the catalyst; a high-surface area catalyst can adsorb more molecules for an efficient catalytic process. However, improving the surface area alone can cause the catalyst particles to agglomerate. To address this issue, TiO2 deposited using 200 to 800 cycles of ALD on carbon fiber was used for methylene blue adsorption.52 The dye pollutant was initially allowed to adsorb on the composite and was later treated under ultraviolet (UV) light for degradation. However, the reusability of this ALD-coated TiO2/carbon fiber decreased with time. Ussia et al. have developed a p-HEMA (poly(2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate)) and graphene oxide (GO) adsorbent based on photocatalytic zinc oxide deposition using ALD.53 To compare the unique effect of depositing a photocatalytic material over adsorbents, they performed swelling studies of the adsorbent in the presence of methylene blue and later regenerated the adsorbents multiple times. p-HEMA/GO adsorbents with ZnO-ALD retained their swelling properties through the photocatalytic degradation of dye molecules under UV irradiation, thus serving dual roles in both retaining the polymer-based adsorbent intact and also helping to increase the efficiency of the adsorbent through regeneration. These are some of the unique strategies to perform adsorption and catalysis separately in a photocatalytic process where there is a huge scope for potential application in environmental cleanup with further improvements.
ALD was applied by Ritala et al.54 to coat photocatalytic TiO2 nanomaterial on various substrates, such as soda lime glass (SLG) and silicon (Si), with temperature varying between 150 °C and 600 °C using TiCl4 and H2O. Their findings showed a variation in crystallinity, where amorphous TiO2 and crystalline (anatase and rutile) TiO2 with partial orientation were grown on amorphous and crystalline substrates, respectively. Furthermore, several studies have been performed with respect to the development of TiO2 thin films by varying the ALD parameters55,56 and subsequently analyzing the optical properties. Pore et al. was the first to employ titanium tetramethoxide as a precursor for titanium for the deposition of TiO2 at 325 °C to degrade methylene blue and stearic acid; they achieved increased photoactivity compared with commercial Activ™ glass.57 The same group later compared the photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic degradation of methylene blue using various ALD-TiO2 thicknesses. Photocatalytic thin films suffered saturated charge separation with TiO2 thicknesses of less than 150 nm, whereas photoelectrocatalytic thin films exhibited activity up to thicknesses of 356 nm and achieved better degradation rates.58 Kawakami et al.59 coated TiO2 on stainless steel and copper alloy substrates using TiCl4 and H2O with a growth rate of 0.5 Å per cycle for the degradation of methylene blue and determined the photocatalytic-induced wettability under UV radiation. They found that TiO2 coating with thicknesses of 50 nm or 100 nm and higher produced better photoactivity for stainless steel and copper alloy substrates, respectively. However, they were not able to determine a saturation or threshold limit with respect to thickness versus photocatalytic activity.
Pore et al. attempted TiO2 deposition using TiF4 and H2O on various glass substrates. Growth rates at substrate temperatures of 400 °C and 500 °C allowed 0.8 Å to 1.0 Å per cycle on borosilicate glass with anatase as the major phase, whereas at the same temperatures on SLG, the growth rate increased to 1.1 Å and 1.5 Å per cycle, respectively, with rutile as the major phase of TiO2. However, irrespective of their phases, films grown at such temperatures degraded stearic acid effectively, whereas growing films at 300 °C did not possess photocatalytic ability, but did achieve super-hydrophilicity upon irradiation by UV light.60 They also prepared rutile TiO2 films using H2S in addition to TiCl4 and H2O, where photocatalytic activity under visible light was exhibited for the degradation of stearic acid resulting from a trace amount of sulfur doping that was detected using TOF-SIMS (Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry) analysis.61 The same group developed nitrogen-doped TiO2 films (TiO2−xNx) by replacing H2S with NH3; however, these films exhibited poor visible light activity for degrading stearic acid.62 Similar results were obtained for degrading salicylic acid.63 It has been reported that rapid recombination is the main reason for the decrease in the activity of the TiO2−xNx films. Zirconium-doped TiO2 films were developed by Qiu et al. by varying the Ti:Zr pulse ratio, and they induced visible light absorption in the thin films to degrade stearic acid better than undoped films.64 These works point the way toward an interesting regime of developing impurity-doped nano thin films using ALD. Substrate-oriented growth of TiO2 with respect to temperature using ALD has been studied by Cheng et al.,65 where Ni, Ta, and Ti were coated on glass substrates to investigate the effect of their work functions and contact angles for the deposition and subsequent photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue. An interesting observation made by this group is that TiO2 deposition on all substrates at temperatures below 200 °C resulted in the anatase phase, whereas the temperature needed for a phase transition to rutile increased with respect to the metal coating on glass in the order of Ti, Ta, and Ni, as shown in Fig. 4. Similarly, grain sizes also varied with respect to the metal for ALD of TiO2. TiO2 deposited at 220 °C on Ni/glass exhibited superior photocatalytic activity for degradation of methylene blue because of the Schottky contact between Ni and the TiO2 film.
 Fig. 4  ALD of TiO2 on various metal coated glass substrates at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2009 Electrochemical Society (ECS). 
In addition to conventional substrates, polymer and inorganic templates have been used for ALD to develop photocatalysts. Similarly, ALD of TiO2 on inorganic templates, such as porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO), has resulted in the generation of arrays of TiO2 nanotubes,66 as shown in Fig. 5. The AAO-templated substrate was deposited using alternating cycles of TiCl4 and H2O with 0.4 s and 0.2 s, respectively, interrupted with 5 s of N2 gas purge between all pulses. The conformal deposition achieved by the ALD process was shown by the formation of titania nanotubes. As the number of growth cycles increased, the thickness of the nanotubes increased, indicating that the deposition process is highly ordered. As the wall thickness of the nanotube increased, the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange also increased, which is due to the increase charge carrier generation.
 Fig. 5  ALD of TiO2 on AAO (a and c) and selective etching of AAO leaving TiO2 nanotubes (b and d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
As an advancement, Sree et al. developed thin films of mesoporous silica on Si wafers. Anatase particles were deposited inside the pores of mesoporous silica and compared with TiO2 deposited on oxidized Si wafers using ALD for textile dye degradation.67 From Fig. 6, it is clear that employing mesoporous silica achieved a more active catalytic surface because of the large surface area of the porous silica compared with the bare Si surface. It is also known that films that possess more active materials result in better degradation of pollutants. Similarly, as the annealing temperature increased, the amorphous coating gradually turned to anatase TiO2 up to 750 °C, which should be more favorable for rutile formation. However, in this case, the crystallinity was restricted to anatase. Hence, it must be noted that the freedom to tune the crystallinity is of a higher degree with ALD compared with other deposition methods. In addition, supports or films that possess high surface area tend to be useful for enhancing the active surface area using a suitable deposition method such as ALD. Core–shell WO3 and TiO2 was fabricated using electrospinning and ALD, as shown in Fig. 7, where core electro-spun WO3 fibers were deposited with TiO2 using ALD for methylene blue dye degradation.68
 Fig. 6  XRF analysis of TiO2 deposition using ALD inside mesoporous silica and on the surface of silica over Si wafer. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 7  Uniform coating of shell TiO2 on core WO3 using ALD (a) and enhancement of optical properties in core–shell WO3/TiO2 photocatalytic heterojunctions (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 
As previously discussed, the shell TiO2 was uniformly deposited onto the fibers because of the conformal nature of the deposition process. The optical properties were enhanced with respect to the visible regime, which is due to the better heterojunction formation at the interfaces, as shown in Fig. 7. However, further studies have found a drawback, though, in which as the number of deposition cycles increases, TiO2 fills all the pores, thereby decreasing the surface area and in turn the adsorption of the pollutant and photocatalytic efficiency, despite of more light absorption compared with the pristine fiber. In a similar manner, TiO2 was deposited on graphene films using multiple cycles of ALD by Marchetti et al. for the degradation of methyl red.69 Deposition of TiO2 on graphene provides better separation of electron–hole pairs, where the excited electron from TiO2 moves to graphene and the hole remains in the valence band to react with the pollutant; the presence of graphene imparts a significant enhancement in the visible light property. In their work, the number of TiO2 deposition cycles was varied approximately ten-fold, from 105 to 1125, to study the effect of the thickness of the active material on graphene films. They showed that the film that possesses the maximum thickness of TiO2 exhibited almost complete degradation of methyl red in 300 min. It is noteworthy that the authors did not observe any threshold in the photoactivity of the films with respect to their thickness. It would be a significant study to understand the interfaces of nanomaterials using ALD with carbon compounds like graphene and carbon nitride to improve both the fabrication and the catalytic ability of composites.
Although TiO2 deposition has been widely carried out using ALD, Tan et al. developed transparent TiO2 arrays using ALD on a free-standing AAO membrane adhered to a glass substrate,70 as shown in Fig. 8. Generally, TiO2 nano arrays can be grown either using Ti foil or depositing TiO2 on AAO glass. However, both have disadvantages respectively. A transparent film is not possible using Ti foil, and TiO2 with an alumina barrier between the glass–TiO2 interface limits charge transport. Therefore, adhering free-standing membranes onto glass has solved both problems effectively and can suppress recombination. The PC of methylene blue and stearic acid was studied using TiO2 arrays of various thickness, as well as with Pd loading on the arrays. Interestingly, sputtered Pd on TiO2 arrays resulted in the maximum degradation (76%) of methylene blue in 4 h under UV irradiation. This provides a huge scope for fine-tuning the photoactivity by developing interfaces between ALD-coated thin films and nanoparticles to enhance the photodegradation of contaminants. Similar results were obtained by Zhou et al., where fine Pt particles were deposited on commercial TiO2 (Evonik, P-25) using ALD.71 Interfaces between the thin films reduce recombination and result in better charge transport compared with thin film–particle interfaces; however, there are exceptions in the case of ALD because of its uniformly distributed coating through the “island growth mechanism”.
 Fig. 8  Transparent TiO2 nanoarrays developed using ALD on freestanding AAO adhered to a glass substrate, with corresponding transmittance spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Because of the large bandgap of TiO2 and substantial recombination of photogenerated charge carriers, it is often grouped with other low-band gap semiconductors and metals, respectively. Composites with metals, e.g., silver nanoparticles, prevent recombination by acting as an electron sink, allowing the generation of surface plasmons at various wavelengths and acting as an effective charge separator, resulting in enhanced photocatalytic rate kinetics. However, uncontrolled nucleation of Ag nanoparticles on the catalyst surfaces hinders light absorption and decreases the active surface area of the catalyst. Kumar et al. addressed these problems with a conformal coating of TiO2 and SiO2 on silver nanoparticles using ALD72 and also observed surface plasmon effects for Ag/SiO2/TiO2 photocatalytic thin films on Si substrates to substantiate their hypothesis of near and far LSPR for methylene blue degradation, as shown in Fig. 9(a). Their results show that the presence of a silica interlayer increases the rates of reaction with a blue shift in the surface plasmon resonance because of energy transfer from silver to the appropriate available states in the bandgap of TiO2. In the absence of a thin silica layer, enhanced degradation of methylene blue occurred because of the band alignment of TiO2 with the work function of Ag with respect to their Fermi levels. Similarly, Chang et al.74 showed that a silver interface with ALD-grown multi-walled TiO2 nano arrays resulted in the superior degradation of methylene blue, where hierarchical tubes were tested. The authors attempted to study the effect of the number of TiO2 walls as a function of photocatalytic efficiency upon the formation of silver particle heterojunctions with the multi-walled tubes. Thus, ALD is the best approach to develop conformal thin films over metallic particles to understand and enhance charge carrier dynamics through LSPR effects in light absorptive applications, such as thin film solar cells and water splitting other than water remediation.
 Fig. 9  (a) Atomic layer deposited TiO2 and SiO2 for understanding the LSPR effect using silver nanoparticles for photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society; and (b) transmission electron microscopic image of ALD-grown TiO2 on silica nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Continuing on from previous work, Convertino et al. deposited TiO2 using ALD on PECVD-grown silica nanowires over a Si substrate,73 as shown in Fig. 9(b). Here, the authors address a few important aspects of photocatalytic thin films, including immobilization of an active material onto a substrate, increasing the active surface area of a photocatalytic thin film, and enhancing the light absorption. Depositing thin layers of TiO2 on the silica nanowires leads the catalysts to possess more active surface area, facilitates sturdy contact with the substrate, and improves the light absorption because of the efficient light scattering ability of silica. The ALD-grown TiO2/SiO2 nanowires were also tested for methylene blue degradation.
Biological templates such as legume trichome (as shown in Fig. 10) and the inner shell membrane of an egg have been used for the deposition of nanomaterials using ALD for PC. A zinc and aluminum mixed metal oxide (ZnAl MMO) framework was prepared using ALD-deposited Al2O3 for the degradation of sulforhodamine B and poly-azo benzene dyes.75 The degradation process with ALD-Al2O3 ZnAl LDH (layered double hydroxides) showed good stability and superior degrading ability compared with a powder sample of the same material under UV irradiation. The reason cited for the improvement is the high surface area (approximately 2.4-times greater than that of the powder catalyst) resulting from the hierarchical nature of the framework, which enables diffusion of pollutants for better catalytic degradation. ALD of alumina helped preserve the three-dimensional architecture of the biological template, which is subjected to pyrolysis post-nanomaterial growth. This shows that the conformal nature of ALD can more effectively prevent damage to the substrate compared with other deposition processes.
 Fig. 10  Schematic of Al2O3 deposition using ALD on a legume (bio-template) for developing ZnAl LDH MMO frameworks for photocatalytic degradation of sulforhodamine B and poly-azo dyes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
To develop a bio-compatible photocatalytic membrane, inner shell membranes of avian eggs were used as a template for ALD to coat TiO2 and ZnO to achieve a bactericidal effect by Lee et al.76 The membranes of ZnO were highly flexible, with an excellent photocatalytic bactericidal effect upon illumination of UV light. Another highlighted factor is the efficacy of ALD for depositing a zinc oxide film onto a biological template while completely retaining an intact membrane structure. In addition, their study shows that the crystallinity of the photocatalytic material, rather than the thickness, influences the bactericidal activity, offering a different perspective for a structure-oriented bactericidal process. It can be hypothesized that excited charge carrier transportation may be better in crystalline films compared with amorphous ones. Likewise, templated structures often result in higher surface area, thus offering more reaction sites for catalytic activity. In terms of micro-organisms, a higher surface area for the catalyst results in better affinity for the bacteria, which can be disinfected easily. Raulio et al. demonstrated bacterial biofilm destruction, as shown in Fig. 11, using ALD-coated TiO2 surfaces77 on borosilicate glass. The ALD-coated TiO2 detached 89% of cells from the substrate under 360 nm irradiation for 20 h. Reactive oxygen species generated during UV illumination on the photocatalytic surface perturbs the bacteria by attacking its cell wall, resulting in subsequent leaking of their metabolic contents.78
 Fig. 11  Prevention of biofilm formation using photocatalytic TiO2 thin film on borosilicate glass deposited using ALD. Before illumination (a and b) and after illumination (c and d). Reprinted with permission from Springer Nature GmBH: Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology77 Copyright 2006. 
2.2. Photocatalysis of phenolic compounds using ALD based photocatalysts
The many environmental issues associated with phenolic compounds have put them on the priority list. Phenol is a widely used disinfectant.79 However, several phenolic compounds are discharged into the environment through industries; in addition, many such phenolic compounds have the possibility to form other toxic products, such as nitrophenol and chlorophenol, after reacting with micro-organisms present in water. Similarly, the presence of nitric species with phenolic pollutants allows the formation of nitrophenols.80 Various reports have showcased the adverse effects of phenol pollutants in water.81
Kapton, which is a polyimide substrate, was coated with TiO2 by plasma-enhanced ALD (PE-ALD) using tetrakis(dimethylamido)Ti (TDMATi, Ti(NMe2)4) and O2 plasma at 250 °C. The authors utilized plasma to induce a self-cleaning effect on the substrate. PE-ALD-coated TiO2 on the polymer had an anatase phase with a bandgap of 3.3 eV, which was able to degrade 4-chlorophenol and possessed better wettability than commercial Activ™ glass.82 ALD of photocatalyst on flexible substrates, such as polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), was performed by Mauro et al. for phenol degradation.83 ZnO photocatalysts were deposited at 80 °C on PEN substrates. The preferable orientation and thickness of the films were varied by controlling the number of deposition cycles. The photoactivity of the as-prepared ZnO thin films on PEN under UV irradiation was nearly the same as that of ZnO on Si wafers. Although this is an improvement in the photocatalytic process, flexible substrates such as polymers tend to corrode under prolonged UV irradiation. Hence, visible light photocatalysts on polymer substrates would be a stable and feasible approach.
The photocatalytic activity of TiO2 deposited using PE-ALD and thermal ALD was compared with respect to the degradation of 4-chlorophenol separately.84,85 The structure of TiO2 on a stainless-steel substrate was either pure anatase or an anatase–rutile mixed phase at 300 °C using PE-ALD or thermal ALD, respectively. In both cases, anatase degraded 4-chlorophenol more effectively compared with the rutile or mixed phase. Anatase grown using PE-ALD showed a nearly two-fold increase in the rate of 4-chlorophenol degradation. TiO2 deposited on stainless steel with oxygen plasma at 300 °C has a pure anatase phase, which is believed to enhance the catalytic efficiency. Similar results were obtained with PE-ALD of TiO2 on a galvanized iron substrate.86
The quantum confinement effect was observed by Singh et al. in ALD-coated TiO2 on fibrous and mesoporous nano silica substrates, including KCC-1, MCM-41, and SBA-15, at 150 °C using titanium isopropoxide and hydrogen peroxide,87 as shown in Fig. 12. These structures were aimed at phenol degradation. Deposition of photocatalyst on fibrous silica showed advantages over that on mesoporous silica because of the improved catalyst loading per specific surface area of support, more available active sites for catalysis, and facilitation of quantum confinement effects, which modified the localized energy levels. The authors also suggested that because of the low adsorption of phenol on the catalyst surface, the rates of phenol degradation were minimal. Therefore, an important point with respect to PC is that the pollutants often must be adsorbed very close to the active carrier generation sites of photocatalysts for a better catalytic efficiency, as the diffusion of the photogenerated reactive radicals is limited.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of ALD-coated TiO2 onto fibrous KCC-1 and other mesoporous silica. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to metal oxides, metal nanoparticles on photocatalysts have been fabricated, primarily for enhanced photo-excited charge carrier separation, among other advantages, such as inducing the surface plasmon field effect. Photocatalytic carbon compounds such as graphene and graphitic carbon nitride were also subjected to ALD to achieve various properties, such as heterojunctions and induced magnetism, and also to enable surface plasmon resonance. Gao et al. deposited copper nanoparticles on TiO2 to perform phenol degradation using copper(I) N,N′-di-sec-butylacetamidinate as a precursor with N2 and H2 as the carrier gas and reducing agent, respectively.88 The ALD- (60 cycles) coated sub-nanoscale copper on TiO2 was compared with copper on TiO2 synthesized using a wet impregnation method for phenol PC. Photodegradation of phenol under UV irradiation showed that ALD-coated TiO2 particles exhibit a three-fold increase in the rate of reaction compared with pristine TiO2, and approximately a 1.5-fold increase over that of impregnated TiO2. Transition metal nanoparticles tend to oxidize easily, especially metals like copper and iron. However, sub-nanoscale particles deposited using ALD, as in this case, show better stability for five consecutive cycles of phenol degradation. This indicates that ultrathin monolayers of metals have much more stability than bulk nanoparticles. Because of this advantage, catalysis research is currently converging on using single-atom catalysts (SACs) to improve efficiency.89
Similarly, zinc oxide was deposited on in situ-prepared g-C3N4 in an ALD chamber using diethylzinc and water by Li et al.,90 as shown in Fig. 13, for cephalexin (antibiotic) degradation. A 10 ppm aqueous solution of cephalexin was completely degraded in an hour by the ALD-deposited ZnO/g-C3N4 composite compared with its individual counterparts. The rates increased six- and eight-fold with respect to pristine ZnO and g-C3N4 under visible light. The degradation profile of total organic carbon (TOC) removal shows a 70% removal of total carbon, which is a considerable amount. Holes and hydroxyl radicals play a crucial role in degrading cephalexin using this composite, where superoxide radicals were involved significantly with no direct electron effect. This suggest that all the electrons efficiently reacted with dissolved oxygen to produce superoxide radicals. Meanwhile, holes and hydroxyl radicals rapidly attacked cephalexin. The high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) results for the treated solution show that the molecular weight of the cephalexin molecule dropped from 348 to 60 in an hour as the composite attacked the molecule to form intermediary compounds. Further prolonged PC may result in complete mineralization of the intermediary compounds.
 Fig. 13  Schematic of ALD of zinc oxide on in situ prepared g-C3N4 photocatalyst for cephalexin degradation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Another important aspect of PC improvement is imparting magnetic properties to the photocatalysts, which aids in recovery of the catalyst particle for reusability. Bimetallic magnetic and surface plasmon field effects can be achieved using a magnetic and noble metal nanoparticle combination with a photocatalytic active material. You et al. fabricated a visible light C3N4 photocatalyst combined with atomic layer deposited platinum and iron nanoparticles to achieve enhanced rates of rhodamine degradation and easily separable photocatalyst, respectively,91 as shown in Fig. 14. FePt nanoparticles were deposited using Bis(N,N′-diisopropylacetamidinato)iron(II) (C20H42N4Fe) and trimethyl(methyl cyclopentadienyl)platinum(IV) (MeCpPtMe3) as iron and platinum precursors, respectively, on porous C3N4 at 200 °C for 15, 30, and 45 ALD cycles using H2 as the reducing agent. In this study, porous C3N4 was coated on a quartz substrate prior to ALD of FePt. Unlike the usual powder deposition of ALD, here, the reason for photocatalyst coating on the substrate is to avoid agglomeration of the C3N4 layers, which prevents the uniform dispersion of FePt particles. Santala et al. combined electrospinning with ALD to produce easily separable magnetic nanofibers for PC.92 Their experiment followed three different strategies to synthesize tubular, co-axial fiber and particle loaded fiber photocatalysts using ALD.
 Fig. 14  Degradation profile of rhodamine B using atomic layer deposited FePt on graphitic C3N4 (a), corresponding rate kinetics (b), reusability (c) and spectroscopic evaluation of rhodamine B degraded using 30 ALD cycles coated FePt/g-C3N4 (d) with inset showing effective magnetic separation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Initially, a polymer fiber was deposited with a photocatalyst and then calcined to produce hollow nanotubes by removing the polymer. In the second route, polymer fibers with inorganic precursors were calcined together to form inorganic fibers, and an ALD thin film was then deposited to produce a co-axial fiber photocatalyst with a conformal interface between the two materials. In the third approach, polymer fibers with inorganic precursors were coated with a thin film and calcined to remove the polymer, thereby synthesizing particle-loaded inorganic fibers. The magnetic and catalyst materials were CoFe2O4 and TiO2, respectively.
ALD is not only being used for fabricating thin film interfaces or heterojunctions, but it also assists in coating a seed layer for growing photocatalysts in nutrient-rich conditions. These strategies often combine two or more methods to develop the final catalyst, where ALD is combined with other synthetic approaches. Kayaci et al. incorporated such a combination to grow zinc oxide needle-like structures of polymer nanofibers using 400 cycles of ALD to deposit a zinc oxide seed layer.93 Growing nanomaterials on polymers is a step toward developing water filter membranes. According to their study, zinc oxide developed using an ALD seed layer results in a photocatalyst with more oxygen vacancies. The developed photocatalytic surface was tested against the textile pollutant methylene blue and compared with the pristine polymer and ALD-seeded polymer.
The needle-like zinc oxide structures grown on nanofibers exhibited an almost eight-fold photocatalytic effect compared with its counterparts, as shown in Fig. 15(a). An exciting point from their experiment is that the needle-like structures possessed intrinsic oxygen vacancies (Fig. 15(b)), which helped generate superoxide radicals as well as hydroxyl radicals using the electrons' interaction with dissolved oxygen and holes' interaction with hydroxyl ions, respectively, where charge carrier interplay occurs between the drain and bulk-grain regimes. The ZnO/PAN photocatalysts retained their activity for multiple cycles, as shown in Fig. 15(c), showing their reusability. ZnO nanorods were grown using a chemical bath deposition technique on atomic layer deposited seed layers over Si substrates by Fragalà et al.94 for photocatalytic methylene blue and phenol degradation. They varied the thickness of the seed layer to investigate its effect during nutrient-rich chemical bath deposition, as shown in Fig. 16(a, a′), (b, b′), and (c, c′).
 Fig. 15  (a) Photocatalytic effect of needle-like zinc oxide nanostructures grown on polymer nanofibers (PAN) against methylene blue degradation, (b) charge carrier interplay in pristine polymer fibers, ALD seeded zinc oxide layer and zinc oxide needles grown using seeded layer and (c) consistency of ZnO/PAN photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 16  Scanning electron microscopic images of atomic layer deposited seed layer's effect on chemical bath deposition of zinc oxide on silicon substrates. Seed layers' thickness vary from 3 nm (a), 10 nm (b) and 30 nm (c) respectively. Growth of zinc oxide nanorods (a′), (b′) and (c′) for corresponding seed layers (a), (b) and (c) respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
As the thickness of the seed layer increases, the aspect ratio of the nanorods also increases, in addition to an increase in surface area. Despite the increase in surface area, the density of nanorods per square micrometer eventually decreases. This indicates that the ultrathin ALD coating results in formation of seed islands, where each island gives rise to a nanorod. In contrast, a thick seed layer acts like a film, where nucleation of nanorods occurs at random points based on the surface energy of nucleation sites. In agreement with these results, the rate of degradation showed a decreasing trend with respect to a decrease in the density of the grown nanorods. Two points must be considered here: first, for a good photocatalyst, a large active surface area is necessary; second, however high the active surface area is, it must facilitate both pollutant adsorption and effective charge transportation, where neither of them must be compromised at the other's expense. In the above case, as the density increases, the rods are clustered together, thereby trapping the movement of excited charge carriers. Despite ALD itself being a precisely controlled growth technique, ALD-seeded growth also allows the controllable deposition or growth of nanomaterials in a desired fashion.
Conventional domestic-scale water purifiers often rely on efficient membranes. However, these membranes suffer from clogs that inhibit the flux. A thin coating of photocatalytic materials on membranes helps attack the fouling agents, thereby improving the flow of water through the membrane. In addition to purifiers, many other applications, such as effluent treatments, heavy metal removal, and redox reactions with organic materials, may also utilize membranes because of their high surface area and accommodative matrix for improved residence time. Membranous substrates have also been used to develop sustainable photocatalysts or photocatalytic heterojunctions using ALD. Other than glass, silicon, and polymers, where the active surface area of the support is limited to the top layer, membranes developed using carbon nanotubes and metal foams such as alumina or nickel may either assist with adsorption of pollutants because of their high surface area, make charge transport easier, or both. Feng et al. deposited hybrid metal oxides of ZnO and TiO2 using ALD on commercial carbon nanotube membranes,95 as shown in Fig. 17, for methylene blue degradation. In addition, several critical aspects of membranes can be both fabricated and controlled using ALD, as proposed by Ritala et al. and Yang et al.96,97 Zinc oxide was deposited onto carbon nanotube membrane fabrics using ALD to study its ultrafiltration abilities by the latter group. The filtering and rejection rates were tested for pure water versus bovine serum albumin. Improving the wettability using thin layer of zinc oxide has provided excellent hydrophilicity thereby making the membrane permeable to water and impermeable to proteins.98
 Fig. 17  Schematic of atomic layer deposition of hybrid metal oxides (ZnO and TiO2) over carbon nanotube membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
2.3. Photocatalysis of pharmaceutical compounds using ALD based photocatalysts
Pharmaceutical compounds such as antibiotics in the water stream have become a huge concern for both pharmaceutical industries and the surrounding environment.99 This is due to improper waste segregation and a lack of proper effluent treatment.100 Several problems associated with the presence of antibiotics in water have been widely reported,101,102 and successful and complete removal treatment approaches are still missing. Photocatalytic treatment of phenol-contaminated water is a viable solution to prevent its direct disposal.103
Eswar et al. attempted complete degradation of chloramphenicol and tetracycline antibiotics using photocatalysts like CeO2, TiO2, and CuO105–107 in a slurry reactor. However, from an economic perspective, immobilizing the photocatalyst is a requirement for developing thin films and heterojunctions toward photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic degradation of pharmaceutical compounds. Wastewater treatment using PC does have certain drawbacks, where the most important one among them is catalyst recovery. When the nanoparticles are used in slurry form, it is often difficult to retrieve the photocatalyst for reusability. In addition, catalyst particles tend to aggregate during regeneration. To address these crucial issues, a photocatalytic process was modified to photoelectrocatalysis (PEC), where the active material is deposited on an electrode for an efficient catalytic process.108,109 In this process, there are many advantages. Among them, the two most important aspects are as follows: (1) immobilized active material can be used several times for the catalytic process; and (2) charge separation can be facilitated, where recombination is avoided with an applied electric bias. However, few reports suggest that photoelectrocatalysis can be performed in a slurry reactor.107,110
Adhikari et al. treated tetracycline under visible light with atomic layer deposited Fe2O3 on Bi2WO6 substrates.104 They fabricated Bi2WO6 (spin-coated on FTO) with a thin layer of Fe2O3 to prevent recombination and to foster excited charge carrier separation by creating efficient interfaces between the two semiconductors. Thick interfaces often trap the exciton movement toward the surface; hence, ALD would be a suitable technique to facilitate charge carrier transportation to the surface. Here, the thickness of the Fe2O3 layer was varied to study its effect on the degradation of tetracycline. The authors studied both PC and photoelectrocatalysis and compared the variation in rate kinetics as well as catalyst stability, as shown in Fig. 18(a–h). Based on their results, 15 nm of atomic layer deposited Fe2O3 showed the best results for both PC and PEC, where the rates of PEC of tetracycline using Fe2O3/Bi2WO6 were enhanced approximately three-fold. As a further step, they utilized the same substrate for photoelectrochemical sensing of tetracycline. Thus, model pollutants like stearic acid, salicylic acid, and methylene blue; pharmaceutical compounds like antibiotics; and biological pollutants such as bacteria and its biofilms can be degraded with enhanced efficiency of photocatalysts modified or prepared using ALD. Moreover, doping of both metal and non-metal impurities into parent metal oxide can be accomplished while inducing super-hydrophilicity, which is an added advantage. The reaction rate kinetics for ALD fabricated catalysts have shown remarkable enhancement compared to the control or standard photocatalysts prepared either without ALD or other conventional methods. Table 2 tabulates the reaction rate parameters of ALD fabricated photocatalysts for a wide range of pollutants using PC or PEC. Also, the phase, grain size, and structure of the nanomaterial can be tuned by performing ALD on different substrates at varying temperatures. In addition to metal and glass substrates, low-temperature nanomaterial thin film catalyst deposition can be performed using ALD on flexible substrates like polymers and biological templates.
 Fig. 18  Photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic degradation of tetracycline (antibiotic) using atomic layer deposited Fe2O3 on Bi2WO6 over FTO substrate. Degradation profile of tetracycline with respect to thickness of ALD-Fe2O3 (a) and (b), corresponding rate kinetics (c) and (d), comparative degradation profile of tetracycline using multiple techniques (e) and (f) where EL, EC, PL, represents electrolysis, electrocatalysis and photolysis respectively, stability of the photocatalyst after multiple cycles (g) and corresponding XRD pattern of photocatalyst after reaction (h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Table 2 Rate kinetic parameters of various photocatalytic reactions performed using ALD fabricated photocatalysts




Catalysts and condition
Pollutant
Rate constant (k → kapp) or reaction rate profile
Ref.




ALD TiO2 on SLG with UV irradiation
Methylene blue and stearic acid
PC

k
MB = 4.75 × 10−3 min−1

57




k
SA = 20 nm h−1


ALD TiO2 with UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB PC = (6.84 ± 0.08) × 10−3 min−1

58



PEC

k
MB PEC = (9.01 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2 on AISI 304 DB, AISI 304 2B and AISI 304 4N with UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB AISI 304 DB (50 nm) = (1.92 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1

59




k
MB AISI 304 2B (200 nm) = (2.11 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1



k
MB AISI 304 4N (100 nm) = (1.21 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1


ALD S-doped TiO2-visible light irradiation (24 h)
Stearic acid
PC
Rate of stearic acid degradation

61



Glass = <1 nm h−1


TiO2 = 10 nm h−1


S doped TiO2 = 14.8 nm h−1


ALD Zr-doped TiO2-visible light irradiation
Stearic acid
PC

k
SA TiO2 = (17.00 ± 2.14) × 10−3 min−1

64




k
SA Zr doped TiO2 = (28.47 ± 1.56) × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2/Ag on AAO with UV irradiation
Methyl orange
PC

k
MO TiO2 = (4.24 ± 0.13) × 10−3 min−1

66




k
MO Ag/TiO2 = (5.41 ± 0.19) × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2 on mesoporous silica with UVA irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB TiO2/silicon = (2.49 ± 0.49) × 10−3 min−1

67




k
MB TiO2/mesoporous silica = (8.69 ± 0.15) × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2 on WO3 nanorods with visible light
Methylene blue
PC (slurry)

k
MB TiO2 = (1.49 ± 0.17) × 10−3 min−1

68




k
MB TiO2/WO3 = (1.68 ± 0.12) × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2 on graphene 1 Sun irradiation
Methyl red
PC

k
MR TiO2/silicon = (0.35 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1

69




k
MR TiO2/graphene = (7.04 ± 0.31) × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2 nanotube arrays under UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB TiO2 = 4.03 × 10−3 min−1

70




k
MB TiO2/Pd = 5.95 × 10−3 min−1


ALD Pt on P-25 TiO2 under UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC (slurry)

k
MB TiO2 = 12.22 × 10−2 min−1

71




k
MB Pt/TiO2 = 4.16 × 10−2 min−1


ALD TiO2/SiO2 on silicon with UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB TiO2 = 2.88 × 10−3 min−1

72




k
MB TiO2/Ag = 3.14 × 10−3 min−1



k
MB TiO2/SiO2/Ag = 1.92 × 10−2 min−1


ALD TiO2/Si nanowires on silicon under UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB TiO2 = 3.9 × 10−4 min−1

73




k
MB SiO2 nanowires = 9.8 × 10−6 min−1



k
MB TiO2/SiO2 nanowires = 4.4 × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2 multiwall nanotube & nanorod arrays under UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB TiO2 nanotube array = (9.19 ± 0.22) × 10−3 min−1

74




k
MB TiO2 nanorod array = (7.59 ± 0.31) × 10−3 min−1


ALD Al2O3 ZnAl MMO under UV irradiation
PAZO
PC

k
PAZO ALD Al2O3 ZnAl MMO powder = (7.20 ± 0.21) × 10−4 min−1

75




k
PAZO ALD Al2O3 ZnAl MMO bio-template = (2.79 ± 0.04) × 10−3 min−1


RhB

k
RhB ZnAl MMO powder = (1.03 ± 0.35) × 10−3 min−1



k
RhB ZnAl MMO bio-template = (1.45 ± 0.18) × 10−3 min−1


PE-ALD TiO2 on Kapton under UV irradiation
4-CP
PC

k
4-CP TiO2 = (1.63 ± 0.08) × 10−3 min−1

82




k
4-CP Pilkington Activ® = (4.83 ± 0.5) × 10−4 min−1


ALD ZnO on PEN under UV irradiation
Phenol
PC

k
Phenol PEN = 8.42 × 10−5 min−1

83




k
Phenol ZnO/PEN = 1.20 × 10−3 min−1



k
Phenol ZnO/Si = 1.43 × 10−3 min−1


PE-ALD TiO2 on SS under UV irradiation
4-CP
PC

k
4-CP TiO2/SS = (2.36 ± 0.10) × 10−3 min−1

84




k
4-CP Pilkington Activ® = (5.72 ± 0.23) × 10−4 min−1


PE-ALD & Th-ALD on SS under UV irradiation
4-CP
PC

k
4-CP PE-ALD TiO2/SS = (2.52 ± 0.11) × 10−3 min−1

85




k
4-CP Th-ALD TiO2/SS = (1.39 ± 0.05) × 10−3 min−1


ALD TiO2 on mesoporous silica with Xe lamp
RhB
PC

k
RhB TiO2/KCC-1 = (68.40 ± 4.70) × 10−3 min−1

87




k
RhB TiO2/MCM-41 = (25.40 ± 1.00) × 10−3 min−1



k
RhB TiO2/SBA-15 = (13.90 ± 1.00) × 10−3 min−1


Methylene blue

k
MB TiO2/KCC-1 = (129.6 ± 8.0) × 10−3 min−1



k
MB TiO2/MCM-41 = (115.5 ± 11.0) × 10−3 min−1



k
MB TiO2/SBA-15 = (92.5 ± 5.0) × 10−3 min−1


Phenol

k
Phenol TiO2/KCC-1 = (4.90 ± 0.20) × 10−3 min−1



k
Phenol TiO2/MCM-41 = (5.20 ± 0.30) × 10−3 min−1



k
Phenol TiO2/SBA-15 = (2.60 ± 0.20) × 10−3 min−1


ALD ZnO on g-C3N4 with Xe lamp
Cephalexin
PC

k
Ceph ALD ZnO/g-C3N4 = 73.50 × 10−3 min−1

90




k
Ceph ALD ZnO = 9.10 × 10−3 min−1



k
Ceph g-C3N4 = 13.60 × 10−3 min−1


ALD FePt on g-C3N4 with Xe lamp (UV filter)
RhB
PC

k
RhB ALD Fe–Pt/g-C3N4 = 89.1 × 10−3 min−1

91




k
RhB g-C3N4 = 40.4 × 10−3 min−1


ALD ZnO seed layer & ZnO nanorods under UV
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB ZnOSL-3 nm = 2.8 × 10−3 min−1

94




k
MB ZnONR-3 nm/ZnOSL = 4.3 × 10−3 min−1


ALD ZnO & TiO2 on CNT membranes under UV irradiation
Methylene blue
PC

k
MB ALD ZnO/CNT = 19.5 × 10−3 min−1

95




k
MB ALD TiO2/CNT = 10.9 × 10−3 min−1



k
MB ALD ZnO, TiO2/CNT = 20.3 × 10−3 min−1


ALD Fe2O3/Bi2WO6-FTO under Xe lamp
Tetracycline
PC

k
TET ALD Fe2O3/Bi2WO6 = 8.06 × 10−3 min−1

104




k
TET Bi2WO6 = 5.44 × 10−3 min−1


PEC

k
TET ALD Fe2O3/Bi2WO6 = 24.69 × 10−3 min−1



k
TET Bi2WO6 = 9.81 × 10−3 min−1


ALD Al2O3 over anatase nanorods under UV-visible irradiation
CO2
PC
Average rate of CO formation

121



With ALD Al2O3/anatase nanorods: 10.3 μmol g−1 h−1


Anatase nanorods: 6.5 μmol g−1 h−1


ALD Al2O3 over Au/TiO2 under Xe lamp (UV filter)
CO2
PC
Average rate of CO formation

122



ALD Al2O3/TiO2: 2.95 μmol g−1 h−1


TiO2: 0.45 μmol g−1 h−1


ALD ZnO over CuO with Xe lamp
CO2
PC
Maximum rate of CO formation

123



ALD ZnO/CuO: 1.98 mmol gcat−1 h−1


CuO: 0.02 mmol gcat−1 h−1


ALD MgO over TiO2 and Evonik P-25 with Xe lamp (UV filter)
CO2
PC
Rate of CO formation

124



ALD MgO/TiO2: 12.75 ± 0.9 μmol g−1 h−1


ALD MgO/P25: 3.75 ± 0.95 μmol g−1 h−1


P25: 2.53 ± 0.25 μmol g−1 h−1


ALD-TiO2 modified PMFI and PMWW zeolites with Xe lamp
CO2
PC
Rate of CH4 formation with ALD TiO2/PMFI: 1.12 mmol per s per mol Ti-sites

125



ALD TiO2/PMWW: 0.76 mmol per s per mol Ti-sites


P-25: 0.05 mmol per s per mol Ti-sites


ALD TiO2 over carbon nanosheets and nanotubes under UV irradiation
Acetaldehyde
PC
Maximum rate of CO2 formation

128



ALD TiO2/CNS: 43 ppmv min−1


ALD TiO2/CNT: 28 ppmv min−1




3. Other photocatalytic organic conversion reactions using ALD based catalysts
In addition to dyes, acids, and phenolic compounds, catalysis of reactions with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), such as toluene combustion, photoreduction of carbon dioxide, and organic oxidation reactions, are some of the industrially significant approaches to preventing the release of toxic compounds and greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, leading to environmental sustainability. Transition metal oxides can act as bases or supports for the deposition of metal/metal oxides, which have high affinities for specific organic moieties. Some of the interesting properties of metal oxides, for instance, oxygen vacancies, phase transitions, electronic defects, and charge transport properties, can be utilized/tuned for target-specific reactions. Such tunable properties make metal oxide nanomaterials prospective candidates for organic conversion reactions.
Toluene combustion to carbon dioxide is one of the reactions used to study the photocatalytic degradation of VOCs using metal oxide nanoparticles. Kim et al. deposited TiO2 on a nanodiamond support for the photocatalytic decomposition of toluene gas.111 The reaction chamber for photocatalytic toluene decomposition is shown in Fig. 19(a). The photocatalytic TiO2 thin films were deposited at 150 °C using titanium isopropoxide and water. Later, the deposited films were annealed at 500 °C for an hour to retrieve the final catalyst. Although the catalytic efficiency decreased gradually for both the catalysts, ALD TiO2, especially on nanodiamond, showed prolonged conversion compared with commercial TiO2 particles, as shown in Fig. 19(b). The authors state that for a successful photocatalytic process, generation of hydroxyl radicals from adsorbed hydroxyl groups is necessary. In their case, nanodiamond attracts more hydroxyl groups because of its excellent hydrophilicity. Even complex organo-inorganic compounds such as alkyl siloxane can be decomposed using photocatalytic treatment on atomic layer deposited TiO2 surfaces.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of typical reaction chamber for photocatalytic organic conversion and (b) photocatalytic toluene decomposition using different cycles ALD TiO2 on nanodiamond compared with commercial TiO2 (Evonik, P-25). Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. 
Lee et al. grew TiO2 on Si (100) substrates using titanium isopropoxide and water.112 Self-assembled monolayers of octadecyltrichlorosilane were coated onto ALD TiO2 and SiO2 (prepared by chemical oxidation of Si (100)) surfaces. Later, they were subjected to photodecomposition under UV irradiation in the presence of humidity, and the film thickness was observed under an atomic force microscope (AFM) to confirm the decomposition. ALD TiO2 on Si resulted in quicker decomposition compared with Si, as shown in Fig. 20. Conversely, photogenerated charge transfer from TiO2 to SiO2 was also observed, which assisted the decomposition on SiO2 surfaces. In addition to photodecomposition, these methods may be useful in developing selective surfaces for further processing toward bio/electronic and wetting applications.113
 Fig. 20  Photodecomposition of self-assembled monolayers by ALD TiO2 on Si (100). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. 
Most photocatalytic organic decomposition follows either addition or abstraction, followed by an auto-oxidation process when the photogenerated radicals react with organic compounds.114 Although it sounds simple, there are several problems associated with organic decomposition at low temperatures, including the deposition of coke, adsorption of non-degraded reaction intermediates or byproducts, changes in the catalyst surface area or a drop in the availability of the active surface area of the photocatalyst, and most importantly, an energy barrier for conversion when compared with high-temperature catalytic reactions. These problems provide more scope for investing in the development of suitable photocatalytic thin films, which is a greener process compared with other modes of decomposition or conversion. Also, it is imperative that decomposition of organics on photocatalysts not result in forming unfavorable intermediates or byproducts that can act as catalytic poison for further decomposition processes. Therefore, studying photocatalysts with a view to complete oxidation or selective oxidation of the organics is essential for viable commercialization. Tungsten oxide was conformally coated by Herrera et al. onto mesoporous silica to achieve better adhesion with silica moieties by forming stable Si–O–W supports. Compared with the impregnated tungsten oxide, ALD inhibited catalyst sintering and also resulted in uniform Brønsted acid sites for 2-butanol and methyl alcohol dehydration to 1-butene, 2-butene and di-methyl ether, respectively.115 They also observed that the effective coverage of tungsten oxide by ALD on the surface of silica offered higher resistance for sintering, even in the presence of water vapor byproduct during methanol dehydration. (1) CO2 + e− → CO2˙−(2) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH(3) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O(4) CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O(5) CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O(6) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O(7) 2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O(8) 2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → C2H2O4(9)
Excess carbon dioxide emissions can be controlled by means of three possible routes, including capture and storage, utilization for other reforming reactions, and reduction to other useful hydrocarbons. Generally, reduction of carbon dioxide into useful hydrocarbons occurs at the expense of high temperature and pressure because of the stable configuration of CO2 molecules. However, photoreduction of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide can be accomplished using photocatalytic nanomaterials without a great amount of energy input. CO2 is a highly stable compound, where charges cannot be abstracted easily. It neither absorbs ultraviolet nor visible light to become sensitized.
Hence, semiconductors are suitable materials to sensitize and transfer the energy for molecular breakage of CO2. Electrons and holes generated from semiconductors can participate in CO2 conversion to other C1 or C2 compounds with reductants. The mechanism of such reductions is elucidated from eqn (1)–(9). Eqn (1) shows the hole oxidation of a water molecule, where the generated ion acts as a reductant for subsequent reactions. Eqn (3)–(9) show the formation of C1 compounds such as formic acid, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, methanol, and methane, and the C2 compounds ethanol and oxalate.116 Conversion of carbon dioxide to other hydrocarbons has been proposed to primarily follow two routes. First, there is a thermodynamic uphill reaction of CO2 activation associated with numerous proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions. The activation of CO2 can be considered as difficult and rate-limiting step, as in eqn (2), which requires a more negative potential of −1.90 V and control of the kinetics of various PCET reactions. Plants perform such reduction using solar energy by photosynthesis. Therefore, fabricating photocatalysts that utilize complete solar energy, mimicking the natural process, would reduce emissions without much sophistication.
Effective adsorption of CO2, dissociation, conversion into products, and desorption of products rely on some crucial factors, as follows. Photocatalysts with high surface area will likely be able to adsorb more molecules; therefore, the primary criteria of a photocatalyst is to possess a large surface area to accommodate more adsorptive sites. Although more porous structures may allow maximum adsorption, charge conduction or transfer may become limited in highly porous catalysts. Nevertheless, porous photocatalysts can be combined with other co-catalysts to enhance exciton transport. Oxygen vacancies are primitive surface defects in photocatalysts that can act as highly reactive sites to change the course of reaction by tuning the chemical and photoconductive properties of catalysts. Hence, structural and morphological tuning to bring forth highly reactive facets and surface defects could improve the efficiency of photocatalytic conversion by facilitating better adsorption and activation sites. Conversely, unprotected high-energy facets and an increase in the concentration of surface defects may result in rapid photocorrosion and facilitate traps for recombination. To prevent these outcomes, passivation layers can be deposited over the photocatalytic active material.
Deposition of co-catalysts on the active material may enhance the rate of reaction and change the reaction kinetics toward the desired product. Noble metallic co-catalysts, because of their high work function, can conduct excited electrons from the photocatalyst and transfer them to the surface reactions easily. They also act as site-specific preferential adsorptive sites that contribute to dissociation of carbon dioxide by forming a bi-dentate complex. However, using noble metals to achieve a uniform dispersion on the surface of a photocatalyst is an essential task and an economic concern. In addition to noble metals, incorporation of alkalis on the surface of photocatalysts enhances basicity by introducing Lewis basic sites. Alkalis help to establish interactions with the carbon atom of carbon dioxide by acting as electron donors, thereby assisting with activation of carbon dioxide.117,118 ALD competes among other synthesis approaches to enhance all of the above influential parameters, and atomic layer deposited materials are being widely tested and compared with conventionally prepared nanomaterials for the photoreduction of carbon dioxide.
Several reports have explained the photoconversion process of carbon dioxide into useful chemicals or fuels. Yuan et al. and Li et al. have elucidated the application of various catalysts and reactor designs for CO2 photoconversion.119,120 TiO2 is the most studied nanomaterial for the photoreduction of carbon dioxide because of its stability, abundance, and economic viability. Despite its advantages, TiO2 suffers in a few critical aspects, like its wide bandgap, limited CO2 adsorption, and most often high recombination rate for excitons. Structural and morphological tuning, impurity doping, and bandgap and defect engineering are some of the techniques that can solve the problems associated with TiO2. Zhao et al. deposited a thin layer of Al2O3 on anatase nanoparticles and intrinsic oxygen vacant anatase nanorods using ALD for carbon dioxide photoreduction with H2O.121 The synthesized anatase nanorods exhibited a more preferential growth along the [100] direction compared with anatase nanoparticles. After ALD of a thin layer of Al2O3 (2 cycles) on both nanoparticles and nanorods, the catalysts were subjected to photoreduction, which resulted in anatase rods giving a better yield of CO and CH4 than nanoparticles, as shown in the Fig. 21(a).
 Fig. 21  Photoreduction of CO2 using anatase nanoparticles and nanorods, (a) effect of ALD-Al2O3 passivation and (b) effect of ALD-Al2O3 thickness on the conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
Varying the number of cycles of ALD coating shows the importance of the thickness of the passivation layer with respect to the photoactivity, as shown in Fig. 21(b). Hence, it is apparent that the passivation layer protects the high-energy facets of nanorods to retain enhanced conversion, although controlled thickness can only be achieved using ALD. Similar results were obtained by Zhao et al. when they attempted Al2O3 passivation on Au nanoparticle-embedded TiO2, where the conversion rates increased approximately eight-fold compared with that of the pristine photocatalyst. This result shows the scope of the interplay for enhancing the activity with respect to tunable passivation layer thickness and size of metal nanoparticles to impart surface plasmon field effects for photocatalytic treatments.122 Syngas (carbon monoxide and hydrogen) was obtained from CO2 using copper oxide nanowires covered with atomic layer deposited zinc oxide by Wang et al.123 The thickness of zinc oxide was varied between 1 and 65 cycles. Approximately 2 mmol g−1 h−1 is the maximum yield of CO achieved using eight cycles of ZnO deposition on CuO nanowires. Interestingly, the authors noticed a quick decrease in the yield after 5 h of reaction. Pristine CuO and ZnO photocatalysts did not give any significant yield after photoreduction, except for when used in combination. Hence, charge segregation across the catalytic interfaces was found to be the primary reason for the increase in photoactivity of the ZnO–CuO nanowires. Regardless of the defect-rich zinc oxide and better charge separation at the interface, the authors reasoned that the gradual decrease in yield was due to saturated adsorption by the intermediary compounds on the surface of the catalyst. Therefore, ALD facilitates optimal exposure of all individual components in the catalytic composite, such as ZnO and CuO in this case, to achieve better photoreduction. This degree of freedom in adjusting the material deposition to achieve maximum efficiency is only possible with ALD.
To improve the basicity on the surface of the photocatalyst, Feng et al. deposited magnesium oxide on porous TiO2 using ALD and compared its photoactivity with MgO coated with a wet impregnation method for photoreduction of CO2 to CO with water vapor.124 Because of the conformal nature of ALD, the average surface area and pore size decreased compared with the wet impregnated MgO–TiO2 photocatalyst. However, 5 cycles of ALD-MgO showed a maximum yield of 55 μmol g−1, whereas 2 wt% wet impregnated MgO on TiO2 showed an approximately 30% reduction in yield under simulated sunlight. Despite the slight decrease in surface area and average pore size, ALD-MgO performed better because of the uniform distribution and availability of Lewis sites compared with wet impregnation, where clusters of MgO were embedded onto TiO2. Thus, ALD can facilitate maximum coverage with a minimum concentration of basic alkali on photocatalysts, which provides more adsorption sites and easy electron transfer.124
Zhang et al. studied the effect of zeolite porosity through ALD of TiO2 for CO2 photoreduction.125 PMFI and PMWW classes of zeolites were subjected to ALD of TiO2 and their interactions with the precursor reactants were studied based on the differences in their mesoporous structure. The number of deposition cycles varied from one to five for each zeolite, and the corresponding volume loss of zeolite with TiO2 addition was calculated. When the ALD-modified zeolites were exposed for CO2 photoreduction, both PMFI and PMWW deposited with one cycle of TiO2 exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity, resulting in the formation of formic acid and methanol, whereas the pristine zeolites did not show much activity. Similarly, the photoactivity of one layer of TiO2 on both the zeolites is approximately ten times more than that of commercial TiO2, as shown in Fig. 22. The reason for both the selectivity and high catalytic ability is the wide distribution of silanol groups in one layer of ALD-TiO2 coated zeolites. Similarly, the sub-nanoscale layer of TiO2 on the zeolites shows different Ti interactions that are unlike those in bulk particles. All these effects result in better selectivity of oxygenated hydrocarbon products though efficient rates of reduction. ALD-TiO2 passivated, Zn-doped p-type gallium phosphide was tested for bubbled CO2 photoreduction in NaCl electrolyte with pyridine under a 532 nm laser by Zeng et al.126 Gallium phosphide naturally tends to photocorrode in solution; hence, a thin layer of passivation would essentially help keep the material intact while increasing the conversion efficiency to methanol. TiO2 passivation of these electrolytic unstable yet highly efficient photocatalysts reduces recombination, protects the active material, and often tends to form heterojunctions at the interface, which may further improve the catalytic ability. Similar results were obtained by Qiu et al. with planar and nanopillars of indium phosphide.127 Verbruggen et al. developed a spacious photocatalytic structure with controllable size, crystallinity, and thickness of the active material (TiO2) using ALD on carbon nanosheets for the photocatalytic oxidation of acetaldehyde to carbon dioxide under UV irradiation.128 The thickness of the TiO2 layer was varied from 50 to 400 ALD cycles, where the optimal thickness was found to be 100 cycles; beyond that, the photoconversion decreased rapidly. Photocatalytic TiO2 in the presence of acetaldehyde and air converts to acetate and formate species as subsequent intermediary reactions. Furthermore, the formate species are oxidized to carbon dioxide. Thus, ALD can be considered as a reliable, stand-alone, and associable nanomaterial fabrication technique to synthesize highly functioning photocatalysts for organic conversion reactions.
 Fig. 22  Photocatalytic CO2 reduction using ALD-TiO2 in PMFI and PMWW zeolites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
4. Reactors for photocatalysis and their selectivity in scaling-up
The crucial factors that limit the photocatalytic reaction efficiency are controlled surface-mediated electron–hole mobility and recombination. The time scales of exciton mobility are on the order of picoseconds (ps), nanoseconds (ns), and microseconds (μs) with various excitation–relaxation processes (as shown in Fig. 23), where diffusion is limited to the atomic level, and effective utilization of charge carriers is always on the downside. Therefore, significant time scales are required to address this limitation as a means to quick and effective transport of excitons to the surface.
 Fig. 23  Typical charge carrier dynamics in a photocatalyst. All the upward-directed solid arrows represent excitation to the conduction band. Downward-directed curved arrows represent relaxation. Excitation and relaxation (1) at the limits of conduction band, (2) within shallow and deep traps (ST and DT), (3) band edge excited charge carrier recombination, (4) recombination within the traps and (5) annihilative excitons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2000 American Chemical Society. 
Both pristine ALD-developed and ALD conformally coated photocatalysts over supporting materials have found extensive applications in immobilized catalytic surfaces for photo-, electro-, and photo-electrocatalytic reactions. These reactions can be conducted either in batch or continuous flow modes. Usually with batch reactor models, pseudo-first order kinetics are seen for degradation studies, whereas for continuous flow systems, microscopic fluid dynamics and mass transfer mechanisms must be studied for better understanding.130–134 In this respect, microreactor technology is one of the viable methods available for process intensification. This technology possesses extraordinary heat and mass transfer rates because of the limited diffusion lengths, low Reynolds number (Re) flow, and homogeneity in terms of concentration compared with conventional reactor systems. These reactor models with suitable photocatalysts can improve the catalytic efficiency by increasing the interfacial surface area and decreasing the electron–hole recombination because of the ultra-small diffusion lengths and time scales. These remarkable attributes of microreactors can be extended to exothermic reactions as well. Already, conventional microreactors are being used as highly exothermic catalytic recombiners for hydrogen oxidation in nuclear power plants.135 Maximum reaction rates can be achieved by controlling the above parameters in regular catalytic systems. Yao et al. developed TiO2-coated walls on microreactors using a wash-coating technique.136 Similarly, Xi et al. developed SLG microchannels with controllably thick titania films ranging from 70–460 nm using a colloidal suspension method.137 ALD is known to provide such depositions easily, with more precision and uniformity.
4.1. General theory of fluid dynamics in microreactor fabrication
Fluid dynamics in the small-scale reactors, such as microreactors, helps to understand the catalytic reactions with more detail and provide insights in the scaling-up process. Microreactors possess several remarkable properties, such as efficient heat and mass transfer rates and minimal molecular diffusive length facilitated by excellent laminar flow and uniform spatial illumination. The mass and heat transfer rates are significantly affected by the fluid dynamics in the microreactors. The fluid dynamics strongly depend on the fluid viscosity, microchannel configuration, surface wettability, temperature, and pressure drop caused by the fluid flow. Most chemical processes comprising the liquid phase, gas phase, and their combinations follows conventional flow reactor models. The fundamental mass, momentum, and energy conservation principles must be obeyed, irrespective of the type of reacting fluid and size of the reactor system. The mathematical model describing these rules can be defined by the Navier–Stokes equations.138 Depending on the nature of the process, those equations can be simplified, and an analytic solution can be derived for a prospective reactor design.
However, gases flowing through special nanomaterials such as nanotubes and microporous materials may provide a transition flow regime, whereas liquid flows fall under continuum models and the flow type is usually laminar, except that the pressure drops may be quite high, depending on the length and diameters of the microchannels. Determining the liquid residence time distribution in the channel defines the characteristics of a microreactor. To model the fluid dynamics, it is essential to consider precise length scales and account for the favorable forces at the microscopic level. Comprehending the physical interpretation from the variables in the modeling equations is quite complicated and may depend on multiple variables. Dimensionless groups (such as Kn) can combine various parameters and variables and consolidate them to simple forms, providing further insight into the desired process. Some of these dimensional parameters show the characteristics of hydrodynamic regimes in microreactor systems. These parameters are estimated based on the length of a 100 μm microchannel for air and water systems.139,140 In a typical gas–liquid interface, viscous forces are equally important like gravitational forces. In microchannels is surface tension more dominant than gravitational forces and inertial forces.
The minimization of mass transfer is important for any reactor design. Without prior understanding of mass transfer effects, the design may not be appropriate for any desired reaction. The mass transfer rates in multiphase reactors are controlled by the volumetric mass transfer coefficient (kLa) corresponding to the liquid phase, where kL and a are the coefficient of mass transfer and the specific interfacial area, respectively. The parameter kLa has a small value for conventional large-scale reactors, whereas it increases by two to three orders of magnitude for microreactor systems. Dimensionless parameters such as the Sherwood number (Sh) and Hatta number (Ha) are important for understanding the physical significance of the process. Sh is the ratio of mass transfer due to convection to the molecular diffusion, and Ha is the ratio of time scale of mass transfer to reaction time.138,141 The mathematical expressions for Sh (eqn (10)) and Ha (eqn (11)) are as follows: (10) (11)where D is diffusivity and kr is the first-order rate constant. For fast reactions, Ha is usually >3, where the mass transfer resistance is supreme, and the reaction is assumed to occur near the liquid interface. When the reactions are primarily slow and occur in bulk fluid, Ha < 0.3. The interactions between flow-kinetics and diffusion-kinetics can be quantified using other dimensionless groups, called the first and second Damköhler numbers (DaI and DaII). Most of the photocatalytic degradation reactions are observed to follow pseudo-first order rate kinetics. Da for heterogeneous photocatalytic reactions can be defined as given in eqn (12) and (13) (12) (13)where VR is the volume of the microreactor, Q is the volumetric flow rate, and h is the size of the microreactor opening. Likewise, the Peclet number (Pe) explains the role of advection over diffusion. The mass transfer limitations with respect to varying Pe, DaI, and DaII confirm that most microreactor systems fall under the kinetics-controlled regime.142
For mass transfer-controlled reactions, along with the Navier–Stokes equations, concentration fields must be computed using the following eqn (14): (14)here, Di and Ci are the diffusion coefficient and concentration of species i, respectively, and Ri({Cj}) is the rate of formation or consumption of species i. For modeling microreactors, the kinetic constants under mass transfer limitation are modeled with respect to a plug flow reactor because of its high length to diameter ratio. For these kinds of geometric systems, all directional flow and concentration vectors need to be considered. Here, ∇ is the Del operator, which contains all directions instead of just one. The Del operator for a cylindrical coordinate (r, θ, z) system, usually considered for cylindrical channeled reactor systems, is defined as  here, ĵr, ĵθ, and ĵz are directional vectors.138
In the respective model as given in eqn (15), axial dispersion is also taken into account, (15)where, u represents the mean velocity in the axial direction alone, Da is the axial dispersion coefficient, km,ext is the external mass transfer coefficient, C is the concentration in bulk, and Cs is the concentration at the surface of the catalyst coated over the walls of the microreactor. This model was validated and the respective kinetic parameters were estimated for the photodegradation of salicylic acid by Charles et al.143Eqn (15) is one of the simple versions of the microreactor modelling equation. However, it has a major limitation where the concentration variance is unidirectional. Nevertheless, in real conditions, the bulk concentration will vary in the radial direction as well. From the same group, Corbel et al.144 used the convection-diffusion, Newtonian-incompressible phenomena in all directions for both surface and bulk concentrations to describe the photocatalytic degradation of salicylic acid by titania using microreactors. In such kinetic model, the reaction rate (R) was estimated using the Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetics, given by eqn (16), (16)
For multicomponent reactions, the generalized form of the concentration balance eqn (14) must be used to predict the concentration profile across the microreactor. For PC in microreactor systems, Padoin et al.145 modeled the photocatalytic reaction rate as a boundary condition, given in eqn (17), (17)where ki is the pre-exponential factor, α is the optical absorption coefficient, I0 is UV irradiation, Bp0n0 represents the equilibrium between electron hole pairs, γ is the electron transfer coefficient, and hν is the photon energy at 365 nm. The resistance corresponds to internal mass transfer in the microreactor system can be characterized using the effectiveness factor as given in eqn (18), (18) (19) (20)here, ϕ is the Thiele modulus. The mathematical expression for ϕ including a light-dependent term is given in eqn (19), where, δ is the mass transfer film thickness, Deff is the effective diffusion coefficient in multicomponent systems, and kapp is the apparent first-order rate constant. The cumulative term of kapp is given in eqn (20).
4.2. ALD in developing microreactors
Padoin et al. proposed a steady-state photocatalytic degradation profile in the three-dimensional domain using the above modeling approach.145 They immobilized titania and titania–graphene composites for the degradation of methylene blue. This model can also be validated for any photocatalytic upscaling studies. Likewise, a recent review on microfluidic channels using titania–graphene oxide composites by Yusuf et al.140 addresses the significance of microreactor establishment for a wide variety of photocatalytic reactions. Li et al. attempted to monitor the photocatalytic activity with graphene-based composite photocatalysts using real-time spectroscopic analysis in a microreactor with blue LED illumination.146 The prototype of their microreactor is shown in Fig. 24. Jayamohan et al. approached soft lithography using poly di-methoxy silane (PDMS) channels to immobilize titania for methylene blue degradation. These studies were performed at Peclet numbers ranging from 9639 to 38556, and the photocatalytic conversions were found to be in a range between 82% and 92% under simulated sunlight.148 The deposition of photoactive catalyst over the walls of channels in the microreactor follows similar kinetics with respect to the degradation of any desired pollutant. Colloidal and other wet chemical methods have many drawbacks, especially maintaining uniform thickness and active sites across the channel. Excessive or irregular material deposition may lead to blockage of the channel. ALD helps avoid such drawback by adopting a conformal method of coating, which is not just limited to narrow channels but also can give more freedom in designing curved channels to tune the residence time of the pollutant. Conversely, sub-nanoscale deposition of the photocatalyst also helps control the thickness and surface wettability, which determines the flow.
 Fig. 24  Schematic representation of real-time spectroscopic monitoring of photocatalytic degradation inside a microreactor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146 under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. 
Microreactor systems are small, easy to use, and maintain a high surface-to-volume ratio, as well as high reaction rates. However, these systems have drawbacks in scaling up. Recent industrial developments suggest that it is possible to construct an efficient microreactor with a variety of approaches.150–153 Connecting many microreactor units in series or parallel, as shown in Fig. 25, scaling up the geometric parameters through maintaining the equivalent magnitudes of dimensionless groups of respective processes, and controlling the flow rates for increased throughput are some of the few unique solutions to address the drawbacks associated with commercial implementation of microreactors.
 Fig. 25  Micro multi-capillary microreactors in series with collection flasks (a), microcapillaries (b), and pumps (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Suhadolnik et al. developed continuous photo and photoelectrocatalytic microreactors and also provided insights on their scale-up process.149 Their designs for a batch reactor and scaled-up continuous flow reactor are shown in Fig. 26(a) and (b), comprising anodized titania and titanium metal as the anode and cathode, respectively, for textile dye degradation. The microreactors possess a reactor volume of 0.35 mL and 5550 m2 m−3 as a surface-to-volume ratio. These kinds of designs developed using ALD are highly accurate and reveal the possibility of implementing PC on a commercial scale with greater efficiency. However, achieving high reaction rates is quite difficult with simple ALD patterns, as described above, because of mass transfer and diffusion limitations. These limitations can be overcome by effective mixing. In macroscopic reaction systems, effective mixing is ensured by providing agitators and baffles. For scaled-up systems under illumination, arrangement of agitators may be difficult; furthermore, they can hinder maximum light exposure on photoactive materials. ALD overlayered baffles would solve such a problem by providing maximum illumination in addition to enhanced mixing and heat distribution properties, as shown in Fig. 27(a)–(d). These cases illustrate the possibility of fabricating various designs for high throughputs, solely based on a light irradiation perspective. The same designs can be enhanced to photoelectrocatalytic processes by enabling patterned ALD photoactive layers connected to anodic and cathodic terminals in series.
 Fig. 26  Schematic representation of batch and continuous flow microreactors made of anodized titania and titanium metal as anodic and cathodic materials, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2018 The Korean Society of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, Elsevier B.V. 
 Fig. 27  Schematic representation of probable designs using ALD coated continuous flow reactors. (a) Regular continuous flow reactor, (b) semi-baffled continuous flow reactor, (c) fully baffled flow reactor and (d) micro-channel reactor. 
In thermo-catalytic reactions, the adsorption affinity, redox nature of the catalyst, thermodynamics, intermediates species, defects, porosity of the catalysts, and operating pressure and temperature control the course of a reaction. In PC, in contrast, the excitons, charge separation, intermediates, and light energy are the primary sources that control the reaction. As thermodynamics play a crucial role in the choice of operating conditions, thermo-catalytic reactions are usually found to be feasible for high-temperature oxidation and reforming reactions, where basic ALD overlayers may not improve the efficiency because of high temperature and pore blockage limitations. On the contrary, a combination of reactors utilizing photo and thermal energies with appropriate catalytic materials are being explored. Fabricating ALD-coated active materials for such combinations may bring synergistic effects to the catalytic process.
4.3. ALD in developing reactors having porous substrates
Porous materials have been widely used in industrial catalysis. The pores of a catalyst material are not perfectly channeled. Most often, they involve a tortuous path that connects the pore bodies with varying cross-sectional areas. Compared with non-porous materials, porous materials have advantages resulting from the tortuous paths, which is defined as the ratio of the actual distance a molecule travels between two points to the shortest distance between them. This allows high diffusional mass transport through the pores and active surface for the surface chemical reaction to occur. The bulk diffusion coefficient is not applicable for generalized mass transfer control through the pores. However, the Knudsen diffusion coefficient captures the bulk diffusion phenomena within the tortuosity of the pores () and is expressed as in eqn (21):154 (21)where DA is the bulk diffusion, ϕP is the pellet porosity, and σ is the constriction factor. Furthermore, porous materials also limited by diffusional or reaction mass transfer regimes. This can be quantified by an internal effectiveness factor (η), which is a measure of how far the reactant diffuses into the pellet before reacting. η is defined as the ratio of the actual overall reaction rate to the reaction rate that would result under hypothetical exposure of the interior surface under external conditions. For spherical catalyst pellets and with first-order rate kinetics, such as occur in photocatalytic degradation, the effectiveness factor can be determined using an expression (eqn (22)) similar to eqn (18), (22)here, ϕ1 is known as the Thiele modulus for a first-order reaction, and it is expressed as given in eqn (23), (23)here k1 is the first-order rate constant, Sa is the specific surface area, ρc is the bulk density of the catalyst, and R is the radius of the catalyst particle. From eqn (23), for small particle sizes, the Thiele modulus decreases and causes the magnitude of the effectiveness factor to be 1, indicating that the mass transfer is completely governed by the surface reaction. For larger particles, η becomes ≪1, indicating diffusion-limited mass transfer. In another method, the Weisz–Prater criterion showcases a similar way to account for internal diffusion limitations. The above equations are reduced to Weisz–Prater parameter (CWP). For any first-order reaction, CWP ≪ 1 indicates that there are no diffusional limitations, hence no concentration gradient exists within the pore, which means that the size of particles is very low compared with the typical pore size of materials. In another words, these particles can be considered as non-porous particles, or these particles have molecular-sized pores that restrict the molecules from being passivated inside the particles. For better understanding, the size-porosity estimates from (a) to (d) for a commercial Degussa P-25 TiO2 are shown in Fig. 28, where CWP ≫ 1 indicates the internal diffusion controlling reaction rates.155,156
 Fig. 28  Size and porosity estimates (a)–(d) for Degussa P-25 TiO2 based on ref. 155 and 156. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157 under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. 
Advanced catalysts deposited on porous materials using ALD can allow both reaction and internal diffusion to further enhance the reaction rates, approaching the industrial scale. Conventional industrial processes primarily depend on the internal pore diffusion and convective mass transfer as rate-controlling mechanisms. However, activating the pores with suitable dopants has not been utilized for many industrial reactions. ALD would be a suitable platform to develop such catalysts to resolve this drawback, so that rates and process efficiencies could be enhanced. Porous materials can be classified as microporous (dp < 2 nm), mesoporous (2 nm < dp < 50 nm), and macroporous (dp > 50 nm), with respect to their pore sizes. In industrial heterogeneous catalysis, pores and doped particles may have aspect ratios of 10000:1, with irregular shapes and lengths. ALD coating would be very challenging for such fabrication. However, a few groups have attempted to develop ALD overlayers in the pores of their respective support materials. Libera et al. successfully coated 50% of the internal porous volume using ALD with ZnO thin films in 1 μm porous silica gel particles.158 The excellent conformality of ALD would be helpful to develop these kinds of internal overlayers in porous structures. In another study, Dendooven et al. deposited TiO2 films using ALD on planar and micropores of silica.159 Recently, Onn et al. discussed a similar concept of ALD on porous electrodes for fuel cell applications.157 Similar concepts can be extended to photocatalytic applications as well.
4.4. ALD in photocatalytic packed bed reactors and membranes
In microscale reactors, the reactor size and pore sizes have comparable aspect ratios within 100:1. Primarily, the reaction rates in microscale systems are diffusion-limited, whereas in macroscale systems, the aspect ratios become much larger (>10000:1) and other mass transfer controlling factors must be accounted for in reaction rate calculations. When the catalytic system is in the diffusion-controlled regime, the reaction rates will be higher than the actual conditions involving the reaction-controlled regime and convective mass transfer. This is the primary reason for preferring microchannels or microscopic reactor systems is to achieve greater rates over macroscopic systems. However, macroscopic systems are needed to achieve greater yields. The trade-off between microscopic and macroscopic systems is essential because of the mass transfer limitations. The size of the tube, packing, and structuring of the reactor determine the ability to absorb light by the active materials in the packing.160 A series of reactors can also be designed using multiple light sources with multiple active layer packings. Distribution of light through the packing materials plays an important role in understanding the reaction rate kinetics. In this respect, ALD can be crucial in improving the reaction rates and thus the product yields by tuning the pores with suitable active material over both porous and nonporous surfaces. This facilitates the enhancement of reaction rates at pores as well as over the catalyst's nonporous surface. These kinds of ALD modifications could improve the catalytic activity for largescale thermo-catalytic, photocatalytic, and photoelectrocatalytic applications.
Membranes can be microporous, mesoporous, or macroporous materials and are widely used for filtration, gas separation (adsorption/absorption), and sensing applications. They can be purely organic (polymeric), hybrids, or composites.161 Fouling, polarized concentration, and stability are some of the key factors affecting membranes. In hybrid and composite types, zeolites have been in use for membrane synthesis. Precise tuning of membrane pores can provide better stability, enable appropriate flux, and may also prevent fouling. It is often difficult to deposit active materials in pores with high aspect ratios. Similarly, removal of reaction byproducts after deposition is a tedious process with conventional coating methods. With ALD, the pore size can be controlled even at sub(nanometer) level and modified such that the adsorption can be selective. Thin film or nanoparticle embedding inside the membrane is often suitable for fabricating photocatalytic membranes.
Photocatalytic metal oxide membranes, such as titania, are mechanically vulnerable.162,163 ALD of titania on a strong supportive material can be a viable solution to achieve moderate reaction rates in PC and enhancing the durability of the membrane. In addition to coating photoactive overlayers, selective adsorption of pollutants can also be performed using ALD-coated membranes. In a recent study, control of the pore mouth and selective adsorption were discussed. A typical 5A zeolite is prone to adsorb more propylene selectively in a mixture of propylene and propane, whereas tuning the pore size with 30 cycles of TiO2 deposition and varying ALD cycles resulted in significant selective adsorption of propane in the mixture, up to 30 ALD cycles. The pore sizes of TiO2 coatings on 5A zeolite were finely tuned from 0.8 nm to 0.6 nm by the combination of both ALD and molecular layer deposition (MLD). With a further number of cycles (40 ALD cycles), the pore sizes were reduced and the adsorption of both propylene and propane decreased.164 ALD offers several benefits with respect to membranes, such as surface charge tuning, functionalization, wettability, pore size tuning, and selective layer formation.97,165 Bacterial fouling in membranes can be avoided by coating a thin layer of photoactive material on the surface of filtration membranes. Mural et al. developed complex PE/PEO porous membranes with grafted reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and silver nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 29.166 The same group developed PE membranes with silver nanoparticle-coated grafted PEI, such that controlled leaching of silver kills the bacteria.167 Although they achieved a significant reduction of the number of bacterial colonies, ALD can be employed on such membranes to deposit a thin conformal layer of photoactive catalyst to kill the incoming bacteria swiftly, without depending on costly noble metals to prevent fouling.
 Fig. 29  Silver nanoparticles embedded rGO-grafted PE/PEO porous membranes for water filtration. Photocatalytic active material deposition can be attempted on such membrane surfaces with ALD which will enhance the stability and efficiency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166 under Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Uported License, Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Conclusion: limitations and future perspectives
Although ALD possesses several benefits, there are a few drawbacks that must be addressed. Not all these drawbacks are completely applicable to fabrication of a photocatalyst, but some of them may be. The primary and most critical concern in the ALD process is designing appropriate precursors and synthesizing them. All the precursors for ALD are organic in nature, with an appropriate cationic or anionic species embedded for deposition. While designing the precursor is a concern, developing it as user-friendly and non-toxic is another essential parameter that must be taken into account. Likewise, to maintain the economic viability of the process, thick deposition of more than a micron is often avoided. Hence, balancing the cost and efficiency of deposition is a crucial task. In addition to these limitations, surface charge of the particles or the substrates plays an important role in achieving better deposition. Therefore, functionalization of the substrate can be considered as an excess price to pay for the deposition. As a result of these drawbacks, ALD is often not considered as a primary choice for material deposition. However, considering the rapid research progress in this field, all these limitations may be overcome in the near future.
Although ALD is favorable for fabricating efficient photocatalysts for photo-mediated organic conversion, the maximum efficiency rendered from a photocatalyst also depends on other parameters such as the absorptive wavelength of the deposited nanomaterial, residence time of the pollutant on the surface of the catalyst (in the case of gases) or diffusion limit of the pollutant (in the case of liquid electrolytes), and finally desorption of intermediary and final products. An imbalance in any one of these properties results in decreased photoactivity. The residence time in particulate reactors can be controlled by adjusting the flow velocity of the reactant gases; however, in the case of photocatalytic reactors, all the reactions occur only on the surface without any applied external activation energy. Important factors that influence conversion with respect to atomic layer deposited nanocatalysts are higher dispersion of the active materials on the supports, intimate interaction of the deposited catalyst with the support or other metals, effective covalent bond formation between the support and the deposited catalyst by better grafting, and control of the size or thickness via growth cycles. The ALD technique also possesses a few limitations regarding the scale-up of photocatalyst fabrication. For powder photocatalysts, introducing ALD precursors to the powder substrates often requires a long time for deposition to give a substantial uniform coverage on all particles. In addition, powders tend to gradually agglomerate upon reacting with precursors. Hence, agglomeration of surfaces must be prevented to obtain effective deposition, where a simple and facile reactor set-up is necessary.168 Similarly, surface-specific reactions in ALD occur only under the complex processing window, which depends on the highly energy-limited activation of precursors and desorption of byproducts.29 As discussed earlier, the photocatalytic reactions are predominantly surface reactions. Hence, the active surface area of the photocatalytic thin film depends on the thickness of the film for maximum light absorption and photon penetration. Although thick photocatalytic films can absorb a large number of photons, the ratio of available charge carriers on the surface compared with excited charge carriers is very low. Hence, there is always a trade-off between the film thickness of the active material and the maximum incident photon conversion efficiency. Optimizing the thickness using ALD within this window is much easier compared with other conventional deposition techniques. In addition, the energy barrier for synthesizing the photocatalytic materials at low temperature using ALD can be addressed with a few improvements in the ALD process through several other enhanced ALD processes, like PE-ALD, where materials that require high enthalpy can be synthesized using the same reactor.169
ALD has more advantages than limitations for developing superior photocatalysts. Although ALD has been applied for decades, there are many areas where ALD contributions would make a huge impact in catalysis research. For instance, ALD onto thin fibrous and carbonaceous aerogels would result in inorganic nano-aerogels that may find applications not only in catalysis but also in several other fields. Because of the advantage of low-temperature reactions in ALD, the integrity and porosity of delicate substrates such as aerogels can be well preserved to achieve similar structures with inorganic nanomaterials.170 Similarly, metal–organic frameworks are promising materials for developing sustainable and highly active photocatalysts, where the energy bands are represented by the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) compared with conventional conduction and valence bands in inorganic photocatalysts, which are associated with the hopping mechanism of excited charges compared with the conventional band edge excitation process.171 Hence, by simply modifying the organic functional groups with either a thin layer of sub-nanoscale particles of inorganic photocatalytic material combined with their high surface area and tunable crystallinity, synergistic catalytic effects can be achieved.172–174
The confinement of nanomaterials within porous substrates is one of the most highly commercialized catalytic fabrication techniques. However, this process is limited to only a few applications, such as catalytic converters and organic filters. ALD onto conventional porous substrates like zeolites can be studied for the development of photocatalytic volatile organic filters. As discussed earlier, the matrix of the porous substrates must be allowed to remain unclogged after making the necessary improvements. ALD is one such suitable technique, where the state of the support/substrate is well preserved. A thin layer of photocatalyst or embedding small nanoparticles into porous planar substrates may photodegrade the pollutants under natural sunlight easily. The residence time of the pollutant can be tuned based on the matrix of the porous substrates. This scope can further be extended to ultrafiltration polymer membranes, where fouling by organic substances is a common problem. Regeneration of polymer membranes under ultraviolet light or at high temperature may affect the stability and lifetime of such membranes. Hence, depositing visible light active photocatalyst particles in the membrane matrix may allow the diffusion of fluid and prevent fouling of the membrane.
ALD can be applied to develop surfaces with photocatalytic tunable wettability for self-cleaning and other biological applications. Thin layers of visible light absorptive photocatalytic materials may help kill micro-organisms that meet with such materials. ALD is one of the appropriate techniques to perform deposition on such soft targets. Compared with metal oxides, metal sulfide photocatalysts for environmental catalysis have very rarely been addressed using ALD, although there are several reports using these materials in particulate or powder form. Similarly, there is more room to apply ALD and study its effect on carbonaceous substrates for environmental PC which needs to be explored further. Thus, there is a large gap and huge scope for understanding the stability and efficiency of metal sulfide and carbonaceous thin films for environmental cleanup PC.
Light penetration and absorption can be studied using photocatalytic films with increasing thickness. Often, nanomaterial growth on substrates is oriented based on the epitaxy of the substrate. In such cases, altering the periodicity of the substrate before depositing the photocatalytic materials can shed light on some interesting light-scattering properties with respect to the intrinsic properties of the material and its thickness.175,176 Such films, when subjected to composite preparation with other metals, metal oxides, or metal sulfides, result in variable excited charge carrier generation and separation. Based on such models, effective photocatalysts can be developed that allow the maximum absorption of incident light, providing high carrier generation. The recent focus on layered nanomaterials, such as graphene and graphitic carbon nitride, shows their excellent charge conducting and photocatalytic capabilities. Likewise, photocatalytic layered inorganic materials can be developed using sacrificial substrates with ALD. Using such processes, catalysts with high surface area and enormous degrees of freedom to tune the structural orientation are possible, which can result in obtaining the desired characteristics in photocatalysts. Thus, this review can aid the utilization of ALD to study and examine photocatalysts from their fundamental formation, allowing researchers to tweak and design catalysts to improve their properties with the utmost control, and finally to enhance reproducibility with maximum precision, as depicted in Fig. 30, to address its great promise in unexplored areas.
 Fig. 30  Advantages of atomic layer deposition over other methods to develop efficient photocatalysts. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (2018R1A2B6002268) and the Human Resources Development (20164030201310) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea. NKR Eswar thanks Dr Sadhasivam Thangarasu and Dr Sangeeta Adhikari for their useful suggestions during the preparation of this article.
References

          W. H. Organization, Climate change and health, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health, accessed  26/11/2018 Search PubMed.
E. Worrell, L. Bernstein, J. Roy, L. Price and J. Harnisch, Energy Effic., 2009, 2, 109 CrossRef .

          W. H. Organization, Sanitation, https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/sanitation, accessed  26/11/2018 Search PubMed.
J. Chow, R. J. Kopp and P. R. Portney, Science, 2003, 302, 1528–1531 CrossRef .

G. E. S. Yearbook, Share of Renewables in Electricity Production (1990–2017), https://yearbook.enerdata.net/renewables/renewable-in-electricity-production-share.html, accessed  26/11/2018 Search PubMed.
I. Fechete, Y. Wang and J. C. Védrine, Catal. Today, 2012, 189, 2–27 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Mouljin, P. van Leeuwen and R. van Santen, An integrated Approach to Homogeneous, Heterogeneous and Industrial Catalysis, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, 1st edn,  1993 Search PubMed .

          C. H. Bartholomew and R. J. Farrauto, Fundamentals of industrial catalytic processes, John Wiley & Sons,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. M. Khin, A. S. Nair, V. J. Babu, R. Murugan and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8075–8109 RSC .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 RSC .
T. Bligaard, R. M. Bullock, C. T. Campbell, J. G. Chen, B. C. Gates, R. J. Gorte, C. W. Jones, W. D. Jones, J. R. Kitchin and S. L. Scott, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2590–2602 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Hunt, JOM, 2004, 56, 13–18 CrossRef .
F. Kettemann, S. Witte, A. Birnbaum, B. Paul, G. Clavel, N. Pinna, K. Rademann, R. Kraehnert and J. Polte, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8247–8254 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Liu, P. Wang, W. Xu and E. J. Hensen, Engineering, 2017, 3, 467–476 CrossRef .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688–1691 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, D. Deng, X. Pan, Q. Fu and X. Bao, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2015, 2, 183–201 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Che and C. O. Bennett, in Advances in Catalysis, Elsevier,  1989, vol. 36, pp. 55–172 Search PubMed .
R. A. Van Santen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 42, 57–66 CrossRef .
J. A. Singh, N. Yang and S. F. Bent, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2017, 8, 41–62 CrossRef .
J. T. Wrobleski and M. Boudart, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 349–360 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schwarz, C. Contescu and A. Contescu, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 477–510 CrossRef CAS .
P. Munnik, P. E. de Jongh and K. P. de Jong, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6687–6718 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 1816–1824 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Bo, T. R. Eaton, J. R. Gallagher, C. P. Canlas, J. T. Miller and J. M. Notestein, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1269–1277 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sinha, D. K. Nandi, S.-H. Kim and J. Heo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 176, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Parsons, J. W. Elam, S. M. George, S. Haukka, H. Jeon, W. Kessels, M. Leskelä, P. Poodt, M. Ritala and S. M. Rossnagel, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31, 050818 CrossRef .
M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, J. P. Dekker, C. Mutsaers, P. J. Soininen and J. Skarp, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 1999, 5, 7–9 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Johnson, A. Hultqvist and S. F. Bent, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 236–246 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Ponraj, G. Attolini and M. Bosi, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2013, 38, 203–233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J. W. Elam and P. C. Stair, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1806–1815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J. W. Elam and P. C. Stair, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2016, 71, 410–472 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hämäläinen, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 786–801 CrossRef .
H. Kim and W.-J. Maeng, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2563–2580 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hengwei and L. Junling, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 1334–1357 Search PubMed .
M. E. Ali, M. M. Rahman, S. M. Sarkar and S. B. A. Hamid, J. Nanomater., 2014, 2014, 209 Search PubMed .
C. Marichy, M. Bechelany and N. Pinna, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1017–1032 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Z. Luo, C. Li and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7469–7484 RSC .
T. Singh, T. Lehnen, T. Leuning and S. Mathur, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2015, 33, 010801 CrossRef .
P. A. K. Reddy, P. V. L. Reddy, E. Kwon, K.-H. Kim, T. Akter and S. Kalagara, Environ. Int., 2016, 91, 94–103 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Coronado, F. Fresno, M. D. Hernández-Alonso and R. Portela, Design of advanced photocatalytic materials for energy and environmental applications, Springer,  2013 Search PubMed .
G.-M. Schwab, H. Noller, F. Steinbach and M. Venugopalan, Nature, 1962, 193, 774 CrossRef CAS .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills and S. Le Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leskelä, M. Kemell, K. Kukli, V. Pore, E. Santala, M. Ritala and J. Lu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2007, 27, 1504–1508 CrossRef .
B. J. O'Neill, D.
H. Jackson, J. Lee, C. Canlas, P. C. Stair, C. L. Marshall, J. W. Elam, T. F. Kuech, J. A. Dumesic and G. W. Huber, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1804–1825 CrossRef .
R. Chen, F. Fan, T. Dittrich and C. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8238–8262 RSC .
D. M. King, X. Liang, Y. Zhou, C. S. Carney, L. F. Hakim, P. Li and A. W. Weimer, Powder Technol., 2008, 183, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Dey, M. J. Kim, K.-D. Kim, H. O. Seo, D. Kim, Y. D. Kim, D. C. Lim and K. H. Lee, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 337, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ussia, A. D. Mauro, T. Mecca, F. Cunsolo, G. Nicotra, C. Spinella, P. Cerruti, G. Impellizzeri, V. Privitera and S. C. Carroccio, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40100–40110 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, E. Nykänen, P. Soininen and L. Niinistö, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 225, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aarik, A. Aidla, T. Uustare and V. Sammelselg, J. Cryst. Growth, 1995, 148, 268–275 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kumagai, M. Matsumoto, K. Toyoda, M. Obara and M. Suzuki, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 263, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pore, A. Rahtu, M. Leskelä, M. Ritala, T. Sajavaara and J. Keinonen, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2004, 10, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heikkilä, E. Puukilainen, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 204, 200–208 CrossRef .
H. Kawakami, R. Ilola, L. Straka, S. Papula, J. Romu, H. Hänninen, R. Mahlberg and M. Heikkilä, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, C62–C68 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pore, T. Kivelä, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Dalton Trans., 2008, 6467–6474 RSC .
V. Pore, M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, S. Areva, M. Järn and J. Järnström, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1361–1371 RSC .
V. Pore, M. Heikkilä, M. Ritala, M. Leskelä and S. Areva, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 177, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vilhunen and M. Sillanpää, Water Sci. Technol., 2009, 60, 2471–2475 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiu and T. L. Starr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, H472–H475 CrossRef CAS .
H.-E. Cheng, C.-M. Hsu and Y.-C. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, D275–D278 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liang, C.-C. Wang, C.-C. Kei, Y.-C. Hsueh, W.-H. Cho and T.-P. Perng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9498–9502 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Sree, J. Dendooven, K. Masschaele, H. M. Hamed, S. Deng, S. Bals, C. Detavernier and J. A. Martens, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5001–5008 RSC .
I. M. Szilágyi, E. Santala, M. Heikkilä, V. Pore, M. Kemell, T. Nikitin, G. Teucher, T. Firkala, L. Khriachtchev and M. Räsänen, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2013, 19, 149–155 CrossRef .
F. Marchetti, N. Laidani, M. Scarpa, G. Gottardi and E. Moser, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 484–495 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Tan, M. K. Kumar, W. W. An and H. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 498–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, D. M. King, X. Liang, J. Li and A. W. Weimer, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 101, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kumar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. K. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, S. Tripathy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
A. Convertino, L. Maiolo, V. Scuderi, A. D. Mauro, M. Scuderi, G. Nicotra, G. Impellizzeri, G. Fortunato and V. Privitera, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 91121–91126 RSC .
W.-T. Chang, Y.-C. Hsueh, S.-H. Huang, K.-I. Liu, C.-C. Kei and T.-P. Perng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1987–1991 RSC .
Y. Zhao, M. Wei, J. Lu, Z. L. Wang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4009–4016 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Lee, G. Grass, G.-M. Kim, C. Dresbach, L. Zhang, U. Gösele and M. Knez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3608–3614 RSC .
M. Raulio, V. Pore, S. Areva, M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, M. Lindén, J. B. Rosenholm, K. Lounatmaa and M. Salkinoja-Salonen, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2006, 33, 261–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Eswar, R. Gupta, P. C. Ramamurthy and G. Madras, Mol. Catal., 2018, 451, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
G. Busca, S. Berardinelli, C. Resini and L. Arrighi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 160, 265–288 CrossRef CAS .

          W. W. Anku, M. A. Mamo and P. P. Govender, in Phenolic compounds-natural sources, importance and applications, IntechOpen,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. Czaplicka, Sci. Total Environ., 2004, 322, 21–39 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Lee, J. Kim, J. Son, W. Choi and H. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 628–633 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Mauro, M. Cantarella, G. Nicotra, V. Privitera and G. Impellizzeri, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 196, 68–76 CrossRef .
C.-S. Lee, J. Kim, J. Son, W. Maeng, D.-H. Jo, W. Choi and H. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, D188–D192 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, C.-S. Lee, D.-Y. Kim, J. Kim, W. Choi and H. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Lee, J. Kim, G. H. Gu, D.-H. Jo, C. G. Park, W. Choi and H. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 4757–4761 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh, R. Bapat, L. Qin, H. Feng and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2770–2784 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, J. Jiang, L. Du, X. Liu and Y. Ding, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 568, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
C. Niancai and S. Xueliang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1508–1514 CrossRef .
N. Li, Y. Tian, J. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Zuo, L. Kong and H. Cui, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 412–422 CrossRef CAS .
J. You and Y. Guo, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 2451–2456 CrossRef CAS .
E. Santala, M. Kemell, M. Leskelä and M. Ritala, Nanotechnology, 2008, 20, 035602 CrossRef .
F. Kayaci, S. Vempati, C. Ozgit-Akgun, N. Biyikli and T. Uyar, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 173–183 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Fragalà, A. D. Mauro, D. A. Cristaldi, M. Cantarella, G. Impellizzeri and V. Privitera, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 332, 497–504 CrossRef .
J. Feng, S. Xiong and Y. Wang, Compos. Commun., 2019, 12, 39–46 CrossRef .
M. Ritala, M. Kemell, M. Lautala, A. Niskanen, M. Leskelä and S. Lindfors, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2006, 12, 655–658 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Yang, R. Z. Waldman, Z. Chen and S. B. Darling, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20505–20513 RSC .
J. Feng, S. Xiong, Z. Wang, Z. Cui, S.-P. Sun and Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 550, 246–253 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. J. Larsson, Upsala J. Med. Sci., 2014, 119, 108–112 CrossRef .
F. Baquero, J.-L. Martínez and R. Cantón, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2008, 19, 260–265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim and D. S. Aga, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, Part B, 2007, 10, 559–573 CAS .
A. Alonso, P. Sánchez and J. L. Martínez, Environ. Microbiol., 2001, 3, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pera-Titus, V. García-Molina, M. A. Baños, J. Giménez and S. Esplugas, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 47, 219–256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adhikari, S. Selvaraj and D.-H. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 11–24 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Eswar, P. C. Ramamurthy and G. Madras, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 3464–3475 RSC .
N. K. Eswar, V. V. Katkar, P. C. Ramamurthy and G. Madras, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 8031–8042 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Eswar, S. A. Singh and G. Madras, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 332, 757–774 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zarei and R. Ojani, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 305–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garcia-Segura and E. Brillas, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2017, 31, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shukla and G. Madras, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 780–787 CrossRef CAS .
K.-D. Kim, N. K. Dey, H. O. Seo, Y. D. Kim, D. C. Lim and M. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 408, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Lee, H. K. Kim, C. R. Park, G. Park, H. T. Kwak, S. M. Koo and M. M. Sung, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8997–9002 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Lee and M. M. Sung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 28–29 CrossRef CAS .
H. Einaga, S. Futamura and T. Ibusuki, Appl. Catal., B, 2002, 38, 215–225 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Herrera, J. H. Kwak, J. Z. Hu, Y. Wang, C. H. F. Peden, J. Macht and E. Iglesia, J. Catal., 2006, 239, 200–211 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 745–758 RSC .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
M. H. V. Huynh and T. J. Meyer, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 5004–5064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 342, 154–167 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. An, K. H. Park, M. Khraisheh and J. Tang, Catal. Today, 2014, 224, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, J. Chen, G. Rao, W. Deng and Y. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 404, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Feng and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18949–18956 CrossRef CAS .
W.-N. Wang, F. Wu, Y. Myung, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, H. S. Im, J. Park, P. Banerjee and P. Biswas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5685–5692 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, F. Pan, H. Zhao, W. Deng, P. Zhang, H.-C. Zhou and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 274–283 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Lu, W. Wu, D. T. Tran, W. Shang, H. Chen, Y. Lei, Z. Li, M. Wang, T. J. Woehl and D. Liu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 276, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zeng, J. Qiu, Z. Li, P. Pavaskar and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3512–3516 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, G. Zeng, M.-A. Ha, M. Ge, Y. Lin, M. Hettick, B. Hou, A. N. Alexandrova, A. Javey and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6177–6181 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Verbruggen, S. Deng, M. Kurttepeli, D. J. Cott, P. M. Vereecken, S. Bals, J. A. Martens, C. Detavernier and S. Lenaerts, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160–161, 204–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 7239–7253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ren, W. Zhou, B. Sun, H. Li, P. Qiao, Y. Xu, J. Wu, K. Lin and H. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 319–328 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vidyasagar, A. Gupta, A. Balapure, S. G. Ghugal, A. G. Shende and S. S. Umare, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 370, 117–126 CrossRef CAS .
F. Araiedh, F. Ducos, A. Houas and N. Chaoui, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 353, 458–463 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Li, Y. Shi, M. Zhang, S. Fan, Z. Yin, M. Qin, T. Lian and X. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 528, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kusior, K. Michalec, P. Jelen and M. Radecka, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 476, 342–352 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kelm, L. Schoppe, J. Dornseiffer, D. Hofmann, E.-A. Reinecke, F. Leistner and S. Jühe, Nucl. Eng. Des., 2009, 239, 274–280 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yao and K. L. Yeung, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xi, L. K. Verma, J. Li, C. S. Bhatia, A. J. Danner, H. Yang and H. C. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1093–1102 CrossRef CAS .

          W. E. Stewart, R. B. Bird and E. N. Lighfoot, Transport Phenomena, John Wiley & Sons, United States of America,  2006 Search PubMed .

          H. L. V. Hessel and S. Hardt, Chemical Micro Process Engineering: Fundamentals, Modelling and Reactions, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmBH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2004, ch. 2 Search PubMed .
A. Yusuf, C. Garlisi and G. Palmisano, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 79–92 CrossRef CAS .

          L. G. Leal, Advanced Transport Phenomena: Fluid Mechanics and Convective Transport Processes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. L. Satuf, J. Macagno, A. Manassero, G. Bernal, P. A. Kler and C. L. A. Berli, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
G. Charles, T. Roques-Carmes, N. Becheikh, L. Falk, J.-M. Commenge and S. Corbel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 223, 202–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Corbel, G. Charles, N. Becheikh, T. Roques-Carmes and O. Zahraa, Virtual Phys. Prototyp., 2012, 7, 203–209 CrossRef .
N. Padoin, L. Andrade, J. Ângelo, A. Mendes, R. d. F. P. M. Moreira and C. Soares, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 2794–2802 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Lin, L. Ge, H. Guo, X. Chen and M. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28803 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yavorskyy, O. Shvydkiv, N. Hoffmann, K. Nolan and M. Oelgemöller, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 4342–4345 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jayamohan, Y. R. Smith, L. C. Hansen, S. K. Mohanty, B. K. Gale and M. Misra, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suhadolnik, A. Pohar, U. Novak, B. Likozar, A. Mihelič and M. Čeh, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 72, 178–188 CrossRef CAS .
M. Atobe, H. Tateno and Y. Matsumura, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4541–4572 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanimu, S. Jaenicke and K. Alhooshani, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 792–821 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kockmann, M. Gottsponer and D. M. Roberge, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 718–726 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, N. J. W. Straathof, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10562–10589 CrossRef CAS .

          H. S. Fogler, Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, Prentice Hall, United States of America, 4th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
D. M. King, J. A. Spencer, X. Liang, L. F. Hakim and A. W. Weimer, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2007, 201, 9163–9171 CrossRef CAS .
F. Grillo, M. T. Kreutzer and J. R. van Ommen, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 268, 384–398 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Onn, R. Küngas, P. Fornasiero, K. Huang and R. J. Gorte, Inorganics, 2018, 6, 34 CrossRef .
J. A. Libera, J. W. Elam and M. J. Pellin, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6158–6166 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dendooven, S. Pulinthanathu Sree, K. De Keyser, D. Deduytsche, J. A. Martens, K. F. Ludwig and C. Detavernier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6605–6610 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alexiadis and I. Mazzarino, Chem. Eng. Process., 2005, 44, 453–459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Weber, A. Julbe, A. Ayral, P. Miele and M. Bechelany, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7368–7390 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. Liu, H. Bai and D. D. Sun, Water Res., 2012, 46, 1101–1112 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, A. J. Du, P. Lee, D. D. Sun and J. O. Leckie, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 313, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Z. Song, F. Zhou, H. Li and M. Yu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 281, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
C. Detavernier, J. Dendooven, S. Pulinthanathu Sree, K. F. Ludwig and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5242–5253 RSC .
P. K. S. Mural, M. Sharma, A. Shukla, S. Bhadra, B. Padmanabhan, G. Madras and S. Bose, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 32441–32451 RSC .
P. K. S. Mural, S. Jain, G. Madras and S. Bose, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 624–631 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adhikari, S. Selvaraj and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1801853 CrossRef .
B. J. O'Neill, D. H. K. Jackson, J. Lee, C. Canlas, P. C. Stair, C. L. Marshall, J. W. Elam, T. F. Kuech, J. A. Dumesic and G. W. Huber, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1804–1825 CrossRef .
J. T. Korhonen, P. Hiekkataipale, J. Malm, M. Karppinen, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1967–1974 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Xu, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7563–7572 RSC .
M. Rimoldi, V. Bernales, J. Borycz, A. Vjunov, L. C. Gallington, A. E. Platero-Prats, I. S. Kim, J. L. Fulton, A. B. F. Martinson, J. A. Lercher, K. W. Chapman, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1058–1068 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Lee, J. Zhao, C. J. Oldham, G. W. Peterson and G. N. Parsons, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 44847–44855 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Shi, M. Li, J. Li and C. Duan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 380, 201–229 CrossRef CAS .
H.-E. Cheng, S. Hsiao and D.-M. Lu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, D19–D22 CrossRef CAS .
V. Likodimos, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 230, 269–303 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
N. K. R. Eswar	Dr Neerugatti Krishna Rao Eswar is currently working as a post-doctoral researcher at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He obtained his Bachelor and Master of Technology degrees in Bio-Technology and Nanotechnology respectively from Anna University, Chennai, India. He worked at IIT-Bombay, India for a brief period on developing mesoporous catalysts. Later, he joined for Ph. D. at IISc – Bangalore, India to work on designing and fabricating catalysts, reactors for energy and environmental applications. His research involves synthesizing nanomaterials and thin films fabrication for catalysis and solar cell applications.
Satyapaul A. Singh	Dr Satyapaul A. Singh obtained his bachelor's degree from JNTU, and Master's., PhD from Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bengaluru respectively in chemical engineering. Further, he worked as a research assistant at IISc for a brief period to develop thermally stable catalysts for gas phase reactions. Since 2018, he is working as assistant professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) – Pilani, Hyderabad. His research interests are experimental and modelling of heterogeneous catalytic systems for thermo-catalytic and photocatalytic fields towards green energy applications.
Jaeyeong Heo	Prof. Jaeyeong Heo is an associate professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Chonnam National University, Republic of Korea. He obtained his Ph. D. from Seoul National University. His research areas include atomic layer deposition, thin-film solar cells, and synthesis of nanomaterials for energy applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a typical ALD process cycle of a metal oxide (zinc oxide). Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 


Growth condition	Continuous film formation with surface specificity	Nucleation and growth	Low energy atoms from source to substrate	High energy atoms from target to substrate
Growth rate	Accurate (usually in Å per cycle)	Variable (nm to μm h−1)	Variable between 10–100 Å s−1	Variable between 10–100 Å s−1
Growth mode	Layer by layer approach	Growth from the nutrient solution	Evaporation and condensation	Continuous ad-atom deposition
Thickness/size	Measured by number of reaction cycles with high specificity	Can be controlled using concentration and time	Not easy to control with single deposition per charge	Can be controlled with high specificity
Synthesis temperature	Room temperature to 400 °C – ALD window	Room temperature to less than boiling point of solvent in reaction mixture	50 °C to 100 °C	Room temperature to 400 °C
Conformality	Highly conformal	Non-conformal	Mostly non-conformal	Conformality depends on substrate rotation and large area target
Film	Thin pinhole free films with minimal stress	Poor adhesion for films beyond	Thin films with pinholes and poor adhesion	Dense films with small grain size and compressive stress
Time	Slow	Fast	Fast	Fast
Precursor	Volatile chemical precursors	Cationic and anionic solution mixtures mostly within three precursors	Point source: metals and di-electrics	Parallel plate source
Substrate condition	Can be used for all types of substrates	Substrate stability in chemical solution is highly preferred	Temperature and vacuum withstanding substrates	Temperature and vacuum withstanding substrates
Reproducibility	Highly reproducible with window of scaling up	Low reproducibility (even slight variation in solution mixtures would not result the effective growth)	Reproducible but difficult to scale up	Reproducible and can be scaled up
Uniformity	Excellent	Poor	Poor	Good
Limitations	Designing of precursor is difficult, slow and expensive process	Improper film adhesion, particle agglomeration and homogeneous nucleation are major disadvantages. Improper surface coverage with large chemical footprint	Non-stoichiometric deposition, poor film density. High impurities (thermal evaporation). High decomposition. Poor step coverage	Expensive targets, film damage may occur due to ion bombardment and plasma. Not suitable for powder/polymer/biological substrates
Advantages	No impurities. High precision. Preserves surface area. Can be applied for both powders and films	Inexpensive and easier	Low cost (thermal evaporation). Inexpensive compared to sputtering	Deposition over large areas. Film properties can be tuned using several controlling parameters

 	Fig. 2  Approaches using ALD to fabricate efficient photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Possible fabrication of photocatalysts with varying interfaces and (b) possible routes for driving force in charge separation in interfaces with varied built-in electric fields ((A) photoelectrocatalysis, (B) photocatalysts with symmetric electric fields, (C) anisotropic electric fields with respect to facets, (D) asymmetric electric fields). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  ALD of TiO2 on various metal coated glass substrates at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2009 Electrochemical Society (ECS).	 

 	Fig. 5  ALD of TiO2 on AAO (a and c) and selective etching of AAO leaving TiO2 nanotubes (b and d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  XRF analysis of TiO2 deposition using ALD inside mesoporous silica and on the surface of silica over Si wafer. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Uniform coating of shell TiO2 on core WO3 using ALD (a) and enhancement of optical properties in core–shell WO3/TiO2 photocatalytic heterojunctions (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Transparent TiO2 nanoarrays developed using ALD on freestanding AAO adhered to a glass substrate, with corresponding transmittance spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Atomic layer deposited TiO2 and SiO2 for understanding the LSPR effect using silver nanoparticles for photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society; and (b) transmission electron microscopic image of ALD-grown TiO2 on silica nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of Al2O3 deposition using ALD on a legume (bio-template) for developing ZnAl LDH MMO frameworks for photocatalytic degradation of sulforhodamine B and poly-azo dyes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Prevention of biofilm formation using photocatalytic TiO2 thin film on borosilicate glass deposited using ALD. Before illumination (a and b) and after illumination (c and d). Reprinted with permission from Springer Nature GmBH: Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology77 Copyright 2006.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of ALD-coated TiO2 onto fibrous KCC-1 and other mesoporous silica. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of ALD of zinc oxide on in situ prepared g-C3N4 photocatalyst for cephalexin degradation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Degradation profile of rhodamine B using atomic layer deposited FePt on graphitic C3N4 (a), corresponding rate kinetics (b), reusability (c) and spectroscopic evaluation of rhodamine B degraded using 30 ALD cycles coated FePt/g-C3N4 (d) with inset showing effective magnetic separation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Photocatalytic effect of needle-like zinc oxide nanostructures grown on polymer nanofibers (PAN) against methylene blue degradation, (b) charge carrier interplay in pristine polymer fibers, ALD seeded zinc oxide layer and zinc oxide needles grown using seeded layer and (c) consistency of ZnO/PAN photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Scanning electron microscopic images of atomic layer deposited seed layer's effect on chemical bath deposition of zinc oxide on silicon substrates. Seed layers' thickness vary from 3 nm (a), 10 nm (b) and 30 nm (c) respectively. Growth of zinc oxide nanorods (a′), (b′) and (c′) for corresponding seed layers (a), (b) and (c) respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of atomic layer deposition of hybrid metal oxides (ZnO and TiO2) over carbon nanotube membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  Photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic degradation of tetracycline (antibiotic) using atomic layer deposited Fe2O3 on Bi2WO6 over FTO substrate. Degradation profile of tetracycline with respect to thickness of ALD-Fe2O3 (a) and (b), corresponding rate kinetics (c) and (d), comparative degradation profile of tetracycline using multiple techniques (e) and (f) where EL, EC, PL, represents electrolysis, electrocatalysis and photolysis respectively, stability of the photocatalyst after multiple cycles (g) and corresponding XRD pattern of photocatalyst after reaction (h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

ALD TiO2 on SLG with UV irradiation	Methylene blue and stearic acid	PC	
k
MB = 4.75 × 10−3 min−1	
57


k
SA = 20 nm h−1
ALD TiO2 with UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB PC = (6.84 ± 0.08) × 10−3 min−1	
58

PEC	
k
MB PEC = (9.01 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2 on AISI 304 DB, AISI 304 2B and AISI 304 4N with UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB AISI 304 DB (50 nm) = (1.92 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1	
59


k
MB AISI 304 2B (200 nm) = (2.11 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1

k
MB AISI 304 4N (100 nm) = (1.21 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1
ALD S-doped TiO2-visible light irradiation (24 h)	Stearic acid	PC	Rate of stearic acid degradation	
61

Glass = <1 nm h−1
TiO2 = 10 nm h−1
S doped TiO2 = 14.8 nm h−1
ALD Zr-doped TiO2-visible light irradiation	Stearic acid	PC	
k
SA TiO2 = (17.00 ± 2.14) × 10−3 min−1	
64


k
SA Zr doped TiO2 = (28.47 ± 1.56) × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2/Ag on AAO with UV irradiation	Methyl orange	PC	
k
MO TiO2 = (4.24 ± 0.13) × 10−3 min−1	
66


k
MO Ag/TiO2 = (5.41 ± 0.19) × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2 on mesoporous silica with UVA irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB TiO2/silicon = (2.49 ± 0.49) × 10−3 min−1	
67


k
MB TiO2/mesoporous silica = (8.69 ± 0.15) × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2 on WO3 nanorods with visible light	Methylene blue	PC (slurry)	
k
MB TiO2 = (1.49 ± 0.17) × 10−3 min−1	
68


k
MB TiO2/WO3 = (1.68 ± 0.12) × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2 on graphene 1 Sun irradiation	Methyl red	PC	
k
MR TiO2/silicon = (0.35 ± 0.02) × 10−3 min−1	
69


k
MR TiO2/graphene = (7.04 ± 0.31) × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2 nanotube arrays under UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB TiO2 = 4.03 × 10−3 min−1	
70


k
MB TiO2/Pd = 5.95 × 10−3 min−1
ALD Pt on P-25 TiO2 under UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC (slurry)	
k
MB TiO2 = 12.22 × 10−2 min−1	
71


k
MB Pt/TiO2 = 4.16 × 10−2 min−1
ALD TiO2/SiO2 on silicon with UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB TiO2 = 2.88 × 10−3 min−1	
72


k
MB TiO2/Ag = 3.14 × 10−3 min−1

k
MB TiO2/SiO2/Ag = 1.92 × 10−2 min−1
ALD TiO2/Si nanowires on silicon under UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB TiO2 = 3.9 × 10−4 min−1	
73


k
MB SiO2 nanowires = 9.8 × 10−6 min−1

k
MB TiO2/SiO2 nanowires = 4.4 × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2 multiwall nanotube & nanorod arrays under UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB TiO2 nanotube array = (9.19 ± 0.22) × 10−3 min−1	
74


k
MB TiO2 nanorod array = (7.59 ± 0.31) × 10−3 min−1
ALD Al2O3 ZnAl MMO under UV irradiation	PAZO	PC	
k
PAZO ALD Al2O3 ZnAl MMO powder = (7.20 ± 0.21) × 10−4 min−1	
75


k
PAZO ALD Al2O3 ZnAl MMO bio-template = (2.79 ± 0.04) × 10−3 min−1
RhB	
k
RhB ZnAl MMO powder = (1.03 ± 0.35) × 10−3 min−1

k
RhB ZnAl MMO bio-template = (1.45 ± 0.18) × 10−3 min−1
PE-ALD TiO2 on Kapton under UV irradiation	4-CP	PC	
k
4-CP TiO2 = (1.63 ± 0.08) × 10−3 min−1	
82


k
4-CP Pilkington Activ® = (4.83 ± 0.5) × 10−4 min−1
ALD ZnO on PEN under UV irradiation	Phenol	PC	
k
Phenol PEN = 8.42 × 10−5 min−1	
83


k
Phenol ZnO/PEN = 1.20 × 10−3 min−1

k
Phenol ZnO/Si = 1.43 × 10−3 min−1
PE-ALD TiO2 on SS under UV irradiation	4-CP	PC	
k
4-CP TiO2/SS = (2.36 ± 0.10) × 10−3 min−1	
84


k
4-CP Pilkington Activ® = (5.72 ± 0.23) × 10−4 min−1
PE-ALD & Th-ALD on SS under UV irradiation	4-CP	PC	
k
4-CP PE-ALD TiO2/SS = (2.52 ± 0.11) × 10−3 min−1	
85


k
4-CP Th-ALD TiO2/SS = (1.39 ± 0.05) × 10−3 min−1
ALD TiO2 on mesoporous silica with Xe lamp	RhB	PC	
k
RhB TiO2/KCC-1 = (68.40 ± 4.70) × 10−3 min−1	
87


k
RhB TiO2/MCM-41 = (25.40 ± 1.00) × 10−3 min−1

k
RhB TiO2/SBA-15 = (13.90 ± 1.00) × 10−3 min−1
Methylene blue	
k
MB TiO2/KCC-1 = (129.6 ± 8.0) × 10−3 min−1

k
MB TiO2/MCM-41 = (115.5 ± 11.0) × 10−3 min−1

k
MB TiO2/SBA-15 = (92.5 ± 5.0) × 10−3 min−1
Phenol	
k
Phenol TiO2/KCC-1 = (4.90 ± 0.20) × 10−3 min−1

k
Phenol TiO2/MCM-41 = (5.20 ± 0.30) × 10−3 min−1

k
Phenol TiO2/SBA-15 = (2.60 ± 0.20) × 10−3 min−1
ALD ZnO on g-C3N4 with Xe lamp	Cephalexin	PC	
k
Ceph ALD ZnO/g-C3N4 = 73.50 × 10−3 min−1	
90


k
Ceph ALD ZnO = 9.10 × 10−3 min−1

k
Ceph g-C3N4 = 13.60 × 10−3 min−1
ALD FePt on g-C3N4 with Xe lamp (UV filter)	RhB	PC	
k
RhB ALD Fe–Pt/g-C3N4 = 89.1 × 10−3 min−1	
91


k
RhB g-C3N4 = 40.4 × 10−3 min−1
ALD ZnO seed layer & ZnO nanorods under UV	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB ZnOSL-3 nm = 2.8 × 10−3 min−1	
94


k
MB ZnONR-3 nm/ZnOSL = 4.3 × 10−3 min−1
ALD ZnO & TiO2 on CNT membranes under UV irradiation	Methylene blue	PC	
k
MB ALD ZnO/CNT = 19.5 × 10−3 min−1	
95


k
MB ALD TiO2/CNT = 10.9 × 10−3 min−1

k
MB ALD ZnO, TiO2/CNT = 20.3 × 10−3 min−1
ALD Fe2O3/Bi2WO6-FTO under Xe lamp	Tetracycline	PC	
k
TET ALD Fe2O3/Bi2WO6 = 8.06 × 10−3 min−1	
104


k
TET Bi2WO6 = 5.44 × 10−3 min−1
PEC	
k
TET ALD Fe2O3/Bi2WO6 = 24.69 × 10−3 min−1

k
TET Bi2WO6 = 9.81 × 10−3 min−1
ALD Al2O3 over anatase nanorods under UV-visible irradiation	CO2	PC	Average rate of CO formation	
121

With ALD Al2O3/anatase nanorods: 10.3 μmol g−1 h−1
Anatase nanorods: 6.5 μmol g−1 h−1
ALD Al2O3 over Au/TiO2 under Xe lamp (UV filter)	CO2	PC	Average rate of CO formation	
122

ALD Al2O3/TiO2: 2.95 μmol g−1 h−1
TiO2: 0.45 μmol g−1 h−1
ALD ZnO over CuO with Xe lamp	CO2	PC	Maximum rate of CO formation	
123

ALD ZnO/CuO: 1.98 mmol gcat−1 h−1
CuO: 0.02 mmol gcat−1 h−1
ALD MgO over TiO2 and Evonik P-25 with Xe lamp (UV filter)	CO2	PC	Rate of CO formation	
124

ALD MgO/TiO2: 12.75 ± 0.9 μmol g−1 h−1
ALD MgO/P25: 3.75 ± 0.95 μmol g−1 h−1
P25: 2.53 ± 0.25 μmol g−1 h−1
ALD-TiO2 modified PMFI and PMWW zeolites with Xe lamp	CO2	PC	Rate of CH4 formation with ALD TiO2/PMFI: 1.12 mmol per s per mol Ti-sites	
125

ALD TiO2/PMWW: 0.76 mmol per s per mol Ti-sites
P-25: 0.05 mmol per s per mol Ti-sites
ALD TiO2 over carbon nanosheets and nanotubes under UV irradiation	Acetaldehyde	PC	Maximum rate of CO2 formation	
128

ALD TiO2/CNS: 43 ppmv min−1
ALD TiO2/CNT: 28 ppmv min−1

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of typical reaction chamber for photocatalytic organic conversion and (b) photocatalytic toluene decomposition using different cycles ALD TiO2 on nanodiamond compared with commercial TiO2 (Evonik, P-25). Reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  Photodecomposition of self-assembled monolayers by ALD TiO2 on Si (100). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)
CO2 + e− → CO2˙−	(2)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	(3)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	(4)
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	(5)
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	(6)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	(7)
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O	(8)
2CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → C2H2O4	(9)

 	Fig. 21  Photoreduction of CO2 using anatase nanoparticles and nanorods, (a) effect of ALD-Al2O3 passivation and (b) effect of ALD-Al2O3 thickness on the conversion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Photocatalytic CO2 reduction using ALD-TiO2 in PMFI and PMWW zeolites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  Typical charge carrier dynamics in a photocatalyst. All the upward-directed solid arrows represent excitation to the conduction band. Downward-directed curved arrows represent relaxation. Excitation and relaxation (1) at the limits of conduction band, (2) within shallow and deep traps (ST and DT), (3) band edge excited charge carrier recombination, (4) recombination within the traps and (5) annihilative excitons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2000 American Chemical Society.	 
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 24  Schematic representation of real-time spectroscopic monitoring of photocatalytic degradation inside a microreactor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146 under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence.	 

 	Fig. 25  Micro multi-capillary microreactors in series with collection flasks (a), microcapillaries (b), and pumps (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic representation of batch and continuous flow microreactors made of anodized titania and titanium metal as anodic and cathodic materials, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2018 The Korean Society of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic representation of probable designs using ALD coated continuous flow reactors. (a) Regular continuous flow reactor, (b) semi-baffled continuous flow reactor, (c) fully baffled flow reactor and (d) micro-channel reactor.	 
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)

 	Fig. 28  Size and porosity estimates (a)–(d) for Degussa P-25 TiO2 based on ref. 155 and 156. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157 under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence.	 

 	Fig. 29  Silver nanoparticles embedded rGO-grafted PE/PEO porous membranes for water filtration. Photocatalytic active material deposition can be attempted on such membrane surfaces with ALD which will enhance the stability and efficiency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166 under Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Uported License, Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  Advantages of atomic layer deposition over other methods to develop efficient photocatalysts.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
