Novel cathode interfacial layer using creatine for enhancing the photovoltaic properties of perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08239B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08239B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21721-21728Novel cathode interfacial layer using creatine for enhancing the photovoltaic properties of perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Guan-Woo 
            Kim‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Yelim 
            Choi‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Hyuntae 
            Choi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jihyun 
            Min
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Taiho 
            Park
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Seulki 
            Song
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), 77 Cheongam-Ro, Nam-gu, Pohang, Kyoungbuk, Korea 37673. E-mail: taihopark@postech.ac.kr
bCenter for Nano Science and Technology@Polimi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Giovanni Pascoli 70/3, 20133 Milano, Italy
cDivision of Advanced Materials, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon, 34114, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sksong@krict.re.kr
Received 
      21st August 2020
    , Accepted 27th September 2020First published on 29th September 2020AbstractWith the unprecedented development of perovskite solar cells (PSCs), various interlayers have been investigated. Interlayers have diverse roles in shifting the energy levels, attracting and extracting charges, and passivating surface traps. These can improve the stability of PSCs, as well as their power conversion efficiency (PCE). In this study, a small molecular self-assembled monolayer (2-[carbamimidoyl(methyl)amino]acetic acid) is introduced on a SnO2 layer. The acetic acid is known as creatine, existing naturally in the human body. It is eatable and dosed by athletes for energy. Due to its structural properties, creatine can be anchored on a SnO2 layer, thus, it can strengthen the charge extraction from a perovskite layer by forming interface dipoles and reducing the work function. Also, it can passivate the defects in the perovskite layer. These properties are comprehensively investigated via various experimental techniques. With the creatine layer as a cathode interfacial layer on the SnO2 layer, the PSC employing a triple cation-based perovskite achieves the highest PCE of 20.8% and retained 90% of it after 50 days. Furthermore, 22.1% of PCE is obtained from the formamidinium-based perovskite. This report represents an interesting application of creatine as an interlayer in PSCs and suggests the possible application of other essential amino acids.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, which usually have the composition ABX3 (A: NH2CHNH2+, FA+ and CH3NH3+, MA+; B: metal ion, X: halides), have attracted much attention due to their superior optoelectronic properties.1–3 Optoelectronic properties such as high absorption coefficient and high charge carrier mobility make them promising for solar cells. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have undergone unprecedented development in recent years. They have recorded a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.2% certified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), which is comparable to that of the established photovoltaic technologies.4
PSCs are composed of a transparent conducting oxide, charge transport layers (CTLs), perovskite layer, and metal electrodes.5–7 Among diverse architectures, most of the PSCs that have exhibited high efficiencies are based on the conventional n–i–p structure. They are generally stacked in the order of fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO), electron transport layer (ETL), perovskite layer, hole transport layer (HTL), and metal electrode.8,9 Photons absorbed generate weakly bound charge carriers, which are separated and transported through the CTLs. However, there are some problems associated with charge transport in PSCs. Charge extraction at the perovskite/HTL interface has been reported to be much faster than that at the perovskite/ETL interface. This can be easily observed via time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL).10 The difference between the extraction rates at the interfaces can result in charge transport imbalance and charge accumulation known as the bottleneck phenomenon.11 This implies that the extraction process at the perovskite/ETL interface could act as the rate-determining step. Also, charge accumulation at the interface can have an adverse effect on other device parameters such as hysteresis and stability.12 Therefore, to overcome these challenges so as to attain the theoretical Shockley–Queisser limit, it is imperative to focus on the device interfaces, especially, the perovskite/ETL interface.
To intrinsically improve the electronic properties of ETLs, many researchers initially adopted metal doping of the ETLs in an attempt to shift the energy level, increase the charge carrier density, and reduce the intrinsic defect density.13–15 A significant improvement was recorded in the electronic properties of mesoporous TiO2 being doped with lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide and sintered at a temperature greater than 450 °C.13 This improved the overall efficiency of the resulting device and, as well, reduced hysteresis phenomena without a direct effect on the perovskite formation. However, such approaches cannot efficiently control the properties of surfaces such as interfaces with the perovskite layer. There is a need to improve the surface properties of ETLs which obliquely affect the growth and quality of the perovskite layer. In the n–i–p architecture, ETL is involved in the nucleation and crystallization of the perovskite layer. For example, a low contact angle with the precursor solution can yield smaller but more nuclei, whereas bigger but fewer nuclei are obtained at higher contact angles.16–18 Accordingly, the optimum contact angle of the precursor solution on the ETL is required to avoid undesired perovskite growth and to achieve a uniform and pinhole-free perovskite layer. Also, a lot of defect states can be generated at the interface, some of which can become deep trap states and directly deteriorate the device performance.19–22 Such defects could also induce ion migration which accelerates device degradation. Introducing an interlayer into the solar cell structure is a facile way to directly change the surface properties as well as electronic properties, thus, it could be a solution to the aforementioned issues.
Many researchers have reported various interfacial modification layers.23–27 Inorganic, insulating, and fullerene-based materials have been introduced on the ETLs. Ultrathin interlayers of insulating materials, such as Al2O3, poly(methyl methacrylate), and polyvinylpyrrolidone, also exhibit a beneficial passivation effect and reduce interfacial carrier recombination.23–25 The introduction of a CuI interlayer on the planar TiO2 layer significantly reduced the hysteresis effect and improved the efficiency of the resulting device by forming locally distributed charged states and dipole moment.26 Thin layers of fullerene or its derivatives greatly reduce the surface trap density of metal oxides and improve charge extraction at the perovskite/ETL interface, thus, resulting in reduced hysteresis loss and improved efficiency.27
The introduction of a self-assembled monolayer (SAM), which consists of an anchoring group and a functional group, is reported to be an easy way to improve the interfacial interaction between the perovskite layer and ETLs.28 This is a result of the uniform and regular arrangement of the SAM. Various SAMs, including polyethylenimine and ethanolamine, have been successfully employed to improve the interfacial properties between perovskite layers and ETLs.29–32 Zheng et al. employed ethanolamine to modify the ZnO surface combined with Mg. Ethanolamine is a neutral ligand, but the proton on the hydroxyl end group can be easily substituted with Mg, thus making it charged.32 The introduction of ethanolamine affects the work function of ZnO layers, thus, it facilitates efficient charge transfer and improves the overall photovoltaic performance. Additionally, it forms a thin MgO layer, which prevents back recombination. These modifications enable a high efficiency of 21.1% and outstanding stability under harsh conditions to be achieved in ZnO-based planar devices. Similarly, zwitterions, which possess anions and cations at the same time, have attracted much attention.33–35 The SnO2 layer has been modified with 3-(1-pyridinio)-1-propanesulfonate to promote efficient charge extraction by reducing the work function of the cathode.35 In addition, zwitterions can improve the stability of devices by passivating the surface traps, resulting in much better thermal stability and humidity stability of the device compared with the reference device.
Herein, we carry out a detailed study on 2-[carbamimidoyl(methyl)amino]acetic acid, generally known as creatine; the structure is as shown in Fig. 1a. Creatine is naturally stored in human muscles, and helps to produce more energy by regenerating adenosine triphosphate. In terms of the chemical structure, it possesses high polarity and has a carboxylic acid functional group which can act as a SAM on the metal oxide. We introduced the commercially available and eatable creatine on a SnO2 layer to modify its interface with the perovskite layer. It would facilitate charge extraction from the perovskite layer to the ETL by forming an interface dipole and reducing the work function (Fig. 1b). Considering the recent concern about eco-friendly processing, this technique could be an interesting one.36–39
 Fig. 1  (a) Structure of creatine. (b) Effect of creatine layer on the band diagram at the perovskite/SnO2 interface. (c) Defect passivation ability of the creatine layer. 
At the interfaces with the perovskite layer, various defect states exist and passivation of those states is essential to achieve high efficiency and stability.19–22 Compared with the well-established solar cell technologies, the defect passivation mechanism in PSCs is different. Due to the ionic character of perovskites, defects are mainly passivated via ionic or coordinate bonding rather than covalent bonding. Furthermore, different types of passivation materials are required for different types of defects. For example, positively charged defects, such as undercoordinated Pb2+, which probably originate from halide vacancies could be passivated using Lewis bases or anions such as an amine group. On the other hand, negatively charged defects, such as cation vacancies and Pb–X antisites, require Lewis acids or cations like fullerene-based materials. In this regard, creatine has advantages over other passivation materials. Creatine contains the carbamimidoyl group, which can be converted to amines and ammonium ions, or an intermediate state between them through a resonance structure. This structural property of creatine is presumed to effectively aid the control of surface trap states by passivating both types of defects (Fig. 1c). In addition, the excessive ammonium ions and amines near the ETL surface can facilitate electron transfer by creating electrostatic interaction with the halides and Pb2+ in the perovskite.32
Herein, we demonstrate that the creatine layer could control the work function of the cathode and reduce the defect density of the perovskite layer. This could have a positive influence on the device performance. With the optimum creatine layer on the SnO2 layer, a highly efficient PSC (20.8% PCE at the maximum) was achieved. In addition, the creatine interlayer not only improved the efficiency but also the stability (over 90% after 50 days under ambient conditions) of the device. This is attributed to the fact that the interlayer aids the removal of the defect states, thus a high-quality perovskite was formed. Recently, we achieved a PCE of 22.1% with an (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05-based PSC. Through a series of experiments, we confirmed that the creatine interlayer enhances charge extraction and reduces the defect density in perovskite layers, just as it actually works in the human body.
Results and discussion
To investigate the effect of the creatine interlayer on the work function of SnO2 layers, we employed ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) (Fig. 2a and S1†). Five different samples—FTO, SnO2 layer, SnO2/0.1 wt% creatine layer, SnO2/1.0 wt% creatine layer, and perovskite layer—were studied. The Fermi energy level (EF) can be obtained from the binding-energy cutoff in the range of 15–20 eV, and the valence band maximum can be calculated from the obtained EF and the binding-energy onset in the range of 0–5 eV. With the absorbance spectrum of the perovskite layer (Fig. S2†), the energy level diagram was obtained, as shown in Fig. 2b. Depending on the concentration of the creatine precursor solution, the work function of the SnO2 layer (3.99 eV) was tuned from 3.60 to 3.32 eV. This implies that a strong interface dipole was formed when the creatine layer was deposited appropriately. After the deposition of the perovskite layer, EF pinning occurred which resulted in band bending toward the ohmic contact. This would form a depleted region, which facilitates more efficient charge transfer by attracting more electrons and preventing back recombination, thus, it can be beneficial to the overall photovoltaic performance.40
 Fig. 2  (a) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results showing each offset. (b) Schematic illustration of the UPS results. (c) Current–voltage curves for conductivity calculation of SnO2, SnO2/high concentration creatine (1.0 wt%), and SnO2/low concentration creatine (0.1 wt%). (d) Top scanning electron microscopy images of SnO2 and creatine-modified SnO2 layers. 
To obtain the conductivity of the creatine-modified SnO2 layer, we measured the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the sample with the configuration: FTO/SnO2/creatine (0, 0.1 and 1.0 wt%)/Au (Fig. 2c). From the slope of the I–V curves, we calculated the conductivity of each of the ETLs. When 0.1 wt% creatine was deposited, the conductivity increased from 7.16 × 10−3 to 7.60 × 10−3 mS cm−1. This could be attributed to the uniform deposition of well-aligned charged molecules. Although the increase was insignificant, it was obvious that the thin creatine layer had no detrimental effect on the electronic properties of the SnO2 layer. As the thickness of the creatine layer increased, the conductivity decreased, reaching a value of 6.59 × 10−3 mS cm−1 at the maximum creatine thickness. High concentration of the precursor solution induced localized aggregation, which possesses an insulating property, thus impedes efficient charge transfer.
Because the perovskite layer was deposited on the modified SnO2 layer, the creatine layer would be dissolved in the perovskite precursor solution or affect the wettability of the perovskite precursor solution. We observed that the creatine was not soluble in dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), which implies that the creatine layer would not be damaged by the deposition of the perovskite layer (Fig. S3†). In addition, a similar wetting property was confirmed by checking the contact angles of the DMF:DMSO (8:2 vol%) solution on FTO/SnO2 and FTO/SnO2/creatine (Fig. S4†).
To optimize the creatine layer, it is important to find the adequate concentration of the precursor solution that would not form aggregations on the SnO2 layer. In Fig. S5† and 2d, the surfaces of the FTO, SnO2 layer, and creatine layer using precursors of various concentrations (0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 1.0 wt%) were observed under a scanning electron microscope (SEM). At low concentrations (0.1–0.4 wt%), no aggregation was observed. However, when the concentration increased, up to 0.6 wt%, some aggregations appeared. The aggregated creatine, which exhibited an irregular alignment, showed an insulating property which could be detrimental to charge transfer. This is in good agreement with the tendency obtained in the conductivity experiment. Therefore, an ultrathin layer of the creatine is desired. It is concluded that the optimized concentration should be lower than 0.6 wt%. We also investigated the effect of the thickness of the creatine layer on the perovskite morphology (Fig. S6†). From the top SEM images, there was no noticeable change in the perovskite morphology. However, we empirically observed that the perovskite layer deposited on the creatine layer had fewer pinholes, which can have an influence on the reproducibility of the device (Fig. S7†). We also measured the thickness of the creatine layer with different concentrations using spectroscopic ellipsometry (Fig. S8 and Table S1†). The samples were prepared on the Si wafer substrate via the spin-coating method. The thickness of creatine layers varied from 1.2 nm to 10.1 nm according to the concentration and exhibited high reproducibility.
We predicted that the creatine layer can efficiently passivate defect states in perovskite layers. To prove this hypothesis, we conducted a series of experiments. First, Urbach energy could be a criterion to estimate the defect density in bulk perovskite materials, corresponding to the sharpness of the absorption spectrum edges and energetic disorder.41 Urbach energy has the following relationship with the absorption coefficient (eqn (1)): (1)where α is the absorption coefficient. We calculated the Urbach energies of the perovskite and creatine/perovskite samples from their respective absorbance (Fig. 3a). With the creatine layer, there was a slight decrease in the Urbach energy, which implies low defect density as a result of the low level of energetic disorder.
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorption coefficients and Urbach energies of perovskite and creatine-modified perovskite layers. (b) Current–voltage curves for space charge limited current to calculate the defect density. Time-resolved photoluminescence of the perovskite layer (c) without and (d) with the quenching layer. 
We further fabricated electron-only devices with the configuration FTO/SnO2/creatine/perovskite/(phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, PCBM)/Ag The I–V curves of the devices were obtained, as shown in Fig. 3b. From the space charge limited current (SCLC) measurement, we can obtain the trap densities of ETLs with which the trap-filled limited voltage (VTFL) can be obtained. The trap densities were calculated using the reported equation. The calculated values of VTFL are listed in Table S2.† The trap density for the SnO2 device was 2.09 × 1016 cm−3, whereas, it was 1.67 × 1016, 1.39 × 1016, 1.32 × 1016, 1.20 × 1016, and 1.14 × 1016 for the creatine-based devices in the order of 0.1 to 1.0 wt%. It is observed that when the SnO2 surface was modified with the creatine, the trap densities of the devices decreased, which is in good agreement with our expectation.
For further investigation, we measured the TRPL of the samples stacked in the order of glass, creatine layer, and perovskite layer (Fig. 3c). The TRPL curves were fitted to the bi-exponential curve (Table S3†). The TRPL curves consist of the fast decaying component (A1, τ1), related to the defect-assisted non-radiative recombination, and the slow decaying component (A2, τ2) related to bimolecular recombination.42,43 As the concentration of creatine increased, the fraction of the fast decaying component (A1) decreased, whereas the lifetime (τ1) increased. This implies that defect states were removed. It was noted that the average lifetime also increased (Fig. S9a†). These results support the hypothesis that the creatine layer could improve the quality of the perovskite layer by passivating the defect states. From the SCLC and TRPL data, it was ascertained that the locally aggregated creatine incurred no adverse effect on the perovskite layer itself. Instead, the SnO2 layer perfectly covered with creatine, although it formed an irregular layer due to aggregation, aided more efficient passivation of the defect states, thus, a high-quality perovskite layer was achieved.
As shown in Fig. 3d, the charge extraction ability of the modified SnO2 layer was investigated via surface quenching TRPL (SQ-TRPL). Samples of configuration FTO/SnO2/creatine/perovskite were prepared, and the TRPL curves were fitted using the bi-exponential curve (Table S4†). In contrast to previous results, at a high concentration of creatine (0.4–1.0 wt%), the extraction ability of the modified SnO2 layer decreased as compared to the pristine SnO2 layer. In this case, the locally aggregated creatine induced irregular charge transfer as a result of its insulating property, hence, it resulted in slow charge extraction, thus the device performance, especially the fill factor, was affected. In the 0.1 wt% creatine sample, the ultrathin and uniform creatine layer exhibited a faster decay curve by forming a well-aligned interface dipole without aggregation, thereby attracting electrons more vigorously. The same tendency was also observed in the steady-state PL (Fig. S9b†).
Considering the previous results, it was expected that the 0.1 or 0.2 wt% creatine interlayer would yield high performance PSCs. Based on the prediction, we fabricated PSCs of the configuration FTO/SnO2/creatine/perovskite/ý2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-9,9′-spirobifluorene/Au (Fig. 4a). The composition of the perovskite was (CsI)0.05(FAPbI3)0.79(MAPbBr3)0.16. The creatine layer was too thin to be detected in the cross-sectional SEM image although some aggregations were observed at high concentrations of the precursor solution in the top SEM images. In Fig. 4b and S10,† histograms of the PCE of 16 devices having creatine layers of different concentrations are presented. When 0.1 wt% precursor solution was used, the highest PCE was achieved. It is worthy of note that we also tried 0.05 wt% precursor solution, but no difference was observed as compared to the 0.1 wt% sample. As the concentration of the precursor solution increased, the overall efficiency decreased, following a similar trend with the SQ-TRPL results. An optimum device was obtained at 0.1 wt% creatine, and the resulting photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Fig. 4c. We observed that the efficiency of the creatine device was improved with a significant increase in the open circuit voltage (VOC); this verifies that interface dipole was successfully introduced. This result agrees well with the previous results (UPS, SCLC, and PL). Favorable band bending in the perovskite layer was achieved due to the reduced work function of the modified SnO2 layer, thus, efficient charge transport is facilitated. The increased VOC is also attributed to the reduced defect density, and the resulting reduced non-radiative recombination and long charge carrier lifetime. As expected, there was an improvement in the device reproducibility (Fig. S10†). Although further investigation is needed, we infer that a possible reason for this improvement is that the carbamimidoyl group in the creatine enhanced the initial nucleation and crystallization process of the perovskite layer by creating electrostatic interaction with the ions in the perovskite precursor solution, in good agreement with X-ray diffraction results (Fig. S11†). Through the optimization process, we finally obtained the optimum device which exhibited the highest PCE of 20.8% with a short circuit current (JSC) of 23.4 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 75.9%, and VOC of 1.19 V (Fig. 4d). There was no significant hysteresis phenomenon despite its planar structure (Fig. S12†). Due to these photovoltaic properties, a steady-state power output at the maximum power point (MPP) was high enough to exhibit about 20% (inset in Fig. 4d). The calculated JSC from the incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was also consistent with that obtained from the current density–voltage (J–V) curves (within 5% of error range) (Fig. 4e).
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM images of the cross-section of the device. (b) Histogram of the PCE of the initial optimization of the concentration of the creatine precursor. (c) Histograms of all parameters for the reference device (black) and 0.1 wt% creatine device (red). (d) J–V curve for the optimum device and its steady power output at the maximum power point. (e) Incident-photon-to-current efficiency and its calculated current density of the optimum device. (f) Ambient stability test of reference and 0.1 wt% creatine devices. 
We further investigated the stability of each of the PSCs. Under the ambient conditions (relative humidity (RH) of 30–40%, room temperature), without any encapsulation, the creatine devices exhibited slightly better stability than the reference devices (Fig. 4f and S13†). They retained over 90% of their initial efficiencies after 50 days, whereas the PCE of the reference device dropped to about 80% after the same period. This enhancement could be attributed to reduced defect density as defect states can affect the stability by providing the pathways for ion migration.44 We conducted various types of stability tests under severely harsh conditions. To investigate the thermal stability, we increased the temperature up to 85 °C. Under this condition, there was an abrupt decrease in the efficiencies of both devices; only approximately 20% was retained after 60 hours (Fig. S14†). At 85 °C and 85% RH, the creatine devices exhibited slightly better stability, however, the improvement was insignificant (Fig. S15†). Finally, we tracked the efficiency of each device at the MPP under continuous illumination to measure the light stability (Fig. S16†). It was conducted under ambient conditions without encapsulation. The creatine device maintained over 70% of its efficiency for 8 hours, whereas the efficiency of the reference device dropped by half after 5 hours. Generally, we observed improvements in the stability against heat and moisture under various conditions due to the reduced defect density, however, the improvements were not significant enough. We thereby confirmed that the development of the HTL or encapsulation methods was a much more efficient method to improve the thermal and moisture stability of PSCs.45–47
To comprehensively understand the charge transfer mechanism at the perovskite/ETL interface, we conducted the capacitance–voltage (C–V) measurement and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). For the C–V measurement, we employed the architecture FTO/SnO2/creatine/perovskite/Au, and the obtained C–V curve was fitted for Mott–Schottky analysis, as shown in Fig. 5a. The built-in potential (Vbi) was estimated from the x-intercept of the slope in the Mott–Schottky plot. When the creatine layer was incorporated, the Vbi increased from 0.551 to 0.758 V, which was consistent with the VOC trend in the full device. Furthermore, the charge carrier density (N) and the width of the depletion region (Wd) were calculated using the following equations (eqn (2) and (3)): (2) (3)where ε is the dielectric constant, ε0 the permittivity of free space, q the elementary charge, and A the active area (0.09 cm2). The charge carrier densities were calculated to be 8.06 × 1016 and 1.07 × 1017 cm−3 for the reference and creatine devices, respectively. Considering the relative thickness of each layer in the device structure, we infer that the calculated density is determined by the perovskite layer. With the reference value of the SnO2 layer, the Wd of the reference and creatine devices was calculated to be 186 nm and 203 nm, respectively.48 The built-in field in the depletion region has an important role in charge separation, transfer, and transport, as well as in preventing back recombination.40,49 When the creatine layer was incorporated, it promoted the formation of the depletion region (186 → 203 nm), by forming an interface dipole and reducing the work function of the SnO2 layer. This would contribute to the improvement of the device performance.
 Fig. 5  (a) Mott–Schottky analysis and (b) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of reference and creatine devices. 

Fig. 5b presents the Nyquist plots of the EIS measurements. Charge transfer resistance (RCT) was observed in the high-frequency region, whereas, recombination resistance (RRec) was observed in the low-frequency region.50,51 However, the first circle was too small to observe RCT, hence, we focused our attention on the second circle which indicates RRec. The RRec increased from 28 to 40 kΩ, when the creatine layer was incorporated. This result demonstrates that there was a reduction in the non-radiative recombination paths due to the lower defect density, which is in good agreement with previous experimental results.
In a recent study, we employed the creatine layer in a device involving the popular perovskite composition, (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05, known for its high performance in PSCs. It exhibited a PCE of 22.1% with a JSC of 24.4 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.15 V, and FF of 78.7% (Fig. 6). The IPCE also confirmed the JSC value from the J–V curve. It, therefore, proves that creatine layers can be applied to other types of perovskite layers.
 Fig. 6  
J–V curve for the champion device employing (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05. The inset shows its incident-photon-to-current efficiency. 
Conclusion
We introduced 2-[carbamimidoyl(methyl)amino]acetic acid, generally known as creatine, on SnO2 layers. Due to its structural properties, it could anchor on the SnO2 layer and form a strong interface dipole which improves the charge extraction and prevents back recombination. Creatine contains a lot of ammonium and amine groups which could promote uniform perovskite formation and passivation of defects. With the optimized creatine layer, the highest PCEs of 20.8 and 22.1% were achieved. The creatine layer also improved the device stability; the device retained 90% of its initial efficiency after 50 days. This novel application of the eatable creatine in the area of solar cells is found to be interesting. We, thus, recommend further investigations on other essential amino acids for interlayers in PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This Research has been performed as a project No KS2022-10 (Advanced materials for low-cost and high-performance solar cells) and supported by the Korea Research Institute Of Chemical Technology (KRICT) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (Code No. 2018R1A2A1A05079144 and 2020R1A6A3A03038988) funded by the Korean government (MSIP).
Notes and references
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035 CrossRef .
M. Hu, C. Bi, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Shao and J. Huang, Small, 2015, 11, 2164 CrossRef CAS .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, accessed August 2020.
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef .
S. Song, R. Hill, K. Choi, K. Wojciechowski, S. Barlow, J. Leisen, H. J. Snaith, S. R. Marder and T. Park, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, L. Zhang, S. She, J. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Li, D. Wang, J. Miao, G. Mi, H. Chen, Y. Tian, B. Xu and C. Cheng, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900331 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16177 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kang, J.-S. Yoon, G.-W. Kim, K. Choi, T. Park, R.-H. Baek and J. Lim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25838 RSC .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602 RSC .
Y. Yang, C. Liu, Y. Ding, Z. Arain, S. Wang, X. Liu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34964 CrossRef CAS .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. C. Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Z. Liu, B. Sun, X. Tan, H. Ye, Y. Tu, T. Shi, Z. Tang and G. Liao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Yang, X. Jia, Y. Wu, N. Yuan, J. Ding, W.-H. Zhang and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 148 CrossRef CAS .

          J. W. Mullin, Crystallization, Butterworth-Heinemann, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2001 Search PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, W. Rehman, F. Pulvirenti, J. B. Patel, N. K. Noel, M. B. Johnston, S. R. Marder, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607039 CrossRef .
H. Taherianfard, G.-W. Kim, M. M. Byranvand, K. Choi, G. Kang, H. Choi, F. Tajabadi, N. Taghavinia and T. Park, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1506 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Ono, S. Liu and Y. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2 CrossRef .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W.-Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Science, 2020, 367, 1352 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, E. Debroye, M. Keshavarz, I. G. Scheblykin, M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. Hofkens and J. A. Steele, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 397 RSC .
H. Si, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Yang, G. Zhang, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, J. I. Khan, W. Liu, E. Ugur, T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, K. Wang, H. Dang, E. Aydin, X. Yang, Y. Wan, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole, F. Laquai, S. De Wolf and T. P. White, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801208 CrossRef .
P. Zhou, Z. Fang, W. Zhou, Q. Qiou, M. Wang, T. Chen and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32957 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Byranvand, T. Kim, S. Song, G. Kang, S. U. Ryu and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702235 CrossRef .
P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
K. Choi, H. Choi, J. Min, T. Kim, D. Kim, S. Y. Son, G.-W. Kim, J. Choi and T. Park, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900251 CrossRef .
C. M. Wolff, L. Canil, C. Rehermann, N. N. Linh, F. Zu, M. Ralaiarisoa, P. Caprioglio, L. Fiedler, M. Stolterfoht, S. Kogikoski Jr, I. Bald, N. Koch, E. L. Unger, T. Dittrich, A. Abate and D. Neher, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1445 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yalcin, M. Can, C. Rodriguez-Seco, E. Aktas, R. Pudi, W. Cambarau, S. Demic and E. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 230 RSC .
L. Zuo, Q. Chen, N. D. Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, H. Chen, P. Sun, S.-Y. Chang, H. Zhao, S. Dong and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 269 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, B. Wu, R. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Hui, B.-W. Mao and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705596 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, A. Pradhan, M. A. Kamarudin, M. Pandey, S. S. Pandey, P. Zhang, C. H. Ng, A. S. M. Tripathi, T. Ma and S. Hayase, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10012 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zheng, R. Peng, G. Wang, J. L. Logsdon, B. Wang, X. Hu, Y. Chen, V. P. Dravid, M. R. Wasielewski, J. Yu, J. Yu, W. Huang, Z. Ge, T. J. Tobin and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903239 CrossRef CAS .
K. Choi, J. Lee, H. I. Kim, C. W. Park, G.-W. Kim, H. Choi, S. Park, S. A. Park and T. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3238 RSC .
R. Wang, J. Xue, K.-L. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Fenning, G. Xu, S. Nuryyeva, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. L. Yang, J. Zhu, M. Wang, S. Tan, I. Yavuz, K. N. Houk and Y. Yang, Science, 2019, 366, 1509 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, J. Xue, L. Meng, J.-W. Lee, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, L. Cai, T. Huang, Z. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Duan, J. L. Yang, S. Tan, Y. Yuan, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1464 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xie, J. Wang, K. Liao, J.-a. Yang, A. Wang, X. Deng, C. Li, T. Li, X. Niu and F. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18626 RSC .
J. Lee, G. -W. Kim, M. Kim, S. A. Park and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902662 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, C. Wang, H. Lei, X. Zheng, P. Qin, L. Xiong, X. Zhao, Y. Yan and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1658 RSC .
Y. Zhang, P. Wang, X. Yu, J. Xie, X. Sun, H. Wang, J. Huang, L. Xu, C. Cui, M. Lei and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18509 RSC .
T. Handa, D. M. Tex, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiy and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 954 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. B. Baloch, F. H. Alharbi, G. Grancini, M. I. Hossain, M. K. Nazeeruddin and N. Tabet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 26805 CrossRef CAS .
N. Phung, A. Al-Ashouri, S. Meloni, A. Mattoni, S. Albrecht, E. L. Unger, A. Merdasa and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903735 CrossRef CAS .
G.-W. Kim, G. Kang, J. Kim, G.-Y. Lee, H. I. Kim, L. Pyeon, J. Lee and T. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2326 RSC .
S. Wang, M. Sina, P. Parikh, T. Uekert, B. Shahbazian, A. Devaraj and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5594 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lee, J. H. Yun, H. J. Son and T.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7029 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Zhou, M. Sun, Z. Gong, Y. Guo, F. Wu, W. Li and W. Ding, Coatings, 2019, 9, 591 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Laban and L. Etgar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3249 RSC .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, N. Tétreault, J. Teuscher, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 362 CrossRef CAS .
G.-W. Kim, G. Kang, K. Choi, H. Choi and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801386 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta08239b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Structure of creatine. (b) Effect of creatine layer on the band diagram at the perovskite/SnO2 interface. (c) Defect passivation ability of the creatine layer.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) results showing each offset. (b) Schematic illustration of the UPS results. (c) Current–voltage curves for conductivity calculation of SnO2, SnO2/high concentration creatine (1.0 wt%), and SnO2/low concentration creatine (0.1 wt%). (d) Top scanning electron microscopy images of SnO2 and creatine-modified SnO2 layers.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorption coefficients and Urbach energies of perovskite and creatine-modified perovskite layers. (b) Current–voltage curves for space charge limited current to calculate the defect density. Time-resolved photoluminescence of the perovskite layer (c) without and (d) with the quenching layer.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM images of the cross-section of the device. (b) Histogram of the PCE of the initial optimization of the concentration of the creatine precursor. (c) Histograms of all parameters for the reference device (black) and 0.1 wt% creatine device (red). (d) J–V curve for the optimum device and its steady power output at the maximum power point. (e) Incident-photon-to-current efficiency and its calculated current density of the optimum device. (f) Ambient stability test of reference and 0.1 wt% creatine devices.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Mott–Schottky analysis and (b) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of reference and creatine devices.	 

 	Fig. 6  
J–V curve for the champion device employing (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05. The inset shows its incident-photon-to-current efficiency.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta08239b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
