Combining 2D inorganic semiconductors and organic polymers at the frontier of the hard–soft materials interface  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC02790G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC02790G
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11158-11164Combining 2D inorganic semiconductors and organic polymers at the frontier of the hard–soft materials interface

        
          
            A. 
            Ramasubramaniam
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Selhorst
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            H. 
            Alon
          
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            M. D. 
            Barnes
          
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            T. 
            Emrick
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            D. 
            Naveh
          
          
        
      d
aDepartment of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. E-mail: ashwin@engin.umass.edu
bDepartment of Polymer Science and Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
dFaculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
eDepartment of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
fDepartment of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
Received 
      22nd June 2017
    , Accepted 3rd August 2017First published on 3rd August 2017AbstractTwo-dimensional semiconductor materials, such as transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and black phosphorus (BP), have emerged as materials of great promise for the future of electronic materials. However, a significant challenge in the application of 2D materials in optoelectronic devices is the lack of precise control over charge carrier doping and in some cases an inherent chemical instability. This Highlight discusses recent advances in combining polymers with 2D TMDCs and BP in studies aiming to improve device performance, photostability, and/or chemical stability. We emphasize non-covalent polymer functionalization approaches which do not rely on the presence of lattice defects in the 2D materials or on surface functional groups that hinder charge transport. We also describe challenges associated with the design of these hard–soft material interfaces and directions for progress.
A. Ramasubramaniam
Ashwin Ramasubramaniam (PhD 2005) is an Associate Professor at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA, where he joined the faculty in 2009. He leads a research group in computational materials science with interests in theoretical modelling of optoelectronic properties of 2D materials, hybrid organic–inorganic materials, and nanoscale catalysts.
R. Selhorst
Ryan Selhorst is a graduate student in the Polymer Science and Engineering department at the University of Massachusetts working with Prof. Todd Emrick. His thesis research focus is the functionalization of TMDCs utilizing polymers bearing a high density of chalcogen atoms, specifically targeted at the non-covalent physisorption of these polymers on TMDCs.
H. Alon
Hadas Alon is a PhD student in the lab of Dr Doron Naveh (Engineering faculty) and the lab of Prof. Chaim Sukenik (Chemistry department) at Bar Ilan University. She studies surface chemistry applied to layered materials based devices. Her work focuses on organic–inorganic strategies of doping 2D materials and devices.
M. D. Barnes
Michael Barnes obtained his PhD from Rice University in 1991, and held postdoctoral and research staff positions at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. In 2004, he joined the Chemistry faculty at UMass Amherst and has held an adjunct position in the Department of Physics since 2009. His research focuses on optoelectronic properties of semiconducting nanomaterials.
T. Emrick
Todd Emrick (PhD 1997) is a Professor of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Emrick's research focus centers on the synthesis of new polymer materials, aqueous polymer assembly, and the connection of novel polymers to interfacial science, including fluid-fluid interfaces and the soft-hard materials interfaces involving 2D materials as described in this Highlight article.
D. Naveh
Doron Naveh (PhD 2009) is an Assistant Professor at the Bar-Ilan University, Israel, where he joined the faculty in 2012. He leads a research group in experimental nanoelectronic devices based on 2D materials with interests in optoelectronics, spintronics, and hybrid organic–inorganic interfaces of layered compounds.
Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials, derived typically from bulk layered phases, exhibit electronic and optical properties that lead to emerging interest in computing, consumer electronics, optical communications, imaging, and energy harvesting.1–5 With rapid progress in the discovery and isolation of 2D materials, a broad range of physical properties from metals to insulators—including exotic phases such as superconductors and topological insulators—becomes available to impact new device paradigms.
Growing interest in 2D semiconductors based on the Mo and W family of transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and black phosphorus (BP) has led to rapid improvements in their syntheses. These 2D materials have appreciable band gaps in the bulk (∼1 eV for TMDCs;6,7 ∼0.3 eV for BP8) that increase due to quantum confinement in the 2D limit.8–11 Their moderate band gaps and large on/off ratios make them better suited for digital logic and near-/mid-IR photonics than graphene, which lacks any inherent band gap. Furthermore, the band gaps of TMDCs and BP are continuously tunable through application of an external electric field12–15 or mechanical strain,16–19 which allows for dynamic control over their optoelectronic response. TMDC monolayers possess a valley degree of freedom that, in conjunction with large spin–orbit splitting, couples carrier spins to polarization of light,20–23 innovations needed for applications in spintronics and valleytronics. Nevertheless, significant challenges remain prior to realizing these promising functionalities, notably due to a lack of robust, scalable strategies for controlling carrier densities via doping. BP, on the other hand, displays relatively high carrier mobilities and good ambipolar charge transport properties but requires robust stabilization strategies to mitigate its ambient chemical instability.24 Even more challenging is the prospect of precise engineering of semiconductor junctions in 2D materials, a prerequisite for constructing the basic elements of digital logic. Thus, there is a pressing need for robust and scalable approaches for controlled doping and/or stabilization of 2D semiconductors.
This Highlight describes advances in interfacial doping of TMDCs and stabilization of phosphorene. While numerous reports detail functionalization of 2D semiconductors with small molecules,25–29 metal nanoparticles,30–34 ionic liquids,35,36 and self-assembled monolayers,37,38 the benefits of polymers include their facile processing in water or organic solvents, and their ability to be patterned using photolithographic techniques. Tuning the intrinsic electronic properties of both the 2D semiconductor, and the polymer in contact with it, is anticipated to control carrier properties and ultimately lead to the production of new, sophisticated devices based on this hard–soft semiconductor interface. Furthermore, integration of 2D materials with polymers offers a facile route to novel polymer nanocomposites39–42 and flexible electronic materials platforms, both of which broaden the application and utility of 2D semiconductors beyond conventional solid-state device architectures. Finally, a key advantage of this soft–hard materials interface approach is that it does not disrupt the inherent atomic structure of the 2D material43,44 and thus exploits ongoing advances in the synthesis of high-quality, large-area 2D materials.45–47
Polymer functionalization of TMDCs
Functionalization of 2D materials with synthetic polymers requires consideration of the surface chemistry of this hard–soft materials interface and methods to promote polymer modulation of the solution and electronic properties of 2D materials. Most generally, as depicted in Fig. 1, one may envisage polymer–TMDC interactions as involving either covalent bonding via TMDC structural defects or non-covalent adsorption to the TMDC basal plane. In contrast, for graphene, covalent functionalization is accomplished by coupling of organic/polymer molecules to “oxidative” defects, such as carboxylates or hydroxyl groups, while non-covalent interactions generally involve physisorption of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The distinct structural features of TMDCs offer both synthetic challenges and opportunities. For example, TMDC defects are typically represented by basal-plane chalcogen vacancies that open opportunities for functional polymers, terminated with thiols or other metal-ligating functionality, to bind to TMDCs.26,27,48 The alternative approach, functionalization of the pristine TMDC basal plane, though less-explored, would allow introduction of convenient new methods for dictating the solution and electronic properties of TMDCs. We first briefly review covalent functionalization of TMDCs with polymers, and then describe non-covalent methods intended to provide simple routes to interfacial interactions and enhanced TMDC electronic properties.
 Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of covalent and non-covalent functionalization of TMDCs with functional polymers. 
A. Covalent functionalization of TMDCs
Covalent functionalization of TMDCs is typically achieved by binding of chalcogen-rich moieties to point defects in the TMDC basal plane and at edges and corners of nanoflakes. This strategy has been widely employed for small-molecule functionalization, which has been reviewed recently.44 For covalent polymer functionalization, thiol-terminated polymers have been employed to achieve solution stability and affect charge-carrier modulation. For example, Dravid and coworkers27 demonstrated aqueous stabilization of chemically exfoliated MoS2 (ce-MoS2) nanosheets by functionalization with thiol-terminated polyethylene glycol (PEG). Using functional PEG-thiols enabled simultaneous TMDC interactions and selective complexation of enzymes, such as β-galactosidase. Liu and coworkers employed the strongly absorbing lipoic acid-modified PEG to impart physiological solution stability to ce-MoS249 and ce-WS250 nanosheets. These PEGylated nanosheets are of interest as drug carriers in photothermal cancer therapeutics. Zhou et al.51 describe an approach involving grafting of common thiol reagents as ligands on TMDC nanosheets, which then serve as nucleation sites for metallic (Ag) nanoparticles, or as grafting sites for the growth of polymer brushes. Key to this ligand-functionalization approach is a facile conversion of the relatively inert MoS2 nanosheets to chemically reactive versions amenable for use in a variety of polymerization chemistries.
B. Non-covalent functionalization of TMDCs
While non-covalent functionalization of TMDCs has received less attention than covalent methods, this strategy holds promise for TMDCs since physisorption of polymers on substrates can be very strong or irreversible. In the work of Ye and coworkers,52 doping effects of polyethyleneimine (PEI)—an amine-rich, electron-donating, aliphatic polymer—were investigated on mechanically exfoliated MoS2 (me-MoS2) field-effect transistors (FETs). By applying a thin film of PEI to multilayer me-MoS2 through dip- or spin-coating, a strong n-doping effect was accompanied by appreciable improvements in device metrics, such as reduced sheet and contact resistance, and higher field-effect mobility and ON currents.
Recent studies examined different materials approaches for non-covalent TMDC functionalization. In one study, Liu, et al.53 deposited monolayers of me-MoS2 and me-WS2 onto a fluoropolymer substrate (CYTOP/SiO2/Si) and prepared back-gated FETs for studies of carrier dynamics. The CYTOP substrate n-doped the MoS2 and WS2 samples (approximately 3 × 1012 electrons per cm2) with large shifts in the charge-neutrality point. Furthermore, the CYTOP substrate suppressed unintentional n-doping of the TMDCs from the SiO2/Si substrate as evidenced by sharper PL spectra with smaller Stokes shifts for the CYTOP-supported TMDCs. While the CYTOP substrate n-doped the TMDCs, the extent of doping was weaker than on SiO2/Si substrates thus allowing for ambipolar transport in WS2 FETs. Such p-type behaviour is difficult to attain in Mo- and W-disulphides due to a combination of intrinsic n-doping from sulphur vacancies and doping from SiO2/Si substrates. Demonstration of facile access to the p-doped regime, where spin–orbit splitting of the band edge is maximal, is thus noteworthy and facilitates investigation of valley-selective properties in TMDCs.20–23
Hersam and coworkers54 exploited non-covalent, charge-transfer interactions between an electron-donating conjugated polymer, PTB7, and monolayer MoS2 to realize a hybrid, organic–inorganic heterojunction solar cell. PTB7 thin films were applied by spin-coating to large-area, CVD-grown MoS2. As seen in Fig. 2, the PTB7/MoS2 band edge alignment affords a type-II (staggered gap) heterojunction, which was confirmed from the strong, mutual PL quenching. Importantly, the authors were able to tune the PTB7 film thickness and quench the PL of MoS2 completely with small residual PTB7 PL, indicative of near-complete extraction of photogenerated charge from MoS2. Solar cells based on this hybrid PTB7–MoS2 heterojunction produced record current densities based on active layer thickness (below 20 nm) with peak external and internal quantum efficiencies in excess of 20% and 40%, respectively, and a power-conversion efficiency of 0.1%. Recombination in the heterojunction was attributed to surface traps in MoS2 such that systematic improvements in the quality of large-area TMDCs may ameliorate this problem.
 Fig. 2  Charge transfer between MoS2 and PTB7. (a) Chemical structure of PTB7. (b) Optical absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of a spin-coated PTB7 film. (c) Band alignment for PTB7 and MoS2. (d) PL spectra for films of PTB7 alone, MoS2 alone, and a PTB7–MoS2 bilayer. The inset shows nearly complete quenching of MoS2 PL and a small contribution from PTB7. (e) MoS2 PL as a function of PTB7 layer thickness. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Emrick, Ramasubramaniam, and Barnes have adopted a different approach to non-covalent TMDC functionalization inspired by studies of small-molecule doping.55 In particular, tetrathiafulvalene (TTF), a well-known electron donor containing a 2:3 S:C ratio, was shown by theory and experiment28 to interact with the basal plane of MoS2 and inject electrons into the TMDC. Extending these results from molecular doping to polymer functionalization required synthesizing TTF-based polymers, previously unknown due to challenges associated with the redox-active nature of TTF. Nonetheless, as shown in Fig. 3, effective syntheses of TTF-containing polymers were achieved, including: (1) ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) of TTF-substituted norbornenes, in which adjustment of catalytic conditions led to successful polymerizations; and (2) post-polymerization cycloaddition of azide-substituted TTF moieties with alkynyl-substituted methacrylate polymers. Each synthetic method affords a wide variation of possible TTF-content along the polymer backbone and integrates TTF into a convenient, soluble polymer platform that undergoes solution processing easily into thin films.
 Fig. 3  (a) Preparation of poly(TTF-norbornene) copolymers by ROMP; (b) post-polymerization cycloaddition affords TTF-substituted methacrylate copolymers. Adapted from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 4 shows the effect of TTF-containing polymers on MoS2, with electronic properties examined by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) and stability of solvent dispersions investigated by optical microscopy. KPFM spatially probes the surface potential of a material by matching the work function of the tip and the substrate. Scanning the MoS2 substrate before and after deposition of TTF-substituted methacrylate polymers resulted in a work function decrease consistent with its theoretically predicted n-doping behavior. These TTF polymers were also found to afford stable dispersions of MoS2 nanosheets in organic solvents. Polymers containing even modest mole percent (20–30%) of TTF pendent groups extended the colloidal stability of MoS2 nanosheets for weeks-to-months. On the other hand, control experiments conducted with poly(methyl methacrylate) (i.e., having no TTF groups) did little to stabilize the structures; instead, rapid precipitation was observed. The sulfur-rich nature of the contacting polymers appeared to be crucial, since a pyrene containing methacrylate polymer combined with MoS2 nanosheets was unable to maintain TMDC dispersion, with aggregation and resultant precipitation observed in less than one hour.
 Fig. 4  (a) KPFM data showing work function decrease for polymer-TTF-coated MoS2 nanosheets; (b) examples of enhanced dispersion of MoS2 nanosheets over ten days with 20–30 mole percent TTF in the polymer backbone; (c) microscopy images showing striking difference in dispersion vs. aggregation of MoS2 nanosheets based on the presence or absence of TTF-functionalized polymer. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In related reports on polymer–TMDC soft–hard materials contact, Zhou et al.56 functionalized ce-MoS2 nanosheets via electrostatic interactions with cationic surfactants (CTAB) and polycationic chitosan to produce stable solutions in aqueous or organic solvents. These solutions were combined with polystyrene or chitosan to produce polymer–MoS2 nanocomposites with superior thermo-mechanical properties. Park et al.57 studied the doping effect of DNA and metal-coordinated DNA (M-DNA) on few-layer MoS2 and WSe2. DNA and M-DNA were deposited on TMDC FETs and shown, via Raman spectroscopy and transport measurements, to induce non-degenerate n- and p-doping, respectively. The n-doping is believed to occur due to the negatively charged phosphate groups along the DNA backbone that immobilize holes at the DNA–TMDC interface; in contrast, p-doping is attributed to positively charged metal ions in M-DNA.
Polymer functionalization of black phosphorus
Relative to TMDCs, few studies have emerged on BP in contact with soft materials. While studies of TMDCs preceded those of BP by only a few years, the lack of ambient instability of BP24 has prevented rapid progress with these materials. Only recently have reports appeared on BP functionalization, using small molecules58–60 ionic liquids,61 and SAMs.62 Within the specific context of polymer functionalization, studies on BP quantum dots (BP QDs) are most prevalent. For example, Zhang, et al.63 prepared BP QDs by mechanical grinding, then dispersed the QDs into poly(vinylpyridine) (PVP) to afford a PVP/BPQD nanocomposite. These nanocomposites were employed as active layers in flexible, nonvolatile memory device. The PVP/BPQD hybrid showed reversible conductance switching between high- and low-resistance states at relatively low applied voltages (1–3 V) with an ON/OFF ratio in excess of 104. The devices retained these states over extended periods of time at moderate reading voltages (0.2 V) indicating their promise in flash memory. Sun et al.64 synthesized PEGylated BP QDs (2.6 ± 1.8 nm wide; 1.5 ± 0.6 nm thick), which displayed a broad absorption band in the UV and NIR regions, and were examined as photothermal agents in cancer therapy. Shao et al.65 loaded poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) with 3 nm BP QDs, which when processed by oil-in-water emulsion solvent evaporation, produced BP QD/PLGA nanospheres of approximately 100 nm diameter. The hydrophobic PLGA decreased the rate of degradation of BP QDs in physiological media (water and oxygen) and simultaneously improved their photothermal stability.
From the electronic devices perspective, Akinwande and coworkers66 mechanically exfoliated BP thin films on to Al2O3/Si substrates and capped the films with successive layers of alumina Teflon-AF. Capping by alumina alone was found to be less effective in mitigating the degradation of the BP films, whereas the application of the second Teflon-AF layer significantly improved the long-term air stability of the devices, as confirmed by microwave impedance and transport measurements (Fig. 5). We are unaware of studies that exploit polymer thin films for carrier doping of BP thin films and this remains an open area for future investigation.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of BP sample on Al2O3/Si substrate with a thick Al2O3 capping layer. (b) Sheet resistance maps approximated by microwave impedance microscopy (MIM) of a 16 nm-thick flake capped by 25 nm Al2O3. The images were acquired daily over one week. (c) Atomic force microscope (AFM) topography of the same flake taken during the same time duration. Neither MIM nor AFM showed discernible changes throughout this period. (d) AFM line profile of thin-cap (bottom) and thick-cap (top) samples. The blue and red lines are associated with Day 1 and Day 7, respectively. Substantial increase in thickness is seen at the edges of the thin-cap sample, while little change is observed for the sample with thick capping. All scale bars are 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Conclusions and outlook
This Highlight described the state-of-the-art in combining soft materials, especially polymers, with 2D semiconducting TMDCs and BP. While functionalization of these 2D materials with small molecules has been pursued broadly, polymer functionalization offers new scalable processing capabilities, ranging from solution processing of chemically exfoliated nanoflakes to well-defined thin films or lithographic patterns on large-area 2D materials. Furthermore, among polymer functionalization approaches, the non-covalent approach does not rely on the presence of basal plane defects or functional groups that are inherently detrimental to charge and exciton transport in the 2D channels. While non-covalent polymer functionalization of semiconductor TMDCs of the type described above will assist in realizing next-generation, all-2D-materials optoelectronic and logic devices, there remains a distinct need for broadening the scope of synthetic polymers suitable for modifying electronic interfaces beyond the few examples reported to date. Studies of doping with small molecules—both theoretical and experimental—could play an important role in this regard by identifying pendent groups for interfacial interactions with TMDCs, as exemplified by our work on TTF-containing polymers. In the case of BP, polymer functionalization remains relatively unexplored to date. Nevertheless, we anticipate that the reactivity of the surface layers will impose additional constraints by requiring that the functional polymer films (possibly multilayers) are hydrophobic, resistant to oxidation, and relatively inert towards phosphorus, thereby presenting opportunities for designing novel synthetic polymers and architectures.
In closing, we suggest that the soft–hard interface resulting from the combination of organic polymers with inorganic 2D semiconductors offers numerous prospects for advancing the fundamental physics and chemistry of interfaces, and will play a major role in novel applications in flexible hybrid electronics (e.g., conformable/wearable devices) in the years to come.
Acknowledgements
Support for research along the lines of this Highlight is acknowledged from the National Science Foundation (TE; NSF-CHE 1506839), the Israeli Ministry of Science, Technology and Space (HA; Scholarship no. 204098), and the Israel Science Foundation (DN; Grant No. 1055/15).
References
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. K. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan and D. R. Zahn, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
K. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ramasubramaniam, D. Naveh and E. Towe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205325 CrossRef .
K. Dolui, C. D. Pemmaraju and S. Sanvito, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Deng, V. Tran, Y. Xie, H. Jiang, C. Li, Q. Guo, X. Wang, H. Tian, S. J. Koester, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, Q. Xia, L. Yang and F. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Low, A. Rodin, A. Carvalho, Y. Jiang, H. Wang, F. Xia and A. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 075434 CrossRef .
K. He, C. Poole, K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Conley, B. Wang, J. I. Ziegler, R. F. Haglund Jr., S. T. Pantelides and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Johari and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rodin, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. Han, H. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Niu, P. Tan, E. Wang, B. Liu and J. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 887 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Jones, H. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, S. Wu, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, B. Zhao, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, J. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. I. Joshua, A. S. Gary, S. J. v. d. Z. Herre and C.-G. Andres, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 011002 CrossRef .
A. Tuxen, J. Kibsgaard, H. Gøbel, E. Lægsgaard, H. Topsøe, J. V. Lauritsen and F. Besenbacher, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, R. Zhu, J. Zhuo, Z. Zhu, Y. Shao and M. Li, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 12064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chou, M. De, J. Kim, S. Byun, C. Dykstra, J. Yu, J. Huang and V. P. Dravid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dey, H. S. S. R. Matte, S. N. Shirodkar, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Remskar, Z. Skraba, P. Stadelmann and F. Levy, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 814 CrossRef .
M. Remskar, Z. Skraba, R. Sanjines and F. Levy, Surf. Rev. Lett., 1999, 6, 1283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, J. K. Huang, L. Jin, Y. T. Hsu, S. F. Yu, L. J. Li and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1839 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Sreeprasad, P. Nguyen, N. Kim and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chao, M. Zhou, C. Zhang, H. Sun, D. Pan, H. Pei, S. Su, L. Yuwen, C. Fan and L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 274005 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Zhang, J. T. Ye, Y. Yomogida, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Perera, M.-W. Lin, H.-J. Chuang, B. P. Chamlagain, C. Wang, X. Tan, M.-C. Cheng, D. Tománek and Z. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kang, M. S. Kim, J. Shim, J. Jeon, H. Y. Park, W. S. Jung, H. Y. Yu, C. H. Pang, S. Lee and J. H. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4219 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kang, J. Shim, S. K. Jang, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, G. Y. Yeom, W. S. Jung, Y. H. Jang, S. Lee and J. H. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhou, J. Liu, P. Wen, Y. Hu and Z. Gui, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 316, 237 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, F. Khosravi, V. Rahneshin, M. Shanmugam, M. Loeian, J. Jasinski, R. W. Cohn, E. Terentjev and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 261001 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Rahneshin, F. Khosravi, D. A. Ziolkowska, J. B. Jasinski and B. Panchapakesan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 34831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xie, G. Xie, Y. Su, D. Hongfei, Z. Ye and Y. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 065502 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Tedstone, D. J. Lewis and P. O’Brien, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1965 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Pham and G. Y. Yeom, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Feng, Y. Zhu, J. Hong, M. Zhang, W. Duan, N. Mao, J. Wu, H. Xu, F. Dong, F. Lin, C. Jin, C. Wang, J. Zhang and F. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2048 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cho, M. Min, T.-Y. Kim, H. Jeong, J. Pak, J.-K. Kim, J. Jang, S. J. Yun, Y. H. Lee, W.-K. Hong and T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Gu, H. Gong, L. Cheng, X. Shi, L. Feng, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, J. Liu, X. Gu, H. Gong, X. Shi, T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Wang, G. Liu, H. Xing, W. Bu, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, B. He, Y. Yang and Y. He, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 32570 RSC .
Y. Du, H. Liu, A. T. Neal, M. Si and P. Ye, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 1328 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, W. Zhao, Z. Ding, I. Verzhbitskiy, L. Li, J. Lu, J. Chen, G. Eda and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Shastry, I. Balla, H. Bergeron, S. H. Amsterdam, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Selhorst, E. Puodziukynaite, J. A. Dewey, P. Wang, M. D. Barnes, A. Ramasubramaniam and T. Emrick, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4698 RSC .
K. Zhou, J. Liu, P. Wen, Y. Hu and Z. Gui, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 316, 237 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Park, S. R. Dugasani, D.-H. Kang, J. Jeon, S. K. Jang, S. Lee, Y. Roh, S. H. Park and J.-H. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, L. Yang, H. Zhou and P. D. Ye, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2016, 37, 429 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yue, D. Lee, Y. D. Jang, M. S. Choi, H. J. Nam, D.-Y. Jung and W. J. Yoo, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12773 RSC .
G. Abellan, V. Lloret, U. Mundloch, M. Marcia, C. Neiss, A. Gorling, M. Varela, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, J. Xu, J.-H. Park, B. H. Lee, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3143 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artel, Q. Guo, H. Cohen, R. Gasper, A. Ramasubramaniam, F. Xia and D. Naveh, NPJ 2D Mater. Applications, 2017, 1, 6 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, H. Xie, Z. Liu, C. Tan, C. Luo, H. Li, J. Lin, L. Sun, W. Chen, Z. Xu, L. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, H. Xie, S. Tang, X.-F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shao, H. Xie, H. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Sun, Y. Xu, Q. Xiao, X.-F. Yu, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Kim, Y. Liu, W. Zhu, S. Kim, D. Wu, L. Tao, A. Dodabalapur, K. Lai and D. Akinwande, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

A. Ramasubramaniam
	Ashwin Ramasubramaniam (PhD 2005) is an Associate Professor at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA, where he joined the faculty in 2009. He leads a research group in computational materials science with interests in theoretical modelling of optoelectronic properties of 2D materials, hybrid organic–inorganic materials, and nanoscale catalysts.

R. Selhorst
	Ryan Selhorst is a graduate student in the Polymer Science and Engineering department at the University of Massachusetts working with Prof. Todd Emrick. His thesis research focus is the functionalization of TMDCs utilizing polymers bearing a high density of chalcogen atoms, specifically targeted at the non-covalent physisorption of these polymers on TMDCs.

H. Alon
	Hadas Alon is a PhD student in the lab of Dr Doron Naveh (Engineering faculty) and the lab of Prof. Chaim Sukenik (Chemistry department) at Bar Ilan University. She studies surface chemistry applied to layered materials based devices. Her work focuses on organic–inorganic strategies of doping 2D materials and devices.

M. D. Barnes
	Michael Barnes obtained his PhD from Rice University in 1991, and held postdoctoral and research staff positions at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. In 2004, he joined the Chemistry faculty at UMass Amherst and has held an adjunct position in the Department of Physics since 2009. His research focuses on optoelectronic properties of semiconducting nanomaterials.

T. Emrick
	Todd Emrick (PhD 1997) is a Professor of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Emrick's research focus centers on the synthesis of new polymer materials, aqueous polymer assembly, and the connection of novel polymers to interfacial science, including fluid-fluid interfaces and the soft-hard materials interfaces involving 2D materials as described in this Highlight article.

D. Naveh
	Doron Naveh (PhD 2009) is an Assistant Professor at the Bar-Ilan University, Israel, where he joined the faculty in 2012. He leads a research group in experimental nanoelectronic devices based on 2D materials with interests in optoelectronics, spintronics, and hybrid organic–inorganic interfaces of layered compounds.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of covalent and non-covalent functionalization of TMDCs with functional polymers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Charge transfer between MoS2 and PTB7. (a) Chemical structure of PTB7. (b) Optical absorbance and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of a spin-coated PTB7 film. (c) Band alignment for PTB7 and MoS2. (d) PL spectra for films of PTB7 alone, MoS2 alone, and a PTB7–MoS2 bilayer. The inset shows nearly complete quenching of MoS2 PL and a small contribution from PTB7. (e) MoS2 PL as a function of PTB7 layer thickness. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Preparation of poly(TTF-norbornene) copolymers by ROMP; (b) post-polymerization cycloaddition affords TTF-substituted methacrylate copolymers. Adapted from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) KPFM data showing work function decrease for polymer-TTF-coated MoS2 nanosheets; (b) examples of enhanced dispersion of MoS2 nanosheets over ten days with 20–30 mole percent TTF in the polymer backbone; (c) microscopy images showing striking difference in dispersion vs. aggregation of MoS2 nanosheets based on the presence or absence of TTF-functionalized polymer. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of BP sample on Al2O3/Si substrate with a thick Al2O3 capping layer. (b) Sheet resistance maps approximated by microwave impedance microscopy (MIM) of a 16 nm-thick flake capped by 25 nm Al2O3. The images were acquired daily over one week. (c) Atomic force microscope (AFM) topography of the same flake taken during the same time duration. Neither MIM nor AFM showed discernible changes throughout this period. (d) AFM line profile of thin-cap (bottom) and thick-cap (top) samples. The blue and red lines are associated with Day 1 and Day 7, respectively. Substantial increase in thickness is seen at the edges of the thin-cap sample, while little change is observed for the sample with thick capping. All scale bars are 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
