Atomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B707553G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B707553G
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22, 973-1006Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAtomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometry

        
          
            Jeffrey R. 
            Bacon
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Kathryn L. 
            Linge
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Randall R. 
            Parrish
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Luc 
            Van Vaeck
          
        
      d
aThe Macaulay Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen, UK AB15 8QH. E-mail: j.bacon@macaulay.ac.uk
bNERC ICP Facility, School of Earth Sciences and Geography, Kingston University, Penrhyn Road, Kingston upon Thames, UK KT1 2EE
cDepartment of Geology, University of Leicester and NERC Isotope Geosciences Laboratory, Kingsley Dunham Centre, Keyworth, Nottingham, UK NG12 5GG
dMicro- and Trace Analysis Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Wilrijk, Belgium
Received 
      18th May 2007
    First published on 21st June 2007Contents1. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)1.1. Reviews1.2. AMS systems1.3. Methodology1.4. Developments in radiocarbon analysis1.5. Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbon2. Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)3. Gas chromatography-electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC-EIMS)4. Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)4.1. Reviews4.2. Instrumentation4.3. Analytical methodology5. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)5.1. Fundamental studies and instrumentation5.2. Interferences5.3. Sample introduction5.4. Speciation5.5. Isotope ratio measurement6. Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)6.1. Instrumentation6.2. Fundamental studies6.3. Analytical methodology7. Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)8. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)8.1. Reviews8.2. Instrumentation8.3. Fundamental studies8.4. Analytical methodology8.5. Quantitative analysis8.6. Single and multi-dimensional analysis9. Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)9.1. Fundamental studies9.2. Instrumentation9.3. Analytical methodology9.4. Imaging10. Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)10.1. Instrumentation10.2. Sample preparation10.3. Analytical methodology11. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)11.1. Review11.2. Analytical methodology12. Glossary of termsReferencesAbstract
This Update is part of a series of annual reviews which cover various aspects of analytical atomic spectrometry. This year’s review follows the same format as last year’s.1 Although an attempt is made to consider all relevant refereed papers, conference abstracts, reports, book chapters and patents for inclusion, the content of the review is highly selective. The selection of papers is based on criteria applied to focus sharply on the most significant developments in instrumentation and methodology or improved understanding of the fundamental phenomena involved in the MS process. The increasing importance of speciation and the blurring of boundaries between atomic and molecular MS require a high degree of judgement to be made in considering papers for inclusion. The main ruling criterion for all speciation papers is that the work should involve or be intended for the study of natural systems. For example, the study of synthetic metal clusters is generally not included, whereas the determination of organometallic compounds in environmental samples is.

Applications of atomic MS are not covered in this Update and readers are referred to the Updates on Industrial Analysis: Metals, Chemicals and Advanced Materials,2 Environmental Analysis3 and Clinical and Biological Materials, Food and Beverages.4 Other fundamental reviews appear on X-ray fluorescence spectrometry5 and atomic emission, absorption and fluorescence spectrometries.6

Throughout this review, the term molecular ion will be restricted to denote only the positive or negative radical ion formed by removal or capture, respectively, of an electron. In contrast, addition of a proton or cation to a neutral molecule gives molecular adduct ions. Deprotonated molecules are considered as fragments.

Although reproducibility or precision is a key figure of merit in MS, there is no agreed format for quoting it. The reader can assume that values of precision given in this Update as a percentage correspond to the RSD unless otherwise specified. For isotope ratios, however, values of precision are generally given as the SD of a permil value.

It is a widespread phenomenon that analytical techniques in general, and MS in particular, spawn a large number of abbreviations and acronyms. A glossary of all abbreviations used in this Update appears at the end of the review. Most abbreviations are not defined in the text but those which are unlikely to be commonly known are defined in the text when used first and again in the glossary.

The developments highlighted in this review indicate the very wide area of applications for which atomic MS can be used. From the measurement of very low isotopic abundances to the measurement of element concentrations at any scale, from bulk analysis to depth profiling and localized analysis, there is likely to be an MS procedure which can provide analytical performance competitive with any other technique. The excellent review by Lobinski et al.7 on the use of MS in bioinorganic analytical chemistry discussed recent developments in ESMS, ICP-MS and MALDI-MS for metal speciation analysis and provided numerous examples of applications to environmental, plant, animal and medical studies. Reviews on the speciation of As8 and Hg9 in environmental samples included MS detection within a wider consideration of all aspects of the analysis. An extensive review of iron isotope measurements and applications10 showed that while the processes that govern iron isotope variations in nature are just beginning to be understood, it is clear that the system has direct relevance to important problems in geosciences and biology. The field is developing rapidly with applications to geochemistry, cosmochemistry and biochemistry. The various sections of the review covered Fe isotope nucleosynthesis, sample preparation and analysis by SIMS, RIMS, TIMS and MC-ICP-MS, and Fe isotope behaviour in a wide range of environments, both extraterrestrial and terrestrial (low temperature aqueous and biological systems, and high temperature systems).

1. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)
1.1. Reviews
The excellent AMS review by Jull and Burr11 covered recent developments, future directions and examples of novel and interesting applications in a wide range of disciplines. Particular emphasis was placed on the trend towards smaller instruments, improvements to ion sources and new approaches to the chemical processing of samples. Within the next ten years AMS was foreseen to become much more widely used for surface exposure dating and in situ cosmogenic dating and to play an important role in improving our understanding of periodicities within the paleoclimate record. Gas ion sources for 14C measurement would become commonplace methods for coupling GC or HPLC on-line to AMS sources. The availability of small instruments would lead to a rapid increase in the number of laboratories using AMS routinely.
The review on the use of AMS in pharmacological and toxicological research discussed both methodology and a range of applications.12 The increased use of AMS had revolutionised high-sensitivity isotope detection by allowing the amount of isotope in a sample to be measured directly rather than through its decay. Exciting applications included the use of 14C-labelled potential carcinogens in the detection of modified proteins or DNA in tissues, monitoring 41Ca turnover in bone by measuring the absorption of 26Al and the high-resolution imaging of 14C in cells. Two chapters in a book on Biological Mass Spectrometry described the use of AMS for biomedical research13 and the tracing of isotopically labelled biochemicals.14
1.2. AMS systems
A new compact multielement 1 MV system with a 6.3 × 3.8 m footprint has been constructed for installation at the “Centro Nacional de Acceleradores” in Seville.15 Although designed primarily for the determination of light elements such as Al, Be and C, the system could also be used for the measurement of heavy elements such as I and Pu. A feature of the ion source was that both solid and gaseous samples could be analysed. Solid targets were stored in a vacuum chamber separate from the ionization chamber in order to minimize cross contamination. A detection efficiency of ∼95% for the rare isotope was achieved by combining a high frequency (∼100 Hz) cycling of the potential on the electrically isolated magnet chamber with short injection periods (100 μs) for the stable isotopes. The accelerator terminal was designed for the high gas-target-thickness (∼2 μg cm−2) needed to achieve efficient break-up of singly charged molecules. The rare isotope was identified with a new design of HR ionization chamber. Carbon was measured with a terminal voltage of 600–700 kV which was a compromise between the optimum voltage (∼500 kv) for charge exchange efficiency and the need for a thick stripper to destroy interfering molecules such as 13C1H and 12C1H2. Isobaric 10B in the measurement of 10Be was suppressed by inserting an absorber foil in front of the electrostatic chamber.
A new commercial 3 MV AMS system installed in Xi’an, China, also had a source designed for analysis of both solid and gaseous samples and a bouncer injection system.16 In comparison to earlier instruments of this type, a smaller holder size was used and the computer-controlled sample movement in the vertical plane was removed to avoid crater formation or fractionation. The injector featured a beam blanking unit, which deflected the beam whilst the bouncer voltage was settling down but allowed the beam to enter the accelerator when the voltage was stable. Another specific feature of the Xi’an injector was the use of 35 keV injection energy which is about half that of other systems. Initial results indicated that the new instrument with a bouncer injector performed as well as more conventional recombinator-based systems. The first AMS facility in India has been created by adding a new line to an existing 3 MV accelerator.17
1.3. Methodology
The complete elimination of isobaric interferences through the instability of atomic anions is unique to AMS but can only be applied to a few elements. Removal of interferences through gas-phase ion–molecule reactions, commonly used in ICP-MS to resolve atomic isobars, was considered to be a viable alternative solution for AMS.18 Although a reaction cell in an ICP-MS instrument was used to test possible ion–molecule reactions, it was considered that such cells incorporated into an AMS system would make resolution of the heaviest atomic isobars possible. This would require, however, development of reactions to produce anions used in AMS rather than cations produced in most existing reaction cells.
1.4. Developments in radiocarbon analysis
In the radiocarbon dating of ancient bone, low-molecular-weight contaminants (for example, degraded collagen fragments, salts and soil-derived amino acids) can be of a different age from the bone and unless removed may lead to inaccurate data. For this reason, relatively few laboratories attempt to date bone samples even though these could be ideal samples for archaeological dating. Ultrafiltration of gelatinized collagen was developed to separate high-molecular-weight (>30 kD) components from low-molecular-weight (<30 kD) compounds.19 This successfully removed the contaminants and resulted in more reliable data than were previously obtained. The authors questioned the reliability of data obtained previously following ion-exchange separations and suggested that bones containing low levels of collagen (<50 mg gelatin) should be re-dated. The ultrafiltration method was not without problems, however, in that glycerol used to coat the regenerated-cellulose membrane of the filter was difficult to remove by standard cleaning procedures and introduced an offset to the measured radiocarbon age. Effective cleaning protocols were developed but no details were provided.
An apparatus for the melting and filtration of glacier ice samples under clean conditions was developed for the dating of glacier ice by radiocarbon analysis of the particulate organic carbon (POC) fraction.20 The small amounts of POC in glacier ice placed considerable constraints on the analysis, however, and although 18–307 μg of C could be recovered from 0.3–1.7 kg of ice, the processing blanks originating from the filters and rinsing liquids amounted to 5–30 μg C. Further improvement to the reproducibility of the filter blanks was needed as these contributed 23% to the total uncertainty. Measurements on as little as 10 μg C were possible when the small-sample graphitization unit was semi-automated. Changes in instrument operation included injection of the stable-isotope beams for longer periods and automatic adjustment of the sensitivities of the beam current amplifiers. These procedures were developed because the age of POC in ice from before the industrial era was considered to correspond to the age of ice formation. Analyses of samples from a single glacier revealed a large scatter of dates, however, and dating of single POC samples was therefore considered to be of little significance.
Borosilicate filters, commonly used in routine PM10monitoring, are not completely suitable for AMS analysis because they have a relatively low melting point (∼700 °C) and melt during the combustion process. A modified temperature programme used in the analysis of air particulate samples held the temperature at 680 °C to maximize combustion before raising the temperature to a level at which the filters melted.21 Whereas the contribution of fossil carbon sources to the atmosphere remained relatively constant (1.0 ± 0.7 μg C m−3) throughout the year, that from wood combustion increased dramatically during the winter months and contributed 97–99% of the wintertime particulate matter.
A novel approach for the measurement of DNA adducts in humans avoided any administration of radiocarbon to the subject by labelling the compound of interest with 14C after recovering it from the subject.22 The method involved isolation of specific adducts from DNA using enzymatic digestion, enrichment and addition of 14C-labelled groups on to the adduct. The method was applied to the determination of highly mutagenic O6-methyldeoxyguanosine for which the AMS LOD was 79 amol, about 18000-fold lower than that achievable by liquid scintillation counting. Although the method had so far not been applied to adducts isolated from humans or animals, the sensitivity demonstrated provided the potential for measuring much lower levels of adducts than was previously possible and for establishing background levels.
1.5. Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbon
Depth resolution in AMS depth profiling depends on the production of flat-bottomed craters by the sputter ion beam. To avoid the costly increase in measurement time associated with sweeping the beam, commonly used in SIMS analysis, a simple mathematical unfolding procedure was developed to correct for crater edge effects.23 The procedure used the crater dimensions provided by optic profilometry of the crater at the end of the experiment. An iterative correction of the sidewall contribution was then applied to successive layers going down the profile. The method worked well if the crater profile could be approximated by a truncated cone but was unsuitable for cases in which host material was displaced during ion bombardment or if the host material had a loose structure. In these cases, the alternative raster methods were seen as the best solution.
The most commonly used of the cosmogenic nuclides for surface exposure dating is 10Be, which is extracted from quartz and measured by AMS with an abundance sensitivity of ∼10−15 for the 10Be:9Be ratio. The BeO− ion beam current depended strongly on the metal matrix in which BeO was dispersed, on the matrix:BeO ratio and, for some metals such as Ag, on the depth to which the sample was packed in the AMS cathode.24 The Be3+ currents produced by a Cs sputter ion source ranged from 7.6 (silver matrix) to 27.5 μA (vanadium matrix). The inverse linear correlation between electron affinity of the matrix and the beam current suggested that the propensity of the matrix to attach electrons determined the strength of the ion current. These results confirmed the advantages of using niobium instead of the commonly used silver as matrix and provided the basis for optimizing sample preparation. In the use of 36Cl for establishing exposure ages, an ID method had the advantages over the commonly used method (AMS determination of 36Cl and measurement of the total Cl concentration using an ion-selective electrode) of simultaneous measurement of both 36Cl and Cl in a single target, improved accuracy and precision and reduced sample size requirement.25 Particular attention had to be paid to preventing loss of Cl during the acid digestion of samples. Small samples of all types of rock were digested in sealed bombs. Larger samples (>5 g) of carbonates could be digested in open vessels provided AgNO3 was added to the sample to prevent volatilization of Cl but the method was untested for large silicate rock samples. Ages for samples with low Cl concentrations and high Ca + K concentrations were insensitive to analytical uncertainties in the 35Cl:37Cl ratio or to traces of Cl contamination from reagents because the errors were cancelled out when propagated to age.
Measurements of long-lived cosmogenic nuclides such as 53Mn, or radionuclides produced in supernovae such as 182Hf and 146Sm, are highly dependent on selective sample preparation methods for removing isobaric stable isotopes with high abundance. The main interference in the detection of 53Mn is the stable isobar 53Cr which is ∼1012 times more abundant in nature. A liquid–liquid extraction procedure using trioctylamine (TOA) diluted in cyclohexane gave a separation factor of ∼1.6 × 104 for the separation of Mn from Cr under optimum conditions of 0.8 M TOA as organic phase and 9 M HCl as aqueous phase.26 A better separation factor of 1.6 × 106 was obtained for the separation of Hf from W using 0.3 M TOA and 6 M HCl (in the presence of a small amount of H2O2).27 A similar procedure for the separation of Sm from Nd also gave a very high separation factor of ∼106 for the separation of 146Sm from 146Nd, which is 106 times more abundant.28 The Nd and Sm in a 0.025 M HCl solution were reduced with hydroxylamine hydrochloride and extracted into di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (0.1% in cyclohexane). To ensure complete separation, the Sm was back-extracted into 0.1 M HCl.
The potential of the new generation of compact AMS instruments has been demonstrated by the measurement of the 240Pu:239Pu ratio in soils from the vicinity of a thermonuclear bomb accident.29 The measurements could be undertaken on as little as 1–2 g of soil thanks to the low LOD (∼106 atoms) achievable for both isotopes. The soils, spiked with 242Pu and ignited at 500 °C, were digested in strong acids and the Pu isolated using anion-exchange resin. The Pu isotopes were extracted from the ion source as PuO−, stripped to Pu3+ at 330 keV with Ar gas and mass analysed. This was the first time that the 240Pu:239Pu ratio has been used to demonstrate the presence of weapons grade Pu in low-activity samples. Such measurements cannot be made using α-spectrometry because of the very similar α-energy emissions of the two isotopes.
2. Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)
A review on the role of MS for metal speciation analysis in phytochemistry concluded that ESMS had become an extremely useful tool for the detection and molecular characterization of biochemical species.30 This was illustrated by numerous examples covering a wide range of biomolecule species. The use of ESMS was, however, considered complementary to that of ICP-MS for quantitation. The scientific principles involved in developing an ES ion source provided useful detail on the role that the geometry of the ion source played in the processes of analyte desolvation, ionization, transportation and detection.31 Some popular configurations were described and future developments considered.
The two elements As and Se dominate the use of ESMS for speciation analysis. A new trend is the use of ESMS alone for quantitative speciation analysis, in particular for As, for which the diversity of species requires high detection selectivity which is unavailable by HPLC-ICP-MS.32 Such analyses are usually based on selected reaction monitoring which is applied routinely to trace analysis of organic compounds but only rarely to trace element speciation. The collision-induced dissociation (CID) of 50 organoarsenic species was investigated with a view to optimizing their detection using anion exchange separation coupled with a triple-quadrupole ESMS instrument operated in the selected reaction monitoring mode. For all but one of the 50 species two different transitions were monitored in rapid sequence throughout the chromatographic run. Issues addressed included whether the total scan time for one data point could be kept small in comparison with the width of the chromatographic peak, whether As species with parent ions of very similar m/z values could be mass-separated sufficiently and whether co-eluting matrix compounds can have selected reaction monitoring transitions in common with the As compounds. Although analysis in the selected reaction monitoring mode provided LOD, linearity and reproducibility comparable, for most species, with those obtained by HPLC-ICP-MS, matrix effects caused signal suppression and placed a severe limitation on the quantification of some compounds.33 These effects could not be removed by a three-stage sample clean-up procedure so calibration using standard additions was applied, an approach which was also adopted in the application of selected reaction monitoring to the analysis of crude extracts of 12 commercially available marine algal powders.34
Use of selected reaction monitoring has one major disadvantage in that one needs to know the identity of the compound to be detected. A variation on the same theme has been developed, however, to detect unknown arsenosugar compounds in a non-targeted analysis.35 In precursor ion scanning, scans were made for precursor ions which give specific product ions (m/z 97, 137, 253), chosen as being characteristic of the two main groups of arsenosugars, the oxo- and thioarsenosugars. The approach was validated by analysing two commercial kelp powders with known contents of arsenosugar species but had not yet been applied to the analysis of “unknown” samples. This methodology opens up the possibility of demonstrating the presence of a variety of unknown arsenosugars in marine samples and would be the first stage in identifying the compounds.

Improvements to the chromatographic procedures for separation of As compounds made it possible to detect thioarsenosugars at the low μg l−1 level in crude extracts.36 The use of anion exchange chromatography with gradient elution using 20 mM NH4HCO3 containing either 0 or 40% methanol allowed two novel arsine–sulfide-containing arsenosugars to be identified in marine bivalve samples. In addition, the presence of all four thioarsenosugars in marine algae was reported for the first time. In contrast, a mobile phase of 20 mM NH4HCO3 containing 55% methanol was found to be optimum for the separation of thioarsenosugars from fresh scallop samples.37 At methanol concentrations of <40%, the S/N for most thioarsenosugars became poor. Both these studies highlighted the fact that the optimum conditions for ESMS analysis were unsuitable for HPLC-ICP-MS and that two separate chromatographic systems were needed.
Selenized yeast is a natural product but commercial preparations vary considerably both in total Se concentration and in Se speciation. The incompatibility of methanolic mobile phases with ICP-MS, highlighted in the analysis of As compounds, has been overcome for simultaneous ESMS and ICP-MS analysis of selenized yeast samples by diluting the flow to the ICP-MS instrument after splitting of the chromatographic column effluent into two streams.38 It was possible to identify a number of Se-containing compounds, both previously reported and unknown species, within a single chromatographic run of untreated water extracts of the yeast. Accurate mass data for the [M + H]+ ions containing 78Se or 80Se and for their associated product ions allowed two compounds, methyl-Se–glutathione and a Se–glutathione species with a S–Se bridge between glutathione and Se–cysteinyl-γ-glutamylglycine, to be identified in yeast for the first time.
An alternative approach to the analysis of yeast digests was to develop identical separation and preconcentration conditions suitable for both ESMS and ICP-MS and to ensure retention time reproducibility.39 In this way, two matching sets of chromatograms could be run, one for element-specific analysis and one to provide structural information. Two mobile phases of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water or acetonitrile were mixed to provide gradient elution. On-line preconcentration of the Se-containing species on a C18 capillary column removed salts and cleaned the samples, and thereby resulted in an improvement of retention time reproducibility and close to ideal detection conditions for ESMS analysis. A third chromatogram was run to obtain CID data for the target peptides. The method was as efficient as the previously used off-line procedures but was more sensitive and less time consuming. A previously characterized digest of selenized yeast protein was used as a model system to test the procedure which had not yet been applied to “unknown” samples.
Dramatically improved purification involving on-line nano-HPLC-ES-TOFMS analysis following a one-step fractionation of an aqueous extract by SEC has been developed for the identification of Se species in selenized yeast.40 Characterization of the observed Se species involved accurate m/z measurements in full-scan mode as well as fragmentation data from CID experiments. The S/N was better for this new ESMS method than for ICP-MS analysis and provided absolute LOD in the pg range, corresponding to 0.02–0.06% of the total Se injected. A similar approach, based on successive SEC and hydrophilic interaction HPLC, was used to purify traces of Ni species from a plant aqueous extract.41 The degree of purity was such that several non-covalent metal complexes could be identified for the first time in different parts of the metal hyperaccumulator plant Thlaspi caerulescens.
The ESMS measurement of metals in biological specimens has the advantages over ICP-MS of a much lower sample requirement and freedom from isobaric interferences. In the determination of Pt derived from cisplatin in tissue samples, Pt and Ag (added as internal standard) were reacted with diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC) and extracted into isoamyl alcohol.42 Acidification of the Pt–DDC complex to form a ternary complex enhanced the signal of Pt(DDC)3 and gave an LOD of 30 pg Pt, with a quantitation range of 0.1–10 ng using 5 mg tissue. Accuracy and precision for the analysis of spiked samples were both <10%. In a very similar procedure using Ru as internal standard, the sample requirement for the determination of Mo in urine samples as the Mo(DDC)4 complex was only 1 μl, whereas 1 ml was needed for ICP-MS analysis.43 The LOD was 20 μg ml−1. The methodology was considered suitable for the determination of other metals through the choice of appropriate reductants, oxidants and solvents to produce weakly charged species suitable for ESMS. A highly selective and sensitive method for the screening of the SbV–citrate complex in urine samples involved analysis in the selected reaction monitoring mode.44 The citrate complex was shown to form in samples spiked with inorganic Sb but detection in “real” samples had yet to be demonstrated. Each individual urine sample produced a specific matrix background so subtraction of blanks was considered essential.
Metal ion determination by ES ion trap MS involved trapping on iron oxide magnetic beads with nitrilotriacetic acid immobilized on their surface.45 The metals were eluted from the beads using EDTA and the EDTA eluent was analysed by electrodeless/sheathless ES ion trap MS. Use of the magnetic beads reduced matrix interferences and measurement of the EDTA complex removed the problem of low volatility. Application of the procedure to the determination of Ca in dairy drinks gave results to within 4% of the expected values. The calibration curve was linear up to 9 mg l−1, above which concentration the magnetic beads became saturated.
The importance of ESMS analysis as a complementary technique to ICP-MS analysis has been highlighted by a wide range of studies. Standards are not available for many of the compounds detected so the use of molecular characterization techniques becomes essential. The characterization and on-line monitoring of Se compounds in human urine following consumption of Se-rich food was optimized by analysis of commercially available sugars because some of the metabolites contained a sugar moiety.46 The procedure was efficient for the characterization of the main urinary Se metabolite (selenomethyl-N-acetylhexosamine) but required both extensive sample clean-up to remove urea and salts and preconcentration of the metabolite. As Se-containing artefact compounds can be formed during both storage and the analytical procedure itself, the use of ESMS was considered essential to confirm the identity of Se compounds in yeast samples.47 In the analysis of alfalfa sprouts, use of ESMS demonstrated the possible presence of Se–2-propenylselenocysteine.48 Further work, including synthesis of the compound, was, however, needed to confirm its presence in the samples. A limitation of this study was the need to bulk individual fractions from five to ten HPLC runs in order to get sufficient sample for ES-TOFMS analysis. The LOD for a range of Se compounds in garlic extracts, including in vitro gastrointestinal digests, were in the range 0.1–5 mg l−1 when operating in the selected reaction monitoring mode.49 Detection was based on the on-line monitoring of typical product ions of the Se-containing species so there was no need for extensive sample clean-up. The main species detected in a hot-water extract of garlic were γ-glutamyl–Se–methylselenocysteine, selenomethionine and Se–methylselenocysteine. Selenomethionine, an essential selenoamino acid and the major nutritional source of Se for animals, was the predominant metabolite detected in in vitro gastrointestinal digests of selenized yeast.50 Upon storage the selenomethionine degraded to selenomethionine selenoxide. In comparison with previous studies on water extracts of yeast, this study addressed directly those Se species that are bioaccessible to humans. Whereas 89 ± 3% of total Se was extracted after gastrointestinal digestion, only 34 ± 1% was quantified as free selenomethionine, indicating that the conversion by gastrointestinal juice of Se-containing proteins into free selenomethionine was inefficient. Typical examples of As analysis include As speciation in Antarctic algae51 and the identification of As–peptide complexes in Brassica juncea.52
3. Gas chromatography-electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC-EIMS)
The availability of commercially available spike solutions containing mixtures of MBT, DBT and TBT labelled with 129Sn has facilitated the development of species-specific ID methods for the determination of these compounds in waters and other environmental matrices. The driver for this work was the need for sensitive, selective and accurate methods that can be applied routinely to meet the requirements of EU legislation on TBT concentrations in fresh waters. Whereas Centineo et al.53 developed a methodology for determination of the three butyltin compounds in waters, Moreno et al.54 developed a method for the simultaneous determination of methylmercury and the three butyltin compounds in both solid and aqueous environmental samples. Both studies selected ethylation to derivatize the Sn compounds, primarily because propylation generated co-eluting interfering compounds, measured the [M − 29]+ ion (loss of an ethyl group) for the butyltin compounds, and applied a mathematical correction for contributions of 13C in the organic groups attached to the metal atoms. Centineo et al.53 achieved LOD of 0.18–0.25 ng Sn l−1 and precisions of 2 and 4% for concentrations of 100 and 10 ng l−1, respectively. The three butyltin compounds in sea-water samples were stabilized by adding glacial acetic acid (1% of the sample volume) during sampling. Moreno et al.54 found it necessary to clean samples prior to analysis in order to eliminate problems of spectral interferences, especially in the analysis of complex matrices. The LOD in water samples were 0.63, 0.15, 0.12 and 0.14 ng l−1 for methylmercury, MBT, DBT, TBT, respectively.
In contrast to the two studies reported in the previous paragraph, propylation was chosen for the ID determination of methylmercury in tuna because it reduced the measurement uncertainty.55 After extraction from the sample, methylmercury was propylated in SPME vials and the derivative sampled from the headspace (15 min). The methylpropylmercury molecular ion was measured in the selected ion monitoring mode. The method LOD of 28 ng g−1 was considerably higher than that (2 ng g−1) reported for GC-ICP-MS but adequate for legislation purposes (1 μg g−1 wet weight). Analysis of canned tuna fish samples from different suppliers revealed that methylmercury was detectable in all samples even though the concentrations were well below the legislative limit.
Of three derivatising agents investigated, 1-propanethiol was selected for the determination of seven organoarsenic warfare agents because it gave the best yield and intense molecular ions.56 The purpose of the study was to identify and quantify new organoarsenic compounds in sediments taken from the vicinity of scuttled ships. The LOD for tripropanethiol arsine, clark I propanethiol derivative and phenyldipropanethiol arsine, were 6, 6 and 3 μg g−1, respectively.
4. Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)
4.1. Reviews
A concise review highlighted the emerging potential of GD to access an important niche of applications in surface analysis, specifically those that need fast erosion with high depth resolution, multi-element detection, LOD in the sub-ppm range and minimal matrix effects.57 The favourable depth resolution and minimal sample damage in comparison with, for instance, SIMS was related to the energy of the bombarding projectiles, being as low as 50 eV. In addition, the wide incidence angle range of the Ar+ ions made sputtering isotropic, thereby improving the flatness of the crater. These advantages were available together with a high current density, allowing erosion rates of >1 μm min−1 to be used for easy analysis of films as thick as 100 μm.
A comprehensive review focused on spatially confined discharges and plasmas in which the increased effect of boundary-dominated phenomena generated new analytical possibilities.58 Working at a sub-mm scale allowed a stable GD to be maintained at atmospheric pressure without deterioration into the arc regime. Pulsed excitation on a sub-μs time scale could substantially shift both the temperatures and the energy distribution functions of ions and electrons for the selective production of chemically reactive species. The physics behind the different source designs used in gas and surface analysis was addressed. The microplasma technology was believed to offer great potential for the development of bench top or even portable analysis instruments with, in the case of pulsed GD, the capability to complement elemental analysis with structural ions for speciation of analytes, including organic compounds.
The use of particle beam (PB) interfaces for speciation with LC-GD was treated in a 90-reference review, covering fundamental aspects such as: principles; solvent removal and analyte delivery; and advantages and disadvantages of PB in relation to other interfaces such as the moving belt.59 The discussion of the on-going development focused on its potential for “comprehensive speciation” analysis, allowing analytes ranging from ions to organic compounds, organometallics, and small biomolecules, to be determined with molecular specificity. Unlike other methods, fragmentation patterns in PB-GDMS were quite similar to those in conventional EI-MS, thereby facilitating deductive identification.
4.2. Instrumentation
A TOFMS instrument with an easy-to-operate dc GD source using He at atmospheric pressure allowed singly charged atomic ions to be generated in the absence of problematic polyatomic background ions.60 The simple discharge could be sustained by a dc power supply with modest voltage (0.9–1.2 kV) and current requirements (40–100 mA). Noise power spectra obtained from He+ ions in an analyte-free discharge showed the absence of discrete-frequency noise sources. The LOD for 75As was 10 ng g−1 and the precisions of the determinations and isotope ratios were within 0.2% and 0.6–1%, respectively.
An original set-up consisting of a pulsed-flow GD source with orthogonal ion extraction into a two-reflector TOFMS analyser was evaluated as detector in GC.61 The two-reflector design allowed either a V- or a W-shaped trajectory to be used for experiments in the high sensitivity or HR modes, respectively. Using an extraction pulse of 2 μs, the mass resolutions measured for 208Pb+ were 5500 and about 1200 (FWHM) in the high resolution and high sensitivity modes, respectively. Switching from the high resolution to the high sensitivity mode increased the Cu+ ion signal by one order of magnitude. The precisions of the Cu+ signal intensity and 63Cu+:65Cu+ ion ratio were better than 1 and 1.5%, respectively.
4.3. Analytical methodology
A new method for the preparation of adequate calibration standards for analysis in a dc-GDMS instrument with Grimm-type discharge cell for flat samples was based on the wet doping of high purity copper and iron powders with solutions containing trace concentrations of the analyte and application of a special pressing technique to ensure homogeneity of the pellets without contamination.62 The powders were doped with 20–40 elements at concentrations of 1–1000 μg g−1. The calibration of the analyte ion intensity normalized to that of the matrix ion as a function of the concentration showed excellent linearity over at least three and, for some elements, even four orders of magnitude. The experimental results for 16–20 elements in several CRM (Euranorm and NIST Iron matrix, Forschungsinstitute für Nichteisenmetalle copper) showed a correlation with certified values of >0.995 and 0.999 in the concentrations ranges up to 500 and 1000 μg g−1, respectively.
The addition of H2 to an Ar rf GD revealed a different effect on the intensity of the analyte ion signals in TOFMS from that seen with a dc GD.63 Argon with 0.5–10% (v/v) H2 was used in the analysis of conducting Ni-base RM (24X-WASP1-B, MBH Analytical) and two homogeneous glass samples. The dc bias voltage measured at the back of the conducting sample and sputtering rate of the nickel sample varied linearly with the forward discharge power between 30 and 70 W with virtually identical slopes for all H2 concentrations. Compared with the discharge in pure Ar, the analytical signals from the nickel sample were about a factor of two higher when 1 or 10% H2 was added but were lower in a mixture with 0.5% H2. In contrast, glass samples yielded a maximum increase of most analytical ion intensities by a factor between two and six when 0.5% H2 was added.

Fast depth profiling of nm-thick layers over a depth of 250 nm was shown to be achievable with a pulsed rf GD-TOFMS instrument developed in-house.64 The commercial Grimm-type source was operated with Ar at 5–9 hPa and a flow rate of 0.2 l min−1 to improve ion transport towards the skimmer interface, after which orthogonal extraction into a TOFMS with reflector was applied. The 50 kHz operating frequency of the analyser allowed several spectra to be sampled from a single rf pulse. Depth profiling of an aluminium sample with an oxide layer (240 nm thick) containing a Cr-marker layer (2 nm thick) resulted in an experimental peak width of 4 nm (FWHM), even though the sputtering rate was as high as 15 nm s−1. The significant broadening as a result of layer mixing during ion bombardment was considered fair in view of the extremely short acquisition times.
5. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
5.1. Fundamental studies and instrumentation
A low consumption torch for ICP-MS reduced Ar plasma gas flow rates to ∼2 l min−1, from the ∼15 l min−1 used typically.65 The static torch was cooled externally by air at 80 l min−1 through 6 nozzles incorporated into the PTFE torch holder, which was designed to fit in the original torch holder of the commercial instrument. The ICP was ignited with 0.65 kW rf power and 1.3 l min−1 plasma gas flow. Positioning the torch close to the cone ensured that no air entered the interface region and also minimized static discharges between the plasma and the sampling cone. As the pressure at the interface was higher than with traditional torches, a high-performance pump was installed in the interface region. Argon-based background signals were less pronounced for the static torch than for a conventional Fassel torch when both were fitted with the same concentric nebulizer. The highest background signals came instead from N- and O-based ions similar to those observed under cold plasma conditions. The high production of doubly charged ions (Ce2+:Ce+
					∼ 44%) indicated that the static torch would benefit from capacitive shielding, as commonly used for cold plasma conditions. Optimum nebulizer flow rates were lower for the static torch (∼0.5 l min−1), which was unstable at the optimum flow rate for the Fassel torch (1.1 l min−1). The LOD were generally an order of magnitude poorer for the static torch but the authors anticipated that sensitivity would improve with the development of a sample introduction system and interface optimized for low gas flow rates (∼0.5 l min−1).
A previously reported Faraday-strip array detector has been extended from 32 to 128 ion collectors.66 Higher spatial resolution and less inter-collector dead space improved the resolving power (M/ΔM = 600) and broader dynamic range (more than seven orders of magnitude) compared with the original design. Other improvements included independent control of the gain level of each collector and more efficient detection by lengthening each collector to span the height of the incoming ion beam. Peltier cooling of the detector chip reduced white noise exponentially, with the minimum reached at 1.70 A (equivalent to a chip temperature of −30 °C). Isotope ratio measurements were more accurate for the second generation detector because the greater number of detectors made it easier to centre the two isotopes on two different collectors. Isotope ratio error was generally <1%, except in the region of the spectrum between 40Ar+ and 40Ar2+, where high ion currents increased noise. Isotope ratio precision and LOD were similar to the first generation detector.
The effect of generator frequency on ICP characteristics has been evaluated for both hot (1.35 kW rf power) and cool (0.85 kW rf power) plasma conditions using an ICP-TOFMS instrument with an rf generator operable at either 27 or 40 MHz.67 The same power supply, impedance-matching unit, load coil and ICP torch were used at both operating frequencies and performance was comparable in terms of background noise, measurement precision, sensitivity, doubly charged and oxide formation and ion energy. Experimentally determined gas-kinetic and ionization temperatures showed no significant dependence on the plasma operating frequency. Matrix effects were slightly greater for the 27 MHz operating frequency but the authors considered this an artefact of the lower optimal nebulizer flow rate required. The higher ion energies and greater plasma offset potential apparent at 27 MHz under cold plasma conditions could also be an artefact of flow rate differences rather than frequency.
Measurement of Ar atom velocities in the expansion zone by diode laser spectroscopy enabled gas kinetic temperatures in the ICP to be calculated.68 Velocities were measured using the Doppler shift in Ar fluorescence excitation peak from the expansion zone compared with the fluorescence from an Ar-filled hollow cathode lamp. As expected, the gas kinetic temperature increased either with decreasing nebulizer or auxiliary gas flows or with increasing rf power. Altering the plasma gas flow had no effect. Counter intuitively, the gas kinetic temperature also increased with increased water loading. This was attributed to higher thermal conductivity from increased H. Addition of 100 mg l−1 Li statistically lowered the ICP temperature, as confirmed by lower absolute Ar fluorescence signal and the Doppler shift. The gas kinetic temperatures of typical hot and cold plasmas were measured as 7380 ± 30 K and 5080 ± 40 K, respectively. The same group of researchers used diode laser spectroscopy of metastable argon atoms to characterize the first (expansion) vacuum stage of the interface.69 Spatially resolved velocities, temperatures and trajectories of neutral Ar atoms within 20 mm downstream of the sampling cone were consistent with supersonic expansion, including initial rapid expansion and cooling of atoms and the development of a slower, hotter population about 10 mm downstream of the sampling cone. Fluorescence excitation profiles from beyond 10 mm were fitted by a combination of two Gaussian curves, confirming two populations of atoms and the formation of a Mach disk and barrel shock. Reduction of the nebulizer gas flow from 1.4 l min−1 to 0.6 l min−1 increased plasma temperatures and, correspondingly, downstream velocities. Similarly, temperature increased linearly with increasing forward power. However, aspirating a 50 mg l−1 Li solution did not statistically alter downstream velocities. While consistent with established theory, the supersonic expansion in the vacuum stage incorporated features generally overlooked in the ICP literature, particularly the diffuse nature of the Mach disk and barrel shock. The study provided a reference point for planned future studies of ion behaviour.
A study of radial ion profiles in an ICP demonstrated that spatial profiling was an efficient way of investigating matrix effects.70 Although both methanol (2% v/v in 1% HNO3) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (0.2% v/v in 1% HNO3) induced the same increase in sample transport (37%), neither resulted in a uniform increase in analyte signal across the mass range. As an anionic surfactant, SDS increased the signal intensity for low mass elements but suppressed that for high mass elements. In contrast, methanol caused little change in signal at high mass but suppressed signal at lower mass (except that for As). Unlike the bell shaped curve seen for both 1% HNO3 and SDS, analytes in methanol produced the same bimodal profile with maxima on either side of the central axis as seen for C+, CO+ and ArC+. This confirmed that ionization predominantly occurred through carbon charge transfer and suggested that volatile organic solvents like methanol spread into the surrounding area of the central channel upon entering the plasma. The widening radial dispersion of each ion was inversely dependent on mass as lighter ions diffused more readily then heavier. The increase in rf power for optimum signal for methanol also suggested that SDS caused less plasma cooling, either because long chain molecules were less likely to dissociate or as a result of lower carbon loading (0.8 M C for methanol and 0.08 M for SDS in this study).

Sample pre-evaporation improved the axial and radial distribution of ions in the ICP of an ICP-TOFMS instrument.71 Heating a connecting tube (2 or 5 mm id, 11 cm long) between the spray chamber and the torch to 400 °C shifted the optimal axial position of all measured elements (Al, As, Cd, Cr, La, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, Sb, Se, V, Zn) closer to the load coil. With heating, the best axial position for multi-element analysis decreased from 3.5 mm (optimal for 6 analytes) to 1.5 mm (optimal for 9 analytes). Furthermore, the radial profiles were significantly narrower and Gaussian-like when using the heated tube, probably as a result of the lower sampling depth minimising the extent of radial diffusion, and increased gas volume and flow rate through the injector tube. Formation of LaO+ also occurred closer to the coil with heating, thereby giving more time for dissociation. These narrower profiles doubled the sensitivity for all elements except Mn. Background noise reduction resulting from the smaller droplets entering the plasma decreased the RSD of the blank for nine analytes, which translated to an order of magnitude improvement in LOD.
The desolvation rate of isolated water droplets in an ICP has been measured using fluctuations in the Mie scattering intensity of light reflected/diffracted from the droplet surface and light transmitted/refracted through the droplet, both of which are functions of the droplet diameter.72 Isolated droplets (∼24 μm diameter) were reproducibly injected into the ICP using a monodisperse microparticulate injector. Although Mie scattering intensity was dependant on droplet size, two droplets of different size could give the same Mie scattering intensity. Therefore, absolute droplet diameters were measured independently, either by using a phase Doppler particle analyser at one location within the plasma or by matching experimental results to a series of theoretical Mie scattering intensity patterns as the droplet evaporated. True desolvation rates were calculated from the distance-based scattering patterns using plasma gas velocities estimated from double exposures of an ion cloud. Unsurprisingly, droplet desolvation at 1250 W rf power was greater than at 750 W but the difference in absolute desolvation was not dramatic because of corresponding faster velocities. Droplet desolvation rates from 0.1 M NaCl solutions were not significantly different from those from solutions with low total dissolved solids, although the initial emission occurred earlier. Desolvation rates (e.g., 0.65 m2 s−1 in 1000 W Ar ICP) were higher than those reported previously and the authors intended to perform further studies to confirm these preliminary results.
5.2. Interferences
A new method for achieving lower oxide interference intensities manipulated the central-channel gas flow of the ICP to impart distinguishable frequency-specific behaviour to analyte and oxide species.73 Flow modulation occurred by inserting a cyclonic mixer between the spray chamber and the torch and manipulating the command voltage to the supplemental mass flow controller. Small changes in central-gas flow produced unique, stable and predictable analyte and oxide responses. Subsequent Fourier transformation for unravelling the superimposed contributions from the analyte and oxide required careful selection of modulation mid-point (normally the point at which analyte signal was optimized) and modulation range using test solutions. The modulated analyses eliminated the ten-fold increase in measured signal, compared with the expected signal, usually observed in steady-state analyses at m/z 156 for 156Gd in the presence of 1 mg l−1 Ce. The correction method was also tested for multiple analyte–oxide interferences (89Y16O on 105Pd, 90Zr16O on 106Pd, 91Zr16O on 107Ag and 181Ta16O on 197Au) using a compromise flow rate based on that for 156Gd and 140Ce16O. While ratios of measured analyte responses to expected analyte responses were closer to unity for modulated than steady state analyses, the method did not correct the interference fully. The authors noted that severe matrix interferences could shift the position of optimum nebulizer flow, meaning that optimal instrumental modulation conditions became sample dependent. In a second paper using central-channel gas flow modulation, interferences were eliminated using mathematical correlation between the interferent-compromised analyte and an internal standard rather than by using Fourier transformation.74 Experiments with 156Gd in the presence of 140Ce16O, using 133Cs as an internal standard, showed the most effective correction occurred when the phase difference between analyte and interferent was 90°. However, analysis of four possible internal standards (Bi, Cs, Eu and Li) demonstrated that small variations in phase change meant that the optimum modulation range was affected by both the interference and the internal standard. The corrections for interferences in the same set of four multiple analyte–oxide interferences tested previously were all improved except for that for 105Pd because 89Y16O+ had significantly different optimal gas flows from the other isotopes. However full cross calibration, where correlation at every possible temporal displacement was calculated, eliminated completely all four interferences simultaneously. The multielement capability of the method was limited to ICP-TOFMS.
Operating with ‘warm’
					plasma ICP-MS (as opposed to traditional hot or cool plasmas) created a sufficient Ar+ population to ionize Se, but at the same time minimized the Ar2+ dimer that peaks at both lower and higher plasma powers.75 Optimum rf power (720 W) was the highest power at which measured 78Se:80Se and 76Se:80Se ratios were consistent with theoretical values. The background at m/z 78 was 130 times lower in warm plasma than hot plasma conditions, whereas signal intensity only halved. Sample introduction via hydride generation (HG) increased Se transport and minimized matrix effects, thereby giving a LOD for 78Se (1 ng l−1) comparable to other techniques such as dynamic reaction cell (DRC) ICP-MS, laser-enhanced ionization or laser-induced fluorescence. The diverging signal of other hydride-generating elements such as As, Bi or Sb was attributed to varying HG production efficiencies. Results from HG warm plasma ICP-MS for cloud waters agreed with those from pneumatic micronebulization hot plasma ICP-MS.
The tripling of Te sensitivity by using ethanol as a matrix modifier (4% v/v) was attributed to carbon charge transfer reactions.76 The suppression of Xe interferences by a factor of six was attributed to plasma cooling. Carbon transfer reactions could not occur with Xe because it has a higher IP than C. Sensitivity was further improved as the 126Te and 128Te isotopes could be monitored instead of the less abundant 125Te isotope. Concentrations calculated using both 126Te and 128Te in geological samples, chosen to cover the entire matrix composition range of igneous rocks, gave excellent agreement, indicating that there were no carbon-based polyatomic interferences at either m/z 126 or 128. The instrumental LOD was improved by a factor of eight.
Point-by-point mathematical correction of polyatomic interferences in a chromatogram has shown experimentally determined correction factors to be statistically the same when calculated from either net peak height or net peak area.77 Daily measurement was, however, required. Selection of acquisition parameters was also important to avoid peak offsetting and it was recommended that a sampling frequency be chosen to ensure a minimum of 20 points per peak, thereby avoiding artefacts in the corrected peak profiles. Without correction, the concentration of Cr in compost lixiviates by flow injection (FI) ICP-MS was biased between 10 and 50% compared with measurements obtained by ETAAS. However, FI-ICP-MS and ETAAS measurements showed good agreement after applying the correction procedure.
Interference reduction using collision cell (CC) ICP-MS continues to provide new developments. Olesik and Jones78 provided step-by-step examples in their review of two approaches in a systematic strategy to overcome spectral overlaps using ion–molecule reactions in a DRC-ICP-MS instrument. Selective ion–molecule reactions could be used either to reduce the overlapping ion signal without affecting analyte ion signal or to promote the formation of alternative product ions containing the element of interest. Both approaches required consideration of appropriate gas choice, an assessment of analyte signal loss, prevention of undesired reaction products at both the analyte m/z and higher m/z (particularly from condensation and clustering reactions), and optimized gas flow rate and cell parameters. More experimental measurements of different reaction gases and background ion were required for further advances in interference reduction by ion–molecule reactions, although thermodynamic data could identify potentially useful reactions if kinetic reaction rates were not available. The authors reiterated that endothermic reactions could still occur if ions gained KE in the rf field of the cell. Use in a CC-ICP-MS instrument of reactive gases normally used in DRC-ICP-MS has been demonstrated with a He–NH3 gas mixture.79 Comparison of two pre-mixed gases (7% H2 in He and 1% NH3 in He) for removing the 35Cl16O interference on 51V showed that, while the H2–He mixture reduced the interference using KE discrimination, the NH3–He mixture required a positive hexapole cell bias to control the energy of the ions entering the cell. At optimum gas flows, He–H2 reduced the 35Cl16O interference by 1 order of magnitude, whereas NH3–He reduced it by three orders of magnitude. Although the LOD were similar (36 ng l−1 for H2–He and 12 ng l−1 for NH3–He) and comparable to that obtained using DRC-ICP-MS, only the NH3–He mixture successfully suppressed 35Cl16O for V measurements in matrices containing 0.005–0.1 mol l−1 Cl. Both gas mixtures also improved the analysis of other elements suffering from polyatomic interferences (As, Fe and Se). Similarly, use of O2 as a CC reactant gas removed 90Zr interferences in high precision measurements of 90Sr:238U in spent nuclear fuel samples by multi-collector (MC) ICP-MS.80 Whereas both Y and Zr reacted with O2, Sr did not. A double ID technique used spikes of enriched 84Sr and 235U to quantify the 90Sr:238U ratio. Results agreed within 0.35% with TIMS measurements for which a chemical separation of Sr from Zr was required.
5.3. Sample introduction

5.3.1. Laser ablation (LA). 
A general overview of LA-ICP-MS suitable for a new user of the technique discussed instrumentation, ablation mechanisms, calibration, standardization and figures of merit.81 Examples given were primarily in the field of environmental chemistry and the authors considered applications for biomedical research, such as microanalysis of element distributions in thin section tissue samples, to be areas of future interest.
Hergenröder82 has summarized current knowledge of laser-generated aerosols in ICP spectrometry and declared that still no agreement exists over the basic mechanisms of particle formation. Current experimental evidence pointed to the existence of some general particle characteristics, including (at least) bimodal distribution, agglomerates of round primary particles and size dependent chemical composition. The LA was treated as an internal problem of laser–material interaction and an external problem of particle formation in the plume. The modelling mechanism was simplified to a series of consecutive yet linked steps. Particle generation by vaporization and subsequent gas-to-particle generation, liquid droplet expulsion and solid material ejection were discussed. As ultra-short laser pulses become more commonly used, additional mechanisms for particle formation will need to be added to the model.
Internal element standardization has been replaced by measurement of the relative mass of the particles introduced into the ICP-MS using aerosol particle size distributions and sample bulk density to correct variations in sample ablation and aerosol transport.83 Particle size distributions were measured by light scattering from a constant fraction of the aerosol (∼1%) that was separated and diluted by a bucket wheel aerosol diluter. The rest of the aerosol (∼99%) was used for ICP-MS analysis with external calibration using NIST SRM 610 (trace elements in glass). Correction factors for other silicate glasses, NIST SRM 612 and 614 (Trace Elements in Glass), were generally within 10% of those calculated using Ca as an internal standard. However, a greater proportion of particles produced from USGS CRM BCR-2G (opaque basaltic glass) and a fluorite sample were >100 nm in diameter and correction was better after particles larger than the ionization size limit were excluded from the calculated mass. While results suggested non-matrix-matched calibration without an internal standard element was possible, calibration of metals by a non-metal matrix remained inadvisable due to variations in the size classification of the aerosol particles.
Calibration of LA-ICP-MS by on-line standard addition of aqueous standard aerosols under wet (aerosol generated using PFA 100 μl fixed capillary nebulizer and cyclonic spray chamber) and dry (desolvated aerosol) plasma conditions investigated fractionation, matrix effects, and mass flux to the plasma.84 The wet plasma was more tolerant of increased LA sample loading, leading to less severe and more constant matrix effects. This was attributed to a single species (water) dominating the plasma loading and masking small perturbations caused by the sample matrix. The effect of sample loading in the dry plasma was less evident at higher rf power at which the plasma was more robust. Results of NIST SRM 612 analysis using Co as an internal standard were better correlated with certified concentrations using a wet plasma than using a dry plasma and average element recoveries were also better (98 and 90% in wet and dry plasmas, respectively).

A 3-D heat model considered internal processes occurring in the condensed material, such as heating and movement of interfaces, melting and evaporation during LA typical for ICP-MS.85 The melted, and subsequently re-solidified, portion of the heated sample was identified as a possible source for element-specific fractionation. Incorporation into the model of radial heat losses provided realistic surface temperatures and resulted in good quantitative agreement with data in the literature for analysis of brass samples. The contribution of LA to elemental fractionation was identified by apportioning the ablation between a zone vaporized with stoichiometric mass removal and a zone of non-congruent evaporation at the rim of the crater. The model demonstrated that fluence-dependent fractionation occurred when surface temperatures failed to reach the regime of kinetic vaporization and ablated material asymptotically approached bulk composition with increasing fluence. Optimum ablation occurred at high surface temperatures and required laser wavelength and pulse duration to be matched to the material’s absorption and heat diffusivity, respectively.

A model for LA particle production by hydrodynamic sputtering described the impact transfer from the expanding plasma to the liquid melt layer and the subsequent generation of droplets of variable sizes.86 Melt thickness was calculated using the 3-D heat model previously described. Melt was displaced from the ablation crater due to the recoil pressure of the plasma expansion directly above, while Kelvin–Helmholtz instabilities caused droplets to form. The model predicted that increasing fluence (i.e., increasing surface temperature) would decrease the particle size distribution because melt thickness was reduced. Preliminary experiments using a standard LA cell connected to a low-pressure impactor confirmed model calculations. A second model for LA generation of small particles under an Ar or He atmosphere using conditions typical for LA-ICP-MS was based on two mechanisms modelled independently.87 Nucleation and condensation of sub-nm clusters in a supersaturated vapour was followed by cluster collision and coalescence to larger particles. The model demonstrated that the small particle fraction was not significantly influenced by cell gas. The enhanced fractionation under Ar gas was therefore attributed to greater plasma recoil than when He was used. The use of He promoted large particle production due to hydrodynamic sputtering. The conditions under which small particles are predominantly produced were discussed and there was good agreement between calculations and preliminary ablation experiments on brass samples.
Results from use of the 1-D numerical model for ns ablation of metal targets (aluminium, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum and zinc), reported in last year’s Update, demonstrated that a high optical absorption coefficient led to improved energy transfer from the laser and, therefore, to higher target surface temperatures.88 High reflectivity minimized energy transfer to the target and lowered surface temperatures. High thermal diffusivity improved heat transfer through the target and led to an even distribution of temperature with depth. Crater depth was dependent on whether the melt phase or vapour phase dominated ablation. Experimental crater profiles from low and high irradiance (1 and 6.3 GW cm−2, respectively) LA (λ = 255 nm) of aluminium, copper and iron were compared with theoretical depths based on either vaporization or melting. Most Al ablation was attributed to melt mobilization and melt displacement on Al craters was notable. However, only 15–30% of ablated mass for Cu and Zn was attributed to melt. The Fe craters obtained experimentally were shallower than those calculated from vaporization. This suggested that the rate of heat transfer and phase change was the controlling factor. Crater morphology was more regular at high than at low irradiance. This indicated more efficient material removal and was inferred by the authors to be connected to the mobilization of the melt phase.
Numerical fluid-dynamic simulations of the carrier gas demonstrated that heavier gases transported particles better than lighter gases.89 Size dependent separation was less evident with Ar than with He. Flow in the transport tubing consisted of nested flow cylinders with a laminar boundary flow cylinder and a faster central plug. Smaller particles transported in He gas followed erratic trajectories, however. High-frequency fluctuations in gas velocity along the tube length were due to molecular diffusion and required an internal standard for signal correction. The logarithmic dependence of simulated signal intensity on transport efficiency exacerbated signal structure. Reducing the tube width dramatically improved transport characteristics for any given gas and flow rate. The minimum width of a single shot signal was calculated by dividing the transport distance by the carrier gas terminal velocity.
Measuring the ion and atom distributions in an ICP from different LA aerosols has demonstrated that all ions had a wider radial spread and, therefore, more uniform vaporization, when He was used in place of Ar as the carrier gas.90 This was attributed to a higher mobility of vapour and ions. Distributions from LA of silicate materials were determined by scanning the ICP vertically across the sampler orifice of the mass spectrometer at four different sampling depths. The smaller proportion of large particles in the aerosol when using λ = 193 nm LA than when using λ = 266 nm LA resulted in faster vaporization of the aerosol. Short sampling depths and incompletely vaporized aerosols gave pronounced mass dependencies in the radial profile but not in the axial profile. Lighter ions generally spread wider, in accordance with the greater mobility of low mass atoms and ions. Although the use of He produced lower variability in elemental intensity ratios, measured signals were proportionally smaller because of the larger radial spread of ions. This could only be remedied by drastic modifications. In another study, simultaneous line monitoring of Cu and Zn from atomized particles in an ICP provided information on aerosol transport and the proportion and elemental composition of small and large particles.91 By using two fast multipliers, simultaneous end-on AES detection of Cu and Zn in an ICP was achieved for aerosols generated by orthogonal pre-pulse LA (λ = 1064 nm) of brass. Time-dependent Cu and Zn emission scans displayed a broad, time-delayed signal, attributed to the large population of small particles (< ∼200 nm diameter), and short, intense spikes from much bigger particles (∼10% of the total aerosol mass). While the average Cu:Zn ratio in smaller particles was ∼1, ratios in the large particles varied between 2 and 12. Results compared well to those from more complicated particle impaction studies and modifications should mean that particles of <250 nm diameter could be individually identified.
The effect of ICP operating conditions on analyte signal intensity and vaporization efficiency was the same for aerosols produced by LA of either λ = 193 or 266 nm.92 However, higher signals were achieved when the aerosol was comprised mostly of smaller particles (<150 nm diameter) generated from NIST SRM 610 by LA at λ = 193 nm. Elements with a high vaporization index always reached the maximum signal at lower gas flow rates than elements with lower vaporization indices. The use of He as carrier gas instead of Ar accelerated particle evaporation and atomization, because of better energy transfer to the central channel of the plasma, and minimized elemental fractionation caused by sequential evaporation. Atomization was improved by increasing rf power or decreasing carrier gas flow rate. Larger particles, produced by LA at λ = 266 nm, were only ionized by these hotter plasmas. However, hotter plasmas also reduced signal because of increased diffusion of atoms and ions from the central plasma channel. Optimization for maximum signal risked selective vaporization and the authors recommended that plasma optimization should focus on reducing fractionation.
A review of the advantages of fs LA compared with ns LA has stated that the fundamental difference between short (>1 ps) and ultra-short (<1 ps) LA pulses was the time available for energy transfer from the excited electron gas to the lattice.93 As well as interacting with the target, longer laser pulses also interacted with different states of matter (e.g., molten sample, plasma), thereby enhancing elemental fractionation. The consequences of plasma formation were discussed for several techniques, including TOF and ion trap LIMS and ICP-MS. A typical state-of-the-art fs LA system was described. Applications suited to fs LA included depth profiling, which benefited from localization of applied energy, and sampling on a cellular level, where the lower collateral damage provided better spatial resolution. Evaluation of the internal and external repeatability for λ = 266 nm fs and ns LA-ICP-MS demonstrated that fs LA sampling improved precision.94 External precision was assessed by ablating at 20 different spots on each sample, while internal precision within an ablation spot was evaluated by dividing each 40 s of ablation time into 4 s segments. Concentrations of Co, La, Li, Pb, Th and U in NIST SRM 612 were calibrated with NIST SRM 610 using 43Ca as an internal standard. Internal and external precisions of fs LA were 2–3 times better than those of ns LA. Whereas using He in the ablation chamber instead of Ar improved the RSD for ns LA, the RSD did not change appreciably for fs LA. The superior precision of fs LA was attributed to narrower particle size distributions, with less systematic error caused by spikes on the signal intensity.
Varying the pressure between 20 and 1400 mbar in a low pressure LA cell changed the aerosol size distribution and particle structure for LA (λ = 266 nm) of NIST SRM 610.95 The maximum signal was produced at atmospheric pressure. At low pressure (20 mbar) the signal decreased by up to two orders of magnitude. However, U:Th ratios were closer to bulk composition for lower cell pressures (700–500 mbar), indicating generation of smaller particles, and this was confirmed by particle size distribution measurements. Particles of >200 nm diameter were almost completely absent at 20 mbar. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images showed less particle agglomeration at low pressures. The constant ablated mass, calculated from crater volumes, indicated that the lower ICP-MS signal was caused by reduced mass transport. Varying aerosol retention time in the cell did not affect the signal and the authors postulated that the loss was caused by vapour deposition on cold surfaces or generation of ‘non-transportable particles’. While promising in terms of particle generation, the practical use of low pressure ablation was limited by the low sensitivity and required development of a new cell and transport system.
A high-efficiency aerosol-dispersion ablation cell for LA-ICP-MS extracted the aerosol into the transporting gas stream by directed flow expansion using two gas nozzles.96 Compared to a standard ablation cell, the novel design improved the extraction of smaller particles. The reduced elemental fractionation seen in LA (λ = 266 nm) of SRM NIST 610 was attributed to reduced agglomeration and, therefore, improved vaporization within the ICP. The precision of 5% obtained for measurement of Cu:Zn ratios in a brass RM using the new cell was considerably better than the precision of 30% obtained with conventional cells. As the LA was the same in both cells, the authors concluded that the improved results were derived from improved aerosol extraction.
Coupling a previously described in-torch LA system to an ICP-TOFMS instrument avoided the transient signal limitations of quadrupole ICP-MS and allowed multi-element analysis to be performed.97 Peaks were baseline-resolved even with the laser firing at 10 Hz, and signals were an order of magnitude greater than from continuous ablation in a conventional cell. Identical elemental ratios for single spot analysis by both in-torch and cell LA indicated that the same particle size distributions were formed, however. Mismatch between laser repetition rate (10 Hz) and ICP-TOFMS sampling rate meant that the in-torch RSD were poorer than those for signals from conventional cell analysis but the repetitive nature of in-torch signals meant that fast Fourier transformation was a suitable evaluation tool for ultra-short, low intensity signals. The S/N for minor elements using in-torch LA were twice as high as those obtained using conventional cell LA analysis and would be improved further with increased sampling rate.
Cleveland et al.98 have demonstrated that resonant LA, in which the wavelength of a pulsed tuneable ns laser matched a resonant gas-phase transition of the analyte, increased signal and selectivity for several metal targets, including pure deoxygenated copper and trace Mo in stainless steel. Ablating high-purity copper ‘on-line’ (i.e., using a Cu resonant wavelength) induced a larger, brighter ablation plasma and larger Cu signals (∼1.5 times) than ‘off-line’ analysis. Inspection of LA craters produced using different wavelengths showed that laser–surface interactions depended on wavelength. Similarly, ‘on-line’ ablation improved LA-MIP-OES and LA-ICP-MS signals of Mo in steel. Scanning the ablation wavelength through 2 nm whilst measuring at m/z 98 gave the highest signals for MoI and MoII at the resonant transitions of 313.259 and 312.299 nm, respectively. The enhancement was most obvious at moderate laser energy densities and disappeared at the higher laser densities typically used for LA. The bandwidth of the wavelength dependence of the ablation was ∼1 nm. The results contradicted the previously published assumption that the resonant interaction occurs solely in the gas phase after non-selective target vaporization. As an alternative explanation, the authors proposed that the thermal effects observed in copper craters resulted from radiation trapping effects. This also explained the increased size and lifetime of the laser-induced plasma and increased localized surface heating. Additionally, the resonant plasma would interact with the surface more efficiently than a non-resonant plasma, thereby contributing to enhanced desorption. Whether this phenomenon of ‘selective’ LA at low power held any advantage for quantitative LA remained to be investigated.
Elemental analysis on the nm scale was achieved with near-field LA-ICP-MS using the principle that very small conductive objects become a source of secondary evanescent near-field radiation when they are immersed in the light radiation field.99 Within close range of the target surface, the secondary radiation caused local laser-induced surface effects (e.g., local desorption and ablation). A single laser shot from a defocused laser beam (λ = 532 nm) on to a thin, electrolytically etched, silver needle produced LA craters approximately the same diameter as the needle (currently 150 nm). Analysis of U-doped gels using sector field (SF) ICP-MS demonstrated that 238U signal intensities were up to 60 times greater and better resolved when the tip was ‘close’ to the gel surface than when it was ‘far away’. Control of the needle position required further improvement, however, and deformation of the tip resulted in lower signal intensities. Despite these limitations, linear 238U calibration curves were produced using gels spiked with increasing 238U concentrations and quantification by ID was demonstrated with gels doped isotopically enriched with 65Cu and 67Zn. Analysis with a lateral resolution at the nm scale was demonstrated on biological samples of varying surface roughness, specifically a rose petal and a violet leaf.


5.3.2. Nebulization. 
A review of continuous micro-sample introduction systems stated that advantages other than volume size included optimized coupling with low-flow techniques such as capillary electrophoresis, reduced solvent loading on the plasma, minimized interferences and easier waste management.100 By referring to fundamental studies where the liquid consumption rate had been <100 μl min−1, differences between micro- and conventional nebulization were discussed in terms of aerosol generation, transport, plasma robustness and ionization. Blockage was more likely to occur in micronebulizers, but memory effects were usually less. Low-volume spray chambers were more efficient due to enhanced aerosol desolvation and dampened droplet coalescence. However, changing between samples of different matrices required longer equilibration and potentially long signal-stabilization times. Different micronebulizers were described in terms of back pressure and droplet distribution and existing low-volume spray chambers, desolvation systems and direct injection systems were described. The authors described a trend towards direct injection of aerosols into the plasma. This improved aerosol transport efficiency but coarse tertiary aerosols also caused plasma instability. Guidelines and many examples were given for optimum sample introduction, which depended on the application and the sample matrix.
A review of slurry nebulization considered the main advantage to be reduced sample preparation time achieved by combining matrix destruction with analyte atomization and ionization.101 However, to get good results required proper control of slurry composition, including particle size distribution, homogeneity and slurry density, plus a well optimized sample introduction system. Appropriate grinding and milling methods were discussed and particular emphasis was placed on calibration strategies. Calibration with solution standards required slurry particles to be smaller than aerosol droplets to ensure transport efficiency and particle–plasma interactions also had to be considered. Correction factors, internal standards and calibration with slurries of suitable CRM were offered as alternatives to solution calibration and examples of each were given. There has been far more application of the technique to ICP-AES than ICP-MS due to the limit (∼1%) on total solids that can be introduced into an ICP-MS instrument.
A shortened standard demountable torch facilitated direct sample injection using conventional and micro-pneumatic nebulizers.102 Optimum operating conditions for a high-efficiency nebulizer in the short torch were similar to those of a direct injection high efficiency nebulizer (DIHEN) in a conventional torch: high rf power (1500 W), low nebulizer gas flow rates (0.09 l min−1) and low solution uptake rates (5–85 μl min−1). However, the plasma gas flow rate was higher (18 l min−1 instead of 15 l min−1) to facilitate tangential gas flow around the shorter intermediate tube. The signal intensity with the short torch system at 85 μl min−1 was ∼2.4-fold better than that obtained with a DIHEN, although RSD and LOD were generally comparable or slightly poorer. The authors considered that an improved torch, designed to minimize turbulence from the high plasma gas flow rates, would improve LOD. At low uptake rates (5 μl min−1), overall performance of the short torch was better than that for the DIHEN. The signal intensity increased 2–7 times and the RSD of 3.5–6% were better than those (4.7–9.1%) obtained for the DIHEN. Good agreement was obtained between certified and measured concentrations for Al, As, Cd, Mn, Pb, U and V in a commercial RM of Trace Metals in Urine, NIST SRM 1515 (Apple Leaves), NIST SRM 1570a (Spinach Leaves) and NIST SRM 1577b (Bovine Liver). Direct injection using the short torch was estimated to be five times cheaper than using a DIHEN in a conventional torch.


5.3.3. Thermal vaporization. 
Monte Carlo simulations, developed to model analyte transport from an electrothermal vaporizer to an ICP, showed that gas and aerosol transport were distinguished by the pronounced, long-lived signal after the transient peak produced by aerosol transport.103 Experimental results for Cu from a multi-element solution measured by ETV-ICP-TOFMS were well predicted by the aerosol transport model but the prolonged signal was not as long-lived as in the simulation. Most analyte loss (60%) was accounted for in the simulations by condensation on to the cooled graphite end cone. A comprehensive model, incorporating information on nucleation processes for low concentrations of condensable species and samples with high concentrations of dissolved salts, was required before matrix effects and the role of matrix modifiers could be investigated.


5.3.4. Chemical vapour generation. 
Simultaneous introduction of HG reaction vapour and conventionally nebulized aerosol has resulted in dual-mode sample introduction for multi-element (As, Bi, Cd, Co, Cu, Ni, Pb, Sb, Zn) ICP-MS analysis.104 Optimum values for parameters controlling HG (i.e., HNO3, NaBH4 and thiourea concentrations, and sample and NaBH4 solution flow rates) differed between HG elements (As, Bi and Sb), and a response optimizer was used to obtain a compromised optimum. Using the dual-mode sample introduction increased signal intensity for As, Bi and Sb 77-, 33- and 56-fold compared with pneumatic nebulization, and LOD were 7, 15 and 10 pg ml−1, respectively. No significant change in signal was observed for other elements (Cd, Co, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn) despite published reports that these also form volatile species with NaBH4. Analyses of NIST SRM 1572 (Citrus Leaves), NIST SRM 1575 (Pine Needles), NIST SRM 1643e (Trace Elements in Water), GBW CRM 07602 (Bush Branches and Leaves) and GBW CRM 07601 (Human Hair) were generally within the error reported for each RM.


5.3.5. Flow injection. 

On-line electrochemical preconcentration by anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV) of multi-element solutions (Cd, Cu, Pb, Tl, Zn) using either mercury or bismuth Nafion-coated film electrodes minimized the film erosion observed when using other electrodes such as the thin-mercury-film electrode.105 The similar elution profiles obtained using either Nafion electrodes or the thin-mercury-film electrode demonstrated that the Nafion coating did not retard metal elution. The cation exchange capability of the Nafion film aided metal ion accumulation from dilute solutions. Metals stripped off at the same potential (e.g., Cd and Tl) were distinguished by ICP-MS detection, which also provided an insight into the electrochemical reactions taking place on the electrode. Nafion-coated electrodes had substantially longer lifetimes (8 and 4 h for bismuth and mercury, respectively) than the thin-mercury-film electrode (30 min). Tests using Pb and Cd solutions demonstrated reproducibility and a wide dynamic range of linearity (4–5 orders of magnitude). The signal was proportional to deposition time, with a 6 min preconcentration time leading to signal increases of 2.8- and 8-fold for Cd and Pb, respectively. Determination of Cs in NRCC CRM CASS-4 (Nearshore Seawater) indicated that ASV removed matrix effects otherwise associated with sea-water analysis by ICP-MS.

5.4. Speciation
A nebulizer developed for sheathless interfacing of nano-HPLC with ICP-MS consisted of a hollow fused-silica needle tip (10 μm id, 20 μm od) centred in a 254 μm id sapphire orifice.106 Equipped with a 3 ml drain-free vaporization chamber, the nebulizer introduced mobile phases containing up to 95% acetonitrile into an ICP at flow rates of 50–450 nl min−1. The low dead volume of the interface resulted in a peak width of 1.3 s (at half-height) and preserved chromatographic resolution. Absolute LOD for analysis of a tryptic digest of a protein containing two to nine selenomethionine residues was 25 fg (80Se).
The peak dispersion from sample introduction in HPLC-ICP-MS has been attributed to the combined effect of column id and nebulizer.107 Poorer chromatographic resolution with reduced column id was demonstrated by repeated separation of carboplatin and oxaliplatin on 3 columns of differing id (2.1, 1 and 0.32 mm) but with constant column length (150 mm) and stationary phase particle diameter (3 μm). Flow rate, injection volume, tubing and injection loops were reduced proportionally with smaller column id. Additional dispersion was minimized in nebulizers with low dead volume. The micro-volume membrane desolvation nebulizer had the poorest resolution and a high dead volume. Additional dispersion was minimal for a DIHEN interface whose dead volume was minimized by inserting a fused silica capillary (75 μm id, 360 μm od) into the sample capillary.
5.5. Isotope ratio measurement
Advances in isotope analysis by ICP-MS have resulted in new measurement procedures for non-traditional stable isotopes. Determination of silicon isotopes (28Si, 29Si and 30Si) in complex geological materials used NaOH digestion and cation-specific ion exchange to avoid the use of HF in the sample preparation.108 Silicon yields were >97% in samples ranging from pure silica to basaltic compositions (45–52 wt.% SiO2). Both δ29Si and δ30Si were determined with high precision (0.1–0.3 and 0.18–0.41‰, 2σ, respectively) using medium resolution MC-ICP-MS (ΔM/M = 2500), which ensured resolution of all polyatomic interferences (e.g., 14N14N, 14N14N1H, 14N16O). Acceptable instrumental blanks (20–65 mV) were achieved using a desolvating nebulizer and a quartz torch with sapphire injector. The sensitivity for 28Si was ∼ 6 V per μg g−1. In another study using high resolution MC-ICP-MS, the 30Si peak remained affected by tailing of the interfering signal, mostly from 14N16O, and exact matching of analyte and nitric acid concentrations in all solutions was mandatory.109 Isotope abundance ratio measurements were performed with sample–standard bracketing (SSB) and on-line mass bias correction using Mg. The 95% confidence intervals for the entire procedure, including Si preconcentration and separation, were ±0.18 and ±0.5‰ for δ29Si and δ30Si, respectively. To achieve an external reproducibility for δ88/86Sr of <25 ppm (1σ) required desolvation of the sample aerosol to increase the sensitivity to 7–8 V for 88Sr and 0.8–0.9 V for 86Sr (50 μg l−1 total Sr). 110 Apart from a stable 86Kr background (0.05 mV ± 5%) that did not influence the 86Sr peak, no interferences were identified, even at high resolution (M/ΔM = 5000). Data were acquired over 300 scans of 3 s duration (15 min total) and mass bias correction was achieved by SSB with NIST SRM 987 (strontium carbonate). Normalized to NIST SRM 987, temperature-dependent Sr isotope fractionation during calcium carbonate precipitation was demonstrated for the first time. Precise measurement of Hg isotope ratios (202Hg:198Hg, 202Hg:199Hg, 202Hg:200Hg and 202Hg:201Hg) by MC-ICP-MS required on-line stannous chloride reduction and instrumental mass bias correction using 205Tl:203Tl and SSB.111 Typically, internal precision was <0.002% (1σ) on all ratios for >20 ng Hg. Using >50 ng Hg improved the internal precision to <0.001%. Repeated runs of NIST SRM 1641d (Hg in water) during a single day gave short-term uncertainty of <0.006% (1σ), while long-term reproducibility over 11 months (>100 measurements) was <0.01%. The method was sufficiently accurate to detect differences in Hg isotope ratios within sample type (e.g., between different sediments). Use of a 58Fe–54Fe double spike for determination of δ56Fe by MC-ICP-MS was quicker than using SSB and also minimized matrix effects.112 Spiking samples before chemical separation enabled isotopic fractionation from incomplete Fe recovery to be accounted for. Argide and 58Ni spectral interferences were overcome by measuring on-peak zero backgrounds, with normalization of results to IRMM CRM 014 (metallic Fe) to account for the effect of Fe on these interferences. Mass-bias-corrected δ56Fe from replicate analysis of an in-house hematite RM had an external reproducibility of ±0.05‰ (2σ) and was accurate even when Ce, Mg and Na concentrations exceeded that of Fe (Ca:Fe, Mg:Fe and Na:Fe up to 0.1, 2 and 5, respectively). Matrix effects were considered insignificant, particularly as chemical separation reduced matrix: Fe ratios by three orders of magnitude. Measured δ56Fe from a set of Fe-containing CRM (igneous rocks, ferromanganese nodules, sedimentary rocks and ores) were consistent with previously published data.
The empirical, linear ln–ln relationship between analyte and internal standard isotope ratios, often used for mass bias correction, has been found to be dependent on the value adopted for the internal standard isotope ratio.113 Previously attributed to inadequate peak tail correction, inaccuracies arose because the correction model used the slope of the relationship between analyte and internal standard but not the intercept. The authors argued that the common practice of artificially altering the true ratio for the internal standard to correct inaccuracies was a circuitous and mathematically questionable method of adjusting the intercept to zero. A revised model incorporated the intercept and an expression for computing the total combined uncertainty in the corrected ratio included contributions from the linear model, the isotopic RM, and measurements of analyte element and internal standards in the sample. Data for 56Fe:54Fe and 66Zn:64Zn ratios demonstrated the improved accuracy of the revised model over the original. Mass bias correction of W isotope ratios externally corrected using Re isotopes and the exponential law incorporated a newly defined mass bias factor derived by minimizing deviations of measured 182W:183W, 184W:183W and 186W:183W ratios from ratios published in the literature.114 The factor was derived daily prior to sample measurements and improved reproducibility of W isotopic ratios to <0.05% for all the ratios. No significant deterioration in the analytical uncertainties was found compared with the data corrected with the conventional exponential law. Data for W reagents and geochemical RM revealed that mass-dependent fractionation of W had occurred during the formation of their geological precursors.

Permil-level precision measurements by quadrupole ICP-MS for natural U were achieved after careful measurement of baseline conditions and mass bias correction.115 Optimum measurements were produced using a peak width of 0.7–0.75 amu, electrostatic peak hopping and integration times of 0.025–0.1 s for isotopes at m/z 228, 233, 234, 235, 236 and 237 during a 15–20 min analysis. The instrumental background was measured at m/z 228, while signals at m/z 237 were attributed to spectral interferences from polyatomic complexes and the tailing characteristics of 238U. While not explicitly measured, 238U was calculated from the signal at m/z 235 using reference data for natural uranium. Presumably this was necessary because the signal at m/z 238 would otherwise be too high to be counted accurately. A desolvating micro-concentric nebulizer with an uptake rate of 30 μl min−1 gave the optimum signal (6–7 × 108 cps ppm−1). A 233U–236U double spike corrected for mass fractionation, while ratio drift was corrected using SSB with NBL CRM 112-A (Uranium Metal). Removing and cleaning the spray chamber and nebulizer between each sample reduced the instrumental blank to <0.01% of the original signal, thereby rendering blank correction unnecessary. Within-run precision of U standards was better than 3‰ (±2σ) for δ234U, while between-run reproducibility was ±3.5‰. Measurements of δ234U in sea-water, coral and speleothems were consistent with the data from single collector SF-ICP-MS and TIMS, although reproducibility was poorer (2–3.5‰ compared with ∼1‰).
An ion deceleration system has reduced peak tailing from 238U+ at m/z 236 during analysis of extremely low 236U:238U ratios by MC-ICP-MS.116 The ion deceleration system, located in front of the m/z 236 ion counter, improved abundance sensitivity by two orders of magnitude to 3 × 10−9, while the 236U signal was reduced by only ∼30%. The minimum determinable 236U:238U ratio was improved to ∼10−8, more than an order of magnitude better than by SF-ICP-MS or TIMS. However, the presence of 235U1H+ compromised accuracy and increased measurement uncertainty by up to 48%, particularly in samples enriched in 235U. The authors suggested that aerosol desolvation or the application of heavy water for sample dissolution would reduce U1H+ production.
An MC-ICP-MS instrument with an artificially set dead time could be characterized with a much lower uncertainty than possible using ratio-based measurements of dead time alone.117 The artificially long dead time, introduced late into the signal chain, controlled the total dead time for the whole system and masked contributions from other components. Experimental determinations of dead time by both ratio and electronic methods for three different dead time settings (10, 20 and 70 ns) agreed only at the longest setting, when presumably other dead times within the system were masked. For shorter dead times, the ratio method gave greater values than the electronic method, with measured dead time on the shortest setting being approximately that expected from an electron multiplier (16 ns). Precisions on electronically measured dead times were much better than those on ratio-measured values (0.4 ns compared to up to 2 ns) and estimates of the contribution of dead time to the combined uncertainty demonstrated that the uncertainty from electronically measured dead time may be negligible even at count rates >1 Mcps.
6. Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)
This section covers the one-step laser desorption-ionization (DI) of solids. The increasing use of lasers for the post-ionization of neutrals generated by laser-beam irradiation or primary-ion-bombardment of solids is treated in the section on SNMS. Because the aim of RIMS is typically different from that of solid state analysis with focused laser or ion beams, publications dealing with the ionization of atomic beams or gas-phase neutrals under resonant conditions are dealt with separately from SNMS in the section on RIMS. Laser microprobe mass spectrometry (LMMS) refers to the use of a focused laser with a spot diameter on the sample of <5 μm. The application of LMMS to suspended particles in combination with TOF analysis is called aerosol-TOF-LMMS (aTOF-LMMS). In this section, the symbols λ and μ denote the wavelength and nominal duration of the laser pulse, respectively.
6.1. Instrumentation
Laser DI-TOFMS at a power density of >108 W cm−2 offers the potential for easy analysis with favourable LOD but requires an analyser capable of measuring ion populations with KED spread over several hundreds of eV. Therefore, the use of collisional cooling was investigated by inserting an axial field rf-only quadrupole between the laser ionization source at 0.3–0.5 Torr and the drift region, from where the ions were orthogonally extracted into a 70 cm TOFMS with a detector based on time-to-digital conversion.118 The sample was irradiated (λ = 532 nm, a spot diameter of 150 μm) at normal incidence and the ions were extracted along an axis parallel to the sample surface into a 17.5 cm long quadrupole at a pressure of 10−2 Torr. Experiments on NIST SRM 1763 (steel) gave a mass resolution of 3000 and RSF relative to 90Zr of between 0.1 and 2.2. The collision cooling improved the LOD by about two orders of magnitude to 10–100 ng g−1 for most elements.
The use of a digital ion trap prior to the TOFMS instrument was developed for easy and large-scale analysis of nano-aerosols in the 1–100 nm size range.119 Thanks to the application of rectangular pulses instead of a conventional sinusoidal voltage, a digital ion trap allowed off-the-shelf electronics to be used and facilitated optimization of the size range of the trapped particles and transfer of the ions to the TOFMS. Experiments with test aerosols generated by electrospraying salt solutions showed trapping of particles in the 7–25 nm size range. It was anticipated that the size range could be extended by manipulation of the bath gas conditions and voltages. The applied laser ionization conditions (λ = 532 nm, spot diameter 0.5 mm, energy per pulse 160 mJ) achieved a nearly identical ionization yield for the different elements in that the measured element ion and molar ratios agreed to within 5%.
The study of ice nuclei or ultra-fine particles with diameters of 100 nm–1 μm and present at ultra-low number densities of the order of 1–10 l−1 is important to understand atmospheric processes. The so-called “particle analyser laser mass spectrometer” was modified to optimize the efficient isolation of the few ice-nuclei, particle detection, transfer to the ionization volume, ionization and detection.120 The separation of ice-nuclei from coarser particles was based on their easy uptake of water vapour, which increased their size to several μm and thereby increased their inertia in contrast to the non-hygroscopic aerosols. A counter flow of dry gas allowed the latter fraction to be blown in the reverse direction. A new aerodynamic lens at the inlet improved the transmission of ice nuclei to 95%. The use of elliptical mirrors improved size selectivity by narrowing the volume where the laser detects particles. Experimental data demonstrated the capability to distinguish between the ice nuclei consisting of mineral dust or fly-ash, producing prominent peaks from C, Fe, Na, Si and their oxides, and purely metallic particles with C, Fe, Si, Zn and no oxide peaks.
6.2. Fundamental studies
Oxides of first-row transition-metals (Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Sc, Ti, V, Zn) were used to delineate the speciation capabilities of FT LMMS compared with those of TOF S-SIMS.121 Both methods generated characteristic positive and negative MxOy ions but the intensity distributions were different. Specifically, laser DI and FTMS led to the detection of intact cluster ions with up to hundred atoms for oxides such as Sc2O3 and Y2O3, while S-SIMS generated in particular clusters with 1–3 additional hydrogen atoms.
Relevant to the continuing discussion on the benefits to be expected from the use of a resonant wavelength in one-step DI, analysis of Ni and Pb was studied with an ingenious system which allowed a non-resonant visible laser and a tuneable UV dye laser to be directed either collinearly on the sample for two-colour single-step DI or separately on the sample and the gas phase above the sample for conventional DI and post-ionization.122 Both the two-colour one-step DI and non-resonant DI combined with UV post-ionization improved ion detection in comparison with non-resonant single-step DI. Specifically, the two-colour one-step DI enhanced the Ni and Pb signals by a factor 15 and 160, respectively, whereas the resonant ionization of neutrals generated under non-resonant conditions increased the detected Pb+ signal by a rather disappointing factor of only 2.5. However, in the latter case, a variety of additional signals from Pb2+, Pb3+, PbO+, Pb2O+ and Pb4+ were seen, probably because the non-resonant irradiation of the sample generated more neutrals than when the beam contained a resonant component.
6.3. Analytical methodology
The effect of composition and morphology of the analysed particles on the ion yield of As in soil samples was overcome by embedding the grains in a zinc matrix.123 In this way, the matrix-dependent processes of energy deposition could be controlled and properly optimized. Experiments were carried out with As- and Ca-spiked samples using a quadrupole instrument with a Nd:YAG laser (λ = 1064 nm, fluence 30 J cm−2, spot diameter 480 μm). Mixtures of up to 50% (w/w) soil in zinc powder behaved as pure metal and the variability on the absolute intensities of Zn+ ion intensities could be kept within ∼30%. Normalization of the analyte signal to that of zinc improved the analytical precision for As and Ca determinations to typically 2–15%. The LOD for As was 70 μg g−1 in soil samples but no distinction could be made between AsIII and AsV. The Ca determinations agreed to within 20% with those obtained with XRA.
Environmental monitoring and nuclear safety applications require fast analysis of swipe samples. Non-resonant one-step laser DI (λ = 532 nm, spot diameter 100 μm) was used for the isotope analysis of Gd, Ni, Pb and Zn microparticles with diameter of 75, 50, 10 and <10 μm, respectively, deposited on zirconium or tantalum sheets.124 The measured isotope abundances were reproducible to within 1% and accurate to within 5% for isotopes with relative abundances of >1–2%, but minor isotopes showed larger deviations. Defocusing allowed a single particle to be used several times for improved accuracy by averaging of the data.
The aTOFMS analysis of particles with UV-absorbing shells and non-absorbing core or vice versa was investigated using artificially generated particles with absorbing Al or transparent Al2O3 cores, coated with transparent NaCl or Al2O3 or absorbing Ni or C layers.125 With UV-laser irradiation (λ = 266 nm, power density 1011 W cm−2) for the analysis of homogeneous particles containing NaCl and Al2O3, the intensity ratio of the Al+ ions to the sum of Al+ and shell element ions correlated relatively well with the Al content but analysis of Al2O3 particles with NaCl shell gave a significantly lower ratio. In contrast, an absorbing coating allowed the correlation between the experimental and expected ratio to be restored.
7. Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)
The number of papers dealing with new analytical developments in RIMS has decreased gradually over the years in spite of the intrinsic potential of the method. There is no alternative to RIMS in terms of selectivity and ionization efficiency, but it requires expensive dedicated equipment for a limited number of analytes and highly trained operators. On the other hand, there is an increasing trend to use resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) or even resonant ionization in SNMS, in which the neutrals are sputtered from the solid with a focused ion beam. These developments of great analytical interest in material and biological sciences owe a lot to the fundamental research and investigations in the field of RIMS.
An extensive study involving the comparison between several multi-step schemes for the resonant ionization of Pu atoms with broadband pulsed and narrowband continuous wave (cw) lasers showed that the latter gave superior isotope selectivity and LOD in the range of 106–107 atoms.126 Additionally, a new three-step two-colour excitation scheme featuring a strong two-photon transition into an auto-ionizing state was discovered. It simplified the excitation process by reducing the number of required lasers while maintaining efficiency and selectivity.
Rapid isotope measurements in, for instance, safeguard applications require the development of dedicated excitation schemes. The analytical potential of non-selective excitation of Pu isotopes in a triple resonance process (λ = 420.77, 847.28 and 767.53 nm) was evaluated with theoretical calculations based on the density matrix formalism.127 This scheme could be applied with common high repetition rate solid-state lasers. The calculations accounted for the effects of Doppler broadening, non-Lorentzian line shape as well as time-dependent laser intensity profiles, and allowed the threshold laser powers and bandwidths for the three-excitation steps to be determined. The isotopic bias between the resonant and off-resonant isotopes under the optimized conditions was predicted to be <3% and should be easily corrected by the use of adequate RM.
A combination of LA and RIMS was applied to the isotope analysis of trace elements in agricultural products such as rice grains to identify the production area.128 Neutrals were generated by irradiation of the sample with a Nd:YAG laser (λ = 532 or 355 nm) and ionized in a 2 + 1 scheme with a tuneable dye-laser system. The method was tested by measuring the 25Mg:26Mg isotope ratio and achieved a precision of 0.3% (RSD). There was, however, a bias of 3% to be corrected for by analysis of RM. Direct measurements of 87Sr:86Sr isotope ratio at sub-μg g−1 concentrations in brown rice were achieved with a precision of 14%. It was anticipated that increasing the ablation power and laser spot size could reduce the RSD significantly. An additional study focused on the use of a two-laser system and a new ion optical system for the determination of Ca isotope ratios.129 Calculations of the resonant ionization efficiency and the ion trajectory simulations were used to optimize sensitivity and miniaturization of the system.
The requirement to measure the abundance of ultra-trace levels of Kr and Xe as indicators of cosmic ray exposure motivated Lavielle et al.130 to build a combined resonant ionization ion source, cryogenic sample concentrator and TOF analyser, similar in design to that at the University of Tennessee and the “RELAX” spectrometer at the University of Manchester. Initially designed for Kr measurements, this new instrument also allowed Xe to be analysed just by tuning the wavelength for ionization. For Kr analysis, atoms of Kr were condensed on a cold trap at 25–35 K and released after heating by a pulse of an IR Nd:YAG laser (50 mJ). Ionization and heating lasers were delayed in order to obtain the maximum ionized atoms in the source of the TOF spectrometer. The LOD was several thousands of Kr atoms. The method was being applied to the determination of cosmic-ray exposure of iron meteorites by using 81Kr–Kr dating.
8. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)
The bombardment of a sample with primary ions in the 1–25 keV range causes the development of a collision cascade over a distance of several tens of nm below the surface. Along its trajectory the projectile imparts sufficient energy to the lattice to break all intermolecular forces and to move individual atoms from their initial positions in the lattice. The generation of the analytically used secondary ions is believed to occur through the recoil of momentum towards the surface. Extensive atom relocation destroys the molecular structures in the subsurface but the ultra-fast penetration of the projectiles through the surface layer allows molecules in the upper (few) monolayer(s) to remain intact. Static SIMS (S-SIMS) limits sputtering to a fraction of the upper monolayer, allowing the contribution of ions specific to the molecular form of the element to be maximized. Speciation and organic surface analysis forms the major application, while depth profiling is incompatible with the principle of S-SIMS. This review restricts the acronym SIMS to the dynamic mode using continuous sputtering for the erosion of subsequent layers and depth profiling of elements. As TOFMS is beneficial in dynamic and static experiments, explicit distinction is made between TOF SIMS and TOF S-SIMS. The proliferation of the TOF instrumentation that can be used in both modes tends to reduce the gap between SIMS and S-SIMS. This trend is further intensified by the increasing use of polyatomic primary ion guns, which may give access to the depth profiling of molecular components by means of structural ions. Therefore, both methods will no longer be treated in separate sections, as in previous Updates, but, whenever applicable, it will be explicitly stated that S-SIMS was involved. The incidence angles, mentioned throughout this and subsequent sections, are expressed as the angle between the beam and the normal to the sample surface. Unless otherwise specified, the surface roughness is referred to by the root mean square (rms) parameter.
8.1. Reviews
A concise tutorial with 66 references provided the materials scientist with an excellent introduction to the instrumental aspects and modes of operation of SIMS and S-SIMS.131 Quantification, depth profiling, imaging and 3-D analysis applications were well covered, as well as advanced methodologies such as imaging of cross sections or samples cut at oblique angles (shallow bevelling) and back-side depth profiling. Numerous examples were discussed to illustrate how SIMS matured to a level where it can deal with a variety of advanced material research problems in the fields of semi- and superconductors, glass, stainless steel, micrometeoroids, solid oxide fuel cell components, museum artefacts, aerospace alloys and biomaterials.
A well-documented survey of the literature on the modelling of the sputtering of atoms, cluster ions and molecules induced by energetic ion or photon beams paid particular attention to the understanding of polyatomic cluster ion bombardment in SIMS.132 The author distinguished between two major schools of thought. One considered that the individual atoms of the projectile cluster initiated overlapping collision cascades similar to atomic bombardment. The other approach focused on the meso-scale motion of the cluster as a whole, which could induce an organized flow of the ejected material in a plume. In spite of the lack of computer capacity, which restricted simulations to the beginning of the sputtering event, simulations were believed to provide essential insight, allowing users to explore new applications and to optimize methodologies.
8.2. Instrumentation
The long awaited TOFMS version of the bench top SIMS, sufficiently robust to be operated in industrial environments, retained the continuous Ga+ primary ion gun used in quadrupole instruments.133 The design and, in particular, the gated extraction optimized the inherent compromise between mass resolution and duty cycle. A mass resolution of 650 (FWHM) was sufficient to separate atomic ions from organic isobars at low m/z.134 Panoramic registration gave signals a factor of ten higher than in the quadrupole instrument but the TOF version remained inferior for depth profiling applications requiring detection of ions at only a few m/z.
Responding to the rapidly growing interest in the use of C60 projectiles for both depth profiling and molecular surface analysis, a versatile range of C60ion sources for both dynamic and static experiments was introduced.135 All experiments used heating of C60 and subsequent EI but employed different ion optics operated at specific accelerating voltages to give spot diameters of 500 μm–150 nm and currents up to 200 nA.
A compact primary ion column with a source using rf induction discharge was developed to produce bright and highly focused beams of B+, O2+ and P+ with 3–35 keV energies.136 Simulations predicted a spot diameter on the sample of <100 nm. The measured brightness of 440 A cm−2 sr−1 represented a 30-fold improvement over prior designs. Operation with the heated solid phosphorus produced a clean beam with only traces of Ar+ ions and a very small contribution of P2+ ions. The use of BF3 and oxygen plasmas gave contamination-free beams of BF2+ and O2+, respectively.
Operation of a Ga+ liquid metal ion gun (LMIG) at low energy (3 keV) became possible with a new optical system consisting of a three-electrode gun lens, a beam limiting aperture and a three-electrode target lens.137 The optics were designed for a target at ground potential and provided a relatively large working distance of between 5 and 80 mm, depending on the required spot size. Particular attention was given to the role of Coulomb repulsion, which became extremely important in the low energy regime, to minimize lens aberrations at high current. Initial tests showed a spot diameter of 300 nm to be feasible.
A novel sample stage with tilt and height adjustable from outside the vacuum chamber and cooling capabilities to −150 °C for reduced beam damage in organic materials was developed for commercial HR-magnetic sector-SIMS instruments.138 Tilt and height adjustment of the sample surface improved the focusing of the primary ion beam and stabilized the secondary ion intensities from a larger area of the sample holder, especially during low energy primary ion bombardment. For instance, constant secondary ion yields could be measured for line profiles over a distance as long as 10 mm.
An ingenious approach called optical conductivity enhancement exploited the use of laser light (λ = 405 nm) to excite electron-hole pairs in materials such as undoped SiGe layers, semi-insulating and as-implanted GaAs(Cr) and P-implanted silicon, to overcome charge build-up during analysis.139 The laser irradiation conditions had to be adapted to the material under study. For instance, Si1−xGex simply required irradiation of the SIMS crater with a photon flux density dependant on the primary ion current. For GaAs(Cr), however, it was necessary to create a conducting surface path from the crater to the sample holder.
A new MC detection system for three adjacent m/z in a double-focusing magnetic sector SIMS instrument allowed the dedicated ion optics and small Faraday cups to be inserted in place of the exit lens, thereby retaining the double focusing capability.140 Experimental isotope ratio measurements in pyrite samples showed that the mass resolution was still as high as 3000 while the precision of the 32S:34S isotope ratio determination was to within 0.2%. There was, however, a relative bias of ∼2% from the calibrated ratio.
A computer program for automated ion imaging of sub-μm pre-solar grains, developed for use with the new generation magnetic sector MC SIMS instruments, had a Cs+ primary ion gun that could be focused to a spot of 100 nm and simultaneous detection of up to 6 isotopes.141 After initial bombardment of a large area to remove the surface contamination, secondary ion images were acquired to localize the sub-μm particles of interest. The most appropriate raster size and ion dose was then automatically determined and applied to the imaging of each recognized particle. Experiments on Al2O3 grains showed that the 18O:16O and 17O:16O isotope ratios could be measured with RSD of 6.9 and 2.6%, respectively.
8.3. Fundamental studies
Comparative experiments with 4 keV Ar+ and 8 keV O2+ projectiles on 18O implanted standards allowed detailed information to be obtained on the processes of sputtered ion formation, atom relocation and segregation occurring in the bombardment of Si and GeC samples with oxygen primary ions with or without oxygen flooding.142 Measurement of the useful yield of various atomic ions (Al, B, C, Cs, Cu, Ga, Ge, O and Si) and sample sputter yields as a function of the measured oxygen fraction in the total emitted flux refined our understanding of the positive secondary ion emission from surfaces oxidized to different degrees. Furthermore, study of the exponential decay lengths in sputter depth profiles of gold overlayers on silicon as a function of the amount of oxygen present at the sputtered silicon surface allowed element-specific effects of oxygen-induced surface segregation to be delineated.
The angular distribution of secondary ions ejected by Ar+ projectiles at oblique incidence angle was studied with an in-house designed instrument, in which the 2 keV microgun was mounted at an angle of 62 ± 2° in the x, z plane (where z is normal to the sample) while the TOFMS was aligned along the y-axis.143 Tilting the sample allowed the secondary ions to be collected at a given angle up to 60°. Experiments on the sputtering of HfN films showed that the intensities of Hf+ and N+ secondary ions decreased strongly with the ejection angle while those of HfN+ clusters only decreased slightly. This observation pointed to the direct ejection of diatomic clusters from the sample since their formation through recombination of monoatomic species would give an identical dependence on the emission angle as the monoatomic ions themselves.
A study of the sputter yields resulting from the bombardment of silicon, GaAs and diamond single crystals with 0.2–3 keV Ar+, Cs+ and O2+ projectiles showed that reactive ion etching process liberating CO or CO2 was the main erosion process during the analysis of diamond with O2+ and not sputtering.144 Erosion rates were ∼10 times higher than expected for ballistic processes and virtually independent of the projectile’s energy and incidence angle. In contrast, no significant difference occurred between sputtering of GaAs and silicon samples, either with O2+ ions or with Ar+ or Cs+ projectiles. As a result, the use of ultra-low energy O2+ ions for the depth profiling of diamond offered rapid penetration to buried defects while surface topography remained minimal at near-normal incidence. Ionization yields for electropositive elements were, however, poor.
A study of the emission of negative cluster ions during the bombardment of Ge, Si and their oxides using 0.2–2 keV Cs+ ions for the sputtering and 25 keV Ga+ ions for the analysis in TOF SIMS revealed very similar generation for both the On− (n = 1, 2) and the GeOn− and SiOn− (n = 2, 3) cluster ions from GeO2 and SiO2, respectively.145 Specifically, both the cluster ion intensity distributions and the ion yields depended on the energy of the Cs+ ions used for sputtering. The sum of the intensities of the cluster ions with same number of Ge or O atoms normalized to the total cluster ion intensity was unaffected by the Cs+ ion energy. Surprisingly, the yield of Sin− ions (n > 2) was less sensitive to Ge concentration than that of Si− ions. This could not be explained by simple statistical considerations. As to the Gen− ions, Ge− ion intensities decreased strongly with increasing germanium concentration while those of Ge2− and Ge3− ions were proportional to the germanium content.146 Finally, the relative intensity of clusters having the same number of Ge or Si atoms normalized to the total ion cluster distribution correlated with the Ge concentration. The authors believed that these systematic trends could assist elaboration of adequate quantification procedures.
Several studies focused on the use of a charged or neutral Cs beam together with another primary ion beam to control the Cs surface concentration and maintain the advantage of ion formation by the other projectiles. The yield of the M+ ions, generated by simultaneous bombardment of RhSi with Cs+ and Xe+ projectiles, decreased exponentially as a function of the Cs concentration with a slope depending on m/z, while the yield of the MCs+ ions went through a maximum at a Cs surface concentration that also depended on the m/z.147 The data indicated that the ejection velocity of the sputtered atoms had a major influence on the ionization probabilities. The behaviour of the MCs+ ions was consistent with the electron-tunnelling model but not with a recombination process. Two other studies involved the use of a gun producing a beam of Cs neutrals together with a conventional Ga+ primary ion gun to control the caesium surface concentration in the sample during sputtering. The first one focused on analysis of aluminium, nickel, silicon, GaAs and InP samples, covering a range of 4.2–5.3 eV on the work function scale.148 The useful yield (relative to Ga+ primary ions) of secondary anions such as Al−, In−, Ni−, P− and Si−, measured as a function of the erosion rate and the flux ratio of the deposited Cs neutrals, showed specific variations depending on the work function and electron affinity. The experimental data were consistent with the electron-tunnelling model for ion formation. As a result, experiments on trace impurities (Al, B, C, Cu, F, Ge, O, S, Si, Ti) covering an electron affinity range between 0.09 and 3.4 eV in various matrices (aluminium, silicon, InP, GaAs, InGaAsP) showed that the useful yield under optimized conditions was virtually matrix- independent and reached a constant value of about 0.1 for all elements with an electron affinity of >1.3 eV.149
The measurement of the KED of Ag+, Ag2+, C+ and H+ ions, emitted from a silver substrate with polystyrene overlayer under bombardment with C60+ projectiles and Ar+ ions of the same 15 keV energy, revealed interesting evidence for differences in energy deposition and sputtering mechanisms active during mono- and polyatomic primary ion bombardment.150 Specifically, the KED of Ag+ had a sloping tail at high energy which could be described with an E−2 and E−3.5 (where E is energy) function for bombardment with Ar+ and C60+ projectiles, respectively. This pointed to a linear cascade regime for monoatomic ion bombardment while polyatomic projectiles increased the contribution from unimolecular dissociation of initially emitted, large species. The results for Ag2+ ions confirmed this interpretation but the KED for the C+ and H+ ions generated with C60+ projectiles from the porous silicon (PS) overlayer decayed very slowly at the high-energy side of the distribution, according to an E−0.4 and E−2.5 function, respectively, in a similar way as with Ga+ projectiles. The data were consistent with the idea that C60+ projectiles led to the collective motion of silver atoms at the surface, creating a large crater. The atomic ions would then be generated from the rim of the crater and thereby obtain lower KE than expected from a direct ejection process. Molecular dynamics simulations of the sputtering of Si by 1–20 keV C60+ projectiles predicted the formation of strong covalent bonds between the C and Si atoms, causing embedding of C atoms in the bombarded surface.151 Calculations showed that the rates of Si sputtering and carbon deposition could be controlled by the projectile energy. Use of 15 keV C60+ ion bombardment would sputter silicon twice as fast as it would deposit carbon, while with 10 keV projectiles there would be no net erosion of the sample surface, rather a replacement of the silicon top layer by a carbon layer.
8.4. Analytical methodology
A completely new approach to sputter depth profiling of thin multilayers on conducting substrates was based on the measurement of the sample current due to the emission of secondary electrons.152 Specifically, CrN/AlN multilayer coatings on nickel alloy, titanium dioxide films deposited on stainless steel, and corrosion layers formed on the surface of a magnesium alloy after long-term interaction with an ionic liquid were profiled with 3–6 keV O2+ primary ions. The profiles based on secondary electron emission were less affected by the matrix than those of the secondary ions but were sensitive to work function variations and surface charging effects. However, the method proved to be capable of monitoring interfaces in the multilayer structure, particularly metal–dielectric boundaries, without being affected by the angle and energy windows of an analyser. The dynamic range was lower than in conventional SIMS and the applicability was limited to structures with sufficiently different secondary electron emission yields and/or different layer conductivities.
Another rather uncommon method was the so-called shave-off depth profiling using a focused ion beam (FIB) parallel to the sample surface, allowing μm-scale objects at a distance of 15 μm under the surface to be characterized with high resolution and a depth scale independent of the sputtering time.153 Sample erosion was achieved by moving the primary beam “sideways”, i.e., in a plane perpendicular to the depth axis. The collected secondary ions reflected the composition of the sample along the line scan. Unlike with conventional SIMS, the FIB shave-off profiles of an embedded spherical particle showed a symmetric bump-type profile, as expected from the gradual increase and decrease of the particles cross section to the line scan. The depth resolution in shave-off experiments depended on the diameter of the focused ion beam, not on the crater depth as in conventional SIMS. Application to a dynamic random access memory tip showed that the elemental distribution in features as small as 30–50 nm could be determined.154
A new method for charge compensation in ultra-low energy SIMS (500 eV Cs+ or O2+ primary ions) used a highly defocused 500 eV electron gun to irradiate an area extending to the sample holder itself.155 Experiments on samples of intrinsic and doped diamond showed efficient charge compensation at an electron current density below that of the primary ions. This was explained by an enhancement of surface conductivity through the creation of carriers in the conduction band of, for example, diamond. Furthermore, use of Cs+ projectiles required less charge compensation because the Cs coverage increased the electron emission by lowering the surface work function and thereby created a partially conductive layer.
A protocol for improved mass accuracy in TOF SIMS was based on ion trajectory calculations to assess the effect of the KE, emission angle and instrumental operating parameters on the measured peak position.156 It turned out that separate calibrations of the m/z scale were needed for atomic ions, clusters and organic molecular ions. An appropriate aperture to restrict the sampling of ions with different energy or emission angle was recommended.
A relatively simple method to distinguish between the surface oxygen in the sample and that from molecules adsorbed from the residual vacuum during sputtering has been developed.157 At sputter rates above 1 monolayer s−1, the relative contribution of the ions generated from the sample over that of ions emitted from the residual vacuum deposition varied linearly with the primary ion current density. Hence, extrapolation to an infinitely high sputtering rate allowed the LOD for the sample elements such as C, H and O to be determined.

Quantitative speciation of adsorbates on clay and soil samples with S-SIMS was studied by comparative analysis using instruments with ion trap, triple quadrupole and TOF analysers.158 Each analyser detected a specific fraction of the initial ion population as a result of the specific method used for the ion analysis (energy-, pressure- or time-domain). For instance, the ratio of the atomic to molecular ion adduct signal intensities decreased in the order TOF, quadrupole, ion trap. However, empirical calibration curves for each instrument allowed consistent results on the condition that the sample be free of local micro-crystallites.
The surface metal contamination on silicon wafers is commonly measured with vapour phase decomposition (VPD) in combination with ICP-MS or total reflection X-ray fluorescence. However, TOF SIMS has been shown to provide an interesting alternative because of its simplicity, sensitivity and capability to monitor extremely small surfaces.159 The RSF (relative to 30Si) were determined by analysis of the contaminated wafer before and after VPD and matching the signal intensities to the amount of removed material. Quantification with TOF SIMS gave concentration data consistent with those obtained by VPD ICP-MS for the removed fraction. Even the use of peroxide rich solution could not overcome the problem of strong binding of Au and Pt to the Si surface, and for such analyses TOF was undoubtedly superior to the traditional method.
Although S-SIMS allows molecular speciation in μm size mineral particles to be achieved, the ion yield of the diagnostic ions at high m/z is often the limitation for practical applications. Mineral phases of interest, identified by a near edge X-ray-absorption fine-structure method were analysed for element ions and isotope ratios with TOF SIMS using a Ga+ liquid metal ion gun.160 Sub-μm resolution could be achieved in the imaging mode. The off-line application was problematical, however, due to the loss of particles, in particular those larger than 10 μm in diameter. The approach was successfully applied to a rare pre-solar grain fraction of the Murchison meteorite.

Transient effects in the ultra-shallow depth profiling of silicon with reactive projectiles such as Cs+ or O2+ could be dealt with by the use of low-energy secondary ions such as Si2−, Si3− and Si4−, generated with a 1 keV Cs+ ion beam at an incidence angle of 60° from silicon with a native oxide layer.161 Their intensities were directly proportional to Cs uptake while the yields of Si2− and Si4− ions were relatively insensitive to matrix effects. As a result, these ions were especially useful when sputtering through the oxide–silicon interface. On the condition that the sputter rate variations were accounted for, normalization of the Si3− or Si4− ion intensities to those of Si2− gave profiles that closely matched the expected Si concentration gradient from a native oxide terminated silicon wafer.

Depth profiling of multilayer systems comprising a PS layer encountered in sensor technology showed a significant dip in the O+ secondary ion generation at a distance of up to 40 nm under the SiO2/PS interface.162 Analysis (5 keV and 0.88 keV Ar+ primary ions at incidence angles between 20 and 70°) of samples consisting of a 50 nm SiO2 layer on 2 μm PS showed that the depth, where the depletion occurred, was maximum for an incidence angle of 20° and gradually decreased with the impact angle. The effect, also seen in depth profiling by Auger electron spectrometry, was explained by ion-beam-induced relocation and deposition of oxygen inside the pores. When the receding surface reached the pores, oxygen ions were trapped in the small pores and redeposited on the walls until saturation occurred. After a given time, apparently at a distance of ∼120 nm, a steady state occurred and the O+, Si+ and SiO+ emission again became stable.
Combined application of TOF S-SIMS and XPS allowed the Fe concentrations in the upper monolayer and deeper subsurface or bulk to be determined for Al2O3 surfaces which had been hydrated and then immersed in an Fe3+ solution.163 Because Al was a common element in the coatings and the bulk, it could be used for normalization of the signal intensities in SIMS to render matrix effects negligible. The Fe concentration was linear with that in the solution but the different slopes obtained for TOF SIMS and XPS showed that an effective enrichment of Fe had occurred at the surface.

Mathematical deconvolution models are increasingly needed for analysis of micro-electronic devices such as SiGe quantum wells (QW). Deriving a depth resolution function from a hypothetical step function was used for the point-by-point correction of the Ge depth profile for a 12 nm QW at a depth of 60 nm.164 In this way, the SIMS data could be converted to a very symmetrical profile, for which the depth and width agreed to within 3 and 1 nm, respectively, with low-energy Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) measurements.
The wealth of information generated by TOF SIMS experiments increasingly requires data processing with multivariate statistical methods to extract the relevant features. A comprehensive set of chemometric techniques was applied to the mass spectra recorded for a suite of minerals such as serpentine, enstatite, olivine, and talc, serving as proxies for extraterrestrial matter.165 The mass spectra contained numerous organic ions from hydrocarbons and phthalates with similar intensities to the atomic ions used for mineral identification. Multivariate analysis of peak intensity data was achieved by PCA and the newer COROICO method, based on the non-linear mapping of the feature space into a sphere and calculation of correlation coefficients for vector pairs. Although both methods worked, the COROICO technique was more successful in eliminating the organic contamination. Classification by the k-nearest-neighbour method or by binary decision trees (CART method) resulted in more than 90% correct assignments in a leave-one-out cross validation. In contrast, PCA was found to be adequate to distinguish between the characteristic features of the mass spectra from three different smokeless gun powders and six different black powder samples to be identified by means of their specific additives.166 Imaging applications are even more demanding with respect to data processing. Multivariate analysis of mass spectra and images recorded with TOF-S-SIMS from various multi-component systems revealed that a major factor was the presentation of raw data in the most suitable form, either by normalization of the mass spectra to the total ion counts of individual pixels or by a Poisson scaling method to account for noise.167 For instance, identification of different phases in the sample required multivariate curve resolution combined with Poisson scaling, but the appropriate selection of data pre-processing and multivariate methods depended on the type of analysis. Multivariate data processing based on so-called geospatial statistical methods allowed extraction of spectral and image information from TOF SIMS data to be improved substantially in comparison with PCA or factor analysis.168 Geospatial methods were designed to use 2- and 3-D spatial statistical techniques for the construction of interpolated images or concentration contours from small datasets. Experiments on full elemental mapping of coins showed that the main image information could be reconstructed from only a part of the original dataset. Skipping between 50 and 99.5% of the pixels still allowed an interface to be distinguished with a resolution corresponding to 5 and 10 pixels, respectively, as opposed to 2 pixels when the complete dataset was used. The efficient extraction of the main information from reduced datasets provided the possibility of significant shortening of the analysis time.
A Visual Basic program was developed for the automated and flexible, processing of ion-microprobe data acquired for quantitative trace elements for U–Th–Pb geochronology and other applications.169 The software identified the secondary ions, matched the samples automatically to the appropriate standards and traced back outliers using a set of editable count-rejection criteria. Specialized routines processed automatically data for trace-element concentrations, Th–U disequilibrium analysis types and U–Th–Pb age determination analyses.
8.5. Quantitative analysis
It is always interesting when a round-robin study is repeated several years later to see whether analytical methods have improved. This was the case for an inter-laboratory comparison of dose determinations in a silicon sample implanted with 2.0 × 1013–1.5 × 1016 cm−2 of As which was repeated after eight years.170 Use of NIST SRM (R 2134) for calibration in all the laboratories instead of the in-house calibrants used in the original exercise improved the analytical precision of the dose determinations to within 5 and 8% for the medium dose and the high or low dose samples, respectively. Depending on the type of normalization used, SIMS results were accurate to within 0.5–1.3, 2.3–3.3 and 0.1–11.4% for the low, medium and high dose samples, respectively. Specifically, the high-dose sample required point-by-point instead of average matrix normalization because the matrix signal decreased in the vicinity of the implant peak. Use of the Si2− and Si3− ion intensities as matrix reference for the AsSi− ion signal did not affect repeatability.
The feasibility of using ultra-shallow As and P dose determinations for quality control applications by using 500 eV O2+ ions at normal incidence was demonstrated because the damage, basically a small, shallow crater with a nm thick layer of SiO2 at the bottom, affected the wafer less than subsequent oxidation and patterning steps so the wafer could be returned into production after the SIMS analysis.171 The total precision (analysis, load repeatability and non-uniformity of the sample) was within 0.26–0.7% while measured dose correlated with the nominal one at the 99.9% confidence level. The dynamic range for the P-depth profiling in high dose shallow implants was 2–3 decades.

Accurate determination of
11
B+ in silicon is essential to make advances in the ultra-large-scale integration technology. A comparison of elastic recoil detection (ERD) using 12 MeV F4+ ions, nuclear reaction analysis (NRA) based on the 11B(p, α)8Be* reaction and SIMS for samples implanted with 0.3–10 keV 11B+ at a fluence of 1013–1016 ions cm−2 showed that the accuracy of SIMS data strongly depended on the conditions used.172 Specifically, 500 eV O2+ oxygen sputtering at an incidence of 60° in the absence of oxygen flooding yielded accurate results within a few %, but 0.7 or 1 keV projectiles at an incidence angle of 45° or 60°, respectively, with oxygen flooding gave deviations of up to 20%.
Although many alternative high-k dielectrics are currently under development, silicon oxynitride (SiON) remains the gate dielectric of choice in ultra-large-scale integrated circuit technology. The bombardment of Si/SiON layers on silicon substrates with 500 eV O2+ and Cs+ primary ions with and without oxygen flooding was investigated for the quantitative depth profiling of B and matrix elements.173 The yield of B and Si secondary ions changed less when oxygen flooding was applied. The measured 11B dose in SiON layers implanted through amorphous Si depended on the N concentration (1–25%) N. On the other hand, the N concentration derived from SIMS analysis correlated linearly with the N concentration determined with XPS so the matrix effect could be accounted for. Quantitative depth profiling of ultra-thin (<1.5 nm) SiON films containing up to 18 at.% N was achieved with ultra-low-energy SIMS using 500 eV Cs+ sputtering at an incidence angle of 60°, with MCs+ detection of N, O and Si.174 The RSF were derived from analysis of reference film samples also characterized with NRA. The RSF for N was found to deviate less than 5% for N concentrations of 1–10%. The N dose and oxynitride layer thickness determined with SIMS and XPS typically agreed to within 5 and 3–29%, respectively, the latter value being dependent on the constraints assumed in XPS data processing for the abruptness of the interface.

Quantitative analysis of SiGe films on either bulk silicon or silicon on insulator (SoI) wafers with 1 keV O2+ ions at normal incidence showed agreement to within 5% for the Ge concentration determined with SIMS and Auger electron spectrometry in samples with 15–65% Ge concentrations.175 The relative sputter rates of SiGe and Si followed a simple polynomial function that could be used to correct the raw data. In that case, it could be assumed that the ratio of the relative secondary ion yields of Si+ and Ge+ inside SiGe films was constant over the entire concentration range considered and calibration with one SiGe/Si or SiGe/SOI RM became possible.
Standardless quantification of groups III-V elements in semiconductor alloys using the intensity ratio of MCs+:(MCs+ + M2Cs+...) gave accurate elemental mole fractions when elements from the same periodic group were considered.176 Analysis of a comprehensive set of AlxGa1−xN, GaxIn1−xAs, AlxGayInzAs, GaAsxSb1−x, AlxGa1−xN samples by RBS, XPS and SIMS (7.2 keV Cs+ projectiles) yielded an agreement to within 5% with the exception of the Al and Ga contents in AlxGaxInzAs, for which the discrepancy between SIMS and the other methods was as high as 32%. The use of 5.5 keV O2+ primary ions in combination with positive atomic ion detection or Cs+ projectiles (5.5 or 14.5 keV) with negative ion or MCs+ detection was investigated for the quantitative analysis of both matrix elements and trace impurities in AlxGa1−xNx samples.177 It was found that the matrix ion intensity ratios of Al+:Ga+ and AlCs+:GaCs+ varied linearly with the mole fraction ratio x/(1–x), whereas the ratio of AlN−:GaN− depended linearly on x for 0 < x < 0.58. The sputter rate decreased with x according to a function specific for the energy and type of primary ion, while the RSF of impurities changed exponentially with x. As a result, adequate calibration procedures for the quantification of both matrix and impurity species could be defined.
The useful yield of major and trace elements in glass and mineral samples was determined as a function of instrumental parameters, including the accelerating voltage, the energy band pass, the energy and polarity of the secondary ions and the mass resolution in a magnetic sector instrument.178 Use of energy filtering or high mass resolution to remove cluster interferences led to useful yields of positive ions at a maximum transmission of 0.2–10−4. There was a negative correlation between ion yields and ionization potential. A set of practical graphs and relationships between, for instance, mass resolution, transmission figures, energy filtering, diameter of the primary ion beam spot and the transfer optics aperture, sampling depth and analyte concentrations was developed to guide the analyst in the choice of appropriate analytical conditions for a given application. An improved quantification method for B, F and H at levels between μg g−1 and several wt.% in minerals was based on the use of 27Al+ and 44Ca+ as reference isotopes for the mineral matrix in combination with calibration using NIST SRM 610 (glass) and axinite.179 A large set of silicate crystals was analysed in two crystallographic orientations using O− primary ion bombardment and energy filtering (75–125 eV). Referencing the ion intensities to those of Al or Ca made the analysis less sensitive to variations in time and ion-bombardment conditions than the traditionally used normalization to Si. The measured concentrations agreed typically to within 5–10% with those found with EPMA. The absolute quantification of H at concentrations of <50 μg g−1 in minerals is a key analytical challenge for the earth sciences. The use of 22 keV O− and 18 keV Cs+ primary ion beams focused to spots of 25 and 10 μm diameter, respectively, was compared for the analysis of a synthetic olivine crystal and a suite of garnet RM whose H2O concentrations (8–870 μg g−1) had been verified independently.180 A high primary ion current density was needed to minimize the contribution of redeposited water from the residual vacuum. Use of the 30Si ion signal to normalize the H peak intensities gave linear calibrations of which the slope could vary by as much as 13% for separate sessions. Use of Cs+ projectiles shortened the transient regime in comparison with O− bombardment but in both cases a LOD of 5 μg g−1 could be achieved.
The correct choice of adequate reference elements for the analysis of biological material was shown to be critical for the determination of the main physiological cations Ca2+, K+, Mg2+ and Na+ in frozen-hydrated ionic solutions and in flax fibres, serving as a model for ions in the vacuole and the plant cell wall, respectively.181 A neutralization chamber placed after the duoplasmatron allowed the analysis to be performed with neutral oxygen projectiles. In comparison with the common practice of referencing the signals to those of characteristic secondary ions from ice, normalization to the K+ signal allowed the uncertainty on the RSF to be as low as 15%, regardless of the K concentration in the sample.
8.6. Single and multi-dimensional analysis

8.6.1. Depth profiling. 
Pushing the limits of the technique to meet the requirements of the semi-conductor industry for increasingly better depth resolution means that each type of analysis becomes unique with its own set of problems. It has therefore been decided to organize this section according to the type of system under study rather than to the methodological improvement involved.
Depth profiling of B in silicon over the years has been one of the most investigated systems and yet interesting methodological improvements continue to be reported. In contrast to most reported findings, oxygen flooding was found not to be strictly necessary for depth profiling (ultra-low-energy O2+ projectiles at an incidence angle of 45°) of a multi-layer stack consisting of B δ-doped layers, separated by 6.4 nm thick undoped B films.182 Reduction of the primary ion energy from 300 to 150 eV improved the depth resolution at a distance of 36 nm from the surface from 1.66 to 0.83 nm decade−1 while the steady state was reached after only 1 nm of sputtering. The feasibility of ultra-shallow depth profiling was investigated by the analysis of samples containing equally spaced B-doped δ layers, some of which had a maximum concentration in the top layer within a distance of 1–2 nm from the surface.183 In addition to SIMS analysis using 500 eV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 60° with and without oxygen flooding, ERD, high resolution RBS and NRA were also used. Only without oxygen flooding did the SIMS results agree closely with those obtained by the other high-accuracy techniques because the oxide interface remained detectable for locating the B profile. On the other hand, oxygen flooding and sample rotation were needed to improve the depth scale accuracy and depth resolution for a sample containing two sets of 5 B-doped δ-layers at a distance of 17 nm, bombarded with 500 eV O2+ ions at a 68° incidence angle.184 The development of topography at different stages of the sputtering was followed with off-line atomic force microscopy (AFM). Comparison of analysis with sample rotation and oxygen flooding to that without showed a reduction of the roughness (rms) at a depth of 60 nm from 5.3 to 0.4 nm, while the apparent depth shift of the first layer decreased from 4.2 to 0.5 nm and the decay length improved from 6.7 to 2 nm per decade. Deconvolution was found to recover the depth resolution lost during the depth profiling (500 eV O2+ projectiles and oxygen flooding or 1 keV ions without oxygen flooding at incidence angles of 48 and 44°, respectively) of B-doped δ-layers and δ-double layers with a interlayer separation of between 1 and 8 nm in silicon.185 Use of the 0.5 keV projectiles gave a FWHM of 1.26 nm and 1.5 nm to be obtained for the depth profile of δ-layers at a depth of 20 and 150 nm, respectively. Deconvolution reduced the FWHM of the δ-layers to 0.6 and 0.7 nm, respectively, and improved the separation between the double δ-layers by about 20% and a factor of three at depths of 20 and 140 nm, respectively.
The availability of a unique single crystal, B-doped δ-layer diamond sample allowed the depth profiling characteristics with normal incidence 0.3–1 keV O2+ projectiles to be delineated.186 In contrast to the sputtering of silicon samples, transient effects on the sputter yield were weak, resulting in a differential shift of only ∼0.6 nm keV−1 at a depth of ∼25 nm. The erosion rate and B+ ion yield did not depend on the projectile energy. The decay lengths increased 3.0 to 3.5 nm for 300 and 100 eV projectiles, respectively.
Another well-studied analysis is the ultra-shallow depth profiling of As in silicon. The matrix effects, typical for high concentration As dopant distributions sputtered with 0.5 keV Cs+ projectiles, were minimized through use of a wide and well-centred slit.187 Resistivity changes due to the high dopant concentrations complicated the analysis by changing the leakage path for the primary ion current, which in turn altered the surface potential and KE of, in particular, the emitted AsSi− ions. In contrast, use of 9.5 keV Cs+ primary ion bombardment at an incidence angle of 45° and low sputtering rate, combined with 28Si−, 28Si2− and 28Si75As− detection, optimized the accuracy and initial transient width during depth profiling of low doses of As (1 and 3 keV) implanted into silicon.188 Medium energy ion scattering (MEIS) was used as reference method because of its excellent depth resolution and first principle quantification. The conditions used in SIMS gave a decay length comparable to that measured by MEIS but the depth localization of the As implant exhibited a significant shift. Unlike point-by-point normalization on either 28Si− or 28Si2−, a simple normalization of the 28Si75As− profile to the average of the 28Si2− results gave the best agreement with the As concentrations found using MEIS. Use of an empirical deconvolution was a valuable alternative to ultra-low-energy primary ion bombardment for improving the accuracy of junction depth measurement.189 Samples of preamorphized silicon implanted with As and B at 500 eV were depth profiled with oxygen flooding during bombardment with 0.2–1.5 keV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 45°. Both the junction depth and decay length increased linearly with the primary ion energy. Using these functions in a deconvolution model allowed virtually identical junction depths to be obtained for all primary ion energies tested. The approach was further validated by measurements of a 1 keV As implant depth profiled with 500, 700 and 1000 eV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 60°. Deconvolution of the three profiles gave the same junction depth of 7.5 nm, whereas the uncorrected value with 500 eV projectiles was as high as 10 nm.
Use of ultra-shallow junctions in semiconductors and of multi-quantum wells (MQW) in lasers demands accurate and high resolution depth profiling of germanium–silicon systems. A comprehensive study of samples containing 10 Ge-doped δ-layers with nominal thickness of 0.4 nm at a distance of about 12 nm from the silicon surface focused on the effect of impact angle and impact energy in the ranges 0–70° and 0.25–1 keV, respectively.190 The best depth resolution was observed with 250 eV projectiles at an impact angle of 40°, resulting in FWHM of ∼1.5 nm and decay length within 1 nm throughout a depth range of up to 120 nm. Impact angles of 50, 40 and 30° optimized the dynamic range for projectiles of 0.25, 0.5 and 1 keV, respectively. A study on the inherent compromise between depth resolution and erosion rate in the depth profiling of MQW, consisting of 10 δ-layers of Si0.7Ge0.3 at a distance from the surface of 11 nm, showed that the use of 250 eV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 40° resulted in an optimal combination of short decay length (0.64 nm) and relatively high sputter rate (47 nm nA−1 cm−2).191 Moreover, the dynamic range was larger than with bombardment at normal incidence. When Cs+ primary ions were used instead of O2+projectiles, beam-induced segregation caused severe tailing and shifts of the maximum concentration depths measured for B implants in Si, SiGe and Si/SiGe/Si samples.192 To maintain the advantage of Cs bombardment of providing direct information on relevant species such as As, B, C, Ge, O, P and Si in a single analysis, an empirical deconvolution model was used to account for the residual ion mixing effect. The corrected B profiles were shown to be equivalent to those measured with an oxygen beam. The hydrogen content in Si1−xGex:H thin films, which governed the density and the optical band gap, could be determined within 10% using Cs+ primary ions, detection of MCs2+ or M− ions, secondary ion filtering at 130 eV and calibration on the basis of ERD and RBS measurements of reference films.193 This became possible because the useful yield ratios of HCs2+:SiCs2+, H−:Si− and Ge−:Si− were almost independent of the Ge concentration.
Hafnium silicate (HfSixOy) is one of the most promising high-k materials for reducing the dimensions of semiconductor devices. To overcome the severe distortion resulting from matrix and sputtering effects in the conventional front-side depth profiling of a 25 nm HfSiO layer on silicon, it was necessary to prepare a back-side-thinned sample with <250 nm of silicon of even thickness over the HfSiO layer.194 Back-side bombardment with 1.25 keV O2+ projectiles at an incidence angle of 50°, resulted in a projected range of 2.7 nm and gave profiles free from the matrix and sputtering effects and with sufficient depth resolution to verify the absence of Hf diffusion across the HfSiO/Si interface. Similiarly, back-side analysis allowed the chemical composition at the interfaces of HfO2/Si and TiN/HfO2/Si systems to be studied properly.195 Specifically, the artificial tails of Hf+ and Ti+, which typically occurred in front-side analysis, disappeared in the back-side depth profiling with a 1 keV O2+ ions at normal incidence angle.
The technologically important challenge of depth profiling N in oxynitride layers with a thickness of 2–5 nm on a silicon substrate was investigated with 5 keV Cs+ and 1 keV O2+projectiles at incidence angles of 57 and 60°, respectively, in a magnetic sector instrument and with 0.25–1 keV Cs+ ions for sputtering and 25 keV Ga+ ions for analysis at incidence angles of 32 and 42°, respectively, in a TOFMS analyser.196 Only when 0.25 keV Cs+ primary ions were used did the surface transient cover less than 0.4 nm and no surface encapsulation with a 7 nm thick SiO2 layer was needed to detect the peak concentration of the Si2N+ ions in the steady state regime. However, encapsulation improved quantification, even in the case of low energy sputtering. Back-side depth profiling was also mandatory to make SIMS data consistent with those obtained with high-resolution RBS for HfSiON films, prepared by nitridation of 4–5 nm thick HFSiO films on silicon.197 A variety of bombardment conditions in the conventional front side sputtering, including 500 eV Cs+ sputtering at various incidence angles with and without oxygen and cooling of the sample to −120 °C, gave unsatisfactory results. Deposition of a 20–30 nm Si capping layer to avoid contact of the original top layer with the insulating glass substrate during analysis and back-side thinning (0.1–0.2 μm) of the sample allowed excellent agreement to be obtained between SIMS using 2 keV O2+ projectiles and RBS.
Consecutive use of 10 and 1.5 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 60° to obtain sputtering rates of 2 and 0.09 nm s−1, respectively, allowed depth profiling of As/Al0.2Ga0.8As MQW structures to be achieved in <2 h with good depth resolution.198 The specific beam-induced damage, introduced by the initial high speed sputtering, was accounted for by deconvolution based on the MRI model. The C-concentration, derived from the deconvoluted data, agreed well with that measured for a 200 nm thick Al0.2Ga0.8As control sample, grown under the same conditions as the MQW test sample.

Carbon deposition in low energy C
60

+ depth profiling seems to limit the promising potential commonly assigned to large polyatomic projectiles. A systematic study on the sputtering of silicon with 3–15 keV C60+ primary ions showed that the use of projectiles ions of at least 8 keV in combination with oxygen flooding or of 15 keV without oxygen backfill was necessary to increase the sputtering rate substantially above that of carbon deposition.199 However, depth profiling of As-doped δ-layers in silicon with 15 keV C60+ projectile ions degraded the depth resolution by a factor of five in comparison with that obtained with 0.5 keV Cs+ primary ion bombardment (5 and 1.1 nm, respectively). This was explained by the formation of platelet-like grain structures in the crater bottoms. In contrast, the sputter depth profile of NIST SRM 2135a (nine alternating layers of Cr and Ni with nominal layer thicknesses of 53 and 66 nm, respectively) was quoted to be excellent, with sharp edges between the layers and qualitatively consistent with results from the literature.200
In Pd–Rh interdiffusion, of interest in the treatment of cancer, the isotopes are separated by effusion of the 103Pd in Rh targets. Dual-beam TOF SIMS with 2 keV Cs+ and 25 keV Ga+ projectiles, both at an incidence angle of 45°, for sputtering and analysis, respectively, was applied to quantitative depth profiling of RhxPd1−x layers on silicon.201 The intensity ratio PdCs+:RhCs+ varied linearly with the relative element concentrations as measured with PIXE. The linear dependency of the experimental total sputter yield on the Pd content was in close agreement with predictions made by TRIM. These relationships allowed TOF SIMS depth profile data to be properly calibrated by analysis of samples annealed at different temperatures and to be applied to the quantification of Pd–Rh interdiffusion.
The surface or bulk nanoscale defects initially present in monocrystalline silicon (111) subjected to 40 keV He+ implantation were found to act as triggers for beam-induced topography development during depth profiling with 8 keV O2+ primary ions at a 38° incidence angle.202 Monitoring the increase of Si2+ and SiO2+ ion intensities during SIMS sputtering as well as by AFM measurements at different stages of the sputtering showed that the local topography developed more rapidly than usual. Once the crater bottom had passed beyond the defect, topography development proceeded as if there had been no local defects and ripples perpendicular to the sputtering beam were formed.


8.6.2. Imaging. 
The influence of initial topography on the image quality for rough samples was studied using a series of pluronic-coated fibres and polystyrene spheres on insulating and conductive substrates.203 Both triple focusing time and reflector type TOF SIMS instruments were used with a 25 keV Ga+ primary ion source. Image features were treated with PCA and Poisson or multinomial mixture models. The size and shape of features as well as the absolute and relative intensities of ion peaks were primarily distorted as a result of the varying incidence angle of the primary ion beam, but the extent of the total ion yield variations also depended on the resistivity of the substrate on which the non-conducting particles had been deposited.

Imaging of biological samples with highly focused beams of polyatomic projectiles was exploited to map the distribution of K+ and Na+ ions in kidney samples with sub-cellular resolution.204 Tissue preparation involved high-pressure freezing, freeze-fracturing and freeze-drying to preserve the initial position of mobile ions. Images recorded over an area of 60 × 60–500 × 500 μm2, obtained with a Bi3+primary ion beam (∼300 nm spot diameter), were processed using correlation analysis and PCA. Exploiting the inherent panoramic registration of TOF SIMS also allowed the phosphocholine-containing phospholipids to be localized by means of structural ions at m/z 184, specific for the phosphocholine head group. Overlay of images at m/z 184, m/z 39 and m/z 23, together with multivariate analysis, revealed strong correlation of K+ with phosphocholine. The study was extended to the imaging of high pressure-frozen, freeze-fractured and freeze-dried rat cerebellum.205
Use of conventional monoatomic primary beams for biological imaging continued to push the limits towards sub-cellular resolution. For these studies also, an increased use of cryo-techniques for sample preparation is evident. Topographical effects caused by the freeze fracturing were compensated for by normalizing the images of specific secondary ions to the total ion counts in individual pixels and by making PCA of the image. Use of neutral O2 projectiles obtained by neutralization of the commonly used 15 keV O2+ primary ions avoided sample charging problems during stigmatic imaging (2 μm resolution) of inorganic cations Ca, K, Mg and Na in thick, non-conducting frozen-hydrated samples of ivy, camomile and flax.206 A mass resolution of 1600 was needed to avoid isobaric interferences. The dedicated sample preparation procedure was shown to keep the integrity of the chemical composition and structure of plant samples, in particular with respect to the ionic gradients both between the outer and the inner parts of the cells and between cells and tissues. In contrast, conventional Ga+ primary ion bombardment was applied to the imaging of Ca and Mg cations in mammalian cell mitosis and chromosomes throughout the cell cycle.207 Subtle differences in cation contents between successive mitotic stages were quantified, leading to a detailed description of the metaphase–anaphase transition at narrow time intervals. Imaging of the Ca and Mg distributions in the polytene chromosomes of Drosophila melanogaster showed that these cations could play a common role in mitosis from lower eukaryotes to mammals. Simultaneous mapping of atomic and organic structural ions in the upper surface layer of sea urchin tooth samples using TOF S-SIMS with a Ga+ primary ion beam (spot size of 0.4 μm) was essential for the study of the biomineralization processes by which a relatively poor material such as magnesium calcite is converted into a mechanically stiff structure.208 The correlation between images for Mg and those for structural ions from mineral-related amino-acids such as asparagine and serine showed the separation of Mg from the calcite structures. Demineralized specimens were characterized by serine localized on membranes between the crystal elements as well as weaker Mg and aspartic acid signals. Application of TOF S-SIMS imaging with 25 keV Ga+ primary ion beam to human liver tumour cells intoxicated with Cd, Cu, Cr, Hg and Zn allowed the metal distributions to be visualized in single cells with a 0.5 μm lateral resolution.209 A protocol combining rapid freezing, freeze-fracture and imprinting was used to place intoxicated cells onto a silicon wafer with preservation of the cellular morphology. Only Cr and Cu ions showed preferential diffusion into the cell after simulated intoxication.
Imaging of size-selected aerosol particles with diameters of 0.05–3 μm collected from near heavily used roads or from car exhausts demonstrated that it was possible to visualize directly the distribution of several important ions such as B+, Ca+, Fe+, Li+, Na+, NH4+ and Si+, and structural ions from aliphatic hydrocarbons, trimethylsilyl groups and phthalates by using TOF S-SIMS with a Ga+ primary ion beam of 200 nm spot diameter.210 In practice, there was sufficient resolution only to image the larger particles individually. Gasoline exhaust particles produced high intensities of Ca+ and hydrocarbon ions, whereas intense signals from NH4+ and trimethylsilyl ions were characteristic of diesel exhaust particulates. This allowed source appointment to be carried out in various ambient aerosols.
The not-so-obvious combination of modern TOF S-SIMS and ancient art objects results from the unique capability to image a wide variety of components at the surface with molecular specificity and minimal surface damage. The limiting step is, of course, the size of the artefact, but the same microscopic fragment can be used for S-SIMS analysis followed by subsequent FTIR and SEM-EDX characterization, since the craters created are as small as 150 × 150 μm2 and only one monolayer deep. The approach was applied to the patina of an African wooden statuette of which a fragment was embedded and analysed in cross section.211 In this way, the depth distribution of quartz, aluminosilicate calcium carbonate and a variety of organic compounds, including lipids, proteins and urate salts, was obtained from both atomic and structural ions. Owing to the inherent panoramic detection in TOF S-SIMS, extensive speciation was feasible without use of additional material or analysis time, which would have been necessary for elemental imaging.


8.6.3. 3-D analysis. 
The tremendous potential offered by TOF S-SIMS for surface speciation and depth profiling of elements in the same micro-objects was exploited in the study of heterogeneous reactions of single sea-salt particles and hydroxyl radicals, one of the most active species in the ozone photochemical cycle.212 The inherent panoramic registration, which provided full mass spectra for each pixel, was a particular advantage in studies in which the reaction products of interest were not known in advance. Specifically, the kinetics of NaOH and NaClOx could be experimentally characterized to provide a better understanding of atmospheric chemistry.

9. Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)
The traditional forms of SNMS have been gradually declining over the years in favour of the use of lasers for efficient and selective post-ionization of the neutrals generated by focused primary ion beams. In particular, the proliferation of TOF SIMS instruments has contributed to their conversion into versatile tools for surface analysis, imaging and depth profiling with improved LOD in comparison with SIMS.
9.1. Fundamental studies
The strength of the chemical bonds rather than statistical recombination was shown to govern the formation of hetero-atomic clusters AlmNin generated from NiAl(111) single crystals by sputtering with 15 keV Ar+ ions at an incidence angle of 60° and post-ionization with an F2-laser (λ = 157 nm).213 The intensity distributions of 33 AlmNin (m and n = 0–5) clusters were measured as a function of laser power to check that single photon ionization took place and to determine the cross section as well as the degree of saturation. The intensities of the Alm or Nin ions, always lower than those of the NimAln clusters with the same number of atoms, showed the role of the energetics of the chemical bonding in cluster formation during sputtering.
Experimental data on the KED of In and In2 neutrals generated with Au− and Au2− projectiles (5 and 10 keV, respectively) from polycrystalline indium were fitted with the predictions of several models, ranging from thermal evaporation, gas flow or phase explosion and thermal spike to linear cascade sputtering and collision spike.214 The results for the monoatomic projectiles were consistent with linear cascade sputtering, while those for polyatomic bombardment pointed to collision spike-induced generation. Thermal evaporation was excluded as a mechanism since the spike temperatures calculated from the data for polyatomic projectiles exceeded the critical temperature of the target material. The observed KED were also consistent with the velocities to be expected from phase explosion and gas flow models.
9.2. Instrumentation

Ultra-trace analysis of samples from space missions was studied with a modified TOFMS instrument fitted with new ion optics and detector system, a 15 keV Ar+ primary ion beam for sputtering and an F2 excimer laser (λ = 157 nm, energy per pulse 6 mJ) for single photon ionization of neutrals.215 Simulations predicted a transmission of 95% for the new optics and the high performance bipolar detectors should reach an efficiency of 75%. The ionization volume of 3 × 3 × 4 mm3 made up to 25% of the sputtered neutrals available for post-ionization. The useful yield of Mo+ was as high as 25% and 16–18% for a pure molybdenum target and NIST SRM 1264a (0.28 atom% Mo), respectively.
A dedicated instrument for quantitative analysis of interstellar grains was developed by fitting an F2-excimer laser (λ = 157 nm, energy per pulse 4.5 mJ) to a TOF SIMS instrument for non-resonant ionization of the neutrals, sputtered by a 25 keV Ga+ primary ion beam with a 250 nm spot diameter.216 The photon energy of 7.9 eV was adequate for single photon ionization of about 60% of the elements of the periodic table. Experiments showed useful yields as high as 1% while the accuracy of isotope measurements was in the order of a few %.
The applicability of aTOFMS in aerosol research was extended by using an instrument for one-step DI, IR or thermal desorption combined with UV post-ionization under REMPI conditions.217 An excimer laser (λ = 248 nm, power density 107 W cm−2) for the one-step DI and REMPI post-ionization was complemented with an IR laser (λ = 10.6 μm, power density 107 W cm−2) as well as a heater cartridge with stainless steel front plate that could be quickly heated to 350 °C for the desorption of neutrals. Application to the analysis of particles from spruce wood ash generated in a residential heating system and exhaust gases from a car showed that one-step DI was the most appropriate mode to detect the elemental composition, including total C content, at the percent level.

In-vacuum cryosectioning of frozen hydrated biological samples allowed the commonly encountered artefacts of redistribution of mobile ions and contamination during transport between the off-line preparation and analysis laboratories to be eliminated.218 In the new combined laser SNMS and TOF SIMS instrument, samples, viewed through a microscope, could be cut on a cooled sample holder with a carbide or diamond knife inside the vacuum chamber. The viability of the method was studied using aqueous KCl solutions in a PVC tubing and by monitoring the K+:H2O.K+ ion ratio, which was lower in the presence of adsorbed water. At a temperature of −110 °C, the contribution from adsorption was removed and the “pristine” hydrated surface preserved for about 90 min.
9.3. Analytical methodology
Comprehensive analysis of the outer surface layers of individual ambient aerosol particles in the size range of 2–4 μm could be carried out with a modified commercial TOF SIMS instrument featuring a 25 keV Ga+ primary ion gun and two excimer lasers (λ = 157 and 193 nm) for post-ionization.219 The primary ion beam was focused to a spot diameter of 200 nm and current mode detection was applied in SNMS experiments, whereas counting was used in SIMS measurements. While the directly emitted secondary ions provided significant information on alkali (earth) elements, inorganic species and aliphatic hydrocarbons, post-ionization was needed to improve the detection of elements such as Pb and Zn or PAH. The lateral resolution in the imaging mode was sufficient for the analysis of particles in the μm size range.

Isotope analysis of B in the calcite shells of foraminifera provides information on the pH-value of the ocean at the time the shell was formed. A RSD within a few ‰ could be obtained even at concentrations of 5 μg g−1 by using a TOF-SIMS instrument equipped with EI and Ga+ primary ion sputtering guns, two tuneable dye lasers and a Nd:YAG laser (λ = 250, 564 and 1064 nm, respectively) for the three-step ionization of B.220 However, there was a significant instrumental bias of ∼20% between the measured and expected B isotope ratios.
9.4. Imaging
Successful anti-cancer therapies must selectively deliver compounds to target cells while sparing normal tissue. Imaging and quantification of intrinsic elements and specific molecules with sub-cellular resolution was achieved in cell cultures and tissues using a TOF SIMS with 30 keV Ga+ primary ion gun (200 nm spot diameter) and an excimer laser (λ = 193 nm, pulse energy 200 mJ, spot diameter 150 μm, τ = 20 ns) for the non-resonant photon ionization of the sputtered neutrals.221,222 Measurements of the K:Na ratio on cancer type cells and mouse tissues treated with borinated compounds demonstrated the adequacy of special sample preparation procedures, developed to preserve the chemical and structural integrity of the living cell. High-resolution images were recorded from the biological samples and the reconstructed mass spectra showed a series of signals that could be used to distinguish between the different cell structures and components. For instance, the P-ions due to the lipids, proteins and DNA could be used to identify cells and cell boundaries, while a series of amine fragments could be related to membrane systems, including the plasma membranes and the membranes surrounding the cell organelles. As a result, the detection of high CN− ion intensities at spots with low amine fragment ion intensities pointed to the cut through a cell, since it removed the membrane of the nucleus. Overlay of the B image with those of CN, amine and P ions allowed the disposal and uptake of the B in the cells as a result of the transport through the tubules to be observed for bulk concentrations in kidney of about 60 μg B g−1.
10. Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)
10.1. Instrumentation
Continuing the trend established over the past few years, the great majority of new developments in SIRMS are based on ‘continuous flow’ (CF) systems: on-line units which variously separate samples into different components, and convert them to gas for analysis in a single-inlet mass spectrometer. Most of the development is in the on-line sample separation/gas production units, with little development in the mass spectrometer itself.
A method to measure δ13C of individual carbon fractions of airborne particulate matter from filter samples using stepwise thermal desorption/combustion analyser-GC-SIRMS was applied to the analysis of atmospheric carbon compounds.223,224 Carbon fractions were released at different temperature ranges and different redox conditions with the δ13C differences providing information on sources of atmospheric particulates, e.g., natural organic molecules versus combustion of fuels. The coupling in parallel of a quadrupole MS and a SIRMS instrument to a thermal analysis system allowed both the identification of evolved organic compounds and the measurement of their δ13C to be made continuously.225 The procedure was applied to a range of lignocellulose materials derived from soils and/or plant tissue.

Analysis of DOC in waters has become a routine hydrochemical procedure through the use of a ‘wet oxidation’ module (heating with persulfate) coupled to an EA (to measure the evolved CO2). As in many of the instrumentation developments in CF-SIRMS, the addition of a mass spectrometer to the system allowed δ13C of the evolved compounds to be measured.226,227 The typical reproducibility of δ13C analyses on DOC was as low as 0.4‰ or better. With appropriate blank correction procedures, accurate analyses were obtained on concentrations as low as 0.5 mg DOC l−1, representing the lower limit typically observed in marine systems.
Skomarkova et al.228 studied the fine-scale isotopic composition of C in tree rings by LA-combustion-GC-SIRMS. In this method, sections of tree rings were physically ablated by laser in a stream of He, then combusted to CO2 for analysis by on-line MS. There was an unexpected high variability in mid-season δ13C values of wood between individual trees (−31‰ to −24‰), which was attributed to competition between dominant trees and microclimatological variations within the canopy.
10.2. Sample preparation
The on-line CF SIRMS analysis of plasma or urine may be a simpler procedure than ‘classical’ off-line methods for use with doubly-labelled (H218O and 2H2O) water techniques widely applied in studies of human and animal physiology. Ripoche et al.229 used a CF SIRMS procedure, initially dedicated to the analysis of water, for analysis of plasma and urine samples. The configuration was adapted for each stable isotope: a chromium tube to produce 2H by reduction and a glassy carbon reactor to produce 18O by pyrolysis. Before the on-line conversion of water into gas, each matrix was submitted to a short and easy treatment, which was the same for the measurement of both isotopes. Plasma was passed through centrifugal filters. Urine was cleaned with black carbon and filtered (0.45 μm diameter). Tested at concentrations of 150–300 ppm in these fluids, the 2H:1H ratio response was linear with good repeatability (SD <0.2 ppm) and reproducibility (SD <0.5 ppm). The accuracy for biological samples was validated by comparison with classical dual-inlet methods with 18O analyses giving more accurate results.
The measurement of 2H:1H in tree rings, potentially involving the analysis of hundreds of samples per tree, used to involve laborious nitration of cellulose to remove exchangeable H. A modification of established methods that substantially reduced sample preparation time was based on the equilibration reaction of the hydroxyl H of cellulose and water vapour of known isotopic composition.230 The equilibrated cellulose was pyrolysed and the total 2H:1H ratio determined by subsequent on-line SIRMS. With a mass balance system, the 2H:1H ratio of non-exchangeable H was recalculated after an empirical calibration had been performed to yield a mean exchangeability of 0.239 and an equilibrium fractionation factor of 1.082 between the hydroxyl H of cellulose and water H at 110 °C. Equilibration took ten minutes per sample. Advantages of this new technique were much reduced sample requirement (∼0.5 mg compared with 20 mg for the conventional nitration technique), an ∼100-fold reduced sample processing time and elimination of hazardous chemicals used in the nitration technique.
10.3. Analytical methodology
Following on from earlier discoveries and applications of mass relationships between oxygen isotopes, interest is now turning to the analysis of mass-independent signatures of sulfur isotopes. Whereas the commonly measured 34S:32S ratio is routinely undertaken on SO2, relatively easily produced by combustion in an on-line EA, measurement of 33S and 36S required the use of SF5 produced by the more complex fluorination reaction. Ono et al.231 presented data on all isotopes of S using a laser-assisted sampling and fluorination technique. The method involved LA microsampling and subsequent fluorination of sulfide (silver sulfide or pyrite), separation of product gas by GC, removal of an interference at m/z 131 by cooling to −110 °C and isotope analysis using CF SIRMS. This technique worked with an optimum sample size of 100 to 200 nmol with precisions for δ33S and δ36S of 0.1 and 0.5‰ (2σ), respectively. One of the major sources of error was tailing of the major ion beam (32SF5+) onto minor beams (33SF5+) and (36SF5+). This effect was corrected by measuring a series of sulfide RM with mass-dependent S isotope compositions. The method improved the spatial resolution of the in situ LA analysis and considerably reduced the analysis time compared with conventional dual inlet methods. In a related study, fluorination of sulfide followed by dual inlet SIRMS was used to characterize several RM and sedimentary sulfides of the Phanerozoic age by high-precision determinations of Δ33S and Δ36S, which are defined as deviations of δ33S and δ36S from ideal mass-dependent relationships.232
Although Cl isotope analysis has great potential for studying sources and degredation pathways for chlorinated solvents in the environment, traditional methods of analysis have required lengthy preparation of gaseous chloride and were not suited to CF-compound-specific isotope analysis (CSIA). A method for the CSIA of δ37Cl in chloroethene compounds233 used a SIRMS instrument with nine collectors, including two set at m/z 50 and 52 (CH3Cl) and two at m/z 94 and 96 (CH3Br). The method was based on the fact that fragments with mass ratios of 94:96, 95:97 and 96:98 were produced from di-, tri- and tetra-chloroethene isomers during ion bombardment in the source of a SIRMS instrument. Using GC-CF-SIRMS, it was possible to separate compounds on-line and to measure directly the Cl isotope ratios of the fragments with the specific mass ratios, using both pure phase and aqueous samples. The precision of the measured Cl isotopic composition varied between ±0.06 and ±0.08‰ for a range of compounds.
While early measurements of silicon isotopes in geological materials revealed a relatively restricted range of isotope ratios, recent interest in dissolved silica and the biosphere has revealed a broader range. Basile-Doelsch234 provided a useful review of the methods of analysis including SIMS, SIRMS and MC-ICP-MS, the general patterns of 30Si:28Si variation and the way in which Si isotopes can provide information on different aspects of the Si cycle. Measurement of the 30Si:28Si isotope ratio is currently undertaken by two quite different techniques: the traditional SIRMS of SiF4 produced by fluorination and, more recently, by MC-ICP-MS of solutions of silicic acid.
Brzezinski et al.235 presented a procedure for the automated determination of the isotopic abundance of Si from biogenic and lithogenic particulate matter and from dissolved silicon in fresh or salt waters. Samples were purified using proven procedures through the reaction of Si with acidified ammonium molybdate, followed by precipitation with triethylamine and combustion of the precipitate to yield SiO2. The SiO2 was converted to caesium hexafluorosilicate by dissolution in HF and the addition of CsCl. Isotope analysis was accomplished by decomposing the caesium hexafluorosilicate with concentrated H2SO4 to generate SiF4 gas, which was purified cryogenically and analysed. Yields of SiF4 were >99.5%. The method did not require gaseous fluorinating reagents and produced samples suitable for automated SIRMS analysis by modification of existing instrumentation. Reproducibility was ±0.03–0.10% for a variety of natural and synthetic materials.
The silicon isotope abundance ratios and atomic weights of NIST SRM NBS-28 and several other silicon isotope RM were determined using two new synthetic isotope mixtures prepared gravimetrically from highly enriched silicon isotope materials in the form of SiO2.236 All materials were converted into SiF4 gas for analysis. The resulting isotopic abundances of NBS-28 were 92.17515 ± 0.00028, 4.67739 ± 0.00024 and 3.14746 ± 0.00014 for 28Si, 29Si and 30Si, respectively. The silicon molar mass of NBS-28 was found to be 28.08653 ± 0.00011, 0.001 larger than previously reported values. The Si isotope abundance ratios and atomic weights of SRM-990, IRMM-017, IRMM-018, GBW-04421 and GBW-04422 were also calibrated. There remains some disagreement on these abundance ratios as measured by SIRMS or MC-ICP-MS methods.
11. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)
11.1. Review
A particularly timely review was that by DeLaeter and Kurz237 on the development of modern MS and, in particular, the role of Alfred Otto Carl Nier, widely regarded as the ‘father of modern mass spectrometry’. Nier developed the sector field mass spectrometer, still the instrument of choice for many isotope scientists some 66 years after its first appearance in 1940, and applied it to a remarkable breadth of applications, including atomic weights, geochronology, isotope geochemistry, nuclear physics and space science.
11.2. Analytical methodology
The analysis of B isotopes in foraminifera by Foster et al.238 used the total-evaporation negative-ionization TIMS technique previously reported for the determination of other elements such as Pb and U. This technique minimizes the effect of instrumental mass fractionation and maximizes the sample signal by analysing samples continuously through to exhaustion. Analysis of as little as 300 pg of B was possible, thereby allowing small numbers of species-specific fossils to be analysed. Measured 11B:10B ratios for sea-water fell within the measurement error of values obtained using ICP-MS and positive- and negative-ionization TIMS. Uncertainties produced were ±0.7‰ (2σ).
The TIMS measurement of Ca isotopes using a 42Ca–43Ca double spike was shown to have advantages over the use of 42Ca–48Ca or 43Ca–48Ca double-spikes.239 Coherent fractionation minimized errors in the corrected ratio due to any deviation of the instrumental fractionation from an exponential law. An additional advantage was that all four isotopes with m/z 40–44 that were required for the analysis could be measured simultaneously by modern MC-TIMS instruments. This approach eliminated errors in mass fractionation correction caused by rapid fluctuations or drifts in fractionation and also reduced the analysis time substantially.
New methods for the micro-sampling and isotopic analysis of Sr have been described.240 The authors developed micro-milling of single (mainly feldspar) crystals in thin sections to yield μg-sized solid samples for subsequent isotopic analysis of ng quantities of Sr extracted from the μg-sized samples. Physical sampling techniques were based around a computerized numerical-control milling machine. Chemical procedures for the isolation of Sr and Rb for TIMS and MC-ICP-MS analysis were assessed in the context of the small sample sizes produced by micro-milling. The work achieved long-term external precisions (2σ) of 50 ppm for load sizes as small as 3 ng Sr.
Cadmium is by far the heaviest element to show isotope fractionation effects in lunar samples. The elemental abundance and isotope fractionation of Cd in nine lunar samples, the Brownfield meteorite, and the Columbia River Basalt BCR-1, have been measured by the TIMS double spike technique.241 Lunar soil samples gave a tightly grouped set of positive isotope fractionation values of between +0.42% and +0.50% per mass unit, whereas vesicular mare basalt gave zero isotope fractionation. The volatile nature of Cd is of importance in explaining these isotope fractionation results. Although a number of mechanisms have been postulated in the literature to explain isotope fractionation of certain elements in lunar soils, these Cd data suggested ion and particle bombardment of the lunar surface as the most likely mechanisms.

Ultra-high precision 142Nd:144Nd measurements of early Archaean rocks, facilitated by MC TIMS using Faraday cups to measure large ion intensities, have been applied to a variety of studies involving earth differentiation.242,243 Old terrestrial samples had positive 142Nd anomalies ranging from 8 to 15 ppm. Repeated measurements of the Ames Nd standard demonstrated that the 142Nd:144Nd ratio could be determined with an external precision of 2 ppm (2σ) so anomalies as small as 5 ppm could be detected with confidence. A major analytical improvement lay in the elimination of the double normalization procedure required to correct for secondary mass fractionation effect.
The lutetium isotopic abundances were measured by TIMS to be 97.4013 ± 0.0012 and 2.5987 ± 0.0012% for 175Lu and 176Lu, respectively.244 The linearity of the method was verified by measuring NIST isotope SRM 985 (potassium). The abundance sensitivity of the mass spectrometer for the measured ion beams of Lu+ was examined to ensure the absence of tailing effects and interfering ion beams. The isotope fractionation of the measured 175Lu:176Lu ratio was estimated with reference to the isotope fractionation of Yb, which used gravimetrically prepared solutions of the enriched isotopes 171Yb and 176Yb. This is the first publication in which the measured isotope ratio of Lu was corrected for isotope fractionation. Revised values of solar system abundances of 175Lu and 176Lu were presented.
The measurement of high precision Pb isotope ratios in small sample quantities was developed by the use of a 202Pb–205Pb double spike.245 The procedure was evaluated by analysis of various standards using between 0.05–3.0 ng of Pb per load. The data were corrected using both the double spike fractionation correction and conventional external normalization procedures. The enhancement in precision and reproducibility achieved varied with the quantity of Pb analysed.
Schoene et al.246 presented a comparison of U–Pb ages measured to very high precision using the chemical annealing ID-TIMS method to re-evaluate the relative accuracy of the 238U and 235U decay constants. The authors dated zircon and xenotime at the single- to sub-grain scale in 11 rock samples ranging from 0.1 to 3.3 Ga old. Systematic deviations of the samples from concordia was used to calculate a ratio of the U decay constants that was lower than the accepted ratio by 0.09% and was five times more precise. Four of the samples were also dated by the 40Ar:39Ar method and were used to augment existing pairs of U–Pb and 40Ar–39Ar ages. The new data supported most previous observations that U–Pb and 207Pb:206Pb dates are older than 40Ar:39Ar dates by 0.5–1%.
Considerable advances have been made in the analysis of Pu and U in urine and other biological materials. A TIMS procedure for the determination of Pu and U in bone samples following ashing and chemical separation gave LOD for Pu and U of 8 and 74 pg, respectively, in 100 mg of bone sample.247 Eliot et al.248 measured fg-quantities of Pu from human urine samples with a LOD of 0.5 fg of 239Pu. The isotopic abundance of the NIST SRM 4334E (242Pu) was also determined by TIMS and was found to be 99.99967 atom% 242Pu. In an assessment of the sensitivity of Pu isotope analysis by TIMS for environmental samples, the LOD for direct, electrodeposition and resin bead source loading techniques were determined by systematically varying the amount of Pu loaded on the rhenium filament.249 The resin bead method produced a stable ion beam for as long as 6 h with ∼108 Pu atoms loaded onto a single resin bead.
12. Glossary of terms



AAS
Atomic absorption spectrometry


AES
Atomic emission spectrometry


AFM
Atomic force microscopy


AMS
Accelerator mass spectrometry


aTOF
Aerosol time of flight


CC
Collision cell


CF
Continuous flow


CID
Collision induced dissociation


cps
counts per second


CRM
Certified Reference Material


CSIA
Compound specific isotope analysis


DBT
Dibutyltin


dc
Direct current


DDC
Diethyldithiocarbamate


DI
Desorption ionization


DIHEN
Direct injection high efficiency nebulizer


DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid


DOC
Dissolved organic carbon


DRC
Dynamic reaction cell


EA
Elemental analyser


EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid


EDX
Energy dispersive X-ray


EI
Electron ionization


EIMS
Electron ionization mass spectrometry


EPMA
Electron probe microanalysis


ERD
Elastic recoil detection


ES
Electrospray


ESMS
Electrospray mass spectrometry


ETV
Electrothermal vaporization


EU
European Union


FI
Flow injection


FIB
Focused ion beam


FT
Fourier transform


FTIR
Fourier transform infrared


FWHM
Full width at half maximum


GBW
National Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)


GC
Gas chromatography


GD
Glow discharge


GDMS
Glow discharge mass spectrometry


HG
Hydride generation


HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography


HR
High resolution


ICP
Inductively coupled plasma


ICP-MS
Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry


ID
Isotope dilution


IP
Ionization potential


IR
Infrared


IRMM
Institute of Reference Materials and Measurements


k
Dielectric constant


KE
Kinetic energy


KED
Kinetic energy distribution


LA
Laser ablation


LC
Liquid chromatography


LIMS
Laser ionization mass spectrometry


LMIG
Liquid metal ion gun


LMMS
Laser microprobe mass spectrometry


LOD
Limit of detection


MALDI
Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization


MBT
Monobutyltin


MC
Multi-collector


MEIS
Medium energy ion scattering


MIP
Microwave induced plasma


MQW
Multi-quantum well


MRI
Mixing-depth roughness information


MS
Mass spectrometry



m/z
Mass-to-charge ratio


NBL
New Brunswick Laboratory


NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology


NRA
Nuclear reaction analysis


NRCC
National Research Council Canada


OES
Optical emission spectrometry


PAH
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon


PB
Particle beam


PCA
Principal components analysis


PFA
Perfluoroalkyl


PIXE
Particle-induced X-ray emission


POC
Particulate organic carbon


ppm
Parts per million


PS
Porous silicon


PTFE
Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)


PVC
Poly(vinyl chloride)


QW
Quantum well


RBS
Rutherford backscattering spectrometry


REMPI
Resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization


rf
Radiofrequency


RIMS
Resonance ionization mass spectrometry


RM
Reference material


rms
Root mean square


RSD
Relative standard deviation


RSF
Relative sensitivity factor


SD
Standard deviation


SDS
Sodium dodecyl sulfate


SEC
Size exclusion chromatography


SEM
Scanning electron microscopy


SF
Sector field


SIMS
Secondary ion mass spectrometry


SIRMS
Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry


S/N
Signal-to-noise ratio


SNMS
Sputtered neutral mass spectrometry


SPME
Solid phase microextraction


SRM
Standard Reference Material


SSB
Sample standard bracketing


S-SIMS
Static secondary ion mass spectrometry


TBT
Tributyltin


TIMS
Thermal ionization mass spectrometry


TOA
Trioctylamine


TOF
Time of flight


TOFMS
Time of flight mass spectrometry


TRIM
Transport of ions in matter


UV
Ultraviolet


VPD
Vapour phase decomposition


XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy


XRA
X-ray analysis


YAG
Yttrium aluminium garnet


1-D
One dimensional


2-D
Two dimensional


3-D
Three dimensional



λ

Wavelength



τ

Pulse duration



13 References
J. R. Bacon, K. L. Linge, R. R. Parrish and L. Van Vaeck, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(8), 785 RSC .
B. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and M. Salisbury, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(12), 1431 RSC .
O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(2), 187 RSC .
A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(4), 415 RSC .
P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(10), 1076 RSC .
E. H. Evans, J. A. Day, C. Palmer, W. J. Price, C. M. M. Smith and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(6), 592 RSC .
R. Lobinski, D. Schaumloffel and J. Szpunar, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2006, 25(2), 255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leermakers, W. Baeyens, M. De Gieter, B. Smedts, C. Meert, H. C. De Bisschop, R. Morabito and P. Quevauviller, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(1), 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leermakers, W. Baeyens, P. Quevauviller and M. Horvat, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(5), 383 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dauphas and O. Rouxel, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2006, 25(4), 515 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. T. Jull and G. S. Burr, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2006, 243(3–4), 305 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brown, E. M. Tompkins and I. N. H. White, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2006, 25(1), 127 CrossRef .

          K. Brown, K. H. Dingley and K. W. Turreltaub, in Biological Mass Spectrometry, Methods in Enzymology Series, Elsevier Academic Press Inc., San Diego,  2005, vol. 402, p. 423 Search PubMed .

          J. S. Vogel and A. H. Love, in Biological Mass Spectrometry, Methods in Enzymology Series, Elsevier Academic Press Inc., San Diego,  2005, vol. 402, p. 402 Search PubMed .
M. G. Klein, D. J. W. Mous and A. Gottdang, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 249, 764 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Zhou, X.-L. Zhao, X.-F. Lu, L. Lin, Z.-K. Wu, C. Peng, W.-N. Zhao and C.-H. Huang, Radiocarbon, 2006, 48(2), 285 CAS .
G. V. R. Prasad, G. Rajagopalan, R. K. Choudhury, K. Gopalan and B. L. K. Somayajulu, Curr. Sci., 2006, 90(4), 488 CAS .
D. R. Bandura, V. I. Baranov, A. E. Litherland and S. D. Tanner, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 255, 312 CrossRef .
T. F. G. Higham, R. M. Jacobi and C. B. Ramsey, Radiocarbon, 2006, 48(2), 179 CAS .
P. Steier, R. Drosg, M. Fedi, W. Kutschera, M. Schock, D. Wagenbach and E. M. Wild, Radiocarbon, 2006, 48(1), 69 CAS .
T. B. Jordan, A. J. Seen, G. E. Jacobsen and J. L. Gras, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40(14), 2575 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Tompkins, P. B. Farmer, J. H. Lamb, R. Jukes, K. Dingley, E. Ubick, K. W. Turteltaub, E. A. Martin and K. Brown, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 20(5), 883 CrossRef CAS .
M. Enachescu, V. Lazarev and C. Stan-Sion, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39(13), 2876 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Hunt, G. A. Petrucci, P. R. Bierman and R. C. Finkel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 243(1), 216 CrossRef CAS .
D. Desilets, M. Zreda, P. F. Almasi and D. Elmore, Chem. Geol., 2006, 233(3–4), 185 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lahiri, D. Nayak and G. Korschinek, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(21), 7517 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maji, S. Lahiri, B. Wierczinski and G. Korschinek, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(7), 2302 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maji, S. Lahiri, B. Wierczinski and G. Korschinek, Analyst, 2006, 131(12), 1332 RSC .
E. Chamizo, M. García-Leon, H.-A. Synal, M. Suter and L. Wacker, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 249, 768 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meija, M. Montes-Bayón, J. A. Caruso and A. Sanz-Medel, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(1), 44 CrossRef CAS .
I. Manisali, D. D. Y. Chen and B. B. Schneider, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(3), 243 CrossRef .
V. Nischwitz and S. A. Pergantis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(11), 1277 RSC .
R. Schaeffer, P. Fodor and C. Soeroes, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 20(19), 2979 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nischwitz and S. A. Pergantis, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54(18), 6507 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanaki and S. A. Pergantis, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 20(12), 1925 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nischwitz, K. Kanaki and S. A. Pergantis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 33 RSC .
M. Kahn, R. Raml, E. Schmeisser, B. Vallant, K. A. Francesconi and W. Goessler, Environ. Chem., 2005, 2(3), 171 CrossRef CAS .
H. Goenaga Infante, G. O'Connor, M. Rayman, R. Hearn and K. Cook, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(11), 1256 RSC .
P. Giusti, D. Schaumlöffel, H. Preud'homme, J. Szpunar and R. Lobinski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 26 RSC .
J. F. García-Reyes, M. Dernovics, P. Giusti and R. Lobinski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(7), 655 RSC .
L. Ouerdane, S. Mari, P. Czernic, M. Lebrun and R. Lobinski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(7), 676 RSC .
K. Minakata, H. Nozawa, N. Okamoto and O. Suzuki, J. Chromatogr., B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci., 2006, 832(2), 286 CrossRef CAS .
K. Minakata, M. Suzuki and O. Suzuki, Anal. Biochem., 2006, 348(1), 148 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Hansen and S. A. Pergantis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(11), 1240 RSC .
Y.-T. Wu and Y.-C. Chen, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 20(13), 1995 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dumont, Y. Ogra, K. I. Suzuki, F. Vanhaecke and R. Cornelis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 555(1), 25 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dernovics, L. Ouerdane, L. Tastet, P. Giusti, H. Preud'homme and R. Lobinski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(7), 703 RSC .
V. Gergely, M. Montes-Bayón, P. Fodor and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54(13), 4524 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dumont, Y. Ogra, F. Vanhaecke, K. T. Suzuki and R. Cornelis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(5), 1196 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Reyes, J. R. Encinar, J. M. Marchante-Gayon, J. I. G. Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Chromatogr., A, 2006, 1110(1–2), 108 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Wuilloud, J. C. Altamirano, P. N. Smichowski and D. T. Heitkemper, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(11), 1214 RSC .
A. P. Navaza, M. Montes-Bayón, D. L. LeDuc, N. Terry and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41(3), 323 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centineo, P. Rodríguez-González, E. Blanco González, J. I. García Alonso, A. Sanz-Medel, N. Font Cardona, J. L. Aranda Mares and S. Ballester Nebot, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(4), 908 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jimenez Moreno, J. Pacheco-Arjona, P. Rodríguez-González, H. Preud'Homme, D. Amouroux and O. F. X. Donard, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41(11), 1491 CrossRef .
G. Centineo, E. Blanco González, J. I. García Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41(1), 77 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Tørnes, A. M. Opstad and B. A. Johnsen, Sci. Total Environ., 2006, 356(1–3), 235 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pisonero, B. Fernandez, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(1), 11 CrossRef CAS .
R. Foest, M. Schmidt and K. Becker, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 248(3), 87 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Brewer, J. Castro and R. K. Marcus, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 134 CrossRef .
W. C. Wetzel, F. J. Andrade, J. A. C. Broekaert and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(8), 750 RSC .
D. Fliegel, K. Fuhrer, M. Gonin and D. Gunther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386(1), 169 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matschat, J. Hinrichs and H. Kipphardt, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386(1), 125 CrossRef CAS .
A. Menendez, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(5), 531 RSC .
M. Hohl, A. Kanzari, J. Michler, T. Nefis, K. Fuhrer and M. Gonin, Surf. Interface Anal., 2006, 38(4), 292 CrossRef CAS .
A. Scheffer, R. Brandt, C. Engelhard, S. Evers, N. Jakubowski and W. Buscher, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 197 RSC .
G. D. Schilling, F. J. Andrade, J. H. Barnes IV, R. P. Sperline, M. B. Denton, C. J. Barinaga, D. W. Koppenaal and G. M. Hieftje, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(13), 4319 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. McClenathan, W. C. Wetzel, S. E. Lorge and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 160 RSC .
J. B. Olsen, J. H. Macedone and P. B. Farnsworth, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(9), 856 RSC .
W. N. Radicic, J. B. Olsen, R. V. Nielson, J. H. Macedone and P. B. Farnsworth, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(6), 686 CrossRef .
S.-L. Liu and D. Beauchemin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(3), 319 CrossRef .
S.-L. Liu and D. Beauchemin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 157 CrossRef .
J. W. Olesik and J. A. Kinzer, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(6), 696 CrossRef .
W. C. Wetzel and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(12), 1367 RSC .
W. C. Wetzel, D. E. Shelby and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(12), 1377 RSC .
K. X. Yang and L. Husain, Spectrosc. Lett., 2006, 39(2), 187 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-C. Hu, S. Gao, D. Günther, S.-G. Hu, X.-M. Liu and H.-L. Yuan, Appl. Spectrosc., 2006, 60(7), 781 CrossRef CAS .
F. Laborda, M. P. Górriz, E. Bolea and J. R. Castillo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(4), 433 CrossRef .
J. W. Olesik and D. R. Jones, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 141 RSC .
V. Chrastný, M. Komárek, M. Mihaljevic and J. Štíchová, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385(5), 962 CrossRef CAS .
H. Isnard, M. Aubert, P. Blanchet, R. Brennetot, F. Chartier, V. Geertsen and F. Manuguerra, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 150 CrossRef .
N. S. Mokgalaka and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41(2), 131 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hergenröder, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(3), 284 CrossRef .
H.-R. Kuhn and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(11), 1209 RSC .
C. O’Connor, B. L. Sharp and P. Evans, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(6), 556 RSC .
R. Hergenröder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(5), 505 RSC .
R. Hergenröder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(5), 517 RSC .
R. Hergenröder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(10), 1016 RSC .
D. Bleiner, Z.-Y. Chen, D. Autrique and A. Bogaerts, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(9), 910 RSC .
D. Bleiner and A. Bogaerts, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(11), 1161 RSC .
Z.-K. Wang, B. Hattendorf and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(11), 1143 RSC .
M. Miclea, C. C. Garcia, I. Exius, H. Lindner and K. Niemax, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(3), 361 CrossRef .
Z.-K. Wang, B. Hattendorf and D. Günther, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 17(5), 641 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hergenröder, O. Samek and V. Hommes, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2006, 25(4), 551 CrossRef .
J. González, S. H. Dundas, C. Y. Liu, X.-L. Mao and R. E. Russo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(8), 778 RSC .
D. Fliegel and D. Günther, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(7), 841 CrossRef .
J. Pisonero, D. Fliegel and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(9), 922 RSC .
M. Tanner and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(9), 941 RSC .
D. Cleveland, P. Stchur, X.-D. Hou, K. X. Yang, J. Zhou and R. G. Michel, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(12), 1427 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Becker, A. Gorbunoff, M. Zoriy, A. Izmer and M. Kayser, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 19 RSC .
J. L. Todolí and J. M. Mermet, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(3), 239 CrossRef .
M. C. Santos and J. A. Nóbrega, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41(4), 427 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Westphal and A. Montaser, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(6), 705 CrossRef .
J. A. Holcombe and G. Ertas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(6), 743 CrossRef .
A. Asfaw and G. Wibetoe, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(10), 1027 RSC .
G. X. Cao, O. Jimenez, F.-M. Zhou and M.-T. Xu, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 17(7), 945 CrossRef CAS .
P. Giusti, R. Lobinski, J. Szpunar and D. Schaumlöffel, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(3), 965 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Stefánka, G. Koellensperger, G. Stingeder and S. Hann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 86 RSC .
S. H. J. M. van den Boorn, P. Z. Vroon, C. C. van Belle, B. van der Wagt, J. Schwieters and M. J. van Bergen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(8), 734 RSC .
E. Engström, I. Rodushkin, D. C. Baxter and B. Ohlander, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(1), 250 CrossRef .
J. Fietzke and A. Eisenhauer, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2006, 7 Search PubMed  , art. Q08009.
D. Foucher and H. Hintelmann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(7–8), 1470 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dideriksen, J. A. Baker and S. L. S. Stipp, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(1), 118 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Baxter, I. Rodushkin, E. Engström and D. Malinovsky, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 427 RSC .
K. Irisawa and T. Hirata, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(12), 1387 RSC .
C.-C. Shen, H.-T. Lin, M.-F. Chu, E.-F. Yu, X.-F. Wang and J. A. Dorale, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2006, 7 Search PubMed  , art. Q09005.
S. F. Boulyga, U. Klötzli and T. Prohaska, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(12), 1427 RSC .
U. Nygren, H. Ramebäck, M. Berglund and D. C. Baxter, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 257(1–3), 12 CAS .
J. He, W. W. Zhong, C. Mahan and W. Hang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 220 CrossRef .
S. Y. Wang and M. V. Johnston, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 258(1–3), 50 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Cziczo, D. S. Thomson, T. L. Thompson, P. J. DeMott and D. M. Murphy, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 258(1–3), 21 CrossRef CAS .
F. Aubriet, C. Poleunis, J. F. Muller and P. Bertrand, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41(4), 527 CrossRef CAS .
K. Song, E. Jung and H. Cha, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 253(1–2), 136 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Beccaglia, C. A. Rinaldi and J. C. Ferrero, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 579(1), 11 CrossRef CAS .
K. Song, Y. Park and W. Kim, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 254(1–2), 122 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, A. Rai and M. R. Zachariah, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 258(1–3), 104 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kunz, G. Huber, G. Passler, N. Trautmann and K. Wendt, Hyperfine Interact., 2005, 162(1–4), 159 CAS .
M. Sankari, P. V. K. Kumar and M. V. Suryanarayana, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 254(1–2), 94 CrossRef CAS .
K. Watanabe, Y. Higuchi, J. Kawarabayashi and T. Iguchi, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2006, 43(4), 325 Search PubMed .
Y. Higuchi, K. Watanabe, J. Kawarabayashi and T. Iguchi, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2006, 43(4), 334 Search PubMed .
B. Lavielle, E. Gilabert and B. Thomas, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2006, 41(8), A104 .
D. S. McPhail, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41(3), 873 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Garrison, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6409 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Eccles, P. Vohralik, B. Cliff, C. Jones and N. Long, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7308 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lemperle, P. P. Rullan and N. Gauthier-Hazan, Plast. Reconstr. Surg., 2006, 118(3), 92S Search PubMed .
R. Hill, R. Blenkinsopp, A. Barber and C. Everest, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7304 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qing, K. N. Leung, T. J. King, X. M. Jiang and B. R. Appleton, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 241(1–4), 335 .
M. Rauscher, K. Marianowski, B. Degel and E. Plies, Microelectron. Eng., 2006, 83(4–9), 815 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miwa, I. Nomachi and H. Kitajima, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7318 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. H. Morris, M. G. Dowsett and R. J. H. Chang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lorincik, R. Hervig, K. Franzreb, G. Slodzian and P. Williams, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7301 CrossRef CAS .
E. Groner and P. Hoppe, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7148 CrossRef .
P. Williams, R. C. Sobers, K. Franzreb and J. Lorincik, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawaguchi, M. Tanemura, M. Kudo, N. Handa, N. Kinoshita, L. Miao, S. Tanemura, Y. Gotoh, M. Y. Liao and S. Shinkai, Vacuum, 2006, 80(7), 768 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. de la Mata, M. G. Dowsett and D. Twitchen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6444 CrossRef .
M. Perego, S. Ferrari and M. Fanciulli, Surf. Sci., 2005, 599(1–3), 141 CrossRef CAS .
M. Perego, S. Ferrari and M. Fanciulli, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brison, B. Douhard and L. Houssiau, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6440 CrossRef CAS .
P. Philipp, T. Wirtz, H. N. Migeon and H. Scherrer, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 253(1–2), 71 CrossRef CAS .
P. Philipp, T. Wirtz, H. N. Migeon and H. Scherrer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Delcorte, C. Poleunis and P. Bertrand, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6542 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Krantzman, D. B. Kingsbury and B. J. Garrison, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6463 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bardi, S. P. Chenakin, A. Lavacchi, C. Pagura and A. Tolstogouzov, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(20), 7373 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nojima, A. Maekawa, T. Yamamoto, B. Tomiyasu, T. Sakamoto, M. Owari and Y. Nihei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nojima, M. Toi, A. Maekawa, T. Yamamoto, T. Sakamoto, M. Owari and Y. Nihei, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 155(1–2), 219 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. de la Mata, M. G. Dowsett and R. J. H. Morris, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2006, 24(4), 953 CrossRef .
F. M. Green, I. S. Gilmore and M. P. Seah, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6591 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kudriavtsev, A. Villegas, A. Godines and R. Asomoza, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(10), 3406 CrossRef CAS .
R. Van Ham, L. Van Vaeck, A. Adriaens, F. Adams, B. Hodges, A. Gianotto, R. Avci, A. Appelhans and G. Groenewold, Talanta, 2006, 69(1), 91 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rostam-Khani, J. Philipsen, E. Jansen, H. Eberhard and P. Vullings, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7255 CrossRef CAS .
T. Berg, J. Maul, N. Erdmann, P. Bernhard, S. Schuppler, P. Nagel, C. Sudek, U. Ott and G. Schonhense, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386(1), 119 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. W. van der Heide, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6456 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cwil, P. Konarski, M. Pajak, T. Bieniek, A. Kosinski and K. Kaczorek, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7058 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Conrad, M. J. Kelley and C. J. Chisholm-Brause, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 295(2), 318 CrossRef CAS .
D. Krecar, M. Rosner, M. Draxler, P. Bauer and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(2), 525 CAS .
C. Engrand, J. Kissel, F. R. Krueger, P. Martin, J. Silen, L. Thirkel, R. Thomas and K. Varmuza, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 20(8), 1361 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mahoney, G. Gillen and A. J. Fahey, Forensic Sci. Int., 2006, 158(1), 39 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wagner, D. J. Graharn and D. G. Castner, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6575 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Milillo and J. A. Gardella, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6883 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Nelson, Comput. Geosci., 2006, 32(9), 1479 CrossRef CAS .
D. Simons, K. Kim, R. Benbalagh, J. Bennett, A. Chew, D. Gehre, T. Hasegawa, C. Hitzman, J. Ko, R. Lindstrom, B. MacDonald, C. Magee, N. Montgomery, P. Peres, P. Ronsheim, S. Yoshikawa, M. Schuhmacher, W. Stockwell, D. Sykes, A. Tomita, F. Toujou and J. Won, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7232 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maul, H. U. Ehrke, N. Loibl and C. Schnurer-Patschan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7269 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Duggan, F. Naab, K. Hossain, O. W. Holland, F. D. McDaniel, J. J. Xu, Z. Y. Zhao, B. N. Guo, J. Liu, K. H. Shim and U. Jeong, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 243(1), 205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sameshima, H. Yamamoto, T. Hasegawa, T. Nishina, T. Nishitani, K. Yoshikawa and A. Karen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7190 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. A. Mulcahy, B. Bock, P. A. Ebblewhite, H. P. Hebert and S. Biswas, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7198 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Jiang, K. Kim, J. Lerma, A. Corbett, D. Sieloff, M. Kottke, R. Gregory and S. Schauer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7262 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guryanov, T. P. S. Clair, R. Bhat, C. Caneau, S. Nikishin, B. Borisov and A. Budrevich, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7208 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Gu, F. A. Stevie, C. J. Hitzman, Y. N. Saripalli, M. Johnson and D. P. Griffis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7228 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Hervig, F. K. Mazdab, P. Williams, Y. B. Guan, G. R. Huss and L. A. Leshin, Chem. Geol., 2006, 227(1–2), 83 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ottolini, F. Camara and F. C. Hawthorne, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 155(1–2), 229 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rhede and M. Wiedenbeck, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7152 CrossRef CAS .
C. Derue, D. Gibouin, F. Lefebvre, D. Studer, M. Thellier and C. Ripoll, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(8), 2471 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juhel, F. Laugier, D. Delille, C. Wyon, L. F. T. Kwakman and A. Hopstaken, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7211 CrossRef .
T. H. Buyuklimanli, C. W. Magee, J. W. Marino and S. R. Walther, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2006, 24(1), 408 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bersani, D. Giubertoni, E. Iacob, M. Barozzi, S. Pederzoli, L. Vanzetti and M. Anderle, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7315 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fares, B. Gautier, J. C. Dupuy, G. Prudon and P. Holliger, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6478 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. de la Mata, M. G. Dowsett, A. Tajani and M. Schwitters, Surf. Interface Anal., 2006, 38(4), 422 CrossRef .
M. Barozzi, D. Giubertoni, S. Pederzoli, M. Anderle, E. Iacob and M. Bersani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7286 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Cox, T. Jones, J. Voors, A. Ouyang and L. Arabshahi, Clin. Chem., 2006, 52(6), A60 .
M. H. Yang, G. Mount and I. Mowat, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2006, 24(1), 428 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Chanbasha and A. T. S. Wee, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2006, 24(2), 547 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Chanbasha and A. T. S. Wee, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7243 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Yang and G. G. Goodman, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 508(1–2), 276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mikami, T. Takagawa, K. Nishio, H. Ogawa, T. Okazawa and Y. Kido, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(14), 5124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, F. A. Stevie, J. Bennett, R. Garcia and D. P. Griffis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7179 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Jiang, K. Kim, J. Lerma, D. Sieloff, H. Tseng, R. I. Hegde, T. Y. Luo, J. Y. Yang, D. H. Triyoso and P. J. Tobin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7172 CrossRef CAS .
A. Budrevich, A. Gladkikh, E. Kaganer and M. Sokolovsky, Surf. Interface Anal., 2006, 38(4), 267 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miwa, S. Kusanagi and H. Kobayashi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7176 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ootomo, H. Maruya, S. Seo and F. Iwase, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7275 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gillen, J. Batteas, C. A. Michaels, P. Chi, J. Small, E. Windsor, A. Fahey, J. Verkouteren and K. J. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6521 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Fahey, G. Gillen, P. Chi and C. M. Mahoney, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brison, R. Hubert, S. Lucas and L. Houssiau, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7038 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fares, C. Dubois, B. Gautier, J. C. Dupuy, F. Cayrel and G. Gaudin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6448 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rangarajan and B. J. Tyler, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2006, 24(5), 1730 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nygren, K. Borner, P. Malmberg, E. Tallarek and B. Hagenhoff, Microsc. Res. Tech., 2005, 68(6), 329 CrossRef .
K. Borner, H. Nygren, P. Malmberg, E. Tallarek and B. Hagenhoff, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6777 CrossRef .
C. Derue, D. Gibouin, M. Demarty, M. C. Verdus, F. Lefebvre, M. Thellier and C. Ripoll, Microsc. Res. Tech., 2006, 69(1), 53 CrossRef CAS .
R. Levi-Setti, K. L. Gavrilov, M. E. Neilly, R. Strick and P. L. Strissel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6907 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Robach, S. R. Stock and A. Veis, J. Struct. Biol., 2006, 155(1), 87 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Mai, B. J. Chen, L. C. Wu, F. Y. Li and W. K. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6809 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tomiyasu, M. Owari and Y. Nihei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7026 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mazel, P. Richardin, D. Touboul, A. Brunelle, P. Walter and O. Laprevote, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 570(1), 34 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laskin, J. P. Cowin and M. J. Iedema, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2006, 150(2–3), 260 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. King, J. F. Moore, W. F. Calaway, I. V. Veryovkin and M. J. Pellin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6426 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Samartsev and A. Wucher, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6470 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Veryovkin, W. F. Calaway, C. E. Tripa, J. F. Moore, A. Wucher and M. J. Pellin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 241(1–4), 356 CrossRef CAS .
T. Henkel, J. Tizard, D. Blagburn and I. Lyon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7117 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bente, T. Adam, T. Ferge, S. Gallavardin, M. Sklorz, T. Streibel and R. Zimmermann, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 258(1–3), 86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moller, A. Beumer, D. Lipinsky and H. F. Arlinghaus, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6709 CrossRef .
R. E. Peterson, A. Nair, S. Dambach, H. F. Arlinghaus and B. J. Tyler, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7006 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vering, C. Crone, P. Kathers, J. Bijma and H. F. Arlinghaus, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 7163 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Arlinghaus, C. Kriegeskotte, M. Fartmann, A. Wittig, W. Sauerwein and D. Lipinsky, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252(19), 6941 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kriegeskotte, J. Moller, D. Lipinsky, A. Wittig, W. Sauerwein, J. Haier and H. F. Arlinghaus, Surf. Interface Anal., 2006, 38(3), 121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, J. R. Brook, W. Zhang, S. M. Li, L. Graham, D. Ernst, A. Chivulescu and G. Lu, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40(15), 2690 CrossRef CAS .
N. Turner, M. Jones, K. Grice, D. Dawson, M. Ioppolo-Armanios and S. J. Fisher, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40(18), 3381 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lopez-Capel, G. D. Abbott, K. M. Thomas and D. A. C. Manning, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2006, 75(2), 82 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fisseha, M. Saurer, M. Jaggi, S. Szidat, R. T. W. Siegwolf and U. Baltensperger, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 20(15), 2343 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bouillon, M. Korntheuer, W. Baeyens and F. Dehairs, Limnol. Oceanogr.: Methods, 2006, 4, 216 Search PubMed .
M. V. Skomarkova, E. A. Vaganov, M. Mund, A. Knohl, P. Linke, A. Boerner and E. D. Schulze, Trees (Berlin), 2006, 20(5), 571 Search PubMed .
N. Ripoche, V. Ferchaud-Roucher, M. Krempf and P. Ritz, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41(9), 1212 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Filot, M. Leuenberger, A. Pazdur and T. Boettger, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 20(22), 3337 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ono, B. Wing, D. Rumble and J. Farquhar, Chem. Geol., 2006, 225(1–2), 30 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ono, B. Wing, D. Johnston, J. Farquhar and D. Rumble, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(9), 2238 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shouakar-Stash, R. J. Drimmie, M. Zhang and S. K. Frape, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(5), 766 CrossRef CAS .
I. Basile-Doelsch, J. Geochem. Explor., 2006, 88(1–3), 252 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Brzezinski, J. L. Jones, C. P. Beucher, M. S. Demarest and H. L. Berg, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(17), 6109 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, D. Wan, R. Bai, Z. Zhang, Y. Shen and R. Meng, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(23), 5487 CrossRef CAS .
J. De Laeter and M. D. Kurz, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41(7), 847 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Foster, Y. Y. Ni, B. Haley and T. Elliott, Chem. Geol., 2006, 230(1–2), 161 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gopalan, D. Macdougall and C. Macisaac, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 248(1–2), 9 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. A. Charlier, C. Ginibre, D. Morgan, G. M. Nowell, D. G. Pearson, J. P. Davidson and C. J. Ottley, Chem. Geol., 2006, 232(3–4), 114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schediwy, K. J. R. Rosman and J. R. de Laeter, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2006, 243(3–4), 326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boyet and R. W. Carlson, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2006, 250(1–2), 254 CrossRef CAS .
G. Caro, B. Bourdon, J. L. Birck and S. Moorbath, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(1), 164 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. de Laeter and N. Bukilic, Phys. Rev. C: Nucl. Phys., 2006, 73(4) Search PubMed .
Y. Amelin and W. J. Davis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(10), 1053 RSC .
B. Schoene, J. L. Crowley, D. J. Condon, M. D. Schmitz and S. A. Bowring, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(2), 426 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Efurd, R. E. Steiner, S. P. LaMont, J. A. Musgrave and D. L. Kottmann, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2006, 269(3), 679 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Elliot, G. A. Bickel, S. H. Linauskas and L. M. Paterson, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2006, 267(3), 637 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kurosaki, D. Chang and K. G. W. Inn, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2006, 269(2), 279 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AES	Atomic emission spectrometry
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
aTOF	Aerosol time of flight
CC	Collision cell
CF	Continuous flow
CID	Collision induced dissociation
cps	counts per second
CRM	Certified Reference Material
CSIA	Compound specific isotope analysis
DBT	Dibutyltin
dc	Direct current
DDC	Diethyldithiocarbamate
DI	Desorption ionization
DIHEN	Direct injection high efficiency nebulizer
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
DOC	Dissolved organic carbon
DRC	Dynamic reaction cell
EA	Elemental analyser
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray
EI	Electron ionization
EIMS	Electron ionization mass spectrometry
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ERD	Elastic recoil detection
ES	Electrospray
ESMS	Electrospray mass spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporization
EU	European Union
FI	Flow injection
FIB	Focused ion beam
FT	Fourier transform
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
FWHM	Full width at half maximum
GBW	National Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)
GC	Gas chromatography
GD	Glow discharge
GDMS	Glow discharge mass spectrometry
HG	Hydride generation
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
HR	High resolution
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
ID	Isotope dilution
IP	Ionization potential
IR	Infrared
IRMM	Institute of Reference Materials and Measurements
k	Dielectric constant
KE	Kinetic energy
KED	Kinetic energy distribution
LA	Laser ablation
LC	Liquid chromatography
LIMS	Laser ionization mass spectrometry
LMIG	Liquid metal ion gun
LMMS	Laser microprobe mass spectrometry
LOD	Limit of detection
MALDI	Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
MBT	Monobutyltin
MC	Multi-collector
MEIS	Medium energy ion scattering
MIP	Microwave induced plasma
MQW	Multi-quantum well
MRI	Mixing-depth roughness information
MS	Mass spectrometry

m/z	Mass-to-charge ratio
NBL	New Brunswick Laboratory
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NRA	Nuclear reaction analysis
NRCC	National Research Council Canada
OES	Optical emission spectrometry
PAH	Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
PB	Particle beam
PCA	Principal components analysis
PFA	Perfluoroalkyl
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
POC	Particulate organic carbon
ppm	Parts per million
PS	Porous silicon
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PVC	Poly(vinyl chloride)
QW	Quantum well
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REMPI	Resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization
rf	Radiofrequency
RIMS	Resonance ionization mass spectrometry
RM	Reference material
rms	Root mean square
RSD	Relative standard deviation
RSF	Relative sensitivity factor
SD	Standard deviation
SDS	Sodium dodecyl sulfate
SEC	Size exclusion chromatography
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SIRMS	Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry
S/N	Signal-to-noise ratio
SNMS	Sputtered neutral mass spectrometry
SPME	Solid phase microextraction
SRM	Standard Reference Material
SSB	Sample standard bracketing
S-SIMS	Static secondary ion mass spectrometry
TBT	Tributyltin
TIMS	Thermal ionization mass spectrometry
TOA	Trioctylamine
TOF	Time of flight
TOFMS	Time of flight mass spectrometry
TRIM	Transport of ions in matter
UV	Ultraviolet
VPD	Vapour phase decomposition
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRA	X-ray analysis
YAG	Yttrium aluminium garnet
1-D	One dimensional
2-D	Two dimensional
3-D	Three dimensional

λ
	Wavelength

τ
	Pulse duration

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
