Eliminating the solvent blocking requirement of interconnection layers in polymer tandem solar cells by thin-film transfer technique   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR00292D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00292D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12588-12594Eliminating the solvent blocking requirement of interconnection layers in polymer tandem solar cells by thin-film transfer technique†

        
          
            Yoonseok 
            Ka
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hyungchae 
            Kim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sunghoon 
            Han
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Changsoon 
            Kim
          
        
      *
      Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology, and Inter-University Semiconductor Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea. E-mail: changsoon@snu.ac.kr
Received 
      11th January 2018
    , Accepted 3rd June 2018First published on 4th June 2018AbstractInterconnection layers (ICLs) for polymer tandem solar cells reported so far are limited in materials’ choice and layer structure, because of a requirement that the ICLs must prevent the penetration of solvents used for the top cells. In this research, it is demonstrated that depositing the active layer of the top subcell using a dry thin-film transfer technique allows for incorporation of an ICL composed of vacuum deposited materials in a polymer tandem cell, providing a large degree of freedom in ICL design. Specifically, a polymer tandem solar cell was fabricated using an ICL composed of bathocuproine:silver/silver islands/1,4,5,8,9,11-hexaazatriphenylene hexacarbonitrile (BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN), where the thicknesses of the BCP:Ag and Ag island layers are precisely controlled at the nanoscale to facilitate the transport of electrons generated in the bottom subcell and to ensure their efficient recombination with holes generated in the top subcell. Consequently, the tandem device featuring the optimized ICL, whose active layers are composed of poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PC61BM) and poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]:[6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCPDTBT:PC71BM), exhibits an open-circuit voltage of 1.20 V, which is equal to the sum of the open-circuit voltages of the two subcells, with a fill factor (FF) of 0.60 almost identical to the FFs of the subcells.
Introduction
Although organic solar cells have the potential for a low-cost, lightweight, and flexible energy conversion device,1,2 they have not yet been commercialized because of their low efficiency. The efficiency of organic solar cells can be improved by fabricating a tandem device consisting of stacked active layers with complementary absorption spectra to widen the optical absorption range and minimize the thermalization loss.3,4
An interconnection layer (ICL) that electrically connects the constituent subcells is a crucial element in a tandem solar cell, which in general must meet the following criteria: it must add the photovoltages of the adjacent subcells with minimal loss and have negligible optical absorption. For polymer tandem solar cells, whose active layers are typically deposited by liquid-phase processes such as spin-coating,4 ink-jet printing,5 and spray coating,6 ICLs must also block the penetration of the solvent used for depositing the active layer of the top subcell, to prevent damage and/or dissolution of the bottom subcell. As a result, the types of ICLs used in polymer tandem devices have so far been limited, with the most commonly used ICL being that composed of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS)/metal oxide, such as PEDOT:PSS/ZnO7,8 and PEDOT:PSS/TiOx,9 where PEDOT:PSS is used as a hole transport layer (HTL) and solvent blocking layer and the metal oxides are used as an electron transport layer (ETL). Although tandem cells featuring these ICLs have good performances, with the open-circuit voltages (VOC) similar to the sum of VOC of the subcells, PEDOT:PSS is not an ideal material to use for ICLs for the following reasons: its acidic nature may decrease the device lifetime,10 and it absorbs light in the visible and near-infrared spectral regions, resulting in an optical loss.11 Therefore, efforts have been made to replace PEDOT:PSS with a p-type metal oxide, such as nickel oxide (NiOx),12,13 molybdenum trioxide (MoO3),14 vanadium pentoxide (V2O5),14 and tungsten trioxide (WO3).15 Thin films composed of these materials, however, tend to have small degrees of porosity, and thus, the complete prevention of solvent penetration has been difficult to achieve with an ICL composed of a metal oxide bilayer, whose thickness is typically less than 30 nm. Consequently, polymer tandem cells with a metal oxide ICL often have VOC losses.16
For small molecule tandem devices, because all the constituent layers are deposited using vacuum thermal evaporation, the materials and structures of ICLs can be chosen without the restriction imposed by the solvent blocking requirement. Furthermore, the electrical properties required for avoiding a VOC loss at the ICL, namely, efficient transport and recombination of charge carriers, can readily be achieved in vacuum thermal evaporation by precise control of layer thicknesses and/or electrical doping.17 Thus, a variety of ICLs have been developed for small molecule tandem cells, such as HTL/metal/ETL18 and doped HTL/doped ETL.19
In this research, it was demonstrated that an ICL formed using vacuum thermal evaporation can be applied to a polymer tandem solar cell by depositing the active layer of the top subcell using a dry thin-film transfer technique. Specifically, a polymer tandem cell was fabricated, whose top and bottom active layers were: poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT):[6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM), respectively. The cell was made by transfer printing the PCPDTBT:PC71BM and P3HT:PC61BM layers onto a vacuum deposited ICL and a 1,4,5,8,9,11-hexaazatriphenylene hexacarbonitrile (HAT-CN) layer, respectively, using the method previously reported.20,21 The ICL was composed of bathocuproine:silver/silver islands/HAT-CN (BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN), and the thicknesses of the BCP:Ag and Ag island layers were precisely controlled to maximize the device performance. Consequently, the tandem device featuring the optimized ICL exhibited a VOC of 1.20 V, which was equal to the sum of the subcells’ VOCs, with its fill factor (FF = 0.60) almost identical to the FFs of the subcells. The results of this research also provided qualitative explanations for the effects of thickness variations of the BCP:Ag and Ag island layers on the device performance. This work shows that the thin-film transfer technique allows the exploitation of the advantageous attributes of vacuum thermal evaporation — precise controllability of layer thicknesses and doping concentrations, and availability of various materials including small molecules, metals, and metal oxides – to form ICLs whose materials and structures are tailored for given active layers of polymer tandem cells.
Results and discussion
The device structure of the polymer tandem solar cell and the chemical structures of its photoactive layer materials deposited by the dry thin-film transfer process using polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps are shown in Fig. 1a. The solar cells have the following structure: glass/185 nm indium tin oxide (ITO)/10 nm HAT-CN/∼200 nm P3HT:PC61BM/BCP:Ag/Ag islands/10 nm HAT-CN/∼90 nm PCPDTBT:PC71BM/20 nm calcium (Ca)/100 nm aluminium (Al). To match the photocurrents of the top and bottom subcells, the thicknesses of the photoactive layers were chosen, using the optical calculation based on the transfer matrix method, to be ∼200 nm and ∼90 nm for the P3HT:PC61BM and the PCPDTBT:PC71BM, respectively.22 For the transfer matrix calculation, the complex refractive indices of all the layers constituting the tandem device were determined using spectroscopic ellipsometry. The absorption efficiency of each active layer, defined as the probability that an incident photon is absorbed in that layer, were calculated using the transfer matrix method (Fig. 1b). Photons with wavelengths (λ) ≤ 600 nm are mostly absorbed by the P3HT:PC61BM [the bottom photoactive layer (blue triangles)], whereas those with λ ≥ 650 nm are mostly absorbed by the PCPDTBT:PC71BM [the top photoactive layer (red triangles)]. As a result, the tandem device is capable of harvesting photons in a wide spectral range extending down to ∼850 nm. Green circles in Fig. 1b correspond to the calculated absorption efficiency of the tandem cell as a whole, which compares well with the measured absorption efficiency of the tandem device fabricated using the thin-film transfer technique (black squares). The HAT-CN deposited on ITO modifies the work function of ITO to ∼5.5 eV,23 which facilitates the collection of holes generated in the bottom photoactive layer. Electrons generated in the top photoactive layer are collected at the Ca/Al top metal electrode. The ICL composed of a BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN multilayer, which has high transmittance in the absorption region of the top subcell (Fig. S1, ESI†), electrically connects the two subcells without a voltage loss. The BCP:Ag works as an ETL, allowing electrons generated in the bottom subcell to move readily to the interface between the HAT-CN and PCPDTBT:PC71BM layers, where they recombine with holes generated in the PCPDTBT:PC71BM layer. Generally, electron transport in a BCP layer occurs through gap states formed by metal deposited on it, not through its lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level. Because these damage induced gap states were expected to be formed only near the BCP surface by deposition of Ag islands whose “thickness” is ∼1 nm, the BCP layer was doped with co-evaporated Ag, which has been shown to create the gap states throughout the BCP layer.24
 Fig. 1  (a) Structure of the polymer tandem solar cells device fabricated using a thin-film transfer technique, and chemical structure of photoactive materials. (b) Spectra of the absorption efficiencies of the top (red) and bottom (blue) active layers calculated using the transfer matrix method. Also shown is the calculated absorption efficiency spectrum of the tandem device as a whole (green), compared with that measured for the tandem device fabricated using the thin-film transfer technique (black). 
The fabrication process of the polymer tandem solar cell is illustrated schematically in Fig. 2, where the bottom and top photoactive layers, P3HT:PC61BM and PCPDTBT:PC71BM, respectively, were both deposited using dry thin-film transfer on the HAT-CN layers without damaging the underlying organic(s) (Fig. 2b and e, respectively). After a P3HT:PC61BM solution was spin-coated on an ultraviolet (UV)-ozone treated PDMS stamp, a P3HT:PC61BM film was formed by sequential applications of solvent25- and thermal-annealing processes. The P3HT:PC61BM film was then transfer printed (Fig. 2b and c), with mild pressure and heat, onto a HAT-CN layer deposited on an ITO-coated substrate (Fig. 2a). Next, layers of BCP:Ag, Ag islands, and HAT-CN were sequentially deposited using thermal evaporation under vacuum to form an ICL (Fig. 2d), onto which a PCPDTBT:PC71BM film was transferred from a PDMS stamp (Fig. 2e).21 Unlike the bottom active layer, before the thin-film transfer, the PCPDTBT:PC71BM layer spin-coated onto the PDMS stamp was quickly dried under a high vacuum (∼10−7 Torr) to prevent the diffusion of the PCPDTBT:PC71BM into the PDMS that would otherwise swell because of 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) used as an additive for the PCPDTBT:PC71BM solution. Also, the stamp was stored under a high vacuum for 1.5 h to thoroughly remove the DIO additive, which is known to form trap states in PCPDTBT:PC71BM.26 Finally, a top cathode was formed using thermal evaporation of Ca, followed by Al (Fig. 2f).
 Fig. 2  (a) Deposition of a HAT-CN layer on a UV-ozone treated ITO substrate. (b) Transfer of a P3HT:PC61BM film from a stamp to the HAT-CN layer. (c) Peeling off the stamp from the substrate. (d) Deposition of an ICL onto the bottom subcell using thermal evaporation in a vacuum. (e) Transfer of a PCPDTBT:PC71BM layer onto the ICL. (f) Deposition of the top electrodes. 
To maximize the performance of the polymer tandem solar cell, a series of devices with varying thicknesses of the BCP:Ag (tBCP:Ag) and Ag islands (tAg) layers of the ICL were fabricated. Fig. 3a shows the current density (J) versus voltage (V) characteristics of the tandem device with varying tBCP:Ag and with tAg and the thickness of the HAT-CN layer fixed at 0.5 nm and 10 nm, respectively, measured under simulated 1 sun AM1.5G illumination. The photovoltaic parameters of the devices are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). When the BCP:Ag layer was omitted (tBCP:Ag = 0 nm, red), the addition of the subcell VOC values, expected for a series connected tandem device, did not occur, leading to VOC of only 0.62 V. With a short circuit current density (JSC) of 6.18 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.39, this device has a power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.49%, the lowest among the six devices that were fabricated. In contrast, insertion of a BCP:Ag layer that was only 5 nm thick made this device (tBCP:Ag = 5 nm, blue) operate as a tandem cell: the value of VOC abruptly increased to 1.09 V, similar to the sum of the subcell VOC values. The values of JSC (7.34 mA cm−2) and FF (0.53) were also improved, and consequently a much higher PCE (4.24%) was achieved. When tBCP:Ag was 10 nm (black), the device showed better performance, exhibiting VOC = 1.20 V, JSC = 7.24 mA cm−2, FF = 0.60, and PCE = 5.21%. As tBCP:Ag was increased beyond 10 nm, the PCE became progressively smaller, primarily because of the decreased JSC and FF: the device with tBCP:Ag = 15 nm (green) exhibited JSC = 5.20 mA cm−2, FF = 0.48, and PCE = 3.00%, whereas the PCE of the device with tBCP:Ag = 30 nm (brown) was 2.08%, with an s-kink in the J–V curve.
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic characteristics of polymer tandem solar cells using an ICL with varying thicknesses of BCP:Ag layer and Ag islands (tBCP:Ag and tAg, respectively). (a) J–V characteristics of the tandem cells with tAg = 0.5 nm and different tBCP:Ag values. (b) J–V characteristics of the tandem cells with tBCP:Ag = 10 nm and different tAg values. (c) Photovoltaic parameters of the tandem cells as functions of tBCP:Ag and tAg. (d) J–V characteristics of the tandem device with tBCP:Ag = 10 nm and tAg = 0.5 nm, compared with the characteristics of the single junction devices. Inset: photovoltaic parameters of the three devices. 
Next, the effect of tAg on device performance was investigated by fabricating tandem cells with tAg = 0, 0.5, and 2 nm while setting both tBCP:Ag and the HAT-CN thickness at 10 nm. The J–V characteristics of the three devices shown in Fig. 3b show that the performance was maximized at tAg = 0.5 nm, with its PCE higher by 24% and 56% compared to the PCEs of the devices with tAg = 0 and 2 nm, respectively. The values of JSC, VOC, and FF of the optimized tandem cell (with tAg of 0.5 nm) were larger than the corresponding values of the other two cells, and the tandem cell with tAg = 2 nm exhibited JSC = 5.47 mA cm−2 that was smaller by 20% and 24%, respectively, than that of the cells with tAg = 0 and 0.5 nm (Table S2, ESI†). Additional information, such as the external quantum efficiency (Fig. S2, ESI†) and the ambient stability (Fig. S3, ESI†) of the optimized tandem cell, and the device-to-device variations of the J–V characteristics and the photovoltaic parameters of the tandem cells shown in Fig. 3b (Fig. S4, ESI†), is shown in the ESI.†Fig. 3c compares the photovoltaic parameters of the six tandem devices having different (tBCP:Ag, tAg), demonstrating that the performance of the polymer tandem solar cell was altered even with very small changes in tBCP:Ag and/or tAg. Thorough optimization, therefore, requires a precise control of the layer thicknesses, which can be routinely achieved using vacuum thermal evaporation.

Fig. 3d compares the J–V characteristics of the optimized tandem device (tBCP:Ag = 10 nm, tAg = 0.5 nm) with the characteristics of the two single junction devices forming the tandem cell. The structures of the single junction devices were glass/185 nm ITO/10 nm HAT-CN/∼200 nm P3HT:PC61BM/10 nm BCP:Ag/100 nm Ag (blue), and glass/185 nm ITO/10 nm HAT-CN/∼90 nm PCPDTBT:PC71BM/20 nm Ca/100 nm Al (red), where the P3HT:PC61BM and PCPDTBT:PC71BM layers were transfer printed on the HAT-CN layers, as in the fabrication of the tandem device. The photovoltaic parameters of the single junction devices, summarized in the inset of Fig. 3d, were in good agreement with those of the corresponding spin-coated devices using PEDOT:PSS in place of HAT-CN,9,25 confirming that the P3HT:PC61BM–HAT-CN and PCPDTBT:PC71BM–HAT-CN interfaces formed using transfer printing were sufficiently intimate to allow for efficient charge transport. It is worth noting that the tandem cell (black), having FF = 0.60 and VOC = 1.20 V that were almost identical to the FFs of the single junction cells and the sum of the VOC values of the single junction cells, respectively, exhibited a J–V characteristic that was expected when the two subcells were connected with an optimal ICL ensuring efficient transport and recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes. This result demonstrated that the dry thin-film transfer technique allows the exploitation, for polymer tandem solar cells, of the advantage of an ICL composed of small molecules and metals that can be thermally evaporated – full optimization of the ICL performance by precise tuning of layer thicknesses.
The dependence of the tandem cell performance on tBCP:Ag and tAg can be qualitatively explained by considering the operational mechanism of the BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN ICL layer that was hypothesized. It was first noted that a hole generated in PCPDTBT by dissociation of an exciton in the top active layer cannot be transported to the HAT-CN layer because of the deep highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of HAT-CN. Therefore, an electron photogenerated in the bottom cell must be transported to the HAT-CN so that the recombination of an electron and a hole photogenerated in the bottom and top active layers, respectively, occurs at the HAT-CN–PCPDTBT interface, as marked by a wavy red arrow in Fig. 4a, respectively. This required transport of electrons from the PC61BM to the HAT-CN was greatly facilitated by the insertion of the BCP:Ag and Ag island layers as follows: electrons in the PC61BM layer were transported through the gap states present in the BCP:Ag,24 which were then injected into the HAT-CN either directly or via the Ag islands, as marked by arrow (i) or (ii) in Fig. 4a, respectively. The Ag islands further enhanced the electron transport through the gap states in the BCP:Ag by increasing the number of unoccupied gap states in the BCP:Ag by extracting some electrons from the BCP:Ag.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the operational mechanism of the tandem device with BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN ICL. (b) Schematic illustration of the origin of VOC loss observed when the BCP:Ag layer in the ICL is omitted. 
The tandem device using the optimized ICL (black, Fig. 3a) exhibited the best performance because the electrons and holes generated in the bottom and top subcells, respectively, readily recombine with each other through the process described previously. However, when the BCP:Ag was omitted (Fig. 4b), it became difficult for the photogenerated electrons in the PC61BM to be transported to the HAT-CN via the Ag islands, which was in agreement with an abrupt degradation of the performance of the P3HT:PC61BM single junction device upon omission of the BCP:Ag layer, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). The resulting accumulation of electrons increases the likelihood of bimolecular recombination, limiting electron generation in the bottom active layer. As a result, electrons in the HAT-CN that are to recombine with holes in the PCPDTBT were more likely to be injected from the HOMO of P3HT, directly from the P3HT or via the Ag islands, as shown by arrows (iii) or (iv), respectively, in Fig. 4b. At the same time, photogenerated holes in the PCPDTBT were collected at the ITO electrode via the hole current flowing through the P3HT, as marked by a red horizontal arrow in Fig. 4b. Consequently, the device with tBCP:Ag = 0 nm and tAg = 0.5 nm (red, Fig. 3a) did not operate as a tandem device, resulting in a small VOC comparable to that of the PCPDTBT:PC71BM single junction device. In the device with tBCP:Ag = 5 nm and tAg = 0.5 nm, it was likely that P3HT was in direct contact with HAT-CN in some regions because of the diffusion of P3HT,24 which caused a VOC loss by direct extraction of holes generated in the top subcell through the P3HT (blue, Fig. 3a). The decrease in FF observed when tBCP:Ag was increased beyond the optimal value of 10 nm (green and brown, Fig. 3a) suggested that electron transport through the BCP:Ag became less efficient. This was likely to have occurred because the number of unoccupied gap states in the BCP:Ag became insufficient with increasing tBCP:Ag because of the limited amount of electrons that the Ag island layer with tAg = 0.5 nm can extract. In fact, an observation that the FF of the tandem cell with tBCP:Ag = 30 nm was increased to 0.59 when tAg was increased to 5 nm was in agreement with this hypothesis (Fig. S6, ESI†). The slight decreases in FF and VOC of the device with tBCP:Ag = 10 nm and without Ag islands (red, Fig. 3b) compared with those of the optimized device can also be explained by the decreased number of unoccupied gap states in the BCP:Ag. It was likely that the decrease in JSC observed when tAg was increased to 2 nm was because of increased parasitic absorption in the Ag islands (blue, Fig. 3b).
Conclusions
By depositing the active layer of the top subcell using the thin-film transfer technique, an ICL composed of vacuum deposited BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN that would otherwise be damaged by a solvent used for the active layer became applicable to polymer tandem solar cells based on the P3HT:PC61BM and PCPDTBT:PC71BM layers. The thicknesses of the BCP:Ag and Ag island layers were precisely controlled to facilitate the transport of electrons generated in the bottom subcell, leading to their efficient recombination with holes generated in the top subcell. As a result, the tandem device featuring the optimized ICL exhibited a VOC of 1.20 V, which was equal to the sum of the VOC values of the two subcells, with its FF (0.60) almost identical to the FFs of the subcells. This work shows that the thin-film transfer technique, together with the advantageous attributes of vacuum thermal evaporation, may contribute to the future development of efficient polymer tandem solar cells by offering a large degree of freedom in selection of materials and structures for ICLs.
Experimental section
Materials
All the organic materials were purchased and used without further purification. Polymers (P3HT, PCPDTBT) and fullerene derivatives (PC61BM, PC71BM) were purchased from 1-Material, Inc. and Nano-C, Inc., respectively. BCP and HAT-CN were purchased from Jilin OLED Material Technology.
Solution preparation
The P3HT:PC61BM solution was prepared by dissolving P3HT and PC61BM (1:1 w/w) into 1,2-dichlorobenzene with a total concentration of 34 mg ml−1, with magnetic stirring at 70 °C for 6 h. The PCPDTBT:PC71BM solution was prepared using a method previously reported.21
Device fabrication
All the devices were fabricated on ITO-coated glass substrates (15 Ω sq−1, 25 mm by 25 mm), which were sequentially cleaned with detergent, de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol, followed by baking at 200 °C for 10 min in a vacuum oven prior to film deposition. The areas of all the devices were defined by patterning the top metallic electrodes using shadow masks with 2 mm diameter circular openings. Vacuum thermal evaporation was performed at a chamber pressure of ∼10−7 Torr. The surface energies of the PDMS stamps were modified by controlling the duration of the UV-ozone treatment to obtain water contact angles of 30° to 35° and 20° to 25° for deposition and transfer of the P3HT:PC61BM and PCPDTBT:PC71BM films, respectively.

P3HT:PC61BM single junction device. 
The HAT-CN layer was deposited using vacuum thermal evaporation onto a UV-ozone treated ITO substrate. The P3HT:PC61BM solution was spin-coated onto a UV-ozone treated PDMS stamp at 700 rpm for 40 s to obtain a ∼200 nm thick P3HT:PC61BM film. Next, the P3HT:PC61BM film was transferred onto the HAT-CN layer. The transfer process was performed in a nitrogen glove box, where the sample was under a pressure of ∼21.7 kgf cm−2 at 70 °C for 3 min. The 10 nm thick BCP:Ag layer was deposited by co-evaporating the BCP and Ag at a molar ratio of 1:1.5. The 100 nm thick Ag metal electrode was also deposited using vacuum thermal evaporation. Deposition rates were ∼1 Å s−1, except for the co-deposited Ag for the BCP:Ag layer, where the deposition rate was 0.05 Å s−1.


PCPDTBT:PC71BM single junction device. 
The HAT-CN was deposited using thermal evaporation under vacuum (∼10−7 Torr) onto a UV-ozone treated ITO substrate. The PCPDTBT:PC71BM film was transferred onto the HAT-CN following the method described elsewhere in the literature.21 The 20 nm thick Ca and 100 nm thick Al layers were deposited as a top metal electrode using vacuum thermal evaporation, with deposition rates of 0.2 Å s−1 and ∼1 Å s−1, respectively.


Tandem devices. 
The bottom and top active layers were formed using the thin-film transfer technique, as in the fabrication of the single junction devices described previously. The ICLs composed of BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN were deposited using vacuum thermal evaporation, with deposition rates of 1 Å s−1:0.05 Å s−1, 0.1 Å s−1, and 1 Å s−1, respectively. The 20 nm thick Ca and 100 nm thick Al layers of the top electrode were also deposited using vacuum thermal evaporation, with deposition rates of 0.2 Å s−1 and 1 Å s−1, respectively.

Device characterization
The J–V characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter and a PEC Peccell Technologies L01 solar simulator calibrated with a Bunkoukeiki BS-520BK standard silicon solar cell. The absorption spectrum was obtained using a PerkinElmer Inc., Lambda 35 UV-visible spectrophotometer.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the 2015 Promising-Pioneering Researcher Program of Seoul National University, and the Global Frontier R&D Program on the Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Science and ICT, Korea.
References
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 19, 1924–1945 CrossRef .
H. Spanggaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 125–146 CrossRef .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C. C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sista, Z. Hong, L.-M. Chen and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1606–1620 RSC .
T. Aernouts, T. Aleksandrov, C. Girotto, J. Genoe and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033306 CrossRef .
C. Girotto, B. P. Rand, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 454–458 CrossRef .
J. Gilot, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 143512 CrossRef .
S. Kouijzer, S. Esiner, C. H. Frijters, M. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 945–949 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Girtan and M. Rusu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 446–450 CrossRef .
C.-H. Chou, W. L. Kwan, Z. Hong, L.-M. Chen and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1282–1286 CrossRef PubMed .
K. X. Steirer, P. F. Ndione, N. E. Widjonarko, M. T. Lloyd, J. Meyer, E. L. Ratcliff, A. Kahn, N. R. Armstrong, C. J. Curtis, D. S. Ginley, J. J. Berry and D. C. Olson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 813–820 CrossRef .
J. R. Manders, S.-W. Tsang, M. J. Hartel, T.-H. Lai, S. Chen, C. M. Amb, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2993–3001 CrossRef .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C.-W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
S. Han, W. S. Shin, M. Seo, D. Gupta, S.-J. Moon and S. Yoo, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 791–797 CrossRef .
J. Sakai, K. Kawano, T. Yamanari, T. Taima, Y. Yoshida, A. Fujii and M. Ozaki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 376–380 CrossRef .
R. Schueppel, R. Timmreck, N. Allinger, T. Mueller, M. Furno, C. Uhrich, K. Leo and M. Riede, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 044503 CrossRef .
T.-Y. Li, T. Meyer, Z. Ma, J. Benduhn, C. Körner, O. Zeika, K. Vandewal and K. Leo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13636–13639 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-S. Shim, J.-H. Chang, C.-I. Wu and J.-J. Kim, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1805–1809 CrossRef .
E. Lee, J. Kim and C. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 1–5 CrossRef .
Y. Ka, H. Hwang and C. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1942 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. A. Pettersson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganäs, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kim, J. Seo and Y. Park, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2011, 59, 3060–3063 CrossRef .
G. H. Jung and J.-L. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3034–3039 RSC .
G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef .
A. Zusan, B. Gieseking, M. Zerson, V. Dyakonov, R. Magerle and C. Deibel, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8286 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00292dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Structure of the polymer tandem solar cells device fabricated using a thin-film transfer technique, and chemical structure of photoactive materials. (b) Spectra of the absorption efficiencies of the top (red) and bottom (blue) active layers calculated using the transfer matrix method. Also shown is the calculated absorption efficiency spectrum of the tandem device as a whole (green), compared with that measured for the tandem device fabricated using the thin-film transfer technique (black).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Deposition of a HAT-CN layer on a UV-ozone treated ITO substrate. (b) Transfer of a P3HT:PC61BM film from a stamp to the HAT-CN layer. (c) Peeling off the stamp from the substrate. (d) Deposition of an ICL onto the bottom subcell using thermal evaporation in a vacuum. (e) Transfer of a PCPDTBT:PC71BM layer onto the ICL. (f) Deposition of the top electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic characteristics of polymer tandem solar cells using an ICL with varying thicknesses of BCP:Ag layer and Ag islands (tBCP:Ag and tAg, respectively). (a) J–V characteristics of the tandem cells with tAg = 0.5 nm and different tBCP:Ag values. (b) J–V characteristics of the tandem cells with tBCP:Ag = 10 nm and different tAg values. (c) Photovoltaic parameters of the tandem cells as functions of tBCP:Ag and tAg. (d) J–V characteristics of the tandem device with tBCP:Ag = 10 nm and tAg = 0.5 nm, compared with the characteristics of the single junction devices. Inset: photovoltaic parameters of the three devices.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the operational mechanism of the tandem device with BCP:Ag/Ag islands/HAT-CN ICL. (b) Schematic illustration of the origin of VOC loss observed when the BCP:Ag layer in the ICL is omitted.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00292d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
