Cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen in China   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE01840J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01840J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4868-4881Cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen in China†

        
          
            Guangsheng 
            Pan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Gu‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Qinran 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianxiao 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Teng
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Goran 
            Strbac
          
        
      *c
aSchool of Electrical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China. E-mail: wgu@seu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Beijing, 102206, China
cDepartment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK. E-mail: g.strbac@imperial.ac.uk
Received 
      16th June 2021
    , Accepted 8th July 2021First published on 13th July 2021AbstractTo quantify the cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen in China, this paper presents a detailed assessment of the levelized cost of electrolytic hydrogen produced by a photovoltaic and grid-based hydrogen system (PGHS). This assessment considers the provincial differences in electricity prices, shares of renewables in power grids, and solar radiations in China. We find that in 2019, the levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) in 31 provinces varies from 31.5 ¥ per kg to 46.8 ¥ per kg in the single electricity price scenario, and reduces by up to 5.5 ¥ per kg when implementing a time-of-use price. In terms of CO2 emissions, we demonstrate that electrolytic hydrogen has greater CO2 emissions than the widespread coal-based hydrogen in 21 out of 31 provinces of China. The results suggest that implementing time-of-use electricity prices and subsidizing photovoltaics, instead of electricity prices and electrolyzers, can improve the performance of electric hydrogen production in terms of cost and CO2 emissions. Further provincial analysis considering hydrogen demand potentials shows that, under stricter CO2 emission constraints, substituting fossil fuel with electrolytic hydrogen can reduce CO2 emissions. However, its popularization is impeded by fossil fuels with low costs. Due to the regional differentiation in the cost competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen, different types and levels of subsidies should be carefully adopted depending on the provincial characteristics in electricity prices, solar radiations, renewable integrations, fossil fuel prices, and hydrogen demand potentials. In the end, when comparing seven pathways towards electrolytic hydrogen development from 2020 to 2050, we find that the production cost of the electrolytic hydrogen is unbundled from the restriction of CO2 emission requirements after 2030, and a high carbon price may accelerate the cost competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen by decades.

Broader context
The spreading concerns on global warming triggered the exploitation of renewables for low-carbon energy systems. As a complement of electricity, electrolytic hydrogen can play a vital role in energy storage and terminal utilization. In terms of the abundant distinctions in the natural endowment of renewables, the level and type of electricity prices, the share of renewable integrations, as well as the demand potential for hydrogen-related fields in China, this article accomplishes a comprehensive differentiation analysis through an optimization-based methodology, thus further allowing us to investigate the electrolytic hydrogen's cost and low-carbon competitiveness in China. Specifically, the following questions are answered via the case studies on electrolytic hydrogen development across China: (1) Is the PV and grid-based hydrogen cleaner than the coal-based hydrogen at present? (2) What is the critical parameter that determines the PV and grid-based hydrogen production cost? (3) How the various subsidy policies impact the cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen, and which subsidy policy is the most suitable for a distinctive region? (4) How to leverage the hydrogen demands to attain CO2 reduction in energy systems? (5) When can electrolytic hydrogen feature the dual advantages of economy and low-carbon compared to coal-based hydrogen? The insights provided can assist the policy-makers in evaluating the development pathway of electrolytic hydrogen in different provinces, and reveal the superiorities of electrolytic hydrogen in low-carbon energy systems.

1 Introduction
Hydrogen, as a versatile energy carrier, can be adopted in diverse sectors, such as transport, buildings, power generation, chemicals, and industry.1–4 Using renewables, nuclear energy, or fossil fuels with carbon capture, use, and storage (CCUS) to produce clean hydrogen can help to decarbonize sectors that have difficulty in reducing emissions – including long-haul transport, chemicals, and iron and steel – and cannot be easily electrified.5,6 Moreover, through the buffering and bridging effect of hydrogen, the surplus electricity from the variable renewable energy in the power system can be converted into hydrogen for transmission, storage, and utilization. Hydrogen is one of the very few options for storing electricity over long durations.7,8
To date, many countries have enacted policies that directly support hydrogen deployment. These include H2@Scale9 in the United States, to explore the potential for hydrogen utilization to enable resiliency of the power generation and transmission sectors, and the H2 Mobility program10 in Japan, to accelerate the utilization of hydrogen in transport applications by building hydrogen refueling stations. Since 2006, the Chinese government has included hydrogen and fuel cells in the National Medium and Long-Term Science and Technology Development Plan Outline (2006–2020).11 In 2014, the Energy Development Strategy Action (2014–2020) issued by the State Council formally adopted “hydrogen and fuel cells” as the strategic direction of energy technology innovation.12 In 2019 alone, more than 70 policies were issued at the national, provincial, and municipal levels to encourage the development of industries related to hydrogen energy. Among them, most policies have focused on the construction of hydrogen fuel cell vehicles and hydrogen refueling stations,13 which highlights the vital role of electrolytic hydrogen due to high purity and ease of access through widespread power grids.
Electrolytic hydrogen can be further divided according to the source of electricity into renewable-based hydrogen [e.g., wind-based hydrogen and photovoltaic (PV)-based hydrogen] and grid-based hydrogen. Among these, renewable-based hydrogen is clean and can also support the integration of variable renewables into the power system.5 However, hydrogen production through variable renewables has the drawback of unstable output, which leads to lower annual utilization hours of electrolyzers, and thus higher hydrogen production costs.14 On the other hand, the price of grid-based hydrogen greatly depends on the electricity price and it still casts a significant carbon footprint for the grid with high penetration of fossil fuel based generation.15 To illustrate this point, the global average share of fossil fuel based generation in 2019 was 62.8%, with corresponding levels of 63.0% in the United States, 38.0% in Europe, 70.8% in Japan, and 67.9% in China.16 Thus, relying solely on electricity from the power grid to produce hydrogen will undoubtedly release vast quantities of CO2. Therefore, the combination of renewable energy utilization and power grid support to produce electrolytic hydrogen is an essential solution.
Much research has been conducted to explore the feasibility of electrolytic hydrogen from an environmental perspective, an economic perspective, or both.17–24 The levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) has been analyzed in different countries and regions based on different power sources, such as wind-based,20 solar-based,14 and grid-based21 hydrogen. To capture the environmental impacts of hydrogen, the levelized cost of CO2 mitigation is required to assess the costs of carbon mitigation for different hydrogen production techniques15 and the environmental benefits of hydrogen for energy storage.23,24 Recently, International Energy Agency published a comprehensive report to estimate the levelized cost and carbon emission factor of different hydrogen production routes. In particular, the hydrogen production cost and corresponding CO2 emissions from renewable electricity, grid electricity, and fossil energy with or without carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) in China are analyzed in this report.10 However, the impact of the provincial differences in solar radiations, electricity prices and types, and shares of renewables in power grids on the regionally differentiated hydrogen production have not been explored, which plays a crucial role in guiding the regional hydrogen development.
Overall, this study provides a detailed assessment of the current province-level levelized cost and carbon emissions of electrolytic hydrogen in China, derived from real-world 31 provincial electricity rates as well as shares of renewables in power grids and 139 city-level solar power data from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). This article is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the system structure and assumptions. Section 3 presents the optimization-based methodology that allows us to study electrolytic hydrogen's cost and low-carbon competitiveness. Section 4 shows the nationwide and statewide results from both the economy and carbon emission perspectives. Finally, Section 5 presents a summary of the work and highlights the key findings.
2 System structure
This work considers that the power for producing electrolytic hydrogen comes from both distributed photovoltaic and power grid via a photovoltaic and grid-based hydrogen system (PGHS; as shown in Fig. 1). The advantages are manifold, as follows:
 Fig. 1  Structure of a photovoltaic and grid-based hydrogen system. 
• conducive to distributed photovoltaic integration;
• interconnect with the main grids to ensure a continuous and stable hydrogen supply;
• distributed photovoltaics as modular technology, and well-connected power grids make it easier to deploy a PGHS close to the hydrogen demand center;
• improve the capacity factors (CFs) of electrolyzers, especially considering electrolyzers’ current expensive investment costs.
The produced electrolytic hydrogen can be used in transport, as a feedstock in oil refining and iron & steel production, power generation, heat generation, and other uses.8,10 Without loss of generality, the daily electrolytic hydrogen production by a PHGS under different provinces is assumed to be 1 kg. This assumption is a standard method for the regionally differentiated economic evaluation of a given technology, such as setting a 1 MW distributed photovoltaic system to calculate whether the levelized cost of electricity of the system in different cities has reached grid parity in China.25 With the given volume of hydrogen production, the provincial cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen can be evaluated, which can guide the downstream hydrogen applications. Since electrolytic hydrogen is still in its infancy stage of development, provincial differences in electrolyzers’ investment cost and conversion efficiency are not considered in this work.
3 Methodology
3.1 Electricity data collection
According to the Notice of the National Development and Reform Commission on reducing general industrial and commercial electricity prices issued in May 2019,26 the price bureaus of different provinces and power grid enterprises implemented specific provincial electricity sale prices on 1 July 2019 in most provinces. Considering that hydrogen can be widely applied in transport, chemicals, oil refining, and iron and steel industries, the related enterprises are distributed into different voltage thresholds from 1–10 kV to ≥220 kV according to different scales and products. Here, we choose the electricity retail price of the 35 kV large industrial electricity supply as the representative electricity price for purchasing power from power grids.
The representative electricity price can be further divided into two types: the single electricity price and the time-of-use price. Different provinces implement different types of electricity prices at present. For example, provinces such as Liaoning (LN), Heilongjiang (HL), and Ningxia (NX) use the single electricity price, while provinces such as Guangdong (GD), Tianjin (TJ), and Beijing (BJ) use the time-of-use price. Provinces such as Jiangsu (JS), Anhui (AH), and Zhejiang (ZJ) use both price types at the same time (selected by the end users). To reveal the impact of the two electricity price types on the development of electrolytic hydrogen in different provinces, further assumptions are made as follows: (1) for provinces that only implement the time-of-use price, we use the flat-segment electricity price as the single electricity price; (2) for provinces that only implement a single electricity price, we will float up and down 50% on the basis of the single electricity price as the peak and valley electricity prices, and the peak–valley–flat time is the same as that of neighboring provinces that implement time-of-use electricity prices. The average value of the single electricity prices in 31 provinces is used as the national average electricity price for subsequent sensitivity analysis. In addition, the basic electricity price charged according to the maximum active power and apparent power from the power grid is added in the provincial single electricity price and time-of-use price, respectively (see Table S1 of ESI†). Data on the provincial single electricity market prices and time-of-use prices are compiled from the National Development and Reform Commission and the price bureaus of different provinces.
Hourly solar power data are collected from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).27 Data for the four municipalities of BJ, Shanghai (SH), TJ, and Chongqing (CQ) can be directly obtained from the NREL. Then, we use the average solar power data of five representative cities distributed throughout each province as the province-level solar power data. Taking Henan (HA) as an example, Anyang, Nanyang, Xinyang, Shangqiu, and Zhengzhou are chosen as representative cities to calculate the provincial solar power data. The national hourly solar power data is derived from the average of the solar power data of selected cities.
This analysis also uses the proportion of provincial non-thermal power generation in the total power generation capacity as the share of renewables in the provincial power grids. The shares can be obtained from the China Energy Statistical Yearbook.28 These shares have a significant impact on the carbon emissions for the development of electrolytic hydrogen in different provinces.
3.2 LCOH2 minimization model for electrolytic hydrogen
The LCOH2 for electrolytic hydrogen is determined by many factors, such as the PGHS lifetime, the electricity price, annual light hours, the system investment cost and operation and maintenance (O&M) cost, conversion efficiency, and interest rate. Here, it should be mentioned that the cost of water is a small proportion of the cost of hydrogen production,29 and thus not considered in this work. Among these parameters, electricity prices and solar irradiances vary in different provinces. Therefore, we establish the following optimization model to calculate each province's LCOH2 and the national average LCOH2 based on specific data. (1a) Cinv = cP2HinvCP2H + cPVinvCPV(1b) Co&m = cP2Ho&mCP2H + cPVo&mCPV(1c) (1d) (1e)
Subject to 0 ≤ CPV(1f) 0 ≤ CP2H(1g) 0 ≤ Pgridt ≤ Pgridmax, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}(1h) 0 ≤ PPVt ≤ ptCPV, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}(1i) 0 ≤ PP2Ht ≤ CP2H, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}(1j) PPVt + Pgridt = PP2Ht, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}(1k) (1l)As shown in eqn (1a), the proposed optimization model is aimed at minimizing LCOH2 in a PGHS. Cinv is the investment cost of PV and power to hydrogen (P2H) in the system, Co&m is the annual O&M cost of the system, Cfix is the fixed annual electricity purchase cost, and Cvar is the variable annual electricity purchase cost. Houtput is the annual hydrogen production in the system, N is the lifetime of the system, and dr is the discount rate. The specific expressions of Cinv, Co&m, Cfix, and Cvar are given in eqn (1b)–(1e), respectively. In eqn (1b), CPV and CP2H are the optimal investment capacities of PV and P2H, and cPVinv and cP2Hinv are the unit investment costs of PV and P2H, respectively. In eqn (1c), cPVo&m and cP2Ho&m are the unit annual O&M costs of PV and P2H, respectively. In eqn (1d), Pgridmax is the maximum electric power purchased from the power grid, φ is the phase angle, and cgridfix1 and cgridfix2 are the unit fixed annual electricity prices in active power and apparent power, respectively. In eqn (1e), Pgridt is the electric power purchased from the grid at time t, cgridt is the electricity price at time t, and T is the number of hours in a year, equal to 8760.
The optimization model is subject to constraints (1f)–(1l). Constraints (1f) and (1g) impose non-negative values on the investment capacities of PV and P2H. Constraint (1h) guarantees that the purchased electric power at time t is non-negative and less than the maximum purchased electric power Pgridmax. Constraint (1i) ensures that the actual PV output PPVt is non-negative and less than the predicted PV output, where pt is the unit PV output at time t. Constraint (1j) imposes that the input electric power of P2H at time t PP2Ht is non-negative and less than the maximum investment capacity. As shown in constraint (1k), the input electric power of P2H is equal to the purchased electric power from the grid and PV output at time t. Constraint (1l) builds the relationship between the input electric power and the hydrogen output in the P2H within a day, and ηP2H is the conversion efficiency of the P2H. The system configurations and technology assumptions of a PGHS can be seen in Table S2 of ESI.†
3.3 Share of PV power in electrolytic hydrogen production
The input electric power of a PGHS comes from power grids and PV, and the proportion of the two is determined by the electricity price (levels and types) and the break-even price of PV power generation (depending on solar irradiances, photoelectric conversion efficiency, PV investment costs, etc.). Therefore, we define the Mix to measure the PV utilization levels for producing electrolytic hydrogen in different provinces, as follows: (2)
3.4 Carbon dioxide emission calculation
Given that the electricity purchased from the power grid in China is generated mainly by thermal power generation units, the production of electrolytic hydrogen can also release carbon dioxide emissions from the energy input side. According to the China Electric Power Industry Annual Development Report 2020 issued by the China Electricity Council on 12 June 2020, the national average carbon dioxide emission per unit of thermal power generation in 2019 is about 0.838 kg kW−1 h−1.30 On 12 September 2014, China implemented ultra-low emissions standards covering the full fleet of existing and future coal-fired power-generating units nationwide,31 so we do not distinguish the provincial carbon dioxide emissions per unit of thermal power generation. Then, the annual carbon dioxide emissions (ACDE) of electrolytic hydrogen is characterized in eqn (3a), where θRPG is the share of renewable power generation in the provincial power grids (see Table S3 of ESI†). Considering that the production of hydrogen directly from coal can yield 20.2 kg of carbon dioxide emissions for per 1 kg of hydrogen production,32 we also use annual carbon dioxide reductions (ACDR) as an indicator to characterize the carbon dioxide reductions of electrolytic hydrogen in comparison with coal-based hydrogen, as shown in eqn (3b). (3a) (3b)
3.5 LCOH2 minimization model from competing technologies
Because of the low coal price, coal-based hydrogen is the cheapest and widely used in industrial fields in China. To compare the cost gap between electrolytic hydrogen and coal-based hydrogen, we define the following LCOH2 for coal-based hydrogen. (4a)Subject to 0 ≤ CCG(4b) 0 ≤ PCGt ≤ CCG, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}(4c) (4d)Eqn (4a) aims to minimize the LCOHcoal2 in the coal-based hydrogen system. In eqn (4a), CCG is the optimal investment capacity of coal gasification (CG), PCGt is the operation power of CG at time t, cCGinv is the unit investment cost of CG, cCGo&m is the unit annual O&M cost of CG, ccoal is the unit coal price, ccar is the unit carbon dioxide emission price, and ecar is the carbon dioxide emissions per unit of hydrogen production. Constraint (4b) imposes a non-negative value on the optimal investment capacity of CG. Constraint (4c) ensures that PCGt is non-negative and less than the maximum investment capacity. Constraint (4d) builds the relationship between the input power and the hydrogen output for CG within a day and ηCG is the conversion efficiency of CG. If CG is installed with CCUS, the difference is reflected in the equipment investment cost, conversion efficiency and carbon emission coefficient, which can be seen in Tables S4 and S5 of ESI.†
4 Results
4.1 Sensitivity analysis of LCOH2 in China
To assess possible variability of electrolytic production cost in China, we analyze the impact of electricity price, the investment cost of solar PV systems, the investment cost of P2H, the conversion efficiency of P2H, and discount rate in a sensitivity analysis of LCOH2; see Fig. 2. First of all, based on real-world data, IRENA statistics and forecast data, and data from authoritative journals, we collect the current and future economic and technical parameters in terms of PV investment costs, P2H investment costs and efficiency, and electricity prices. Especially on P2H, we consider the comprehensive performances of alkaline, polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM), and solid oxide electrolyzers. The relevant data is given in Table S6 of ESI.† According to the above data, the upper and lower limits of the P2H efficiency are selected as 83% and 40%, and the upper and lower limits of the P2H investment cost are selected as 13800 and 1380 ¥ per kW, respectively.33 In the PV investment cost, the lowest value is selected as State Grid Energy Research Institution's forecast value of 1900 ¥ per kW in 2050,34 and the highest value is selected as a system-level distributed photovoltaic system price of 8430 ¥ per kW25 considering commercial loans. Based on the different electricity price levels and types in various provinces, the lowest value is selected as the low electricity price in Yunnan during the high-water period of 0.19 ¥ per kW h, and the highest value is selected as the Jiangsu peak electricity price of 1.14 ¥ per kW h. In addition, the discount rate ranges from 2% to 8%.
 Fig. 2  Sensitivity of levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) under different factors. The parameters in the benchmark scenario are: electricity price 0.56 ¥ per kW h, investment cost of photovoltaic (PV) 5477.4 ¥ per kW,35 investment cost of power to hydrogen (P2H) 11665 ¥ per kW,21 P2H efficiency 61.3%,21 discount rate 3.85%. The orange and blue bars represent the increase and decrease of LCOH2, respectively. 
Using a national average electricity price of 0.56 ¥ per kW h (CNY 1.0 = EUR 0.130 = USD 0.145 in 2019) as an example, the national average LCOH2 in China is 41.7 ¥ per kg. In comparison, the break-even prices of wind-based hydrogen in Germany and Texas are 22.3 ¥ per kg and 24.4 ¥ per kg, respectively,22 and the cost of electrolysis-based hydrogen using 7182 industrial and commercial retail electric utility rates in the United States varies from 17.9 to 84.9 ¥ per kg.23 If the price of electricity purchased from the grid drops from 0.56 ¥ per kW h to 0.19 ¥ per kW h, the LCOH2 can be reduced from 41.7 ¥ per kg to 24.2 ¥ per kg; however, an electricity price of 1.14 ¥ per kW h can push the LCOH2 up to 54.4 ¥ per kg. Increasing the PV investment cost from 1900 ¥ per kW to 8430 ¥ per kW leads to an increase in LCOH2 from 37.2 ¥ per kg to 44.3 ¥ per kg, while changing the P2H investment cost from 1380 ¥ per kW (in a decade of development)20 to 13800 ¥ per kW leads to an increase in LCOH2 from 36.9 to 42.6 ¥ per kg. If the conversion efficiency of P2H can be improved to 83%, the LCOH2 can be reduced by 27% (30.7 ¥ per kg). The discount rate had less impact on the LCOH2, with effect ranges of −4% to +9%. Considering that each factor may also interact with the others, we used the “Compounded” bar (see Fig. 2) to quantify the combined effects of multiple factors on LCOH2. In the best-case scenario, where the values of the above five factors are set to their left values, the LCOH2 can be reduced to 15.2 ¥ per kg (a reduction of 64%), which can be cost competitiveness with that in Germany and the United States. In the worst-case scenario, the LCOH2 can rise to 112.8 ¥ per kg with an increase of 171%. From the above, we can conclude that the electricity price, conversion efficiency of P2H, and PV investment price play significant roles in determining the LCOH2 in China.
To highlight the economic advantages of grid and PV-based hydrogen (producing hydrogen with power from power grid and PV input), we further provide the LCOH2 of grid-based hydrogen (power from power grid) and PV-based hydrogen (power from PV), respectively. From Fig. 2, the LCOH2 of grid-based hydrogen and PV-based hydrogen is 44.3 ¥ per kg and 69.7 ¥ per kg, respectively, which are both higher than the grid and PV-based hydrogen. Next, a specific analysis of the province-level cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen is given.
4.2 Provincial economic environment analysis under two electricity price types
In China, electricity market prices are set by the National Development and Reform Commission and the price bureaus of the different provinces, which may impose different price levels and types (single electricity price or time-of-use price). To explore the impact of the two types of electricity prices on the provincial development of grid and PV-based hydrogen, we compare provincial LCOH2 and configurations of PV and P2H under two types of electricity prices (Fig. 3). The results show that the provincial LCOH2 in China for the single electricity price scenario varies from 31.6 ¥ per kg in Qinghai (QH) to 46.8 ¥ per kg in ZJ. Twelve provinces with the highest LCOH2 (greater than 45 ¥ per kg) are BJ, TJ, JS, AH, SH, ZJ, Hubei (HB), Hunan (HN), Jiangxi (JX), Guangdong (GD), Guangxi (GX), and Hainan (HI), all of which are in eastern regions with relatively high single electricity prices and lower annual PV generation. QH has the lowest LCOH2 (31.6 ¥ per kg), followed by Ningxia (NX), Xinjiang (XJ), Gansu (GS) and Inner Mongolia (IM; all provinces with LCOH2 below 36 ¥ per kg). Differences in the provincial LCOH2 are directly related to provincial differences in electricity price levels and annual PV generations (see Fig. S1 of ESI†).
 Fig. 3  Levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) and investment capacities of photovoltaic (PV) and power to hydrogen (P2H) under two different price scenarios. (a) Province-level LCOH2 under the single electricity price scenario. Darker color indicates higher LCOH2. Provinces marked with black blocks have LCOH2 ≥45 ¥ per kg, those marked with black circles have LCOH2 ≤36 ¥ per kg. (b) Province-level LCOH2 under the time-of-use price scenario. Provinces marked with blue blocks have LCOH2 falls of ≥3 ¥ per kg. (c) Investment capacities of PV (blue bar) and P2H (orange bar) under two price scenarios. 
Under the time-of-use price scenario, the provincial LCOH2 varies from 31.1 ¥ per kg in QH to 46.0 ¥ per kg in JS, with varying degrees of decline in all provinces when compared with the single price scenario (see Fig. S2 of ESI†). Specifically, HL, JL, BJ, Shaanxi (SN), SH, HN, JX, Fujian (FJ), Yunnan (YN), GX, GD, and HI show declines of more than 3 ¥ per kg, and SH and GD have the highest decline of 5.5 ¥ per kg. These results demonstrate that the application of the time-of-use price in the PGHS can significantly reduce LCOH2 in China when compared with the single electricity price.

Fig. 3c shows the province-level configuration capacities of PV and P2H when producing 1 kg of hydrogen per day for each province. Under the single electricity price scenario, the PV configuration capacity varies from 0 kW in Guizhou (GZ) to 6.13 kW in Tibet (XZ). The corresponding P2H configuration capacity is 2.26 kW in all provinces except for XZ (2.61 kW). After adopting the time-of-use price, the fluctuation of PV configuration capacity is between 3.71 kW and 7.54 kW, with the lowest in NX and the highest in ZJ. The P2H configuration capacity varies significantly in each province under the time-of-use price scenario, with the lowest capacity of 2.26 kW in QH, Hebei (HE), and NX and the highest capacity of 3.09 kW in TJ. Under the single price scenario, P2H will purchase electricity from the grid when PV output is insufficient, and continuously produce hydrogen at rated power. When it comes to the time-of-use price scenario, the PGHS will avoid purchasing electricity from the grid at peak periods. At the first peak period, PV power generation can be used to hold the operation of P2H; at the second peak period, the P2H is shut down (see Fig. S3 of ESI†). At other times, the P2H would operate in part-load state or shutdowns and would be more flexible than the single electricity price. These results highlight that the time-of-use electricity price can also increase the PV configuration capacity in the PGHS.
At present, the electricity purchased from the power grid is generated mainly by thermal power generation units in China (renewable power generation accounted for 27.9% of total power generation in 2019),36 so the production of electrolytic hydrogen also releases CO2 emissions from the energy input side. Considering that producing hydrogen directly from coal can yield 20.2 kg of CO2 for per 1 kg of hydrogen,10 we provide a province-level comparative analysis of the ACDR of electrolytic hydrogen production under two different scenarios based on the CO2 emissions of coal-based hydrogen (Fig. 4). The results show that under the single electricity price, the ACDR varies from −5240.1 kg in TJ to 7098.1 kg in XZ when producing an annual hydrogen amount of 365 kg. Compared with coal-based hydrogen, provinces that can achieve lower CO2 emissions from electrolytic hydrogen (ACDR with positive values) are XZ, QH, GS, YN, Sichuan (SC), GX, HN, HB, and FJ, all of which are concentrated in China's Qinghai-Tibet region and the southern region. The provinces with the most CO2 emissions for electrolytic hydrogen production are TJ, Shanxi (SX), HA, Shandong (SD), AH, and SH. These six provinces are not suitable for PV and grid-based hydrogen at this stage, especially from environmental perspectives.
 Fig. 4  Annual carbon dioxide reductions (ACDR) of electrolytic hydrogen and share of renewable power generation under two different price scenarios. (a) ACDR of electrolytic hydrogen under the single electricity price scenario. (b) ACDR of electrolytic hydrogen under the time-of-use price scenario. For areas in green, darker color indicates better CO2 reductions of electrolytic hydrogen. For areas in grey, darker color indicates higher CO2 emissions of electrolytic hydrogen. (c) Share of renewable power generation under two different price scenarios. The blue and orange dotted lines supposedly represent the average share of renewable power generation under two different price scenarios, respectively. 
After adopting the time-of-use price, the ACDR can be significantly improved in nearly all provinces, with a range from −3741.4 kg in TJ to 7095.5 kg in XZ. Fifteen provinces with ACDR increases greater than 1000 kg are HL, JL, LN, IM, TJ, SD, SX, SA, HN, AH, JS, SH, ZJ, GZ, and XJ. From a geographical perspective, provinces with high ACDR rises are concentrated in the north and east of China and have obvious regional differences from provinces with high ACDR. Fig. 4c shows the province-level share of renewable power generation in hydrogen production under the two scenarios. The highest and lowest shares under the two scenarios are 43% in XZ and 0% in GZ, respectively. Most provinces are concentrated in the share range of 20–40% under the two scenarios. The average of all province-level shares in the single electricity price scenario is 25.3%, and that in the time-of-use scenario is 33.3%, with an increase of 8%. Except for XZ, the province-level share of renewable power generation in hydrogen production can be improved to varying degrees through the adoption of time-of-use electricity prices. Among them, GZ has the highest degree of improvement, from 0% to 24%.
Combining the cost of hydrogen production, the benefits of CO2 reduction, and the PV integration in the PGHS under the two types of electricity prices, we found that time-of-use electricity prices perform better in all provinces except XZ. From the perspective of developing electrolytic hydrogen, we recommend that the above provinces in China should implement the time-of-use electricity prices.
4.3 Provincial comparison of different subsidy policies
Subsidy policies are playing significant roles in developing emerging technologies. For example, since 2000, the Chinese government has issued hundreds of policies, including national solar PV feed-in tariff schemes and financial funds and services, to support the solar PV industry.25 By the end of 2019, the cumulative installed capacity of PV power generation nationwide reached 204 GW, which is almost a third of the global installed PV capacity.37 Most cities in China can achieve subsidy-free PV feed-in generation.25 When it comes to the hydrogen industry, policy mechanisms in different regions have included a limitation of the maximum electricity price for producing hydrogen,38 subsidies on hydrogen-related devices,39 and hydrogen price subsidies for transport.40 To investigate the effects of different subsidies on the LCOH2 and ACDR, we set three subsidies: a 50% subsidy of the electricity price, a 50% subsidy of the PV investment cost, and a 50% subsidy of the P2H investment cost; see Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of subsidy effects on levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) and annual carbon dioxide reductions (ACDR). (a) Variation of LCOH2 under three subsidies. The light green bar represents LCOH2 without subsidies under the time-of-use price scenario. (b) Variation of ACDR under three subsidies. The pink bar represents the ACDR without subsidies under the time-of-use price scenario. (c) Relationships between the share of renewable power generation in the power grid and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen in 31 provinces. Provinces falling into the gray area have higher CO2 emissions from electrolytic hydrogen compared with coal-based hydrogen. Provinces falling into the light green, green, and dark green areas have 0–45%, 45–65%, and 65–100% ACDRs of electrolytic hydrogen in comparison with coal-based hydrogen, respectively. The magenta points indicate that if all the electricity in the provincial power grid comes from fossil energy power generation units, the annual purchased electricity of the photovoltaic and grid-based hydrogen system (PGHS) equal to 8.8, 4.0, and 3.1 MW h can achieve 100%, 65%, and 35% CO2 emissions as coal-based hydrogen, respectively. The orange points indicate that if the shares of renewable power generation in the power grid reach 0.56, 0.80, and 0.84, all the electricity purchased from the grid in producing hydrogen can also achieve 100%, 65%, and 35% CO2 emissions as coal-based hydrogen, respectively. 
The results show that a 50% subsidy of the electricity price achieves the largest reduction of LCOH2 in all provinces (with an average drop of 10.8 ¥ per kg). The subsidy of PV investment cost leads to better performance in most provinces (except for NX, IM, and QH) in comparison with the subsidy of P2H investment cost. A higher LCOH2 is generally consistent with a greater gap between the effects of the two subsidies. In addition, the annual bills paid by provincial governments under the three subsidies are given in Fig. S4 of ESI.† In terms of ACDR effects, a subsidy of electricity prices leads to the fall of ACDR in all provinces as more electricity is purchased from the grid to produce hydrogen. The degree of ACDR fall is closely related to the increased electricity purchased from provincial power grids with low share of renewable power generation. For example, the ACDR of AH, TJ, SD, and HA reached −8000 kg with a drop of ≥5000 kg, meaning that the CO2 emissions of electrolytic hydrogen are more than twice that of coal-based hydrogen (7373 kg of CO2 emission to produce 365 kg of hydrogen). In addition, electricity price subsidy would also change the ACDRs of some provinces from positive to negative, such as CQ, HN, FJ, and GS. Except for XZ, HE, QH, and NX, simply reducing P2H investment costs has little effect on ACDR in most provinces. The above analysis demonstrates that it is more suitable to subsidize PV investment costs than P2H investment costs in most provinces because it can achieve better economic and environmental benefits.
The relationships among the share of renewable power generation in power grids, the power purchased by the PGHS from power grids, and the comparison of annual carbon dioxide emissions (ACDE) between electrolytic hydrogen and coal-based hydrogen in different provinces are further shown in Fig. 5c. The annual purchased electricity of most provinces is between 12.0 and 14.5 MW h. Thirty-one provinces fall into four areas, of which the gray area contains the most. Because the ACDE of electrolytic hydrogen is higher than that of coal-based hydrogen in the gray area (ACDR with negative values), reducing electricity prices would lead to more ACDE, which would make this measure unsuitable in these provinces. CQ, HN, FJ, GS, GX, and HB fall into the light green area, where the ACDE of electrolytic hydrogen is lower than that of coal-based hydrogen, so a certain amount of space can be used to reduce LCOH2 by applying electricity price subsidies. With the high shares of renewable power generation, SC, YN, and XZ fall into the dark green area for which reduced electricity prices are most suitable for hydrogen production when compared with other provinces. However, based on the Strengthening Actions against Climate Change—China's Nationally Determined Contributions issued by the Chinese government, the CO2 emissions per GDP in 2020 and 2030 must decrease by 40–45% and 60–65%, respectively, of the value in 2005.41 If stricter CO2 emission requirements are considered, only QH, SC, YN, and XZ have the possibility to develop electrolytic hydrogen with a decrease of 45% in 2020, and the latter three provinces can achieve the 2030 goals. Therefore, although the electricity price subsidy has a better effect of lowering the LCOH2, it faces significant environmental pressure and is only suitable for very limited provinces.
4.4 Further provincial analysis considering hydrogen demand potentials
Two representative provinces, Jiangsu and Yunnan, are selected to conduct a more detailed analysis of the cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen. The differences are reflected in hydrogen production prices, renewable integration in power grids, and hydrogen demand potentials. Considering that hydrogen is still in an early market phase, we only use the fuel cost metric without externality costs for comparison.21 The new LCOH2 is optimized by adding the following CO2 emission constraints (5) in (1). Here, we assume that the CO2 emissions of electrolytic hydrogen are more than 45% lower than that of coal-based hydrogen, which is in line with China's current low-carbon goals.34 (5)
We consider the hydrogen demand potentials in coal substitution, gasoline substitution (GS) and diesel substitution (DS). In coal substitution, electrolytic hydrogen can be used as feedstock for two potential applications, including iron and steel production (ISP) and ammonia production (AP), to reduce the use of coal. Eqn (6a) calculates hydrogen demand potentials Hspo in industry, where ρs represents the hydrogen consumption for producing per kg of product s. ωs and As represent the substitution percentage and the annual productions of product s, respectively. s denotes AP and ISP. The related data and parameters for fossil fuel substitution by hydrogen in industry can be seen in Table S7 of ESI.†Eqn (6b) and (6c) calculate the hydrogen demand potentials in gasoline substitution Hgasolinepo and diesel substitution Hdieselpo, where ρS-FC/M-FC/MD-FC/HD-FC represents the mass ratio for hydrogen to gasoline or diesel when using hydrogen fuel cell vehicles (HFCV) to replace fuel vehicles, following the study by Guerra et al.,21 respectively; ωS-FC/M-FC/MD-FC/HD-FC and NS-FC/M-FC/MD-FC/HD-FC represent the substitution percentage and vehicle numbers of Subcompact-FC(S-FC), Midsize-FC (M-FC), Medium duty class 3-FC (MD-FC), and Heavy duty class 8-FC (HD-FC), Agasoline and Adiesel represent the annual consumptions of gasoline and diesel in transport. According to the provincial statistical yearbook in 2019, the annual consumptions of gasoline and diesel in the transport of Jiangsu were 5.92 and 5.72 megatons, while these of Yunnan were 2.0 and 4.80 megatons. With stricter carbon emission constraints, electrolytic hydrogen can further reduce CO2 emissions in transport. Eqn (6d) shows the annual CO2 reductions in gasoline substitution and diesel substitution, where θf is the CO2 reduction factor by applying electrolytic hydrogen in replacing fuel f, and can be further calculated in eqn (6e) and (6f). f denotes gasoline and diesel, and the factor 10−9 converts from kg to megaton. egasoline and ediesel in eqn (6e) and (6f) are the carbon emission factors of gasoline and diesel; we set them 3.06 and 3.18 kgCO2 per kg.42Table 1 shows the numbers of different types of vehicles in the transport and HFCV substitutions in Jiangsu and Yunnan. Hspo = ρsωsAs, ∀s ∈ {AP, ISP}(6a) (6b) (6c) (6d) (6e) (6f)From Fig. 6a, the LCOH2 in Jiangsu would increase from 46.0 to 52.9 ¥ per kg after considering the carbon emission constraint (5). This is because the relatively lower share of renewable power generation in Jiangsu's power grids reduces the purchased power from the grids under carbon emission constraints. Hydrogen can be directly supplied to S-FC and M-FC for gasoline substitution at a LCOH2 of 52.9 ¥ per kg, which is lower than the fuel cost of hydrogen for gasoline substitution (ranging from 54.5 to 62.6 ¥ per kg, with assumptions of a gasoline price of 8.835 ¥ per kg43 and a hydrogen storage and transmission price of 5 ¥ per kg44). To further enhance the cost competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen, we adopt electricity price subsidy, PV investment cost subsidy, P2H investment cost subsidy, and a combination of them. It can be seen from Fig. 6a that electricity price subsidy has the least impact on LCOH2 of Jiangsu, followed by P2H investment cost subsidy. In contrast, PV investment cost subsidy has a significant effect compared to the first two subsidies. For example, an 80% PV subsidy can reduce the LCOH2 from 52.93 ¥ per kg to 37.47 ¥ per kg, realizing complete diesel substitution (the fuel cost of hydrogen ranging from 38.5 to 43.2 ¥ per kg, with assumptions of a diesel price of 7.335 ¥ per kg43 and a hydrogen storage and transmission price of 5 ¥ per kg44). However, the above three single subsidies cannot achieve cost competitiveness with coal-based hydrogen. Therefore, we further apply a combination of them. For example, a 70% combined subsidy can reduce LCOH2 to <28 ¥ per kg, achieving cost competitiveness with coal-based hydrogen with a carbon price of 100 ¥ per ton.
Table 1 Number of different types of vehicles in transport and substitution percentage by HFCVs in Jiangsu and Yunnan




Province
Fuel types
Vehicle types
Vehicle numbers (104 units)
FC types
Substitution percentage
Mass ratio




The vehicle numbers of different vehicle types are collected from the 2019 statistical yearbooks of Jiangsu and Yunnan. The substitution percentages are referenced from hydrogen scaling up – a sustainable pathway for the global energy transition, which is published by the Hydrogen Council and gives the predicted substitution percentages of different HFCVs in 2050.46 The mass ratios of hydrogen to gasoline/diesel are calculated based on the fuel economy for different types of traditional fuel vehicles and HFCVs.21




Jiangsu
Gasoline
Subcompact passenger cars
1626.57
Subcompact-FC
10
0.131


Midsize passenger cars
4.25
Midsize-FC
25
0.149


Diesel
Large passenger cars, subcompact and midsize trucks
81.38
Medium duty class 3-FC
25
0.152


Heavy trucks
46.34
Heavy duty class 8-FC
35
0.169






Yunnan
Gasoline
Subcompact passenger cars
569.61
Subcompact-FC
10
0.131


Midsize passenger cars
2.12
Midsize-FC
25
0.149


Diesel
Large passenger cars, subcompact and midsize trucks
82.90
Medium duty class 3-FC
25
0.152


Heavy trucks
14.59
Heavy duty class 8-FC
35
0.169




 Fig. 6  Cost and CO2 reduction of electrolytic hydrogen in Jiangsu and Yunnan. (a) LCOH2 under different subsidies in Jiangsu. (b) LCOH2 under different subsidies in Yunnan. The light yellow, light cyan, and light gray areas represent the up price ranges for the applications of electrolytic hydrogen generation to gasoline, diesel, and coal substitutions, respectively. (c) Hydrogen demand potentials and corresponding CO2 reductions in Jiangsu. (d) Hydrogen demand potentials and corresponding CO2 reductions in Yunnan. Fig. 6c and d further show the relationship between the CO2 reductions and LCOH2. The center of each bubble represents LCOH2, and the radius represents the CO2 reductions when using electrolytic hydrogen to substitute gasoline, diesel, or coal. 
Compared with Jiangsu, the LCOH2 in Yunnan is not affected by the carbon emission constraints (see Fig. 6b) due to the higher share of renewable power generation in Yunnan's power grids (as shown in Fig. 5c). Also, electrolytic hydrogen in Yunnan can replace gasoline and diesel without any subsidy, with assumptions of a gasoline price of 9.13 ¥ per kg,45 a diesel price of 7.61 ¥ per kg45 and a hydrogen storage and transmission price of 5 ¥ per kg.44 The difference from Jiangsu is that electricity price subsidy is more prominent in Yunnan than PV and P2H subsidies. A 50% electricity price subsidy can make electrolytic hydrogen cost-competitive with coal-based hydrogen including a carbon price of 100 ¥ per ton. In comparison, a 100% electricity price subsidy (In other words, using waste electricity from power grids and only paying for the fixed annual electricity purchase cost for usage of transformer's capacity) can make electrolytic hydrogen cost-competitive with coal-based hydrogen without carbon prices.
From Fig. 6c and d, Jiangsu's hydrogen demand potentials in gasoline substitution, diesel substitution and coal substitution are 0.078, 0.263, and 0.49 megatons, while Yunnan's hydrogen demand potentials in the three substitutions are 0.026, 0.198, and 0.147 megatons. In terms of carbon reduction benefits, Jiangsu can reduce CO2 emissions by 0.958 megatons by replacing gasoline with electrolytic hydrogen in the absence of subsidies. An 80% subsidy of PV investment cost can contribute to a carbon reduction of 2.375 megatons by replacing diesel with electrolytic hydrogen, and a 70% combined subsidy can contribute to a carbon reduction of 4.455 megatons by replacing coal with electricity in producing hydrogen. In contrast, Yunnan can reduce CO2 by 0.557 or 3.62 megatons by replacing gasoline and diesel with electrolytic hydrogen without subsidies, while a 40% combined subsidy can reduce CO2 by 2.58 megatons by replacing coal-based hydrogen through electrolytic hydrogen. By comparing the two provinces’ carbon reductions in diesel substitution, we can find that Yunnan can achieve higher carbon reductions with lower hydrogen demand potentials, thanks to the higher share of renewable power generation in Yunnan's power grid. The results also show that electrolytic hydrogen produced by a PGHS under stricter carbon emission constraints can achieve carbon reduction benefits in many areas. However, the popularization of electrolytic hydrogen is impeded by fossil fuels with low fuel costs. Restricted by regional differentiation in the cost competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen determined by traditional fossil fuels, different types and levels of subsidies should be carefully adopted according to the characteristics of different provinces.
4.5 Pathways to cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen
According to different economic and emission constraints, seven pathways to develop the PV and grid-based hydrogen are analyzed in China from 2020 to 2050. Pathway 1 only considers the cost competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen. Pathway 2 minimizes the LCOH2 under the premise that the CO2 emission of electrolytic hydrogen is not more than that of coal-based hydrogen. Pathway 3 adopts stricter CO2 emission requirements to meet China's commitment in the Paris Agreement. Based on Pathway 3, Pathways 4–6 consider a 50% subsidy in the electricity price, investment cost of PV, and investment cost of P2H, respectively. Pathway 7 considers combined subsidies of Pathways 4–6. The assumptions of the related economic and technical parameters, including equipment investment cost and efficiency, coal and carbon prices, and renewable integration in power grids under different years are given in Tables S4, S5 and S8–S11 of ESI.† In particular, Pathways 3–7 adopt stricter CO2 emission requirements to meet China's commitment in the Paris Agreement. Here, we assume that the contribution of hydrogen from coal or electricity to GDP is the same, so CO2 emissions of new hydrogen produced in the future need to be reduced. For example, assuming that all hydrogen in 2005 was converted from coal, the CO2 emissions of electrolytic hydrogen in Pathways 3–7 need to be reduced by 60–65% compared with coal-based hydrogen. To exceed the CO2 reduction target in 2030, we set it to 70% based on the China Energy and Electricity Outlook 2019.34
From an economic perspective, different CO2 emission requirements mainly affect the cost of electrolytic hydrogen before 2030. For example, the transition from Pathway 1 to Pathway 2 and Pathway 3 would change the LCOH2 in 2020 from 41.7 ¥ per kg to 42.5 ¥ per kg and 47.3 ¥ per kg (see Fig. 7a). In the following 10 years, the gap of LCOH2 in Pathways 1–3 decreases. After 2030, the three curves of LCOH2 in Pathways 1–3 coincide; that is, the production cost of the electrolytic hydrogen is unbundled from the restriction of CO2 emission requirements. Under the stricter CO2 emission requirements in Pathway 3, four subsidies are further analyzed in Pathways 4–7. Among the three alternatives, the PV subsidy has the best performance in reducing LCOH2, followed by the electricity price subsidy and the P2H subsidy. The combined subsidies can reduce LCOH2 to 30 ¥ per kg in 2020 with 15–20 years earlier than the single subsidy method, and its benefits become weaker as the year increases.
 Fig. 7  Pathways to cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen. (a) Levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) under different years. The light grey intervals indicate the coal-based hydrogen cost via coal gasification with and without CCUS, and the upper and lower boundaries of them adopt high and low CO2 prices, respectively. (b) Annual carbon dioxide emissions (ACDE) under different years. 
We also quantify the production cost of the coal-based hydrogen using coal gasification with or without CCUS under two CO2 price levels. The development of coal-based hydrogen is highly affected by the carbon price. Coal gasification with CCUS can reduce the impact of carbon price because about 90% of CO2 emissions can be captured by CCUS. By comparing the LCOH2 of electrolytic hydrogen with coal-based hydrogen, it is clear that under optimistic CO2 price, the LCOH2 of electrolytic hydrogen without subsidies is lower than that of coal-based hydrogen after 2035, and higher than that of coal-based hydrogen with CCUS before 2050. The combined subsidies can achieve the cost competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen compared with coal-based hydrogen without or with CCUS in 2030 and 2045, respectively. However, compared with the low CO2 price, the higher CO2 price may accelerate the cost competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen in Pathways 1–3 by >10 years. It should be noted that the estimated hydrogen price is still conservative and higher than a value of <10.4 ¥ per kg in optimal locations within five to ten years estimated by Hydrogen Council.47 However, more optimistic equipment investment price and conversion efficiency, coupled with a higher percentage of subsidies, will further reduce LCOH2.
The ACDEs of Pathways 1–7 with different CO2 emission requirements are given in Fig. 7b. Pathway 1 has the highest ACDE, even higher than that of hydrogen produced from coal gasification in the first few years. The next highest ACDE is that of Pathway 2, with the ACDE from the beginning being no higher than that of hydrogen from coal gasification. Compared with Pathways 1–2, Pathways 3 has the lowest ACDE because stricter CO2 emission constraints are applied, and the difference of them is mainly reflected before 2030. It can be seen from the ACDEs of Pathways 4–7 that different subsidy policies also have an impact on carbon emissions. Among them, PV subsidy can further reduce ACDE in all years, making ACDE lower than that in coal gasification with CCUS around 2032, with a few years ahead of Pathways 1–3. P2H subsidy can mainly reduce ACDE in the decade from 2025 to 2035. However, electricity price subsidy can increase ACDE from 2025 to 2050, making the ACDE of electrolytic hydrogen higher than coal-based hydrogen with CCUS before 2050. In Pathway 7, combined subsidies can obviously increase ACDE from 2025 to 2040 compared to Pathways 1–3. Therefore, PV subsidy has the sub-optimal effect of reducing LCOH2 and the best carbon reduction effect and can be popularized in all provinces. Electricity price subsidy has the highest carbon emissions of all subsidies and needs to be promoted cautiously from province to province. Combined subsidies can reduce the LCOH2 quickly and be applied to provinces where hydrogen energy is urgently developed under stricter carbon emissions constraints.
5 Conclusions
The era of electrolytic hydrogen in China has begun, with more than 70 hydrogen-related policies issued in 2019 alone. In this work, we first establish a PV and grid-based hydrogen system (PGHS), and then implement a detailed assessment of the current (2019) province-level levelized cost and carbon emissions of electrolytic hydrogen in China, derived from real-world 31 provincial electricity rates, 31 provincial non-thermal power generation shares and 139 city-level solar power data. The results show that the current national LCOH2 is 41.7 ¥ per kg, and the three most relevant factors are the electricity price, conversion efficiency of P2H, and PV investment price. The provincial LCOH2 vary greatly and are determined by provincial electricity prices and solar radiation resources. Compared with the single electricity price, the provincial time-of-use electricity price can effectively reduce the LCOH2 and increase the investment capacity of PV and P2H.
Under the current provincial electricity prices (including the single and time-of-use prices) and PV power generation costs, the reduction of CO2 for the current electrolytic hydrogen is not promising, and is even higher than that of coal-based hydrogen in most provinces. The main reason is the relatively low share of non-fossil energy power generation in the existing power grid of China. At present, only nine provinces in the single electricity price scenario and ten provinces in the time-of-use electricity price scenario can achieve lower CO2 emissions from electrolytic hydrogen than coal-based hydrogen. Subsidies can stimulate the popularization and development of emerging technologies, as we can see from the PV industry. By implementing subsidies on electricity prices and investment costs of PV and P2H, it is clear that a certain degree of subsidies can reduce LCOH2 for electrolytic hydrogen, but the subsequent CO2 emission problems are different. After implementing the electricity price subsidy, the PGHS would increase the annual amount of electricity purchased from the power grid; then, more CO2 is omitted. In comparison, subsidies for equipment investment costs can reduce both LCOH2 and CO2 emissions. The results further show that in all provinces, PV subsidies have a better CO2 reduction than P2H subsidies. Considering that the current subsidies for national solar PV feed-in tariff have sharply reduced in recent years, additions to solar PV capacity slowed again in 2019. If subsidies are passed on to photovoltaics for hydrogen production, the development of the solar PV industry will be further stimulated and pressure on the main grid for transportation will be reduced.
Further provincial analysis considering hydrogen demand potentials shows that different provinces have significant differences in hydrogen demand potentials in various fields. To achieve decarbonization in related fields, on the one hand, the development of electrolytic hydrogen produced by a PGHS should consider stricter carbon emission constraints; on the other hand, subsidies are needed to achieve decarbonization in the industrial sector impeded by fossil fuels with low fuel costs. With predicted economic and technical parameters from 2020 to 2050, we propose and analyse seven pathways to cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen. After 30 years of development, the LCOH2 of electrolytic hydrogen can be reduced by half from 40–50 ¥ per kg to ≤20 ¥ per kg, and CO2 emissions is the main restricting factor on the development of electrolytic hydrogen from 2020 to 2030. Subsidies can accelerate progress to a time when electrolytic hydrogen is cost-competitive, while carbon prices may shorten the time by decades.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: G. P., W. G., and G. S., methodology: G. P., J. W., Q. H., and F. T., investigation: G. P., W. G., Q. H., and J. W., visualization: G. P., W. G. and Q. H., supervision: W. G. and G. S., writing – original draft: all the authors, writing – revised draft: all the authors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1866208), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20200013), and the National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFE0200400).
Notes and references
N. Sunny, N. M. Dowell and N. Shah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4204 RSC .
M. Z. Jacobson, Nat. Clim. Change, 2016, 6, 441–442 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, A. Vogel and M. Sachs, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 746–760 CrossRef CAS .
I. Staffell, 
            et al.
          , Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 463–491 RSC .
Hydrogen (International Energy Agency, 2020), https://www.iea.org/fuels-and-technologies/hydrogen.
C. K. Miskin, Y. Li and A. Perna, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Sustain., 2019, 2, 972–980 CrossRef .
O. Schmidt, S. Melchior and A. Hawkes, 
            et al.
          , Joule, 2019, 3, 81–100 CrossRef .
O. J. Guerra, J. Zhang, J. Eichman, P. Denholm, J. Kurtz and B.-M. Hodge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1909–1922 RSC .
H2@Scale (Department of Energy, 2021), https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/h2scale.
The Future of Hydrogen - Seizing today's opportunities (International Energy Agency, 2019), https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen.
Notice on Issuing and Implementing Several Supporting Policies of the Outline of the National Medium and Long-term Science and Technology Development Plan (2006–2020) (The State Council, 2006), http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2008-03/28/content_5296.htm.
Notice on Issuing the Energy Development Strategic Action Plan (2014–2020) (The State Council, 2006), http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2014/content_2781468.htm.
Over 70 hydrogen energy related policies released in 2019 (Polaris Hydrogen Energy Network, 2020), http://chuneng.bjx.com.cn/news/20200212/1042452.shtml.
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
B. Parkinson, P. Balcombe, J. F. Speirs, A. D. Hawkes and K. Hellgardt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 19–40 RSC .
Statistical Review of World Energy (BP, 2020), https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/energy-economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2020-full-report.pdf.
S. Timmerberg and M. Kaltschmitt, Appl. Energy, 2019, 237, 795–809 CrossRef .
L. Mastropasqua, I. Pecenati, A. Giostri and S. Campanari, Appl. Energy, 2020, 261, 114392 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beccali, S. Brunone, P. Finocchiaro and J. M. Galletto, Appl. Energy, 2013, 102, 534–544 CrossRef .
G. Glenk and S. Reichelstein, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Guerra, J. Eichman, J. Kurtz and B.-M. Hodge, Joule, 2020, 3, 2425–2443 CrossRef .
B. Lux and B. Pfluger, Appl. Energy, 2020, 269, 115011 CrossRef CAS .
O. Babacan, S. De Causmaecker and A. Gambhir, 
            et al., Assessing the feasibility of carbon dioxide mitigation options in terms of energy usage, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 720–728 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sternberg and A. Bardow, Power-to-What? –Environmental assessment of energy storage systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 389–400 RSC .
J. Yan, Y. Yang and P. Elia Campana, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 709–717 CrossRef CAS .
Notice of the National Development and Reform Commission on reducing general industrial and commercial electricity price, National Development and Reform Commission, 2019, https://www.ndrc.gov.cn/xxgk/zcfb/tz/201905/t20190515_962447.html.
PVWatts Calculator, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2018, https://pvwatts.nrel.gov/.
National Bureau of Statistics of China. China Energy Statistical Yearbook 2018, China Statistics Press, 2019, https://www.chinayearbooks.com/tags/china-energy-statistical-yearbook.
Opportunities for Australia from hydrogen exports, ACIL Allen Consulting for ARENA, 2018, https://apo.org.au/organisation/187246.
China Electric Power Industry Annual Development Report 2020, China Electricity Council, 2020, https://www.cec.org.cn/detail/index.html?. 1-284214.
Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the People's Republic of China, National Development and Reform Commission & National Energy Administration Work Plan of Full Implementing Ultra-Low Emission Policy and Energy Saving Transformation for Coal-Fired Power Plants, Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the People's Republic of China, 2015.
IEA G20 Hydrogen report: Assumptions, International Energy Agency, 2019, https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/a02a0c80-77b2-462e-a9d5-1099e0e572ce/IEA-The-Future-of-Hydrogen-Assumptions-Annex.pdf.
Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction: Scaling up Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5 °C Climate Goal, International Renewable Energy Agency, 2020, https://www.irena.org/publications/2020/Dec/Green-hydrogen-cost-reduction.
China Energy & Electricity Outlook 2019, State Grid Energy Research Institution, 2019, http://www.sgeri.sgcc.com.cn/html/files/2019-02/19/20190219111915944695018.pdf.
Renewable Energy Statistics 2020, International renewable energy agency, https://www.irena.org/publications/2020/Jul/Renewable-energy-statistics-2020.
Grid-connected operation of renewable energy in 2019, National Energy Administration, 2020, http://www.nea.gov.cn/2020-03/06/c_138850234.htm.
Solar PV, International Energy Agency, 2020, https://www.iea.org/reports/solar-pv.
Our province implements a precise electricity price policy to support the development of characteristic industries, The People's Government of Sichuan Province, 2019, http://www.sc.gov.cn/10462/10464/10797/2019/8/5/364511d0110d45179edd95d103eb4591.shtml.
Notice on the public solicitation of opinions on the “Opinions on Supporting the Development of the Hydrogen Energy Industry”, Jining City Industry and Information Technology Bureau, 2019, http://www.jining.gov.cn/art/2019/10/18/art_33400_2203009.html.
Blue Book of Infrastructure Development of China's Hydrogen Energy Industry, China National Institute of Standardization, National Hydrogen Energy Standardization Technical Committee, 2018, https://item.jd.com/69646953883.html.
Strengthening Actions against Climate Change-China's Nationally Determined Contributions, The State Council Information Office of the People's Republic of China, 2015, http://www.scio.gov.cn/xwfbh/xwbfbh/wqfbh/2015/20151119/xgbd33811/Document/1455864/1455864.htm.
Green and low-carbon road, IPCC, 2013, https://wenku.baidu.com/view/8e0a1273168884868762d61b.html (in Chinese).
The sixth increase in the year! Jiangsu 92 gasoline rose to 6.23 ¥/L, Modern Express, 2021, https://www.163.com/dy/article/G8MOH9B5053469KC.html (in Chinese).
Hydrogen economy outlook, BloombergNEF, 2020, https://about.bnef.com/new-energy-outlook/.
The latest news of Yunnan refined oil price adjustment in 2021, Kunming Local Treasure, 2021, http://km.bendibao.com/news/2020721/53307.shtm.
Hydrogen scaling up – A sustainable pathway for the global energy transition, Hydrogen Council, 2017, https://hydrogencouncil.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Hydrogen-scaling-up-Hydrogen-Council.pdf.
Path to hydrogen competitiveness – A cost perspective, Hydrogen Council, 2020, https://hydrogencouncil.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Path-to-Hydrogen-Competitiveness_Full-Study-1.pdf.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01840j‡ Lead contact.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
The spreading concerns on global warming triggered the exploitation of renewables for low-carbon energy systems. As a complement of electricity, electrolytic hydrogen can play a vital role in energy storage and terminal utilization. In terms of the abundant distinctions in the natural endowment of renewables, the level and type of electricity prices, the share of renewable integrations, as well as the demand potential for hydrogen-related fields in China, this article accomplishes a comprehensive differentiation analysis through an optimization-based methodology, thus further allowing us to investigate the electrolytic hydrogen's cost and low-carbon competitiveness in China. Specifically, the following questions are answered via the case studies on electrolytic hydrogen development across China: (1) Is the PV and grid-based hydrogen cleaner than the coal-based hydrogen at present? (2) What is the critical parameter that determines the PV and grid-based hydrogen production cost? (3) How the various subsidy policies impact the cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen, and which subsidy policy is the most suitable for a distinctive region? (4) How to leverage the hydrogen demands to attain CO2 reduction in energy systems? (5) When can electrolytic hydrogen feature the dual advantages of economy and low-carbon compared to coal-based hydrogen? The insights provided can assist the policy-makers in evaluating the development pathway of electrolytic hydrogen in different provinces, and reveal the superiorities of electrolytic hydrogen in low-carbon energy systems.


 	Fig. 1  Structure of a photovoltaic and grid-based hydrogen system.	 
	(1a)
Cinv = cP2HinvCP2H + cPVinvCPV	(1b)
Co&m = cP2Ho&mCP2H + cPVo&mCPV	(1c)
	(1d)
	(1e)
0 ≤ CPV	(1f)
0 ≤ CP2H	(1g)
0 ≤ Pgridt ≤ Pgridmax, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}	(1h)
0 ≤ PPVt ≤ ptCPV, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}	(1i)
0 ≤ PP2Ht ≤ CP2H, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}	(1j)
PPVt + Pgridt = PP2Ht, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}	(1k)
	(1l)
	(2)
	(3a)
	(3b)
	(4a)
0 ≤ CCG	(4b)
0 ≤ PCGt ≤ CCG, ∀t ∈ {1,2,…,8760}	(4c)
	(4d)

 	Fig. 2  Sensitivity of levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) under different factors. The parameters in the benchmark scenario are: electricity price 0.56 ¥ per kW h, investment cost of photovoltaic (PV) 5477.4 ¥ per kW,35 investment cost of power to hydrogen (P2H) 11665 ¥ per kW,21 P2H efficiency 61.3%,21 discount rate 3.85%. The orange and blue bars represent the increase and decrease of LCOH2, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) and investment capacities of photovoltaic (PV) and power to hydrogen (P2H) under two different price scenarios. (a) Province-level LCOH2 under the single electricity price scenario. Darker color indicates higher LCOH2. Provinces marked with black blocks have LCOH2 ≥45 ¥ per kg, those marked with black circles have LCOH2 ≤36 ¥ per kg. (b) Province-level LCOH2 under the time-of-use price scenario. Provinces marked with blue blocks have LCOH2 falls of ≥3 ¥ per kg. (c) Investment capacities of PV (blue bar) and P2H (orange bar) under two price scenarios.	 

 	Fig. 4  Annual carbon dioxide reductions (ACDR) of electrolytic hydrogen and share of renewable power generation under two different price scenarios. (a) ACDR of electrolytic hydrogen under the single electricity price scenario. (b) ACDR of electrolytic hydrogen under the time-of-use price scenario. For areas in green, darker color indicates better CO2 reductions of electrolytic hydrogen. For areas in grey, darker color indicates higher CO2 emissions of electrolytic hydrogen. (c) Share of renewable power generation under two different price scenarios. The blue and orange dotted lines supposedly represent the average share of renewable power generation under two different price scenarios, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of subsidy effects on levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) and annual carbon dioxide reductions (ACDR). (a) Variation of LCOH2 under three subsidies. The light green bar represents LCOH2 without subsidies under the time-of-use price scenario. (b) Variation of ACDR under three subsidies. The pink bar represents the ACDR without subsidies under the time-of-use price scenario. (c) Relationships between the share of renewable power generation in the power grid and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen in 31 provinces. Provinces falling into the gray area have higher CO2 emissions from electrolytic hydrogen compared with coal-based hydrogen. Provinces falling into the light green, green, and dark green areas have 0–45%, 45–65%, and 65–100% ACDRs of electrolytic hydrogen in comparison with coal-based hydrogen, respectively. The magenta points indicate that if all the electricity in the provincial power grid comes from fossil energy power generation units, the annual purchased electricity of the photovoltaic and grid-based hydrogen system (PGHS) equal to 8.8, 4.0, and 3.1 MW h can achieve 100%, 65%, and 35% CO2 emissions as coal-based hydrogen, respectively. The orange points indicate that if the shares of renewable power generation in the power grid reach 0.56, 0.80, and 0.84, all the electricity purchased from the grid in producing hydrogen can also achieve 100%, 65%, and 35% CO2 emissions as coal-based hydrogen, respectively.	 
	(5)
Hspo = ρsωsAs, ∀s ∈ {AP, ISP}	(6a)
	(6b)
	(6c)
	(6d)
	(6e)
	(6f)


Jiangsu	Gasoline	Subcompact passenger cars	1626.57	Subcompact-FC	10	0.131
Midsize passenger cars	4.25	Midsize-FC	25	0.149
Diesel	Large passenger cars, subcompact and midsize trucks	81.38	Medium duty class 3-FC	25	0.152
Heavy trucks	46.34	Heavy duty class 8-FC	35	0.169


Yunnan	Gasoline	Subcompact passenger cars	569.61	Subcompact-FC	10	0.131
Midsize passenger cars	2.12	Midsize-FC	25	0.149
Diesel	Large passenger cars, subcompact and midsize trucks	82.90	Medium duty class 3-FC	25	0.152
Heavy trucks	14.59	Heavy duty class 8-FC	35	0.169

 	Fig. 6  Cost and CO2 reduction of electrolytic hydrogen in Jiangsu and Yunnan. (a) LCOH2 under different subsidies in Jiangsu. (b) LCOH2 under different subsidies in Yunnan. The light yellow, light cyan, and light gray areas represent the up price ranges for the applications of electrolytic hydrogen generation to gasoline, diesel, and coal substitutions, respectively. (c) Hydrogen demand potentials and corresponding CO2 reductions in Jiangsu. (d) Hydrogen demand potentials and corresponding CO2 reductions in Yunnan. Fig. 6c and d further show the relationship between the CO2 reductions and LCOH2. The center of each bubble represents LCOH2, and the radius represents the CO2 reductions when using electrolytic hydrogen to substitute gasoline, diesel, or coal.	 

 	Fig. 7  Pathways to cost and low-carbon competitiveness of electrolytic hydrogen. (a) Levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH2) under different years. The light grey intervals indicate the coal-based hydrogen cost via coal gasification with and without CCUS, and the upper and lower boundaries of them adopt high and low CO2 prices, respectively. (b) Annual carbon dioxide emissions (ACDE) under different years.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee01840j
‡ Lead contact.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
