Increased charge transfer state separation via reduced mixed phase interface in polymer solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA12336E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA12336E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4536-4548Increased charge transfer state separation via reduced mixed phase interface in polymer solar cells†

        
          
            Thomas 
            Ferron
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Matthew 
            Waldrip
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Pope
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Brian A. 
            Collins
          
        
      *
      Department of Physics and Astronomy, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA. E-mail: brian.collins@wsu.edu
Received 
      21st December 2018
    , Accepted 28th January 2019First published on 28th January 2019AbstractInvestigations into bulk heterojunction organic solar cells have demonstrated that molecular mixing within domains and at interfaces significantly impacts device performance. However, these studies often use broad performance metrics that blur fundamental structure–function mechanisms – in particular the role of the mixed phase in charge generation versus charge extraction. Here, we present a new analysis based on time-delayed collection field that separately quantifies each fundamental step in the charge generation process. Additionally, we present a novel resonant X-ray scattering analysis to quantify the state of the three-phase nanostructure (phase volumes and their compositions) as it exists in the devices. We find that in a model semicrystalline system, decreasing the mixed phase interface between pure donor and pure acceptor domains has little effect on the efficiency of charge transfer (CT) state formation but instead dramatically increases the efficiency of CT state separation. While charge extraction efficiencies are affected as well, this has only a minor impact on device performance. With both structure and properties quantitatively resolved for the first time on the exact same devices, we determine a simultaneous >99% (anti)correlation between (mixed)pure phase volume and charge separation efficiency, with values fitting well to an exponential saturation model. This result plus our ability to eliminate other possible contributing factors provides strong evidence of a causal relationship that reducing interfacial mixed phases to establish a steep energy gradient between pure phases aids in charge generation and extraction in organic solar cells.
Introduction
Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have continued to be an important technology on the frontier of energy research. Solar cells fabricated from polymer or small molecule components bring with them considerable advantages over their inorganic counterparts including the potential for solution printing,1,2 chemical structures that enable fine tuned properties,3 lead-free and earth-abundant elements, and compatibility for wearable, flexible,4 and semitransparent technologies.5 Recent work has seen single junction power conversion efficiencies surpass 14%6,7 and tandem cells have reached 17.3%.8 Theoretical models forecast practical efficiencies beyond 20%,9,10 rivaling common inorganic/hybrid materials. To realize high performance in organic systems, however, massive trial-and-error optimization studies are required over multiple processing parameters for a particular material system, thus slowing progress. Additionally, efforts to design new molecules often lack direction in terms of what moieties will result in what nanostructures. Swiftly approaching efficiency goals will require a more deterministic and quantitative understanding of fundamental structure–function relationships behind device performance.
The highest efficiency devices are formed from the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) where electron donor and acceptor molecules are cast from a single solvent and phase separated to form an interpenetrating network of domains.11–13 Morphology investigations have determined that BHJs typically form up to three phases due to a finite donor–acceptor miscibility. Amorphous molecular systems typically form two phases via liquid–liquid phase separation and have been characterized extensively in the past,14,15 while semicrystalline polymer systems will form three phases: a pure crystalline donor phase, a mixed amorphous phase, and a pure aggregate acceptor phase.15–18 While pure phases are seen as critical for efficient charge transport,19–21 the role of the mixed phase is less well understood. Some studies have correlated the presence of a mixed phase with increased photocurrents, suggesting molecular mixing promotes interfacial charge-transfer (CT) states and eventually charge generation.22–25 Other reports tie increased domain purity to better device fill-factors, suggesting that mixed phases increase charge recombination losses.15,26 Unfortunately, these metrics (photocurrent and fill factors) depend on many underlying processes, and a more fundamental breakdown of charge generation and recombination dynamics is needed to elucidate the effects of the mixed phase.
Recently, McNeill and coworkers revealed longer charge lifetimes in devices with a higher purity mixed phase and argued that charge extraction must be the main effect on device performance.27 However, their methods were not able determine whether charge generation or extraction dynamics was the primary influence on device performance. Gorenflot and coworkers have recently made progress on this front via transient absorption spectroscopy global analysis, although the high excitation fluences used and lack of electrical connections in their samples could impact the measured populations and dynamics.28 The development of time-delayed collection field (TDCF) by the Neher group, on the other hand, has enabled separate measurement of the charge generation and recombination rates within working devices and at relevant excitation fluences.29–31 Thus, TDCF could be used to comprehensively quantify device dynamics directly tied to performance in organic solar cells.
Even if such an analysis could be perfected, much uncertainty still lies in quantifying the mixed phase. Previous studies used energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM) to directly image the presence of the mixed phase and show that it primarily exists at the interface between the two pure phases in blends of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester PCBM.16,17,32 Cyclic voltammetry measurements, have revealed cascading energy levels between pure, aggregated phases,33 indicating that the energy gradient across the interface is highly dependent on the size of the mixed phase. Thus a measurement of phase volumes is useful in probing interfacial width in this system.
Studies have used X-ray or neutron scattering techniques to determine statistical domain purities. In one study, X-ray diffraction intensities were used to quantify phase volumes and compositions.34 However, in this case diffraction from pure films of the donor molecule were assumed to be 100% crystalline, which may not be accurate, especially for polymers. Neutron scattering has been used to measure mixed phase compositions through measured contrast modulation in the polymer phase.35 Unfortunately, neutrons cannot distinguish between pure and amorphous polymer phases making phase volume measurements challenging. Most studies that report domain purity quantify total scattering intensity (TSI) of resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS),27,36–39 but domain purity is convoluted with the number of phases and the respective phase volumes.14,22,27,40 Because of this, it is unclear in these studies which parameter is actually changing and, therefore, affecting device performance. These studies, furthermore, only assume two phases, which is inappropriate for high-performing semicrystalline polymer systems.37,41,42 Thus, it would be highly beneficial if a method were developed that could separate and quantify nanophase volumes and compositions in a three-phase system.
In this study we report both a method to separately quantify the phase volumes and compositions within a three-phase, semicrystalline organic blend as well as measure the quantum efficiency of each of the fundamental excited state transitions in the charge generation process of an organic solar cell. Improving on previous scattering models,43,44 we combine an analysis of RSoXS and X-ray diffraction to quantify the state of the three phase BHJ morphology – in particular the mixed phase. We additionally fully characterize device dynamics and their impact on the device performance by combining optical spectroscopies and TDCF. These analyses are applied to a model semicrystalline polymer:fullerene blend P3HT:PCBM where the phase volume fractions are varied via the fullerene concentration. By conducting structure, dynamics, and performance measurements on the exact same devices, we reveal definitive correlations of CT state separation and free charge recombination dynamics with the pure and mixed phase volumes and critically which is most important for device performance. We find that a reduction in the mixed phase volume across the donor/acceptor interface dramatically improves the charge separation efficiency and is the main driver of device efficiency. While charge extraction efficiency improves as well, this is not enough to significantly suppress charge recombination losses. These results further support the growing theory that a steep energy gradient across the interface between pure domains assist in splitting CT states and improve device performance.33,45–47
Results & discussion
Photovoltaic performance
Overall device performance is summarized in Fig. 1 and reveal all PCBM concentrations form a photovoltaic device, even those containing only 5 wt% PCBM. Critical parameters are extracted and presented Fig. 1b and c as a function of increasing PCBM wt%. The most prominent change in device performance comes from the short circuit current increasing from 0.13 to 10.1 mA cm−2 with most of the improvement occurring between 20–40 wt% PCBM. Voc sees its largest change earlier (between 5–10 wt% PCBM), followed by a modest growth to a maximum of 0.64 V. FF sees its biggest increase between 30–40 wt% PCBM before plateauing around 52% for the highest performing devices. The optimum concentration of PCBM is in agreement with previous studies.48,49
 Fig. 1  (a) J–V curves for all fabricated devices. Log scaling is used to more readily allow visual inspection of low performing devices. (b) Short circuit current (JSC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) as a function of PCBM wt%. (c) Fill factor (FF) and open circuit voltage (Voc) as a function of PCBM wt%. Tabulated list in the ESI.† 
To better understand driving forces behind the device performance trends we turn to quantify the charge generation process. This involves four fundamental steps with an associated efficiency η: photon absorption into the device active layer forming a Frenkel exciton ηabs, exciton diffusion to a donor/acceptor interface to create a CT state ηCT, potentially voltage-dependent CT state separation into free charges ηsep(V), and lastly voltage-dependent charge extraction at the electrodes ηext(V). Corresponding losses in the last two steps are termed geminate and bimolecular recombination, respectively. In our work, these efficiencies are defined such that they multiply together with the incident irradiance to determine the voltage-dependent photocurrent of the device under 1 sun illumination.
Photo-absorption and CT state formation
First, we calculate ηabsvia transmission UV-Vis absorption measurements shown in Fig. 2a. Spectrally, all films show P3HT with distinct 0-0 and 0-1 optical transitions indicating good polymer aggregation.50 As expected, increasing the total wt% of PCBM both decreases P3HT peak intensity and correspondingly increases the contribution of PCBM below 400 nm. We use the transfer matrix method to calculate the efficiency of photon absorption within the full device (Fig. S2†).51 Although our measurements reveal an overall decrease in optical density upon increasing PCBM wt% we find, due to the optically thick films used, the absorption efficiency remains fairly constant across all devices. Only slight variations are apparent in the photo-absorption of the active layer at wavelengths <400 nm while the rest of the spectra remains above 80%.
 Fig. 2  (a) UV-Vis absorption for all devices. Legend colors additionally apply to (b) and (c). (b) Thickness normalized photoluminescence spectra of devices with pure films of P3HT and PCBM for reference. (c) Measured photocurrent and voltage dependent generation current Jgen(V) for all devices. Excitation wavelength was 550 nm with a fluence of 0.27 μV cm−2. (d) Bi-molecular recombination rate as a function of PCBM wt% (uncertainties from fits to transients). Fits shown in the ESI.† 
We next use photoluminescence quenching (PLQ) as a measure of radiative recombination of excitons who fail to diffuse to a donor/acceptor interface,22,52,53 thus revealing ηCT. Thickness normalized PL spectra are given in Fig. 2b along with reference spectra for pure P3HT and PCBM. Each device is found to exhibit high levels of quenching with qualitatively similar vibronic structure. A noticeable shoulder centered around 910 nm develops with increasing PCBM wt% that we attribute to PL from PCBM aggregates as seen in the pure reference sample. While fullerene PL is historically ignored as a factor in quenching efficiency54 we find that it contributes a measurable signal within our devices and is a sign of a PCBM pure aggregate phase that exists in the blend film that is at least on the length scale of the exciton diffusion length. PLQ is calculated by comparing the integrated blend signal to that of the pure spectra (see ESI† for details) and is found to be approximately 90–92% with only one sample (5 wt%) at 84% quenched. Thus, each sample has a similar chance for excitons to reach an interface with PCBM distributing the active layer even at low concentrations. Combining this information with our absorption efficiency we can say that in all devices, 70–77% of incident photons convert into CT states. Looking back at the dramatic increase in device performance, we can conclude that neither photon harvesting nor the number of CT states formed are responsible for the performance trends in these devices. Charge loss must then come from mechanisms following the formation of CT states in the form of either geminate or biomolecular recombination.
Charge separation and extraction
Measurement of the last two steps in the charge generation process (charge separation and extraction) critically depend on TDCF experiments. TDCF is an optical pump, electronic probe experiment. First, a nanosecond laser pulse excites charges within a device while it is held at an operating bias (Vpre). After a delay (td), free charges are swept out of the device via an electronic extraction pulse, which quickly switches the device to a collection bias (Vcoll = −5 V). The lifetime of the CT state (∼1 ns) and the lifetime of free charges (∼2 μs, Fig. S6†) provide a window of time that the electronic probe pulse has to sweep out the generated charges before bimolecular recombination takes place. Thus, by setting td = 10 ns, we can directly measure the generation current (Fig. S4†). Conversely, by increasing td we can probe the lifetime of free charges and measure losses due to bimolecular recombination effects.

Fig. 2c gives the photocurrent of each device plotted along with the generation current density (Jgen) as a function of operating bias (Vpre), which allows us to investigate how the internal electric field affects the rate of charge generation. In all devices investigated charge separation is independent of applied electric field. This result is consistent with previous P3HT:PCBM TDCF measurements29,30 where here, we find that even devices with as low as 5 wt% PCBM exhibit charge separation that is independent of field. Although the generation current is independent of field, it increases dramatically as a function of PCBM concentration. Since the total number of generated CT states is nearly identical in all devices, this result indicates that an increased efficiency of CT-state separation is one mechanism responsible for the higher short circuit current.
Charge generation independent of applied electric field implies a considerable component of device fill factor is due to bimolecular recombination. We can investigate the rate at which this occurs by varying td out to 10 μs, while holding a constant Vpre across the device equal to its max power point. This rate is quantified through fitting the extracted charge density n over time to a second order rate equation  using an iterative method developed by the Neher group.30γ is the bimolecular recombination coefficient. Data along with fits are given in the Fig. S5† with γ presented in Fig. 2d. We find that over the series investigated, γ decreases by more than an order of magnitude (∼16×). Although TDCF may overestimate the magnitude of γ,55 the overall trend will still be accurate. Additionally, the coefficient is not enough by itself to determine the impact of bimolecular recombination on device performance. It must be combined with the overall charge density (n) present in the devices and the average extraction time for charges (dependent on active layer thickness and charge mobility) in order to calculate total charge recombination for each device.
Quantum efficiencies of the charge generation process
From our optoelectronic measurements, we can now calculate the quantum efficiency of each step in the charge generation process. Our absorbance and PLQ measurements determine the first two steps with efficiencies ηabs and ηCT as described above with their trends displayed in Fig. 3a as a function of PCBM concentration. As discussed earlier both efficiencies are independent of blend ratio and stay above 80% and 90% respectively, ensuring that the total population of CT states available for charge separation is approximately the same for each device in our series.
 Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency of each charge generation process as a function of PCBM wt%. (b) Composite figure of charge density at each step in the process. From top to bottom, each colored region represents excited state populations relative to Jmax: photons not absorbed by the active layer (black), exciton recombination (maroon), geminate recombination (red), bimolecular recombination (orange), and charge extracted (yellow). 
To calculate the efficiency of separating the CT-states into free charges (ηsep), we first calculate the maximum current density available under AM1.5G solar illumination (Jmax), which assumes a 100% quantum efficient conversion of all available photons within a chosen wavelength range into extracted charge. For our calculations (Fig. S7†), we consider light up to 650 nm as determined by the bandgap of P3HT. We next use Jmax and the prior efficiencies to calculate the density of generated CT states JCT = ηabs × ηCT × Jmax. The efficiency of charge separation can be calculated through the ratio of the generation current to the CT state density: ηsep = Jgen/JCT. Fig. 3a reveals that increasing PCBM concentration from 5 wt% to 50 wt% dramatically increases the charge separation efficiency from 5% to 80%.
Lastly, we can calculate the efficiency of charge extraction by comparing the photocurrent under solar illumination to the generation current: ηext(V) = Jph(V)/Jgen.31,56,57 This is shown for each device as a function of cell voltage in Fig. 2c. The difference between these curves represents charge lost due to bimolecular recombination following charge separation.31,58 This efficiency is plotted in Fig. 3a for max power point conditions, where much like the separation efficiency, increasing PCBM wt% increases ηext, in this case from 10% to 70%. Data at short circuit is given in Fig. S8† and while it keeps to the same trend we see a significant decrease in bimolecular recombination as expected. The ability to separate losses from geminate and bimolecular recombination at operational conditions (rather than at open circuit or short circuit) is uniquely enabled via TDCF.
While it may look like the extraction and separation efficiencies have a similar impact on photocurrent we note that at each successive step there is a different density of excited states. To reflect this, Fig. 3b gives a representation of the device current density at each step for maximum power point conditions, where values are represented as the percentage of Jmax. In this representation the geminate recombination (red region), dramatically decreases from 65% to 12.5% as PCBM is added to the blend, while bimolecular recombination (orange region) actually increases somewhat from 3.9% to 19.3%. Thus, it is clear that the trends in geminate recombination fully dominate device performance trends, and the main effect of increased PCBM concentrations on device performance is to increase CT-state separation (charge generation). It is striking that JSC, FF, and γ do not track bimolecular recombination losses in the completed device. In fact, they exhibit an opposite trend. Bimolecular recombination losses actually increasing with PCBM concentration is due to the dramatic increase in charge density from increased generation overwhelming the decrease in γ. This is in contrast to previous reports claiming increased photocurrents are due primarily to reduced bimolecular recombination.27,48,55 This critical distinction between charge generation and extraction is often blurred together in other photocurrent measurements and points to the power of our analysis method debuted here.
Device morphology
Having quantified the charge generation process, we next turn to quantify the device morphology with the goal of revealing the structural mechanisms behind the device behavior. RSoXS has been used extensively to reveal the nano-to-mesoscale domain structure within the active layer of an OPV19,59–61 because the signal originates overwhelmingly from molecular contrast rather than electron density contrast. Lorentz-corrected RSoXS profiles of the measured OPV devices shown in Fig. 4a are consistent with previous reports16,62,63 with a single feature present at q = 0.23 nm−1, corresponding to a characteristic length of l = 2π/q ≈ 26 nm. This length is independent to PCBM wt%, only varying over a range of l = 24 nm to 30 nm in a non-monotonic fashion. Due to the static nature of this feature we interpret its origin to be the width of the pure P3HT crystalline fibrils64 (form factor) rather than a distance between adjacent domains (structure factor), since swelling of PCBM domains between P3HT crystals would naturally increase such distances as seen in studies of other systems.14,27 The upturn in scattering at Q < 0.1 nm−1 for PCBM concentrations of 40 and 50 wt% was identified as surface roughness through spectral analysis (Fig. S9†). The profiles fit well to a rod form factor with a mean fibril radius of 9 nm (Fig. S10†), which is comparable to the exciton diffusion length for efficient exciton harvesting65,66 evidenced by excellent PLQ in all PCBM concentrations (Fig. 2b). We note that RSoXS primarily measured bulk average morphology and is insensitive to vertical segregation such as the wetting layers that are known to form within these devices.67,68 However, due to the relatively large thickness of our active layers, the device dynamics will primarily originate from the structures measured by RSoXS.
 Fig. 4  (a) Lorentz corrected RSoXS profiles taken at 283.5 eV for each device. Legend colors additionally apply to (b). (b) Normalized circular averaged GIWAXS profiles. Data shown normalized at q = 12.1 nm−1, but can also be normalized at several other q-values without significant changes. (c) P3HT (100) pole figure area (rDOC) and PCBM peak intensity as a function of PCBM wt%. Uncertainties from possible normalization conditions. Dashed line is a linear fit is the blend P3HT rDOC. 
Circularly averaged grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) profiles are displayed in Fig. 4b, which investigates the molecular packing and aggregation of both P3HT and PCBM. Peak identification for each is done through pure film scattering with all features in agreement with previous studies (Fig. S12†).69–72 Relative degree of crystallinity (rDOC) from the P3HT (100) reflection allows a quantitative representation of the relative volume fraction occupied by the P3HT crystal (Fig. S13†).53,73 Normalized rDOC is plotted in Fig. 4c where increasing PCBM concentration in blends tracks a linear decrease in P3HT diffraction. The asymptotic trend in the blend films (dashed line) does not coincide with the measured signal from a pure P3HT film but is instead significantly lower. This indicates a lower P3HT crystallinity in the blends, likely due to an attractive interaction with PCBM molecules that lowers the free energy of crystallization.
The inset in Fig. 4b focuses on the scattering feature from PCBM aggregates at q = 13.9(1) nm−1. Peak fits (Fig. S14 and S15†) show only the 5 wt% sample's peak position deviates to agree with the pure P3HT feature at q = 13.5 nm−1. The peak widths monotonically narrow with PCBM concentration, indicating increasing PCBM–PCBM correlation lengths. Additionally, Fig. 4c presents the PCBM peak intensity, which exhibits a linear increase with PCBM concentration. Similar work conducted on other material systems have used the fullerene scattering peak intensity to identify the onset of PCBM aggregation into pure phases via a “constant-kink” concentration dependence.74 Here, we do not see such a feature and can conclude that either a three-phase morphology exists throughout the device series, or the three-phase onset occurs at low PCBM wt% such that it is obscured by the diffuse amorphous P3HT scattering.
Quantifying the mixed phase
Of keen interest here is the volume and composition of the interfacial mixed phase versus the pure phases (i.e. the state of the 3-phase system). The RSoXS profiles in Fig. 4a reveal a gradual increase in scattering intensity with PCBM concentration, which is traditionally interpreted as an increase in domain purity in a two-phase system.15,26 However, domain volume fractions also affect the scattering intensity but are commonly assumed to remain constant.36–39 In a three-phase system, the situation is even more ambiguous with all phase volume fractions and their molecular compositions potentially changing. With the case of semicrystalline polymer–fullerene blends investigated here, the three phases are an amorphous mixed phase between a pure polymer crystal phase and a pure fullerene aggregate phase.15–17 This results in three independent parameters: volume fractions ϕ of two phases (the third adding to one) and the composition x of the mixed phase. Thus, there is likely a shift of both domain compositions and volume fractions. With three independent parameters determining the state of the system, we require three measurements.
A recent study measured the state of the system on a small-molecule OPV blend using GIWAXS measurements with the intensities fit to a two phase model (pure donor crystal and pure fullerene aggregate).34 The deviation of the fit from the blend ratio revealed the third mixed phase. Two assumptions in the analysis were, first, that scaling the diffraction of a blend film would result in that of a pure film and, second, that a pure film would be 100% crystalline. Our rDOC results in Fig. 4c show that the diffraction intensity of a blend film does not always asymptotically reach that of the pure film. Furthermore, most pure films are only semicrystalline, and some independent measurement of absolute crystallinity for the pure film is necessary for a quantitative analysis. Fortunately, work by Snyder et al. has measured the absolute crystallinity of our donor polymer utilizing differential scanning calorimetry focusing on the properties of high molecular weight P3HT similar to that used in this study.75 Correcting this measurement with differences in regioregularity76 and differences in the asymptotic diffraction intensity of blended P3HT with that of pure P3HT (line in Fig. 4c), we determined the absolute crystallinity of our blends to be fwt = 0.51. (The absolute crystallinity of the pure film was calculated as fwt = 0.58.) Here, fwt is the weight fraction of crystal to total P3HT, the remainder being amorphous polymer. This value of absolute crystallinity is consistent with the linear trend measured for all blend devices suggesting that all samples have ∼51 wt% P3HT crystallinity.
Despite quantifying the absolute crystallinity of the donor material in our devices (i.e. the volume fraction of the pure donor phase ϕp), this measurement alone is not enough to quantify the state of the three phase system. To do this, we combine this measurement with two others: the overall donor–acceptor blend ratio and the total scattering intensity (TSI) measured by RSoXS. The TSI is an integration of measured scattering intensity across all of reciprocal space and through Porod Invariant formalism can be expressed in the following equation:40,77 (1)where α is a term that is constant between all devices, |Δxij|2 is the difference in molecular composition by mass between domains i and j, and ϕi is the volume fraction of domain i. (See ESI† for details.) In our three-phase model, the two remaining independent parameters are the volume fraction and composition of the mixed phase: ϕm and xm, respectively.

Fig. 5a displays the measured TSI as a function of PCBM concentration along with the model fit. |χ|2 = 1.4 for this fit, indicating it describes the data well. Resulting fit parameters (volume fractions and mixed phase molecular composition) are plotted as a function of PCBM concentration in Fig. 5b. We find that at less than 8 wt% total PCBM in the blend, the film exhibits the scattering behavior of a two-phase morphology where additional fullerene is miscible within the amorphous mixed phase. Once the mixed phase reaches a composition of 14.4 ± 0.8 wt% PCBM, fullerene begins to aggregate into a third domain. This maximum composition is consistent with that of previous thermodynamic miscibility measurements of P3HT and PCBM78,79 and indicates the devices reached an equilibrium state during film formation. As PCBM is further added to the blend, both volumes of the P3HT crystal phase and the mixed phase shrink. The highest performing cells around 40 and 50 wt% PCBM have nearly balanced phase volume fractions. It is of note that a kink in the RSoXS TSI denotes a transition between two and three phases, but a kink is not seen in the PCBM GIWAXS scattering intensity, indicating that the backgrounds at the q-values investigated obscure the measurement. To the best of our knowledge this is the first time the three-phase morphology has been solved quantitatively. This critically required the enhanced sensitivity of RSoXS but could be conducted on any material system, including non-fullerene systems or even ternary systems with the use of our recently developed spectral analysis.44
 Fig. 5  (a) Total scattering intensity as a function of PCBM wt% along with model fit. A constant background has been removed from the data, which sets the TSI at 0 wt% PCBM to zero. Uncertainties from incident beam intensity. (b) Volume fraction extracted from model fit as a function of PCBM wt% and labels are the same as discussed in the main text. Mixed phase composition (dashed) gives the wt% of PCBM within the mixed phase with the remaining mass consisting of amorphous P3HT. 
The final result is that as PCBM is added to the blend, the aggregate phase volume increases while the mixed phase volume goes down. This is in good agreement with our PL spectroscopy measurements in Fig. 2b, showing increasing fullerene exciton recombination, which can only result from a pure fullerene phase of the size scale near and above the exciton diffusion length. Additionally, the fullerene scattering peak width in Fig. 4b monotonically decreases with increasing PCBM concentration, which is consistent with an increasing presence and organization of a pure fullerene phase. The peak position shifting to agree with that of pure P3HT at 5 wt% PCBM further strengthens our analysis that no pure PCBM phase exists at this concentration but is instead in a two-phase state.
Impact of mixed and pure phases
Having quantified both the charge generation process and the phase volumes, we can directly relate the two within our devices. Fig. 6a displays both the charge separation efficiency and extraction efficiency plotted against the mixed and pure PCBM phase volumes. Both efficiencies simultaneously anticorrelate with the mixed phase volume fraction and correlate with that of the pure PCBM phase. In particular, the separation efficiency fits well to a two-parameter exponential saturation model of the following form: ηsep = A(1 − e−ϕ/B)(2)
 Fig. 6  (a) Separation and extraction efficiency as functions of the mixed and pure PCBM volume fraction. Legend applies to all sub-graphs. Colored curves for ηsep are fits to eqn (2) while those for ηext are second order polynomials acting as guides to the eye. In lower panels, light colors are fits to efficiencies at max power point (MPP) rather than short circuit conditions (SC). (b) Schematic representation of the volume fraction distribution affecting the donor–acceptor interfacial width and therefore the charge separation efficiency. Yellow hole and blue electron at the top will separate while the pair at the bottom combines geminately due to lack of proximity to the pure fullerene aggregate phase. 
The fits reveal A = ηmaxsep = 96 ± 8% and B = 20 ± 4 vol%. The latter is the minimum volume fraction occupied by a pure PCBM phase required for efficient charge separation. Impressively, the graphs linearize when plotting ln(1 − ηsep/ηmax) versus the pure and mixed volume fractions to yield a better than 99% Pearson correlation (Fig. S16†). Such an unprecedented quantitative structure–property correlation is likely due to the fact that RSoXS morphology experiments were conducted directly on the device films themselves without using duplicate samples, thus eliminating sample-to-sample variations.
Since the mixed phase occurs predominantly at the interface between pure domains,16,17 this correlation indicates that a large mixed phase volume, and correspondingly a wide interface between pure phases, reduces CT state separation efficiency. Instead, close proximity of a CT state to a pure fullerene phase is necessary for efficient charge separation. We schematically propose this concept in Fig. 6b where the presence of a large mixed phase becomes a source of geminate recombination, while a relatively narrow mixed interface between pure phases enhances separation efficiency of local CT states. We postulate that the aggregation of donor and acceptor molecules in pure phases proximate to the interface is the governing mechanism behind the separation efficiencies we measure here. In fact, the large (>100 meV) increase in VOC from 5 to 10 wt% PCBM without an increase in charge density (ηsep) not only solidifies our assertion that the pure PCBM aggregate phase is established at this concentration, shifting energy levels, but also that it is present at and directly affects the donor–acceptor interface. The delayed improvement of JSC and FF may come from the need for the pure PCBM phase to fully intercalate between P3HT fibrils, which requires a higher phase volume for efficient percolation of charges to electrodes.80 This is in line with studies that correlate overall device performance with aggregation of either donor or acceptor.81–83 However, to our knowledge this is the first time such a correlation is made directly and quantitatively between charge separation efficiency and phase volume fractions. It is interesting to note that this is a different result than our recent study of small-molecule donor-based OPVs, where instead a large mixed phase correlated with increased charge generation and extraction.22 In that case, however, we found donor alignment and aggregation occurring even in mixed phases, and that a lack of polymer tie chains between small molecule crystals may, in fact, require mixed phases at compositions that allow for charge percolation – a requirement unique to small-molecule OPVs.
The strong correlation measured here further implies a causal relationship because other possible competing effects are accounted for in our analysis. For example, the efficiency of CT state generation (ηCT) does not track with the mixed phase volume fraction. The CT state density is, in fact, held constant in our study (∼75%), while the mixed phase volume is cut roughly in half to 30 from 55 vol%. This implies that the volume of the mixed phase is not important for CT state generation in this system. Another possibly contributing factor to the correlation (bimolecular recombination) is removed by our analysis as all charges are extracted at internal fields greater than 107 V m−1 and within 200 ns of generation. The extraction efficiency itself, while still moderately correlated with phase volume, shows a more scattered dependence compared to the separation efficiency, possibly due to charge mobility or film thickness effects. However, this moderate dependency supports previous studies that find increased molecular mixing correlated with lower FF.15,40 A final potentially competing influence is polymer crystallinity. However, our rDOC measurement clearly shows a decreasing level with PCBM concentration – opposite the trend in ηsep. Put together, our control for contributing effects strongly indicates that the mixed phase interface is the dominant causal factor in determining the separation efficiency in our series.
While we do not altogether rule out the utility of a mixed phase interface for efficient polymer-based devices, we propose that the interfacial width between pure domains must be limited to enable both high charge separation efficiencies and continuous percolation pathways within the pure phases for charge extraction. This would result both in a high energetic gradient across the interface33,45–47 as well as close proximity of delocalized charge states that exist in pure phases84–86 – two possible mechanisms for the enhanced efficiency. As P3HT is a model semicrystalline polymer, this relationship is expected to be applicable in other high-performing semicrystalline polymers such as FTAZ, PGeBTBT, or PffBT4T,37,41,42 and even apply to systems that include non-fullerene acceptors. In addition, this relationship should inform on the design of future polymeric systems. Donor–acceptor molecules designed with a high enthalpic cost of mixing (high interaction parameter) thus would be one target for high efficiency with such correlations recently noted.15,40 By combining these morphological insights with recent advances in energy-level tuning and increased charge mobility, power conversion efficiencies of 20% appear feasible.
Conclusion
We presented a characterization of the step-by-step quantum efficiencies of power generation in model OPV devices simultaneous to the quantification of phase volume fraction, molecular composition/crystallinity, and nanodomain size. Increasing the overall PCBM concentration in the device resulted in a transition between two and three phases, where the compositional saturation of the amorphous mixed phase resulted in the appearance and growth of a third pure PCBM aggregate phase. We found that photon absorption and CT state generation is largely invariant to phase evolution primarily due to the self-limiting domain size appearing in the semicrystalline polymer. A moderate correlation is found between charge extraction and the pure phase volume, in agreement with previous results. However, an unprecedented >99% correlation between CT state separation efficiency (charge generation) and phase volume fraction – along with our ability to eliminate other possible factors – is the strongest evidence to date of a causal relationship between the pure aggregate phase and charge generation. A narrow mixed phase interfacial width between pure domains allows for CT states to more efficiently separate into free charges due to the steeper energetic gradient as well as the proximity to delocalized states in the pure phases. These results point to an increasingly focused ideal morphology in organic solar cells, consisting of a limited mixed phase between pure donor/acceptor domains supporting charge separation and extraction. The methods here are poised to study high performing materials or device concepts such as non-fullerene acceptors or ternary systems to generalize the role of the mixed phase in OPVs.
Methods
Device preparation and performance
Pre-patterned ITO on glass substrates (145(10) nm, 20(2) Ω sq, 88% trans. @ 550 nm, NIST mask #550, Thin Film Devices) were first sonicated in sequential baths of detergent, water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol and then treated to 15 min of UV-ozone. Subsequently, substrates were coated with a PEDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AI 4083, Heraeus) hole transport layer. Devices were next transferred into a nitrogen glovebox (O2 & H2O ∼ 0.1 ppm) for the remainder of fabrication and device testing. Active layer solutions were made by co-dissolving P3HT (Mw = 50–70k, RR = 91–94%, <0.01% metals, 4002 EE Rieke Metals) and PCBM (Nano-C) in dichlorobenzene with blend ratios of 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 wt% PCBM. Total solid concentrations were varied from 30–45 g l−1 to make ≈300 nm thick films. Solutions were spun-cast (800 rpm for 10 s) and left to dry (>10 min) before being transferred to a vacuum chamber for electrode deposition (20 nm Ca at 0.4 Å s−1 then 150 nm Al at 1 Å s−1) via thermal evaporation (NexDep Angstrom Engineering), which resulted in four symmetric devices on each substrate with areas of 4 mm2. Devices were not thermally annealed. J–V characterization (Keithley 2450) was conducted under AAA 1-sun illumination (Oriel 300W Xenon lamp with AM1.5G filter) at 1000 W m−2 calibrated with a NIST-calibrated silicon photodiode (Thorlabs). Characteristics reported are averaged from four devices fabricated from a single thin film to ensure morphology is consistent across the substrate for subsequent X-ray measurements.
Absorption & photoluminescence spectroscopy
UV-Vis was conducted on device active layers before electrode deposition. Reference films of P3HT and PCBM were spuncast on PEDOT:PSS coated glass substrates following procedures for active layer fabrication. To simulate fullerene in a polymer matrix, PCBM reference films were cast in blends of polystyrene as done previously.87 All visible light spectroscopy was measured with an Ocean Optics QEPro spectrometer cooled to −25 °C. A cosine corrector (Thorlabs) was fiber coupled to the spectrometer for photoluminescence (PL) to compare reference film and device emission intensities. PL excitation was carried out at a wavelength of 550 nm (Ekspla NT232) with a 600 nm long-pass filter after the sample to block the laser excitation.
Time delayed collection field
TDCF was carried out on the same devices and probe station for J–V testing with procedures similar to previous reports.29,30 Excitation is accomplished with an ND-YAG pumped OPO (Ekspla NT232) with a 3 ns pulse width running at 100 Hz. To limit sample degradation and maximize throughput, laser light is fiber coupled onto the JV testing stage within the glovebox. Collection voltage was supplied through a custom amplification circuit synched with the laser pulse using a 250 MHz bandwidth function generator (Tektronix AFG 3251). Photocurrent transients are measured with a 12 bit, 1 GHz bandwidth oscilloscope (Teledyne LeCroy HDO 4104).
X-ray scattering
RSoXS was conducted at beamline 11.0.1.2 at the ALS.88 Active layers of the actual devices tested were released from the substrate by dissolving the PEDOT:PSS layer in deionized water with the floating active layers picked up on silicon nitride windows (Norcada). Procedures for the experiment have been published previously with enhanced q-range obtained by varying the sample-detector distances.89 For accurate relative scattering intensities between samples, it was necessary to calibrate incident beam intensity every other sample to counter beam drift.44 Samples for X-ray diffraction were prepared on Na:PSS coated silicon substrates with processing conditions identical to device fabrication. Experiments were carried out at beamline 7.3.3 at the Advanced Light Source (ALS)90 and all results were measured at grazing incidence with angle of 0.2° (above the critical angle for sample and substrate). All X-ray data reduction was done through the IGOR package NIKA by Jan Ilavsky91 with a custom skin used to process RSoXS.92
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge help in designing the TDCF setup from Jona Kurpiers and Dieter Neher. T. Ferron was financially supported by U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Early Career Research Award number DE-SC0017923. This research used resources of the Advanced Light Source, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
References
F. C. Krebs, Fabrication and Processing of Polymer Solar Cells: A Review of Printing and Coating Techniques, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93(4), 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel and F. C. Krebs, Roll-to-Roll Fabrication of Large Area Functional Organic Materials, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51(1), 16–34 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, D. Feng, Y. Wu, S. T. Tsai, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Highly Efficient Solar Cell Polymers Developed via Fine-Tuning of Structural and Electronic Properties, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(22), 7792–7799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi, H. Chong, M. Vosgueritchian, J. Mei and Z. Bao, Toward Mechanically Robust and Intrinsically Stretchable Organic Solar Cells: Evolution of Photovoltaic Properties with Tensile Strain, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 355–365 CrossRef CAS .
K. Forberich, F. Guo, C. Bronnbauer and C. J. Brabec, Efficiency Limits and Color of Semitransparent Organic Solar Cells for Application in Building-Integrated Photovoltaics, Energy Technol., 2015, 3(10), 1051–1058 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, H. Yan, B. Yang, D. Liu, W. Li, H. Ade and J. Hou, A Wide Band-Gap Polymer with a Deep HOMO Level Enables 14.2% Efficiency in Polymer Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7159–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Qin, J. Zhu and J. Hou, Over 14% Efficiency in Polymer Solar Cells Enabled by a Chlorinated Polymer Donor, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(20), 1–7 CrossRef .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding and R. Xia, 
            et al., Organic and Solution-Processed Tandem Solar Cells with 17.3% Efficiency, Science, 2018, 1094 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. J. Janssen and J. Nelson, Factors Limiting Device Efficiency in Organic Photovoltaics, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(13), 1847–1858 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baran, T. Kirchartz, S. Wheeler, S. Dimitrov, M. Abdelsamie, J. Gorman, R. S. Ashraf, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth and N. Gasparini, 
            et al., Reduced Voltage Losses Yield 10% Efficient Fullerene Free Organic Solar Cells with >1 V Open Circuit Voltages, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(12), 3783–3793 RSC .
Y. Huang, E. J. Kramer, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells: Morphology and Performance Relationships, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(14), 7006–7043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. M. Ade, Crystallinity, and Phase Development in P3HT/PCBM Solar Cells: Toward an Enlightened Understanding of Device Morphology and Stability, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2(24), 3135–3145 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, P3HT/PCBM Bulk Heterojunction Organic Photovoltaics: Correlating Efficiency and Morphology, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(2), 561–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Tumbleston, L. Yang, W. You and H. Ade, Morphology Linked to Miscibility in Highly Amorphous Semi-Conducting Polymer/Fullerene Blends, Polymer (U. K.), 2014, 55(19), 4884–4889 CAS .
L. Ye, H. Hu, M. Ghasemi, T. Wang, B. A. Collins, J. H. Kim, K. Jiang, J. H. Carpenter, H. Li and Z. Li, 
            et al., Quantitative Relations between Interaction Parameter, Miscibility and Function in Organic Solar Cells, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17(3), 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, D. R. Kozub, S. Vajjala Kesava, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and E. D. Gomez, Signatures of Multiphase Formation in the Active Layer of Organic Solar Cells from Resonant Soft X-Ray Scattering, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2(3), 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pfannmöller, H. Flügge, G. Benner, I. Wacker, C. Sommer, M. Hanselmann, S. Schmale, H. Schmidt, F. A. Hamprecht and T. Rabe, 
            et al., Visualizing a Homogeneous Blend in Bulk Heterojunction Polymer Solar Cells by Analytical Electron Microscopy, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(8), 3099–3107 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Vandewal, S. Himmelberger and A. Salleo, Structural Factors That Affect the Performance of Organic Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Macromolecules, 2013, 46(16), 6379–6387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, C. M. Proctor, G. C. Bazan, T. Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, Significance of Average Domain Purity and Mixed Domains on the Photovoltaic Performance of High-Efficiency Solution-Processed Small-Molecule BHJ Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(21), 1–11 Search PubMed .
S. Mukherjee, C. M. Proctor, J. R. Tumbleston, G. C. Bazan, T. Q. Nguyen and H. Ade, Importance of Domain Purity and Molecular Packing in Efficient Solution-Processed Small-Molecule Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(6), 1105–1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Treat, A. Varotto, C. J. Takacs, N. Batara, M. Al-Hashimi, M. J. Heeney, A. J. Heeger, F. Wudl, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Polymer-Fullerene Miscibility: A Metric for Screening New Materials for High-Performance Organic Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(38), 15869–15879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Alqahtani, M. Babics, J. Gorenflot, V. Savikhin, T. Ferron, A. H. Balawi, A. Paulke, Z. Kan, M. Pope and A. J. Clulow, 
            et al., Mixed Domains Enhance Charge Generation and Extraction in Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells with Small-Molecule Donors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1–16 Search PubMed .
E. Buchaca-Domingo, A. J. Ferguson, F. C. Jamieson, T. McCarthy-Ward, S. Shoaee, J. R. Tumbleston, O. G. Reid, L. Yu, M. B. Madec and M. Pfannmöller, 
            et al., Additive-Assisted Supramolecular Manipulation of Polymer:Fullerene Blend Phase Morphologies and Its Influence on Photophysical Processes, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1(2), 270–279 RSC .
F. Dou, E. Buchaca-Domingo, M. Sakowicz, E. Rezasoltani, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, X. Zhang, N. Stingelin and C. Silva, The Effect of Phase Morphology on the Nature of Long-Lived Charges in Semiconductor Polymer:Fullerene Systems, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(15), 3722–3729 RSC .
M. Scarongella, J. De Jonghe-Risse, E. Buchaca-Domingo, M. Causa, Z. Fei, M. Heeney, J. E. Moser, N. Stingelin and N. Banerji, A Close Look at Charge Generation in Polymer:Fullerene Blends with Microstructure Control, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(8), 2908–2918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, B. A. Collins, X. Jiao, J. Zhao, H. Yan and H. Ade, Miscibility-Function Relations in Organic Solar Cells: Significance of Optimal Miscibility in Relation to Percolation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1703058 CrossRef .
W. Huang, E. Gann, N. Chandrasekaran, L. Thomsen, S. K. K. Prasad, J. M. Hodgkiss, D. Kabra, Y. B. Cheng and C. R. McNeill, Isolating and Quantifying the Impact of Domain Purity on the Performance of Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(8), 1843–1853 RSC .
J. Gorenflot, A. Paulke, F. Piersimoni, J. Wolf, Z. Kan, F. Cruciani, A. El Labban, D. Neher, P. M. Beaujuge and F. Laquai, From Recombination Dynamics to Device Performance: Quantifying the Efficiency of Exciton Dissociation, Charge Separation, and Extraction in Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells with Fluorine-Substituted Polymer Donors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(4), 1–12 Search PubMed .
J. Kniepert, I. Lange, N. J. Van Der Kaap, L. J. A. Koster and D. Neher, A Conclusive View on Charge Generation, Recombination, and Extraction in as-Prepared and Annealed P3HT:PCBM Blends: Combined Experimental and Simulation Work, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(7), 1301401 CrossRef .
J. Kniepert, M. Schubert, J. Blakesley and D. Neher, Photogeneration and Recombination in P3HT:PCBM Solar Cells Probed by Time Delayed Collection Field Experiments, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 700–705 CrossRef CAS .
S. Albrecht, S. Janietz, W. Schindler, J. Frisch, J. Kurpiers, J. Kniepert, S. Inal, P. Pingel, K. Fostiropoulos and N. Koch, 
            et al., Fluorinated Copolymer PCPDTBT with Enhanced Open-Circuit Voltage and Reduced Recombination for Highly Efficient Polymer Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(36), 14932–14944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Kozub, K. Vakhshouri, L. M. Orme, C. Wang, A. Hexemer and E. D. Gomez, Polymer Crystallization of Partially Miscible Polythiophene/Fullerene Mixtures Controls Morphology, Macromolecules, 2011, 44(14), 5722–5726 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sweetnam, K. R. Graham, G. O. N. Ndjawa, T. Heumüller, J. A. Bartelt, T. M. Burke, W. Li, W. You, A. Amassian and M. D. McGehee, Characterization of the Polymer Energy Landscape in Polymer:Fullerene Bulk Heterojunctions with Pure and Mixed Phases, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(Cv), 14078–14088 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, V. Savikhin, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. A. Burgers, S. R. Marder, G. C. Bazan and M. F. Toney, Mixing Behavior in Small Molecule:Fullerene Organic Photovoltaics, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(7), 3062–3069 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer, R. Meier, L. Porcar, R. Cubitt and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Phase Separation and Molecular Intermixing in Polymer–Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Thin Films, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3(6), 683–688 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, Y. Wu, K. Chen, Y. Xia, G. Li, S. K. K. Prasad, J. Zhu, L. Huo and H. Bin, 
            et al., Mapping Polymer Donors toward High-Efficiency Fullerene Free Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(3), 1604155 CrossRef .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, Q. Zhang, S. Li, C. Wang, Z. Jiang, J. Hou, W. You and H. Ade, Surpassing 10% Efficiency Benchmark for Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells by Scalable Coating in Air from Single Nonhalogenated Solvent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(8), 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Roland, L. Yan, Q. Zhang, X. Jiao, A. Hunt, M. Ghasemi, H. Ade, W. You and D. Neher, Charge Generation and Mobility-Limited Performance of Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells with a Higher Adduct Fullerene, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(19), 10305–10316 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, Y. Li, H. Hu, P. C. Y. Chow, S. Chen, J. Zhao, Z. Li, J. H. Carpenter, J. Y. L. Lai and G. Yang, 
            et al., A Facile Method to Fine-Tune Polymer Aggregation Properties and Blend Morphology of Polymer Solar Cells Using Donor Polymers with Randomly Distributed Alkyl Chains, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(6), 1–6 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Mukherjee, J. H. Carpenter, O. Awartani, X. Jiao, J. Hou and H. Ade, High-Efficiency Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells: Critical Factors That Affect Complex Multi-Length Scale Morphology and Device Performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(7), 1–10 Search PubMed .
Z. Fei, J. S. Kym, J. Smith, E. B. Domingo, T. D. Anthopoulos, N. Stingelin, S. E. Watkins, J. S. Kim and M. Heeney, A Low Band Gap Co-Polymer of Dithienogermole and 2,1,3-Benzothiadiazole by Suzuki Polycondensation and its Application in Transistor and Photovoltaic Cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(40), 16257–16263 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Aggregation and Morphology Control Enables Multiple Cases of High-Efficiency Polymer Solar Cells, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5(9), 1–8 Search PubMed .
B. A. Collins, Z. Li, J. R. Tumbleston, E. Gann, C. R. Mcneill and H. Ade, Absolute Measurement of Domain Composition and Nanoscale Size Distribution Explains Performance in PTB7:PC71BM Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3(1), 65–74 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ferron, M. Pope and B. A. Collins, Spectral Analysis for Resonant Soft X-Ray Scattering Enables Measurement of Interfacial Width in 3D Organic Nanostructures, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119(16), 1–6 CrossRef .
C. Groves, Suppression of Geminate Charge Recombination in Organic Photovoltaic Devices with a Cascaded Energy Heterojunction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(6), 1546–1551 RSC .
T. M. Burke and M. D. McGehee, How High Local Charge Carrier Mobility and an Energy Cascade in a Three-Phase Bulk Heterojunction Enable >90% Quantum Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(12), 1923–1928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Mueller, M. Brendel, P. Ruckdeschel, J. Pflaum and M. Thelakkat, Diketopyrrolopyrroles with a Distinct Energy Level Cascade for Efficient Charge Carrier Generation in Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5(21), 1–10 Search PubMed .
C. Müller, T. A. M. Ferenczi, M. Campoy-Quiles, J. M. Frost, D. D. C. Bradley, P. Smith, N. Stingelin-Stutzmann and J. Nelson, Binary Organic Photovoltaic Blends: A Simple Rationale for Optimum Compositions, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(18), 3510–3515 CrossRef .
N. Li, F. MacHui, D. Waller, M. Koppe and C. J. Brabec, Determination of Phase Diagrams of Binary and Ternary Organic Semiconductor Blends for Organic Photovoltaic Devices, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95(12), 3465–3471 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Spano, Modeling Disorder in Polymer Aggregates: The Optical Spectroscopy of Regioregular Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) Thin Films, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122(23), 234701 CrossRef PubMed .
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, Accounting for Interference, Scattering, and Electrode Absorption to Make Accurate Internal Quantum Efficiency Measurements in Organic and Other Thin Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(30), 3293–3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Photoinduced Electron Transfer from a Conducting Polymer to Buckminsterfullerene, Science, 1992, 258(5087), 1474–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schubert, B. A. Collins, H. Mangold, I. A. Howard, W. Schindler, K. Vandewal, S. Roland, J. Behrends, F. Kraffert and R. Steyrleuthner, 
            et al., Correlated Donor/Acceptor Crystal Orientation Controls Photocurrent Generation in All-Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(26), 4068–4081 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Arndt, M. Gerhard, A. Quintilla, I. A. Howard, M. Koch and U. Lemmer, Time-Resolved Charge-Transfer State Emission in Organic Solar Cells: Temperature and Blend Composition Dependences of Interfacial Traps, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(24), 13516–13523 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Heiber, T. Okubo, S.-J. Ko, B. R. Luginbuhl, N. Ran, M. Wang, H. Wang, M. A. Uddin, H. Y. Woo and G. C. Bazan, 
            et al., Measuring the Competition between Bimolecular Charge Recombination and Charge Transport in Organic Solar Cells under Operating Conditions, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 3019–3032 RSC .
D. Credgington, F. C. Jamieson, B. Walker, T. Q. Nguyen and J. R. Durrant, Quantification of Geminate and Non-Geminate Recombination Losses within a Solution-Processed Small-Molecule Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cell, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(16), 2135–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. A. Dibb, F. C. Jamieson, A. Maurano, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Limits on the Fill Factor in Organic Photovoltaics: Distinguishing Nongeminate and Geminate Recombination Mechanisms, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(5), 803–808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Proctor, S. Albrecht, M. Kuik, D. Neher and T. Q. Nguyen, Overcoming Geminate Recombination and Enhancing Extraction in Solution-Processed Small Molecule Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(10), 1400230 CrossRef .
J. H. Carpenter, A. Hunt and H. Ade, Characterizing Morphology in Organic Systems with Resonant Soft X-Ray Scattering, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2015, 200, 2–14 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, Y. Li, W. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Choi, T. Kim, C. Wang, E. D. Gomez, H. Y. Woo and B. J. Kim, Correlation between Phase-Separated Domain Sizes of Active Layer and Photovoltaic Performances in All-Polymer Solar Cells, Macromolecules, 2016, 49(14), 5051–5058 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kurpiers, T. Ferron, S. Roland, M. Jakoby, T. Thiede, F. Jaiser, S. Albrecht, S. Janietz, B. A. Collins and I. A. Howard, 
            et al., Probing the Pathways of Free Charge Generation in Organic Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Nat. Commun, 2018, 1–11 CAS .
W. Yin and M. Dadmun, A New Model for the Morphology of P3HT/PCBM Organic Photovoltaics from Small-Angle Neutron Scattering: Rivers and Streams, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(6), 4756–4768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Liao, C.-S. Tsao, T.-H. Lin, C.-M. Chuang, C.-Y. Chen, U.-S. Jeng, C.-H. Su, Y.-F. Chen and W.-F. Su, Quantitative Nanoorganized Structural Evolution for a High Efficiency Bulk Heterojunction Polymer Solar Cell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(33), 13064–13073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter and I. M. Anderson, 3D Nanoscale Characterization of Thin-Film Organic Photovoltaic Device Structures via Spectroscopic Contrast in the TEM, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(41), 17501–17508 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Exciton Diffusion Measurements in Poly(3-Hexylthiophene), Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(18), 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, Accurate Measurement of the Exciton Diffusion Length in a Conjugated Polymer Using a Heterostructure with a Side-Chain Cross-Linked Fullerene Layer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109(24), 5266–5274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H. Y. Chiang, V. Körstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Solvent-Induced Morphology in Polymer-Based Systems for Organic Photovoltaics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21(17), 3382–3391 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. J. Pearson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. C. Dennison, H. Hamamatsu, M. W. A. Skoda, D. C. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Depletion of PCBM at the Cathode Interface in P3HT/PCBM Thin Films as Quantified via Neutron Reflectivity Measurements, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(22), 2444–2447 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Gomez, K. P. Barteau, H. Wang, M. F. Toney and Y. L. Loo, Correlating the Scattered Intensities of P3HT and PCBM to the Current Densities of Polymer Solar Cells, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(1), 436–438 RSC .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Interdiffusion of PCBM and P3HT Reveals Miscibility in a Photovoltaically Active Blend, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1(1), 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Effects of Thermal Annealing upon the Morphology of Polymer–Fullerene Blends, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20(20), 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Andersen, H. F. Dam, M. Hösel, M. Helgesen, J. E. Carlé, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, S. A. Gevorgyan, J. W. Andreasen, J. Adams and N. Li, 
            et al., Scalable, Ambient Atmosphere Roll-to-Roll Manufacture of Encapsulated Large Area, Flexible Organic Tandem Solar Cell Modules, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7(9), 2925–2933 RSC .
M. R. Hammond, R. J. Kline, A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter, D. S. Germack, H. W. Ro, C. L. Soles, D. A. Fischer, T. Xu and L. Yu, 
            et al., Molecular Order in High-Efficiency Polymer/Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(10), 8248–8257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Bartelt, Z. M. Beiley, E. T. Hoke, W. R. Mateker, J. D. Douglas, B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston, K. R. Graham, A. Amassian and H. Ade, 
            et al., The Importance of Fullerene Percolation in the Mixed Regions of Polymer–Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3(3), 364–374 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Snyder, R. C. Nieuwendaal, D. M. Delongchamp, C. K. Luscombe, P. Sista and S. D. Boyd, Quantifying Crystallinity in High Molar Mass Poly(3-Hexylthiophene), Macromolecules, 2014, 47(12), 3942–3950 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Snyder, J. S. Henry and D. M. Delongchamp, Effect of Regioregularity on the Semicrystalline Structure of Poly(3-Hexylthiophene), Macromolecules, 2011, 44(18), 7088–7091 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Small-Angle X-Ray Study of Particulate Reinforced Composites, Polymer (Guildford)., 1982, 23(13), 1907–1912 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Collins, E. Gann, L. Guignard, X. He, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Molecular Miscibility of Polymer–Fullerene Blends, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(21), 3160–3166 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, R. Hegde, J. Browning and M. D. Dadmun, The Miscibility and Depth Profile of PCBM in P3HT: Thermodynamic Information to Improve Organic Photovoltaics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(16), 5635–5641 RSC .
K. Vakhshouri, D. R. Kozub, C. Wang, A. Salleo and E. D. Gomez, Effect of Miscibility and Percolation on Electron Transport in Amorphous Poly(3-Hexylthiophene)/Phenyl-C61-Butyric Acid Methyl Ester Blends, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(2), 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Menke, A. Cheminal, P. Conaghan, N. A. Ran, N. C. Greehnam, G. C. Bazan, T. Q. Nguyen, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Order Enables Efficient Electron–Hole Separation at an Organic Heterojunction with a Small Energy Loss, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Jamieson, E. B. Domingo, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, N. Stingelin and J. R. Durrant, Fullerene Crystallisation as a Key Driver of Charge Separation in Polymer/Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3(2), 485–492 RSC .
D. Veldman, Ö. Ipek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. Van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, Compositional and Electric Field Dependence of the Dissociation of Charge Transfer Excitons in Alternating Polyfluorene Copolymer/Fullerene Blends, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(24), 7721–7735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, The Role of Driving Energy and Delocalized States for Charge Separation in Organic Semiconductors, Science, 2012, 335(6074), 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Feier, O. G. Reid, N. A. Pace, J. Park, J. J. Bergkamp, A. Sellinger, D. Gust and G. Rumbles, Local Intermolecular Order Controls Photoinduced Charge Separation at Donor/Acceptor Interfaces in Organic Semiconductors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(6), 1–9 Search PubMed .
F. Provencher, N. Bérubé, A. W. Parker, G. M. Greetham, M. Towrie, C. Hellmann, M. Côté, N. Stingelin, C. Silva and S. C. Hayes, Direct Observation of Ultrafast Long-Range Charge Separation at Polymer–Fullerene Heterojunctions, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4288 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Turner, P. Pingel, R. Steyrleuthner, E. J. W. Crossland, S. Ludwigs and D. Neher, Quantitative Analysis of Bulk Heterojunction Films Using Linear Absorption Spectroscopy and Solar Cell Performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21(24), 4640–4652 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gann, A. T. Young, B. A. Collins, H. Yan, J. Nasiatka, H. A. Padmore, H. Ade, A. Hexemer and C. Wang, Soft X-Ray Scattering Facility at the Advanced Light Source with Real-Time Data Processing and Analysis, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83(4), 045110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Collins, J. E. Cochran, H. Yan, E. Gann, C. Hub, R. Fink, C. Wang, T. Schuettfort, C. R. McNeill and M. L. Chabinyc, 
            et al., Polarized X-Ray Scattering Reveals Non-Crystalline Orientational Ordering in Organic Films, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11(6), 536–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hexemer, W. Bras, J. Glossinger, E. Schaible, E. Gann, R. Kirian, A. MacDowell, M. Church, B. Rude and H. Padmore, A SAXS/WAXS/GISAXS Beamline with Multilayer Monochromator, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2010, 247, 0–11 CrossRef .
J. Ilavsky, Nika: Software for Two-Dimensional Data Reduction, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2012, 45(2), 324–328 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Ferron and B. A. Collins, RSoXS Data Reduction,  2017, https://labs.wsu.edu/carbon/xray-analysis-tools/, accessed 1st January, 2018 Search PubMed.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details regarding JV device metrics, transfer matrix modeling, calculations for PLQ and generation current, delay dependent TDCF results and model fits, maximum current calculation, quantum efficiencies at short circuit current, off-resonant scattering with contrast functions, form-factor scattering models, device thickness measurements, pure sample GIWAXS, P3HT (100) pole figure analysis, multi-peak fitting for PCBM GIWAXS feature, TSI scattering model details, correlation analysis. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12336eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) J–V curves for all fabricated devices. Log scaling is used to more readily allow visual inspection of low performing devices. (b) Short circuit current (JSC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) as a function of PCBM wt%. (c) Fill factor (FF) and open circuit voltage (Voc) as a function of PCBM wt%. Tabulated list in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) UV-Vis absorption for all devices. Legend colors additionally apply to (b) and (c). (b) Thickness normalized photoluminescence spectra of devices with pure films of P3HT and PCBM for reference. (c) Measured photocurrent and voltage dependent generation current Jgen(V) for all devices. Excitation wavelength was 550 nm with a fluence of 0.27 μV cm−2. (d) Bi-molecular recombination rate as a function of PCBM wt% (uncertainties from fits to transients). Fits shown in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Efficiency of each charge generation process as a function of PCBM wt%. (b) Composite figure of charge density at each step in the process. From top to bottom, each colored region represents excited state populations relative to Jmax: photons not absorbed by the active layer (black), exciton recombination (maroon), geminate recombination (red), bimolecular recombination (orange), and charge extracted (yellow).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Lorentz corrected RSoXS profiles taken at 283.5 eV for each device. Legend colors additionally apply to (b). (b) Normalized circular averaged GIWAXS profiles. Data shown normalized at q = 12.1 nm−1, but can also be normalized at several other q-values without significant changes. (c) P3HT (100) pole figure area (rDOC) and PCBM peak intensity as a function of PCBM wt%. Uncertainties from possible normalization conditions. Dashed line is a linear fit is the blend P3HT rDOC.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Total scattering intensity as a function of PCBM wt% along with model fit. A constant background has been removed from the data, which sets the TSI at 0 wt% PCBM to zero. Uncertainties from incident beam intensity. (b) Volume fraction extracted from model fit as a function of PCBM wt% and labels are the same as discussed in the main text. Mixed phase composition (dashed) gives the wt% of PCBM within the mixed phase with the remaining mass consisting of amorphous P3HT.	 
ηsep = A(1 − e−ϕ/B)	(2)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Separation and extraction efficiency as functions of the mixed and pure PCBM volume fraction. Legend applies to all sub-graphs. Colored curves for ηsep are fits to eqn (2) while those for ηext are second order polynomials acting as guides to the eye. In lower panels, light colors are fits to efficiencies at max power point (MPP) rather than short circuit conditions (SC). (b) Schematic representation of the volume fraction distribution affecting the donor–acceptor interfacial width and therefore the charge separation efficiency. Yellow hole and blue electron at the top will separate while the pair at the bottom combines geminately due to lack of proximity to the pure fullerene aggregate phase.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Details regarding JV device metrics, transfer matrix modeling, calculations for PLQ and generation current, delay dependent TDCF results and model fits, maximum current calculation, quantum efficiencies at short circuit current, off-resonant scattering with contrast functions, form-factor scattering models, device thickness measurements, pure sample GIWAXS, P3HT (100) pole figure analysis, multi-peak fitting for PCBM GIWAXS feature, TSI scattering model details, correlation analysis. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta12336e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
