How to explore ambient electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reliably and insightfully  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00280D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00280D
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3166-3180How to explore ambient electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reliably and insightfully

        
          
            Cheng 
            Tang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shi-Zhang 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. E-mail: s.qiao@adelaide.edu.au
Received 
      12th April 2019
    First published on 20th May 2019AbstractThe efficient activation of dinitrogen for the production of ammonia plays a crucial role in our modern society, considering the significant impact of ammonia on food, chemicals, and energy. As an attractive alternative to the century-old Haber–Bosch process which is responsible for 1–2% of global energy consumption, utilization of half the hydrogen produced globally, and ∼1% of global energy-related CO2 emissions, the ambient electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction has attracted tremendous interest during the past few years. Some achievements have revealed the possibility of this process, but have also identified great challenges. The activity and selectivity of the nitrogen reduction reaction are fundamentally limited by competing hydrogen evolution and nitrogen scaling relations, while low production rates and ubiquitous contaminants plague experimental practices. Aiming toward higher accuracy and reproducibility of claimed results, and more meaningful, impactful, and insightful research, this tutorial review summarizes the present status and challenges in the study of ambient electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction, followed by a thorough discussion of various experimental parameters. We then recommend a series of protocols and best practices for experiments, and also highlight some potential directions for future research in this exciting and important field.
Cheng Tang
Cheng Tang received his BEng and PhD from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, in 2013 and 2018, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Qiang Zhang and Prof. Fei Wei. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher at The University of Adelaide working with Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao. His research focuses on nanomaterials and energy electrocatalysis, including 3D graphene, hierarchical nanomaterials, oxygen reduction/evolution, hydrogen evolution, nitrogen reduction, etc.
Shi-Zhang Qiao
Shi-Zhang Qiao is currently a Chair Professor and Australian Laureate Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide, Australia. Dr Qiao received his PhD in chemical engineering from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2000. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for electrocatalysis, photocatalysis and energy storage and conversion technologies. Dr Qiao is also a Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher (Chemistry, Materials Science). In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society) and the ARC, ARF and APD Fellowships.

Key learning points
• Rigorous and efficient experimental protocols to study electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction more reliably and meaningfully.
• Possible opportunities for studying catalysts, electrochemical cells, and characterization techniques to accelerate future research more efficiently and insightfully.
• The near-electrode interface is as important as the electrocatalyst when determining electrocatalytic activity and selectivity.
• The selectivity challenge of nitrogen reduction can only be solved by coupling highly favorable electrocatalysts with advanced electrochemical cell configurations.

1 Introduction
The production of ammonia (NH3) from dinitrogen (N2) is among the most attractive and important topics in the field of chemistry, spawning three Nobel Prizes in Chemistry (1918, 1931, 2007). The N2 molecule is highly stable due to the extremely strong triple bond (941 kJ mol−1) and large energy gap (10.82 eV) between its highest occupied molecular orbital and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital. Consequently, biological fixation into ammonia by nitrogenase was the only possible route for several billion years. It was not until the ingenious invention of the Haber–Bosch process in the early 20th century that the global nitrogen cycle was fundamentally altered.1 As a result, NH3 has become the second highest produced chemical in the world (∼170 Mt year−1), over 80% of which is used for fertilizers, while the rest for refrigerant or chemical feedstocks.2 The Haber–Bosch process has doubled the nitrogen fixation capacity of the natural process, revolutionized the production of food, and supported half of the world's population since 1908.1
However, this exothermic process (N2 + 3H2 ⇌ 2NH3, ΔfH° = −45.940 kJ mol−1, ΔfG° = −16.407 kJ mol−1) requires a high temperature (400–500 °C) for accelerated kinetics and high pressure (10–30 MPa) for favorably shifting the equilibrium.3 Generally, annual ammonia production is responsible for 1–2% of global energy consumption, utilization of half the global hydrogen production (∼30 Mt year−1), and ∼1% of global energy-related CO2 emissions (∼420 Mt year−1).2 Further, the substantial centralized infrastructures required for the Haber–Bosch process result in huge capital risks (over $1 billion per plant), large innovation barriers, and regional distribution imbalances (such as no large-scale facilities in East Africa).4 Therefore, innovative development in this century-old industry toward high-performance, cost-effective, and environmentally friendly nitrogen fixation is required, and presents fascinating challenges in both fundamental science and engineering.
Recently, nitrogen fixation at a low temperature and pressure has attracted intensive research interest and achieved considerable progress,4–7 not only for the present fertilizer industry, but also for advanced energy systems. Ammonia has a large hydrogen content (17.6 wt%), high energy density (4.32 kW h L−1 for liquid ammonia), and can exploit existing infrastructure (including liquefaction, storage, and transport).8 Thus, it would be an ideal energy carrier and storage intermediate for renewable energy sources, especially because it can be easily transported across the world. In addition to improvements of the modern Haber–Bosch strategy under moderate conditions, the employment of renewable electricity (from wind, solar, etc.) instead of fossil fuels is widely recognized as an attractive alternative.4 Given that steam reforming for hydrogen production is the main energy consuming (∼75%) and CO2 emitting sub-process (Fig. 1a), replacement of the steam reforming unit with electrocatalytic water splitting combined with a traditional Haber–Bosch reactor is the most direct and effective strategy for “green ammonia”.5 In fact, this idea has already been demonstrated at scale in America, Australia, Africa, United Kingdom, etc.5 Ultimately, the electrocatalytic synthesis of ammonia under ambient conditions directly from N2 and H2O (and even humidified air) and powered by renewable electricity should be an optimal route (Fig. 1b).5 This scenario based on the electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) can offer many advantages: (1) converting sustainable energy in remote areas to transportable chemicals; (2) eliminating fossil fuel consumption and CO2 emissions; (3) smaller plant infrastructure favorable for decentralized and on-site/-demand ammonia generation; (4) modular technology beneficial for imitating present electrochemical technologies and further innovation.4,6
 Fig. 1  Energy efficiency for different ammonia synthesis strategies. (a) Conventional Haber–Bosch strategy and (b) electrocatalytic strategy. Adapted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Motivated by these impressive advantages and the rapid development of sustainable electricity, the ambient electrocatalytic NRR has attracted dramatically growing efforts since 2016 (Fig. 2a), aimed at improved NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency. Until now, various nanomaterials have been reported as potential catalysts for NRR electrocatalysis (Fig. 2b), including noble metals (Au, Ru, Pd, Pt, Ag, Ir, Rh, etc.), transition metals and oxides/carbides/nitrides/sulfides (Fe, Ti, Mo, Nb, V, Cr, Co, etc.), metal-free materials (B, C, N, S, P, etc.), single-atom catalysts, and their hybrids, coupled with some effective strategies to improve the catalytic performance (defect engineering, interface engineering, electrolytes, cell design, etc.).9–12 Despite this progress in a short time, this research field is undoubtedly in its infancy and faces many problems. The present investigation of different materials for NRR electrocatalysts is mostly based on trial-and-error approaches or experience from previous projects, with limited reports providing instructive and prospective knowledge specific for this topic. Besides, the wide variety and ambiguous description of experimental details between groups make the results incomparable and thus impede the mutual communication and promotion in the community. Moreover, some neglected but influential issues throughout experiments can invalidate claimed performance, which can affect the reproducibility and even result in misleading conclusions. Therefore, to provide a reliable framework and accelerate further exploration, community-defined standards and best practices are urgently required in the specific field of electrocatalytic NRR, similar to those established in catalysis,13 oxygen evolution reaction (OER),14 CO2 reduction reaction,15etc. Detailed discussion of ammonia contamination and recommendation of rigorous controls reported by Greenlee and co-workers,16 Wang and co-workers,17 and MacFarlane and co-workers7 have played an exemplary role. However, many aspects are required to be highlighted and updated according to the most recent advances.
 Fig. 2  Present status of electrocatalytic NRR research. (a) Publications about ambient electrocatalytic NRR during the past three years, including nearly all reports using a H-type cell and single-chamber cell, and some important studies using a half-cell and flow cell. (b) Reported NRR electrocatalysts to date. The depth of color represents the number of reports. (c) Performance map of the reported electrocatalytic NRR in terms of NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency. Updated until April 12, 2019. 
In this Review, we first summarize the present research status and challenges in electrocatalytic NRR. We will primarily consider ambient electrocatalytic NRR (at room temperature and atmospheric pressure), except for some important references in other conditions (lower than 100 °C and at atmospheric pressure). Then, we systematically identify and discuss a series of aspects throughout the experiment that should be properly handled, including but not limited to materials, cell setup, electrolyte, electrodes, ion-exchange membrane, measurement, and activity merits. Some typical results from the literature are highlighted, with a set of protocols and best practices recommended. Finally, we also provide some prospects from different aspects in order to guide and accelerate future research in this exciting field more effectively and insightfully. We aim to point out some key issues and guidelines for more judicious and impactful research efforts towards breakthroughs in ambient electrocatalytic NRR in the near future.
2 Present status and challenges in electrocatalytic NRR
2.1 State-of-the-art performance and targets
With extensive efforts during the past three years, the ambient electrocatalytic NRR has witnessed three orders of magnitude improvement for both NH3 yield (ranging from ∼0.03 to 140 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2) and faradaic efficiency (ranging from ∼0.03% to 66%), attributed to the innovations in nanostructured materials, electrolytes, and cell configurations (Fig. 2c). This statistical analysis has covered nearly all reports on ambient electrocatalytic NRR using a H-type cell and single-chamber cell, and also included some important studies using a half-cell18 and flow cell19,20 with flowing gas and/or electrolyte. Notably, many of the involved literature reports have not been independently reproduced yet, and the accuracy and reliability cannot be verified; thus this performance map is only drawn for a general view rather than definite conclusions. Nonetheless, current performance is still far from being practical and competitive with the Haber–Bosch process. According to the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)'s ARPA-E REFUEL Program,8 the targets for electrochemical ammonia synthesis are very challenging: a current density of 300 mA cm−2, a NH3 yield of 10−6 mol s−1 cm−2, a faradaic efficiency of 90%, an energy efficiency of 60%, and a degradation rate of 0.3% for 1000 hours. In contrast, what we have achieved is still several orders of magnitude lower than the targets. Most published research findings (∼80%) report a NH3 yield lower than 3 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2 and a faradaic efficiency lower than 10%. Besides, the average catalyst loading is less than 1 mg cm−2, which limits the total current density to less than 10 mA cm−2 and NRR partial current density to as low as ∼0.1 mA cm−2. Considering this huge gap between expectations and reality, we believe that fundamental innovation and breakthrough instead of routine improvements is extremely needed, which should be established through in-depth understanding of this process and smart integration of comprehensive knowledge.
2.2 Challenges and tricks
In general, the major challenges we face in pursuit of breakthroughs in ambient electrocatalytic NRR can be classified as inherent limitations and technical puzzles. On the one hand, though it is thermodynamically possible to reduce N2 to NH3 or NH4+ under moderate conditions, the potential window between the NRR and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is quite narrow throughout the whole pH range (Fig. 3a).4 This means that a highly active electrocatalyst should be explored if NRR was operated at a small overpotential (above line a in Fig. 3a), while an extremely selective one would be required for more negative potentials (below line a in Fig. 3a). In fact, the vast majority of investigated materials were calculated to exhibit more negative onset potentials for NRR compared to those for HER (above the dashed line in Fig. 3b), especially for the most commonly reported d-block transition metals (blue colored).21 Besides, the low solubility of N2 in water (0.66 mmol L−1 under ambient conditions22) significantly limits the NRR performance compared with the parasitic HER process, which further challenges the possibility for high NRR activity and selectivity simultaneously.
 Fig. 3  Mechanistic insights into electrocatalytic NRR. (a) Partial Pourbaix diagram for the N2–H2O system. Adapted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) The calculated onset potentials for NRR and HER of different materials. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
On the other hand, ambient ammonia contamination during experiments is inevitable and significant, thus making it really difficult to detect NRR-generated ammonia accurately.16 Due to its high polarity and aqueous solubility, ammonia (in the form of NH3 or NH4+) can be ubiquitous in all aqueous solutions and many surfaces, including atmosphere, oven, human respiration, latex glove, lab coat, sample tubing, Nafion membrane, stored samples, stale Milli-Q water, etc. For example, the dissolved ammonia (32 wt%) in a Nafion 117 membrane (1 cm2 × 25 μm) was estimated to be 136.4 μg;19 acid trapped (50 mL of 0.01 M HCl) ammonia under an air-conditioner for 12 h can be 7.65 μg;17 and latex gloves can provide 41.70 μg of ammonia as new and ∼15 μg after washing.17 Considering a relatively good NRR performance with a NH3 yield of 3 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2 for a 1 × 1 cm2 electrode and 2 h reaction time, the NRR-generated ammonia is only 36.72 μg. Therefore, ambient ammonia contamination could very likely lead to uncertainty, non-repeatability, and even false positives of results if the experiment wasn’t conducted properly and carefully.5,16,23,24
Although an attractive subfield of electrocatalysis, ambient electrocatalytic NRR still suffers from a lack of benchmarking and best practices. To date, there is not yet a suitable catalyst that can be employed as the standard catalyst for ambient electrocatalytic NRR research. The electrochemical cell configuration and test techniques also vary between different research groups, and are not fully described in most literature with omissions in gas flow rate, electrolyte volume, sampling methods, etc. The influences of some critical experimental parameters on the measured activity and selectivity remain to be thoroughly investigated. This causes remarkable challenges and unreliability when directly comparing the results obtained by different groups. It can also substantially mask the problems which require attention, reduce the impact of our individual research, and hinder the anticipated progress in this field.
2.3 Suggestions and initiative
Targeted at the challenges above, we want to first highlight some key and general issues during our research practices, and then provide detailed suggestions according to specific aspects in the next section.

Effective documentation of methods. 
Authors should provide complete descriptions of the experimental protocol and methodology step-by-step, including the chemical and gas purity, material synthesis, cell configuration, electrode preparation and treatment, electrochemical measurements, control experiments, cycling stability tests, ammonia detection, etc. It can make the results more meaningful and acknowledged, enable reliable comparisons between different groups, and facilitate replication for new researchers.


Rigorous conduct of experiments. 
Researchers should be mindful of any possible artifacts introduced during the whole experiment process. The effect of ambient ammonia contamination is required to be identified, reported, and mitigated in as much detail as possible. In addition to appropriately performing control experiments to exclude false positives (such as leaching from the catalyst, membrane, gas, cells, atmosphere, etc.), it is also recommended to probe the ammonia products that may be overlooked (such as adsorption by the membrane, cell walls, headspace, off-gas, anode chamber, etc.), in order to obtain more accurate and rigorous results for a specific catalyst. Opportunities and suggestions for further improvements are encouraged in future publications.


Transparent report of data. 
The report of NH3 yield, faradaic efficiency, and other metrics should be accompanied by a clear specification about how these values are obtained from the original results, including the catalyst loading, sampling source, calculation method, control subtraction, etc. Error bars for headline samples and tests should be provided, as well as a clear specification of their derivation. The raw data or absolute values of UV-vis absorption spectra, current density, NH3 yield, and faradaic efficiency for all experiments (N2, Ar, blank, and other controls) are strongly recommended to be included in the supplementary materials.


Responsible effort in the community. 
It is our community-shared responsibility to clarify the problems, establish recognized standards and promote the efficient and healthy development in this fascinating field. At this primary stage, quality should be emphasized and incentivized over quantity, with stringent requirements on reliability, reproducibility, accuracy, and transparency. The reports of negative and re-evaluation results,16,23,24 refined electrochemical techniques, and eye-opening but immature explorations are as important as the reports of another catalyst or claimed record performance, and are indeed believed to make more meaningful and impactful contributions.

3 Protocols and best practices in electrocatalytic NRR
Being widely recognized, many experimental parameters can lead to significant influence and discrepancies in the obtained electrocatalytic performance, including the cell configuration, electrolyte cleanliness, catalyst preparation, operating conditions (temperature, pressure, concentration, rotation speed, flow rate, etc.), human experimental variance, etc. These factors can be easily overlooked, but considerably limit the accuracy and reproducibility of claimed results. In the case of ambient electrocatalytic NRR, however, the combination of a very small quantity of products due to the low yield and efficiency, ubiquitous ammonia contamination, and inefficient detection methods makes this problem more serious and challenging. Drawing on the standards in other subfields of catalysis,13–15 herein, we try to identify the variables and tricks during the research of ambient electrocatalytic NRR as much as possible. We then recommend a set of protocols and best practices, which are categorized into materials/chemicals/gases, cell configuration, electrolyte, working electrode (WE), reference electrode (RE), counter electrode (CE), ion-exchange membrane, electrochemical measurements, ammonia detection, and activity merits. The protocol should not only be clear, rigorous, and reproducible, but also accessible and affordable in order to facilitate meaningful advancements in most research groups all over the world. The discussion of experimental parameters and recommendation of best practices are established based on the inspiration from several excellent reviews,7,16,17 a thorough interpretation of related literature, years of experimental studies in our group, and also the open discussions among different groups. The methodology details can be found in our most recent work.25
3.1 Materials, chemicals, gases
The problems in this aspect originate from the impurity or instability of as-synthesized electrocatalysts. From our statistical analysis, 70% of previous works do not provide clear information about the purity of used chemicals and gases (neither N2 nor Ar). Moreover, half of all reports involve nitrogen-containing chemicals during the fabrication of catalysts, such as nitric acid, ammonium salts, nitrate, urea, thiourea, melamine, ammonia gas, polyvinyl pyrrolidone, 2-methylimidazole, etc. Nearly all of these works, if they conducted Ar-saturated control experiments, claimed that ammonia was “trace” or “undetectable” when N2 was replaced by Ar for NRR tests, and provided the UV-vis absorption spectra as well. In contrast, in the works conducted by Greenlee and co-workers,16 and Ling and co-workers,26 high NH3 yields around 1.5 × 10−9 mol s−1 cm−2 and 6 × 10−12 mol s−1 cm−2, respectively, were reported in Ar-saturated electrochemical controls which accounted for nearly 30% of those in N2-saturated electrochemical NRR. El-Sayed and co-workers also reported a detectable NH3 yield of ∼5.56 × 10−12 mol s−1 cm−2 in the Ar-saturated control, about 9% of the performance in N2.27 More remarkably, re-evaluation of two different electrocatalysts (FeNi nanoparticle16 and Sn phthalocyanine23) revealed that the amount of NH3 detected could be even higher when Ar was used instead of N2, which reinforces the critical significance of rigorous controls.
From our point of view, researchers are first required to specify the purity of all chemicals and gases employed in experiments. It is suggested that any materials (fresh or stored, with nitrogen-containing precursors used or not) should be thoroughly washed by acid (avoid nitric acid) or fresh ultrapure water before NRR tests. Symes and co-workers reported a rigorous investigation into the effect of pre-washing with a total number of five washings for 50 mg of Sn phthalocyanine each time.23 An approximate ammonia concentration of 4.7 × 10−6 mol L−1 in the first wash supernatant and an average of 3.5 × 10−7 mol L−1 in the supernatant after 3–5 washes were obtained, revealing that at least two such washes were required. Besides, nitrogen-free substitution is preferred if it does not limit the success of material synthesis. In the case of transition metal nitride catalysts, however, it is more difficult to accurately identify the electrocatalytic ammonia.24 A rigorous nitrogen balance encompassing all nitrogen-containing species is then recommended via a combination of Nessler's method, Elemental analysis, and 15N isotope experiments.20
With regard to impurities in the inlet gas, such as NH3 and NOx, MacFarlane and co-workers provided the most thorough investigation.28 They proposed the prepurification of gases by passing through a saturator filled with 0.05 M H2SO4 to remove any possible contaminants.24 Based on their findings (0.003 vppm NH3 in N2 gas from Air Liquide),28 Ling and co-workers quantified that the impact of potential NH3 contaminant from the input N2 stream was negligible (∼1%).26 Therefore, ultra-high purity (UHP) N2 with a purity grade of 99.999% is required. Use of only UHP N2 will achieve convincing results when being properly handled and compared with the Ar controls.
Particular attention should be paid when the electrocatalyst is unstable, e.g., may be reduced (such as Fe2O318,29 and nitrides20,24) or decomposed (such as phthalocyanine23) under the negative bias for electrocatalytic NRR. This will always result in limited stability,18 but can also provide a good platform for mechanism studies.20,29 It should be noted that unstable samples might decompose under an applied bias to liberate nitrogen-containing species even after thorough washing.23,24 Therefore, Ar-saturated control experiments with the same bias used for the NRR should be always conducted instead of conducting non-electrochemical controls with Ar saturation.16,23
3.2 Cell configuration
Generally, four types of electrochemical cells have been developed for the laboratory-scale investigation of ambient electrocatalytic NRR, including H-type cells, single-chamber cells, half-cells, and flow cells.12 As the most widely investigated type, we will mainly use the H-type cell as an example to discuss cell configuration, and also provide some insights into other configurations in the next section. Authors should provide a detailed specification of their electrochemical cells with a photograph of the cell under operation. A schematic illustration of the NRR cell clearly showing all the components is also expected,18,20 as shown in Fig. 4. Several groups have presented a careful and thorough documentation of the H-type cells in their works,24,25,30,31 which are highly suggested for reference. Herein, we highlight some important points and recommendations for conducting and reporting experiments (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic of a H-type cell. It shows all the details we emphasized. 
All parameters of the employed cells should be rationally designed and definitely reported, including the temperature, stirring rate, flow rate, volume of the electrolyte and headspace in both cathode and anode chambers, working electrode, reference electrode, counter electrode, ion-exchange membrane, gas tightness, gas inlet/outlet, in-line acid trap (concentration and volume), etc. These parameters can significantly affect the resultant concentration and collection efficiency of ammonia products.
Similar to the case in CO2 reduction,15 the extremely low solubility and diffusion coefficient of N2 in aqueous electrolytes can cause significant variation of pH and N2 gradients near the catalyst surface, resulting in unfavorable mass transfer effects. Therefore, we also recommend moderate agitation of the electrolyte by stirring (400–800 rpm25,29,31,32) in addition to bubbling, at least in the cathode chamber, during all electrochemical tests. The inlet N2 flow rate should also be mindfully investigated and controlled, which is revealed to be able to alter the hydrodynamic boundary layer thickness and thus partial currents.15,16,25 Increasing the flow rate can reduce the hydrodynamic boundary layer thickness, but will also cause current disturbance and ammonia escape. Based on our experience and other reports, a flow rate of around 20 sccm is deemed appropriate for general cases, which can be adjusted according to special requirements. In addition, ammonia escape in the off-gas from both cathode and anode chambers should be checked for each condition and each test, with a clear statement of the concentration and volume.24,25 Despite the fact that some groups clearly claim that no apparent ammonia can be detected in the acid trap in their experiments (neutral or acid electrolytes),29,31 about 20% of previous papers have reported the in-line collection of ammonia with acid traps (1–100 mM H2SO4).
To limit ammonia contamination from the atmosphere and pre-treatments, the electrochemical cell setups, with all components including cells, caps, flow lines, electrodes, and ion-exchange membrane, should be thoroughly cleaned and appropriately stored.24 For example, the cell setup is recommended to be cleaned with 1 M H2SO4 (as opposed to HNO3),14,16 and then soaked in sulfuric acid or water when not in use. Prior to use, the cells should be thoroughly rinsed with ultrapure water and the following electrolyte three times.
3.3 Electrolyte
The majority of ambient electrocatalytic NRR research is performed in aqueous electrolytes, typically 0.05 M H2SO4 or 0.1 M HCl for acid, 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS) or 0.1 M Na2SO4 for neutral, and 0.1 M KOH for alkaline. The effect of the electrolyte pH and counter-ions on the resultant NRR activity and selectivity has been widely reported and emphasized; however, there is no general agreement on it yet. In the case of a nitrogen-doped nanoporous carbon electrocatalyst, Wu and co-workers demonstrated that 0.1 M KOH was more favorable than 0.1 M HCl for a varied temperature of 25 to 60 °C, and the concentration of KOH was also influential (0.1 M was much better than 0.5 M).33 Meanwhile, some reports revealed that the electrocatalytic NRR performance was quite similar for a wide range of pH from acid to alkaline, or even showing higher performance in lower pH values (∼3).32 This variation may originate from the difference of cell configurations, intrinsic properties of different catalysts, impurity effects in the electrolyte, and also reaction-induced local pH gradients.34 Due to the consumption of protons in these reduction reactions, the near-electrode pH can deviate from the bulk value by several pH units, which can significantly impact the HER activity and thus the NRR selectivity.34 A more rigorous and in-depth investigation into the effects of electrolyte choice is highly expected in future studies.
The electrolyte provides some opportunities to improve the selectivity of electrocatalytic NRR.9,17 For example, Li+ ions have been widely demonstrated to effectively suppress the HER and enhance the NRR (in 0.5 M Li2SO4 and LiClO4, with or without pH adjustment), which has been attributed to the strong ability of Li+ to interact with and activate N2,27,30 steric effects inducing a higher near-electrode concentration of N2,30 competitive association and retardation of HER active sites,35etc. Another potentially more effective strategy in electrolyte optimization is the replacement of aqueous solvents by organic solvents with much higher N2 solubility and lower proton supply, such as 0.01 M H2SO4 in 2-propanol/water (9:1, v/v),36 0.1 M LiCl in ethylenediamine,37 0.2 M LiCF3SO3 in ethanol/dry tetrahydrofuran,26 1 M LiBF4 in ethanol/dry tetrahydrofuran,38 and aprotic ionic liquids.28 These pioneering works show some opportunities to improve the faradaic efficiency toward the ambient electrocatalytic NRR. However, the stability and mechanism of organic electrolytes should be further investigated.
3.4 Working electrode
The working electrode can be divided into four categories: glassy carbon rotating disk electrodes (GC-RDE), glassy carbon plates, carbon paper electrodes, and self-supported electrodes. For each situation, the researchers should provide a thorough and clear report about the size of the electrodes, the preparation protocol of electrolyte inks, the cleaning and pre-treatment of substrates, and the catalyst loading. Carbon paper is the most widely applied electrode substrate in the field of electrocatalytic NRR owing to its low price, feasibility for surface modification, and compatibility in practical devices. The cleaning and pre-treatment protocol of carbon paper electrodes is required to be explicitly included in future reports. Due to different methods of manufacture and pre-treatment, carbon paper can be hydrophilic or hydrophobic which will affect the electrocatalytic process; however, nearly all previous reports do not provide any information about this. Besides, nitric acid should be avoided during the pre-treatment of carbon paper electrodes as it can generate metastable nitrogen-containing functional groups on the surface and lead to accidental contamination. The catalyst loading on carbon paper electrodes is recommended to be 0.2–1 mg cm−2, and can be adjusted according to the catalyst type. Extremely low loading is not beneficial to the accuracy and reproducibility of NRR performance, while very high loading may be accompanied by low catalyst utilization and exfoliation of the catalyst. The value is suggested to be precisely determined by the weight difference after catalyst loading, especially for calculating activity metrics normalized by the catalyst mass. Additionally, the contributions from working electrode substrates (carbon paper and electrode holder) should be carefully checked with appropriate controls using the bare carbon paper electrode, which will be discussed in detail below and listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Electrochemical tests and controls to rigorously evaluate the NRR activity




Experiments
NH3 yield
Purpose of the tests or controls




Sample-N2-echem



Study the NRR activity of electrocatalysts preliminarily


Sample-Ar-echem
[NH3]ecat.,Ar
Check the contaminants from potential-dependent leaching/decomposition of the catalysts, impurities (such as NO3−) in the electrolyte chemicals, etc.


Bare WE-N2-echem



Check the contribution from the working electrode substrate (activity or contaminants), the contaminants from the inlet N2 gas (such as NOx), impurities (such as NO3−) in the electrolyte chemicals, etc.


Sample-N2-ambient



Check the ammonia contaminants from the inlet N2/Ar gas, leakage from the atmosphere, ammonia adsorbed on electrodes/reactors, impurities (such as NH4+) in the electrolyte chemicals, etc.


Sample-Ar-ambient
[NH3]ocat.,Ar


Bare WE-N2-ambient





Sample-15N2-echem



Confirm the NRR activity of electrocatalysts, and check the potential-dependent leaching/decomposition of the catalysts, etc.


Sample-15N2-ambient



Check the contaminants from the inlet 15N2 gas (such as 15NH3), etc.




3.5 Reference electrode
The majority of researchers use Ag/AgCl reference electrodes with different KCl filling solutions for all kinds of electrolytes. As is well-known, the reference electrode potential can shift due to the leaching of contaminants into or KCl from the filling solution after improper use. Therefore, the potential is recommended to be converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale via calibration rather than calculation.28,31 Specifically, the calibration is conducted in the high purity H2-saturated electrolyte with Pt foil as both working electrode and counter electrode. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests are performed at a scan rate of 1.0 mV s−1, and the average of the two potentials at which the current crosses zero is taken to be the thermodynamic potential for the hydrogen electrode reactions.31
3.6 Counter electrode
Half of the reported NRR research works use Pt as the counter electrode, and the others use graphite rods, with several exceptions. In addition to its stability and performance, the electrochemical inertness of the counter electrode should also be highly considered in the case of electrocatalytic NRR, due to the probable electro-oxidization of produced ammonia on it. As demonstrated by Wang and co-workers, the NH4+ solution (0.1 μg mL−1) in 0.01 M HCl can be completely electrolyzed by the Pt counter electrode within an hour in a single cell.17 Therefore, counter electrodes must be strictly partitioned for each experiment, which is generally performed by an ion-exchange membrane. Despite impediments to mixing caused by the physical obstruction of a glass frit in a few reports,28,30 the isolation efficiency of glass frits is still worthy of further discussion with specific validation experiments, such as the separator permeability measurement reported by Manthiram and co-workers.38 With regard to ion-exchange membranes, the ammonia transfer is believed to be significantly blocked, but a slight crossover can also be observed from the cathode to anode chamber.17,18,25
Recently, it was highlighted that Pt can be dissolved electrochemically and transported under anodic conditions in both acid and alkaline electrolytes.14 It has therefore been encouraged to avoid the use of Pt counter electrodes in electrocatalysis, particularly for platinum-group-metal-free electrocatalysts. Considering the ammonia electro-oxidization activity and HER activity of Pt, we also recommend the replacement of Pt by a graphite rod as counter electrode for electrocatalytic NRR research.
3.7 Ion-exchange membrane
Appropriate ion-exchange membranes are required to allow H+/OH− conductivity and hinder ammonia crossover between cathode and anode chambers. Proton-exchange membranes, such as Nafion, are generally applied for various pH electrolytes (acid to alkaline). The obtained Nafion membranes should be pre-treated by boiling in 3–5 wt% H2O2, 0.5 M H2SO4, and deionized water at 80 °C for 1 h, respectively, and then being thoroughly rinsed in deionized water several times.25,31 Several types of Nafion membranes have been reported with the main difference being thickness. These include Nafion 115 (127 μm), Nafion 117 (183 μm), and Nafion 211 (25.4 μm). Considering the large water uptake (38–50%, dry weight basis) and considerable ammonia adsorption of the membrane,19,27,39 the thinner Nafion 211 is recommended due to its lower ammonia adsorption. However, we still encourage to measure the amount of ammonia dissolved in the Nafion 211 membrane during the NRR process. Xu and co-workers reported that a considerable amount of ammonia could be trapped in a Nafion 211 membrane and membrane–electrode-assembly during the first 8 h of reaction, which was confirmed by acid soaking and Elemental analysis.20 When employing anion-exchange membranes in alkaline conditions, such as FAAM-PK-75, the stability of the membrane should be studied. As revealed by Xu and co-workers as well,39 they found a total of 0.8 × 10−6 mol of leached quaternary ammonium from FAAM-PK-75 after 1 h at −0.2 V, and undetectable amounts afterwards. Therefore, the ion-exchange membrane should be carefully handled, and the contribution of ammonia dissolved in or leached from the membrane to the claimed NRR activity should be strictly checked with raw data provided.20 The ion-exchange membrane should be refreshed between tests, and also for cycling tests if possible.
3.8 Electrochemical measurement
The electrochemical measurements for NRR studies are very different from that for the oxygen reduction reaction, OER, and HER due to the extremely low activity and selectivity of most catalysts. According to previous reports and our experiments, electrochemical measurements are routinely performed by CV, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), and chronoamperometry (CA), typically for four objectives: pre-treatment or activation, comparison between HER and NRR, NRR activity measurements, and stability tests. Prior to any electrochemical measurement, the researchers should make sure of the gas tightness of the cells, and also saturate the electrolyte and headspace in both cathode and anode chambers by purging the gas used in the following experiments (N2 or Ar) for at least 30 min. It is also recommended to conduct iR-compensation and stirring during the measurements.23,29,31
Pre-treatment or activation of the working electrode is expected to be performed for each experiment before systematically studying the NRR performance, although very few reports explicitly mention it.25 Due to the possible adsorption of ammonia on the surface during preparation of the working electrode or unstable nitrogen-containing species in the catalysts, it is necessary to clean the electrode surface and minimize the ammonia contamination using several CV measurements. We recommend to refresh the electrolyte or detect the ammonia concentration at this stage before the following NRR tests if ammonia contamination from the working electrode is confirmed; otherwise the working electrode should be soaked in a separate electrolyte for several hours in advance. As a preliminarily probe of NRR activity, many researchers reported one set of LSV or CV data in both N2 and Ar saturated electrolytes, and ascribed the current density difference between them to the additional NRR process in N2. However, this difference is always very subtle, and can be caused by many other experimental factors in addition to the NRR. Thus some research claimed that any distinctions between CV data and even CA data obtained in N2 and Ar were inconclusive and could not be used to identify the electrocatalytic properties.24 To obtain more meaningful and reliable results, this measurement should be performed at least for several segments (Fig. 5a)40 under near-identical conditions, such as the same working electrode, cell setup, and other parameters except for the gas switch, preferably using the GC-RDE setup.41
 Fig. 5  Typical electrochemical measurements of NRR. (a) CV data of an Au film electrode in N2 or Ar saturated 0.1 M KOH with a scan rate of 2.5 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) CA data for the electrodeposited iron electrode in N2-saturated ionic liquids obtained at −0.8 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency of VN catalysts obtained at different potentials for 1 h tests. (d) Time-dependent NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency of VN catalysts at −0.1 V and −0.2 V vs. RHE for 8 h tests, respectively. (c) and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The electrocatalytic NRR performance is generally characterized by a set of CA tests at specified potentials (Fig. 5b),28 and then the NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency can be calculated based on the ammonia detection results and CA data (Fig. 5c).20 In the majority of studies, the optimized potential to achieve the maximum NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency is around −0.3 V vs. RHE which can be referred to for the screening of potential catalysts. Notably, the thermodynamic equilibrium potential for NRR under the reaction conditions can be shifted to a potential more positive than 0 V vs. RHE due to the extremely low concentration of ammonium (∼10−7 M), which is beneficial for a potentially enhanced faradaic efficiency. For example, the standard reduction potential (E°) for the reaction N2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 6H+ (aq) + 6e− ⇌ 2NH4OH (aq) is 0.092 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) at 298.15 K (25 °C) and 101.325 kPa (1 atm). The thermodynamic equilibrium potential for NRR under the actual reaction conditions (E) can be calculated according to the Nernst equation, (1) (2)where R is the gas constant (8.314 J mol−1 K−1), T is the temperature in Kelvin (298.15 K), F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1), and n is the number of transferred electrons (6). Assuming a [NH4OH] of 10−7 M and 1 atm of N2 in the solution, the corresponding E is determined to be 0.230 V vs. RHE.
The reaction duration for each CA test is usually 2 h, and it is suggested to be prolonged to 4–6 h to increase the amount of products for higher accuracy of ammonia detection if necessary.18,26,30 The electrochemical stability of NRR catalysts can be investigated by long-term CA tests and consecutive ammonia detection at the optimal potential (Fig. 5d),20 with or without refreshing the electrolyte between adjacent cycles. Most reports do not provide details about how the cycling tests were conducted, and no disturbance of the current density assigned to electrolyte refreshing or sampling can be observed in many cases. Rondinone and co-workers reported an efficient and low disturbing method to evaluate the stability by in situ sequential sampling.30 After a period of time, 1.5 mL of electrolyte was sampled by means of a syringe followed by supplementing another 1.5 mL of degassed fresh electrolyte. The rate of ammonia formation at the time of sampling can be accurately calculated by considering the accumulative effect of reaction and dilution effect of added fresh electrolyte. A few of the studies explicitly state the effect of the adsorbed ammonia in the ion-exchange membrane on the detected ammonia yields during stability tests.20
Due to ubiquitous contaminants, a set of control experiments have been strongly recommended by several groups,7,16,17 typically including non-electrochemical and electrochemical experiments in both N2 and Ar. Electrochemical experiments in Ar (sample-Ar-echem) investigate the contaminants from leaching/decomposition of the catalysts or impurities (such as NO3−) in the electrolyte chemicals, while the non-electrochemical experiments conducted by direct bubbling or at open circuit potentials (sample-Ar-ambient, sample-N2-ambient) evaluate the contaminants from the inlet gas, leakage from the atmosphere, or ammonia adsorbed on electrodes/reactors. The contribution from the working electrode substrate should also be electrochemically studied in N2 (bare WE-N2-echem). Besides, isotopic labelling experiments (15N) are mandatory for the verification of ammonia produced by NRR, especially for nitrogen-containing catalysts.7,16,17,20,24,42 Due to the expense of 15N2, an effective cell design is required to improve the utilization efficiency of the isotope gas.20 All these NRR tests and controls are summarized in Table 1 with specific purposes to crosswise check the contaminants from various sources and rigorously evaluate the NRR activity. For an efficient screening of electrocatalysts, we recommend a sequence of controls performed on the same day: sample-N2-echem, sample-Ar-echem, bare WE-N2-echem, and sample-N2-ambient at least. Repeated measurements for each catalyst under each control condition for at least three times with different electrodes are required to confirm the obtained performances.
3.9 Ammonia detection
Electrocatalytic NRR performance is directly determined by the detection of ammonia in the sampled electrolyte or acid traps. Therefore, the method of ammonia quantification is very critical and should be highly sensitive, selective, accurate, and reproducible. Zhang and co-workers provided a thorough introduction and comparison of all methods for ammonia determination, including spectrophotometry, ion-selective electrode detection, ion chromatography, fluorescence, and also some commercial test kits.12 The spectrophotometric method, mainly the indophenol blue method and Nessler's method, is widely used for ammonia nitrogen determination in day-to-day experiments, owing to its good sensitivity and low cost. The indophenol blue method, or the salicylate method, is better due to the lower detection limit, more stable color development, and better reproducibility.11,12,16 Notably, the spectrophotometric methods are highly sensitive to pH, temperature, time, reagent chemical concentrations, and interference from metal ions.43 Control experiments using electrolytes with intentional ion addition are recommended to eliminate the potential interference.29 The ion-selective electrode method, using the Orion 9512HPBNWP NH3 electrode or the Radiometer Analytical ISE25NH4-9 NH4+ electrode, can provide a much lower detection limit and larger detection range (5 × 10−7 or 3 × 10−6–1 mol L−1). However, it takes a much longer time for stable and precise results at lower concentrations and thus the samples should be very well sealed during measurement.12 Ion chromatography with appropriate columns (such as Dionex IonPac CS16-4μm Column) provides advantages of a much lower detection limit (3 × 10−7 mol L−1), excellent reproducibility and accuracy, and direct determination of multiple ions. However, Li+ and Na+ containing electrolytes are not suitable due to their shorter retention time, and organic electrolytes are also incompatible.
In the case of isotopic labelling experiments, 1H NMR should be performed to quantify 15NH4+ (doublet) separately from 14NH4+ (triplet).7,42 Given the low activity and utilization efficiency, possible 15N contamination in the 15N2 gas (especially 15NOx),7 and 14N contamination from the catalysts or atmosphere, the quantitative detection of ammonia by isotope studies is very challenging and should be interpreted with caution.24 The detected amount of 15NH4+ must be substantially greater than that of 14NH4+,7 and the total ammonia yield for 15N2 tests should be quantitatively consistent with the corresponding 14N2 tests under the same condition. The results supported by a combination of different methods are expected to be more convincing and reliable.20,30,40 Meanwhile, we want to highlight the priority for a set of well-designed controls and rigorous experiments, which is more essential and influential.
In addition to the detection methods, researchers should be very mindful of sampling choice. Due to the variety of pH, flow rate, and cell configurations, the produced ammonia can be possibly detected in the electrolyte of the cathode or anode chambers, the in-line acid traps of the cathode or anode chambers, and also the ion-exchange membranes. If the researchers sample directly from the cathode electrolyte, additional justification about the absence of ammonia in other parts should be provided along with convincing evidence. Authors should include the raw data of ammonia concentrations obtained from each source and each control experiment in the supplementary materials, and appropriately discuss it in the main text, no matter how low the value is.20,26,38 We highly recommend the NRR community to consider this as an important issue for reliability during peer review. With regard to the ammonia calibration curves, the standard chemicals, NH4Cl or (NH4)2SO4, should be thoroughly dried before use (such as at 105 °C for 4 h), and calibration checks should be performed regularly.
3.10 Activity merits
For accurate comparison and rational optimization of NRR electrocatalysts, appropriate activity metrics (including activity, selectivity, and stability) are important to characterize performance. The majority of studies report the NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency as accessible metrics. Compared to other subfields in electrocatalysis, more fundamental and direct metrics for electrocatalytic NRR are expected to be obtained by delicate measurements, such as onset potential, Tafel slope,15 turnover frequency (TOF),14etc.
The electrocatalytic NRR activity is objectively revealed by the NH3 yield obtained from the results of ammonia detection. It is calculated by normalizing the ammonia formation rate at a given potential to the electrode geometric surface area, weight of catalyst, electrochemically active surface area (ECSA), or the amount of active atoms.17 The potential should be corrected accurately by iR compensation.14,29,31 The ECSA of electrocatalysts can be determined by measuring the (differential) capacitance via CV or impedance spectroscopy.14 The NH3 yield normalization based on ECSA is of fundamental interest, but it is noteworthy that the accuracy of ECSA measurement may vary substantially from catalyst to catalyst, and even morphology to morphology, and the as-obtained value is likely to be overestimated due to the porous carbon substrate. According to the DOE's targets, the NH3 yield normalized based on the electrode geometric surface area is highly recommended (mol s−1 cm−2 or μg h−1 cm−2), while the catalyst loading (varying from 0.1 to 5 mg cm−2) should be seriously considered and unambiguously reported for comparison. When reporting the NH3 yield, authors are required to explicitly state how the value is obtained from the raw data of all experiments. The ammonia yield assigned to electrocatalytic NRR should be calculated with both background and non-electrochemical ammonia subtractions which can be expressed by eqn (3):7,16 (3)
Additionally, we also recommend the careful check (comparing the bare WE-N2-echem and sample-Ar-echem controls) and appropriate subtraction of the activity contribution, if any, from the bare WE substrate. The electrocatalytic NRR selectivity is roughly represented by the NH3 faradaic efficiency, comparing the measured ammonia production (based on the obtained NH3 yield) against the theoretical ammonia production (based on the total charge determined from CA results and three electron transfer for one NH3). The overall current density and NH3 partial current density are also recommended to be specifically provided in tabulated or graphical forms.30,41 Further, the authors should also determine the production of another possible NRR product, N2H4, using a spectrophotometric method developed by Watt and Chrisp. Considering that the HER is the main competitive reaction to the NRR, it is highly recommended to directly measure H2 production by periodic gas chromatography of the headspace.31,37 The researchers should be able to explicitly account for 100% of the faradaic efficiency or have a reasonable hypothesis as to where the unassigned faradaic efficiency is going.31
Targeted at more reliable, informative, and transparent research, the reporting of claimed activity merits should be fully supported by providing an explicit description of the calculation method and a set of raw data of the NH3 yield and current density from each sampling source, each control and each repeat.30 The authors should provide error bars for the activity merits, or at least for the optimal potential, with a clear statement of how the error bar is obtained.20,25,29–31 For example, the error bars correspond to the standard deviations of at least three measurements using separately prepared samples under the same condition, and the data reported are averages.
Despite lots of challenges and annoying matters, we prefer to consider it as “desirable difficulty”, which requires considerable and desirable efforts and thereby improves long-term achievements. To balance accuracy with efficiency, we recommend a set of experimental protocols for day-to-day research as shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Flow diagram of recommended protocols to rigorously conduct NRR research. 
4 Prospects towards targeted NRR performance
The ambient electrocatalytic NRR has provided us with an attractive approach for the world's future production of food and chemicals, and effective utilization of sustainable energy. Despite some achievements reported so far, this technology is still far away from industrially relevant levels, in terms of the NH3 yield, faradaic efficiency, current density, and stability. So far, we have identified and discussed how key experimental parameters and challenges affect the electrocatalytic NRR performance and how to effectively deal with them. However, it is apparent that the most critical issue is to optimize the electrocatalysts and cell configurations themselves aiming at substantially improved NRR activity and selectivity. In principle, the NRR electrocatalysis is determined by the intrinsic regulation of active sites and the supply management of electrons, protons, and N2. Potentially effective strategies require insightful guidelines from extensive theoretical studies and advanced characterization of both the electrocatalysts and the catalyst–electrolyte interface. Herein, we try to present several research opportunities from the following aspects.
4.1 Guided exploration of electrocatalysts

4.1.1 Theoretical guidance. 
The advances of density functional theory computations have accelerated material screening and trend prediction for potential NRR electrocatalysts. Severely limited by the nitrogen scaling relations (*N2H and *NH2) and the competing HER process,44 pure late transition metals (such as Fe, Rh, Ru, etc.) will suffer from low selectivity while early transition metals (such as Sc, Y, Ti, and Zr) require a great overpotential.45 Metal nitrides (such as VN, NbN, RuN, etc.) have shown promise for improved activity and selectivity via the Mars–van Krevelen mechanism,46 but their poisoning, decomposition, and regeneration under operation conditions should be explicitly evaluated.20,24 In contrast to bulk metals, single metal atoms, such as Fe, Mo, Ru, Ti, etc., anchored on substrates with distinct electronic and ensemble effects have been extensively investigated and have shown attractive performance.47 Nevertheless, there is still significant room for improvement in the matching and interpretation between theoretical and experimental results. Theoretical studies should not only identify these potential electrocatalysts in theory, but also provide a series of optimization guidelines to experiments.44 In addition, new computational strategies are urgently needed to bridge the gap between computational models and electrochemical conditions, involving the pH, proton supply, electrical conductivity, interface structure, electrolyte effect, mass transfer, etc. For example, a strategy which lowers the accessibility of electrons, protons, or both at the electrode surface is suggested to improve NH3 selectivity after a qualitative analysis of the reaction rates.9 A microkinetic model numerically simulated under 0.1 M non-oxidizing strong acid was reported to be able to interface the kinetics of competing reactions on electrode surfaces with the mass transport of reactants in the solution.48


4.1.2 Material engineering. 
Integrated insight from different fields and subfields, such as biological, molecular/homogeneous, and heterogeneous catalysis, is recommended to increase the possibility for transformative advances in ambient electrocatalytic NRR.6 Above all, a standard catalyst with excellent and reproducible performance is expected to be proposed. Some possible research directions are listed as follows (Fig. 7a): (i) learn from various strategies that have been widely deployed in other electrocatalytic subfields,11,49 including heteroatom doping, defect engineering, cation/anion regulation, surface/interface engineering, etc. (ii) Develop nanostructured electrocatalysts or self-supported freestanding electrodes for beneficial active site accessibility and mass transfer. (iii) Explore and elucidate the potential of semiconducting electrocatalysts. They possibly limit the electron availability and thus suppress HER, with many materials already reported such as TiO2, C3N4, Fe2O3, MoS2, etc. (iv) Alloy bimetals or multimetals from either side of the ‘volcano’ plot. These systems possibly modify the binding configurations of reaction intermediates towards optimized activity and selectivity. (v) Modify the d-block transition metals with p-block elements to break the linear scaling relationship between the energetics of *N2H and *NH2, which has proved to be successful in other subfields.21 (vi) Functionalize the catalyst surface with co-adsorbed molecules to selectively tune the respective adsorption energies (*N2H),44 mimicking the ligand binding of natural nitrogenases.6 (vii) Introduce appropriate promoters to form hybrid electrocatalysts, analogous to the FeMo cofactor in nitrogenase and K2O/Al2O3 in the iron-based Haber–Bosch catalyst.3,6 (viii) Manipulate the electrocatalyst–electrolyte–gas interface by a thin coating layer or buffer layer to optimize the local microenvironments and mass transfer favorable for higher NRR selectivity.26 (ix) Decouple the adsorption/activation and hydrogenation steps with multifunctional or multicomponent electrocatalysts, such as metal domains for N–N activation and support domains for nitrogen hydrogenation. (x) Develop feasible and efficient utilization strategies of lithium–nitrogen and boron–nitrogen chemistry in aqueous heterogeneous electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 7  Possible research opportunities in electrocatalytic NRR. (a) Material engineering to improve the NRR selectivity with more attention on electrode surface and functionality decoupling. (b) Flow cell to alleviate mass transfer limitations and improve the NH3 yield. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Advanced characterization of the electrical double layer to probe the reaction mechanism and guide further optimization. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 

4.2 Systematic optimization of cell configuration

4.2.1 Improvements in H-type cells. 
As the H-type cell is the most widely deployed and easily accessible cell configuration for many groups, it is also recommended to systematically improve this cell setup for the best demonstration of obtained electrocatalysts. Some issues are expected to be further scrutinized: (i) clarify the specific effect of various operation parameters (temperature, pH value, flow rate, stirring rate, etc.) to optimize performance. (ii) Investigate the performance and effect of ion-exchange membranes during operation, such as the ion conductivity, the ammonia leaching and adsorption, the interface blocking effect, etc. (iii) Explore more convenient strategies for anode partition, such as electrochemically inert counter electrodes in single-chamber cells. (iv) Optimize the electrolyte recipe with higher N2 solubility, a higher N2 diffusion coefficient, and limited proton supply.9 Aprotic fluorinated ionic liquids with high N2 solubility (up to 17 mmol L−1) are believed to be excellent candidates,28 while other common organic electrolytes, such as alcohols (ethanol: ∼20 mmol L−1, 2-propanol: ∼23 mmol L−1 under ambient conditions22), are highly recommended for future investigations. The water content in the electrolyte requires fine management.36,37 The site blocking or other effects of various electrolyte cations and additives are encouraged to be considered to tune the proton-coupled electron transfer and NH3 selectivity. (v) Develop effective strategies to improve the mass transport in the near-electrode region and decrease the hydrodynamic boundary layer thickness.


4.2.2 Developing other types of cells. 
H-Type cell configurations bear little resemblance to commercially relevant conditions, considering the current density, NH3 yield, faradaic efficiency, and product collection. Flow cells which circulate the reactants and products to and away from the electrodes have been proven highly effective in the development of fuel cells, water electrolyzers, and CO2 reduction (Fig. 7b).50 These configurations typically generate a much higher current density and faradaic efficiency by alleviating mass transfer limitations, increasing the N2 concentrations at the electrode interface, and increasing the N2 retention time.17,50 Despite these advantages, there are strikingly few studies of ambient electrocatalytic NRR in flow cells (or half-cells only with continuous gas supply),18–20,41 and the obtained performance is still unsatisfactory. The kinetics, thermodynamics, and hydrodynamics of the NRR within flow cells are expected to be investigated to better understand, explore, and utilize such effective platform. In addition to the catalysts and working electrode properties, the non-catalytic components (such as gas diffusion layer, ion-exchange membrane, flow field, electrolyte buffer layer, etc.) and feedstock characteristics (such as gas vs. liquid, flow rate, electrolyte supply, water management, etc.) are also recommended to be systematically studied.50 Besides, we advocate and encourage the full cooperation between relevant research groups in universities and companies (in the area of fuel cells, water electrolyzers, membrane, etc.) to share their strengths in fundamental science and integrated technology. The development of automated microreactors for high-throughput screening of various electrocatalysts and operation conditions is also highly anticipated.

4.3 Advanced characterization

4.3.1 Time- and potential-dependent catalyst. 
Given exposure to strong acid or alkaline solutions under reducing potentials, the electrocatalyst can be reduced, activated, or decomposed. Therefore, the real composition, morphology, and especially the surface layer of the catalyst under reaction conditions are required to be scrutinized, which is crucial for identifying the real active phases, and understanding the reaction and deactivation mechanisms. It can be achieved by the comparative studies of fresh and spent catalysts, or in situ/operando studies using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Raman, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), etc. Additionally, analysis of any metals dissolved in the electrolyte by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is also very effective for studying the stability.23 Xu and co-workers reported an excellent operando XAS study of their VN nanoparticles, which confirmed the gradual conversion of VN0.7O0.45 during NRR and also elucidated a slow deactivation at lower overpotential.20 We highlight the investigation of reconstruction and change of cation valence states, various vacancies, nanoscale surface layer, and coalescence of active sites.


4.3.2 Interface and mechanism. 
In addition to the electrocatalyst and bulk electrolyte, the interface between electrocatalyst and electrolyte, namely the electrical double layer, plays a critical role in the optimization of heterogeneous electrocatalysis. Xu and co-workers emphasized the significant effects of potential-dependent structure of the solvent, reaction-induced concentration gradients, and potential-dependent behavior of electrolyte cations on the double layer structure toward reaction activity and selectivity (Fig. 7c).34 The direct observation of the near-electrode local reaction environment can help to identify the reaction-relevant species, solvent and cation effects, reaction pathways and mechanisms, and thus guide the optimization of electrocatalysts and electrolytes. Many in situ or in operando analytical techniques have been developed, such as attenuated total reflectance surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (ATR-SEIRAS), differential electrochemical mass spectrometry, XPS, XAS, Raman, and smart electrokinetic studies, to investigate the reaction-relevant species near the catalyst surface and elucidate the reaction pathways and mechanisms. By the use of ATR-SEIRAS, Shao and co-workers successfully revealed the associative reaction mechanism on Au thin films due to the presence of adsorbed N2Hy species, and the low NRR efficiency on Pt.40

5 Conclusion
With extensive efforts during the past few years, the ambient electrocatalytic NRR has proven its potential for producing green NH3 from inexhaustible N2 and H2O. It shows opportunity for replacing the century-old Haber–Bosch process, contributing to solving global energy and CO2 issues, and also effectively transforming renewable electricity (from wind, solar, etc.) into more convenient liquid fuels. Researchers have made some achievements in the exploration of electrocatalysts, electrolytes, and cell configurations, to improve the NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency. However, the performance is still far from practical, while the research advances greatly suffer from many challenging obstacles. Fundamentally, the competing HER process and nitrogen scaling relations limit the activity and selectivity of NRR electrocatalysts. Technically, the combination of low nitrogen solubility, low ammonia production, and ubiquitous ammonia contamination raises the difficulty in experimental practices and considerably slows progress. Moreover, the wide variety and ambiguous description of experimental conditions between different studies lead to challenges, unreliability, and even misleading conclusions when directly comparing the results. Standard protocols and insightful strategies are urgently required for transformative success.
In order to improve the accuracy and reproducibility of claimed results and also discover new opportunities for future research, we systematically identify a series of aspects throughout the experiment that should be properly handled, including materials/chemicals/gases, cell configuration, electrolyte, working electrode, reference electrode, counter electrode, ion-exchange membrane, electrochemical measurement, ammonia detection, and activity merits. With a thorough analysis of all reported studies, we recommend a set of protocols and best practices for each aspect, especially highlighting the effective documentation of methods, rigorous conduct of experiments, transparent reporting of data, and responsible effort by the community. Together, it is expected to accelerate the field towards more meaningful and impactful achievements. Some directions in the field of electrocatalysts, cell configuration, and characterization techniques are envisioned. Given the significant mass transfer limitations of this process, we emphasize the importance of studying the catalyst–electrolyte interface in addition to the catalyst, which can be studied by many in situ or in operando analytical methods and optimized by surface modification of electrocatalysts, regulation of electrolyte composition, engineering of hydrodynamics, etc. With future efforts addressing the fundamental drawbacks and technological issues, we have confidence in the breakthrough of the ambient electrocatalytic NRR in the near future, and also its contributions to our society in the long term.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
S. Z. Qiao acknowledges financial support from the Australian Research Council through Discovery Project programs (DP160104866, DP170104464 and FL170100154). C. Tang thanks the open discussion from L. Q. Li, A. Vasileff, X. Liu, H. Y. Jin and J. J. Duan at The University of Adelaide, X. Y. Cui and H. F. Wang at Tsinghua University, H. Wang and L. X. Ding at South China University of Technology, X. Yang and J. H. Wang at University of Delaware, P. Chen at Anhui University, and S. Makart at Thermo Fisher Scientific.
References
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Philibert, Renewable Energy for Industry: From Green Energy to Green Materials and Fuels, IEA Report, 2017.

          H. Liu, Ammonia Synthesis Catalysts, World Scientific and Chemical Industry Press, China,  2013 Search PubMed .
J. G. Chen, R. M. Crooks, L. C. Seefeldt, K. L. Bren, R. M. Bullock, M. Y. Darensbourg, P. L. Holland, B. Hoffman, M. J. Janik, A. K. Jones, M. G. Kanatzidis, P. King, K. M. Lancaster, S. V. Lymar, P. Pfromm, W. F. Schneider and R. R. Schrock, Science, 2018, 360, eaar6611 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Xia, H. Wang, K. Huang, C. Qian, C. T. Maravelias and G. A. Ozin, Joule, 2018, 2, 1055–1074 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Foster, S. I. P. Bakovic, R. D. Duda, S. Maheshwari, R. D. Milton, S. D. Minteer, M. J. Janik, J. N. Renner and L. F. Greenlee, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 490–500 CrossRef .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H.-L. Du, D. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef .
Renewable Energy to Fuels Through Utilization of Energy-Dense Liquids (REFUEL) Program Overview, U.S. DOE, 2016.
A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, J. A. Schwalbe, M. Cargnello, K. Chan, T. F. Jaramillo, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 706–709 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
D. Yan, H. Li, C. Chen, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800331 CrossRef .
X. Cui, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800369 CrossRef .
T. Bligaard, R. M. Bullock, C. T. Campbell, J. G. G. Chen, B. C. Gates, R. J. Gorte, C. W. Jones, W. D. Jones, J. R. Kitchin and S. L. Scott, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2590–2602 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Stevens, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, M. R. Cosby, A. E. Vise, C. D. M. Trang and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 120–140 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Clark, J. Resasco, A. Landers, J. Lin, L. T. Chung, A. Walton, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo and A. T. Bell, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6560–6570 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Greenlee, J. N. Renner and S. L. Foster, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7820–7827 CrossRef CAS .
G.-F. Chen, S. Ren, L. Zhang, H. Cheng, Y. Luo, K. Zhu, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800337 CrossRef .
X. Cui, C. Tang, X.-M. Liu, C. Wang, W. Ma and Q. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18494–18501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lan, J. T. S. Irvine and S. W. Tao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1145 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Nash, J. Anibal, M. Dunwell, S. Kattel, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13387–13391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Martín, T. Shinagawa and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem, 2019, 5, 263–283 Search PubMed .
R. Battino, T. R. Rettich and T. Tominaga, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1984, 13, 563–600 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 618–622 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Du, T. R. Gengenbach, R. Hodgetts, D. R. MacFarlane and A. N. Simonov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6839–6850 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Tang, B. Xia, H. Jin, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2902–2908 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Lee, C. S. L. Koh, Y. H. Lee, C. Liu, I. Y. Phang, X. Han, C.-K. Tsung and X. Y. Ling, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar3208 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nazemi and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5160–5166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, L. M. Azofra, M. Ali, M. Kar, A. N. Simonov, C. McDonnell-Worth, C. Sun, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2516–2520 RSC .
L. Hu, A. Khaniya, J. Wang, G. Chen, W. E. Kaden and X. Feng, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9312–9319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, D. Johnson, R. Peng, D. K. Hensley, P. V. Bonnesen, L. Liang, J. Huang, F. Yang, F. Zhang, R. Qiao, A. P. Baddorf, T. J. Tschaplinski, N. L. Engle, M. C. Hatzell, Z. Wu, D. A. Cullen, H. M. Meyer, III, B. G. Sumpter and A. J. Rondinone, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, e1700336 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Yu, L. Hu, G. Chen, H. Xin and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1795 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-C. Hao, Y. Guo, L.-W. Chen, M. Shu, X.-Y. Wang, T.-A. Bu, W.-Y. Gao, N. Zhang, X. Su, X. Feng, J.-W. Zhou, B. Wang, C.-W. Hu, A.-X. Yin, R. Si, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 448–456 CrossRef .
S. Mukherjee, D. A. Cullen, S. Karakalos, K. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Zhao, H. Xu, K. L. More, G. Wang and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 217–226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dunwell, Y. S. Yan and B. J. Xu, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2018, 20, 151–158 CrossRef .
G.-F. Chen, X. R. Cao, S. Q. Wu, X. Y. Zeng, L.-X. Ding, M. Zhu and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9771–9774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, N. Lee, C.-Y. Yoo, J.-N. Kim, H. C. Yoon and J.-I. Han, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F610–F612 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, C.-Y. Yoo, J.-N. Kim, H. C. Yoon and J.-I. Han, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1523–F1526 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lazouski, Z. J. Schiffer, K. Williams and K. Manthiram, Joule, 2019, 3, 1127–1139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nash, X. Yang, J. Anibal, J. Wang, Y. Yan and B. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F1712–F1716 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, S. Q. Zhu, H. J. Wang, H. Li and M. H. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1496–1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kong, A. Lim, C. Yoon, J. H. Jang, H. C. Ham, J. Han, S. Nam, D. Kim, Y.-E. Sung, J. Choi and H. S. Park, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10986–10995 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L.-X. Ding, G.-F. Chen, X. Yang and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2612–2616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, R. Shi, X. Bian, C. Zhou, Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, F. Wu, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802109 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Skulason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdottir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Vegge, H. Jonsson and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1235–1245 RSC .
Y. Abghoui, A. L. Garden, J. G. Howat, T. Vegge and E. Skulason, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 635–646 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, S. Back, N. Y. Kim, J. Lim, Y. H. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7517–7525 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, D. H. Lee and C. Liu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800332 CrossRef .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 881–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Weekes, D. A. Salvatore, A. Reyes, A. X. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 910–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Cheng Tang
	Cheng Tang received his BEng and PhD from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, in 2013 and 2018, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Qiang Zhang and Prof. Fei Wei. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher at The University of Adelaide working with Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao. His research focuses on nanomaterials and energy electrocatalysis, including 3D graphene, hierarchical nanomaterials, oxygen reduction/evolution, hydrogen evolution, nitrogen reduction, etc.

Shi-Zhang Qiao
	Shi-Zhang Qiao is currently a Chair Professor and Australian Laureate Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide, Australia. Dr Qiao received his PhD in chemical engineering from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2000. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for electrocatalysis, photocatalysis and energy storage and conversion technologies. Dr Qiao is also a Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher (Chemistry, Materials Science). In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society) and the ARC, ARF and APD Fellowships.

Key learning points
• Rigorous and efficient experimental protocols to study electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction more reliably and meaningfully.
• Possible opportunities for studying catalysts, electrochemical cells, and characterization techniques to accelerate future research more efficiently and insightfully.
• The near-electrode interface is as important as the electrocatalyst when determining electrocatalytic activity and selectivity.
• The selectivity challenge of nitrogen reduction can only be solved by coupling highly favorable electrocatalysts with advanced electrochemical cell configurations.


 	Fig. 1  Energy efficiency for different ammonia synthesis strategies. (a) Conventional Haber–Bosch strategy and (b) electrocatalytic strategy. Adapted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  Present status of electrocatalytic NRR research. (a) Publications about ambient electrocatalytic NRR during the past three years, including nearly all reports using a H-type cell and single-chamber cell, and some important studies using a half-cell and flow cell. (b) Reported NRR electrocatalysts to date. The depth of color represents the number of reports. (c) Performance map of the reported electrocatalytic NRR in terms of NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency. Updated until April 12, 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  Mechanistic insights into electrocatalytic NRR. (a) Partial Pourbaix diagram for the N2–H2O system. Adapted with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) The calculated onset potentials for NRR and HER of different materials. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of a H-type cell. It shows all the details we emphasized.	 

Sample-N2-echem	

	Study the NRR activity of electrocatalysts preliminarily
Sample-Ar-echem	[NH3]ecat.,Ar	Check the contaminants from potential-dependent leaching/decomposition of the catalysts, impurities (such as NO3−) in the electrolyte chemicals, etc.
Bare WE-N2-echem	

	Check the contribution from the working electrode substrate (activity or contaminants), the contaminants from the inlet N2 gas (such as NOx), impurities (such as NO3−) in the electrolyte chemicals, etc.
Sample-N2-ambient	

	Check the ammonia contaminants from the inlet N2/Ar gas, leakage from the atmosphere, ammonia adsorbed on electrodes/reactors, impurities (such as NH4+) in the electrolyte chemicals, etc.
Sample-Ar-ambient	[NH3]ocat.,Ar
Bare WE-N2-ambient	


Sample-15N2-echem	

	Confirm the NRR activity of electrocatalysts, and check the potential-dependent leaching/decomposition of the catalysts, etc.
Sample-15N2-ambient	

	Check the contaminants from the inlet 15N2 gas (such as 15NH3), etc.

 	Fig. 5  Typical electrochemical measurements of NRR. (a) CV data of an Au film electrode in N2 or Ar saturated 0.1 M KOH with a scan rate of 2.5 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) CA data for the electrodeposited iron electrode in N2-saturated ionic liquids obtained at −0.8 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency of VN catalysts obtained at different potentials for 1 h tests. (d) Time-dependent NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency of VN catalysts at −0.1 V and −0.2 V vs. RHE for 8 h tests, respectively. (c) and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Flow diagram of recommended protocols to rigorously conduct NRR research.	 

 	Fig. 7  Possible research opportunities in electrocatalytic NRR. (a) Material engineering to improve the NRR selectivity with more attention on electrode surface and functionality decoupling. (b) Flow cell to alleviate mass transfer limitations and improve the NH3 yield. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Advanced characterization of the electrical double layer to probe the reaction mechanism and guide further optimization. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
