Energy harvesting and storage devices fused into various patterns   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA03235K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03235K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14977-14984Energy harvesting and storage devices fused into various patterns†

        
          
            Hao 
            Sun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yishu 
            Jiang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Longbin 
            Qiu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            You
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiahua 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xuemei 
            Fu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peining 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guozhen 
            Guan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhibin 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xuemei 
            Sun
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Huisheng 
            Peng
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Molecular Engineering of Polymers, Collaborative Innovation Center of Polymers and Polymer Composite Materials, Department of Macromolecular Science and Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China. E-mail: penghs@fudan.edu.cn
Received 
      3rd May 2015
    , Accepted 9th June 2015First published on 9th June 2015AbstractThe conventional connection of energy devices by electrically conducting wires is less efficient and inconvenient, even unavailable in many applications. Herein, a general and effective method is developed to connect energy harvesting or/and storage devices by simply stacking and gently pressing them. The energy devices are touched together and then rapidly fused into one by incorporating an electrically conducting carbon nanotube sheet and a self-healing polymer into a ladder structure. Flexible supercapacitors, perovskite solar cells and their integrated devices are demonstrated. Supercapacitors are fused into various patterns with tunable capacitances, perovskite solar cells are fused into one in series with linearly increasing output voltages, and supercapacitors and perovskite solar cells are also fused into an integrated device to simultaneously realize energy conversion and storage.
Energy harvesting and storage devices are widely used to power various electronic products in our life,1–6 and they are generally connected in series or parallel by a large number of electrically conducting wires to output voltages or currents.7 As a result, a complex fabrication is typically required to assemble them together with low efficiency but high cost. The introduction of many conducting wires further brings a severe safety issue due to the fear of short circuit, particularly, in booming portable and wearable electronic devices. Flexible power systems are also needed for a broad spectrum of applications besides the portable and wearable electronic facilities, but their complex connection may make the assembled power system rigid although all building energy units are flexible. Therefore, it is necessary to find new methods to connect many energy devices more efficiently.
Interestingly, Google launched a revolutionary modular smartphone project named “Ara” to assemble a smartphone from standardized modules in early 2015, allowing for a high customisation and longer lifetime (Fig. S1† and related references). The modular design is believed to be a mainstream in the future electronics. However, it is important while unavailable to assemble energy device modules into a continuous power system without the use of external conducting wires.
Such fusible energy devices are herein developed by designing an electrically conducting carbon nanotube (CNT) sheet and a self-healing polymer (SHP) into a ladder structure and standardized module. The CNT sheet and ladder structure make the fusible energy devices available to be connected in series or parallel, and the SHP layer fuses them into a patterned structure. The energy device units can be fabricated into standardized modules and connected with each other at edges to form a continuous film, number or letter and an even more complex pattern. Flexible supercapacitors and perovskite solar cells that have recently attracted increasing attention are studied as examples. High electrochemical storage and photovoltaic performances are well maintained for the fused device even under bending. These fusible energy devices can be produced for flexible power systems on a large scale.
The fusible energy device units had been made from mechanically and electrically healable electrodes which were composed of aligned CNT sheets and SHPs. The CNT sheet was dry-drawn from a spinnable CNT array that had been synthesized by chemical vapor deposition.8,9 Many CNT sheets were cross-stacked onto a SHP film in favor of fusions in both transverse and longitudinal directions (Fig. 1a). Some CNTs were embedded into the SHP film after a pressing treatment (Fig. 1b). As expected, the SHP layer could be healed after breaking, so small composite films were fused into a continuous larger one. As the aligned CNT sheet showed a high optical transmittance (over 80% in the range of visible light),9 the resulting composite film was transparent with the underlying symbols clearly observed (inset image in Fig. 1c). The composite film was thin and could float on water (Fig. S4†).
 Fig. 1  (a and b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of an aligned CNT/SHP composite film at low and high magnifications, respectively. (c) Photograph of a fused composite film. The inset image shows the composite film on a labelled paper. Scale bar, 5 mm. (d–i) Fusing process of the composite film traced by optical microscopy (d–f) and SEM (g–i). The labelled rectangles by dashed yellow lines in (d–f) correspond to the fused area. 
The self-healing ability of the SHP layer is important in fusing the energy devices at edges. The fusing process of two aligned CNT/SHP films was completed in ∼15 s at room temperature (Fig. 1d–f). The gap between the two composite films disappeared after the fusion by the generation of hydrogen bonds in the SHP. The morphology evolution of the “scar” during the fusing process had also been verified by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 1g–i). An aligned CNT strand was observed at the healed “scar” to bridge the aligned CNTs from the two sides.
To quantitatively verify the efficient connection, the electrical resistances of the two fused composite films were investigated after fusing. They had been connected by two formats, i.e., “face to face” and “side by side”, determined by the relative position of two films. The CNT layer was placed face to face with an overlapped section to enable the connection of the conducting pathway in a “face to face” fusion (Fig. 2a), while the two composite films were placed with the CNT and SHP layer being parallel to each other in a “side by side” fusion (Fig. 2b). The electrical resistances slightly increased by 4.6% and 7.6% after the “face to face” and “side by side” fusions compared with the total resistances of two composite films, respectively. The resistance variations varied below 7% and 24% for the face-to-face and side-by-side fused films under bending, respectively, indicating a high flexibility (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Resistance variations of two CNT/SHP composite films (20 × 8 mm) before and after fusing through face-to-face and side-by-side formats, respectively. The inset scheme indicated the connecting process. (c) Resistance variations of two CNT/SHP composite films (20 × 8 mm) connected by face to face and side by side under bending. (d–f) Schematic illustration, photograph and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of two fusible supercapacitors fused in series before and after twisting, respectively. (g–i) Photograph, schematic illustration and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (with increasing bending angles from 0 to 135°) of two fused supercapacitors under bending, respectively. (j–l) Photographs (j and k) and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (l) (with increasing twisting angles from 0 to 135°) of five fused supercapacitors under twisting. The current densities are 0.15 A g−1 in (f) and 0.30 A g−1 in (i), and the current in (l) is the same as (i). 
The fusible supercapacitor can be fabricated based on the aligned CNT/SHP composite films as two electrodes (Fig. S5†). Typically, poly(vinyl alcohol)–H3PO4 gel electrolyte was coated on the composite film, and the two electrodes were kept facing each other. A key and different design in the two electrodes was obtained to realize the fusible functionality. The conducting CNT sheet was left blank without coating the gel electrolyte at three edges of an electrode, while one edge was left free of the gel electrolyte at the other electrode. The above design realized the access of in series or parallel connection of different units, as well as a close contact between different electrodes (Fig. S6†).
Carbon materials, such as activated carbon, carbon fiber (carbon cloth), CNTs and graphene, have been widely investigated to fabricate flexible energy storage devices.10–16 For instance, carbon clothes are used as conducting substrates to fabricate flexible supercapacitors. However, the resulting devices generally demonstrate low specific capacitances due to a low specific surface area and generally require functionality or modification to enhance device performance.2b To this end, carbon nanomaterials with much higher specific surface areas show better electrochemical performances. For example, the electrodes based on multi-walled CNTs exhibited a specific capacitance of 6.5 F g−1,10 and chemically reduced graphene using hydrazine hydrate can produce high specific capacitances of 135 and 99 F g−1 in aqueous and organic electrolytes, respectively.11 A further enhancement in the energy storage performance may be achieved by introducing conducting polymers or metal oxides.15
The dependence of the capacitive performances on the CNT thickness was first explored. The galvanostatic charge–discharge curves were compared by increasing the CNT thickness from 80, 160 and 240 to 320 nm at the same current density of 0.15 A g−1 (Fig. S7a†). They shared a shape of a symmetric triangle that indicated a high reversibility during the charge–discharge process. The specific capacitances first increased from 10.39 to 15.68 F g−1 at increasing thicknesses from 80 to 240 nm due to the decreased resistance and then started to reduce with the further increase in the thickness, e.g., 13.65 F g−1 at 320 nm due to the less effective penetration of the gel electrolyte into thicker CNT sheets (Fig. S7b†), which was confirmed by the Nyquist plots (Fig. S8†). The charge transfer resistance (Rct) displayed a slight increase with the increasing thickness of CNT sheets (inset image in Fig. S8†). This phenomenon may be attributed to the fact that a thicker CNT sheet impedes the ion diffusion and migration process due to the hydrophobic nature of CNTs.14 The equivalent series resistance showed a decreasing trend from 315 to 200 Ohm with increasing thicknesses of CNT sheets from 160 to 240 nm; it slightly decreased to 180 Ohm when the thickness was further increased to 320 nm. The reason is that the electrical resistance of the electrode decreased with the increasing CNT thickness. Therefore, the CNT thickness of 240 nm was mainly studied as shown below.
The electrochemical properties of individual supercapacitors were first investigated. With increasing current densities from 0.15 to 1.50 A g−1, the symmetric triangle shape of the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves had been well maintained, indicating a high electrochemical reversibility during charge–discharge processes (Fig. S7c†). At increasing scan rates of 200, 500 and 1000 mV s−1, the rectangle shapes of CV curves further showed excellent electrochemical stability (Fig. S7d†). The high cyclic stability was verified by low specific capacitance variation (below 4.5%) after 10000 charge–discharge cycles (Fig. S7e†).
The energy storage performances can be further enhanced by introducing active materials with pseudocapacitances such as conducting polymers and metal oxides. Herein, polyaniline (PANI) was deposited onto aligned CNT sheets as a demonstration (Fig. S9†). The performances of supercapacitors based on bare CNT and CNT/PANI (PANI weight percentage of 70%) composite films were compared at the same current density of 0.75 A g−1 (Fig. S7f†). Large improvement in the specific capacitance of 185.2 F g−1 was obtained based on composite films, nearly 12 times higher than the bare CNT. A high reversibility during charge–discharge processes had also been observed for the CNT/PANI composite electrode at increasing current densities from 0.45 to 4.50 A g−1 (Fig. S10†). Satisfactory energy/power densities were achieved (6.82 W h kg−1 at 225 W kg−1 and 2.48 W h kg−1 at 2250 W kg−1) (Fig. S11†) and are comparable to previously reported flexible supercapacitors based on carbon and conductive polymer materials, e.g., ∼5.5 W h kg−1 at ∼264 W kg−1 based on the CNT/PANI composite electrode10 and ∼4.6 W h kg−1 at ∼27.5 W kg−1 based on the graphite/graphene/PANI composite electrode (on the basis of the total mass of the electrode).17 The specific capacitances had been further maintained by 88.5% after 2000 charge–discharge cycles (Fig. S12†).
These supercapacitors can be connected at the edges of two neighboring electrodes, and a gentle pressing at the joint section fused them into one device through the self-healing of SHP. Because a joint could be made from any edge, these supercapacitors could be assembled into various patterns via different connection formats. As a demonstration, Fig. 2d demonstrates the in-series connection in a face-to-face format. With the joint edges being fused together, the patterned supercapacitor remained stable without fatigue in the structure under twisting (Fig. 2e). To further verify the high stability of the fused supercapacitor pattern, the galvanostatic charge–discharge and CV curves of the building supercapacitors had been compared before and after twisting. The curves were overlapped in both kinds of curves, with the specific discharge capacitances varied by only 1.9% (Fig. 2f and S13†). The same high and stable electrochemical performance had also been verified after the incorporation of PANI (Fig. S14 and S15†). Besides twisting, it was also important to investigate the stability under bending. Fig. 2g and h show the in-series pattern under bending, and the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves were almost identical under increasing bending angles from 0° to 135° (Fig. 2i). More complex patterns could be produced according to this method, e.g., five supercapacitors were connected in a cross-shaped pattern by both in parallel and series connections (Fig. 2j). Satisfactorily, the pattern remained stable with increasing twisting angles from 0° to 135°, and the discharging time fluctuated below 5% (Fig. 2k and l).
It is simple and effective to vary the output voltages or currents from the fusible supercapacitors. Eight supercapacitors were fused in two formats (Fig. 3a–c) to tune the working voltage as 3.2 or 6.4 V (Fig. 3d). By fusing two more supercapacitors into the module (Fig. 3e–g), the working voltages were increased to 4 and 8 V, respectively (Fig. 3h). More complex patterns can be designed with twelve supercapacitors (Fig. 3i–k). Although the working voltage was the same for the fused supercapacitors as shown in Fig. 3b and i, the latter showed an increased discharging time by 28% compared with the former under the same current as more units were connected in parallel. Under an ideal situation, it is calculated to be enhanced by 33% (see ESI†), which verifies the effective fusion among neighboring supercapacitors.
 Fig. 3  (a). Schematic illustration of two kinds of connections for eight supercapacitors. (b–d) Photographs (b and c) and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (d) of the fused supercapacitors in (a). (e) Schematic illustration of two kinds of connections for ten supercapacitors. (f–h) Photographs (f and g) and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (h) in (e). (i and j) Schematic illustrations and photographs for twelve supercapacitors fused by different formats. (k) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the fused supercapacitors in (i) and (l). The inset images in (d, h and k) show the equivalent circuit of corresponding curves at the same charge–discharge current. Scale bar, 1 cm. 
Perovskite solar cells have been widely studied as next-generation photovoltaic devices due to the combined high power conversion efficiency and all-solid-state structure which are particularly favorable for flexible electronics.18–24 The above composite films had been also used to fabricate efficient perovskite solar cells with a fusible property (Fig. 4a and b). Briefly, indium tin oxide coated on polyethylene naphthalate had been sequentially spin-coated with TiO2, CH3NH3PbI3 and spiro-OMeTAD (detailed in the Experimental section), and a composite film typically with a CNT thickness of 320 nm was closely attached onto the spiro-OMeTAD layer serving as a back contact electrode to complete a fusible perovskite solar cell.25,26 The high electrical conductivity of the aligned CNT sheet offered both high charge extraction and transport with a short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage and fill factor of 15.30 mA cm−2, 1.06 V and 0.48, respectively, which produced a power conversion efficiency of 7.80% (Fig. 4c). As all components were flexible, the resulting perovskite solar cell was also flexible (Fig. S16†).
 Fig. 4  Fused perovskite solar cells and integrated devices. (a and b) Schematic illustration and photograph of a fusible perovskite solar cell, respectively. (c) J–V curve of a fusible perovskite solar cell. (d and e) Schematic illustration and photograph of two fusible perovskite solar cells being fused in series. (f) Current–voltage curves of individual and two fused perovskite solar cells. (g and h) Schematic illustration and photocharging and galvanostatic discharging curves of the integrated device composed of a supercapacitor and a perovskite solar cell, respectively. (i) Photocharging and galvanostatic discharging curves of the integrated eight units with increasing discharging current densities. The yellow and purple areas in (h) and (i) correspond to the photocharging and discharging processes, respectively. 
The same two fusible perovskite solar cells were fused into one in series by connecting the composite electrode from one device with the indium tin oxide electrode from the other device under mild pressing (Fig. 4d and e). The short-circuit current was slightly decreased by 6.4% while the open-circuit voltage had been doubled to 1.90 V (Fig. 4f). Of course, these fusible perovskite solar cells can be fused into various patterns, depending on the specific application. For instance, five perovskite solar cells were fused into one in series to increase the output voltage (Fig. S17†).
It is highly desired to simultaneously realize energy harvesting and storage in a single device.27,28 Fusible supercapacitors and perovskite solar cells had been also fused into an integrated device by connecting the composite electrode from a supercapacitor with the composite electrode from a perovskite solar cell (Fig. 4g). A switch was connected with the other two electrodes to control the photocharging and discharging processes. As an example, photovoltaic conversion was performed at the solar cell part, and the generated electric energy was stored in the supercapacitor when the switch was turned on. The photocharging process was terminated when the switch was turned off, and the charged supercapacitor can be then used to power an electronic device (Fig. 4h). The energy storage efficiency (ηstorage) and entire photovoltaic conversion and energy storage efficiency (η) were calculated from the following equations. (1) (2)here Q is the charge during the galvanostatic discharging process; Ein and ηconver are the incident solar energy and energy conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cell, respectively; I and tdischarge are the galvanostatic discharging current and time, respectively; U1 and U2 are the lowest and highest voltage, respectively; Pin is the illuminated light-energy density of 100 mW cm−2; S and tcharge are the effective area of the solar cell and photocharging time, respectively. The maximal ηstorage and η were found to be 72.1% and 4.3%, respectively. The output voltages and capacitances could be further controlled by varying the building units. The photocharging and discharging curves were similar, but the discharging voltages were 1.82 and 3.65 V for four and eight units, respectively (Fig. S18†). The integrated devices can stably discharge with increasing current densities (Fig. 4i).
It should be noted that although this work mainly focuses on a novel connection method for energy devices, the high device performance and efficient connection are largely dependent on the remarkable properties of used materials. For instance, aligned CNT sheets that are highly conductive not only serve as an excellent electrode material and framework for PANI but also enable an electrically fusible process with the assistance of the self-healing polymer; the self-healing polymer has determined the structural connection and offers the connection of conductive networks; electrochemically deposited PANI enhances the energy storage performance of the device. Without the featured functions of the above materials, the novel connection and high performance cannot be obtained. More efforts are on the way to further enhance the device performance by optimizing the material structure and fabrication process.
Conclusions
To summarize, a new family of fusible energy harvesting and storage devices has been developed as basic building units to produce flexible, integrated power systems. Compared with the traditional connection by external conducting wires, these fusible energy devices can be fused into various patterns at room temperature with high stability, high efficiency and low cost. In particular, they are assembled into desired patterns without complex templates and tedious fabrications, which remains difficult for the current technologies while becomes critical in many fields such as portable and wearable electronic devices. The novel design on the material and structure may represent a general and efficient strategy in the advancement of energy devices that require simple and efficient connections.
Experimental section
The synthesis of the SHP is described in the ESI.†29,30 A polymer/chloroform solution (0.1 g mL−1) was drop-cast onto clean glass slides to produce thin films. Aligned CNT sheets were drawn from spinnable CNT arrays synthesized by chemical vapor deposition with a height of 200 μm (Fig. S3†).8,9 The aligned CNT sheets (thickness of ∼20 nm for a single layer) were orthogonally overlapped onto a SHP film.
To fabricate supercapacitors, the aligned CNT/SHP composite film was cut into two different sizes of 10 × 8 or 8 × 6 mm and served as electrodes. The effective area of each supercapacitor was 6 × 6 mm, and the touched edge shared a width of ∼2 mm. 0.1 M aniline and 1.0 M H2SO4 were used as the electrolyte to perform the electro-polymerization at 0.75 V vs. SCE. The calculation of PANI mass was previously reported.10 A PANI weight percentage of 70% was investigated. For a CNT thickness of 240 nm, the loading PANI density was 39.5 μg cm−2. The poly(vinyl alcohol)–H3PO4 gel electrolyte with poly(vinyl alcohol) powder (1 g) in deionized water (9 mL) and H3PO4 (1 mL) was then coated on the film electrodes. The same two electrodes were assembled face to face after drying the gel electrolyte at room temperature for 4 h.
To fabricate a perovskite solar cell, an indium tin oxide-coated polyethylene naphthalate flexible substrate was sequentially washed with acetone, isopropanol and deionized water in an ultrasonic bath. TiO2 nanoparticles dispersed in ethanol were spin-coated onto the treated substrate at a rotation speed of 5000 rpm for 30 s. A layer of PbI2 was further deposited at a rotation speed of 4000 rpm for 30 s and dried at 80 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to room temperature, the resulting substrate was dipped into a CH3NH3I/isopropanol solution (10 mg mL−1) for 30 s and annealed at 80 °C for 30 min, followed by coating the spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer (61.4 mM of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9-spirobifluorene, 26 mM of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide and 55 mM of 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixed solvent of chlorobenzene and acetonitrile with a volume ratio of 20/1) at a rotation speed of 3000 rpm for 60 s. A CNT/SHP composite film with a CNT thickness of 320 nm was directly attached onto the hole transport layer to obtain the perovskite solar cell. The perovskite solar cell and supercapacitor were integrated into a single one by attaching their composite electrodes together.
The structures and morphologies were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi FE-SEM S-4800 operated at 1 kV) and optical microscopy (Olympus BX51). The electrical resistances were measured on a Keithley Model 2400 Source Meter. Cyclic voltammograms, galvanostatic charge–discharge curves and electro-polymerization data were obtained using an electrochemical workstation (CHI 660a). The cyclic charge–discharge measurement was performed on an Arbin multi-channel electro-chemical testing system (Arbin, MSTAT-5 V/10 mA/16 Ch). The J–V curves were obtained by using a Keithley 2420 Source Meter under illumination (100 mW cm−2) of simulated AM1.5 solar light derived from a solar simulator (Oriel-Sol3A 94023A equipped with a 450 W Xe lamp and an AM1.5 filter). The specific capacitance (C) of the electrode was calculated from the equation of Celectrode = 2 × (I × Δt)/(ΔV × m), where I, Δt, ΔV and m correspond to discharge current, discharge time, voltage variation and mass of the active material on one electrode, respectively.10,31 The photocharge and galvanostatic discharge curves were measured using an electrochemical workstation (CHI 660a) under illumination (100 mW cm−2).
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding support from MOST (2011CB932503), NSFC (21225417), STCSM (12nm0503200), the Fok Ying Tong Education Foundation, the Program for Special Appointments of Professors at Shanghai Institutions of Higher Learning, and the Program for Outstanding Young Scholars from the Organization Department of the CPC Central Committee.
References

  (a) Y. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Hu, G. Zheng, F. Zhao, H. Shao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3699 RSC .

  (a) J. Xu, M. Wang, N. P. Wickramaratne, M. Jaroniec, S. Dou and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2042 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Yu, Y. Zeng, C. Zhang, X. Lu, C. Zeng, C. Yao, Y. Yang and Y. Tong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10806 RSC ; 
  (c) D. S. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, W. C. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. M. Dai and Y. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) T. Chen, Y. H. Xue, A. K. Roy and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zeng, M.-S. Balogun, K. Mai, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4724 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Zeng, Y. Han, Y. Zhao, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, Y. Liu, H. Tang, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1402176 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, B. Zhu, W. Jiang, Y. Yang, W. R. Leow, H. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, H. Li, X. You, Z. Yang, J. Deng, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 345–349 CAS .
H. Sun, Z. Yang, X. Chen, L. Qiu, X. You, P. Chen and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 8434 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, Y. Jiang, G. Guan, X. Fang, J. Deng, P. Chen, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 9680 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Sun, W. Wu, H. Peng and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 124, 4722 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, H. P. Li, X. You, Z. B. Yang, J. Deng, L. B. Qiu and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 345 CAS .
H. Lin, L. Li, J. Ren, Z. Cai, L. Qiu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1353 Search PubMed .
M. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gwon, H. Kim, K. Lee, D. Seo, Y. Park, Y. Lee, B. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277 CAS .
J. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Wu, J. Lin, Z. Shen and X. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3709 CAS .
J. Liu, J. Sun and L. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19614 CAS .
J. Liu, M. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Jiang, J. Yan, Y. Huang, J. Lin, H. Fan and Z. Shen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xin, Y. Wang, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Huang and J. Zang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 167, 254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. R. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, I.-H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. A. Kulkarni, P. P. Boix, E. Z. Shi, A. Y. Cao, K. W. Fu, S. K. Batabyal, J. Zhang, Q. H. Xiong, L. H. Wong, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, L. Li, Y. Luo, R. He, L. Qiu, H. Lin and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 954 CAS .
P. Cordier, F. Tournilhac, C. Soulié-Ziakovic and L. Leibler, Nature, 2008, 451, 977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Tee, C. Wang, R. Allen and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, J. Deng, X. Chen, Z. Yang, J. Ren and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03235kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of an aligned CNT/SHP composite film at low and high magnifications, respectively. (c) Photograph of a fused composite film. The inset image shows the composite film on a labelled paper. Scale bar, 5 mm. (d–i) Fusing process of the composite film traced by optical microscopy (d–f) and SEM (g–i). The labelled rectangles by dashed yellow lines in (d–f) correspond to the fused area.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Resistance variations of two CNT/SHP composite films (20 × 8 mm) before and after fusing through face-to-face and side-by-side formats, respectively. The inset scheme indicated the connecting process. (c) Resistance variations of two CNT/SHP composite films (20 × 8 mm) connected by face to face and side by side under bending. (d–f) Schematic illustration, photograph and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of two fusible supercapacitors fused in series before and after twisting, respectively. (g–i) Photograph, schematic illustration and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (with increasing bending angles from 0 to 135°) of two fused supercapacitors under bending, respectively. (j–l) Photographs (j and k) and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (l) (with increasing twisting angles from 0 to 135°) of five fused supercapacitors under twisting. The current densities are 0.15 A g−1 in (f) and 0.30 A g−1 in (i), and the current in (l) is the same as (i).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a). Schematic illustration of two kinds of connections for eight supercapacitors. (b–d) Photographs (b and c) and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (d) of the fused supercapacitors in (a). (e) Schematic illustration of two kinds of connections for ten supercapacitors. (f–h) Photographs (f and g) and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves (h) in (e). (i and j) Schematic illustrations and photographs for twelve supercapacitors fused by different formats. (k) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the fused supercapacitors in (i) and (l). The inset images in (d, h and k) show the equivalent circuit of corresponding curves at the same charge–discharge current. Scale bar, 1 cm.	 

 	Fig. 4  Fused perovskite solar cells and integrated devices. (a and b) Schematic illustration and photograph of a fusible perovskite solar cell, respectively. (c) J–V curve of a fusible perovskite solar cell. (d and e) Schematic illustration and photograph of two fusible perovskite solar cells being fused in series. (f) Current–voltage curves of individual and two fused perovskite solar cells. (g and h) Schematic illustration and photocharging and galvanostatic discharging curves of the integrated device composed of a supercapacitor and a perovskite solar cell, respectively. (i) Photocharging and galvanostatic discharging curves of the integrated eight units with increasing discharging current densities. The yellow and purple areas in (h) and (i) correspond to the photocharging and discharging processes, respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03235k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
