Understanding the sodium storage mechanisms of organic electrodes in sodium ion batteries: issues and solutions  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE03637G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE03637G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1568-1592Understanding the sodium storage mechanisms of organic electrodes in sodium ion batteries: issues and solutions

        
          
            Ranjusha 
            Rajagopalan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yougen 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chuankun 
            Jia
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobo 
            Ji
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Haiyan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aHunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Power Sources, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, 410083, P. R. China. E-mail: wanghy419@csu.edu.cn; ygtang@csu.edu.cn
bCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114, P. R. China
Received 
      8th November 2019
    , Accepted 30th January 2020First published on 31st January 2020AbstractOrganic electrode materials offer a new opportunity to develop high energy/power density, low-cost, environmentally benign sodium ion batteries (SIBs). For many years this category of materials has not been considered as a potential electrode candidate for SIBs mainly because excessive research focused on inorganic materials due to their successful commercialization in the proven lithium ion battery (LIB) technologies. However, recently, many promising advancements have been made in the field of organic cathode and anode materials for SIB applications. This review for the first time consolidates and provides insights into the different sodium storage mechanisms observed in various categories of organic electrode materials. We believe that the fundamental understanding of the redox mechanisms that govern the electrochemical performances of SIBs is necessary to design new materials/electrodes and is beneficial for enhancing the existing properties of investigated compounds.
Ranjusha Rajagopalan
Ranjusha Rajagopalan received her PhD in Physics with specialization in battery technology from the University of Wollongong, Australia in 2017. She received her Master's and Bachelor's Degrees in Physics from Calicut University, India. She possesses another Master's (Nanosciences) and Doctoral (Chemical Engineering) Degree. She is currently working on functionalized organic/inorganic materials for developing high-performance metal-ion batteries, including sodium- and potassium-ion batteries at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, China. Her research interests include the enhancement of power and cycling performances of battery electrodes by designing novel materials and composites.
Yougen Tang
Yougen Tang earned his PhD in Materials Science at Central South University. In 2000, he was appointed a Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Central South University. He is the Director of the Institute of Chemical Power Sources and Materials at Central South University, and he is also the Head of the Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Power Sources. He has published over 200 refereed papers. His current research interests are focused on new energy materials and advanced batteries.
Chuankun Jia
Chuankun Jia is a Research Professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology. Dr Jia is the Group Leader of “the 100 Talented Team of Hunan Province” and Co-leader of “Hunan Provincial Base for Scientific and Technological Innovation Cooperation-Smart Energy Storage Lab”. He serves as an “External Reviewer” for Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong. His research focuses on designing materials for the applications of energy conversion and storage. He has 13 years of expertise in flow battery systems and has designed a series of high energy density redox flow batteries. His group has obtained more than 10 million CNY support from the Hunan Province and Changsha University of Science and Technology since October 2017.
Xiaobo Ji
Xiaobo Ji is a “Shenghua” Professor at Central South University and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, specializing in the research and development of batteries and supercapacitor materials and their systems. He received his PhD in Electrochemistry in 2007 under the supervision of Prof. Richard Compton at the University of Oxford and undertook postdoctoral work at MIT with Prof. Donald Sadoway.
Haiyan Wang
Haiyan Wang earned his BS (2005), MS (2008) and PhD (2012) degrees in Chemistry at Central South University. In 2010, he joined Prof. Peter G Bruce's group at the University of St. Andrews (UK) as a visiting PhD student. Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Central South University. At the beginning of 2016, he joined Prof. Minhua Shao's group at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology as a Hong Kong Scholar. He has published over 100 refereed papers. His current research interests are focused on new energy materials and advanced batteries.

Broader context
The global demand for energy is huge and growing at a rapid rate. Most of the widely used current resources have various drawbacks, such as non-sustainability and environment-polluting nature, which lead to climate change. Hence, the demand for safe and renewable energy sources has increased, which can guarantee our supply of energy. The development of renewable energy systems such as wind turbines, photovoltaic cells, and biomass plants has led to the investigation of more energy storage devices. Accordingly, batteries are one of the most versatile energy storage systems, which play an important role in the transition from the conventional-based fossil fuels to the advancing renewable energy technologies. The increasing demand to store a large amount of renewable energy in a sustainable fashion has generated great interest in sodium-ion battery technology. This has further led to the development of redox-active, cost-effective and environmentally benign electrode compounds. In this aspect, organic compounds are ideal because of their superior properties such as cost-efficient, sustainable, eco-friendly and abundant nature. Thus, it is beneficial to understand in depth the underlying charge storage mechanisms these materials for researchers to develop rational designs for practical sodium-ion storage and related devices.

Introduction
Currently, one of the major challenges for SIB technology is the slow charging and discharging rates, leading to low power performance. Also, a high charge/discharge rate can compromise the capacity value.1,2 Thus, to achieve better rate performances, more studies on the fundamental charging mechanism/molecular structure of electrode materials need to be carried out in detail. Even though the elemental properties of lithium and sodium are similar, the ∼25% larger size of Na+ creates a difficult situation for its insertion in the rigid crystal structure of inorganic materials,3,4 which compromises its ionic movement, resulting in slow charge/discharge performances. Additionally, the charge transportation and stability of the crystal structure are jeopardized. Thus, this challenge should be considered to obtain better sodium storage properties. However, it is impossible to reduce the size of the Na+ ion, but its insertion efficiency in the structure of materials can be improved. Accordingly, the use of organic materials is advantageous, where the molecular design strategy can be utilized, based on extending the π-conjugated system of a material.5 This fundamentally influences the way that these molecules bond with each other. Thus, this strategy generally leads to a terrace structured molecule, comprising widely spaced multiple layers, which can facilitate faster Na+ movement. The extended π-conjugated structures can also enhance the charge transportation and stabilize the charged and discharged states and hence better tolerate the fast intercalation/deintercalation of Na+ in SIBs.5 Organic materials also possess low molecular weights and are capable of the multiple electron transfer mechanism, which can lead to superior specific capacities.6–9 This category of compounds comprises earth-abundant materials, such as C, H, O, S, and N.10–14 Other advantages of using organic materials over inorganic compounds are as follows: (a) the organic materials can be obtained from biomass resources; (b) they can be disposed/recycled in a low cost/temperature method with low environmental impact because of the absence of metal phases; (c) they have flexible structures and thus can reversibly accommodate large ions such as Na without much spatial hindrance, leading to faster insertion/extraction kinetics; and (d) they show structural versatility and tunable nature and hence can be used to modify the electrochemical properties according to the application (Table 1 provides a general comparison of the properties of organic and inorganic materials).15,16 The idea of employing organic compounds as electrode materials for LIBs emerged at around the same time as that of inorganic compounds. Moreover, the first commercially available lithium batteries utilized a polymer-based ((CF)n–Li) configuration. However, although organic compounds have a relatively long history, the commercialization of inorganic-based LIBs has caused the research on organic compounds to be stagnant. Recently, scientists have been investigating the possible electrochemical properties of many inorganic compounds for use in both SIBs and LIBs. Also, based on the increase in the number of reports on organic compounds, it is well evident that the popularity of organic compounds has increased tremendously. However, greater efforts are required from academic and industrial groups to realize this potential system for practical applications. For instance, Lei et al. proposed an organic compound for SIBs, which exhibited a capacity of 160 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, with a capacity retention of 70% over 400 cycles.5,17 This material also exhibited a capacity of 72 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 (which is ∼1000 times greater than most of the earlier reported current rates for SIBs). In this work, they utilized the molecular design strategy through π-conjugated system extension to improve the rate performance of the battery. This strategy demonstrates a good way to build new electrode materials from the traditional inorganic and organic materials.5,17 These impressive results prove the potential application of organic compounds in practical SIBs. Hence, detailed analyses on the charge storage mechanism and molecular design of different organic electrode materials explored for SIBs need to be revisited to understand the potential advantages and challenges. Our literature assessment on organic materials for SIBs has shown that most articles are focused on the recent research and development of organic materials and their electrochemical performances. However, the motivation behind the present review was to consolidate the different sodium-ion storage mechanisms observed in various categories of organic electrode compounds reported to date. Accordingly, this review focuses on the in-depth and comprehensive analysis of the charge storage mechanisms of different organic electrodes, their molecular structural designs, potential applications, challenges and future opportunities. Moreover, solutions to the current issues and the electrochemical performance evaluations of potential organic materials are also provided for the benefit of readers. We believe that besides SIBs, this review can also provide insight in the field of organic electrodes for other rechargeable energy storages, such as LIBs and potassium-ion batteries.
Table 1 Comparison of the general properties of organic and inorganic materials




Property
Organic
Inorganic




Bonding nature
Generally covalent
Generally ionic


Forces between molecules
Normally weak
Normally strong


Melting point
Low
High


Thermal stability
Low
High


Solubility
Low solubility in water and high solubility in aprotic solvents
Mostly soluble in water and low solubility in aprotic solvents


Electric properties
Insulating to conducting
Semiconducting to conducting


Density
Low
High


Mechanical properties
Elasticity, plasticity and flexible nature
Hardness, fragility and rigid nature


Chemical reaction
Slow rate
Fast rate


Flammability
Generally flammable
Generally nonflammable


Electrochemical properties
Versatile
Usually fixed nature


Structure
Mostly complex but tunable
Mostly simple but rigid


Availability
Millions of compounds
Thousands of compounds




Evolution of organic electrodes for SIBs
The application of organic electrodes for SIB is not a new technology. Studies in the 80's explored the possibility of using organic electrodes for Na+ insertion. A schematic illustration of the evolution of organic materials for SIBs is presented in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Evolution of organic compounds for SIBs with time (starting from 1985 to 2019). 
In 1985, Shacklette et al. demonstrated the possibility of using two polymer-based anodes, polyacetylene and polyphenylene, for non-aqueous rechargeable batteries, including SIBs.18 In their study, they reported the possible intercalation mechanism of polyacetylene19 using an electrolyte of sodium tetraethylborate in 2-methyltetrahydrofuran and in poly(p-phenylene), [C6H4Nay]x.18 The ion insertion reaction of these compounds is as follows: [P]x + xyC+ ↔ [P−yCy+]x(1)where P represents the repeat unit of polymer, C is the inserted cation, y is the fractional charge per repeat unit (frequently called the doping level), and x denotes the degree of polymerization. They also reported that the alkali-metal insertion in these compounds continued through a sequence of stoichiometric phases. The transformations between phases were dominated by the electrochemistry of reduced polyacetylene and poly(phenylene). Further, this study revealed a ∼100% Coulombic efficiency for redox cycles. In addition, it was proposed that the reduction process of these compounds did not proceed through a simple reversible process. Even before this study, the possible intercalation of polyacetylene as a cathode material was investigated for Li insertion.20 Later in 1990, a research group investigated the properties of thin-film polyparaphenylene doped by cations such as, Li+, Na+ and K+ using an electrochemical method in poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)-based solid-state cells. They reported that the doping and un-doping proceeded in consecutive stages, resulting in the formation of reversible phases. Also, a high level of doping was demonstrated through this technique, leading to a stable doped-polyparaphenylene.21 In the same year, another research group presented the electrochemical performance of tetracyanoethylene (TCNE) when employed as a depolarizer for high-temperature SIBs. The electrode demonstrated an energy density of ∼620 W h kg−1 with a voltage of >3.0 V against Na+/Na.22 This study also reported a novel configuration to achieve a high energy rechargeable battery by assembling the cell in a particular manner; that is, Na/β-alumina solid electrolyte/molten electrolyte + depolarizer/current collector (or TCNE). Until recently, the research on organic compounds as electrode materials for SIBs was stagnant. However, currently, many research groups across the globe have started in-depth investigations on organic compounds to explore their potential sodium-storage properties.23–26
Charge storage mechanisms
Knowledge on the in-depth charge storage mechanisms of electrode materials is very important in the design of functional batteries. Most of the investigated organic compounds suffer from poor electrochemical performances, such as low cycling stability, poor rate performances and inferior specific capacity.27–30 One method to solve this issue is to closely analyze the intermediate free radicals produced upon Na+ insertion/extraction, and then implement the necessary modifications in the compound. The reduction reactions of CC, CN, NN and CO (unsaturated bonds) in organic compounds generally result in the formation of intermediate radicals with the majority of the negative charge located on N and O and the unpaired electron situated on C. These intermediate radicals are normally unstable and can form inactive compounds immediately either by interacting with the electrolyte molecules or among the radicals. This affects the reversibility of the oxidation/reduction reaction, resulting in a poor cycle life.31,32 This has been observed in the redox-process behaviour in carbonyl-based organic materials. For instance, dichloroisocyanuric acid (DCCA), a tri-carbonyl compound, was reported to demonstrate irreversibility because of the generation of inactive compounds.33 Thus, it is necessary to stabilize the produced intermediate radicals in the redox process to enhance the reversibility. The common strategy to stabilize the radicals is through the modification of conjugated compounds via the incorporation of pairs of unsaturated groups, leading to reversible breaking/re-formation of unsaturated bonds via an unpaired electron internal-consumption process.32,34–36 Other suitable techniques include employing crosslinks in the compound and increasing the formula weight of the compound, leading to a reduction in solubility of the molecular intermediate radicals.37,38 However, due to the versatile nature of organic compounds, each material behaves in a different manner during the charge storage mechanism.39–41 Thus, a detailed analysis on the electrochemical charge storage process for each category of materials is required to design better performing electrodes for functional SIBs.
Carbonyl compounds (CO bond reactions)
Quinones and ketones
The redox mechanism of organic compounds generally depends on the charge-state changes of their redox-active units or moieties. Furthermore, n-type organic molecules such as carbonyl compounds can be used as both anode and cathode materials based on their redox potentials.42–46 In conjugated carbonyl materials, the charge storage process can be defined through the redox processes of CO,47 where the CO bond energy is significantly affected by the chemical environment. In this type of compound, the negative charge stabilization during the reduction process of the carbonyl unit depends on the generation of more aromatic moieties. This category of compounds normally demonstrates huge capacity fading because of their dissolution in organic electrolyte. Moreover, the dissolved organic entities in the electrolyte migrate through the anode and cathode sides, leading to a shuttle effect, resulting in a low capacity with low Coulombic efficiency.48 There are various techniques to solve this drawback, such as compositing organic materials with advanced carbon, optimizing the electrolytes with enhanced viscosity, preparing salts with improved polarity, fabricating superior separators, and polymerization to obtain a higher molecular formula/weight.48 The exact storage mechanism of carbonyl compounds is yet to be unravelled. However, a recent study proposed the charge storage mechanism of this class of compounds by taking the sodium salt of 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone (2,5-DBQ) (Na2C6H2O4) as an example.49 The structure of this compound comprises an alternating octahedral inorganic layer of Na–O units and organic layer of π-stacked benzene rings in spatial arrangement. In this study, the experimental/calculation data revealed that the inorganic layer of Na–O gave Na+ transportation pathways and storage sites, although the organic layer of the benzene rings offered electron transportation pathways and redox active centers.49 Moreover, this study also analyzed and proposed the structural evolution of the material during the sodium insertion/extraction process using in situ XRD.

Fig. 2(a) and (b) demonstrate the structural changes in Na2C6H2O4 during the initial redox processes.49 At the start of the first discharge, all the XRD peaks showed the triclinic phase of Na2C6H2O4. The existence of 2 quinone groups in the crystal structure allowed insertion and extraction of 2 Na+, which was observed in the first discharge process, where Na2C6H2O4 changed to Na4C6H2O4via a 2-phase process. The evolution of new peaks at 14.6°, 24.9°, 31.8°, and 37.5° and the disappearance of the peaks at 15.2°, 16.7°, 31°, and 40.6° were noted.49 The initial charge profile showed 2 plateaus at voltages of 1.30 and 1.60 V, demonstrating that the intercalated 2 Na atoms were individually deintercalated, which further indicated the intermediary tri-anion radical. Specifically, when charging to a voltage of 1.40 V, the Na4C6H2O4 phase initially formed Na3C6H2O4 (an intermediary-phase), which was observed through the appearance of new peaks at 25.8° and 27.3°. With the complete extraction of both Na+ from the Na4C6H2O4 phase, the XRD profile transformed back to the triclinic Na2C6H2O4 phase. The intermediate-phase formed during the first charge process demonstrated high reversibility in the subsequent cycles (Fig. 2(c) and (d)).49Fig. 2(e) represents the reaction path of the compound. The completely discharged state and an intermediary charged states, that is Na4C6H2O4 and Na3C6H2O4, respectively, are highly susceptible to water and air in the atmosphere. The structure of these materials can be represented as an alternative packing of 2,5-DBQ organic layers and Na–O inorganic layers in the c direction. From Fig. 2(f) and (g), it can be seen that the layered structure remained unaltered in the sodium insertion process. Also, it is evident that the introduced Na atoms were stored in the Na–O polyhedron inorganic layers, this can also provide migration pathways for Na+ in the ab direction. For sodium intercalation, the coordination conditions of the Na atoms and carbonyl units become altered significantly. In Na2C6H2O4, all the Na atoms are associated with six neighbouring oxygen atoms from the five nearby 2,5-DBQ and each carbonyl unit is associated with three different Na atoms. For the Na4C6H2O4 molecule (i.e. in the discharged state), the 2 symmetry-independent Na atoms are associated with five neighbouring oxygen atoms, and thus configure an inorganic layer. In this phase, the coordination number of the Na atom in the carbonyl group increased from three to five. Fig. 2(h and i) demonstrate the structure of the intermediate state (Na3C6H2O4). One Na atom is located in an octahedral surrounded with a coordination number of six and the other 2 Na atoms reside in a pyramidal arrangement with a coordination of five, forming inorganic layers with an alternating arrangement of octahedral and pyramidal units along the b-axis. Fig. 2(j) and (k) represent the 2,5-DBQ units and Na+ tube/ball format. In this study, it was also reported that the angle between the identical planes of benzene and the bc is reduced upon sodium insertion, and the benzene ring rotates about its center (Fig. 2(l)–(q)), which leads to a considerable expansion of the distance between the nearby benzene rings to 3.282 and 3.734 Å.49 This reveals that the sodium insertion leads to a significant motion of all the oxygen atoms and benzene. Another study revealed the effective way to achieve reversible 4-Na storage in a disodium rhodizonate (Na2C6O6) compound.50 This study reported that the reversible phase transition, even if it is kinetically limited upon desodiation, is required for the effective redox reaction of 4 electrons. It was also demonstrated that the understanding of the redox mechanism is necessary to effectively utilize the redox compounds to achieve high performance. With this understanding, an electrode was designed, which could provide 4-Na storage with a capacity of 484 mA h g−1,50 where the carbonyl groups in the molecules act as electrochemical active sites, offering a superior theoretical capacity.
 Fig. 2  
In situ XRD patterns upon first (a and b) and second (c and d) discharge/charge of the Na/Na2C6H2O4 cell with a C-rate of C/20 in the potential window of 1.0 and 2.0 V. (e) Schematic illustration of the reaction process. Crystal structure of Na3C6H2O4 (f) layered structure (yellow: Na–O square pyramid, and green: Na–O octahedron), (h) along the a-axis direction and (j) along the b-axis, and layered structure of Na4C6H2O4 (g), (i) along the a-axis and (k) along the b-axis directions. Angles between the benzene rings and bc plane (blue) in (l) Na2C6H2O4, (m) Na3C6H2O4, and (n) Na4C6H2O4. Rotation of the benzene rings in (o) Na2C6H2O4, (p) Na3C6H2O4, and (q) Na4C6H2O4 (reprinted with permission from (Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500330). Copyright (2015) American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
Further, to understand the phase evolution, in situ synchrotron XRD was conducted (Fig. 3(a)). During the initial plateau (∼2 V of discharge: 1.5 Na insertion), the XRD patterns revealed a phase change from α to γ. With the complete fading of the α-phase, additional discharge to 1.0 V (∼0.5 Na insertion) led to the formation of a small peak at q of 2.74, resulting in another phase transformation. Subsequently, charging from 1.0 V to 2.4 V (about 1.0 Na extraction) resulted in the formation of multiple step peaks in the q range of 2.7 to 2.8, which is consistent with the numerous plateaus in the charge curve. However, the peaks from the initial α-stage were not formed yet. Upon charging to 2.9 V, a positive shift in the representative peaks of the γ-phase appeared. Then continuous charging from 2.9 V to 3.2 V resulted in a 2-phase section, demonstrating the phase transition from γ-Na2.5C6O6 to α-Na2C6O6 (Fig. 3(b)). This in situ XRD characterization revealed the reversible phase transformation during the redox process. The characteristic plateau at ∼3.0 V with an overshoot resulted from the γ- to α-phase transition in the initial cycle; however, it did not appear in subsequent cycles (Fig. 3(d)). Also, this study demonstrated that in the second cycle, the peaks from the α-phase reformed at 2.2 V, which is much earlier than that in the first cycle. It was proposed that this phenomenon may be an indication of accelerated kinetics for the γ- to α-phase transition. This was further explained by the sodium-driven morphological changes observed in the SEM images during the first charge/discharge cycle (Fig. 3(c) and (e)). The size of the uncycled electrode material was about 300 nm and conductive carbon additive was ∼50 nm (Fig. 3(c)). During the sodiation process, the particles maintained their initial morphology. Also, when recharged to 2.9 V, the morphology was maintained as well. However, when charged to 3.2 V (i.e. the material was fully converted back to the initial α-phase), there was an obvious morphological change. The higher magnification image revealed the formation of nanosized grains (<50 nm) within the primary particles (Fig. 3(e)). From these observations, it was proposed that the high activation barrier for the phase transition drove the generation of metastable phases (γ-Na2.5C6O6) during the first charge process.50 This may be due to the difficulty in the direct nucleation of α-Na2C6O6, which involves the whole slab movement, and thus is not kinetically viable. Hence, by reducing the active size of the particle, the kinetic barrier for the phase transition can decrease. Thus, in the subsequent cycles, the lower activation energy permitted the direct nucleation of α-Na2C6O6 even under 2.2 V.50Fig. 3(f) demonstrates a schematic illustration of the proposed redox mechanisms for Na2C6O6. During sodiation, α-Na2C6O6 becomes transformed into γ-Na2C6O6 (because it is energetically more suitable with the addition of sodium). However, during the charging process (Na extraction), the reverse structural transformation is kinetically repressed, leading to partial desodiation.50 Hence, the recharged electrode maintains its γ-phase with partial sodiation (Na2+xC6O6), which considerably reduces the redox activity of the material in the following charge/discharge cycles. Nonetheless, a complete reversible phase transition in the constant voltage range can be probable by reducing the size of the particle and choosing an appropriate electrolyte. Many studies have reported that diethylene glycol dimethyl ether (DEGDME) is the most effective electrolyte to facilitate phase transitions.51,52 Thus, the strong solvation of DEGDME can result in the dissociation of Na+ from the dianion salt, and enable elimination of Na from the metastable γ-Na2.5C6O6 compound in the desodiation process, leading to a lower kinetic barrier for the phase changes. Other ways to achieve good cycling stability in disodium rhodizonate are by controlling the solubility of the material (by molecular design) and determining an appropriate electrochemical window, which is necessary to avoid the dissolution of the electrode material.53 The selection of the binder is also a crucial step to obtain the desired stability. As reported in various studies, the poly(vinylidenedifluoride) binder tends to undergo decomposition during the charge/discharge process, and hence is not a suitable binder. This highlights the importance of proper binder selection to achieve long cycling stability.53,54 In addition, it is also important to have good charge transportation and ionic diffusion pathways for the fast redox mechanism.53 The importance of the morphology of the electrode materials has also been realized. For instance, the flake-like morphology can accelerate ionic diffusion, thus leading to a capacitive effect, which favours the fast charge/discharge process.53 A research group constructed reversible/stable tri-carbonyl-based materials by restricting the reactivity of intermediate radicals.53
 Fig. 3  Phase transformation of Na2C6O6 upon sodiation/desodiation. (a) In situ synchrotron XRD characteristics of the electrodes and the corresponding potential curve at 30 mA g−1. The red and blue lines are the Bragg peaks from γ-Na2.5C6O6 and α-Na2C6O6, respectively. (b) Crystal structure transformation from γ-Na2.5C6O6 to α-Na2C6O6. (c–f) Morphological changes while reversible phase changes and proposed redox mechanism for sodium storage of Na2C6O6. (c) SEM images of the electrodes at various stages of charging during the first cycle in DEGDME electrolyte (scale bar: 200 nm). (d) Charge profiles for the first four cycles in DEGDME. (e) Higher magnification SEM images of Na2C6O6 nanoparticles upon desodiation from 2.9 to 3.2 V. (f) Schematic representation of the proposed de/sodiation mechanism of Na2C6O6 (reprinted with permission from (Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 861). Copyright (2017) Springer Nature). 
This study also proposed the sodiation/desodiation mechanism in tris-N-salicylideneanthraquinoylamine (TSAQ) electrode (Fig. 4(a)). Initially, the reduction of quinone (at ∼1.2 V) leads to the generation of sodium enolate (TSAQ-6Na). At about 0.7 V, the 3e− reduction reaction of β-keto occurs, leading to the rupture of a 12-π-e− Hückel ring and the creation of a 9-π-e− aromatic Hückel ring, which then changes to benzyl intermediates (α-C˙ radical), and finally settles by the combined reaction of enamine and the formed benzene ring (i.e. TSAQ-9Na). The α-C˙ intermediate is anticipated to be electrophilic in nature, and thus attracts a further e− (α-C− anion) and then is coordinated with Na+, leading to the formation of TSAQ-12Na (Fig. 4(a)). All the aforementioned reactions are highly reversible, resulting in a stable cycling performance. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 4(b), the 3e− reduction of dichloroisocyanuric acid (DCCA) also provides a C˙ intermediate (DCCA-3Na). Nevertheless, the formed DCCA-3Na immediately leads to the formation of an electro-inactive compound (DCCA-3Na-A) due to the side-reaction in the radical or with the electrolyte, resulting in an inferior cycling performance.53 Further, the quantum calculation of the Na storage process using the density functional theory (DFT) method was shown in Fig. 4(c). The molecular orbital theory states that the LUMO energy represents a higher affinity towards electron and larger reduction voltage. However, the gap between the LUMO and the HOMO levels (Eg) demonstrates the electronic conduction.32,55 As shown in Fig. 4(c), the LUMO levels of both TSAQ-6Na and TSAQ-9Na are adjacent, leading to sloping charge/discharge curves in the range of 0.7–0.05 V (Fig. 4(d)). However, the LUMO level of TSAQ is 1.01 eV less than that of TSAQ-6Na, resulting in a comparatively larger plateau of around 1.2 V in the charge/discharge profile (Fig. 4(d)). This study also reported that the theoretical analysis of the various intermediates showed a planar rigid nature, demonstrating the strong sterically hampered outcome from the aromatic rings to stabilize the intermediates in materials based on tri-β-ketoamine.32
 Fig. 4  (a) Reversible sodium insertion/extraction process in the TSAQ electrode. (b) Formation of inactive material of DCCA electrode (‘A’ represents the groups reacting with the radical intermediate). (c) Quantum chemical calculations analysis of the LUMO/HOMO of TSAQ, TSAQ-6Na, TSAQ-9Na and TSAQ-12Na. (d) Charge/discharge curves at a current density of 50 mA g−1 (reprinted with permission from Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13318. Copyright (2016) from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License). 
Carboxylate compounds
The sodium storage properties of carboxylate compounds have been reported in various carboxylate-based materials.56–59 For instance, studies on disodium terephthalate (Na2TP) compounds as anode materials have demonstrated that the sodium storage properties and voltages can be tuned via chemical alteration of the terephthalate ion in Na2TP.60,61 Also, studies have reported that 2 Na can interact with 2 carboxylate units in Na2TP during the sodium insertion process.60,62 For instance, a study demonstrated that when 2 Na atoms participated in the redox process a specific capacity of 250 mA h g−1 with 74.4% capacity retention at the end of 50 cycles could be attained in Na2TP.62 This material also demonstrated an average voltage of ∼0.43 V vs. Na+/Na. It was also revealed that a thin Al2O3 coating on the material could further enhance the electrochemical performances (specific capacity of 250 mA h g−1 and cycling stability of 79.8% after 50 cycles).62 However, the crystal structure of the material seems to be disturbed significantly with these 2 incorporated Na atoms per Na2TP unit. Thus, the design of potential electrodes based on Na2TP requires a much deeper understanding on the sodium storage process. A recent study proposed a detailed theoretical report on the sodium binding mechanism in Na2TP using DFT analysis.63 This study revealed that the interaction of Na atoms with the carboxylate groups of Na2TP governs the formation of half-sodiated Na2+1TP. Subsequently, the binding of Na occurs at the hexagonal site of benzene. The most stable conformational isomer upon the incorporation of various numbers of Na atoms is demonstrated in Fig. 5(a).
 Fig. 5  (a) Most stable conformal isomers of one to eight Na atoms inserted in the Na2TP-planar crystal, where the last figure corresponds to 2 Na atoms inserted per formula unit (blue spheres: inserted Na atoms). Density of states (DOS) plots of (b) clean, (c) single Na, (d) 2 Na and (e) 8 Na inserted Na2TP-planar. The Fermi level is demonstrated as dotted lines and set as zero in all the cases (reprinted with permission from (J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 572). Copyright (2016) Elsevier). 
Also, in this study it was reported that the calculated binding energies (BEs) of Na are stronger (BE with 0.25 Na for each molecule is −1.272 eV) than the cohesive energy (calculated: −1.089 eV) of the bulk bcc Na, demonstrating that Na prefers binding with Na2TP rather than transforming to bulk Na metal. The estimated BEs for all the conformational isomers (Fig. 5(a)) are presented in Table 2. All the inserted Na atoms bind with the oxygen atoms through the ionic bond at the oxalate group. Upon the incorporation of a single Na, the volume increase of the planar Na2TP molecule was observed to be 0.17%.
Table 2 Calculated average Na binding energies per Na atom with Na2TP-planar crystal




No. of inserted Na atoms

E
Naba (averg.)

E
Nabb (averg.)
Bader chargeb [e]





a Calculated binding energies based on Na interactions only with carboxylate groups.
b Calculated binding energies and average charges on inserted Na atoms based on the most stable conformations (i.e. inserted Na atoms either at the carboxylate groups or at hexagonal sites).
c Calculated binding energies from spin polarized calculations.
d Calculated binding energies using a larger (3 × 1 × 1) supercell.





1
−1.272 [−1.274]c [−1.273]d
−1.272
0.81


2
−1.338 [−1.336]c [−1.336]d
−1.338
0.82


3
−1.337 [−1.337]c [−1.336]d
−1.337
0.82


4
−1.351 [−1.351]c [−1.350]d
−1.351
0.82


5
−1.289 [−1.292]c [−1.291]d
−1.332
0.85


6
−1.269 [−1.270]c [−1.270]d
−1.361
0.84


7
−1.273 [−1.271]c [−1.271]d
−1.373
0.84


8
−1.269 [−1.269]c [−1.268]d
−1.378
0.84




The density of state (DOS) estimation shows that the Fermi level shifts to the inside of the conduction band (CB) of Na2TP during the incorporation of an Na atom in Na2TP-planar. Thus, the CB becomes partly occupied, implying that the Na insertion into Na2TP-planar provides its electron to the empty positions in the CB (Fig. 5(b)–(e)). The estimated highest BE of an Na positioned at the hexagonal site of the benzene in the terephthalate ion is −0.895 eV. Also, it was pointed out that the BE at the hexagonal position is much lower than the cohesive energy (−1.089 eV) of bulk bcc Na. Moreover, the estimated Bader charge on the Na atom incorporated at the hexagonal position is +0.78e, while the same at the carboxylate site is +0.81e.63 These calculation results demonstrate that not only the BE is weaker for binding an Na atom at the hexagonal position of Na2TP, but also the electron donation is weaker compared to the carboxylate site of Na2TP. Thus, it is predicted that the binding of Na at the hexagonal site is not necessary for Na storage in the Na2TP molecule. Further, the crystal volume of Na2TP-planar can be increased to 3.39% when the Na is inserted into the hexagonal site. In addition, the DOS calculation revealed that the Na at the hexagonal location can also donate its electron from the valence state to the empty space in the CB. Thus, from these calculations, it can be concluded that for the Na2TP molecule, there are only 2 types of Na binding sites, carboxylate and hexagonal.63 In the same study, it was also revealed the effective second Na insertion into the Na2TP-planar molecule. The energy of the second Na binding at the site of the carboxylate unit is stronger than that at the hexagonal site (which is similar to the first Na atom) (Fig. 5(a) and Table 2). The estimated highest average BE per Na atom insertion is −1.338 eV. If the 2 Na atoms are inserted only at hexagonal positions, the BE will be −0.926 eV per Na atom, which is considerably weaker than the cohesive energy of bcc Na.63 They estimated the BEs of higher Na concentrations, where the most stable structure was selected to continue the insertion process. The estimated highest BEs per atom of the third (−1.337 eV) and fourth (−1.351 eV) Na atom insertions at the carboxylate site are provided in Table 2 (corresponding structure is given in Fig. 5(a)). The BE of 4 Na atoms inserted at the hexagonal site was calculated to be −0.960 eV per Na atom. Hence, with up to 4 Na atoms incorporated, it was proposed that the Na atoms bind at the carboxylate group, and the carbon backbone is not significant for Na binding. However, the fourth Na atom favours (highest BE of −1.332 eV) the hexagonal site rather than the carboxylate site (Table 2 and Fig. 5(a)). Nevertheless, Na binding only at the carboxylate site demonstrated the highest average BE for 5 Na atoms (−1.289 eV, per Na atom).63
The Na atom BEs at the hexagonal site of the most stable first, second and third Na atoms inserted into Na2TP are −1.037, −1.101 and −1.118 eV, respectively, suggesting that the BE at the hexagonal sites becomes stronger with an increase in Na concentration. Also, for higher Na concentrations of over 5 Na atoms (i.e. 6, 7 and 8-BEs are −1.361, −1.373 and −1.378 eV, respectively), the Na atoms prefer to bind at the hexagonal rather than carboxylate sites (Table 2 and Fig. 5(a)). With the incorporation of 8 Na atoms, Na2TP is transformed into Na2+2TP. The BE of a single Na atom in the Na2+2TP structure is −0.296 eV, which is significantly lower than the cohesive energy of bulk bcc Na. This predicts that the Na2TP structure can accommodate a maximum of 2 Na atoms per molecule.63 Another study reported the molecular structure and the sodium storage process in the tetrasodium salt of 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid (Na4DHTPA) (Fig. 6(a)), where the small organic molecule connects the phenolic enolate and carboxylate units at the two para sites of benzene (with a theoretical capacity of 187 mA h g−1), irrespective of its use (i.e. as an anode or cathode).35 Further, the electron delocalization effect of the carboxylate units and the electron-donating capability of the enolate groups individually demonstrate a positive and negative shift in de-sodiation and in sodiation voltage, respectively, resulting in an enlarged voltage gap for both redox pairs. In addition, the conjugation effects of each functional unit together with a strong benzene core can efficiently stabilize the species during redox processes. Moreover, the generation of a tetrasodium salt can effectively avoid the solubility in organic electrolytes, and also function as an Na-reservoir to elude the usage of Na metal, leading to enhanced safety. A study demonstrated the Na storage properties of sodium perylenetetracarboxylate (Na4C24H8O8) and explored the reversible binding of Na+ with the carboxylate units.64 This study reported a specific capacity of ∼100 mA h g−1 at a narrow potential window of 0.8–0.6 V vs. Na+/Na with negligible capacity degradation even after 100 cycles, which shows the potential application of this material in SIBs. It was found that the storage process of the compound proceeded by the electron transfer to/from the conjugated Na4C24H8O8 rings together with Na+ addition and removal (Fig. 6(b)). To further investigate the charge storage mechanism, ICP-AES analysis was carried out and the number of Na+ cycled in the electrode quantified. From this analysis, it was revealed that the fully discharged state (0.3 V) of the compound showed a composition of Na6.09C24H8O8, corresponding to 1.79 inserted-Na+ coordinated to the carboxylate site. Upon full recharge to 3 V, the composition recovered back to Na4.3C24H8O8, revealing the total removal of Na+ from the molecule (Fig. 6(b)).64 Another study utilized the benefits of the extended π-conjugated approach to enhance the battery redox properties, where the current challenge in SIBs, which is their poor rate performance, was well addressed.5 The three critical parameters to achieve high rate capability are charge transport/collection, ionic diffusion, stable nature of charged/discharged states. Here, the extension of the π-conjugated compounds was expected to result in fast charge transportation/collection properties and enhanced toleration to the fast addition/removal of Na+ while a high rated redox mechanism. Moreover, extending the π-conjugated system can strengthen the intermolecular interactions (e.g., π–π, and C–H⋯π), leading to a layer-by-layer molecular stacking. This molecular structure is anticipated to form fast pathways for ionic diffusion between the layers. To confirm this, in this study, they selected sodium benzene-dicarboxylate (SBDC) as the starting molecule (Fig. 6(c)). Three linkages, C–C, CC, and CC, were utilized for the extension of the π-conjugated system, resulting in molecule 1, sodium 4,4′-stilbene-dicarboxylate (SSDC), and molecule 2, respectively (Fig. 6(c)). Many studies have reported that due to the steric hindrance among the nearby aromatic rings, the C–C single bond tends to form a nonplanar structure,65–67 which leads to the destruction of the extension of π-conjugation, and hence damages the charge transportation and electric stability.68 The electron cloud shape and the probable rotation of the CC bond-linked materials also led to a nonplanar structure, showing a lower π-conjugation structure than the CC-based material.66 Thus, CC was chosen as the linkage to prolong the π-conjugated molecule of SBDC. SSDC, comprising 2 benzenes with a theoretical capacity of 172 mA h g−1, was selected as the optimized material to study the effect of the extended π-conjugated molecule on fast-redox sodium batteries because further improvement in the molecular weight would compromise the capacity (Fig. 6(c)). Besides, the one-step synthesis procedure from 4,4-stilbenedicarboxylic acid (HSDC) and the redox process of the obtained SSDC are shown in Fig. 6(d).5
 Fig. 6  (a) Electrochemical redox reaction mechanism of Na+ with Na4C8H2O6/Na6C8H2O6 and Na2C8H2O6/Na4C8H2O6 at potentials of 0.3 V and 2.3 V, respectively (reprinted with permission from (Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5892) Copyright (2014) Wiley). (b) Structure and charge–discharge mechanism of Na4C24H8O8 (reprinted with permission from (J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 688, 93). Copyright (2013) Elsevier). (c) Chemical structure of starting materials (SBDC) and three possible linkages to extend the π-conjugation (molecule 1, SSDC, and molecule 2). (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis and Na-ion insertion/extraction processes (reprinted with permission from (J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3124). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society). 
Anhydride compounds
Generally, anhydrides compounds have large conjugated molecules with a tunable amount of inserted Na+ by altering the discharge potential. 3,4,9,10-Perylene-tetracarboxylicacid-dianhydride (PTCDA) is an organic pigment, which is commonly called Red 224. This compound possesses a core aromatic structure with 2 anhydride units (C24H8O6) (Fig. 7(a)).69
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reactions of PTCDA during the sodiation/desodiation process (reprinted with permission from (Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400554). Copyright (2014) Wiley). (b) Molecular structure of the multi-ring aromatic compounds (PTCDA and NaPTCDA). (c) CV curves of PTCDA in the potential range of 0 and 3.0 V at 0.01 mV s−1. (d) CV curves of NaPTCDA in the potential range of 0 and 3.0 V at 0.01 mV s−1. (e) HOMO plots of selected molecules/anions with different extents of reduction, PTCDA (top) and NaPTCDA (bottom) (reprinted with permission from (Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3160). Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry). 
PTCDA is also noted to be an organic semiconductor, having superior mechanical and thermal properties. This low-cost organic compound is mainly synthesized from acenaphthene (coal tar component) and is readily available. Also, it is considered to be an appropriate system to analyze the redox mechanisms during the Na insertion/extraction process because of its negligible solubility.70 PTCDA can accommodate 2 Na+ in the potential range of 1.0–3.0 V with a specific capacity of around 150 mA h g−1. Further, additional Na+ can be inserted into the PTCDA structure by reducing the discharge potential. For instance, a discharge voltage up to 0.6 V can accommodate 4 Na+ in its structure. In addition, discharge to a very low potential of 0.1 V can lodge about 15 Na+, corresponding to a high capacity of 1017 mA h g−1. The distribution of Na+ in Na15PTCDA is shown in Fig. 7(a), where Na+ is accommodated in the unsaturated C6 and anhydride units. The discharge capacity of Na15PTCDA is considerably larger than that of most of the investigated anode materials for SIBs, such as hard carbon, sulphides, alloys, conversion materials, metal oxides, etc.71–77 Nevertheless, the subsequent charge of Na15PTCDA resulted in a capacity of only 435 mA h g−1, demonstrating an extraction of 6.4 Na+. The associated poor Coulombic efficiency of ∼43% in the voltage window of 0.01 to 3 V revealed that not all the Na+ occupied in the fused aromatic units can be extracted. In the voltage range of 1.0–3.0 V, PTCDA exhibited capacities of 145 mA h g−1 and 91 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1 and 1000 mA g−1, respectively, with a cycling life of over 200 cycles.69 A study compared the performances of PTCDA and NaPTCDA, where both materials exhibit multi-ring aromatic units with 2 types of carboxylate groups (Fig. 7(b)).70 When employed as the anode in SIBs, PTCDA demonstrated initial capacities of 620.5 mA h g−1 (discharge) and 436.1 mA h g−1 (charge), with 60.9% Coulombic efficiency. The huge initial capacity loss of this material can be attributed to multiple reasons, such as the decomposition of the electrolyte molecules, formation of an SEI layer at lower voltages and irreversible bonding of Na+ with the condensed aromatic units. NaPTCDA contains multi-ring aromatic carbonyl groups and the alteration from PTCDA to NaPTCDA demonstrates a color change from red to orange, which can be ascribed to the enhanced energy gap between the HOMO and LUMO in the compound. This is because of the substantial effect of the dianhydride opening on the inner electronic/bond structure of the perylene group.64,70,78 NaPTCDA delivered a high first discharge (350.6 mA h g−1) and moderate charge (182.3 mA h g−1) capacities for sodium storage. The huge capacity loss is mainly due to the formation of an SEI layer. Theoretically, every formula unit of NaPTCDA can transfer 4 electrons via the enolization of 4 CO, with 206 mA h g−1 capacity.70 The various functional units of PTCDA and NaPTCDA demonstrate distinctive redox properties. For instance, NaPTCDA exhibits additional discharge plateaus, lower operating potentials and narrower potential gaps. The reason for the difference between NaPTCDA and PTCDA was revealed in a study from a theoretical viewpoint using molecular orbital theory.70 A lower LUMO level means improved electron affinity and oxidizability, resulting in a larger reduction voltage. The relative redox potential of the NaPTCDA and PTCDA compounds was estimated by calculating the HOMO/LUMO levels of related compounds using the DFT method. Obviously, the LUMO (−3.97 eV) of PTCDA is much lower than that of NaPTCDA (−1.49 eV), which means lower discharge plateaus and narrower potential gap of NaPTCDA compared to that of PTCDA.70 Considering their safety and energy density, these two materials are suitable as anodes in SIBs. Also, the additional peaks observed above 0.3 V in the CV analysis of NaPTCDA compared to that of PTCDA (Fig. 7(c) and (d), respectively) demonstrate that only 2 opposite CO units can combine with 2 Na+ to generate sodium enolate. To verify this, DFT modelling was performed on the four carbonyls of NaPTCDA and PTCDA (Fig. 7(e)). When 2 Na+ are accommodated at the opposite sites of the CO units, the perylene ring can generate an effective conjugated structure with CO groups to provide stability; hence, the HOMO levels of Na2-PTCDA and Na2-NaPTCDA can be well localized within the molecular structure. For the insertion of 4 Na+, the HOMO of Na4-PTCDA can be still localized within the structure, revealing the stable nature of PTCDA and elucidating its 4 Na intake ability. However, the HOMO level of Na4-NaPTCDA fails to be maintained within the molecular structure, indicating that the backbones of the molecule are not suitable to support more than 2 Na+.70 They also investigated the sodium storage performances of these materials with planar C6 structures. For the multi-ring aromatic core structure of PTCDA (that is perylene), if Na+ interacts with the unsaturated carbon and produces Na/C compounds via an addition process, it can provide a high theoretical capacity (2125 mA h g−1). However, the perylene materials only exhibited a low specific capacity of 193 mA h g−1. Pyrene and truxene, two other materials without CO units, also demonstrated low discharge specific capacities of 205.9 and 199.1 mA h g−1, respectively. Actually, these three organic materials have various molecular structures and number of benzene rings; however, they exhibit a similar specific capacity, revealing that there is no addition process among Na+ and the unsaturated carbons. The low discharge capacity can be ascribed to the generation of an SEI layer and the incorporation of Na+ into the condensed aromatic structures (even if conducting carbon was added to the active material to enhance the conductivity of the electrodes). Nevertheless, the multi-ring can generate a conjugated structure with carbonyl moieties, and thus facilitate the redox enolation process, which plays a significant role in the reversible Na+ insertion/deinsertion process. Moreover, the existence of aromatic carbonyl units not only causes Na+ to form sodium enolate, but also plays a critical role in the Na+ insertion process in the condensed aromatic structures; hence, permitting high specific capacity and stable properties in these organic compounds.70 Other investigated anhydrides for SIB applications include 1,2,4,5-benzenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PMDA) and 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA), which display a similar sodium storage mechanism as that of PTCDA.36,70
Imide-based compounds
Studies on diimides in SIBs have been conducted together with anhydrides and the investigated compounds show high similarity in molecular structure and redox mechanism with that of anhydrides. In general, the carbonyl group in these compounds bonds with N to form OC–N, which is also directly connected to the aromatic core. The redox process of imides is based on the enolization mechanism of their CO moieties together with the Na+ association/disassociation with/from the oxygen atoms, while the negative charge is stabilized by the aromatic core of the diimide structure.16 Only limited studies have been reported on the electrochemical performance of simple imides (the discussion on polyimides is provided in Section ‘3.2.1. Organic polymers’) when employed as an electrode in SIBs mainly due to the high solubility/decomposition of these materials. For instance, a study demonstrated the electrochemical properties of disodium pyromellitic diimidate (Na2C10H2N2O4) in SIBs. This material delivered an initial specific capacity of 103 mA h g−1, which is close to its theoretical specific capacity. It also showed a capacity of ∼90 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles. This study emphasized the importance of modifying Na-based electrode materials to have good chemical/structural stability at a high sodiation level because, generally, material decomposition and side-reactions are possible during high-level sodiation.79
The reaction mechanism of this compound was proposed to be a two-step sodiation process, as shown in Fig. 8(a) (top). Unlike other Li analogues, this material demonstrated reasonable capacity retention after 100 cycles. Gradual capacity degradation is often observed for organic compounds, which is mainly because of the electrode solubility in the electrolyte.80 However, this explanation is not suitable for this material considering its insoluble nature in DMSO and other organic solvents such as PC. Thus, they proposed a new decomposition mechanism upon cycling for this material. After complete sodiation, two negative charges are presented in the same functional units, which can generate a high-energy configuration, and thus activate side reactions. Since Na+ has a bulkier size than Li+, Na+ will not shield negative charges very well compared to Li+, resulting in more severe instability than its Li counterparts. Thus, the high amount of negative charges created upon sodiation in pyromellitic diimidate is less compensated than that during the lithiation processes. Considering this, the incorporation of 4 Na (or Li) ions into the carbonyl groups of an aromatic diimide compound can lead to disintegration due to structural damage/deformation, as shown in Fig. 8(a) (bottom).79 This indicates that bi-radical compounds are not able to reversibly cycle in rechargeable batteries. Another study reported a perylene diimide, 3,4,9,10-perylene-bis(dicarboximide) (PTCDI), as a cathode for SIBs. Due to the presence of very dense redox-active CO groups in its stable π-conjugated structure, the PTCDI material can be subjected to a 2-electron redox process with the reversible insertion/extraction of 2 Na+ per molecular unit (Fig. 8(b)), corresponding to a high specific capacity of 140 mA h g−1. It also showed a superior rate capability of 103 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1 and a long cycling stability with a capacity retention 90% after 300 cycles.81 The sodium storage redox process in PTCDI was elaborated, which is based on the reversible enolization mechanism, where the carbonyl units in the imide molecule undergo an electron transfer process together with the insertion/extraction of Na+. Theoretically, every PTCDI has 4 carbonyl units, which are capable of transferring 4 electrons for the reversible occupation of 4 Na+. Nevertheless, similarly to many of the aromatic imides studied for Na and Li storage,36,38,82,83 the PTCDI cathode could only demonstrate a 2-electron redox process at a voltage of ≥1.5 V, probably because of the electrostatic repulsion and steric hindrance in the molecule. Hence, as shown in Fig. 8(b), the Na storage phenomenon of the PTCDI compound can be depicted as a 2-staged enolization process with reversible insertion of 2 Na+.81 Besides the above discussed simple imides, the majority of the investigated imides fall in the anhydride category (e.g. PMDA, NTCDA and PTCDA). The Na storage mechanisms of these compounds were provided in the previous Section, ‘3.1.4. Anhydride compounds’.
 Fig. 8  (a) Electrochemical reaction mechanism during the sodiation of Na2C10H2N2O4 (top) and the decomposition mechanism in diimide systems (bottom) (reprinted with permission from (Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 52). Copyright (2014) Elsevier). (b) Schematic illustration of the reversible Na-storage redox mechanism of PTCDI (reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21095). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society). 
Compounds based on doping reactions
Organic polymers
Besides polyimides and polyquinones, most other organic polymers are bipolar in nature; however, they are mainly utilized as p-type to achieve superior discharge potentials. The investigations on polymer-based batteries have advanced with the development of electronic conductivity in doped conjugated polymers.84 Even as far back as 1981, studies demonstrated the application of n/p-doped polyacetylene in organic batteries.85,86 Subsequently, many other conjugated polymers have been explored for rechargeable battery applications, namely poly(aniline), poly(pyrrole), poly(thiophene), poly(p-phenylenes), and poly(carbazole).87,88 Even before the 90's, companies such as Bridgestone/Seiko and VARTA/BASF commercialized lithium/polymer batteries based on conjugated polymers; however, they were discontinued due to their inferior performances.89 The main reason for the unsatisfactory battery performance was revealed to be the storage of electric energy through the delocalized charge carriers in the extended π-system upon electrochemical doping. As a result, the materials do not have a distinct redox potential, but they have a significant dependency on the level of doping.88,90 Generally, the level of doping changes during the charge/discharge processes, which can lead to a fluctuating voltage, thus raising a severe concern for practical battery applications.
Conjugated (conductive) polymers
Conjugated polymers are intrinsically conducting organic polymers. Generally, this type of structure is comprised of a backbone of alternating single and multiple bonds, leading to π-conjugation by overlapping of the π-orbitals, thus forming a continuum of energy states (band structure). Even in the 80's, conducting polymers such as polyacetylene and poly(p-phenylene) were investigated as electrode materials for sodium ion storage.18 Among the different conjugated polymers, polypyrrole ((C4H3N)n: PPy)- and polyaniline (PAn)-based polymers are the two widely investigated materials for SIBs. In general, they are produced in a p-doped state using a p-doping/de-doping process with large anions in the electrolyte. However, most of the as-prepared polymers suffer from an inferior doping degree and low capacity. Moreover, all these p-doped polymers cannot store Na, and hence cannot be used as electrodes in SIBs. However, organic/inorganic redox-active species can be incorporated into their polymer chain to facilitate redox activity in SIBs. A study on PPy demonstrated that the organic redox dopant not only can enhance the electrochemical properties of the polymer chain by serving as anionic counter-ions, but also adds redox capacity to the active compound.91
Thus, the diphenylamine-4-sulfonate (DS)-doped PPy (Ppy/DS) composite demonstrated a reversible capacity of 115 mA h g−1 with good rate and cycling performances when employed as a cathode in an SIB. This composite exploits its large organic redox units as immobilized anionic counter-ions to trigger the electronic conductivity and electrochemical activity of the polymeric frameworks, and also it functions as active redox centers for Na-storage.91 This study also investigated the charge storage mechanism of Ppy/DS in SIBs using ICP analysis (Fig. 9(a)). During the initial charge, the amount of Na detected using ICP analysis was negligible and only PF6− ions were observed to be inserted into the positively charged Ppy/DS material. Thus, the initial charge mechanism in the Ppy/DS electrode is the electro-oxidation of the Ppy chains and the DS anions, followed by the incorporation of PF6− ions for charge counterbalance (Fig. 9(a) (top)). In the subsequent discharge/charge process, the oxidized Ppy/DS polymers become reduced and re-oxidized together with the incorporation and removal of Na+ and dedoping/doping of PF6− (Fig. 9(a) (bottom)).91 Another study utilized redox-active Fe(CN)6−4-doped ppy (PPy/FC) as a cathode compound for SIBs. This material demonstrated a redox capacity of 135 mA h g−1, superior rate performance at 1600 mA g−1 and good capacity retention of 85% after 100 cycles.92 It possesses a reversible Na+ insertion/extraction process followed by a PF6− doping/dedoping mechanism. During the initial discharge, the starting PPy17.14+Fe(CN)64− material undergoes a reduction as shown below. PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)64− + 4Na+ + 4e ↔ PPy17.1·Fe(CN)64−·4Na+(2)The theoretical capacity for this material is estimated to be ∼80 mA h g−1 upon 4 Na+ insertion (eqn (2)). In the charging process, the first step of oxidation of PPy/FC involves 4 Na+ extraction, resulting in a charging capacity of 80 mA h g−1. The study also conducted a quantitative analysis to confirm the proposed reaction. The samples taken after the completely discharged state demonstrated a superior Na/Fe ratio of 4.241, representing 3.84 inserted-Na+ into the polymeric network. After recharging to 3.8 V, the material showed a molar ratio of 1.199 Na/Fe, revealing the removal of certain inserted Na+. Upon continuous charging to higher voltages, as shown below, oxidation of the Fe(CN)64− dopant together with the insertion of equal moles of PF6− anions into the polymeric network (to counterbalance the charge) occurred. PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)64− + PF6− − e ↔ PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)63−·PF6−(3)Also, the PPy chains undergo a redox or pseudocapacitive charge-storage process simultaneously during the oxidation of Fe(CN)64− as follows. PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)63−·PF6− + xPF6− − xe ↔ PPy17.1(4+x)+·Fe(CN)63−·(1 + x)PF6−(4)By considering an Fe(CN)64− content of 5 wt%, the theoretical specific capacity calculated from eqn (3) is ∼20 mA h g−1. Since the doping level of PF6− into the PPy network is the same for both PPy and PPy/FC, their reversible capacity (∼35 mA h g−1) only due to the p-doping/dedoping process (eqn (4)) is the same. Hence, the total reversible specific capacity for the PPy/FC electrode is ∼135 mA h g−1, which is the sum of the stoichiometric capacities of Na-insertion/extraction reaction (80 mA h g−1), Fe(CN)63−/4− redox process (20 mA h g−1) and p-doping/dedoping mechanism (35 mA h g−1). This suggests that the obvious enhanced capacity is due to the presence of the redox-active Fe(CN)64− dopant. A schematic illustration of the structure of this material and the charge storage mechanism is presented in Fig. 9(b).92 Another study demonstrated the cathodic performances of PPy hollow nanospheres prepared using templates of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) nanospheres.93 This study proposed the Na storage mechanism in PPy using the DFT method. According to the experimental result, it was reported that 4 units of PPy can absorb 1 Na+ ([C4H5N]4Na). The possible sodiated PPy positions are (1) in the bond between two [C4H5N] units, (2) in the middle of the inner [C4H5N] ring, and (3) in the mid-region of the outer [C4H5N] ring.93 The negative energy barriers were calculated to be ∼0.24 eV, ∼0.25 eV and ∼0.40 eV for positions 1, 2, and 3, respectively (Fig. 9(c)). The DFT calculations also confirmed that the Na+ storage in the PPy hollow nanospheres is an absorption-based process. In addition, it was also revealed that the highly stable position for Na storage is in the outer [C4H5N] ring since it possesses the lowest energy barrier (Fig. 9(c)). Moreover, the DFT calculation for the Li storage mechanisms in PPy demonstrated that the lithiation is also a spontaneous mechanism because of the estimated negative energy barriers (0.11 eV, 0.18 eV and 0.31 eV for positions 1, 2 and 3, respectively) (Fig. 9(c)). However, the energy values of lithiation are higher than that for the sodiation process, suggesting that PPy has superior Na storage ability than Li.93 Another study developed an excess Na cathode by embedding the electron-withdrawing –SO3Na group on PAn chains (PAnS).94 This polymer demonstrated a high capacity of 133 mA h g−1 with excellent cycling stability via a cation-exchange process. This superior electrochemical performance can be attributed to the immobile doping and efficient activation of the sulfonate unit. The Na storage mechanism of PAnS was proposed using ICP analysis on the cycled PAnS at various depths of charge/discharge. During the initial charge to 3.8 V, Na+ was not detected, revealing the entire removal of Na+ from the polymer framework. After discharge to 3.0 V, the Na present in the polymeric electrode was estimated to be 5.74 wt%, demonstrating that 0.706 Na was incorporated per PAnS (C12H8N2SO3Na). When the electrode was fully discharged to 1.5 V, the Na content was about 1.06 Na+ per PAnS unit, revealing the effective Na+ insertion/extraction process of PAnS. The theoretical capacity of PAnS was calculated to be ∼95 mA h g−1 using the reaction process, as shown in Fig. 9(d). Nonetheless, the experimental specific capacity obtained for this material was 133 mA h g−1, which is significantly larger than the theoretical value. This higher value was attained from the reversible Na-insertion/extraction process, followed by the PF6 doping/dedoping mechanism.94 Another group investigated the potential application of aniline/o-nitroaniline P(AN–NA) copolymer as a cathode material for SIBs, which was synthesized through a chemical oxidative polymerization method.95 The P(AN–NA) copolymer exhibited a superior specific capacity of 180 mA h g−1 with an average potential of ∼3.2 V (vs. Na+/Na) and maintained a capacity of 173 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles. It also showed a good rate performance of 165 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1, which can be ascribed to the flexible nature of the polymeric network. The main charge storage mechanism associated with the P(AN–NA) copolymer is the doping/dedoping process of PF6− into/from the para-disubstituted benzene and quinone diimine structures, respectively.95 The reaction mechanisms of P(AN–NA) are as follows.
 Fig. 9  (a) Charge storage mechanism in PPy/DS electrodes (reprinted with permission from (J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 114). Copyright (2013) Wiley). (b) Schematic illustration of the structure and redox mechanism of PPy/FC (reprinted with permission from (RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5495). Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Energy barriers of sodiated/lithiated PPy (reprinted with permission from (Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16092). Copyright (20125) Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Reaction mechanism of PAnS (reprinted with permission from (Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14354). Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry); (e) reversible charge/discharge mechanism of oligopyrene (reprinted with permission from (J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 73). Copyright (2014) Elsevier). (f) Reaction mechanism in poly(ferrocenyl-methylsilane) (reprinted with permission from (Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6768). Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry). (g) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical mechanism for PTMA (reprinted with permission from (Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1264–1269). Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry). 
At cathode: P(AN–NA) + PF6− ↔ P(AN–NA)+PF6− + e(5)At anode: Na+ + e ↔ Na (or NaCx)(6)Overall reaction: P(AN–NA) + PF6− + Na+ ↔ P(AN–NA)+PF6− + Na (or NaCx)(7)A polybithiophene–carbon (PBT/C) composite was also investigated as an anode material for both LIBs and SIBs. This material possesses n-type redox activity with good specific capacity and cycling life. This compound achieved a specific capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1via the doping/dedoping mechanism of Na+ into/from the polymeric network.96 Oligopyrene (OPr, 3–4 pyrene units) was also explored as a cathode for SIBs.97,98 It demonstrated anion-dominant transportation behavior, while redox switching in NaClO4 electrolytes, indicating that the it can reversibly incorporate/release perchlorate anions for charge-balance.98 The crystalline OPr, having a layered structure, showed sloping charge/discharge characteristics with a capacity of ∼42.5 mA h g−1 and an average potential of ∼2.9 V at 20 mA g−1, indicating a large over-potential because of the sluggish ClO4 diffusion across the crystalline phase (Fig. 9(e)). However, the amorphous OPr demonstrated a markedly reduced over-potential with a plateau of around 3.5 V during discharge. This phase also demonstrated an initial capacity and energy of 121.0 mA h g−1 and 423 W h kg−1, respectively with limited cycling stability.98 Polydopamine (PDA), which is derived from naturally occurring products, was also investigated as an electrode material for SIBs,99,100 where controllable partial oxidization is crucial in balancing its percentage of redox-active carbonyl units, structural stability and conductivity. The optimized PDA demonstrated superior electrochemical performances in both SIBs and LIBs. For instance, PDA as a binder free electrode in SIBs demonstrated a capacity of 500 mA h g−1 with 100% capacity retention over 1024 cycles.100 In conventional electrodes, the addition of a binder having insulating, inactive, and easily swelling nature leads to irreversible capacity loss and poor cycling life. Therefore, binder-free electrodes are desirable to maximize the electrochemical performance. Nonetheless, the preparation of binder-free electrodes in normal cases is very difficult and may require special equipment, complicated (energy/time consuming) synthesis techniques, etc. However, the PDA (with a catechol unit) electrode can provide strong adhesion properties, and hence serve as both an electrode and redox-active binder.100 A recent study investigated the redox performances of self-polymerized dopamine with numerous oxygen and nitrogen functional units as a cathode material for SIBs. This hybrid 3D electrode exhibited a specific capacity of ∼109 mA h g−1 with good rate capability and cycling life when employed as a cathode in SIBs.99 However, the exact redox mechanisms of polydopamine in both SIBs and LIBs still remain unclear.
Porous organic polymers
The bipolar porous polymeric framework (BPPF), which is comprised of benzene and triazine rings as electron donor and acceptor, respectively, is a bipolar semiconducting polymeric compound.101,102 In general, this category of materials can deliver high specific capacity and power density. Moreover, the BPPF possesses a redox process by utilizing both p- and n-doped states of the electrode material. Hence, it demonstrates a capacity-like bipolar energy storage mechanism, with a linear transition from each doped state in the charge storage phenomenon. The advantages of the BPPF include high operating voltage due to the superior stability of the C–N bonds in the network, fast ion transportation through the electrolyte-filled porous network, and high surface area.103,104 A study investigated the BPPF as both the anode and cathode in organic SIBs and LIBs. The sodium-based all-polymer battery provided a specific energy density of 22 W h kg−1 under a power density of 0.9 kW kg−1 (considering the total weight of BPPF).102 The conjugated microporous polymer 4,7-dicarbazyl-[2,1,3]-benzothiadiazole (PDCzBT) prepared by FeCl3 oxidation coupling polymerization was reported to show Li- and Na-storage properties.105 This material demonstrated a very high surface area, hence provided enormous active sites for Na storage.105 The microporous structure of this material is beneficial for rapid ion and electron transfer. The skeleton of PDCzBT is formed by abundant redox-active centers, which possess numerous energy storing modules. Further, PDCzBT is a n-type material and demonstrates the doping/dedoping mechanism into/from the polymer network. Compared to rigid 3D inorganic compounds, this n-type organic polymer with a flexible network can easily occupy bulky Na+ without much spatial hindrance, resulting in fast kinetics.105 The sodium storage mechanism in PDCzBT is demonstrated in eqn (8), revealing the Na+ doping/dedoping process into/from the polymeric chains. It exhibited a specific capacity of 145 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 20 mA g−1 with a promising Coulombic efficiency of >96% after the 15th cycle. However, its initial Coulombic efficiency was very low (∼29.8%), making its use very difficult in practical SIBs. Thus, intense research needs for to be conducted for this type of material. PDCzBT + xNa+ + xe− ↔ Nax+PDCzBTx−(8)
Organometallic polymers
Owing to their fast-electrochemical responses and superior air stability, organometallic compounds have been extensively studied as electrode materials in the area of electrochemistry.106–109 However, normal organometallic materials are highly soluble in organic electrolytes. Hence, they are commonly employed in redox flow batteries.110 However, studies have demonstrated that organometallic polymers with a high molecular weight can be used as cathode materials for SIBs.111 Ferrocene-based compounds such as poly(ferrocenyl-methylsilane) and its derivatives were prepared using the ring-opening polymerization technique, which showed potential applications in LIBs and SIBs as cathode materials.111 In general, these materials demonstrate high-power density, superior cycling life and reasonable capacity performance, which make them comparable or even superior to the inorganic electrodes explored for SIB applications. The reaction mechanism of the poly(ferrocenyl-methylsilane) compound is presented in Fig. 9(f), where the ferrocene moiety is the only electro-active site in the compound. The valence state of Fe in ferrocene is +2. After the p-doping process, through gaining an anion (ClO4−) and losing an electron, the oxidation state of Fe becomes +3. In NaClO4/EC + DMC electrolyte, ferrocene-based compounds can insert/extract anions at a voltage above 3.2 V.111,112 The major advantage of using organometallic compounds for battery applications is their tunable redox voltage through the selection of different metal ions. Besides ferrocene-based compounds, cobaltocene and titanocene have also been investigated in different battery applications.113,114
Organic radical polymers
Organic radical compounds possess pendant side units, and have the highest redox voltages among the organic compounds explored for SIBs. Even though there have been many reports about the successful applications of organic radicals in LIBs,115–117 their investigations in SIBs are limited.118,119 The electrochemical process of the organic radical was first investigated in LIBs, where the p-type polymer radical poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy-4-yl methacrylate) (PTMA) was employed as a cathode and its electrochemical performances against lithium metal anode were determined.120–124 Besides PTMA, polyacetylene, polyethers, and polynorbornene-based radical polymers have also been reported as p-type electrodes for LIBs.19,125–129 Recently, poly(styrene)-based polymer radicals have been investigated as n-type anode materials for LIBs.130–132 Studies have reported that radical polymers can demonstrate not only the p-type doping/dedoping mechanisms at high voltages with electrolyte anion (e.g. ClO4− and PF6−) insertion/extraction process, but also n-type doping/dedoping processes with Na+ insertion/extraction at lower potentials. For instance, a study demonstrated the utilization of a polynorbornene-based radical polymer (poly[norbornene-2,3-endo, exo-(COO-4-TEMPO)2]) as a cathode material for SIBs. The charging process of this polymer in SIBs corresponds to the one-electron oxidation of the stable nitroxide radicals to the oxoammonium cations per repeating unit (electrolyte anions provide the counter-charge). The Na+ in the electrolyte salt is reduced to metal, and subsequently deposited at the anode. During discharging, the reverse mechanism occurs.118 However, this material demonstrated inferior electrochemical performances with a capacity of 75 mA h g−1 and capacity retention of 48 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles.118 On the other hand, PTMA has a stable organic radical, 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO), as its repeating unit, which demonstrates a fast-reversible redox performance, superior power, high potentials, and stable cycling ability.119 Upon charging, the nitroxide radical unit in the early state of TEMPO becomes oxidized to an oxoammonium cation. Upon discharge, the oxoammonium cation is reduced in a 2-stage process to a nitroxide radical and an aminoxy ion. In the subsequent redox reaction, the TEMPO radical undergoes a 2-electron oxidation/reduction process with a theoretical capacity of 225 mA h g−1. The reversible redox process in PTMA occurs rapidly (electron transfer rate constant is in the order of 10−1 cm s−1) with the anions/cations in the electrolyte, leading to a high rate capability (Fig. 9(g)).119 Nonetheless, the high self-discharge because of the solubility of the polymer in the aprotic electrolyte is considered a drawback for its use in practical SIBs. Moreover, PTMA shows low energy density because of its high insulating characteristics, leading to the utilization of a high amount of conducting carbon while preparing the electrode. Thus, with a high content of PTMA (>50 wt%) in an electrode, the polymer battery compromises the redox performance due to the inferior electrical contact between the polymer and the conducting carbon. Recently, a study addressed this drawback by designing a novel organic material, in which the active PTMA was encapsulated into a CNT. The CNT in the encapsulated structure could hold the active polymer within the electrode structure, and thus provide an efficient electronic conduction path. This PTMA/CNT structure delivered superior electrochemical properties (specific capacity: 222 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and cycling stability: 93% retention over 100 cycles) without self-discharge.119
Compounds based on CN reactions
Schiff base organic compounds
Schiff bases are organic compounds with the molecular structure of R1HCNR2 (where R2 ≠ H).133–136 They are considered as a sub-class of imines.137 The electrochemical properties of this category of materials can be expected from the presence of CN. Their electrochemical activity at low voltage in organic electrolyte was revealed through the polarographic findings on aromatic Schiff bases.138 Recently, this category of materials has been investigated in rechargeable batteries.139–141 Their synthesis generally consists of an environmentally friendly/green condensation process of aldehydes and amines, with water as the by-product.137 Among the different Schiff bases, polymeric Schiff bases possess superior thermal/mechanical properties. Nonetheless, their poor solubility restricts their preparation and application. However, the selection of a suitable linker among the azomethine groups along the polymer chain enhances their solubility, which can help in the processing of the polymeric Schiff base compounds.142,143 A study reported the electrochemical properties of several polymeric Schiff bases with a common repeating unit of (–NCH–Ar–HCN–; Ar: aromatic unit) as anode materials for SIBs in organic electrolytes. These compounds possess ten π electrons, and hence are Hückel-stabilized, and are capable of incorporating more than one Na+ per –CN–. The redox properties of these compounds can be either modified by means of the aromatic and nonaromatic diamine units among the terephthalaldehyde monomers or by incorporating donor substituents on the aniline (usually C6H5–N) and benzyl rings.139 In general, the conjugate –NCH–Ar–CHN– is observed to be the active center. The isomer unit of –CHN–Ar–NCH– with a non-conjugated unit is considered to be redox inactive.112
Further, even though the Ar center is inactive in Schiff bases, it plays a crucial role in stabilizing the molecular structure. In a study, the reduction process was reported to occur in two steps in the potential window of 0.005–1.6 V (vs. Na+/Na), indicating two processes. The potential can be modified by the appropriate incorporation of substituents in the phenyl rings without compromising the planarity and conjugation. The best electrochemical performance with a capacity of 350 mA h g−1 was reported for unsubstituted poly-[N,N′-p(benzylidene)phenylenediamine], representing more than one sodium per azomethine CN–. This report also revealed that the conjugated and planar structures play a critical role in achieving the desired redox activity in Schiff base materials.139 Later, the same group explored the electrochemical properties of oligomeric-Schiff bases as anodes for SIBs.140 The oligomeric-Schiff base with carboxylate groups showed an enhanced theoretical capacity compared to that of the simple Schiff base. The DFT calculations on this material revealed that the active Hückel co-planar centers (–OOC–φ–CN– and –NC–φ–CN–) were responsible for the Na+ incorporation process, whereas the isoelectronic units (–OOC–φ–NC and –CN–φ–NC–) in the compounds were not electrochemically active. However, it had a structural stabilizing effect through either preferring the π–π interactions or eliminating N–N repulsions and through loss of planarity (Fig. 10(a) and (b)). This study also proposed a linear association among the number of incorporated Na+ and the number of active Hückel centers. Hence, the reversible specific capacity could be directly linked to the ratio between active/total Hückel centers (Fig. 10(a) and (c)). Besides this, the crystallinity or electronic repulsions could also affect the specific capacity of the Schiff bases. The optimized oligomeric-Schiff bases demonstrated low hysteresis and a specific capacity of ∼340 mA h g−1 at 21 mA g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of >98% after a few cycles.140
 Fig. 10  (a) Number of Huckel units in different sodiated oligomers and their contribution to reversible capacity. Active Huckel groups considered: –OOC–φ–CN– (end) and –NC–φ–CN– (central). Inactive Huckel groups considered: –OOC–φ–NC– (end) and –CN–φ–NC– or simply –φ– (central). (b) Schematic illustration showing the molecular structure of the O6Na and O7Na oligomers. (c) Schematic representation of a Schiff molecule and the linear relationship showing the active Huckel units and Na+ inserted (reprinted with permission from (Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3233). Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Biologically derived compounds
Living organisms have evolved over billions of years, and thus have effective and optimal metabolic processes that an artificial device cannot ever attain. In addition, natural processes mostly utilize Earth-abundant and eco-friendly materials. Thus, reverse engineering or mimicking their processes can be an efficient way to design high-performing electrode material for batteries. This is mainly because living entities can convert, transport, and store energy to be alive, and their metabolism includes various transduction processes. These processes involve energy transportation from one system to another via electron and/or ion transportation, which are similar to the electrochemical processes in batteries.144–146 Thus, organic compounds that imitate the redox units in natural energy transduction have attracted considerable attention due to their sustainable nature.80,147,148 For example, carbonyl-based materials are the most studied bio-inspired redox centres, where they mimic the quinone cofactors in biological systems (e.g. plastoquinone and ubiquinone), which participate in the electron transportation chain of chloroplasts and mitochondria.38,82,149 Further, a broad range of ion-coupled electron transfer processes occurs biological energy conversion. Riboflavin (vitamin B2) has been considered a potential electrode system by analyzing the energy transduction functionality in mitochondria.150 Also, flavin cofactors enable electron transportation in the respiratory system, where ATP is generated when flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2) concurrently releases protons and electrons.151 The oxidized flavin cofactors can be reversibly reprocessed in the reduction reactions (uptake of protons and electrons) by the citric acid cycle of the mitochondria, which are analogous to rechargeable battery systems (Fig. 11(a)).152
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the energy conversion reaction in biochemical energy storage and the analogous electrochemical energy storage and (b) redox mechanisms of the flavin group in nature and LIBs (reprinted with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8322). Copyright (2013) Wiley. (c) Molecular simplification strategy of pteridine derivatives (reprinted with permission from (Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5335). Copyright (2014) Springer Nature). (d) Nanohybridization of flavin with SWNTs (reprinted with permission from (Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2558). Copyright (2014) Wiley). (e) Schematic representation of full cell discharge process of melanin/silver nanowire (AgNW)-based SIBs and (f) proposed structure and Na+-ion insertion process of melanin-based full cells (reprinted with permission from (Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3173). Copyright (2016) Wiley). 
By considering this analogy, a research group reported that flavin demonstrated a two-step reversible reaction (Fig. 11(b)), involving two-electron reduction at the nitrogen atom of diazabutadiene, but with limited cycling performance when it was employed in LIBs.152 The electrochemical enhancement in flavin-based electrodes can be achieved by molecular designing/tailoring. As shown in Fig. 11(c), the flavin molecule can be tailored into simple molecules, such as lumichrome, alloxazine, and lumazine, by retaining the redox active centers (diazabutadiene motif) of flavin and chopping off the inactive parts.153 Here, the reduced molecular mass with the same redox active unit led to a higher energy density. Further, to enhance the electrochemical properties of flavin, it can be immobilized by highly conducting scaffolds (e.g. SWNTs) at the molecular level through π–π interactions among the flavin molecules and SWNTs (Fig. 11(d)).154 Also, the strong π–π interactions can efficiently minimize the dissolution of flavin in organic liquids, thereby increasing its cycling performances. The polymerization approach can also be utilized to reduce the dissolution of the flavin molecule. After the application of flavin molecules in LIBs, a study explored pteridine-based organic compounds for SIBs.148 They designed the electrode materials by considering the mechanism of photosynthesis and cellular respiration, where flavin (a class of pteridine) cofactors function as a prime redox unit, which facilitates the proton-coupled electron transfer process for energy transduction. In this study, they proposed that the pteridine derivatives are capable of reversibly inserting/extracting 2 Na+. The redox activity of the compounds occurs on the conjugated diazabutadiene center, where it enables the electron transfer process during the reduction of nitrogen. Among the different pteridine derivatives, lumichrome and alloxazine exhibit specific capacities of 138 and 168 mA h g−1 at 10.0 mA g−1, respectively. The capacities of these materials was further enhanced to 222 and 255 mA h g−1 at 50.0 mA g−1 by incorporating CNTs, but with limited cycling stability (∼50% retention after 20 cycles for both compounds).148 Besides pteridine derivatives, melanin was also investigated as an electrode for SIBs with a reversible capacity of 80 mA h g−1 in the potential range of 1.9–2.2 V (vs. Na+/Na) in combination with a silver nanowire substrate.155 This study also revealed that Na+ experiences occupancy-dependent stepwise insertion into the core of the porphyrin-like tetramers in eumelanins at distinct voltages. Fig. 11(e) demonstrates the full cell discharge process of sodium titanium phosphate (NTP) as the anode and melanin/silver nanowires (AgNW) composite as the cathode in aqueous SIBs. Fig. 11(f) shows the proposed molecular structure of porphyrin-like tetramers in melanin and the Na+ insertion process into the cathode during the discharging process.155
Azo compounds (NN bond reactions)
The three main categories of organic electrodes for SIBs are based on CO, CN, and doping reactions (Fig. 12(a)).
 Fig. 12  (a) Different reaction mechanisms for organic electrode materials. (b) Molecular Structure of different azo compounds. (c) In situ synchrotron XRD spectra and color-mapped patterns of ADASS compound, and the corresponding voltage profile. (d) XRD pattern of ADASS material before and after 5 cycles. (e) Raman spectra of ADASS material before and after 5 and 20 cycles. (f) DFT calculation results for the relative energies and optimized structures of AB, PBASS, and ADASS compounds (reprinted with permission from (Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2879). Copyright (2018) Wiley). 
In general, doping-reaction-based materials such as radical organic compounds demonstrate high reaction voltages and the p-doping mechanism with the electrolyte anions (e.g. ClO4− and PF6−), and thus, are not suitable as anode materials in SIBs. Hence, the commonly used anodes are mainly based on CO– and CN-based compounds, where they provide CO and CN redox centers to reversibly interact with Na+ at relatively low operating voltages. However, most of these compounds experience low rate capability and poor cycling stability. To overcome these issues, recently a group proposed organic compounds based on the azo group (NN) for SIB applications. In this study, the azo group acted as a redox center to reversibly interact with Na+.156 The sodium storage properties of the azo compounds were evaluated using three different compounds, azobenzene (AB), 4-(phenylazo) benzoic acid sodium salt (PBASS), and azobenzene-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid sodium salt (ADASS) (Fig. 12(b)). AB was chosen as the basic model of the aromatic azo material because of the presence of only one active azo unit in its center. Nonetheless, this basic azo molecule was highly soluble in organic electrolytes. To control this problem, carboxylate groups were introduced in AB to obtain PBASS and ADASS. Among the different azo compounds, the reported ADASS had superior electrochemical properties in terms of high rate and cycling performances. For instance, it could deliver a capacity of 170 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, and maintained about 66% and 58% of its capacity at 10C and 20C, respectively. This material also demonstrated good cycling stability with a stable capacity of 98 mA h g−1 over 2000 cycles at 20C (a slow capacity degradation rate of 0.0067% per cycle). The same group also explored the electrochemical properties of azo compounds for Li storage.157,158 The sodium storage mechanism and structural changes of ADASS upon sodiation/desodiation were revealed by analyzing the XRD, Raman spectroscopy and DFT calculation results. The in situ XRD characteristics upon discharge from 2.5 V to 0.5 V in Fig. 12(c) demonstrate that the typical XRD peaks of ADASS (6.6°, 17.3° and 18.2°) were slowly reduced and two new peaks appeared at 19° and 22° after it was sodiated to below 1.2 V, illustrating the generation of a new phase at 1.2 V. Fig. 12(d) demonstrates the XRD results of the original ADASS and fully charged ADASS after 5 cycles. The fully retrieved XRD peaks of the cycled sample showed the phase reversibility of the material. The disappearance of the typical Raman peak at 1450 cm−1 of the azo group and the appearance of a new peak at 1295 cm−1 in the fully discharged state (0.5 V) of ADASS (Fig. 12(e)) represented the sodiated azo group (Na–N–N–Na), indicating the interaction of the azo group with Na+ during sodiation. When the sample was recharged to 2 V, the distinctive Raman peak at 1450 cm−1 completely recovered, representing the reversible electrochemical process between the azo group and Na+. In addition, the peak at 1600 cm−1 for the CO group in ADASS did not change upon cycling, demonstrating that the CO group did not participate in the sodiation/desodiation processes. The electrochemical mechanism of the azo compounds was further investigated using DFT studies. The energy levels of the LUMO and the HOMO for AB, PBASS, and ADASS are presented in Fig. 12(f). The charge density isosurfaces of the LUMO states for AB, PBASS, and ADASS illustrate that the electron localizes in the azo group upon sodiation, confirming that the azo group is the redox active site in the azo-based compounds during the reduction reaction.156
Challenges and opportunities
In recent years, the application of redox-active organic materials for rechargeable batteries has attracted considerable attention. Various studies have developed superior performing electrochemical organic compounds for SIBs. However, for the practical applications of this category of materials in batteries, further research and development are required. For any electrochemical energy storage system, the fundamental understanding of the charge storage mechanism is necessary to investigate and enhance the properties of the materials. This review provides a comprehensive understanding of the underlying Na storage mechanism in various organic electrode materials explored for SIBs to date. We believe that the knowledge on the variety of redox-active centres in organic materials can shed light for the design of fully functional SIBs in the near future. We also believe that together with the investigations on new organic compounds, the fundamental understanding of the electrochemical and molecular aspects of compounds is essential to build advanced SIBs to meet future energy demands. Hence, with this understandings, new electrodes with superior properties can be designed or the properties of existing materials tuned for better applications. For instance, in the past, the major challenge for organic compounds was their high solubility in organic-based electrolytes. However, currently, there are different approaches to solve this issue. Also, to improve the properties of organic compounds, many common strategies are available including molecular designing/engineering, compositing/coating with carbon, polymerization and electrolyte modification (Fig. 13).112
 Fig. 13  Different approaches to enhance the properties of organic electrodes. 
By selectively utilizing these strategies, the properties of organic electrodes, such as conductivity, solubility, specific capacity, operating potential and diffusion rate, can be modified according to the requirements. For example, with the appropriate molecular designing/engineering, the following points can be tuned according to the application: (a) by adding electron drawing/donating groups, the LUMO level energies can be lowered/increased, resulting in an improved/reduced working potential. (b) In carbonyl-based compounds, an increment in π-aromatic conjugation in the core can result in improved rate performances. (c) The dissolution of organic molecules into the organic electrolyte can be greatly reduced by the formation of salts with high polarity or through polymerization. (d) Ionic diffusion can be enhanced by nanostructuring organic compounds. The polymerization technique has the following benefits: (a) the huge enhancement in the molecular weight of polymeric compounds can address the dissolution issue in organic electrolytes. (b) The capacity of organic compounds can be increased by preparing copolymers and 3-D porous polymers. (c) Doping anions/cations in conjugated polymers is expected to enhance the usage of their polymeric chain, and Na-excess organic polymers have been shown to reduce the electrolyte consumption of p-type polymers during the redox processes. The compositing/coating strategy with carbon also demonstrates multiple advantages as follows: (a) embedding/confining organic materials into the carbon matrix can also help to address the dissolution problem in organic compounds. (b) The high self-discharge of organic radical polymers can be reduced by this strategy. (c) Organic materials/carbon composites can help to reduce the charge transportation pathway and enhance the electrode–electrolyte contact area, resulting in the high utilization of active materials (leading to superior capacity) and fast kinetics (leading to high rate performances). Studies have reported that the utilization of conductive binders can enhance the rate performance and also reduce the dissolution of organic compounds.157 Another important aspect is the utilization of optimal electrolytes to improve the cycling performances of materials. For instance, highly concentrated electrolyte or solid-state electrolyte can effectively reduce the dissolution of organic compounds, resulting in improved cycling stability. However, they can compromise the power performances of batteries. Thus, the selection of electrolyte should be application oriented. Downscaling organic materials to the nanometer size is also an effective strategy to improve their electronic conductivity and accommodate the large volume changes during the redox process. Hence, the aforementioned multiple approaches have definitely helped to improve the electrochemical performances of organic materials. These solutions have caused organic electrodes become ‘even more’ important than inorganic materials for SIBs. Even though these great achievements have shed light to the advancement of SIBs, various challenges still remain in the areas of electrochemistry, material/electrode design and engineering. Furthermore, the inferior electrochemical performance due to the poor initial Coulombic efficiency of anode materials in the full-cell format is still a great challenge that needs to be addressed. Besides the poor Coulombic efficiency, other numerous challenges to fabricate efficient full cells include the selection of appropriate active materials (anode, cathode and electrolyte), thorough understanding of the fundamental redox reactions of organic materials in the full-cell format, and proper electrode mass balancing. Our aim is to reveal the underlying charge storage mechanisms in organic electrodes for SIBs, which are basically the prime factor for the performances of any battery system. Recently, with advancement of science and technology, it is easy to find different redox active organic materials, and study their charge storage mechanisms and other basic electrochemistry, which govern the final performances of electrode materials. Many recent studies have utilized simulations to support their experimental results. To date, simulations have significantly helped in finding solutions to many challenges presented in the past for various organic compounds, which can also be a guide to choose/design redox active functional groups to achieve superior performances using organic electrodes. However, we cannot simply depend only on simulation results, and ultimately experimental data is required to judge the real functionality and performances of materials. Thus, it is advisable to use simulation to find solutions to problems or ways to improve the electrochemical properties of conventional organic compounds, together with experimental implementation.
Summary and future outlook
Organic electrode materials are potential candidates for future energy applications mainly because of their easily tunable redox active functional groups. According to their redox activity and functionality, organic compounds can be divided into many groups, such as carbonyl, conjugated polymers, radical, Schiff base, biologically-derived compounds, and azo materials. The specific capacity and voltage comparison charts of different organic compounds are provided in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  (a) Specific capacity and (b) voltage comparison charts of different organic compounds. 
Further, a comparative analysis of the electrochemical performances of four categories of organic compounds are shown in the Radar plot (Fig. 15). This figure clearly indicates that at present, the electrochemical properties (such as rate, capacity and voltage) of carbonyl- and polymer-based organic compounds are much more promising than Schiff base and azo compounds. However, in terms of stability, azo compounds outperform the other categories of materials. Hence, we believe that in-depth research in this group of compounds can yield potential electrode materials for practical SIB applications in the future. The charge storage mechanisms, redox reactions and electrochemical properties of each category of materials were discussed in detail. The charge storage mechanisms and electrochemical properties in different organic compounds are summarized and provided in Fig. 16 and Table 3, respectively. Carbonyl compounds with CO redox centers are the most explored organic materials for SIBs, and they can be divided into many subclasses, such as quinone, ketones, carboxylates, anhydrides and imides (including polyimides).
 Fig. 15  Radar plots comparing the different electrochemical parameters (qualitative analysis) of the four categories of organic compounds. The values shown for each compound are based on their peak performances. 
 Fig. 16  Sodium storage reaction mechanisms in different types of organic compounds. 
Table 3 Comparison of the electrochemical properties of the different organic materials explored for SIBs




Material
Initial discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
Initial charge capacity (mA h g−1)
Rate capability (capacity (mA h g−1)) at current density (mA g−1)
Initial coulombic efficiency (%)
Cycling stability (capacity retention (cycle number))
Voltage (V)
Ref.




Note: * the data obtained from the graph. The coulombic efficiency for cathode = first discharge capacity/first charge capacity. For anode = first charge capacity/first discharge capacity. # indicates the capacity and coulombic efficiency may not be representing first cycle.




Carbonyl


Na2C6H2O4
288
265
288@0.1C
108.7
>88% (2)*
1.0–2.0

49



Na2C6O6
498 (2nd)
∼498* (2nd)
371@1000
∼100 (2nd)*
90.8% (50)
0.5–3.3

50



TASQ
366
∼351*
220@100
51
95% (50)
3.0–0.05

32



TSAA
172
∼165*
95@100
56
95% (50)
3.0–0.05

32



Na2TP
∼491
295
100@10C
60
∼90% (90)
2.0–0.0

60



C8H5NaO4
689
273
—
39.6
∼89% (50)*
1.7–0.1

61



C8H6O4
801
204
—
25.5
>80% (50)*
1.7–0.1

61



C10H2Na4O8
305
152
—
49.8
∼85% (20)*
1.7–0.1

61



C8Na2F4O4
714
179
—
25.1
∼78% (20)*
1.7–0.1

61



C14H4Na4O8
263
171
—
65
∼88% (30)*
1.7–0.1

61



Na2C8H4O4
>500*
<300*
150@2C*
62.5
79.8% (50)
2.0–0.1

62



Na4C8H2O6
183
∼168
75@5C*
92
84% (100)
1.8–0.1

35



Na4C24H8O8
>225*
∼100*
—
∼44*
∼80% (100)*
2.4–0.3

64



SSDC
375
260
72@10000
69.3
80% (400)
2.5–0.1

17



PTCDA
134
∼134*
91@1000
∼100*
74% (200)
1.0–3.0

69



PTCDA
1017
435
—
42.8
52% (5)
3.0–0.01

69



PTCDA
620.5
436.1
67.7@2000
60.9
40.4% (140)
2.0–0.01

70



PTCDA
148.9
>180*
38.9@80C
∼82*
87.5% (5000)
1.5–3.5

36



Na2C10H2N2O4
191.3
128.9
>50@2C
67.4
∼37% (100)*
0.5–3.0

79



PTCDI
140
150
103@600
93.3
90% (300)
1.0–3.0

81







Polymers


Ppy/DS
>105*
—
85@800
—
82% (50)
1.5–3.9

91



PPy/FC
∼120*
∼105*
75@1600
∼114*
85% (100)
1.5–3.8

92



Hollow PPy
97
∼112*
87@320
∼90*
78.5% (1000)
1.0–3.8

93



PANS
85
98.7
76@800
86.1
96.7% (200)
1.8–3.7

94



P(AN–NA)
181
∼181
165@200
∼100
95.5% (50)
2.0–4.0

95



PBT/C
690
1187
—
∼58
34% (40)
3.0–0.0

96



Crystalline OPr
42.5
∼100*
—
∼42*
64.5% (50)
1.5–4.5*

98



Amorphous OPr
120
∼175*
60@100
∼68*
∼70% (50)
1.5–4.5*

98



Binder free PDA
1181
581
122@3200
∼54
∼100% (1024)
3.0–0.0

100



PDA
213
—
54@10000
—
—
1.5–4.5

99



PDCzBT
∼520*
∼150*
99@100
29.8
60% (200)*
3.0–0.0

105



Organic radical
75
296
—
25
64.5% (50)
2.0–4.0

118



PTMA/CNT
222
120
190@5C
185
92% (100)
1.5–4.0

119







Schiff bases


Schiff base
>300*
>200*
>150@0.2C*
∼66*
—
1.6–0.005

139



Schiff base-O2Na
660
268
50@5C*
40.6
97.5% (25)
1.6–0.05

140







Biologically derived


Lumichrome/CNTs#
222
∼215*
—
∼98*
∼50% (20)
1.0–3.0

148



Alloxazine/CNTs#
255
∼240*
—
∼94*
∼50% (20)
1.0–3.0

148



Lumazine/CNTs#
220
∼220*
—
∼100*
∼50% (20)
1.0–3.0

148



Melanin
∼80
—
—
—
—
1.9–2.2

155







Azo compounds


AB
929
15
—
∼0.02
—
2.0–0.5

156



PBASS
162
>250*
—
>150*
∼24% (50)*
2.0–0.5

156



ADASS
∼220*
∼170*
71@40C
∼77*
86.6% (2000)
2.0–0.5

156





Quinone-based compounds possess a high theoretical capacity. Carboxylate materials have potential commercial prospects due to their suitable working potential. Polyimides demonstrate a more stable cycling life compared to other carbonyls. The different types of polymers fall under the doping reaction category, where polymer radicals, conjugated polymers, and porous polymers can undergo p-doping with anions and n-doping with Na+. In general, polymer radicals and conjugated polymers demonstrate fast redox kinetics, leading to high power performances. Organic compounds with CN bond reactions can be subdivided into Schiff base compounds and biologically-derived pteridine compounds. Generally, Schiff base organic compounds show conjugated structures, which satisfy the Hückel rule; however, they suffer from a low theoretical capacity. Recently explored azo compounds with NN bond reactions possess great advantages as electrode materials for SIBs. This new family of materials demonstrate long cycle life and good specific capacity. Further, the high solubility of azo compounds can be addressed via the introduction of carboxylate groups into the active material.
In addition, many studies have provided evidence of the successful application of organic materials in the full-cell format. For instance, a study utilized Na2TP (anode) and Na0.75Mn0.7Ni0.23O2 (cathode) materials to fabricate a full cell, delivering a cycling stability of 96% over 50 cycles with an operating potential of 3.6 V.61 Another study fabricated an all-organic battery using Na4C8H2O6 as the anode/cathode, and achieved a specific capacity of 150 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with an average potential of 1.8 V.35 Besides the aforementioned advantages of the different explored organic materials, there are some challenges that need to be overcome. For instance, most carbonyls show poor electronic conductivity, leading to a limited rate capability. Further, small carbonyls often exhibit high solubility in organic electrolytes, resulting in poor cycling performances. Materials based on the doping mechanism show an inferior specific capacity due to the low level of doping. CN bond reaction compounds usually demonstrate a poor theoretical capacity. Pure NN azo compounds experience high solubility in organic electrolytes. Thus, the proper understanding of the electrochemical charge storage mechanism in each organic compound can be useful to further enhance the performances of these investigated materials. The recent developments in technology demand batteries with different characteristics, such as thinner, smaller, flexible, and wearable, to be employed in portable electronics and roll-up displays. Thus, we believe that compared to rigid inorganic compounds, the flexible and tunable nature of organic materials can be suitable for future advanced technological applications. Besides metal-ion rechargeable batteries, due to the versatile nature of organic compounds, these systems can also be applied in a variety of energy storage applications, such as redox flow batteries (where the soluble nature of organic compounds can be useful), aqueous batteries, and supercapacitors.159–172 Among them, organic compounds in aqueous SIBs are likely to have better applications due to the superior properties (non-flammability, cost effectiveness, easy to assemble batteries, high ionic conductivity, etc.) of aqueous electrolytes compared to their organic counter parts. With the increasing interest in organic batteries, attempts have been made to move beyond the existing battery technologies, wherein the focus has been on developing safe and efficient storage systems. Accordingly, some research groups have demonstrated prototype versions of all-organic batteries, including (a) chlorophyll-based organic batteries, (b) fermented cellulose-based organic batteries, (c) organic-lithium battery based on madder flower dye extract, and (d) plant-derived quinone-based organic batteries. Although these prototypes have shown lower performances than conventional batteries, they offer opportunities to find safer and more efficient ways to build low-cost and high-performance organic batteries for a sustainable future.173 Besides energy storage applications, in the present state of affairs, organic materials have been finding their niche in electronic, optoelectronic, and photonic devices, where the use of inorganic semiconductor materials has been predominant. In recent years, new fields of organic electronics, organic optoelectronics, organic photonics, organic photoelectrochemical cells, and organophotocatalysts have emerged.174–177 These fields of research and development, which are mostly related to information and energy technology, are mainly concerned with the fabrication of flexible devices using organic materials. The flexibility presented by organic materials at the molecular level allows the fabrication of thin films via solution processes, which are called printed electronics. We believe that organic materials, including both molecular level and polymers, for use in organic photovoltaics, and organic light-emitting diodes, will have great economic and social value in the near future. For instance, a study demonstrated that organic-metal–organic electrodes have excellent opto-electrical properties and can be utilized to replace indium tin oxide in optoelectronic devices, such as touch panels, organic light-emitting diodes and solar cells.178 Thus, in-depth investigations on photoactive and electroactive organic materials are required to understand and analyse the characteristic features and molecular design concepts for device applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 21671200 and No. 21975289), Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 2018JJ4002), Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Major Project of China (No. 2017GK1040), Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project, China (No. 2017TP1001 and No. 2018RS3009). This work was also financially supported by Postdoctoral International Exchange Program Funding of China (No. 115) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M652802).
Notes and references
H. Zhang, I. Hasa, D. Buchholz, B. Qin, D. Geiger, S. Jeong, U. Kaiser and S. Passerini, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e370 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, J. Zhou, B. Li, J. Ma, S. Tao, D. Xia, W. Chu and Z. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4188 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Eftekhari and D.-W. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 336–348 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eguia-Barrio, E. Castillo-Martínez, F. Klein, R. Pinedo, L. Lezama, J. Janek, P. Adelhelm and T. Rojo, J. Power Sources, 2017, 367, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, M. Zhou, L. Liang, S. Singh, H. Zhao, A. Schober and Y. Lei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3124–3130 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, G.-H. Ning, J. Su, G. Zhong, W. Tang, B. Tian, C. Su, D. Yu, L. Zu, J. Yang, M.-F. Ng, Y.-S. Hu, Y. Yang, M. Armand and K. P. Loh, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17074 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakaushi, E. Hosono, G. Nickerl, T. Gemming, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1485 CrossRef .
R. L. Belanger, B. Commarieu, A. Paolella, J.-C. Daigle, S. Bessette, A. Vijh, J. P. Claverie and K. Zaghib, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1213 CrossRef .
M. Yao, K. Kuratani, T. Kojima, N. Takeichi, H. Senoh and T. Kiyobayashi, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3650 CrossRef .
J. Winsberg, T. Hagemann, T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 686–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Z. Zhu and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607007 CrossRef .
N. Ogihara, T. Yasuda, Y. Kishida, T. Ohsuna, K. Miyamoto and N. Ohba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11467–11472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Wang and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18235–18245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, G. Kwon, K. Ku, K. Yoon, S.-K. Jung, H.-D. Lim and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704682 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 742–769 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Zhou and Y. Lei, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 60–78 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Zyga, Na-ion batteries get closer to replacing Li-ion batteries, https://phys.org/news/2015-03-na-ion-batteries-closer-li-ion.html.
L. W. Shacklette, J. E. Toth, N. S. Murthy and R. H. Baughman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 1529–1535 CrossRef CAS .
O. N. Efimov, D. G. Belov, G. I. Kozub, L. I. Tkachenko, L. P. Krinichnaya and G. N. Petrova, Synth. Met., 1996, 79, 193–196 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Farrington, B. Scrosati, D. Frydrych and J. DeNuzzio, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hérold, D. Billaud and R. Yazami, Solid State Ionics, 1990, 40-41, 985–987 CrossRef .
B. V. Ratnakumar, S. Di Stefano, R. M. Williams, G. Nagasubramanian and C. P. Bankston, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1990, 20, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, R. Zeng, J. Nan, D. Shu, Y. Qiu and S.-L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700278 CrossRef .
W. Deng, X. Liang, X. Wu, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Feng and H. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2671 CrossRef .
C. Delmas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703137 CrossRef .
P. Barpanda, L. Lander, S.-i. Nishimura and A. Yamada, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703055 CrossRef .
T. Huang, D. Lu, L. Ma, X. Xi, R. Liu and D. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, C. Zhao, S. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Hou, Y.-S. Hu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 960–973 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mu, Y. Lu, X. Wu, Y. Ding, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 63–70 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, R. R. Gaddam, D. Yang, E. Strounina, A. K. Whittaker and X. S. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 702–708 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pasquali, G. Pistoia, T. Boschi and P. Tagliatesta, Solid State Ionics, 1987, 23, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, W. Wang, M. Li, L. Cao, F. Lyu, M. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Shi, B. Nan, S. Yu, Z. Sun, Y. Liu and Z. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13318 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Williams, J. J. Byrne and J. S. Driscoll, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 2–4 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. Armand, M. Courty, M. Jiang, C. P. Grey, F. Dolhem, J.-M. Tarascon and P. Poizot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8984–8988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Zhu, Z. Hu, Q. Zhao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5892–5896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-g. Wang, S. Yuan, D.-l. Ma, X.-l. Huang, F.-l. Meng and X.-b. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301651 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, Y. Shen, M. Sun, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11370–11372 RSC .
Z. Song, H. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8444–8448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Schon, B. T. McAllister, P.-F. Li and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6345–6404 RSC .
W. Deng, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Small, 2016, 12, 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, L. Yang, X. Yan and X. Ding, Small, 2018, 14, 1802444 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu, F. Jing, X. Xi, L. Ma, D. Lu, P. Yang and R. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 538, 597–604 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Zhao and Y. Zhao, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 837, 226–229 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Shang, A. Yang, Q. Zhang, F. Cheng, D. Jia and J. Chen, Chem, 2019, 5, 364–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Deng, J. Xue, W. Zou, L. Wang, A. Zhou and J. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 761, 74–79 CrossRef CAS .
B. Häupler, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402034 CrossRef .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribière, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu and J. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2393–A2405 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, S. Jin, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang, L. Mu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, X. Chen, M. Armand, L. Chen and X. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500330 CrossRef .
M. Lee, J. Hong, J. Lopez, Y. Sun, D. Feng, K. Lim, W. C. Chueh, M. F. Toney, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 861–868 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bock, C. Naether and Z. Havlas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 3869–3870 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bock, C. Näther, Z. Havlas, A. John and C. Arad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 875–878 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Xu, L. Liang, M. Zhou, H. Zhao and Y. Lei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1777–1786 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao and C. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 1050–1062 CAS .
Z. Song, Y. Qian, X. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Zhu, H. Yu, M. Otani and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 4077–4086 RSC .
Y. Wang, K. Kretschmer, J. Zhang, A. K. Mondal, X. Guo and G. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 57098–57102 RSC .
H. Banda, D. Damien, K. Nagarajan, M. Hariharan and M. M. Shaijumon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10453–10458 RSC .
H. Fei, W. Feng and T. Xu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 488, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, K. Luo, S. Du and X. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 398, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, D.-S. Shin, S. H. Woo, N. S. Choi, K. H. Shin, S. M. Oh, K. T. Lee and S. Y. Hong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3562–3567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abouimrane, W. Weng, H. Eltayeb, Y. Cui, J. Niklas, O. Poluektov and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9632–9638 RSC .
L. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, Z. Zhou, M. Armand and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 962–965 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Sk and S. Manzhos, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 572–581 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Zhao, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 688, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
A. Choi, Y. K. Kim, T. K. Kim, M.-S. Kwon, K. T. Lee and H. R. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14986–14993 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Dong, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Meng, F. Sun, M. B. Goldfinger, G. D. Jaycox, Z. Li, W. J. Marshall and G. S. Blackman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2406–2407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, G. Yuan, Q. Li, B. Wang, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, J. C. Chang, C.-s. Lee and S.-t. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6945–6950 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, M. Allen, V. Raju and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400554 CrossRef .
H.-g. Wang, S. Yuan, Z. Si and X.-b. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3160–3165 RSC .
I. Izanzar, M. Dahbi, M. Kiso, S. Doubaji, S. Komaba and I. Saadoune, Carbon, 2018, 137, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Q. Liu, W. Chen, M. Wan, X. Li, L. Wang, L. Xue and W. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 331–337 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, X. Zhou and J. Bao, Carbon, 2018, 127, 658–666 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, J. Yi, Y. Sun and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2978–3006 RSC .
F. Zhang, C. Xia, J. Zhu, B. Ahmed, H. Liang, D. B. Velusamy, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601188 CrossRef .
Q. Li, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Li, J. Ma, C. Wang, X. Ge, S. Dong and L. Yin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600376 CrossRef .
Q. Lin, J. Zhang, D. Kong, T. Cao, S.-W. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Tao, W. Lv, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803078 CrossRef .
L. Fédèle, F. Sauvage and M. Bécuwe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18225–18228 RSC .
S. Renault, V. A. Mihali, K. Edström and D. Brandell, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 52–55 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 RSC .
W. Deng, Y. Shen, J. Qian, Y. Cao and H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21095–21099 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, C. Chang, L. Yuan, T. Sun and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1616–1621 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, K. Wang, Y. Meng, K. Lu and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6366–6372 RSC .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580,  10.1039/C39770000578, .
D. MacInnes, M. A. Druy, P. J. Nigrey, D. P. Nairns, A. G. MacDiarmid and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1981, 317–319,  10.1039/C39810000317 .
C. K. Chiang, Polymer, 1981, 22, 1454–1456 CrossRef CAS .
P. Novák, K. Müller, K. S. V. Santhanam and O. Haas, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 207–282 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Muench, A. Wild, C. Friebe, B. Häupler, T. Janoschka and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9438–9484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Miller, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 671–676 CrossRef .
T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6397–6409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, Y. Xiong, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 114–118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, L. Zhu, Y. Cao, R. Zhao, J. Qian, X. Ai and H. Yang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5495–5498 RSC .
D. Su, J. Zhang, S. Dou and G. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16092–16095 RSC .
M. Zhou, W. Li, T. Gu, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14354–14356 RSC .
R. Zhao, L. Zhu, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 21, 36–38 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, Y. Niu, Y. Cao, A. Lei, X. Ai and H. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fang, Y. Huang, W. Zhang, J. Han, Z. Deng, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501727 CrossRef .
S. C. Han, E. G. Bae, H. Lim and M. Pyo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, K. C. Kim, B. Lee, Z. Chen, S. Noda, S. S. Jang and S. W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 205–215 RSC .
T. Sun, Z.-j. Li, H.-g. Wang, D. Bao, F.-l. Meng and X.-b. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 10820–10824 CrossRef .
K. Sakaushi, G. Nickerl, F. M. Wisser, D. Nishio-Hamane, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7850–7854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sakaushi, E. Hosono, G. Nickerl, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 553–556 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Côté, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, W. Huang, P. Hu, C. Huang, C. Shang, C. Zhang, R. Yang and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1896–1901 RSC .
R. R. Gagne, C. A. Koval and G. C. Lisensky, Inorg. Chem., 1980, 19, 2854–2855 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Serrano-Ruiz, F. Scalambra and A. Romerosa, in Advances in Organometallic Chemistry and Catalysis, ed. A. J. L. Pombeiro, Wiley,  2013, ch. 29 DOI:10.1002/9781118742952.ch29 .
H. S. Nalwa, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1990, 4, 91–102 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Canobre, N. Bocchi, R. C. Rocha-Filho and S. R. Biaggio, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hwang, M.-S. Park and K. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 310–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, G. Wang, Z. Song, X. Li, H. Tang, Y. Zhou and H. Zhan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6768–6770 RSC .
Q. Zhao, Y. Lu and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601792 CrossRef .
H. Chen, G. Cong and Y.-C. Lu, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1304–1325 CrossRef .
P. Leung, A. A. Shah, L. Sanz, C. Flox, J. R. Morante, Q. Xu, M. R. Mohamed, C. Ponce de León and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 243–283 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, D. Choi, L. Cosimbescu and J. P. Lemmon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20921–20928 RSC .
W. Guo, Y.-X. Yin, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5221–5225 RSC .
K. Nakahara, S. Iwasa, M. Satoh, Y. Morioka, J. Iriyama, M. Suguro and E. Hasegawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 359, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, Y. Zhang, L. Gao, G. Xu and J. Xie, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A22–A24 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, Y. Kim, S. Park, H. Ko and Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1264–1269 RSC .
N. Dardenne, G. Hautier, J.-F. Gohy, J.-C. Charlier and G.-M. Rignanese, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2018, 143, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Kim, G. Cheruvally, J.-H. Ahn, Y.-G. Seo, D. S. Choi, S.-H. Lee and C. E. Song, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2008, 14, 371–376 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 398–402 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Kim, J.-E. Lim, M.-S. Oh and J.-K. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2017, 361, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hergué, B. Ernould, A. Minoia, R. Lazzaroni, J.-F. Gohy, P. Dubois and O. Coulembier, Batteries Supercaps, 2018, 1, 102–109 CrossRef .
Z.-I. Takehara, K. Kanamura, S.-I. Yonezawa and T. Hanawa, J. Power Sources, 1989, 25, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bahceci and B. Esat, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Farrington and R. Huq, J. Power Sources, 1985, 14, 3–9 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Belov, O. V. Yarmolenko, A. Peng and O. N. Efimov, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 745–751 CrossRef CAS .
T. Katsumata, M. Satoh, J. Wada, M. Shiotsuki, F. Sanda and T. Masuda, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1206–1211 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2339–2344 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, H. Ohshiro, S. Sugita, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1627–1630 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, J.-K. Kim, G. Cheruvally, J.-W. Choi, J.-H. Ahn, G. S. Chauhan and C. E. Song, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 503–507 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Song, R. Guo, D. Kong, S. Zhou, X. Huang, R. Iqbal and L. Zhi, Small, 2018, 14, 1703569 CrossRef .
X. Zhuang, F. Zhang, D. Wu and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3081–3086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Xu and W.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 355, 180–198 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, D. Kong, Q. Song, S. Zhou, Y. Zhang, A. Badshah, J. Liang and L. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schiff, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1864, 131, 112–117 CrossRef .

          Y. P. Kitaev and T. V. Troepol'skaya, in Progress in Electrochemistry of Organic Compounds 1, ed. A. N. Frumkin and A. B. Érshler, Springer US, Boston, MA,  1971, pp. 43–83 DOI:10.1007/978-1-4684-3339-5_2 .
E. Castillo-Martínez, J. Carretero-González and M. Armand, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5341–5345 CrossRef PubMed .
M. López-Herraiz, E. Castillo-Martínez, J. Carretero-González, J. Carrasco, T. Rojo and M. Armand, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3233–3241 RSC .
H. Ye, F. Jiang, H. Li, Z. Xu, J. Yin and H. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 253, 319–323 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar Gutch, S. Banerjee, D. C. Gupta and D. K. Jaiswal, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 383–388 CrossRef .
X. Li, C. Li and S. Li, Synth. Met., 1993, 60, 285–288 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, Y. Ko, G. Kwon, S. Lee, K. Ku, J. Kim and K. Kang, Joule, 2018, 2, 61–75 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hervás, J. A. Navarro and M. A. De la Rosa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 798–805 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Poizot and F. Dolhem, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2003–2019 RSC .
J. Hong, M. Lee, B. Lee, D.-H. Seo, C. B. Park and K. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Milczarek and O. Inganäs, Science, 2012, 335, 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kakkar and B. K. Singh, Mol. Cell. Biochem., 2007, 305, 235–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sokic-Lazic and S. D. Minteer, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 939–944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, J. Hong, D.-H. Seo, D. H. Nam, K. T. Nam, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8322–8328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Schon, A. J. Tilley, C. R. Bridges, M. B. Miltenburg and D. S. Seferos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6896–6903 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, J. Hong, H. Kim, H.-D. Lim, S. B. Cho, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2558–2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, A. Khetan, W. Wu, S.-E. Chun, V. Viswanathan, J. F. Whitacre and C. J. Bettinger, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3173–3180 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, G.-L. Xu, X. Ji, S. Hou, L. Chen, F. Wang, J. Jiang, Z. Chen, Y. Ren, K. Amine and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2879–2883 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, X. Ji, S. Hou, N. Eidson, X. Fan, Y. Liang, T. Deng, J. Jiang and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706498 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Luo, X. Ji, J. Chen, K. J. Gaskell, X. He, Y. Liang, J. Jiang and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8567–8571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, U. Martin, C. Friebe, S. Morgenstern, H. Hiller, M. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Nature, 2015, 527, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kwon, S. Lee, J. Hwang, H.-S. Shim, B. Lee, M. H. Lee, Y. Ko, S.-K. Jung, K. Ku, J. Hong and K. Kang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1771–1782 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and Y.-C. Lu, Chem, 2018, 4, 2020–2021 CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185–1191 RSC .
J. Huang, Z. Yang, M. Vijayakumar, W. Duan, A. Hollas, B. Pan, W. Wang, X. Wei and L. Zhang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700131 CrossRef .
X. Wei, W. Xu, J. Huang, L. Zhang, E. Walter, C. Lawrence, M. Vijayakumar, W. A. Henderson, T. Liu, L. Cosimbescu, B. Li, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8684–8687 CrossRef CAS .
S. Perticarari, Y. Sayed-Ahmad-Baraza, C. Ewels, P. Moreau, D. Guyomard, P. Poizot, F. Odobel and J. Gaubicher, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701988 CrossRef .
T. Jähnert, B. Häupler, T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 2616–2623 CrossRef .
D. Bin, F. Wang, A. G. Tamirat, L. Suo, Y. Wang, C. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703008 CrossRef .
I. Shown, A. Ganguly, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Energy Sci. Eng., 2015, 3, 2–26 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Chang, C. Young, M.-H. Lee, R. R. Salunkhe, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, M. T. Islam, K. C.-W. Wu, M. S. A. Hossain, Y. Yamauchi and K.-C. Ho, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 2857–2862 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, H. Fan, K. Fu and Y. Zhao, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 3730–3738 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Li, K. Ding, H.-R. Tian, M.-S. Yao, B. Nath, W.-H. Deng, Y. Wang and G. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702067 CrossRef .

          M. Sloan, Organic batteries: 4 breakthrough prototypes for clean energy storage, https://endalldisease.com/organic-batteries-clean-energy-storage, June 20, 2018.
K. Nagai, T. Kuwabara, M. F. Ahmad, M. Nakano, M. Karakawa, T. Taimad and K. Takahashi, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12491–12494 RSC .
J. T. Kirner and R. G. Finke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19560–19592 RSC .
A. Guerrero, M. Haro, S. Bellani, M. R. Antognazza, L. Meda, S. Gimenez and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3666–3673 RSC .
L. Yao, A. Rahmanudin, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 15, 1802585 CrossRef .
X. Guo, X. Liu, F. Lin, H. Li, Y. Fan and N. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10569 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Ranjusha Rajagopalan
	Ranjusha Rajagopalan received her PhD in Physics with specialization in battery technology from the University of Wollongong, Australia in 2017. She received her Master's and Bachelor's Degrees in Physics from Calicut University, India. She possesses another Master's (Nanosciences) and Doctoral (Chemical Engineering) Degree. She is currently working on functionalized organic/inorganic materials for developing high-performance metal-ion batteries, including sodium- and potassium-ion batteries at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Central South University, China. Her research interests include the enhancement of power and cycling performances of battery electrodes by designing novel materials and composites.

Yougen Tang
	Yougen Tang earned his PhD in Materials Science at Central South University. In 2000, he was appointed a Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Central South University. He is the Director of the Institute of Chemical Power Sources and Materials at Central South University, and he is also the Head of the Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Power Sources. He has published over 200 refereed papers. His current research interests are focused on new energy materials and advanced batteries.

Chuankun Jia
	Chuankun Jia is a Research Professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology. Dr Jia is the Group Leader of “the 100 Talented Team of Hunan Province” and Co-leader of “Hunan Provincial Base for Scientific and Technological Innovation Cooperation-Smart Energy Storage Lab”. He serves as an “External Reviewer” for Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong. His research focuses on designing materials for the applications of energy conversion and storage. He has 13 years of expertise in flow battery systems and has designed a series of high energy density redox flow batteries. His group has obtained more than 10 million CNY support from the Hunan Province and Changsha University of Science and Technology since October 2017.

Xiaobo Ji
	Xiaobo Ji is a “Shenghua” Professor at Central South University and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, specializing in the research and development of batteries and supercapacitor materials and their systems. He received his PhD in Electrochemistry in 2007 under the supervision of Prof. Richard Compton at the University of Oxford and undertook postdoctoral work at MIT with Prof. Donald Sadoway.

Haiyan Wang
	Haiyan Wang earned his BS (2005), MS (2008) and PhD (2012) degrees in Chemistry at Central South University. In 2010, he joined Prof. Peter G Bruce's group at the University of St. Andrews (UK) as a visiting PhD student. Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Central South University. At the beginning of 2016, he joined Prof. Minhua Shao's group at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology as a Hong Kong Scholar. He has published over 100 refereed papers. His current research interests are focused on new energy materials and advanced batteries.

Broader context
The global demand for energy is huge and growing at a rapid rate. Most of the widely used current resources have various drawbacks, such as non-sustainability and environment-polluting nature, which lead to climate change. Hence, the demand for safe and renewable energy sources has increased, which can guarantee our supply of energy. The development of renewable energy systems such as wind turbines, photovoltaic cells, and biomass plants has led to the investigation of more energy storage devices. Accordingly, batteries are one of the most versatile energy storage systems, which play an important role in the transition from the conventional-based fossil fuels to the advancing renewable energy technologies. The increasing demand to store a large amount of renewable energy in a sustainable fashion has generated great interest in sodium-ion battery technology. This has further led to the development of redox-active, cost-effective and environmentally benign electrode compounds. In this aspect, organic compounds are ideal because of their superior properties such as cost-efficient, sustainable, eco-friendly and abundant nature. Thus, it is beneficial to understand in depth the underlying charge storage mechanisms these materials for researchers to develop rational designs for practical sodium-ion storage and related devices.


Bonding nature	Generally covalent	Generally ionic
Forces between molecules	Normally weak	Normally strong
Melting point	Low	High
Thermal stability	Low	High
Solubility	Low solubility in water and high solubility in aprotic solvents	Mostly soluble in water and low solubility in aprotic solvents
Electric properties	Insulating to conducting	Semiconducting to conducting
Density	Low	High
Mechanical properties	Elasticity, plasticity and flexible nature	Hardness, fragility and rigid nature
Chemical reaction	Slow rate	Fast rate
Flammability	Generally flammable	Generally nonflammable
Electrochemical properties	Versatile	Usually fixed nature
Structure	Mostly complex but tunable	Mostly simple but rigid
Availability	Millions of compounds	Thousands of compounds

 	Fig. 1  Evolution of organic compounds for SIBs with time (starting from 1985 to 2019).	 
[P]x + xyC+ ↔ [P−yCy+]x	(1)

 	Fig. 2  
In situ XRD patterns upon first (a and b) and second (c and d) discharge/charge of the Na/Na2C6H2O4 cell with a C-rate of C/20 in the potential window of 1.0 and 2.0 V. (e) Schematic illustration of the reaction process. Crystal structure of Na3C6H2O4 (f) layered structure (yellow: Na–O square pyramid, and green: Na–O octahedron), (h) along the a-axis direction and (j) along the b-axis, and layered structure of Na4C6H2O4 (g), (i) along the a-axis and (k) along the b-axis directions. Angles between the benzene rings and bc plane (blue) in (l) Na2C6H2O4, (m) Na3C6H2O4, and (n) Na4C6H2O4. Rotation of the benzene rings in (o) Na2C6H2O4, (p) Na3C6H2O4, and (q) Na4C6H2O4 (reprinted with permission from (Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500330). Copyright (2015) American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

 	Fig. 3  Phase transformation of Na2C6O6 upon sodiation/desodiation. (a) In situ synchrotron XRD characteristics of the electrodes and the corresponding potential curve at 30 mA g−1. The red and blue lines are the Bragg peaks from γ-Na2.5C6O6 and α-Na2C6O6, respectively. (b) Crystal structure transformation from γ-Na2.5C6O6 to α-Na2C6O6. (c–f) Morphological changes while reversible phase changes and proposed redox mechanism for sodium storage of Na2C6O6. (c) SEM images of the electrodes at various stages of charging during the first cycle in DEGDME electrolyte (scale bar: 200 nm). (d) Charge profiles for the first four cycles in DEGDME. (e) Higher magnification SEM images of Na2C6O6 nanoparticles upon desodiation from 2.9 to 3.2 V. (f) Schematic representation of the proposed de/sodiation mechanism of Na2C6O6 (reprinted with permission from (Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 861). Copyright (2017) Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Reversible sodium insertion/extraction process in the TSAQ electrode. (b) Formation of inactive material of DCCA electrode (‘A’ represents the groups reacting with the radical intermediate). (c) Quantum chemical calculations analysis of the LUMO/HOMO of TSAQ, TSAQ-6Na, TSAQ-9Na and TSAQ-12Na. (d) Charge/discharge curves at a current density of 50 mA g−1 (reprinted with permission from Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13318. Copyright (2016) from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Most stable conformal isomers of one to eight Na atoms inserted in the Na2TP-planar crystal, where the last figure corresponds to 2 Na atoms inserted per formula unit (blue spheres: inserted Na atoms). Density of states (DOS) plots of (b) clean, (c) single Na, (d) 2 Na and (e) 8 Na inserted Na2TP-planar. The Fermi level is demonstrated as dotted lines and set as zero in all the cases (reprinted with permission from (J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 572). Copyright (2016) Elsevier).	 


1	−1.272 [−1.274]c [−1.273]d	−1.272	0.81
2	−1.338 [−1.336]c [−1.336]d	−1.338	0.82
3	−1.337 [−1.337]c [−1.336]d	−1.337	0.82
4	−1.351 [−1.351]c [−1.350]d	−1.351	0.82
5	−1.289 [−1.292]c [−1.291]d	−1.332	0.85
6	−1.269 [−1.270]c [−1.270]d	−1.361	0.84
7	−1.273 [−1.271]c [−1.271]d	−1.373	0.84
8	−1.269 [−1.269]c [−1.268]d	−1.378	0.84

 	Fig. 6  (a) Electrochemical redox reaction mechanism of Na+ with Na4C8H2O6/Na6C8H2O6 and Na2C8H2O6/Na4C8H2O6 at potentials of 0.3 V and 2.3 V, respectively (reprinted with permission from (Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5892) Copyright (2014) Wiley). (b) Structure and charge–discharge mechanism of Na4C24H8O8 (reprinted with permission from (J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 688, 93). Copyright (2013) Elsevier). (c) Chemical structure of starting materials (SBDC) and three possible linkages to extend the π-conjugation (molecule 1, SSDC, and molecule 2). (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis and Na-ion insertion/extraction processes (reprinted with permission from (J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3124). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical reactions of PTCDA during the sodiation/desodiation process (reprinted with permission from (Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400554). Copyright (2014) Wiley). (b) Molecular structure of the multi-ring aromatic compounds (PTCDA and NaPTCDA). (c) CV curves of PTCDA in the potential range of 0 and 3.0 V at 0.01 mV s−1. (d) CV curves of NaPTCDA in the potential range of 0 and 3.0 V at 0.01 mV s−1. (e) HOMO plots of selected molecules/anions with different extents of reduction, PTCDA (top) and NaPTCDA (bottom) (reprinted with permission from (Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3160). Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Electrochemical reaction mechanism during the sodiation of Na2C10H2N2O4 (top) and the decomposition mechanism in diimide systems (bottom) (reprinted with permission from (Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 52). Copyright (2014) Elsevier). (b) Schematic illustration of the reversible Na-storage redox mechanism of PTCDI (reprinted with permission from (ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21095). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society).	 
PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)64− + 4Na+ + 4e ↔ PPy17.1·Fe(CN)64−·4Na+	(2)
PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)64− + PF6− − e ↔ PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)63−·PF6−	(3)
PPy17.14+·Fe(CN)63−·PF6− + xPF6− − xe ↔ PPy17.1(4+x)+·Fe(CN)63−·(1 + x)PF6−	(4)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Charge storage mechanism in PPy/DS electrodes (reprinted with permission from (J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 114). Copyright (2013) Wiley). (b) Schematic illustration of the structure and redox mechanism of PPy/FC (reprinted with permission from (RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5495). Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Energy barriers of sodiated/lithiated PPy (reprinted with permission from (Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16092). Copyright (20125) Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Reaction mechanism of PAnS (reprinted with permission from (Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14354). Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry); (e) reversible charge/discharge mechanism of oligopyrene (reprinted with permission from (J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 73). Copyright (2014) Elsevier). (f) Reaction mechanism in poly(ferrocenyl-methylsilane) (reprinted with permission from (Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6768). Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry). (g) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical mechanism for PTMA (reprinted with permission from (Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1264–1269). Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
P(AN–NA) + PF6− ↔ P(AN–NA)+PF6− + e	(5)
Na+ + e ↔ Na (or NaCx)	(6)
P(AN–NA) + PF6− + Na+ ↔ P(AN–NA)+PF6− + Na (or NaCx)	(7)
PDCzBT + xNa+ + xe− ↔ Nax+PDCzBTx−	(8)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Number of Huckel units in different sodiated oligomers and their contribution to reversible capacity. Active Huckel groups considered: –OOC–φ–CN– (end) and –NC–φ–CN– (central). Inactive Huckel groups considered: –OOC–φ–NC– (end) and –CN–φ–NC– or simply –φ– (central). (b) Schematic illustration showing the molecular structure of the O6Na and O7Na oligomers. (c) Schematic representation of a Schiff molecule and the linear relationship showing the active Huckel units and Na+ inserted (reprinted with permission from (Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3233). Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the energy conversion reaction in biochemical energy storage and the analogous electrochemical energy storage and (b) redox mechanisms of the flavin group in nature and LIBs (reprinted with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8322). Copyright (2013) Wiley. (c) Molecular simplification strategy of pteridine derivatives (reprinted with permission from (Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5335). Copyright (2014) Springer Nature). (d) Nanohybridization of flavin with SWNTs (reprinted with permission from (Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2558). Copyright (2014) Wiley). (e) Schematic representation of full cell discharge process of melanin/silver nanowire (AgNW)-based SIBs and (f) proposed structure and Na+-ion insertion process of melanin-based full cells (reprinted with permission from (Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3173). Copyright (2016) Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Different reaction mechanisms for organic electrode materials. (b) Molecular Structure of different azo compounds. (c) In situ synchrotron XRD spectra and color-mapped patterns of ADASS compound, and the corresponding voltage profile. (d) XRD pattern of ADASS material before and after 5 cycles. (e) Raman spectra of ADASS material before and after 5 and 20 cycles. (f) DFT calculation results for the relative energies and optimized structures of AB, PBASS, and ADASS compounds (reprinted with permission from (Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2879). Copyright (2018) Wiley).	 

 	Fig. 13  Different approaches to enhance the properties of organic electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Specific capacity and (b) voltage comparison charts of different organic compounds.	 

 	Fig. 15  Radar plots comparing the different electrochemical parameters (qualitative analysis) of the four categories of organic compounds. The values shown for each compound are based on their peak performances.	 

 	Fig. 16  Sodium storage reaction mechanisms in different types of organic compounds.	 


Carbonyl
Na2C6H2O4	288	265	288@0.1C	108.7	>88% (2)*	1.0–2.0	
49

Na2C6O6	498 (2nd)	∼498* (2nd)	371@1000	∼100 (2nd)*	90.8% (50)	0.5–3.3	
50

TASQ	366	∼351*	220@100	51	95% (50)	3.0–0.05	
32

TSAA	172	∼165*	95@100	56	95% (50)	3.0–0.05	
32

Na2TP	∼491	295	100@10C	60	∼90% (90)	2.0–0.0	
60

C8H5NaO4	689	273	—	39.6	∼89% (50)*	1.7–0.1	
61

C8H6O4	801	204	—	25.5	>80% (50)*	1.7–0.1	
61

C10H2Na4O8	305	152	—	49.8	∼85% (20)*	1.7–0.1	
61

C8Na2F4O4	714	179	—	25.1	∼78% (20)*	1.7–0.1	
61

C14H4Na4O8	263	171	—	65	∼88% (30)*	1.7–0.1	
61

Na2C8H4O4	>500*	<300*	150@2C*	62.5	79.8% (50)	2.0–0.1	
62

Na4C8H2O6	183	∼168	75@5C*	92	84% (100)	1.8–0.1	
35

Na4C24H8O8	>225*	∼100*	—	∼44*	∼80% (100)*	2.4–0.3	
64

SSDC	375	260	72@10000	69.3	80% (400)	2.5–0.1	
17

PTCDA	134	∼134*	91@1000	∼100*	74% (200)	1.0–3.0	
69

PTCDA	1017	435	—	42.8	52% (5)	3.0–0.01	
69

PTCDA	620.5	436.1	67.7@2000	60.9	40.4% (140)	2.0–0.01	
70

PTCDA	148.9	>180*	38.9@80C	∼82*	87.5% (5000)	1.5–3.5	
36

Na2C10H2N2O4	191.3	128.9	>50@2C	67.4	∼37% (100)*	0.5–3.0	
79

PTCDI	140	150	103@600	93.3	90% (300)	1.0–3.0	
81



Polymers
Ppy/DS	>105*	—	85@800	—	82% (50)	1.5–3.9	
91

PPy/FC	∼120*	∼105*	75@1600	∼114*	85% (100)	1.5–3.8	
92

Hollow PPy	97	∼112*	87@320	∼90*	78.5% (1000)	1.0–3.8	
93

PANS	85	98.7	76@800	86.1	96.7% (200)	1.8–3.7	
94

P(AN–NA)	181	∼181	165@200	∼100	95.5% (50)	2.0–4.0	
95

PBT/C	690	1187	—	∼58	34% (40)	3.0–0.0	
96

Crystalline OPr	42.5	∼100*	—	∼42*	64.5% (50)	1.5–4.5*	
98

Amorphous OPr	120	∼175*	60@100	∼68*	∼70% (50)	1.5–4.5*	
98

Binder free PDA	1181	581	122@3200	∼54	∼100% (1024)	3.0–0.0	
100

PDA	213	—	54@10000	—	—	1.5–4.5	
99

PDCzBT	∼520*	∼150*	99@100	29.8	60% (200)*	3.0–0.0	
105

Organic radical	75	296	—	25	64.5% (50)	2.0–4.0	
118

PTMA/CNT	222	120	190@5C	185	92% (100)	1.5–4.0	
119



Schiff bases
Schiff base	>300*	>200*	>150@0.2C*	∼66*	—	1.6–0.005	
139

Schiff base-O2Na	660	268	50@5C*	40.6	97.5% (25)	1.6–0.05	
140



Biologically derived
Lumichrome/CNTs#	222	∼215*	—	∼98*	∼50% (20)	1.0–3.0	
148

Alloxazine/CNTs#	255	∼240*	—	∼94*	∼50% (20)	1.0–3.0	
148

Lumazine/CNTs#	220	∼220*	—	∼100*	∼50% (20)	1.0–3.0	
148

Melanin	∼80	—	—	—	—	1.9–2.2	
155



Azo compounds
AB	929	15	—	∼0.02	—	2.0–0.5	
156

PBASS	162	>250*	—	>150*	∼24% (50)*	2.0–0.5	
156

ADASS	∼220*	∼170*	71@40C	∼77*	86.6% (2000)	2.0–0.5	
156


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
