Surface acoustic wave enhanced water splitting reaction with methanol as a sacrificial material   - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CY01788D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CY01788D
(Paper)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 1458-1466Surface acoustic wave enhanced water splitting reaction with methanol as a sacrificial material†

        
          
            Sixuan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rudolf 
            Herrmann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alexander 
            Reiner
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Achim 
            Wixforth
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Christoph 
            Westerhausen
          
        
      *abc
aExperimental Physics I, Institute of Physics, University of Augsburg, Germany. E-mail: christoph.westerhausen@gmail.com
bCenter for NanoScience (CeNS), Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Germany
cPhysiology, Institute of Theoretical Medicine, University of Augsburg, Germany
Received 
      11th September 2020
    , Accepted 2nd December 2020First published on 8th December 2020AbstractTiO2 is the most widely used photocatalyst for the water splitting reaction to generate the clean fuel hydrogen, but its energy conversion efficiency is still low, mainly due to the easy recombination of photo-generated electron–hole pairs. In order to promote the efficiency of the catalyst, a surface acoustic wave assisted catalyst is presented in this study. On 128° rotated y-cut LiNbO3, Rayleigh waves with a frequency of 150 MHz are generated and act on Pt modified TiO2 catalyst nanoparticles. We here quantify the effect of the application of surface acoustic waves to a Pt/TiO2 catalyst for hydrogen production by photo-splitting of a methanol/water vapor mixture. The results convincingly show that the photocatalytic activity of Pt/TiO2 is clearly enhanced by the SAW propagation underneath the catalyst layer. The effect increases nonlinearly with the applied power level of the acoustic waves. As the main mechanism, we identify the electric field produced by the displacement of LiNbO3, which hinders the recombination of photo-generated electron–hole pairs.
Introduction
The term “photocatalysis” describes a process in which solar energy is converted into chemical energy, in most cases, via a suitable (semiconductor) catalyst. Such solar-to-chemical conversion possibly represents a potential solution for any fossil fuel energy crisis and an effective strategy for environment remediation. TiO2 is a kind of a widely used and quite well understood semiconductor catalyst for photochemical reactions, for instance, for the production of hydrogen from water splitting and also for degrading organic waste pollutants. However, there are some drawbacks to its photocatalytic properties due to its low efficiency of light absorption, the fast charge carrier recombination and the slow surface redox reaction rate.1,2 Therefore, much effort has been devoted to improving its photocatalytic efficiency to meet the demands for commercialization. In general, this comprises expansion of the TiO2 light absorption into the visible spectrum, improving the charge carrier separation and lowering the overpotential for surface chemical reactions. Among others, the prolongation of the charge carrier lifetime by efficiently preventing electron–hole recombination remains the most critical issue. In order to obtain longer lifetimes of the charge carriers in semiconductors, various heterostructures have been constructed, such as p–n junctions,3 Schottky junctions4 and z-scheme heterostructures.5 The key point for these heterostructures is their built-in electric field at the material interface, which enhances the charge carrier separation and thus hinders their recombination. However, these heterostructures have to be specifically designed and synthesized for different semiconductors and for different photocatalytic applications, which might potentially lead to high costs.
In order to reduce the cost, many research projects attempt to apply controllable external electric fields to photocatalysts. For instance, there is a growing body of work which focuses on controlling the photochemical reaction by employing the polarization of ferroelectric materials. Ferroelectric materials have a non-centrosymmetric crystal structure, which leads to charge separation and thus polarization by supplying an external force. Many studies have shown before that polarization can in fact enhance the separation of photo-induced charge carriers in a photocatalyst and lead to a promotion of surface chemical reactions. Rohrer and coworkers for example reported a heterostructure photocatalyst comprising a ferroelectric core (PbTiO3) and a non-ferroelectric TiO2 shell.6 They showed that the degradation rate for methylene blue by using such a PbTiO3–TiO2 heterostructure catalyst turns out to be about five times faster than that using PbTiO3 or TiO2 alone and any mixture of both. They reasoned that this enhancement of the catalytic effect is due to the ferroelectric polarization, which causes significant band bending at the interface between the ferroelectric material and the photo-catalyst. This band bending in turn enhances the separation of photo-excited electrons and holes.
A similar work on the piezo- and also ferroelectric materials LiNbO3 and LiTaO3 combined with the TiO2 photocatalyst was pioneered by Inoue and coworkers in the 1980s.7 In their experiment, they employed conventional Pt loaded TiO2 for a water splitting reaction, and by determining the amount of produced hydrogen, they found that the activity for the following different materials and polarization combinations turned out to be ranked like: LiNbO3 (negative polar surface)/TiO2 > LiNbO3 (positive polar surface)/TiO2 > LiTaO3 (parallel polar surface)/TiO2 > α-Al2O3 (nonpolar surface)/TiO2. The promoted catalytic activity was obviously not only due to polarization induced band bending in TiO2, but also due to the influence on the adsorption of H2 and O2 on the catalyst's surface.
After the discovery that static surface polarizations quite strongly affect the catalyst action on ferroelectric materials, also, dynamic surface polarizations like those produced by surface acoustic waves (SAWs) on piezoelectric materials have attracted attention in recent years. SAWs have been long used in radio frequency (rf) telecommunications, as they represent very powerful filters and signal processing devices. They are modes of elastic energy localized at the surface of an infinite half space substrate. SAWs can be easily excited and then propagate on piezoelectric crystals, and their frequency and vibration mode can be precisely designed and controlled. Application of an rf voltage to so-called interdigital transducers (IDTs) leads to the generation of an acoustic wave at a frequency and wavelength determined by the geometry of the IDT and the SAW velocity of the respective substrate. They propagate at the speed of sound and are accompanied by piezoelectric fields produced by the local surface deformations of the wave. Since the surface acoustic waves hence not only provide well defined displacements of any surface volume element but are also accompanied by strong electric fields, also propagating at the speed of sound, they provide spatio-temporal surface polarization. However, this continuously varying system is different from the above mentioned static polarization, which could prevent the surface from achieving thermodynamic equilibrium with its environment.8 On the other hand, the SAW induced surface periodic spatial–temporal deformations also could positively impact the activity of surface mounted catalysts, as these rapid deformations might also affect both adsorption and desorption of reactants on the catalyst surface.9,10 It is thus expected that the SAW driven time-dependent alternating polarization in fact can more efficiently activate surface mounted catalysts.
In this work, we carry out a SAW mediated catalytic water splitting reaction with methanol as a hole scavenger, and employ Pt modified titanium dioxide nanoparticles as the photocatalyst. In summary, the presented study is carried out as outlined in the following section.
Here, the non-oxidative dehydrogenation of the alcohol in a methanol–water mixture is employed to produce formaldehyde and hydrogen gas. At the first photocatalytic reaction step, methanol first strongly adsorbs on the surface of TiO2 to form methoxy species, and then the methoxy species directly react with light excited holes and decompose as follows:11 CH3O−(ad) + h+ → CH3O˙(a)(1) CH3O˙(a) → CH2O˙−(a) + H+(2) CH2O˙−(a) → CH2O(a) + e−(3)
The anaerobic flow-conditions and the extremely small amount of catalyst in the experiment can prevent further oxidation of formaldehyde, so it is assumed that formaldehyde is the main product in the photodehydrogenation of methanol.
On the other hand, photo-excited electrons in TiO2 are transferred to Pt, which act as active sites for hydrogen production.12 (4)
By measuring the amount of photocatalytically produced formaldehyde, being proportional to the amount of H2 produced in the catalytic water splitting process, information about the photocatalytic activity of Pt/TiO2 can be obtained.
A SAW chip comprising an interdigital transducer (IDT) for the generation of surface acoustic waves13 with a resonance frequency of around f = 150.3 MHz was fabricated using standard microlithography. Pt modified titanium dioxide nanoparticles serving as the photocatalyst were synthesized by a reduction method,14 and then deposited within the propagation path of the surface acoustic waves by a simple spin coating method.
The SAW based catalyst was used with and without the assistance of Rayleigh type surface acoustic waves, and the catalytic efficacy was determined by measuring the amount of produced formaldehyde. This is achieved by applying the Hantzsch reaction of acetoacetanilide with formaldehyde and fluorometric measurements.15 Our experimental results convincingly show that the photocatalytic activity of Pt/TiO2 is clearly enhanced by applying intense surface acoustic waves to it and exhibits a nonlinear relationship with the SAW power. To clarify the physical origin of the observed SAW-induced enhancement of the catalytic efficacy, we have to consider the (i) mechanical surface deformation and (ii) the piezoelectric fields accompanying the SAWs. In order to study the effect of any electric fields, we separate the catalyst layer from the piezoelectric SAW substrate using a very thin (60 nm) conductive metal film. This conductive layer is known to very efficiently attenuate the SAW induced electric fields but does not affect the SAW-induced mechanical vibrations. The same photocatalysis experiments were carried out again by using this metalized SAW based catalyst. All other experimental parameters were kept the same as those in the “mechanical plus electric field” studies before. Our findings indicate that the catalysis-promoting effect of the SAWs clearly decreases when the surface electric field is attenuated.
Experimental
General procedure for the synthesis of Pt modified TiO2
To synthesize the Pt modified TiO2 nanoparticles, we deposited platinum nanoparticles on the surface of TiO2 powder by a reduction method.14 The TiO2 powder [Degussa (P25, anatase 78%)] was used without any pretreatment. 30 mg TiO2 was suspended in 5 mL of 0.4 M K2PtCl4 solution and then stirred vigorously for 8 hours at room temperature. Thereafter, 5 mg KBH4 were gradually added to the slurry. After sufficient stirring, the suspension was centrifuged and washed with pure water 3 times. Afterwards, the sediment was dried and we added 20 mg produced Pt/TiO2 into 1 mL ethanol to obtain the suspension used for spin coating. All the chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Finally, the synthesized Pt modified TiO2 nanoparticles were inspected with a transmission electron microscope (TEM) to check their morphology as shown in Fig. 1(c1) and (c2).
 Fig. 1  (a) The setup: the green part represents a circuit board which holds an rf connector, the SAW chip with the catalyst layer in the propagation path of surface acoustic waves and the micro reaction chamber. Through a quartz glass window on top of the cylinder, the sample is illuminated with UV radiation. The reaction chamber has a gas inlet and a gas outlet. The inlet is supplied with nitrogen, water and methanol vapor, and the outlet may in addition contain hydrogen and formaldehyde, with the latter serving as an indicator for the hard to detect H2. (b1) presents the SAW-based Pt/TiO2 catalyst device without a metal layer, and (b2) presents the SAW-based Pt/TiO2 catalyst device with a metal layer. (c1) and (c2) TEM pictures of the synthesized Pt/TiO2 catalyst. (d) presents the AFM picture of the spin-coated Pt/TiO2 catalyst film. (e) Dektak© profilometer measurement for the determination of the thickness of the catalyst film. 
Design and fabrication of the SAW chips
For the SAW chips, we used 128° rotated y-cut LiNbO3 single crystal substrates, on which Rayleigh type SAWs are generated. The size of the LiNbO3 chips is 17.5 mm × 17.5 mm and the thickness of the chip is 0.5 mm. The designed IDT had an aperture of W = 2 mm and a finger spacing of d = 6.25 μm, which results in a SAW wavelength of λ = 25 μm. The IDT employed had 16 finger pairs. These IDT finger pairs were microlithographically fabricated near the sides of the substrate, and consisted of 5 nm Ti on the bottom, and then 50 nm Au and 5 nm Ti on the top. Lastly, a h = 100 nm thick SiO2 layer was deposited on top of the whole LiNbO3 substrate by thermal evaporation, serving as a protection film. After fabrication, the resonance frequency and the return loss S11 of the IDT was determined using a vector network analyzer (Rohde & Schwarz).
SAW-based Pt/TiO2 catalyst chip
To finalize the SAW assisted catalysis samples, we spin coated (1500 rpm for 5 seconds) an 8 μL Pt/TiO2–ethanol suspension of the Pt/TiO2 catalyst directly onto the propagation path of the LiNbO3 SAW delay lines. Then, the coated substrate was baked at T = 80 °C for 5 min to evaporate all ethanol. Finally, any accidentally deposited catalyst layer outside the SAW propagation path was carefully removed to ensure that all the present catalyst particles are influenced by the SAWs. This resulted in an active catalyst area of around 2 mm × 8 mm. The side view of the SAW-based Pt/TiO2 catalyst chip is shown in Fig. 1(b1). The morphology of the catalyst films was measured with an AFM and the thickness of the film was checked using a Dektak© profilometer, and the results of both are presented in Fig. 1(d) and (e).
To characterize the SAW chip and to check whether the thin catalyst layer possibly alters the SAW propagation mode, we manufactured two otherwise nominally identical SAW delay lines with and without the thin catalyst layer and compared their rf transmission functions by employing a network analyzer. The measured S21 transmission in the time domain shows that the catalyst layer does not affect the SAW propagation mode once it was deposited on the chip, except for a 10 dB attenuation of the transmitted signal (see the ESI†).
Determining the amount of formaldehyde
The quantity of the produced formaldehyde is determined by the Hantzsch reaction of acetoacetanilide (AAA) with formaldehyde which involves cyclization between AAA and formaldehyde in the presence of ammonia so that it will produce a yellow dihydropyridine derivative product which in turn can be detected in fluorometric measurements with λ = 370 nm excitation.15 This method is very simple and sensitive, and allows the measurement of formaldehyde at the μmol l−1 level. In addition, the Hantzsch reaction can take place at room temperature without any heating system.
For calibration purposes, a series of formaldehyde standard solutions was prepared which has concentrations of 0, 0.856 μmol l−1, 1.712 μmol l−1, and 2.569 μmol l−1. After 30 minutes of Hantzsch reaction, the solutions were spectroscopically measured at room temperature, which allows the preparation of a calibration graph. Fig. 2(a) illustrates that the emission intensity at 472 nm increases with the HCHO concentration, in the range of 0–2.5 μmol l−1, and according to Li′s work, the lowest determined level is 0.1 μmol l−1.15Fig. 2(b) shows the clear linear correlation between formaldehyde concentration and fluorescence intensity (linear regression: y = 17630.8x + 41771.9, correlation coefficient 0.9974, x = [HCHO] in μmol l−1, y = fluorescence intensity).
 Fig. 2  (a) Fluorescence emission intensity of standard formaldehyde solutions with different concentrations; (b) calibration graph of the raw data shown in (a); (c) fluorescence emission intensity of the adsorption solution after 30 minutes in the dark (black line), after the first 30 minutes of UV illumination + no SAWs (yellow dashed line), and another 30 minutes of UV illumination + no SAWs (yellow solid line); (d) fluorescence emission intensity of the adsorption solution; the same experiment as depicted in (c) but with PSAW = 40 mW SAWs; (e) the amount of formaldehyde being produced during the photocatalytic processes for UV illumination only and UV illumination plus PSAW = 40 mW SAWs; (f) activation coefficient (as defined in the text) for various SAW power levels: PSAW = 0 mW, 10 mW, 20 mW, 30 mW and 40 mW. 
Acoustic-photocatalysis and its dependence on SAW power
The gas-phase catalytic reaction takes place in a flow-type reaction cell, in which a small (1 cm3) cylindrical chamber with a quartz window on top was in direct contact with the LiNbO3 sample and the Pt/TiO2 catalyst. A UV light emitting diode (λ = 365 nm) was placed above the reactor cell, and its irradiation intensity was PLED = 85 mW cm−2 which was determined using a power meter (Thorlabs PM100A). We used nitrogen as a carrier gas and it passed through liquid water and methanol at flow rates of 4.8 mL min−1 and 0.2 mL min−1, respectively. Then, the gas mixture gathered together and passed through the photocatalytic reaction cell. In Fig. 1(a), a schematic of our setup is depicted. Before the photocatalysis experiments, the reaction cell was flushed with nitrogen–water–methanol vapor for one day to reach anaerobic conditions. As a reference measurement, the gas mixture passed the chamber and was bubbled in an adsorption solution, which was used for the Hantzsch reaction, for 30 minutes. Its fluorescence represents the base line for the subsequent “active” measurements with UV LED and SAWs for 60 min (fSAW = 150 MHz and PSAW = 40 mW). During the SAW-assisted-photocatalytic process, every 30 min, the adsorption solution was exchanged with a fresh one and the fluorescence emission of the previous adsorption solution was checked immediately to determine the amount of formaldehyde produced.
For comparison, reference experiments were also carried out with UV illumination only (no SAW) to be able to investigate the effect of the SAWs on the photocatalytic efficiency. The results are shown in Fig. 2(c)–(e). Clearly, a positive effect of the additional SAW interaction with the catalyst is seen.
To study the relationship between the applied SAW power level PSAW and the enhancement of photocatalytic reaction, the photocatalytic reactions were carried out at different SAW power levels: PSAW = 10 mW, 20 mW, 30 mW and 40 mW, separately. The Pt/TiO2 catalyst was freshly prepared after each experiment. Here, the activation coefficient indicates the effect of SAWs to the photocatalytic reaction. The activation coefficient is defined as AC: = MSAW+UV/MUV, where MSAW+UV is the yield amount of formaldehyde when SAWs were applied during UV illumination, and MUV is the yield amount of formaldehyde when SAWs were not applied during UV illumination. The result is shown in Fig. 2(f).
Separation of mechanical and electric contributions to the SAW effect
In order to distinguish between the mechanical vibrations and the accompanying electric fields as the main contributor to the enhanced photocatalysis reaction, the SAW chip was modified using a thermally deposited 60 nm thick metal film, which consists of the simple metallization (5 nm Ti + 50 nm Au + 5 nm Ti) of the SAW propagation path before we deposit the Pt/TiO2 catalyst on it. The side view of the metalized SAW-based Pt/TiO2 catalyst chip is shown in Fig. 1(b2). This metallization has no significant influence on the mechanical deformation of the chip surface, because the thickness of the metal film (60 nm) is much lower than the wavelength of the SAWs (25 μm), but it can completely alter the electrical boundary conditions at the surface. A (thin and massless) conductive layer on the surface of the SAW substrate, however, efficiently shortens the piezoelectric fields accompanying the SAWs and also renormalizes the SAW velocity to a somewhat lower (Δv) value as compared to the open, unmetallized surface (v0).16 The same photocatalytic reaction was carried out again at the resonance frequency by using PSAW = 10 mW, 20 mW, 30 mW and 40 mW SAW power, separately, and the obtained activation coefficient results (AC2) were compared with the one obtained at the same SAW power but with the non-metalized SAW chip before (AC1).
Results and discussion
Morphology of the catalyst
The two SEM images shown in Fig. 1(c1) and (c2) illustrate that the diameter of TiO2 (P25) nanoparticles was around 20 nm and the size of Pt nanoparticles was around 1 nm in diameter, and these Pt nanoparticles are located on the surface of TiO2. Fig. 1(d) shows that the roughness of the spin-coated catalyst film is relatively low. Fig. 1(e) shows the profilometer measurement for the determination of the thickness of the catalyst film. Here, the positions from 0 to 3.5 mm represent the area of the catalyst film, and that from 3.5 mm to 5 mm is the area of the substrate. We find that the thickness of the film is around 2 μm, which is much less than the SAW wavelength (25 μm). This indicates that the catalyst film should not lead to another type of acoustic wave, which is supported by additional measurements shown in the ESI.†
Photocatalytic reaction with the assistance of 40 mW SAWs
During the 60 min photocatalytic reaction, the fluorescence emission intensity of the adsorption solution was checked every 30 minutes. The result of the purely photocatalytic reaction with only UV light is shown in Fig. 2(c), and the result of the acoustic–photocatalytic reaction with the assistance of 40 mW SAWs is shown in Fig. 2(d). As can be seen from these figures, the additional effect of the PSAW = 40 mW surface acoustic waves results in a clear increase of the fluorescence emission intensity after t = 30 min and t = 60 min, respectively, whereas the fluorescence intensities in the dark are almost the same. Based on our calibration data as depicted in Fig. 2(b), we can now determine the amount of formaldehyde being produced during the reaction. The data presented in Fig. 2(e) illustrate that the amount of the produced formaldehyde is about 0.008 μmol after 1 hour UV illumination, and doubles to 0.016 μmol when SAWs act additionally upon the photocatalyst. Due to the small area of the catalyst film of only 2 mm × 8 mm, the total amount of produced formaldehyde is very small, but we still observe a nearly 100% increase of the production efficiency under PSAW = 40 mW SAW interaction.
In order to exclude any spurious SAW heating effect, we monitored the temperature changes during the experiment by employing a miniature temperature sensor. The result of this control experiment is shown in the ESI:† the total temperature (obviously mainly caused by the UV illumination) increases by about 20 K during the experiment and the PSAW = 40 mW SAWs cause only a negligible additional temperature rise. Thus, it is safe to state that the SAWs, which clearly produce a double in the catalytic efficiency, do not act via an additional temperature increase but rather via intrinsic SAW related effects.

Fig. 3 shows the return loss S11 of the chip. Due to the large bandwidth of the IDT structure (≈8 MHz), a less than 0.1 dB power change is caused by a ΔT = 20 °C temperature rise, as the reported temperature expansion coefficient for 128° rotated y-cut LiNbO3 is 76 ppm °C−117 and the output frequency of the rf generator was kept constant at 150.3 MHz. Hence, the observed nearly 100% increase of the catalytic efficiency due to SAW interaction might even be a bit larger, taking the non-compensated shift of the SAW resonance frequency into account.
 Fig. 3  Return loss S11. a) The resonance frequency of the IDT measured using a network analyzer at room temperature; b) zoom-in of the panel a); after 30 min and 60 min of UV illumination, the resonance frequency is only slightly shifted to the values indicated by the vertical lines. 
Acoustic-photocatalysis depends on SAW power
Now that it has been unambiguously shown that the SAWs increase the catalytic reaction efficiency of our assay by a non-temperature related effect, we turn to a detailed investigation of the SAW power dependence of the efficiency. In Fig. 2(f), we use the extracted activation coefficient AC = MSAW+UV/MUV of our reaction, where M denotes the amount of formaldehyde being detected by the fluorescence intensity measurements with and without SAWs as described above. We find that the activation coefficient seems to first strongly increase and then saturate for PSAW > 30 mW. The increasing activation coefficient (AC) indicates the SAW-enhanced photocatalytic activity of Pt/TiO2. In this experiment, SAWs propagate at the surface of LiNbO3, and at the same time, these waves can cause well-defined displacements at the surface of the substrate, and these mechanical displacements are also accompanied by an electric potential because the distorted substrate is a piezoelectric material. The spatial and temporal positive and negative surface polarizations lead to a strong electric field near the surface. The SAW induced electric potential (∅) is related to the square root of the power level of the SAWs according to eqn (5). The SAW induced electric field and amplitude of the mechanical vibration are both related to the SAW induced electric potential according to eqn (6) and (7).18 (5)Here, A is the beam width of the SAWs, λ is the wavelength and y0 is a material dependent constant (y0,LiNbO3 128° = 0.21 mS).
Electric field: (6)Here, Ex and Ey are the SAW-induced in-plane electric fields, and x is the SAW propagation direction. Ez is the out-of-plane electric field, and the z direction is perpendicular to the surface of the substrate. Since the SAWs are travelling along the x direction, ∂/∂x can be represented by j·k, where k is the wave vector. The in-plane electric field Ey is always zero because SAWs are a kind of travelling wave and are uniform in the y direction. ∂/∂z can be represented as a sum of decaying exponentials because the SAWs decay underneath the surface of the substrate. Typical fields for the applied power range in this study range from E = 1.65 × 105 V m−1 to E = 3.31 × 105 V m−1, while both positive and negative signs are possible.
The displacement at the surface is also related to the surface potential ∅ through the piezoelectric constants cx, cy and cz.
Mechanical vibration: ux = cx·∅,  uy = cy·∅,  uz = cz·∅(7)Here, ux is the displacement along the x direction, uy is the displacement along the y direction and uz is the displacement along the z direction.

Eqn (5)–(7) indicate that the SAW-induced surface potential, electric field and mechanical vibration are positively related to the square root of the SAW power level. When the SAW power increases, these SAW-induced accompanying parameters will also increase. This gives rise to the interpretation that the SAW-induced surface deformations, electric fields and electric potential could be the reason for the SAW power dependent catalytic activity.
The SAW-induced electric field could directly affect the band structure of TiO2. As we know, TiO2 is a semiconductor catalyst, which has a well-defined conduction band and a valence band. When it is under the influence of a strong enough electric field, this external electric field could cause certain band bending of the TiO2. LiNbO3 has a non-centrosymmetric crystal structure, so it has an internal dipole and piezoelectric effect. The internal dipole can cause electrical states of the material, while the piezoelectric effect is a linear interaction between the mechanical and electrical states in the crystal. When the SAWs propagate on the LiNbO3, the change of mechanical stress causes the movement of the center of negative charge and the center of positive charge, and furthermore changes the internal dipole. As a consequence the surface dynamically exhibits a negative or positive surface charge upon the propagation of a piezoactive surface wave. The SAWs, being responsible for the dynamic poling of the LiNbO3 substrate, also couple electric fields into the Pt/TiO2 nanoparticles where they induce dynamic band bending and the formation of depletion and accumulation layers in the TiO2. To illustrate this idea, we sketch in Fig. 4(a) and (b) the schematic energy level diagrams of TiO2 under both negative and positive polarization. On positively poled LiNbO3, there are many positive polarization charges at the interface of LiNbO3, which causes a drift of the negative free charge carriers in the TiO2 toward the interface to compensate for the positive polarization. These redundant negative free charge carriers cause a negatively charged depletion layer, and lead to downward band bending. Positive free charge carriers, on the other hand, move into the opposite direction, namely the interface between TiO2 and the gas phase. These redundant positive free charge carriers cause a positively charged depletion layer, and lead to upward band bending. As a result, the SAW-induced external electric field leads to an internal electric field at the LiNbO3/TiO2 interface and the TiO2/gas interface. There, under UV light illumination, electrons are excited from the valence band of TiO2 to the conduction band of TiO2, and leave holes in the valence band. These photoexcited electron–hole pairs can be separated by the external SAW-induced electric field, and the photoexcited electrons in the TiO2 move toward the LiNbO3/TiO2 interface while the photoexcited holes drift towards the TiO2/gas interface. Moreover, the upward-bent band at the TiO2/gas interface tends to accumulate holes at the interface, and then these holes take part in the oxidation reaction. Both CH3OH and H2O could interact with these holes but most holes will react with methanol since it always serves as a hole scavenger, and transient spectroscopic studies have revealed that the reaction of CH3OH and holes happens at a much faster rate than the one for H2O molecules and holes.11 Here, the methanol does not only serve as a hole scavenger, and as a hydrogen-containing sacrificial material, it also contributes its hydrogen atom to produce hydrogen gas. The produced ˙CH3O radical (see chemical reaction (1)) is an excellent electron donor,19 which dissociates a proton (reaction (2)) and injects its electron (reaction (3)) to the conduction band of TiO2, which is called the “doubling effect”.20,21 The injected electron prefers to aggregate on the Pt nanoparticles located at the surface of TiO2, and it reduces the dissociated proton into hydrogen gas. Here, the Pt nanoparticles act as an active site for the reduction reaction to produce hydrogen gas, because they can capture photogenerated electrons, and also lower the overpotential for hydrogen production.12
 Fig. 4  Schematic energy level diagrams of TiO2 under the conditions of (a) negative polarization and (b) positive polarization normal to the LiNbO3/TiO2 interface. EC represents the conduction band edge and EV represents the valence band edge of the TiO2. (c) and (d) COMSOL simulated electric potential of LiNbO3; the rectangle shows the side view of 128° y-cut LiNbO3, and the width of LiNbO3 is 25 μm (one wavelength) and the height is 75 μm, and the propagation direction of waves is along the width of the rectangle. The surface of LiNbO3, where SAWs propagate, is at the top of the rectangle. (c) depicts the simulated electric potential when the surface is free, and (d) depicts the simulated electric potential when the surface is covered with metal. 
For a temporarily negatively poled LiNbO3, the positive free charge carriers in TiO2 will move toward the interface of LiNbO3/TiO2 and lead to upward band bending. At the same time, the negative free charge carriers in TiO2 will drift to the TiO2/gas interface and lead to downward band bending. The photoexcited electron–hole pairs are subsequently spatially separated by the electric field travelling with the SAWs and are driven into opposite directions. The photoexcited electrons drift to the TiO2/gas interface, and the downward band bending helps the electrons transfer firstly to Pt nanoparticles and then take part in the reduction reaction to produce hydrogen gas. This SAW-induced electric field and caused band bending quite efficiently prevent electron and hole recombination and lead to longer lifetimes of these charge carriers, which in turn strongly promotes the photocatalytic reaction.
On the other hand, the SAW-induced mechanical vibration could accelerate the chemical reaction by reducing the strain dependent diffusion barrier of the reactant. For a heterogeneous catalysis process, the reactant is firstly adsorbed on the catalyst's surface and then diffuses to the active site of the catalyst. Secondly, the chemical reaction can take place on the active site and the adsorbed reactant changes into the product. Some detailed analyses of the SAW promoted activation at the atomic-level in surface catalytic processes were done by Wu et al., and his theoretical and computational investigation illustrates that the action of Rayleigh acoustic waves could enhance the surface diffusion of adsorbed atoms by tens and hundreds percent,22 which could also positively affect the activity of the catalyst.
Separation of the electric and mechanical contributions to the SAW effect on catalysis
In order to further elucidate the physical mechanism behind the observed beneficial interaction mechanism of SAWs, enhancing the efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction, the exact same photocatalytic reaction was carried out again at the SAW resonance frequency but with a metalized SAW chip, at different SAW power levels. SAW with PSAW = 10 mW, 20 mW, 30 mW and 40 mW were applied separately to the Pt/TiO2 catalyst for one hour of UV illumination.
The SAW-induced electric potentials for the open surface and the metalized surface are simulated using COMSOL software and are shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d) separately.
The activation coefficients AC1 for the normal SAW chip (open surface) and AC2 for the metallized SAW chip are compared in Fig. 5(c). Moreover, the multiplication constants for the SAW-induced electric field (Efield), AC1 and AC2 at various SAW power levels are compared in Fig. 5(d), where the SAW-induced electric fields (Efield) are normalized by the Efield which is produced by the PSAW = 10 mW SAWs, so the multiplication constants for PSAW = 10 mW, 20 mW, 30 mW and 40 mW SAW-induced Efield are 1, , , and 2 respectively. Using the same method, all AC1 (normal SAW chip) values were also normalized to AC1 at PSAW = 10 mW, and all AC2 (metalized SAW chip) values were normalized to AC2 for PSAW = 10 mW SAWs.
 Fig. 5  Amount of produced formaldehyde as a function of SAW power for the normal (a) and metalized (b) SAW chips. (c) Activation coefficients AC1 and AC2 at various SAW power levels, with a separately prepared sample for each power level. The resonance frequency was kept at fSAW = 150.3 MHz. (d) The multiplication constant for the SAW-induced electric field (Efield), AC1 and AC2 at various SAW power levels. 
In Fig. 5(a), we can clearly see that the values of AC1 (normal SAW chip) and AC2 (metalized SAW chip) both exceed unity, when PSAW = 10 mW, 20 mW, 30 mW and 40 mW SAWs are applied. This experimental finding in fact reveals that obviously both the “metal film modified” SAW chip and the non-metalized “normal” SAW chip enhance the catalytic activity of Pt/TiO2. At the same SAW power, however, the AC2 (metalized SAW chip) values are always smaller than the AC1 (normal SAW chip) values. This indicates that the obvious SAW-promoted catalytic efficiency was somewhat weakened by the 60 nm metal film. The metal film cancels the SAW-generated electric potential at the surface (∅ = 0), and it short circuits the in-plane electric fields Ex and Ey, which are parallel to the surface of the substrate. The out-of-plane electric field Ez, which is perpendicular to the surface, is strongly reduced. In terms of mechanical vibrations, metalization is not a prominent factor, since the thickness of the metal film (60 nm) is much smaller than the SAW wavelength (25 μm) and the mass loading of such a thin film is negligible.23
Hence, the metalized SAW chip and the normal SAW chip basically provide the same mechanical vibration at the same SAW power. As a result, we consider the reason for the smaller AC2 (metalized SAW chip) as compared to AC1 (normal SAW chip) to be the weaker SAW-induced electric field (Efield) that is reduced by the metal film. The reduced electric field values, however, cannot cause the same significant band bending of TiO2. Moreover, the photo-excited electrons and holes will not be efficiently separated by the small external SAW-induced electric field (Efield) and most of them have a chance to recombine. Thus, the photocatalytic reactions are not so significantly promoted as we have observed in the experiment for the normal chip.
For the normal SAW chip, AC1 at PSAW = 10 mW was AC1 = 1.18, and it was AC1 = 1.65 at PSAW = 20 mW, which is 1.4 times bigger. However, for the metalized SAW chip, AC2 at PSAW = 20 mW was AC2 = 1.19 and thus only 1.06 times bigger than AC2 at PSAW = 10 mW. When the power of SAWs is doubled from PSAW = 10 mW to 20 mW, the SAW-induced mechanical vibration and electric field will become  times stronger, according to eqn (5)–(7). We know that the metal film causes only a negligible attenuation of the mechanical vibrations, so they should be increased from PSAW = 10 mW to PSAW = 20 mW, the same factor for both the normal SAW chip and the metalized SAW chip. However, we observe a significantly larger SAW mediated increase for AC1 (normal SAW chip) but not for AC2 (metalized SAW chip), so we take this fact as a sign to be safe to exclude the SAW-induced mechanical vibration as the main reason for the SAW-promoted catalytic properties. Again, in terms of the SAW-induced electric fields (Ex, Ey and Ez), due to the shortcut and attenuation effect of the metal film, the in-plane electric fields Ex = 0 and Ey = 0, and the out-of-plane electric field Ez (metalized SAW chip) is smaller than the Ez (normal SAW chip). Therefore, the weaker electric fields might not efficiently separate the electron–hole pairs and prolong their lifetime, which might be the reason for the low AC2 value under the influence of the PSAW = 20 mW SAWs.
In Fig. 5(d), it is obvious that the multiplication constant of AC1 (normal SAW chip) is almost constantly the same as the multiplication constant of the SAW-induced electric field when the applied SAW power is lower than 30 mW. As has been analyzed above, the SAW-induced electric field is the main reason for the promotion of catalytic activity, so Efield and AC1 have the same rising tendency. However, the tendency deviates when the SAW power exceeds PSAW = 30 mW. The increase of AC1 becomes lower than the increase of SAW-induced Efield, and the reason for which might be the further oxidation of formaldehyde. Even though the reaction rate of CH3OH and the photoexcited holes is faster than the one for the H2O molecules and holes, some holes will still inevitably react with H2O molecules and oxidize them into free ˙OH radicals,19 and due to their strong oxidizing properties, the free ˙OH radicals could further oxidize formaldehyde into HCOOH or CO2.24 Under the conditions of big SAW power, the SAW-induced electric field is relatively strong and this can help to efficiently separate photoexcited electron–hole pairs and hinder their recombination. Even though the illumination with UV light is still the same, the amount of photogenerated electrons and holes becomes bigger, and the produced amount of formaldehyde and ˙OH radical production also becomes bigger, but some formaldehyde will be consumed by the oxidation of the free ˙OH radicals. As a result, the final detected amount of formaldehyde does not increase with the increase of the SAW induced electric field, explaining the differences in the increase of AC1 and the electrical field with increasing SAW power. For the metalized SAW chip, the electrical field is smaller because of the screening and attenuation effect of the metal film. At low SAW power (10 mW and 20 mW), the SAW-induced electric field is not strong enough to significantly separate the electron–hole pairs, so the multiplication constant of AC2 is almost equal to 1. At high SAW power (30 mW and 40 mW), the electrical field becomes stronger, but still remains smaller than that caused by the non-metalized normal SAW chip at the same SAW power. Hence, the increased reaction rate is not fast enough to promote further oxidation of formaldehyde, and AC2 exhibits the same tendency as the electrical field.
Conclusions
We have performed experiments in which Rayleigh type piezoelectric surface acoustic waves with a resonance frequency of 150 MHz act upon well-known Pt/TiO2 photocatalysts during the photocatalysis of a water splitting reaction with methanol as a hole scavenger.
To quantify the SAW-enhanced catalytic efficiency, we employed the Hantzsch reaction to detect the photoexcited hole oxidized formaldehyde production. Here, acetoacetanilide (AAA) with formaldehyde in the presence of ammonia which produces a yellow dihydropyridine derivative product that can be quantitatively detected in fluorometric measurements. Due to the “doubling effect” of methanol, we can thus approximately determine the amount of produced H2. Our experimental findings show that the SAWs in fact can improve the catalytic efficiency for the methanol photodehydrogenation and that this effect increases with increasing applied SAW power. According to the comparison experiment with a non-metalized normal SAW chip and a metalized SAW chip, we argue that the SAW accompanying electric field is most likely the reason for this enhancement. The SAWs, being responsible for dynamic poling of the LiNbO3 substrate, also couple electric fields into the surface deposited Pt/TiO2 nanoparticles where they prevent the recombination of electron–hole pairs and prolong their lifetime. Moreover, they also induce dynamic band bending of TiO2. The longer lifetime of charge carriers and the band bending of TiO2 finally enhance the photocatalytic reaction.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie Grant agreement No. 642688 (SAWtrain). The authors thank the Cluster of Excellence ‘Nanosystems Initiative Munich (NIM)’ and the ‘Augsburg Centre for Innovative Technologies (ACIT)’ for funding. Special thanks are given to Andreas Hefele, Matthias Küβ, Lukas Schnitzler, and Andreas Hörner for technical assistance.
References
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Z. Qiao, L. Qi and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12088 RSC .
X. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, A. Cao, J. Wei, C. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Zhang, A. M. Schultz, X. Liu, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1945 RSC .
Y. Inoue, M. Okamura and K. Sato, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 5184 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Starr and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 296–311 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishiyama, N. Rattana, N. Saito, K. Sato and Y. Inoue, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10602 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishiyama, N. Saito, H. Chou, K. Sato and Y. Inoue, Surf. Sci., 1999, 433–435, 525 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, Z. Feng, G. Wu, J. Shi, G. Ma, P. Ying and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8005 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hao, Z. Wang, T. Wang, Z. Ren, C. Zhou and X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 286 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. White and F. W. Voltmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1965, 7, 314 CrossRef .
A. A. Torrano, R. Herrmann, C. Strobel, M. Rennhak, H. Engelke, A. Reller and C. Bräuchle, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(27), 13352–13367 RSC .
Q. Li, P. Sritharathikhun and S. Motomizu, Anal. Sci., 2007, 23, 413 CrossRef .
A. Wixforth, J. P. Kotthaus and G. Weimann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 2104 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dewan, M. Tomar, V. Gupta and K. Sreenivas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 223508 CrossRef .

          S. Datta, Surface Acoustic Wave Devices, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.,  1986 Search PubMed .
F. Guzman, S. S. C. Chuang and C. Yang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 61 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hykaway, W. M. Sears, H. Morisaki and S. R. Morrison, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 6663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3479 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, V. Y. Zaitsev and L. V. Zhigilei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9252 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paschke, A. Wixforth, D. Denysenko and D. Volkmer, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 740 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sheng, Q. Li, W. Ma, H. Ji, C. Chen and J. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138–139, 212 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cy01788dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
CH3O−(ad) + h+ → CH3O˙(a)	(1)
CH3O˙(a) → CH2O˙−(a) + H+	(2)
CH2O˙−(a) → CH2O(a) + e−	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 1  (a) The setup: the green part represents a circuit board which holds an rf connector, the SAW chip with the catalyst layer in the propagation path of surface acoustic waves and the micro reaction chamber. Through a quartz glass window on top of the cylinder, the sample is illuminated with UV radiation. The reaction chamber has a gas inlet and a gas outlet. The inlet is supplied with nitrogen, water and methanol vapor, and the outlet may in addition contain hydrogen and formaldehyde, with the latter serving as an indicator for the hard to detect H2. (b1) presents the SAW-based Pt/TiO2 catalyst device without a metal layer, and (b2) presents the SAW-based Pt/TiO2 catalyst device with a metal layer. (c1) and (c2) TEM pictures of the synthesized Pt/TiO2 catalyst. (d) presents the AFM picture of the spin-coated Pt/TiO2 catalyst film. (e) Dektak© profilometer measurement for the determination of the thickness of the catalyst film.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Fluorescence emission intensity of standard formaldehyde solutions with different concentrations; (b) calibration graph of the raw data shown in (a); (c) fluorescence emission intensity of the adsorption solution after 30 minutes in the dark (black line), after the first 30 minutes of UV illumination + no SAWs (yellow dashed line), and another 30 minutes of UV illumination + no SAWs (yellow solid line); (d) fluorescence emission intensity of the adsorption solution; the same experiment as depicted in (c) but with PSAW = 40 mW SAWs; (e) the amount of formaldehyde being produced during the photocatalytic processes for UV illumination only and UV illumination plus PSAW = 40 mW SAWs; (f) activation coefficient (as defined in the text) for various SAW power levels: PSAW = 0 mW, 10 mW, 20 mW, 30 mW and 40 mW.	 

 	Fig. 3  Return loss S11. a) The resonance frequency of the IDT measured using a network analyzer at room temperature; b) zoom-in of the panel a); after 30 min and 60 min of UV illumination, the resonance frequency is only slightly shifted to the values indicated by the vertical lines.	 
	(5)
	(6)
ux = cx·∅,  uy = cy·∅,  uz = cz·∅	(7)

 	Fig. 4  Schematic energy level diagrams of TiO2 under the conditions of (a) negative polarization and (b) positive polarization normal to the LiNbO3/TiO2 interface. EC represents the conduction band edge and EV represents the valence band edge of the TiO2. (c) and (d) COMSOL simulated electric potential of LiNbO3; the rectangle shows the side view of 128° y-cut LiNbO3, and the width of LiNbO3 is 25 μm (one wavelength) and the height is 75 μm, and the propagation direction of waves is along the width of the rectangle. The surface of LiNbO3, where SAWs propagate, is at the top of the rectangle. (c) depicts the simulated electric potential when the surface is free, and (d) depicts the simulated electric potential when the surface is covered with metal.	 

 	Fig. 5  Amount of produced formaldehyde as a function of SAW power for the normal (a) and metalized (b) SAW chips. (c) Activation coefficients AC1 and AC2 at various SAW power levels, with a separately prepared sample for each power level. The resonance frequency was kept at fSAW = 150.3 MHz. (d) The multiplication constant for the SAW-induced electric field (Efield), AC1 and AC2 at various SAW power levels.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cy01788d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
