Carbonaceous materials as substitutes for conventional dye-sensitized solar cell counter electrodes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA02840J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02840J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20849-20862Carbonaceous materials as substitutes for conventional dye-sensitized solar cell counter electrodes

        
          
            H. Ghorbani 
            Shiraz
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            F. Razi 
            Astaraie
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: razias_m@ut.ac.ir;   Tel: +98 216 111 85 75
bFaculty of New Sciences and Technologies, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran
Received 
      19th April 2015
    , Accepted 11th August 2015First published on 9th September 2015AbstractDue to the rapid growth in energy demand, renewable energy plays a great role in both economics and energy supply. Recently, solar cells which convert solar energy to electricity have been proposed as typical renewable energy devices in this regard. Dye-sensitized solar cells, as the third generation of solar cells, have been attracting increasing attention. The development of counter electrodes, as one of the key components in electron cycling and redox reaction (to regenerate oxidized electrolyte), has faced several challenges due to their high price and the complicated deposition process of conventional platinum electrode. As cost effective materials, scientists have proposed carbonaceous materials as Pt alternatives that satisfy the catalytic role. In this paper, carbonaceous materials as counter electrodes are reviewed. Carbon structures present a high surface area as well as low impedance which lead to efficient solar cells. Improvements occur through modulating the porosity or nanostructure which is determined by the material morphologies; in this regard, some disadvantages associated with the fabrication procedure, also are included in the discussion.H. Ghorbani ShirazH. Ghorbani Shiraz received his Master in Chemical Engineering at the University of Tehran; 2015. His research interests lie in Energy, Nanotechnology, and the Microelectronic.F. Razi AstaraieF. Razi Astaraie is a Faculty member of New Sciences and Technologies, University of Tehran. She received her PhD in physics at Sharif University of Technology in 2010. Her research interests lie in thin films, surface physics and solar cell.
I. Introduction
Energy as the most challenging problem plays an effective role in the guideline of countries. Fossil fuels, as the primary source of energy, are associated with several problems such as environmental damage, as well as non-renewability. On the other hand, renewable energy sources have emerged as a remedy to both the energy and environmental concerns.1–10 Amongst the renewable energy sources, the most effort has been focused on solar energy as an interminable resource. Due to the high price of fabrication and upkeep facilities of conventional solar cells, cost-effective approaches have defined new configurations of solar cell. Gratzel et al. combined nanostructured electrodes and charge injection dye as the first dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) with a conversion efficiency of more than 7%.11 DSSCs consist of a working electrode (photoanode), like a TiO2 nanostructure, sensitizer dye, a redox electrolyte like iodide/tri-iodide (I−/I3−), and a photocathode, the so-called counter electrode. Facility in fabrication procedure, the use of low cost materials, and the relative flexibility, have provided these devices with considerable potential. As DSSC suggests, dye molecules as sensitizer are usually prepared based on a ruthenium polypyridine complex, due to its wide recognition for optical activity and photo-redox reactions.12
DSSCs insert between two film layers which usually are made of transparent conductive oxide (TCO) such as fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO). Both transparency and conductivity are necessary for these films.13 One of the key components of the working electrode is the semiconductor. TiO2 is the most common semiconductor due to its favourable optical features.14 Using porous structures like nanoporous films significantly increases the available surface area for dye molecule bonding, but limits the electron transfer rate, simultaneously.
The counter electrode (CE) is a decisive factor in the power conversion efficiency (PCE), due to its role as a cathode, which implies the reduction of oxidized species of electrolyte. The electrolyte consists of a couple of ions that transform into each other through electron exchange (redox reactions). Iodide/tri-iodide (I−/I3−) is one of the best-known electrolytes to researchers; however, there are some shortcomings with this: toxicity and volatility. Liquid electrolyte is not stable over the wide range of operation temperatures that solar cells typically deal with. As a remedy, highly mobile solid electrolytes are being investigated (solid-state dye sensitized solar cells).
Generally, CEs should possess some special characteristics. Amongst these, they should have high conductivity and catalytic activity, due to the need to regenerate the oxidized species of electrolyte.15 Conventionally, platinum (Pt) as a catalyst is deposited over TCO. It is clear that the Pt morphology, which directly introduces available surface area, will influence the number of catalytic sites; however, from the viewpoint of economy, Pt is an unfavourable choice. Intensive research has been conducted to investigate promising alternatives which possess Pt characteristics and are also cost effective.
In this paper, firstly the performance of a DSSC and the different applied structures of Pt have been reviewed. Then we have focused on carbonaceous materials as alternatives to conventional Pt electrodes.
II. Brief account of electron transfer in DSSCs
When DSSCs are exposed to the sun light, dye molecules absorb the photons’ energy. The photons which possess an energy content equal to the gap of HOMO–LUMO are absorbed. This excites electrons to the HOMO band in dye molecules, then the electrons are injected into a conduction band (CB) of the semiconductor. The charge transfer occurs over a timescale of tens of femtoseconds to hundreds of picoseconds. The dye is stabilized to the ground state through the help of the electrolyte; i.e. in the case of iodide/tri-iodide (I−/I3−), iodide (I−) will be oxidized to tri-iodide (I3−) according to 3I− ↔ 2e− + I3−; in which the reduction of (I3−) is accomplished by the CE. So the resulting electrons are consumed in the dye ground state process. The electrons which have been injected into the semiconductor CB accumulate over the micro- to millisecond range. Consequently, electrons can leave the photoanode and move to the CE through an external circuit.16,17 Thus, the CE must be prepared to provide low electron transfer resistance and also contribute to the rapid reduction of oxidized electrolyte. With this in mind, the CE has a great role in continuing the electron cycle.
As a considerable issue, the recombination of electrons imposes a detrimental effect on the PCE. Mainly, electron back transfers lead to recombination. Unfortunately electron collecting in the working electrode occurs more slowly than excitation in the dye molecules; therefore there is always a partial electron accumulation especially at the interface of the semiconductor/dye/electrolyte and most of the time this results in recombination. Chiefly, electron recombination happens to the electrolyte and oxidized dye over a timescale of milliseconds to a second, and microseconds to a millisecond, respectively. Also, recombination coming from shuffling electrons could be considerable; therefore the geometry of the semiconductor plays an important role in charge transfer.
More recently, researchers have proposed given structures for the semiconductor, including nanowires and quantum dots (QDs), which introduce a significant enhancement to the conversion efficiency.18
III. Platinum
Pt has been defined as one of the best CEs and this is due to its possession of given properties that are requisite for each CE such as stability in air or water even at high temperatures (does not oxidise), good electrical and thermal conductivity,19–21etc. On the other hand, it also possesses some disadvantages like high cost, low abundance of material, diminishing catalytic properties on exposure to dye molecules, and difficulty (vacuum conditions) in using it with conventional methods of sputtering. These undesirable features stimulate efforts to find an alternative CE for DSSCs.22,23
The conventional CEs which are prepared based on the deposition of Pt on the substrate (TCO) possess significant electrocatalytic activity;24 electro refers to electrical conductivity and catalytic refers to application as a catalyst for the reduction of oxidized electrolyte. The activity varies for different morphologies; e.g., compared to a Pt film, a nanostructure promotes activity due to a range of reasons such as (a) its higher surface area, thus higher number of catalytic sites, (b) decreased charge transfer resistance (CTR), and (c) higher transparency, due to the size reduction.25 However, the employed methods, such as the doctor-blade technique, screen-printing, spray-coating, etc. can result in different morphologies and different activities.
Some configurations result in unfavourable mechanical cohesion and/or high series resistance. Also, CTR occurs due to the contact quality between catalytic boundary particles and the conductive substrate, which varies for each morphology and structure.
It was mentioned that with regard to the CE structure, a high surface area plays a great role in determining the cell performance. It is clear that a broad surface area supplies the large number of catalytic active sites. Kim et al.26 proposed a high surface area in the structure of a Pt CE through Pt hollow spheres over both bare and Pt sputtered FTO(II). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and I–V measurements revealed that compared to a conventional sputtered electrode, the performances were improved. The results have been compared in Table 1. The characterizations demonstrated that the approach results in the facility of electron transfers through the broad surface area; especially for the sample of II. Therefore, an increase in fill factor (FF) and a short circuit current (Isc) resulted in higher efficiencies.
Table 1 Comparison of Pt decorated counter electrodes




Item
CTR (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)




I
0.91
8.2


II
0.48
8.53


Conventional
1.28
7.89




Choi et al.27 prepared Pt nanoparticles by a thermal degradation method and investigated the effect of a transparent Pt CE on the cell performance. They concluded that the PCE is influenced by heating rate. This is attributed to the electrocatalytic activity of the sample. It corresponds to the morphology of the Pt nanoparticles that were provided at a given degradation rate. Study of HRSEM images indicates the effect of thermal degradation on the different morphologies. It was concluded that the rate of 1.2 °C min−1 offers the highest surface area. Indeed, this heating rate enhanced the PCE through the introduction of numerous catalytic sites.
Yang et al.28 prepared a CE by a pulse electrode deposition method. The characterization of the fabricated sample revealed significant surface roughness, compared to the reference sputtered samples. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements revealed a higher catalytic activity than the sputtered Pt electrode. Also, it was proved that the pulse-plated electrode provided a PCE of 6.0% more than that of the sputtered electrode, as they expected. Also, Lin et al.29 examined the effect of morphology using platinum nanotubes (PNTs) grown on an FTO substrate using a facile polycarbonate template. EIS measurements indicated that the PNTs, as a highway for the electron transfer, possess higher electrocatalytic activity for electrolyte redox reduction, compared to a conventional Pt CE. This morphology resulted in a PCE of 9.05% under 100 mW cm−2 simulated solar light, while the reference sample (spin-coated) revealed an efficiency of 7.24%.
Zhao et al.30 incorporated the low cost surfactant in order to realise better adhesion of Pt materials to the substrate and allow the introduction of screen-printed Pt CEs. In this regard, they proposed DSSCs based on screen-printing, spin-coating and dip-coating. PCEs of 7.30%, 7.03% and 6.96% were obtained for the screen-printed, spin-coated, and dip-coated DSSCs, respectively. The characterizations explained the improvement of the screen-printed CE in both morphology and CTR. In the case of efficient sample, uniformity in the distribution of Pt particles has introduced numerous local catalyses. On the other hand, CV and EIS measurements showed that the CTR for the screen-printed CE was assessed as the lowest. So, the reduction reaction could be defined as having a fast rate.
Recently, Pt composites have been defined as novel CEs. Tao et al.31 made a composition of Pt and silicon nanowires (SiNWs) by an electroplating method. The fabricated one exhibited higher electrochemical activity, compared to the sputtered Pt CE. The higher performance electrode emerged with a PCE of 8.30%, in front of 7.67% for the sputtered one. This is ascribed to the promotion in CTR which was improved notably by 0.5%. In fact, the nanowires were defined as an oriented electron exchange system and the Pt as a redox reaction center.
Also, some fabrication conditions have emerged as impressive. Yu et al.32 synthesized novel DSSCs using FTO nanocrystals as a substrate to deposit Pt. This resulted in a PCE of 6.09%. Obviously, an uneven substrate presents a higher surface area to assemble the Pt species rather than a smooth, level substrate. In another study, Meng et al. used the press-transfer method to prepare Pt CE. The DSSC using the Pt CE under different applied pressures, achieved PCEs of 7.21 (100 MPa) and 5.51% (50 MPa).33 This shows that higher pressures can result in higher efficiency. This may be due to charge transformation; i.e. compact media introduces facile charge transformation through reduction in contact resistance; thereby the catalytic activity can be defined as being of higher quality.
As noted before, Pt may be replaced by some other alternative due to a number of limitations like price. As stated, the morphology can be a decisive factor. Indeed, it can affect the performance through reduction in CTR and the introduction of more catalytic sites.
Recently, carbonaceous materials such as carbon black, mesoporous carbon, and a number of well-known carbon nanostructures like carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene, which have demonstrated great catalytic activity, have been proposed as promising candidates for CEs. In the following, the recent progress and their advantages have been reviewed. Firstly, theoretical analysis of the materials is discussed, focusing on the CTR, and then each material is discussed one by one.
IV. Carbon materials
Carbon nanomaterials are promising candidates for the replacement of conventional Pt electrodes because of their advantages such as low cost, high catalytic activity, high electrical conductivity, high thermal stability, and good corrosion resistance; e.g., individual carbon nanotubes can be electrically highly conductive, mechanically strong and also offer flexibility toward bending.
1. Charge-transfer resistance and catalytic activities

(a) Carbon nanomaterials as the counter electrode34. 
The key characteristic of the DSSC CE is the CTR. CTR can be measured by EIS, and it should be as low as possible. In the case of porous carbon nanomaterial CEs, the CTR (notified by RCE (Ω m2) in the equations) decreases as the film thickness d increases; RCE = rCEd−1(1)where rCE (Ω m3) is the charge transfer resistance per unit volume of the film. It has been supposed that the whole film contributes in the charge transfer process; however, it is an ideal electrode. Since the ideal performance may not be satisfied, modifications will be considered, as follows.

r
CE can be described as the function of the electrode microstructure characteristics, such as the specific surface area per unit volume AV (m2 m−3) and the charge transfer resistance per surface unit area, rCE,A (Ω m2); rCE = rCE,AAV−1(2)
It was noted that a fraction of (specific) surface area would contribute to the charge transfer process. One criterion of catalytic activity is electrode capacitance CCE (F m−2), which has been defined by following equation: CCE = cCEd = cCE,AAVd(3)where cCE and cCE,A are the capacitances per unit volume (F m−3) and per surface area (F m−2) of the electrode microstructure, respectively. Taking the product of the charge transfer resistance and the capacitance leads to a proper measurement of area, regardless of BET technique and other complex methods; RCECCE = rCE,AcCE,A(4)
The latter equation satisfies the lack of thickness (d) and specific surface area per unit volume (AV (m2 m−3)); which is arduous to find for micro- and nanostructures. It is a proper comparison criterion for catalytic activities. The relation suggests that the ideal electrode is defined as being highly capable of transferring and accepting the electrons. Carbonaceous materials, as highly useable materials in industrial batteries, satisfy both requisites. Also, escalation applications in the photocatalytic processes confirm this claim.
For different carbon nanomaterials, authors have assumed that their area-specific capacitance cCE,A values are equal. cCE,A is defined as the value which depends only on the capacitance of the boundary double layer per microscopic surface area. The boundary double layer is included in the interface of the electrolyte and CE, where charge transfer occurs. With this in mind, it is clear that the catalytic activity of the materials can be optimized by introducing electrodes with a defined nanostructure material to enhance the available surface sites; i.e., extend the boundary double layer, due to the enhanced electrically active surface, and preparing continuum media to charge transfer. The preferable value for CTR is in the range of 1 Ω cm2 that has been obtained with an optimized planar Pt CE; similar to those of some CNT electrodes or carbon nanoparticle electrodes with several micrometers in thickness. It demonstrates the potential of the carbon nanomaterial CEs, properly.
In addition, durability with respect to bending has been supplied by employing carbonaceous materials and this indicates the potential application of carbonaceous materials toward flexible DSSCs.

2. Carbon black
Carbon black is produced as a by-product of incomplete combustion and has a variety of properties such as high surface area to volume ratio and electrocatalytic activity; it has been known as a good candidate for CEs. In carbon black and other carbonaceous materials, the active sites for catalysis are located at the edge crystals.35–37 When carbon materials are used as CEs, the surface morphology can play a great role. In this regard, Takahashi et al.38 have demonstrated that roughness has an important effect on the efficiency. They showed that as the roughness factor increases, the CTR decreases and thereby the performance improves. Also, it was demonstrated that there must be a control on the layer thickness because it effects the catalysis and resistance parameters strongly; however, the dominant nature of carbon materials, amorphous, could be helpful in this challenge.
In general, the CE thickness should be kept below a few tens of microns, which is the typical optimum thickness of the free electrolyte layers, with regard to the planar Pt CE.34 Murakami et al.39 employed carbon black as the CE on FTO substrates. They studied the thickness of carbon black as the CE. According to the research, a thickness of 14.47 μm of carbon black as the CE, exhibited an efficiency of 9.1% and a significant current density and open circuit voltage. From the EIS measurements, it was demonstrated that the broad surface area of the carbon black structure resulted in a low CTR of around 2.96 Ω cm2. They proved that a thickness of 10 μm of carbon black offers the optimum point to take the maximum fill factor and PCE. They observed that as the thickness increases, CTR decreases; and above a few tens of microns, the PCE became one-third of conventional Pt.
Also, amorphous carbon as a flexible CE has been used recently. Bojan et al.40 dispersed carbon powder with an average particle size of less than 50 nm in ethanol, ultrasonically. The solution was spray-coated over an FTO substrate. The carbon thickness was controlled by means of a variety of deposition times from 10 s to 420 s. SEM images showed pores with size of around a few angstroms, which is accessible to diffusion and the reduction reaction of oxidized species. Characterizations were carried out using EIS and CV. The CTR of the carbon CE, which had been sprayed for 420 s, was comparable with that of the platinized CE. Peak tails on the left relate to the reduction of tri-iodide. The CV curve indicates that the catalytic behaviour of the carbon electrode has emerged as comparable to that of the Pt ones. It was determined that the use of the spray coating layer introduces a porous structure and each particle develops catalytic activity by itself. Due to the lower surface area and low number of catalytic sites in carbon thin films, the tri-iodide reduction rate was slowed. As a result, thinner films (short deposition time) can result in a low current density which comes from a high level of CTR; however, it is confirmed by the EIS measurements.
In addition to the crystallinity and thickness, purity is also considered as a decisive factor in the performance. Pure carbon materials which have been employed as CEs, exhibited very low series resistance and CTR; consequently high conductivity and high catalytic properties could be expected.41
Other factors contribute to cell performance through different effects such as morphology and particle size, and deposition method. However, the result of morphology and particle size is strongly influenced by the deposition method.
Joshi et al.42,43 used carbon nanoparticles (<50 nm) with TiO2, as a binder, to form a catalytic CE for DSSCs. The carbon nanoparticles were treated in a mixture of TiO2 and water. The obtained mixture was treated in the form of paste. It was spin-coated over FTO as a CE. Surface characterization demonstrated that the particle sizes in the carbon/TiO2 composite film were larger than those for pure TiO2. Compared to a 6.4% PCE with a platinized device, the fabricated DSSC exhibited a PCE of 5.5%. The lower efficiency of the DSSC is ascribed to the higher series resistance than that observed in conventional Pt electrodes. It was evaluated to be due to the large thickness and resistivity of the carbon structure. Also, large grain size through surface area influences the efficiency.
As noted before, porosity, which extends the available surface area, leads to an increase in electrocatalytic sites; thereby better redox reduction will be obtained. On the other hand, large size particles, which result in a low surface area to volume ratio, have detrimental effects on the electrochemical properties. So, surface catalytic activity drops and the redox reduction rate substantially decreases. According to the significant series resistance of typically two times higher than that of a platinum electrode, it seems that the former effect (large particle size) is important (rather than porosity) for photovoltaic parameters.
Another study to be referred to is that of Chen et al.44 They dispersed carbon black in an aqueous solution and it was added to ethyl alcohol to form a paste. They placed a 10 μm paste thickness on an FTO substrate using the squeegee method. The characterizations revealed that the PCE was round 4.0%, while the achieved value for the sputtered Pt-based DSSC was 6.13%. The lower efficiency may be attributed to the lower conductivity and relatively large thickness. The structure avoids a lower number of catalytic sites. Also with regard to thickness, it defines a long electron pathway, which in turn, introduces a higher CTR.
A further step has been taken by Elbohy et al.8 They investigated the effect of a carbon nanoparticle (CNP) composite on DSSC performance by employing it as a support of Pt in a CE. CNPs were soaked in a platinum precursor solution. Next, they underwent post-treatment and finally resulted in the formation of a paste which was doctored blade over an FTO substrate (10 μm thick). The fabricated electrode was dried at 60 °C for 12 h. As a reference, a Pt CE was prepared through spin-coating on FTO. SEM images of the Pt and CNPs/Pt were compared and proved that the latter one results in a porous structure, while the Pt sample offers a smooth surface. CV characterizations were studied for both the reference Pt and CNPs/Pt electrodes. Compared to the reference electrode, on the left tails, a higher peak current density for the CNPs/Pt electrode indicates faster reduction of the tri-iodide species. This states the higher electrocatalytic activity of the CNPs/Pt electrode. The high reduction rate is attributed to the larger surface area of the porous CNPs/Pt electrode which provides a larger number of reduction sites and thus enhances the activity. On the other hand, the other peak tail shows the oxidation of iodide which has no significant effect on the PCE. Also, they examined the effect of the thickness of CNPs/Pt on the solar cell parameters (Fig. 1). They employed thicknesses of 4 μm, 9 μm, 13 μm, and 22 μm for the CE. The proposed DSSCs underwent characterizations under A.M 1.5 illumination of light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Although the short circuit current density (Jsc) and open circuit voltage (Voc) did not show any clear correlation with the thickness of CE, the measurements revealed that the thicker samples demonstrated better performance with regard to a number of parameters (FF, Rse, PCE and sometimes Jsc and Voc). This provides no contradiction to the aforementioned arguments; i.e. high thickness of porous media could be translated as high surface area and conclusively high reaction centers.
 Fig. 1  Photocurrent–voltage curves of DSSCs with different counter electrodes. (Data has been adapted from ref. 8) 

Table 2 covers all found results; it obviously defines CNPs/Pt as a proper alternative to conventional Pt.
Table 2 Thickness and photovoltaic parameters for various CE thicknesses and reference ones




Thickness (μm)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
CTR (Ω cm2)




4
13.98
0.83
0.68
7.87
10.12


9
14.23
0.80
0.69
7.86
9.53


13
13.53
0.82
0.70
7.67
9.38


22
13.49
0.84
0.72
8.12
8.99


Ref.
13.60
0.83
0.66
7.49
11.25




As a result, thickness, particle size, environment, and the composition can affect the performance through various mechanisms; however, the electrocatalytic activity and charge transfer rate are strongly impressive.
3. Carbon nano fiber
As another carbon nanostructure, carbon nanofibers (CNFs) have been employed in DSSCs. The limited surface area could be compensated by introducing high thickness which will lead to higher resistance and impedance, unfortunately. This is the shortcoming to these cost-effective matters. It may be synthesized in various diameters and lengths by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or pyrolysis of electro-spun fibers; using organic matter as the precursor.
Joshi et al.45 prepared electro-spun carbon nanofibers (ECNs) and employed them as a CE. After the post-treatment they became a paste which was doctored blade over an FTO substrate. The surface morphology of the ECNs demonstrates countless interconnections in the mixed matrix. The ruptured structure introduces numerous micropores which can be defined as proper catalytic sites for redox reactions. The ECNs are defined as relatively uniform with an average diameter of ∼250 nm and are tens of microns in length. In contrast, the characterizations of an ECN CE show that the length of the nanofibers varies from submicrons to microns; it translates that some of the nanofibers were broken and made short-length fibers during the process. Apart from initial structural defects, the broken tips with the high charge density lead to high rate recombination and low conductivity; yet a higher surface area is provided.
Hierarchical types of carbon fiber (CF) were proposed for fabrication of a CE by Yoo et al.;46 carbon fiber (CF), NaOH etched carbon fiber (ECF), carbon fiber with thermally deposited platinum (CFPt), and carbon fiber etched with NaOH followed by thermal deposition of platinum (ECFPt); also a thermally deposited Pt CE was fabricated as a reference electrode. It was demonstrated that etching and platinum deposition processes introduced roughness over the structures; the available surface area was increased through efficient catalytic inequalities. EIS measurements revealed that the surface treatment improved the catalytic performance of the carbon fiber CE. Fig. 2 shows the photovoltaic performance of the samples. In comparison to the reference, an increase in Voc comes at the expense of a reduction in Jsc; this is a general role for other examined electrodes. However, the Pt incorporation results in a higher PCE through reduction of the series resistance. Thus, the fabricated electrode did not meet comparable performance compared to FTO/Pt (Fig. 2). The detrimental effect can be ascribed to the dimensions of the CFs. A nanoscale component can be defined as more efficient due to its high surface area to volume ratio; as in the Joshi study.45
 Fig. 2  PCE and CRT values for the samples which are extracted from J–V and EIS measurements. (Data has been adapted from ref. 46) 
Recently, highly graphitic carbon nanofibers (CNFs) were defined as suitable alternatives for use in DSSC CEs.47 The CNFs were grown by introducing pure methane to a Ni-based catalyst at four temperatures ranging from 550 °C to 750 °C. Characterizations showed that low temperature synthesis leads to small diameters and a high surface area as well as high porosity. Current density–voltage (J–V) analysis demonstrated that the low temperature synthesized samples show the better performance. Also, EIS measurements showed that the series resistance increases as the preparation temperature increases; but did not show regular correlations regarding CTR.
The low temperature samples may satisfy the threshold dimensions. Also, the effect of thickness of the CEs on the cell performance was investigated in the case of the low temperature samples followed by thickness characterization. The best results both in PCE and series resistance were achieved in the case of the thick samples. Overall, it can be stated that a thicker layer, but small and entire CNFs, explain the considerable performance through more catalytic sites introduced in the porous media.
4. Porous carbon structure
It is known that CE porous structures increase the active area; i.e. available sites to take part in redox reactions increase. Recently, among the carbon family, porous carbon has received great attention as a CE component.
Mesoporous silica materials (surface area around 1300 m2 g−1)48 are one of the best adsorbent structures, due to high porosity that they present. Large porous carbon structures were characterized by nitrogen adsorption isotherm. It was revealed that the surface area and porosity were higher than that of mesoporous silica materials.49 According to the potential, this highly porous media may be employed as a promising CE through facile diffusion of the electrolyte for redox reactions. Xing et al.50 made hierarchical types of porous carbon samples (C-1, C-2 and C-3) from rice husk as DSSC CEs. Pre-treatments to prepare the samples included pre-carbonization (C-1), leaching (C-2) and lastly, activation process of the leached samples (C-3). The measurements resulted in significant findings. The pore volume of C-1 was lower compared to that of C-2, which was obtained due to inorganic matter leaching from C-1 (mainly silica); also, a much lower volume was obtained for the C-3, which comes from the activation of C-2 (pore opening and widening). Table 3 shows the pore specifications of the samples. It's clear that C-3 is more capable of catalytic activity than the others. The key point refers to the high void volume which has emerged. CV was studied to investigate the catalytic activity of all fabricated as well as reference (Pt) samples.
Table 3 Porous samples characterization




Sample

S
micro (m2 g−1)

S
meso (m2 g−1)

V
micro (cm3 g−1)

V
meso (cm3 g−1)




C-1
247.1
21.6
0.13
0.02


C-2
231.3
89.9
0.11
0.20


C-3
962.4
132.2
0.35
0.26




The peak current densities can be used to evaluate the catalytic activities of the CEs. C-3 possesses the highest current density value which is attributed to its high degree of porosity. Hierarchical porous structures consist of large-size mesopores and a large number of micropores which result in a stronger catalytic activity. Mesopores can act as transport channels to the micropores for the electrolyte. Both meso- and micropores together provide a criterion for accessible surface area; consequently, the electrocatalytic activities are enhanced. By similar argument, C-1 has the weakest catalytic activity. The low activity is ascribed to its low surface area and the limited accessibility of the electrolyte to the micropore.
5. Graphene
Two dimensional structures of graphite are called graphene which has received a great amount of attention recently. It has an array of sp2 hybridization of carbon atoms. The layers are one atom thick, and possess promising properties such as high carrier mobility (i.e. charge carriers can travel long distances without scattering ∼10.000 cm2 V−1 s−1), excellent thermal conductivity, optical transparency, good mechanical resistance and considerable corrosion resistance.51–53 Due to such characteristics, graphene offers great potential to electronic devices like DSSCs. Due to its high surface area that presents in the planar structures, it demonstrates a high potential for use in redox reactions.
Moreover, it has been proved that the catalytic activity is enhanced by introducing oxygen species; also structural defects have the same effect on the catalytic activity.54
Oxidative exfoliation of graphite (Hummer) is one of the most conventional methods to produce graphene. Other techniques also are available to provide graphene nanosheets; such as the chemical reduction of graphene oxide colloids under microwave radiation, electrophoretic deposition (EPD) which is followed by annealing, etc. However, the oxidative exfoliation method to prepare the CE may be carried out thermally or chemically. Significantly, thermal exfoliation prepares graphene nanosheets for CEs through introducing defects; thereby, it increases the surface area. This method is carried out by dispersing graphite in a mixed solution of Nafion and ethanol, and then drop casting it onto an FTO substrate. However, Nafion is employed as a binder to better attach the material to the substrate. On the other hand, the chemical method is not as easy as the thermal method. The process includes oxidative exfoliation by hydrazine reduction which gets a maximum efficiency of around 6.8%. However, annealing treatment is needed as a key step with regard to deposition over TCO. The optimized temperature for this process is about 400 °C; above that temperature graphene sheets are peeled-off from the substrate. Regardless of additional thermal treatment which could lead to numerous damages to the nanosheets, the binding to the TCO could be considerable.
Functional graphene sheets have also been defined as one of the best candidates. The high surface area, structure defects and oxygen-containing groups such as hydroxyl, carbonyl and epoxide, have shown promising results in CE operation.55–57 Surface area and structure defects have been discussed before. In the following, the effect of oxygen-containing groups will be discussed.
Extremely pure graphene has an excellent conductivity, but possesses a limited number of active sites for electrocatalytic mechanisms. Therefore, functional groups can be useful in this regard. As far as we know, it is noticeable that just oxygen-containing groups can improve the catalytic property.43
Kavan and Aksay, solely, proved that as the number of oxygen-containing groups increases, the catalytic activation strongly increases. Since then, there has been some contrasting reports such as Jeon's work,58–60 from which it could be concluded that there is an optimum number of oxygen-containing groups to propose a promising catalytic activity.
Electrochemical methods have been developed to produce graphene oxide sheets. In this regard, after pre-treatment, the graphite precursor underwent exfoliation for 4 h using a dilute H2SO4 solution. Then, it was processed to result in a slurry. The slurry was doctored blade on a clean FTO substrate, followed by drying at 350 °C for 1 h. The surface morphology of the fabricated CEs showed that exfoliation peeled off the graphitic structure to pave the way for oxygen to enter during the oxidation process; thus, it becomes a promising structure for use as a CE. As expected, J–V characterization of the DSSCs using graphene oxide (GO) exhibited a PCE of 0.90% which is an excellent performance over the Pt one (reference) with a PCE of 0.27%.61 However, it is more likely to offer a higher performance if it satisfies the optimized value of oxygen matter.
Graphene oxide (GO) was prepared using a modified Hummer’s method from graphite. This was followed by reduction to form reduced-graphene oxide (rGO) by applying a modified photo-thermal reduction process (P-rGO). The samples were employed as CEs; also, a Pt CE was fabricated as in ref. 62. Characterizations included J–V and CV measurements which were carried out to compare their performances (Fig. 3). Obviously, the P-rGO has offered a better performance than GO. It has been demonstrated that P-rGO as a CE can achieve 95% of the performance of Pt CE. Also, CV measurements were carried out to study the reduction reactions of the electrodes and revealed that the P-rGO electrode shows the highest peak current density value (J = 4.70 mA cm−2). It allows fast kinetics of the redox reactions, compared to the GO and Pt electrodes.
 Fig. 3  J–V curves of DSSCs with CEs containing the films of P-rGO and Pt. (Data has been adapted from ref. 62) 
Also, EIS measurements show that GO has the highest CTR and series resistance. Hybrid systems received high interest for CE fabrication. Yen et al.63 introduced Pt nanoparticles onto a graphene-coated FTO substrate (Pt NPs/GR) as a hybrid CE. In comparison with a conventional Pt CE, the measurements showed that the hybrid system demonstrated a significant reduction in CTR as well as diffusion resistance (Rd); also, the FF improved. Pt NPs/GR showed a PCE of 6.35%, higher than that of the conventional CE (5.47%). According to the aforementioned discussion, a thermal approach to fabricate the graphene may result in proper conditions. The introduction of thermal nanosheets offers a high performance.
It was noted that the fabrication procedure can be considered as a key factor in determining the resulting performance, directly. Thus, given materials which are employed in different procedures probably will result in different results. A hybrid Pt/rGO electrode was synthesized by using the Pt precursor H2PtCl6 and GO (modified Hummer's method).64 To reduce both GO and the Pt precursor, the synthesis was followed with post thermal treatments. The J–V and EIS characterizations showed the high electrocatalytic activity of the hybrid electrode which emerged with a 4% growth in PCE over the conventional Pt CE. The claim is supported by a 10% decrease and 4% increase in resistance and fill factor, respectively. In addition, 33% reduction in H2PtCl6 consumption was obtained, rather than conventional electrodes. Recently, the closed system has been investigated, in this regard. Dry plasma reduction was used to hybridize Pt nanoparticles with GO.65 GO powder in the form of paste was doctored blade over FTO. Then Pt precursor was dropped onto the GO followed by reduction in an Ar atmosphere. Characterizations showed that structural damages were recovered through chemical bonding between Pt and rGO. Pt sputtered, GO-coated and hybrid electrodes underwent J–V and EIS characterizations which are shown (Fig. 4). The hybrid electrode shows a 4% improvement in PCE over the conventional Pt-based electrode; moreover the FF revealed the highest value. It is inferred that the internal resistance is the minimal, compared to that of the others. EIS measurements showed that in comparison with the conventional CE, the hybrid electrode has exhibits a lower CTR. However, hybrid electrodes provide desirable systems from an economic viewpoint; indeed, they benefit from lower content of Pt element. Jang et al.66 employed GO and Pt nanoparticles as a CE. They fabricated a GO CE by spin-coating followed by the immobilization of Pt nanoparticles via pulse current electro-deposition. This procedure possesses range of advantages such as a given (favourable) particle size, density control, and uniform morphology. The uniform distribution of Pt nanoparticles with an average size of ∼30 nm introduced catalytic sites which enhanced the electrolyte reduction rate. Measurements show they exhibit a PCE enhancement of more than twofold. However, the fill factor and current density revealed the highest values for the synthesized electrodes. CV and EIS confirmed improvements in the electrocatalytic activities of these CEs.
 Fig. 4  J–V (top) and EIS (bottom) characteristics of DSSCs for three kinds of electrode. (Data has been adapted from ref. 65) 
The last three studies which were carried out on very closed systems, state the synergic effect of a hybrid CE. The high mobility of graphene-based systems promotes the charge transfer from TCO; however, Pt species, which were distributed over the nanosheets, play a role as hot catalytic sites. Overall, quick charge transfers as well as fast reductions lead to promising performances.
Among other efforts which have developed cost effective approaches, one can be referred to the study of Mallam et al. They sprayed Pt NPs onto hot substrates. The measurements revealed that the PCE was enhanced significantly, yet this method results in a reduction in Pt consumption by 86%; this leads to cheap DSSCs.67,68 In fact, they examined the new procedure for Pt NPs, which have a high surface area over a broad substrate. Overall, it resulted in a wide distribution of catalytic sites.
Another kind of hybridization which has been introduced as a CE consisted of rGO and ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC). The composite was prepared by the method of Tang et al.. Measurements indicated that the primary particles of the OMC result in a good degree of interconnection with the graphene networks. Also a N2 isotherm confirmed that the ordered mesoporous structures were retained for both OMC and rGO/OMC without any deformation. It was demonstrated that the volume and size of the pores show an increase of 17% and 41% in rGO–OMC, respectively, over OMC; also, resistance was decreased by 65%. rGO/OMC, OMC, and Pt were employed as CEs in DSSCs. It is expected that the increased porosity in rGO/OMC leads to a higher surface area for reactions, and thereby facile diffusion for the electrolyte. With this in mind, synergy effects may define the rGO/OMC as a competitive alternative for Pt-based CEs. However, this was inferred from the J–V characterizations (Fig. 5). Photovoltaic parameters proved that the PCE and FF in the hybrid electrode can achieve ∼90% of those of Pt-based CEs. Also, EIS (Fig. 5) parameters of the conventional Pt electrode were evaluated to be about one third of those of the hybrid one. These findings showed the potential of the new hybrid electrode for use in efficient DSSCs.69 Indeed, the combination of a high charge mobility in graphene with the catalytic activity of OMC, which could be deduced from Fig. 5, avoids several recombinations and demonstrates a high performance for the composite electrode through a higher photocurrent.
 Fig. 5  J–V curves and EIS characteristics (Insert graph) of DSSCs with different CEs. (Data has been adapted from ref. 69) 
6. Carbon nanotube
CNTs like other members of the carbon material family which were reviewed, offer good properties such as high electrical conductivity, high structural porosity, etc. Amongst these, multi wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are an alternative material for CEs; this is attributed to the active area which is offered by several walls. MWCNTs were grown by chemical vapor deposition at the low temperature of 530 °C, using ammonia and acetylene gas as precursors. Pt as reference and MWCNT CEs were synthesized in similar procedure. The linear resistance was measured by using tow probes and it was found that the electrical resistance of the CEs emerged comparatively low. Also, I–V characterization revealed that the MWCNT electrode results in a 16% enhancement in PCE, over the reference one (Table 4). Also, the Jsc, Voc and FF increased by 18%, 10% and 22%, respectively.70 The improvement states the high potential in catalytic activity which arises from the broad inner and outer surface area. Of other studies which have focused on MWCNTs, one can be referred to study conducted by the group of Bae. They investigated three different structures of MWCNTs (raw, purified, and purified & ground). The purified & ground MWCNT CE showed an overall photovoltaic efficiency of 4.94%; which satisfied 97% of conventional Pt electrodes performance.71 Also, a number of research studies were proposed based on a Pt composite of CNTs, and they exhibited remarkable results. Huang et al. synthesized a Pt NPs/MWCNTs composite and treated it with imide functionalized materials. The composition was spin-coated as a CE, subsequently. The measurements showed its high catalytic activity which can be attributed to the broad surface area which had been prepared through the composite structure; also the PCE of around 8% and the high current density were ascribed to the good degree of redox species (I3−) reduction.
Table 4 Performance for Pt- and CNT-based DSSCs




Counter electrode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Pt
2.31
0.58
53.8
0.85


CNTs
2.74
0.64
66.1
0.99




Recently, Sedghi et al.72 compared three different CEs; Pt-based, MWCNTs-based, and hybridized Pt/MWCNTs. The Pt electrode was prepared by immersing FTO in a H2PtCl6 solution followed by thermal treatment. The MWCNTs-based CE and the Pt/MWCNTs CE both were fabricated by spraying a MWCNT solution and a Pt-loaded MWCNT solution onto FTO; and carrying out a thermal treatment, finally. Morphology characterization showed that the first sample (Pt) has discontinuity of coverage on the FTO substrate. However, it revealed large pores on the Pt film, thus the catalytic active area is not considerable. The second sample (MWCNTs) showed a uniform layer with less porosity. Also, an interesting result was obtained in the case of Pt/MWCNTs electrode, It was revealed that large pores on the Pt film have enfolded nanotubes and hence this enhances the catalytic active area. Therefore, the PCE of the DSSCs which were proposed were expected to be in the order of Pt/MWCNTs > Pt > MWCNTs. Also, the highest current density peak in the CV measurements, which belongs to the hybrid electrode, revealed that Pt/MWCNTs have the highest kinetic rate of reduction.
Further systems in hybridization modes were constructed.73 MWCNTs, graphene (GR), graphene/MWCNTs (GC) hybrids with different ratios of components, and Pt as a reference were introduced as CEs. The hybrid types consisted of two ratios in the following compositions: 30 wt% graphene (70 wt% MWCNT) and 70 wt% graphene (30 wt% MWCNT) which were denoted as GC37 and GC73, respectively. The fabrication of the carbonaceous CEs was the same and included mixing with other components and ultrasonic treatment to result in a paste. Subsequently, the resulting paste underwent solvent-casting over FTO under vacuum. The DSSCs were introduced by each sample and were characterized by J–V measurements; rounded values are presented in Table 5.
Table 5 Current–voltage characterization




Electrode

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Platinum films
10.26
0.72
0.70
5.09


GR
11.95
0.78
0.42
3.90


GC37
11.52
0.74
0.47
3.94


GC73
11.42
0.77
0.53
4.66


CNT
9.12
0.77
0.53
3.73




The FF in all carbonaceous electrodes shows a reduction when compared to a conventional Pt electrode. Compared to the MWCNTs, GR possesses a higher contact area. On the other hand, it possesses a higher diffusion resistance and isolated aromatic tails; which come from its synthesis procedure and leads to a lower FF. Also, a higher current density, in the case of GR, is satisfied through the broad surface area as well as more surface defects. The hybrid electrode resulted in a considerable performance because of the interconnections between the isolated aromatic domains. Also, the processed network reduces the diffusivity resistance of the electrolyte. G73 was revealed as having a better performance than G37. The main reason for this is the aggregation of the MWCNTs which results in high diffusion resistance.73
MWCNTs have demonstrated a strong effect. As a matter of fact, the wide specific surface area leads to an improvement in the reaction at active sites through strong π–π interactions. Although, the MWCNTs show the highest current density, but the electron transfer rate is poor compared to that of the other samples (GR and GC hybrid). Overall, GC73 offers the best results to replace conventional Pt CEs. It benefits from active site reactions (which are imposed by MWCNTs), high electron transfer and also surface defects (which come from GR). However, electron mobility plays a greater role in this regard; that's why GC73 leads to a better performance.
V. Carbonaceous derivatives
Recently, manipulations of materials and methods have resulted in novel carbonaceous nanomaterial-based CEs. These approaches mainly included functionalized, composed, and doped carbon structures. Here, we proceed to discuss some important ones.
1. Composed carbonaceous electrode

(a) Carbon based electrode. 
Recently, a polymer hybrid of carbon black was examined as a CE.74 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate/carbon (PEDOT:PSS/C) was employed as a CE in a DSSC. The conductive polymer may improve the charge transfer and enhance the performance. The characterizations have demonstrated this improvement. The measurements demonstrated that the reduction in CTR is recognizable and the catalytic activity has increased, clearly.
Also, an inorganic material was employed as a candidate for a CE by Mingxing et al.;75 they reported considerable results in the regard of fabricated Ni5P4/C, Ni5P4 and MoP as CEs comparable conventional Pt CEs. The J–V and EIS results are presented in Table 6.
Table 6 CTR and PCE for various CE compositions




Electrode
CTR (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)




MoP
27.4
4.92


Ni5P4
18.9
5.71


Ni5P4/C
2.2
7.54


Pt
3
7.76




Clearly, the MoP and Ni5P4 CEs cannot be competitors to the conventional Pt. The low PCEs are directly attributed to the high CTRs. When Ni5P4 was incorporated into the carbonaceous porous media, the CTR decreased significantly, to even lower than that of Pt. This suggests the high catalytic activity of the porous carbon substrate. The slightly different PCEs for the carbonaceous and conventional CE may come from the hybrid mismatching of the Ni5P4/C composition.
Gentian et al.76 fabricated a CE based on a highly porous molybdenum sulfide–carbon (MoS2–C) hybrid film using an in situ hydrothermal method. The measurements of the proposed DSSC indicated a better performance compared to the Pt and MoS2–C reference ones. CV analysis revealed that MoS2–C possesses a highest current density in both reduction and oxidation peaks which is ascribed to the lowest CRT on the electrolyte–electrode interface. This translates to high electrocatalytic activity and reduction rate for the electrolyte in comparison with the others. They progressed the study through investigation of the carbon content of the successful electrode and concluded that there is an optimum value for the composite electrode. It may be related to the defects which emerge in various hybrid ratios.


(b) Graphene based electrode. 
As it was frequently noted, electrochemical activity and conductivity, as well as cost contribute to the performance of DSSCs. Recently, polymerization of carbon-based materials has emerged as a potential fabrication method of CEs for these devices. Gentian et al.77 electrodeposited the composite of graphene/PEDOT:PSS over an FTO substrate by employing an electrochemical polymerization method. The DSSCs were proposed based on various fractions of graphene in hybrid system CEs, as well as a reference Pt one. Measurements were done and results have been summarized in Table 7.
Table 7 CTR and PCE for various CE compositions




Electrode
CTR (Ω cm2)
PCE (%)




0.01 wt.%
6.22
6.33


0.03 wt%
4.37
6.96


0.05 wt%
2.74
7.86


0.10 wt%
3.62
7.10


0.15 wt%
5.68
6.58


Pt
2.82
7.31




Clearly, 0.05 wt% is an optimum ratio of graphene to be incorporated into the composition. The significant enhancement of the performance for optimum DSSCs may be due to the large active surface-area, lower surface resistivity and the higher electrical conductivity of the graphene flake and PEDOT:PSS synergistic catalytic effect, which is advantageous to increase the redox reaction rate on the CE side.


(c) Carbon nanotube based electrode. 
In this regard, conductive polymers such as polyaniline have been employed in DSSCs and presented efficient performances. Xiao et al.78 fabricated the cobalt sulfide (CoS1.097) nanoclusters/MWCNT nanocomposite embedded polyaniline (PANI) film (PANI/MWCNT@CoS1.097) (Fig. 6) CE and compared it with a Pt reference one. The J–V measurements revealed that the composite electrode can obtain a PCE of 98% of the conventional Pt CE. The improvement in conversion efficiency is attributed to the numerous interconnections between the highly intrinsic electrocatalytic MWCNT@CoS1.097 nanocomposites through the polymer matrix. In fact, the insertion of the nanocomposites into the conductive lamellas introduced many reduction centers for the oxidized electrolyte.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of a composite electrode. 
However, it was proved that the same composition of CNT@CoS1.097 potentially can result in a promise DSSC.79 The structural features as well as performance of a non-polymerized composed electrode, (which was fabricated by spray-coating followed by annealing under a N2 atmosphere) were measured. X-ray diffraction characterization revealed that the crystalline CoS1.097 transferred to the form of Co9S8 which possesses higher electrochemical activity. Also, the measurement revealed a reduction of 23 and 28% in CTR compared to the initial form (CoS1.097) and Pt sputtered, respectively. Subsequently, the composed electrode resulted in a 6 and 4% improvement in PCE over the initial and Pt CEs.

2. Doped carbonaceous electrode
Recently, employing doped carbon nanostructures as CEs has been considered as an interesting topic for DSSCs. Scientists have worked on the improvement of the electrocatalytic performance of carbonaceous nanostructures, especially through heteroatom doping. Generally, there are two main effects which simulate the potential of doped systems: (1) the conjugation effect of the lone pair electrons on the heteroatoms and carbonaceous π-system may reduce the barrier to I3− reduction; (2) the doped heteroatoms are usually located at edge or defects sites, which are chemically active, thereby causing acceleration redox reactions.

(a) Graphene based electrode. 
In this regard, Peng et al.80 have proposed a DSSC based on microwave exfoliated graphene (MEG) and a nitrogen doped one (N-MEG) as a Pt-free CE. The FESEM images of the fabricated electrode for both samples illustrate a high degree of porosity for the N-MEG sample. Also, it was demonstrated that the CTR correlates inversely with the available surface area, in the case of a carbon nanostructure. Consequently, a broad surface area, in the case of N-MEG leads to a lower CTR, compared to the MEG electrode. Moreover, the samples underwent EIS characterizations. As expected, it revealed CTRs of 6.13 and 1.31 Ω for MEG and N-MEG, respectively. In comparison to a conventional Pt electrode, N-MEG introduces a more than two times higher resistance.
It could be ascribed to the low charge transfer rate constant of the electrolyte for the redox reaction due to its relatively large peak-to-peak separation.
Further research proposed nitrogen doped graphene nanoribbons (N-GNR) with thicknesses of 7 and 19 μm (N-GNR-1 and N-GNR-3, respectively) and the electrolyte of thiolate/disulphide.81 The PCE for N-GNR-1 and N-GNR-3 was 3.82% and 5.07% respectively, while the reference Pt one resulted in a PCE of 3.09%. This suggests that the carbon based material could lead to superior performance; however, the difference is attributed to the operation of CEs. In this regard, EIS measurements were carried out and the CTR values were obtained in the order of Pt ≫ N-GNR-3 > N-GNR-1. However, this is in contrast to the point of the Peng group80 study and the inconsistency in CTR trends could be explained through deposition thickness; i.e. the deposition thickness is a decisive factor in determining charge transfer, as far as it can satisfy the charge transfer constant.
Also, phosphor as a dopant was introduced to the reduced graphene oxide (PrGO) and proposed as a CE.82 The performance and the CTR was improved over the conventional Pt electrode. The improvement is attributed to conjugation systems over carbon substrates which were introduced through the phosphorous and the preparation of more active sites.


(b) Carbon nanotube based electrode. 
Yedi et al.83 examined nitrogen doped carbon nanotubes decorated with Co and Ni nanoparticles (NCNT-Co and NCNT-Ni) as CEs. In comparison with a Pt-based electrode as a reference (PCE = 7.67%), the NCNT-Ni (PCE = 8.39%) and the NCNT-Co achieved the higher conversion efficiency (PCE of 7.75%). The high performance of the fabricated systems is attributed to the higher conductivity of the CNT over Pt, higher electrocatalytic activity of the nitrogen induced species, and faster reduction of the electrolyte which arises from the metal nanoparticles. CNT doped electrodes like graphene and other porous media, demonstrate a higher catalytic activity due to the facile permeation of liquid electrolyte, inherently; while non-rough sputtered Pt electrodes do not offer such a choice.

VI. Conclusions
The efficiency of DSSCs is looking forward to a commercialization approach. The present review encompassed a discussion of a large number of carbonaceous materials as CEs in DSSCs. An ideal CE should possess (a) perfect stability, (b) high catalytic activity and (c) low charge transfer resistance. The use of platinum as a conventional and efficient element in DSSC CEs, faces several issues such as corrosion, high cost etc. This encouraged scientists’ efforts to find an inexpensive alternative and yet with the same performance. As it was reviewed, the carbonaceous matters such as carbon black, nanofibers, graphene, and nanotubes, have been proposed as good candidates to replace conventional CEs due to their plasticity, simple fabrication procedures and excellent electrochemical activity towards the redox species. The advantages are as a result of the higher surface area, which has emerged in planar or tubular nanostructures; also, potential electrochemical activity. Moreover, from an economic viewpoint, cost effective carbon electrodes have emerged as considerable. However, most of the performances of DSSCs which are proposed with carbonaceous CEs, are slightly lower than those fabricated using Pt CEs. This mostly comes from various resistances associated with the structurally complex carbon electrodes such as bulk resistance through the comparatively thick carbon CE, contact resistance to the TCO substrate, the diffusion resistance in the pores of the CE, etc. Despite the problems, carbonaceous CEs still offer distinct advantages of low cost and long-term stability which can reveal the potential of these DSSCs among various photovoltaic devices. Thus, the study of new organic and inorganic compounds as an alternative material to Pt in DSSCs is a promising research area which will be essential to reducing the cost of the devices for commercialization.
Notes and references

          A. Herzog, T. Lipman and D. Kammen, Renewable Energy Sources, Our Fragile World: Challenges and Opportunities for Sustainable Development, Forerunner to the Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS), UNESCO-EOLSS Secretariat, EOLSS Publishers Co. Ltd,  2001, vol. 1, section 1 Search PubMed .

          J. Nelson, The physics of solar cells, World Scientific,  2003 Search PubMed .

          I. Müller, A history of thermodynamics: the doctrine of energy and entropy, Springer Science & Business Media,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. Xie, P. Joshi, S. B. Darling, Q. Chen, T. Zhang, D. Galipeau and Q. Qiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(41), 17880 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Karanjit, L. Zhang, H. Fong, Q. Qiao and Z. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98(8), 082114 CrossRef .
P. Joshi, Z. Zhou, P. Poudel, A. Thapa, X.-F. Wu and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(18), 5659 RSC .
P. Poudel, L. Zhang, P. Joshi, S. Venkatesan, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(15), 4726 RSC .
P. Poudel, A. Thapa, H. Elbohy and Q. Qiao, Improved performance of dye solar cells using nanocarbon as support for platinum nanoparticles in counter electrode, Nano Energy, 2014, 5, 116 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Krasnaya, V. V. Kachala and S. G. Zlotin, Mendeleev Commun., 2014, 24(6), 377 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Sun, X. Wang, L. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Fu, Y. Lin and T. Xie, Branched hierarchical photoanode of anatase TiO2 nanotubes on rutile TiO2 nanorod arrays for efficient quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 4445 RSC .
B. O'regan and M. Grfitzeli, Nature, 1991, 353, 24 CrossRef .
M. Zalas, B. Gierczyk, M. Klein, K. Siuzdak, T. Pędziński and T. Łuczak, Polyhedron, 2014, 67, 381 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Kim, C.-H. Shim, D.-H. Kim, H. J. Lee and H.-J. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520(6), 2257 CrossRef CAS .
D. Susanti, M. Nafi, H. Purwaningsih, R. Fajarin and G. E. Kusuma, Procedia Chem., 2014, 9, 3 CrossRef CAS .
D.-J. Yun, J. Kim, J. Chung, S. Park, W. Baek, Y. Kim, S. Kim, Y.-N. Kwon, J. Chung and Y. Kyoung, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson and R. E. Chandler, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248(13), 1181 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Upadhyaya, S. Senthilarasu, M.-H. Hsu and D. K. Kumar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 291 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wu and Z. M. Wang, Quantum Dot Solar Cells, Springer,  2014 Search PubMed .
H. Ma, J. Tian, S. Bai, X. Liu and Z. Shan, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, X. Zhang and T. He, Self-Assembled CoS2 Nanocrystal Film as an Efficient Counter Electrode for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(43), 24877 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoshi, S. Tanaka and T. Miyoshi, Pt-graphene electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2014, 190, 47 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Duong, T. Q. Tuan, D. V. A. Dung, N. van Quy, D.-L. Vu, M. H. Nam, N. D. Chien, S.-G. Yoon and A.-T. Le, Application of polyaniline nanowires electrodeposited on the FTO glass substrate as a counter electrode for low-cost dye-sensitized solar cells, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14(12), 1607 CrossRef .
G. Wang, S. Kuang, D. Wang and S. Zhuo, Nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon as low-cost counter electrode for high-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 346 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dutta, A.-M. J. Haque and H. Yang, Improvement of the electrocatalytic activities of long-aged Pt electrodes and the change of the improved activities with aging, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 141, 319 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Tsai, C.-H. Chen, Y.-C. Hsiao and P.-Y. Chuang, Investigation of graphene nanosheets as counter electrodes for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, Org. Electron., 2015, 17, 57 CrossRef CAS .
V.-D. Dao, S.-H. Kim, H.-S. Choi, J.-H. Kim, H.-O. Park and J.-K. Lee, Efficiency Enhancement of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Using Pt Hollow Sphere Counter Electrode, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(51), 25529 CrossRef CAS .
V.-D. Dao and H.-S. Choi, An Optimum Morphology of Platinum Nanoparticles with Excellent Electrocatalytic Activity for a Highly Efficient Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 93, 287 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Yang, H. Q. Zhang and Y. R. Zheng, DSSC with a novel Pt counter electrodes using pulsed electroplating techniques, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11(1), S147 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Z. Tang, Y. Huang, M. Huang, H. Yu and J. Lin, A dye-sensitized solar cell based on platinum nanotube counter electrode with efficiency of 9.05%, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 84 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, Y. Shi, Z. Zhong and T. Ma, Screen-printed Pt counter electrodes exhibiting high catalytic activity, Chin. J. Catal., 2014, 35(2), 219 CrossRef CAS .
F. Miao, B. Tao and P. K. Chu, Enhancement of the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells with highly ordered Pt-decorated nanostructured silicon nanowires based counter electrodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 96, 61 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bao, H. Huang, J. Yang, H. Gao, T. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Zhou, Z. Li and Z. Zou, The Maximum Limiting Performance Improved Counter Electrode Based on a Porous Fluorine Doped Tin Oxide Conductive Framework for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(11), 4951 RSC .
Y. Gong, C. Li, X. Huang, Y. Luo, D. Li, Q. Meng and B. B. Iversen, Simple Method for Manufacturing Pt Counter Electrodes on Conductive Plastic Substrates for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5(3), 795 Search PubMed .
K. Aitola, J. Halme, N. Halonen, A. Kaskela, M. Toivola, A. G. Nasibulin, K. Kordás, G. Tóth, E. I. Kauppinen and P. D. Lund, Comparison of dye solar cell counter electrodes based on different carbon nanostructures, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519(22), 8125 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Luo and W. Zhong, Investigation of catalytic activity of glassy carbon with controlled crystallinity for counter electrode in dye-sensitized solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85(11), 2826 CrossRef CAS .
C.-D. Wu, T.-H. Fang and J.-Y. Lo, Effects of pressure, temperature, and geometric structure of pillared graphene on hydrogen storage capacity, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(19), 14211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Idriss and M. A. Barteau, Active sites on oxides: From single crystals to catalysts, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 261 CAS .
K. Imoto, K. Takahashi, T. Yamaguchi, T. Komura, J.-I. Nakamura and K. Murata, High-performance
carbon counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 459 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Murakami, S. Ito, Q. Wang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Bessho, I. Cesar, P. Liska, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte and P. Péchy, Highly Efficient Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Based on Carbon Black Counter Electrodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153(12), A2255 CrossRef CAS .
G. Veerappan, K. Bojan and S.-W. Rhee, Amorphous carbon as a flexible counter electrode for low cost and efficient dye sensitized solar cell, Renewable Energy, 2012, 41, 383 CrossRef CAS .
J. Balamurugan, R. Thangamuthu, A. Pandurangan and M. Jayachandran, Facile fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells utilizing carbon nanotubes grown over 2D hexagonal bimetallic ordered mesoporous materials, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 364 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, Y. Xie, M. Ropp, D. Galipeau, S. Bailey and Q. Qiao, Dye-sensitized solar cells based on low cost nanoscale carbon/TiO2 composite counter electrode, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2(4), 426 Search PubMed .
P. Poudel and Q. Qiao, Carbon nanostructure counter electrodes for low cost and stable dye-sensitized solar cells, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Chen, Y. C. Yan and K. J. Lin, Effects of Carbon Nanotubes on Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2010, 57(5B), 1180 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, Electrospun Carbon Nanofibers as Low-Cost Counter Electrode for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2(12), 3572 Search PubMed .
H. Pak and Y. R. Yoo, Surface Treatment Effect of Carbon Fiber Fabric Counter Electrode in Dye Sensitized Solar Cell, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12(2), 1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sebastián, V. Baglio, M. Girolamo, R. Moliner, M. Lazaro and A. Arico, Carbon nanofiber-based counter electrodes for low cost dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2014, 250, 242 CrossRef .
H. Nagata, M. Takimura, Y. Yamasaki and A. Nakahira, Syntheses and Characterization of Bulky Mesoporous Silica MCM-41 by Hydrothermal Hot-Pressing Method, Mater. Trans., 2006, 47(8), 2103 CrossRef .
S. Thomas, T. Deepak, G. Anjusree, T. Arun, S. V. Nair and A. S. Nair, A review on counter electrode materials in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(13), 4474 RSC .
G. Wang, D. Wang, S. Kuang, W. Xing and S. Zhuo, Hierarchical porous carbon derived from rice husk as a low-cost counter electrode of dye-sensitized solar cells, Renewable Energy, 2014, 63, 708 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Mao, Y. H. Lu, J. D. Lin, S. Zhong, A. T. S. Wee and W. Chen, Manipulating the electronic and chemical properties of graphene via molecular functionalization, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2013, 88(2), 132 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Das and H. Rahaman, Carbon Nanotube and Graphene Nanoribbon Interconnects, Crc Press,  2014 Search PubMed .
T. Dürkop, S. Getty, E. Cobas and M. Fuhrer, Extraordinary mobility in semiconducting carbon nanotubes, Nano Lett., 2004, 4(1), 35 CrossRef .
Z. Lu, G. Xu, C. He, T. Wang, L. Yang, Z. Yang and D. Ma, Novel catalytic activity for oxygen reduction reaction on MnN4 embedded graphene: A dispersion-corrected density functional theory study, Carbon, 2015, 84, 500 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Chung, T. Shen, H. Cao, L. A. Jauregui, W. Wu, Q. Yu, D. Newell and Y. P. Chen, Synthetic Graphene Grown by Chemical Vapor Deposition on Copper Foils, Int.
J. Mod. Phys. B, 2013, 27(10), 1341002 CrossRef .
V.-D. Dao, L. L. Larina, H. Suh, K. Hong, J.-K. Lee and H.-S. Choi, Optimum strategy for designing a graphene-based counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells, Carbon, 2014, 77, 980 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Zhao, L. Liu and F. Li, Graphene Oxide: Physics and Applications, Springer,  2014 Search PubMed .
L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Grätzel, Optically Transparent Cathode for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Based on Graphene Nanoplatelets, ACS Nano, 2010, 5(1), 165 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, Functionalized Graphene as a Catalytic Counter Electrode in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(10), 6203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, H. Kim, S. Hwang, Y. Han and M. Jeon, Graphene Counter Electrodes for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Prepared by Electrophoretic Deposition, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(21), 7548 RSC .
P. K. Singh, U. Singh, B. Bhattacharya and H.-W. Rhee, Electrochemical synthesis of graphene oxide and its application as counter electrode in dye sensitized solar cell, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2014, 6(1), 013125 CrossRef .
M. H. Yeh, L. Y. Lin, L. Y. Chang, Y. A. Leu, W. Y. Cheng, J. J. Lin and K. C. Ho, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells with Reduced Graphene Oxide as the Counter Electrode Prepared by a Green Photothermal Reduction Process, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15(6), 1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Yen, C.-C. Teng, M.-C. Hsiao, P.-I. Liu, W.-P. Chuang and C.-C.M. Ma et al., Platinum nanoparticles/graphene composite catalyst as a novel composite counter electrode for high performance dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(34), 12880 RSC .
H. H. Gong, S. H. Park, S.-S. Lee and S. C. Hong, Facile and Scalable Fabrication of Transparent and High Performance Pt/Reduced Graphene Oxide Hybrid Counter Electrode for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing, 2014, 15(6), 1193 CrossRef .
V.-D. Dao, N. T. Q. Hoa, L. L. Larina, J.-K. Lee and H.-S. Choi, Graphene–platinum nanohybrid as a robust and low-cost counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(24), 12237 RSC .
H.-S. Jang, J.-M. Yun, D.-Y. Kim, S.-I. Na and S.-S. Kim, Transparent graphene oxide–Pt composite counter electrode fabricated by pulse current electrodeposition-for dye-sensitized solar cells, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 242, 8 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iefanova, J. Nepal, P. Poudel, D. Davoux, U. Gautam, V. Mallam, Q. Qiao, B. Logue and M. F. Baroughi, Transparent platinum counter electrode for efficient semi-transparent dye-sensitized solar cells, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 562, 578 CrossRef CAS .
K.-M. Lee, L.-C. Lin, C.-Y. Chen, V. Suryanarayanan and C.-G. Wu, Preparation of high transmittance platinum counter electrode at an ambient temperature for flexible dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 578 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, T. Peng, Y. Liu, N. Huang, S. Guo and X. Zhao, Ordered mesoporous carbon decorated reduced graphene oxide as efficient counter electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Carbon, 2014, 77, 18 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Roh, Y. H. Kim and C. S. Lee, Synthesis of MWNTs using thermal chemical vapor deposition for the application of a counter electrode for DSSCs, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11(4), S69 CrossRef .
B. Munkhbayar, S. Hwang, J. Kim, K. Bae, M. Ji, H. Chung and H. Jeong, Photovoltaic performance of dye-sensitized solar cells with various MWCNT counter electrode structures produced by different coating methods, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 80, 100 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sedghi and H. N. Miankushki, Effect of Multi Walled Carbon Nanotubes as Counter Electrode on Dye Sensitized Solar Cells, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9(4), 2029 Search PubMed .
L.-H. Chang, C.-K. Hsieh, M.-C. Hsiao, J.-C. Chiang, P.-I. Liu, K.-K. Ho, C.-C. M. Ma, M.-Y. Yen, M.-C. Tsai and C.-H. Tsai, A graphene-multi-walled carbon nanotube hybrid supported on fluorinated tin oxide as a counter electrode of dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 518 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yue, J. Wu, Y. Xiao, J. Lin and M. Huang, Low cost poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate/carbon black counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 67, 113 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Bai, Y. Wang, A. Wang, X. Lin, L. Wang, Y. Shen, Z. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, High-performance phosphide/carbon counter electrode for both iodide and organic redox couples in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11121 RSC .
G. Yue, J. Wu, Y. Xiao, M. Huang, J. Lin and J.-Y. Lin, High performance platinum-free counter electrode of molybdenum sulfide–carbon used in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1495 RSC .
G. Yue, J. Wu, Y. Xiao, J. Lin, M. Huang, Z. Lan and L. Fan, Functionalized graphene/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): polystyrenesulfonate as counter electrode catalyst for dye-sensitized solar cells, Energy, 2013, 54, 315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, W.-Y. Wang, S.-W. Chou, T.-W. Lin and J.-Y. Lin, In situ electropolymerization of polyaniline/cobalt sulfide decorated carbon nanotube composite catalyst toward triiodide reduction in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 448 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Tai, M.-N. Lu, H.-P. Ho, Y. Xiao and J.-Y. Lin, Investigation of carbon nanotubes decorated with cobalt sulfides of different phases as nanocomposite catalysts in dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 143, 216 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhai, T.-C. Wei, Y.-H. Chang, Y.-T. Huang, W.-T. Yeh, H. Su and S.-P. Feng, High Electrocatalytic and Wettable Nitrogen-Doped Microwave-Exfoliated Graphene Nanosheets as Counter Electrode for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Small, 2014, 10(16), 3347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, J. M. Baek, H. Chen, J. Qu and L. Dai, N-doped graphene nanoribbons as efficient metal-free counter electrodes for disulfide/thiolate redox mediated DSSCs, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7078 RSC .
Z. Wang, P. Li, Y. Chen, J. He, J. Liu, W. Zhang and Y. Li, Phosphorus-doped reduced graphene oxide as an electrocatalyst counter electrode in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, X. Zheng, Y. Wu, M. Li, W.-H. Zhang and C. Li, Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes with metal nanoparticles as counter electrode materials for dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(38), 8146 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
H. Ghorbani Shiraz	H. Ghorbani Shiraz received his Master in Chemical Engineering at the University of Tehran; 2015. His research interests lie in Energy, Nanotechnology, and the Microelectronic.
F. Razi Astaraie	F. Razi Astaraie is a Faculty member of New Sciences and Technologies, University of Tehran. She received her PhD in physics at Sharif University of Technology in 2010. Her research interests lie in thin films, surface physics and solar cell.

I	0.91	8.2
II	0.48	8.53
Conventional	1.28	7.89
RCE = rCEd−1	(1)
rCE = rCE,AAV−1	(2)
CCE = cCEd = cCE,AAVd	(3)
RCECCE = rCE,AcCE,A	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Photocurrent–voltage curves of DSSCs with different counter electrodes. (Data has been adapted from ref. 8)	 

4	13.98	0.83	0.68	7.87	10.12
9	14.23	0.80	0.69	7.86	9.53
13	13.53	0.82	0.70	7.67	9.38
22	13.49	0.84	0.72	8.12	8.99
Ref.	13.60	0.83	0.66	7.49	11.25

 	Fig. 2  PCE and CRT values for the samples which are extracted from J–V and EIS measurements. (Data has been adapted from ref. 46)	 

C-1	247.1	21.6	0.13	0.02
C-2	231.3	89.9	0.11	0.20
C-3	962.4	132.2	0.35	0.26

 	Fig. 3  J–V curves of DSSCs with CEs containing the films of P-rGO and Pt. (Data has been adapted from ref. 62)	 

 	Fig. 4  J–V (top) and EIS (bottom) characteristics of DSSCs for three kinds of electrode. (Data has been adapted from ref. 65)	 

 	Fig. 5  J–V curves and EIS characteristics (Insert graph) of DSSCs with different CEs. (Data has been adapted from ref. 69)	 

Pt	2.31	0.58	53.8	0.85
CNTs	2.74	0.64	66.1	0.99

Platinum films	10.26	0.72	0.70	5.09
GR	11.95	0.78	0.42	3.90
GC37	11.52	0.74	0.47	3.94
GC73	11.42	0.77	0.53	4.66
CNT	9.12	0.77	0.53	3.73

MoP	27.4	4.92
Ni5P4	18.9	5.71
Ni5P4/C	2.2	7.54
Pt	3	7.76

0.01 wt.%	6.22	6.33
0.03 wt%	4.37	6.96
0.05 wt%	2.74	7.86
0.10 wt%	3.62	7.10
0.15 wt%	5.68	6.58
Pt	2.82	7.31

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of a composite electrode.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
