Green transformation of CO 2 to ethanol using water and sunlight by the combined effect of naturally abundant red phosphorus and Bi 2 MoO 6   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE02976B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE02976B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1967-1976Green transformation of CO2 to ethanol using water and sunlight by the combined effect of naturally abundant red phosphorus and Bi2MoO6†

        
          
            Risov 
            Das
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kousik 
            Das
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bitan 
            Ray
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chathakudath P. 
            Vinod
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Sebastian C. 
            Peter
          
        
      *ab
aNew Chemistry Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore-560064, Karnataka, India. E-mail: sebastiancp@jncasr.ac.in; sebastiancp@gmail.com
bSchool of Advanced Materials, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore-560064, Karnataka, India
cCatalysis and Inorganic Chemistry Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Dr Homi Bhabha Road, Pune, 410008, Maharashtra, India
Received 
      23rd September 2021
    , Accepted 17th March 2022First published on 17th March 2022AbstractDirect photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to ethanol remains a scientific challenge because of the sluggish kinetics of C–C coupling and complex multielectron transfer processes. To achieve a green transformation of CO2 to C1+ products using naturally abundant sunlight and water requires the smart design of an efficient catalyst by selecting the right combination of atoms either in elemental or in compound form. Herein, we report a composite photocatalyst composed of earth abundant red phosphorus (RP) in nano-sheet morphology decorated with Bi2MoO6 nano-particles. The composite synthesised by a facile ultrasonication method produces 51.8 μmol g−1 h−1 of ethanol from CO2. The ability of RP for the conversion of CO2 to C1 has been altered by the introduction of Bi2MoO6. In situ Diffuse Reflectance Infrared Fourier Transform Spectroscopy (DRIFTS) and Kinetic Isotopic Effect (KIE) analysis shed light on the mechanistic pathway, which propose that the presence of Bi–Mo dual sites play a crucial role in the C–C coupling toward the formation of ethanol. Spectroscopic evidence and isotope labeling experiments suggest that the intermediate OCH3* is the key active species for ethanol formation via self-coupling followed by proton transfer.

Broader context
Ethanol is an immediate alternative to crude oil. Therefore, up to 20% ethanol blending with petroleum has emerged in the oil industry. However, the existing ethanol synthesis process is not completely green. In this scenario, ethanol synthesis by abundant sunlight, water and CO2 can provide the cheapest and greenest route. However, the existing literature based on photocatalytic CO2 reduction is still stuck at C1 products due to multiple intermediate steps and the kinetically sluggish 12 proton coupled electron transfer route in the CO2 to ethanol formation process. In this work, a composite photocatalyst has been designed by tailoring the economically viable, earth abundant red phosphorus and Bi2MoO6 for the conversion of CO2 to ethanol in the absence of any sacrificial agent. The optimized photocatalyst showed one of the best ethanol formation rates under simulated light as well as direct sunlight. Because ethanol formation is very rare, the formation mechanism of ethanol from CO2 is still unexplored. Here, a mechanism has been established based on several control experiments, primary isotope labeling study and DRIFTS. Most importantly, via primary and secondary kinetic isotopic effect analysis, it is proposed that the in situ generated methanol from CO2 photoreduction is further consumed for ethanol formation.

Introduction
The highly abundant renewable-solar energy-powered CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) provides scope for storing green energy as transportable chemical feedstock and fuel. It also offers an appealing opportunity for a “carbon-clean” or even “carbon neutral” policy.1,2 There are several critical challenges that need to be addressed to achieve this dream concept; however, catalyst design is key among them.3 A wide range of materials such as metal oxides,4,5 chalcogenides,6 halide perovskites,7 porous organic polymers (POP),8 covalent organic frameworks (COF),9 metal–organic frameworks (MOF)10 and organometallic photocatalysts11,12 have been explored for photocatalytic CO2RR. However, the poor efficiency and high cost limit the practical implementation of these potential catalytic systems. To elaborate further, enlisted below are the key targets to be achieved for the effective implementation of photocatalytic CO2RR:
a. Enhancing CO2RR efficiency by increasing the number of excited electrons with a potential equivalent to the desired product.
b. Avoiding charge recombination13
c. Enhancing the surface area of the catalysts to drive maximum CO2 molecules adsorption at the active sites of a photocatalyst
d. Obtaining the desired selectivity towards C1+ products, while suppressing the competitive hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
e. Reducing operational costs by discovering more durable low-cost catalyst for the formation of C1+ products14
Traditionally the photochemical CO2 reduction route offers C1 (CO, CH4, CH3OH and HCOOH) products under mild conditions.15 However, tuning the active sites and band structure can promote further coupling of these C1 products to form desired higher carbon products. Multi-electron and proton transfers are necessary to produce C1+ products, which must go through complex reaction pathways, resulting in low efficiency. Among the C1+ products, ethanol is of great value as it can be used as a potential energy storage fuel and in the production of several industrially important chemicals. Photocatalytic CO2 to ethanol conversion has a very limited repository in terms of the literature as compared to electrocatalytic processes due to low efficiency of the process. To the best of our knowledge, the highest conversion of CO2 to ethanol was obtained with the formation rate of 50 μmol g−1 h−1via the AgBr–NG–g–C3N4 catalyst under visible light.16 However, photogenerated holes in this process had to be scavenged by organic pollutants rendering it a non-green process. On the other hand, all other CO2 to ethanol reports indicate formation rates of lower than 20 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light.14,17–19 These reports had other drawbacks including obscurity of the coupling mechanism involved, surface recombination and limited gas adsorption capacity over the catalysts.
In this work, we report the discovery of a novel photocatalyst composed of naturally abundant exfoliated red phosphorus (RP) and Bi2MoO6 (BMO) nanoparticles synthesized via a facile sonication process. RP is a non-toxic semiconducting element with a relatively narrow bandgap (about 1.72 eV) that has light-harvesting ability and a suitable conduction band edge for CO2 photoreduction. The favorable band structure of RP can be exploited if it can be modified by the formation of a heterostructure with another strong light harvesting material. Various studies have suggested that Bi-based ternary metal oxides (BixMyOz) have the potential to trigger C–C coupling.20 Bi2MoO6 is already well known as a photocatalyst and it produces very small amount of methanol and ethanol.21,22 In the light of these observations, we inferred that the interface of these two materials in a heterostructure composite should be a promising candidate to study the ability of a dual-metal site to modulate C–C coupling in CO2 photoreduction (Fig. 1). The structural chemistry and chemical interactions of the catalysts are well characterized by several microscopic and spectroscopic techniques.
 Fig. 1  Photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to ethanol by a composite catalyst. Schematic representation of CO2 to ethanol formation through methanol under sunlight in only water by the composite of red phosphorus and Bi2MoO6. 
A composite with the optimized ratio of RP and BMO yields high CO2-to-ethanol conversion efficiency (51.8 μmol g−1 h−1) under visible light without any degradation for more than 5 consecutive runs. The role of a dual metal site for ethanol formation was probed using the kinetic isotopic effect (KIE) study, which was further supported by operando DRIFTS measurements. These experiments suggest that abundant RP wrapped dual-metal sites allow specific hydrogenation at Mo–OC* (hydrogenation at the C centre) and Bi–O* centres (Scheme S1, ESI†), leading to the high yield of ethanol from CO2.
Results and discussion
Material design
To investigate our proposal, several composites with different ratios of RP and BMO were synthesised. We deliberately exfoliated amorphous RP and impregnated previously synthesised BMO nanocrystals into it by prolonged sonication (see the ESI†) to develop an optimum interface between them for better CO2 reduction efficiency. The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns showed the formation of amorphous RP and pure crystalline BMO (Fig. S1, ESI†). The SEM image of BMO (Fig. S2, ESI†) and RP (Fig. S3, ESI†) showed nanoparticles and exfoliated a thick sheet-like morphology, respectively and the corresponding elemental mapping clearly indicates the uniform distribution of elements in BMO, and phosphorus only in RP. The absence of O atoms suggests that RP has not been oxidised to P4O10 or P2O5.23 SEM images and elemental mapping in Fig. 2a shows the dispersion of Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles on exfoliated RP in RP-BMO(21).
 Fig. 2  Characterization of composites and individual components. (a) SEM image showing that the Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles are lying on exfoliated RP. (b) SEM elemental mapping for the identification of 2 different materials. (c) Elemental mapping of P, Bi, Mo and O. (d) TEM image of the Bi2MoO6/RP composite. (e) HRTEM image of BMO nanoparticles on RP. The yellow border shows the BMO nanoparticle (f). (e) was zoomed to show the d-spacing clearly. (g) AFM image of 10 h sonicated RP which shows 2 layers of RP. (h) The presence of 2 layers was found by analysing the height profile. (i) The height profile of 20 h sonicated RP shows single layers of RP sheets. (j) AFM image of a 20 h sonicated RP sheet. (k) UV-Vis DRS of composites and individual components. (l) Corresponding Tauc plots drawn by using Kubelka–Munk parameter ((αhν)2) as a function versus photon energy (eV). (m) Surface area of composites, Bi2MoO6 and RP calculated from BET measurements for understanding the gas adsorption capacity. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images further confirmed the dispersion of BMO nanoparticles on exfoliated RP (Fig. 2d). Small BMO nanoparticles were confirmed from HRTEM. As depicted in Fig. 2e and f, BMO on the RP matrix exhibited a d spacing of 0.32 nm corresponding to the (131) lattice plane which is the most prominent plane as observed from XRD too. The morphology and average particle size of BMO were also determined from TEM (Fig. S4a and b, ESI†). In addition to that, the exfoliated RP was characterized by the TEM image which shows a thin sheet-like morphology of RP (Fig. S5a and b, ESI†). Further insight into the sonication-induced time-dependent exfoliation of RP was visualised by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 2g, h and Fig. S5c, d (ESI†) clearly show 2 layers of RP sheets where each layer has around 2 nm height after 10 h sonication. On the other hand, 20 h sonicated RP has a single layer of around 2 nm height (Fig. 2i, j and Fig. S5e, f, ESI†). The single layer of RP can disperse BMO particles on it more compared to multiple layers which in turn helps in the formation of more heterojunctions and interfaces. The band structures of RP, BMO and composites were determined by ultraviolet-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (UV-Vis DRS). RP and BMO exhibit the optical absorption edge at 689 nm and 459 nm, respectively, which is also observed in the case of the composite materials as well (Fig. 2k). The prominent absorption edge of RP compared to BMO can be interpreted as better absorption ability of RP compared to BMO. The Kubelka–Munk function24 (see ESI†) was used to determine direct bandgaps of RP, BMO and composites.
The bandgaps of 1.95 eV and 2.91 eV observed for RP and BMO, respectively also were found in the case of all composites (Fig. 2l). The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm reveals better gas adsorption capacity of Bi2MoO6 compared to common oxide semiconductor materials (Fig. S6a, ESI†). However, RP has a very poor gas-adsorption ability (Fig. S6b, ESI†). Therefore, a compromised surface area was obtained for RP-BMO composites (Fig. S6c–e, ESI†). Fig. 2m shows the monotonic decrease of surface area upon increasing the impregnation of BMO on RP. Pure BMO consists of mesopores of 20 nm diameter (Fig. S6f, ESI†). This kind of mesopore is beneficial for the adsorption of CO2 molecules and it helps in triggering the catalytic activity. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy was performed to verify the oxidation state of Bi in pristine BMO (Fig. S7a, ESI†) and RP-BMO composites (Fig. S7b, ESI†). The RP-BMO composite show very small amounts of Bi0 along with Bi3+ whereas pristine BMO comprises only Bi3+. Extensive sonication may lead to the formation of Bi0 on the surface of the RP-BMO composite.25 However, no Bi metal peak was observed in the powder XRD images of RP-BMO composites because the amount of Bi0 was very less. The presence of metallic Bi at the interface of RP and BMO may facilitate a faster charge transfer between them. The binding energy value of Bi3+ in the composite shifted towards a lower value (0.2 eV; this value is sufficient to show the interfacial charge transfer)26 which suggested the charge transfer from red P to BMO (Fig. S8c, ESI†). The positive binding energy shift (+0.13 eV) of the P-2p band in RP-BMO(21) compared to pristine RP (Fig. S8a and b, ESI†) further confirms the interfacial charge transfer and substantial electrostatic interaction between the 2 individual components in the composite. The change of binding energy in RP and BMO upon composite formation due to drastic sonication is schematically represented in Fig. S8d (ESI†).
CO2 to methanol under visible light
CO2 photoreduction was conducted under visible light illumination using a CGA 400 nm UV-cutter filter. Detailed information on the photocatalytic CO2 reduction measurements are given in the ESI.† As shown in Fig. 3a, single phase RP favored the conversion of CO2 to CH4 and HCOOH with the formation rates of 5.2 μmol g−1 h−1 and 9.6 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively, after 10 h light irradiation. No considerable product was detected for the pristine BMO catalyst (Fig. S9, ESI†). The control experiment also showed that the presence of Bi0 in BMO (BMO(AS)) due to extended sonication process did not change the CO2 reduction efficiency considerably (Fig. S9, ESI†). However, the composites (RP-BMO) made up of RP and BMO favored a higher conversion of CO2 with the large production of C2H5OH (51.8 μmol g−1 h−1) (Table S1 and Fig. S10, ESI†). The obtained ethanol formation rate by visible light driven CO2RR is the best compared to other literature reports (Table S2, ESI†). Additionally, this activity was obtained in water in the absence of any external additives (sacrificial agents, carbonate solution). Bulk RP was exfoliated and separated upon the extended sonication process. Therefore, the effect of sonication on catalytic activity was checked for RP-BMO(21) with different sonication times. Compared to the physical mixture sample (0 h sonication), the 10 h sonicated sample showed very high activity. In particular, ethanol formation increased drastically. Upon further sonication, up to 20 h, the activity increased further (Fig. S11a, ESI†). Sonication process separated RP sheets which in turn facilitated better dispersion of BMO and composite formation. This eased the interfacial charge transfer process which caused a dramatic increase in activity (Fig. S11b, ESI†). To check the reusability, the best optimized catalyst, RP-BMO(21) was employed for 5 consecutive photocatalytic cycles (Fig. 3b, ESI†) and continuous 30 h catalytic tests (Fig. S12, ESI†). No significant change in activity even after the 5th cycle and 30 h catalysis was observed, confirming high recyclability and stability of the catalysts towards CO2 photoreduction. Apart from the performance stability, the structural stability of the catalyst was checked by probing using powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and XPS after the photoreduction test (Fig. S13a and b, ESI†), which confirmed that the original structure remains the same even after light irradiation. A set of controlled experiments confirmed that the combination of CO2, H2O, light and catalyst are absolutely necessary for the photoreduction of CO2 (Fig. S9, ESI†). Inspired by the high activity of CO2 to ethanol formation capabilities under laboratory conditions, the CO2 photoreduction of the best catalyst RP-BMO(21) was also tested under direct sunlight. Experiments were done in winter/summer and cloudy/sunny conditions in Bengaluru, India, using water as the source of protons (Fig. 3c). A similar yield of ethanol (34.1 μmol g−1 h−1) was observed under direct sunlight compared to artificial arc lamp conditions. The relative quantum yield (QY) of the ethanol formation rate under sunlight is around 90.91% (Fig. 3d) of ethanol formation rate under a Xe lamp (51.8 μmol g−1 h−1 ethanol). These findings indicate the promising application of this catalyst for large-scale commercial use. CO2 photoreduction experiments with 13CO2 further confirm that the source of produced ethanol is CO2 only. Fig. 3e shows the gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) fragmented peak of 12CH312CH2OH and 13CH313CH2OH. GC–MS data for other products generated in the 13CO2 experiment is given in Fig. S14 (ESI†). Photoelectrochemical J–V measurements with RP-BMO(21) carried out in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 solution under ambient conditions (Fig. 3f) showed negligible current in the absence of light. In contrast, the same photocathode showed enhanced photocurrent (−0.09 mA cm−2) under 115 mW cm−2 light irradiation. This study clearly shows the light driven CO2 reduction ability of RP-BMO(21).27 A hydrophilic catalytic surface provides more proton availability due to better water adsorption and in turn facilitates better CO2 hydrogenation reaction.28 As depicted by the contact angle measurements in Fig. S15, (ESI†) RP and Bi2MoO6 have contact angles of 22.7° and 63.2° respectively.
 Fig. 3  Quantitative and qualitative photocatalytic performance. (a) CO2 photoreduction activity of BMO/RP composites with different composition under Xe lamp irradiation (>400 nm). All the experiments were carried out and average values are presented with error bars for standard deviation. (b) The rate of formation of each product at different cycles is presented. (c) Photocatalytic CO2 to ethanol formation activity under sunlight with RP-BMO(21). The solar light intensity was given in mW cm−2 in between bars. (d) Comparison of ethanol formation rate under sunlight and a Xe lamp. (e) GC–MS of ethanol, generated from 13CO2 photoreduction experiment. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) with RP-BMO(21) photo-electrode in the presence and absence of light illumination in CO2 atmosphere. (g and h) Photocatalytic control experiment with methanol. (g) Ethanol formation rate from methanol feed under light illumination with different concentrations of methanol. CH3OH and CD3OD were exploited for studying the kinetics (kinetic isotopic effect) of methanol to ethanol formation. (h) Overall methanol to other liquid product formation rate. (i) Methanol oxidation by the photogenerated holes (h+) of the RP valence band counterpart. 
Consequently, RP-BMO(21) has a contact angle of 29.1°. RP-BMO(21) provides optimum gas (Fig. 2i) and water adsorption capabilities compared to the pristine components and other composites. These synergetic effects provided by the RP-BMO(21) composite indicate that it is the most promising catalyst evaluated in this work and potentially in the existing literature on photocatalytic CO2RR.
Role of C1 molecules in C–C coupling
C1 molecule (CO, CH4, HCOOH, and CH3OH) transformation into liquid fuels or long-chain hydrocarbons is well studied.29–32 However, harsh conditions like high temperature and pressure are required for such transformations and it is very rare in CO2 photo-reduction, especially for the formation of ethanol.33 Since we have observed CH4, MeOH and HCOOH in our CO2 photo-reduction test, a set of controlled experiments were performed using the intermediate C1 molecule under light illumination with the best catalyst (RP-BMO(21)). No ethanol formation was observed when methane was used, but 996.3 μmol h−1 g−1 ethanol was formed (Fig. 3g) when 300 mM methanol solution was used, confirming that methanol is the key intermediate for ethanol formation. Light-induced conversion of methanol to ethanol was further probed via kinetic isotopic effect (1° KIE) study using deuterated methanol (CD3OD) to verify the involvement of OCH3*/OCD3* species in the rate-determining step. Fig. 3g shows almost 3.6 times lesser activity for the formation of partially deuterated ethanol (Fig. S16, ESI†) from CD3OD compared to CH3OH. Importantly, formation of formic acid was also affected by changing the reactant from CH3OH to CD3OD (Fig. 3h). However, the methane formation rate remained similar upon switching the feed from CH3OH to CD3OD because the C–H bond is not involved in OCH3* to CH4 formation. This confirms the direct involvement of C–D bond during C–C coupling for ethanol formation and methanol oxidation by C–D bond dissociation for the formic acid production. The generation of formic acid can be attributed to the photo-oxidation of methanol by photo-generated holes (Fig. 3i). Furthermore, the synergistic effect of BMO and RP on ethanol formation was verified by using methanol or methane as feed and pristine exfoliated RP, sonicated BMO (BMO(AS)) as a catalyst. When methane was used as the reactant, both the catalysts have not shown activity. However, in 300 mM methanol RP has generated methane and formic acid, which indicates that RP has good C1 product formation capability but inability towards the C–C coupling process (Fig. S17, ESI†). Interestingly, BMO(AS) has generated a very small amount of ethanol along with methane from methanol (Fig. S17, ESI†), meaning that it has C–C coupling power but it suffers from the lack of adequate amount of photoexcited charges and blockage of active sites due to agglomeration. Therefore, the composite catalyst can stabilise photoexcited charges and supply methanol for C–C coupling. Exfoliated RP also provides proper dispersion of BMO(AS) where active sites get exposed for catalysis.
Mechanism via in situ DRIFTS
Insight into the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to ethanol by RP-BMO(21) was obtained from the in situ DRIFTS experiments, which were performed in the range of 400–4000 cm−1 at room temperature (25 °C). An absorption peak was observed at 1613 cm−1 with a proportional increase of peak intensity upon irradiation time. This peak can be assigned to the COOH* group, which is considered the common intermediate for CH4, HCOOH, CH3OH and C2 product formation during CO2 reduction (Fig. 4a).28,34 Most importantly, RP-BMO(21) exhibited high activity for ethanol formation from CO2 photoreduction at room temperature, flagged by the growth of the OCH3* characteristic band at 1069 cm−1.26 Evolution of the characteristic CHO* peak at 993 cm−1 was also observed upon irradiation time.35 Both the CHO* and OCH3* groups are the key intermediates for the production of CH3OH, CH4 and C2H5OH from CO2. The peaks observed at 1290 cm−1 and 1,506 cm−1 (Fig. 4a) could be assigned to asymmetric and symmetric stretching (ASS) of CO3*. FT-IR peaks corresponding to HCO3* ASS vibrations are observed at 1356 cm−1 and 1430 cm−1 respectively.26,36 Contextually, no CO absorption peak was found in the range of 2000–2200 cm−1 in the in situ FTIR spectra,37 indicating the rapid conversion of CO intermediates to CHO* instead of being desorbed to form CO molecules. DRIFTS experiments with pristine BMO indicated the formation of carbonate, bicarbonate and COOH species (Fig. S18, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  
In situ FT-IR. (a) In situ FT-IR spectra recorded for RP-BMO(21) under light illumination after purging the in situ cell with CO2 and water vapour. (b) In situ FT-IR experiments were done with co-observed methanol and water vapour without CO2. 
The presence of high amounts of carbonate and bicarbonate can be attributed due to the presence of O-vacancies because these vacancies are capable of adsorbing CO2 as carbonate species. The presence of O-vacancies was also confirmed from electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy (Fig. S19, ESI†). Additionally, a very small peak observed at 1071 cm−1 can be assigned to OCH3* species confirming negligible CO2 conversion activity of BMO (Fig. S9, ESI†). Inappropriate CBM position with respect to HCOOH and CO formation potential38 and excessive charge recombination in BMO hindered the CO2 photoreduction process, hence no further intermediates like CHO* or OCH3* peaks were observed in in situ DRIFTS. On the other hand, DRIFTS studies on RP exhibited a strong band at 1067 cm−1 corresponding to OCH3*, which supports the formation of methane (Fig. S20, ESI†). However, due to inefficient gas adsorption capabilities (Fig. 2i and Fig. S6b, ESI†), it shows very weak carbonate and bicarbonate peaks (Fig. S20, ESI†). The moderate formation of methane from CO2 on pristine RP has been supported by the increased in situ FTIR peak intensities for CHO* and OCH3* (key intermediates for CH4 formation) upon irradiation time (Fig. S20, ESI†). Hence, the co-operative efforts of RP and BMO in RP-BMO(21) offers optimum conditions for optimum CO2 and water adsorption and further hydrogenation as depicted from the presence of both high quantities of OCH3* intermediates and carbonate species (Fig. 4a). Methanol has been identified as the active species which are converted to ethanol via C–C coupling from controlled experiments (Fig. 3g and h), which is further mapped by in situ FTIR. As a controlled study, DRIFTS was done in the presence of methane gas and methanol vapour. A strong peak corresponding to OCH3* was observed at around 1062 cm−1 on the RP-BMO(21) catalyst surface upon the in situ DRIFTS experiments with methanol (Fig. 4b). No significant spectral evolution was observed with long time light illumination due to the presence of sufficient methanol vapour inside the DRIFT cell from the beginning of the experiment. No carbonate or bicarbonate stretching bands were observed because the cell was not purged with CO2 during these control experiments. Most importantly, on the other hand, completely silent FTIR spectra were found during methane and water vapour mediated experiments. These controlled experiments strongly support the transformation of methanol to ethanol through C–C coupling on RP-BMO catalyst.
C–C coupling mechanism
There are two well-known pathways for the transformation of CO2 to ethanol: (1) formate pathway (Fig. S21, ESI† top) and carbide pathway (Fig. S21, ESI† bottom). The latter can be eliminated based on the in situ DRIFTS, Kinetics Isotopic Effect (KIE) and controlled photochemical experiments as it is expected to form only methane, which clearly indicates that the reaction mechanism occurred through the C-adsorbed formate pathway (Fig. S21, ESI† top). In general C2 product formation (Fig. S22, ESI† top) requires stronger CO* intermediate which couples with neighboring CO*.39 However, the absence of the CO* peak in DRIFTS measurements suggests the transient life span of this species and rapid conversion into the CHO* intermediate ruling out the coupling of the 2 CO* intermediate occurrence. It is reported that OCH3* is the key intermediate for methanol and methane production. Proton (H+) adsorption on the O center leads to the formation of methanol. On the other hand, H+ adsorption on the C center produces methane.28,40 Since no OCH3* peak was observed in our controlled DRIFTS measurements with methane and water vapour, we focused on the methanol to ethanol conversion step. Li and co-workers have reported that the insertion of methyl carbene (:CH2) into the C–H bond of methanol drives the formation of ethanol on GaN nanowires under UV-vis-light irradiation at ambient temperature. However, this pathway will promote C3-alcohol formation upon further CH2 insertion in ethanol.41 Since we didn’t observe any C2+ alcohols, this pathway is not valid in this case. Insertion of CO into CH2 (formed by the carbide mechanism) can also lead to the formation of ethanol (Fig. S22, ESI† bottom).42 However, this process demands the generation of CH2* and CO (gaseous). In this study, the process is not following the carbide mechanism and gaseous CO was not observed. Hence this pathway can also be ruled out. In this context, a novel mechanistic path can be proposed as the coupling of 2 OCH3* groups on the BMO surface, which is well complemented by the presence of strong OCH3* peak in DRIFTS. As shown in Fig. 5a one OCH3* on the Bi atom and another on the Mo atom interact with a neighbouring OH* group on RP, facilitating the C–C coupling and C–H bond breaking in OCH3. Subsequent formation of the C2H4O2* intermediate followed by the proton adsorption on the O center (attached with Bi) and C center (attached with Mo–O) will lead to the formation of ethanol. Higher oxidation state and electropositivity of the Mo atom compared to Bi in BMO leads to the formation of a stable MoO bond, which drives the formation of water upon reacting with 2H+ and 2e− (Fig. S23, ESI†). Rate of the reaction has reduced 3.6 times upon the use of CD3OD instead of CH3OH whereas negligible changes in the methane formation rate imply O–D/H bond breaking is not involved in the rate determining step. This observation asserts the direct involvement of C–D/H bond breaking in the process of ethanol formation.
 Fig. 5  Photo induced CO2 to ethanol formation and electron transfer mechanism in RP-BMO(21). (a) Methanol to ethanol formation via 2 OCH3* coupling induced by co-operative effort of Bi and Mo atom of BMO on RP. (b), Static PL of RP-BMO(21) and other pristine individual components. (c) Schematic illustration of photogenerated charge transfer by type-II mechanism. (d) Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay spectra of RP-BMO(21) and BMO. (e) Transient photocurrent density of BMO, RP and RP-BMO(21) at 0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (f) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Nyquist plot) to understand charge transfer resistance from the bulk to the surface of the photocatalyst. BMO(AS) represents BMO after sonication. 
Charge transfer
To understand the driving force for the enhanced CO2 photoreduction, steady-state photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra were collected, which provide an insight into the charge recombination phenomenon. Almost complete PL quenching was observed in the case of RP-BMO(21) compared to the pristine BMO (Fig. 5b, ESI†) implying that the intrinsic radiative recombination of photogenerated charges in BMO has been drastically alleviated by the construction of the heterojunction. This confirms a strong interfacial charge transfer between well dispersed BMO nanoparticles and the exfoliated RP sheets. The band structure of the ultrathin RP-BMO(21) was determined via the Tauc plot (Fig. 2h) and Mott–Schottky measurements. As revealed from impedance spectroscopy (Mott–Schottky (MS) plot)43 in Fig. S24a and b (ESI†) the conduction band minima (CBM) position of RP and Bi2MoO6 lies at −0.66 V and −0.6 V (vs. RHE). The valence band maxima (VBM) of RP and Bi2MoO6 lie at +1.29 V and +2.35 V, was calculated from the bandgap as well as the flat band potential values (Fig. 2h and Fig. S24a, b, ESI†). As depicted in Fig. 5c, upon irradiation, the photogenerated electrons at the CBM of the RP travel to the CBM of the BMO. Meanwhile, photogenerated holes transfer from the VBM of BMO to the CBM of RP through the intimate interfaces. Consequently, the CBM of BMO and VBM of RP in the composites gain enough CO2 reduction and O2 production ability, respectively.
Formation of HCOOH can only be explained by the Z-scheme mechanism (Fig. S25, ESI†) because CO2 to HCOOH formation demands a potential of −0.58 V whereas BMO CB minima lie at −0.42 V. However, photoexcited electrons of RP can also convert CO2 to formic acid. On the other hand, a controlled study confirms methanol oxidation in the RP VBM counterpart is the main reason for formic acid production (Fig. 3i).44 Here photogenerated holes have been consumed by the produced methanol. Therefore, in situ generated methanol acts as a hole scavenger and increases the supply of electrons for CO2 reduction on the CBM of BMO. Z-Scheme mechanism (Fig. S25, ESI†) in composites will lead to the accumulation of electrons on RP CBM and holes at BMO VBM.45 However, RP alone has not shown any ethanol formation despite having a suitable bandgap, on the other hand, control study with methanol by BMO has not shown formic acid production.
Hence, reduction of CO2 to ethanol by electrons and oxidation of methanol to HCOOH by holes over composite catalysts can only be done by the BMO (CBM) and RP (VBM) respectively. Therefore, flow of electrons from RP to BMO through Z-scheme route is not a favorable path for electron transfer, instead, type-II charge transfer mechanism efficiently separates photo-generated charges and minimizes their recombination. This hypothesis was further supported by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) emission decay spectra (Fig. 5d), which shows longer average lifetime (τavg) of photogenerated charge carriers in RP-BMO(21) with respect to the pristine BMO (Table S3, ESI†) suggesting that a substantial number of photogenerated electrons are available for longer time in the CBM of RP-BMO(21) for CO2 reduction.46 Furthermore, to obtain qualitative insight on photogenerated charge transfer properties, transient photocurrent and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were done for RP, BMO and RP-BMO(21). Transient photocurrent measurements exhibit a consistent increase of photocurrent for RP-BMO(21) compared to RP and BMO (Fig. 5e). The smallest semicircle corresponding to RP-BMO(21) in EIS (Fig. 5f) indicates lower charge transfer resistance of RP-BMO(21), which implies better charge transfer efficiency of composites by the formation of type-II heterostructure. The role of sonication on pristine BMO was further understood from photo-current and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. It showed a very small increment (Fig. 5e) of photocurrent and minor decrease of charge transfer resistance (Fig. 5f), implying small amount of Bi0 on BMO after sonication has very negligible impact in stabilizing excited photoelectrons. This observation also supports small increment of CO2 reduction efficiency by BMO(AS) catalyst compared to BMO. However, Bi0 in the interface of RP and BMO may play a crucial role in faster charge transfer. Based on these observations, the enhanced activity of CO2 to ethanol on composite can be understood by considering the type-II charge transfer pathway.
Conclusions
We have discovered a novel type-II composite heterostructure with an earth-abundant, non-toxic, cost-effective exfoliated red phosphorus nano-sheet and Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles with manipulated band structure for selective conversion of CO2 to ethanol. The formation of the photocatalyst was verified by a combination of several microscopic and spectroscopic techniques. A record high amount of ethanol was obtained under arc lamp as well as direct sunlight. Controlled experiments with the intermediate methanol and methane molecules revealed that the in situ generated methanol is the actual active species that was consumed for the production of ethanol. With the help of the kinetic study by deuterated methanol (CD3OD) and in situ DRIFTS, a new ethanol formation mechanistic pathway has been established for the first time. An efficient type-II charge transfer mechanism in the composite was proposed and supported by PL, TRPL, EIS, photocurrent density measurements. These findings are prospects for a relatively less explored photocatalyst that holds great promise for photocatalytic CO2RR and is selective towards value-added ethanol formation in higher yield through a new mechanistic pathway.
Author contributions
SCP designed and instructed the work. RD and KD performed all the experiments. BR performed BET measurements. CPV contributed with the XPS measurements. RD and SCP wrote the paper with inputs from all the authors.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Department of Science and Technology (DST/TMD/(EWO)/IC#5-2018/02) is gratefully acknowledged. SCP thanks DST for Swarna Jayanti Fellowship (DST/SJF/CSA-02/2017-18). RD and BR thanks CSIR for the research fellowship and KD thanks DST for the research fellowship.
Notes and references
C. J. Nolan, C. B. Field and K. J. Mach, Nat. Rev. Earth Environ., 2021, 2, 436–446 CrossRef .
R. Sen, A. Goeppert, S. Kar and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4544–4549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, L. Huang, S. Zaman, K. Lei, T. Yue, Z. A. Li, B. You and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003159 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ci, J. J. Carbó, R. Neumann, C. D. Graaf and J. M. Poblet, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6422–6428 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, C. Qian, Y. Dong, Y. F. Li, H. Wang, M. Ghoussoub, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4631–4644 RSC .
J. Wang, S. Lin, N. Tian, T. Ma, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008008 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shyamal and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 6921–6934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Cheng, X. Ding and B.-H. Han, ChemPhotoChem, 2021, 5, 406–417 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fu, X. Wang, A. M. Gardner, X. Wang, S. Y. Chong, G. Neri, A. J. Cowan, L. Liu, X. Li, A. Vogel, R. Clowes, M. Bilton, L. Chen, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 543–550 RSC .
C. S. Diercks, Y. Liu, K. E. Cordova and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 301–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Boutin, L. Merakeb, B. Ma, B. Boudy, M. Wang, J. Bonin, E. Anxolabéhère-Mallart and M. Robert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 5772–5809 RSC .
Z. Guo, G. Chen, C. Cometto, B. Ma, H. Zhao, T. Groizard, L. Chen, H. Fan, W.-L. Man, S.-M. Yiu, K.-C. Lau, T.-C. Lau and M. Robert, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 801–808 CrossRef CAS .
S. Corby, R. R. Rao, L. Steier and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 1136–1155 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, W. Ma, X. Wu, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 37–89 RSC .
R. Das, S. Chakraborty and S. C. Peter, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3270–3274 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Gan, H. Wang, D. Han and L. Niu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6906–6913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Jeyalakshmi, R. Mahalakshmy, K. R. Krishnamurthy and B. Viswanathan, Catal. Today, 2016, 266, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dai, H. Xu, J. Yu, X. Hu, X. Luo, X. Tu and L. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 356, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Huang, Y. Dai, X. Zhang, X. Qin, M. Jiang and M.-H. Whangbo, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 210–213 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, R. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Weng, C.-M. Che and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11791–11795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, S. Gu, Y. Zhao, G. Zhou and W. Li, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 56, 45–68 CrossRef .
W. Dai, J. Yu, H. Xu, X. Hu, X. Luo, L. Yang and X. Tu, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3472–3480 RSC .

          M. J. Comstock, in Phosphorus Chemistry, ed. M. J. Comstock, American Chemical Society,  1981, vol. 171, pp. i–iv Search PubMed .
D. Zhao, Y. Wang, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang, J. Chen, F. Xue, S. Shen and L. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gomez, G. Hallot, A. Pastor, S. Laurent, E. Brun, C. Sicard-Roselli and M. Port, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 56, 167–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Tan, B. Xie, Y. H. Ng, S. F. B. Abdullah, H. Y. M. Tang, N. Bedford, R. A. Taylor, K.-F. Aguey-Zinsou, R. Amal and J. Scott, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 1034–1043 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sahara, H. Kumagai, K. Maeda, N. Kaeffer, V. Artero, M. Higashi, R. Abe and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14152–14158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Sun, J. Xu, Y. Shao, J. Wu, X. Xu, Y. Pan, H. Ju, J. Zhu and Y. Xie, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 690–699 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yarulina, A. D. Chowdhury, F. Meirer, B. M. Weckhuysen and J. Gascon, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 398–411 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, D. Fan, Y. Wei, P. Tian and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Harmel, L. Peres, M. Estrader, A. Berliet, S. Maury, A. Fécant, B. Chaudret, P. Serp and K. Soulantica, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10579–10583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, R. Jin, A. Li, Y. Bi, Q. Ruan, Y. Deng, Y. Zhang, S. Yao, G. Sankar, D. Ma and J. Tang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 884–890 RSC .
T.-C. Zhuo, Y. Song, G.-L. Zhuang, L.-P. Chang, S. Yao, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, P. Wang, W. Lin, T.-B. Lu and Z.-M. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 6114–6122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, Y. M. Chan, Z. Bian, F. Song, J. Wang, Q. Zhong and S. Kawi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 15191–15204 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wan, Q. Zhou, X. Wang, T. E. Wood, L. Wang, P. N. Duchesne, J. Guo, X. Yan, M. Xia, Y. F. Li, A. A. Jelle, U. Ulmer, J. Jia, T. Li, W. Sun and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 889–898 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cherevotan, J. Raj, L. Dheer, S. Roy, S. Sarkar, R. Das, C. P. Vinod, S. Xu, P. Wells, U. V. Waghmare and S. C. Peter, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 509–516 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Deng, S. Xie, Y. Li, W. Zhang, H. Sheng, C. Chen and J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2984–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Ghoussoub, H. Wang, Y. Shao, W. Sun, A. A. Tountas, T. E. Wood, H. Li, J. Y. Y. Loh, Y. Dong, M. Xia, Y. Li, S. Wang, J. Jia, C. Qiu, C. Qian, N. P. Kherani, L. He, X. Zhang and G. A. Ozin, Joule, 2018, 2, 1369–1381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Kong, R. T. Rashid, S. Chu, C.-C. Li, Z. Hearne, H. Guo, Z. Mi and C.-J. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 858–867 CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
J. Li, W. Pan, Q. Liu, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, X. Feng and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 6551–6559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111-112, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das, S. Sarkar, R. Kumar, S. D. Ramarao, A. Cherevotan, M. Jasil, C. P. Vinod, A. K. Singh and S. C. Peter, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 687–697 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Zuo, W. Zhou, J. Zhang and X. W. D. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2173–2177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee02976bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Ethanol is an immediate alternative to crude oil. Therefore, up to 20% ethanol blending with petroleum has emerged in the oil industry. However, the existing ethanol synthesis process is not completely green. In this scenario, ethanol synthesis by abundant sunlight, water and CO2 can provide the cheapest and greenest route. However, the existing literature based on photocatalytic CO2 reduction is still stuck at C1 products due to multiple intermediate steps and the kinetically sluggish 12 proton coupled electron transfer route in the CO2 to ethanol formation process. In this work, a composite photocatalyst has been designed by tailoring the economically viable, earth abundant red phosphorus and Bi2MoO6 for the conversion of CO2 to ethanol in the absence of any sacrificial agent. The optimized photocatalyst showed one of the best ethanol formation rates under simulated light as well as direct sunlight. Because ethanol formation is very rare, the formation mechanism of ethanol from CO2 is still unexplored. Here, a mechanism has been established based on several control experiments, primary isotope labeling study and DRIFTS. Most importantly, via primary and secondary kinetic isotopic effect analysis, it is proposed that the in situ generated methanol from CO2 photoreduction is further consumed for ethanol formation.


 	Fig. 1  Photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to ethanol by a composite catalyst. Schematic representation of CO2 to ethanol formation through methanol under sunlight in only water by the composite of red phosphorus and Bi2MoO6.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of composites and individual components. (a) SEM image showing that the Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles are lying on exfoliated RP. (b) SEM elemental mapping for the identification of 2 different materials. (c) Elemental mapping of P, Bi, Mo and O. (d) TEM image of the Bi2MoO6/RP composite. (e) HRTEM image of BMO nanoparticles on RP. The yellow border shows the BMO nanoparticle (f). (e) was zoomed to show the d-spacing clearly. (g) AFM image of 10 h sonicated RP which shows 2 layers of RP. (h) The presence of 2 layers was found by analysing the height profile. (i) The height profile of 20 h sonicated RP shows single layers of RP sheets. (j) AFM image of a 20 h sonicated RP sheet. (k) UV-Vis DRS of composites and individual components. (l) Corresponding Tauc plots drawn by using Kubelka–Munk parameter ((αhν)2) as a function versus photon energy (eV). (m) Surface area of composites, Bi2MoO6 and RP calculated from BET measurements for understanding the gas adsorption capacity.	 

 	Fig. 3  Quantitative and qualitative photocatalytic performance. (a) CO2 photoreduction activity of BMO/RP composites with different composition under Xe lamp irradiation (>400 nm). All the experiments were carried out and average values are presented with error bars for standard deviation. (b) The rate of formation of each product at different cycles is presented. (c) Photocatalytic CO2 to ethanol formation activity under sunlight with RP-BMO(21). The solar light intensity was given in mW cm−2 in between bars. (d) Comparison of ethanol formation rate under sunlight and a Xe lamp. (e) GC–MS of ethanol, generated from 13CO2 photoreduction experiment. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) with RP-BMO(21) photo-electrode in the presence and absence of light illumination in CO2 atmosphere. (g and h) Photocatalytic control experiment with methanol. (g) Ethanol formation rate from methanol feed under light illumination with different concentrations of methanol. CH3OH and CD3OD were exploited for studying the kinetics (kinetic isotopic effect) of methanol to ethanol formation. (h) Overall methanol to other liquid product formation rate. (i) Methanol oxidation by the photogenerated holes (h+) of the RP valence band counterpart.	 

 	Fig. 4  
In situ FT-IR. (a) In situ FT-IR spectra recorded for RP-BMO(21) under light illumination after purging the in situ cell with CO2 and water vapour. (b) In situ FT-IR experiments were done with co-observed methanol and water vapour without CO2.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photo induced CO2 to ethanol formation and electron transfer mechanism in RP-BMO(21). (a) Methanol to ethanol formation via 2 OCH3* coupling induced by co-operative effort of Bi and Mo atom of BMO on RP. (b), Static PL of RP-BMO(21) and other pristine individual components. (c) Schematic illustration of photogenerated charge transfer by type-II mechanism. (d) Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay spectra of RP-BMO(21) and BMO. (e) Transient photocurrent density of BMO, RP and RP-BMO(21) at 0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (f) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Nyquist plot) to understand charge transfer resistance from the bulk to the surface of the photocatalyst. BMO(AS) represents BMO after sonication.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee02976b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
