Recent development of core–shell SnO 2 nanostructures and their potential applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TC01030B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TC01030B
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6706-6722Recent development of core–shell SnO2 nanostructures and their potential applications

        
          
            Arik 
            Kar†
 and 

        
          
            Amitava 
            Patra
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata 700032, India. E-mail: msap@iacs.res.in;  Fax: +91-33-2473-2805;   Tel: +91-33-2473-4971
Received 
      17th May 2014
    , Accepted 28th May 2014First published on 28th May 2014AbstractThis feature article highlights the recent development of core–shell SnO2 nanostructures for their potential applications, i.e. optical, electrical, photo-electrochemical, photo-catalytic and gas sensing. Current studies reveal that the core–shell SnO2 nanocrystals could pave the way for developing new challenging devices because core–shell structures exhibit significant improvement of different physical properties, e.g. electrical, optical, electrochemical, etc. Here, we mainly highlight the impacts of core–shell structures of SnO2 nanocrystals on optical, electrical, photo-electrochemical, photo-catalytic and gas sensing properties. To begin with, we illustrate general synthesis methodologies for preparing core–shell SnO2 nanostructures and describe the structural changes due to the formation of core–shell nanocrystals. Successively, we emphasize the fundamental understanding of free charge carrier generation, charge transfer, charge separation, and interfacial charge transfer of the core–shell structures. The chemical and electronic mechanisms for SnO2 sensor performance have been discussed. We discuss a general analysis of the band structure of the heterojunction formed between the SnO2 core and shell materials. Recent findings reveal that the photoelectrochemical, photocatalytic and gas sensing properties are enhanced manifold in core–shell SnO2 nanocrystals. Finally an outlook on the prospects of this research field is given.Arik KarDr Arik Kar (born 1984) obtained his B.Sc (Hons) in chemistry from Serampore College, University of Calcutta in 2005. Later he obtained his M.Sc in chemistry from the University of Calcutta (Presidency College) with specialization in inorganic chemistry in 2007. Later he completed his Ph.D in Materials Science from Jadavpur University in 2013. He has been awarded a prestigious “Newton International Fellowship” from the Royal Society for the academic year 2014–2016. He is now continuing his research as a “Newton Fellow” in the “University of Cambridge”. His research interests include synthesis and characterization of different colloidal semiconductors, rare earth doped semiconductors and core–shell nanomaterials.Amitava PatraProf. Amitava Patra (born 1965) received his Ph.D (1993) from Jadavpur University, India. He is now Professor at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, India. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2014. He is the recipient of C. N. R. Rao National Prize for Chemical Research, DAE-SRC Outstanding Investigator Award, A. V. Rama Rao Foundation Prize in Chemistry, AsiaNANO 2010 Award, CRSI Bronze Medal, Ramanujan Fellowship, and MRSI Medal. He is an Advisory board member of Nanoscale and Journal of Physical Chemistry and others. He is an author or co-author of more than 151 scientific papers, 3 book chapters and 2 Indian patents. His research interests include decay dynamics, energy transfer, and electron transfer of QD, Au nanoparticles, polymer and porphyrin based luminescent nanoparticles, and rare-earth based materials for up- and down- conversion luminescence.
1. Introduction
Tin oxide (SnO2) is an important metal-oxide, and an n-type wide band gap (3.6 eV at 300 K) semiconductor.1–3 On account of its outstanding electrical, optical, and electrochemical properties, SnO2 offers a wide range of applications in solar cells,4,5 catalytic support materials,6 transparent electrodes,7,8 and solid-state chemical sensors.9–13 These unique properties have enthused us to design new synthesis methodologies for well-controlled SnO2 nanostructures. There are numerous synthesis methods available in the literature such as discharge,14 laser ablation,15 solution,16 vapor–liquid–solid (VLS),17 sol–gel,18 hydro(solvo)thermal,19–22 microwave1etc. to prepare various morphologies of SnO2 such as nanoparticles,23 nanorods,24 nanodisks,25 nanosheets,26 nanobelts,27 nanowires,28etc. It is evident that SnO2 is one of the most important and extensively used metal oxide semiconductor materials for gas sensors due to its high sensitivity and low cost. Over the past decades, significant attention has been paid to enhancing the sensing performance of the SnO2-based gas sensor.29–32 Again, SnO2 also finds application as photocatalytic materials.33 However, it is found that pure SnO2 has some limitations owing to its low surface area and low stability.3 To combat these problems, fabrication of core–shell structures of SnO2 is found to be promising.
Core–shell structures of SnO2 are found to be promising materials to improve the performance of various SnO2-based devices. The photocatalytic activities of SnO2 are found to be increased when core–shell structures are formed due to efficient charge separation. There are a number of studies associated with the improvement of the photocatalytic activity of core–shell structured SnO2 such as SnO2–TiO2,34 SnO2–ZnO,35 SnO2–CdS,36etc. It is found that the appropriate shell materials would serve as additional electron sources that can significantly improve the electron conduction in SnO2 which improves the gas-sensing response.31 Again, coupling SnO2 (large bandgap 3.6 eV) with another smaller bandgap semiconductor also facilitates the charge separation by accumulating electrons and holes in separate particles which will enhance the photo electrochemical properties of SnO2.37–41
A few review articles are in the literature on the gas-sensing applications of SnO2.42,43 Göpel et al.42 have mainly focused on the development of SnO2 nanostructures for gas sensing. Ma et al.43 wrote a mini-review on various aspects on the performances of SnO2-based gas sensors. Batzill et al.44 have highlighted the gas sensing properties of SnO2 and their controlling factors. There are a few review articles on the photoelectrochemistry of transparent SnO2,45 synthesis and applications of one-dimensional SnO2 nanostructures,46 application of SnO2:F films in solar cells47 and synthesis and applications of hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures.48 Interestingly, there is no review article on the impact of core–shell structures of SnO2 on its potential applications.
The main focus of this feature article is to address the important questions: how the core–shell structures of SnO2 nanocrystals influence optical and electrical, photo-electrochemical, photo-catalytic and gas sensing properties. To begin with, we describe the general synthesis methodologies to prepare the core–shell structure of SnO2. Spectroscopic and microscopic methods are being used to understand the structural changes due to the core–shell structure which eventually influences the physical properties of SnO2. We describe the mechanism how core–shell structures improve the electrical, optical, sensing and other physical properties. Finally, an outlook on the prospects of this research field is given.
2. General synthesis methods for preparing core–shell structures of SnO2 nanocrystals
The synthesis of core–shell nanocrystals is typically classified into two major categories: “top-down” and “bottom-up”.49 The bottom-up approach has proven to be more appropriate for the synthesis of core–shell nanocrystals. The most vital step during the synthesis of core–shell nanoparticles is to maintain a uniform coating and to control the shell thickness. Core–shell nanoparticles are typically synthesized using a two-step process, the synthesis of the core is the first step and the synthesis of the shell is the second step. The synthesis techniques of core–shell nanoparticles can be classified into two types.
(i) The core particles are synthesized first and then the shell is formed by surface modification.50–52
(ii) The core particles are synthesized in situ which is followed by surface coating.53,54 In this method, the core particles are synthesized first using appropriate reactants in the presence of a surface modifier; then more reactants are added to form the shell in situ.55 The shell material is selectively deposited on the modified core surface and core–shell particles are formed. The main disadvantage of this process is that impurities may be trapped between the core and the shell layers.
Temperature is the most important reaction parameter which is being used to control the reaction kinetics for core–shell nanoparticle formation. The working temperature range depends mostly on the reaction mechanism of core or shell formation. In general, a low temperature is favorable for core–shell nanoparticle synthesis.49 The proper band alignment and the small lattice mismatch between the shell and the core are the important parameters for choosing core and shell materials.49 Due to the lattice mismatch, a lattice strain will develop which will produce surface defects in the interface. Cozzoli et al.56 have reported the influence of interfacial energy on core–shell structure formation. It is recommended to choose shell materials with less lattice mismatch with the core.
In the view of SnO2-based core–shell nanoparticles, significant efforts have been devoted in the last decade to synthesize high quality SnO2-based core–shell nanoparticles. The chemical and the physical properties of core–shell SnO2 nanostructures depend on the nature of the shell. There are few techniques that can be taken care for the formation of a uniform shell coating over SnO2 core nanoparticles. The techniques are (i) sequential addition of the reactants, (ii) the proper choice of the shell forming agent, (iii) control over the rate of addition of the shell forming agent, (iv) control over the reaction temperature and (v) the appropriate selection of organic ligands adhered to the surface of the core. There are different chemical synthesis methods available in the literature such as hydrothermal, sonochemical, colloidal, chemical vapor deposition, etc. to prepare core–shell SnO2 nanocrystals.36,57–60 In this section, we briefly discuss some of the current methods for preparing various core–shell structures of SnO2 nanocrystals.
2.1. Hydrothermal method
This is an outstanding method for generating core–shell nanocrystals with controlled crystal sizes and good dispersibility in solutions. It refers to a chemical synthesis procedure within a sealed autoclave environment under high pressure and temperature (often above the critical point of the solvent). The hydrothermal method is being used for the synthesis of SnO2-based core–shell nanoparticles.36,57 Patra et al.36 have used this method for the synthesis of core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods by using a single-source precursor cadmium thiobenzoate complex for the CdS shell. They have modified the surface of SnO2 nanorods by cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) using ultrasonic irradiation. The detail synthesis procedure is represented in Fig. 1a. The TEM image of the as-prepared sample is also given in the inset of Fig. 1a. The main advantage of this synthesis method is the use of a single source precursor for the CdS shell. The surface capping agent CTAB is being used for creating a uniform shell thickness. Fan et al.57 have used a hydrothermal process for the fabrication of ZnO nanostructures hierarchically assembled on SnO2 nanowire backbones. Firstly, the SnO2 nanowires were coated with ZnO nanoparticles as seeds by a dip-coating technique. Then, the SnO2 nanowire covered substrates were immersed into an aqueous solution of zinc nitrate (Zn(NO3)2·6H2O) and hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4). The main advantage of this synthesis technique is that the morphology of the ZnO shell can be tuned by adjusting the salt concentration, reaction time, and additives. Zhang et al.58 have reported an innovative hydrothermal shell-by-shell templating strategy appropriate for the preparation of SnO2 rattle-type nanospheres. First, they have used an organic capping agent (PVP) to anchor the SiO2 nanoparticles and prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles in solution. Then, the SnO2 nanospheres were coated with silica and used as templates to prepare SnO2 rattle-type nanospheres. The fabrication process is a three-step procedure, and each step is well controlled (Fig. 1b). Peng et al.34 have used a hydrothermal process for the synthesis of TiO2 coated SnO2 nanotubes with different SnO2 contents. It is clear from the above discussion that the hydrothermal method is an effective approach for the synthesis of SnO2-based core–shell nanoparticles.
 Fig. 1  (a) A scheme for the preparation of the SnO2–CdS heterostructure (below the figure is the TEM image of a core–shell SnO2–CdS heterostructure) (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the SnO2 rattle-type nanoreactor (below the figure is the TEM image of SnO2 rattle-type nanospheres) (reprinted with permission from ref. 58, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
2.2. Sonochemical method
An alternative approach for the formation of SnO2-based core–shell nanoparticles is the sonochemical synthesis by employing acoustic waves. In this method, the required amount of SnO2 core materials is taken in an appropriate solvent and sonicated. After sonication, the required amount of the shell forming agent was added to form core–shell nanostructures. The ultrasound helps to initiate reaction leading to growth of shell and disperse the nanoparticles in solution. Gao et al.59 have used a simple sonochemical approach for the preparation of SnO2–CdS core–shell heterostructures. They have prepared SnO2 core particles by thermal evaporation of metallic Sn powders. Then, cadmium chloride and thiourea were added to water in a sonication cell and the reaction mixture was irradiated with a high-intensity ultrasonication (100 W, 40 kHz). Argon gas was bubbled through the reaction mixture prior to the sonication to expel dissolved oxygen. This method is an effective approach for the synthesis of SnO2-based core–shell nanoparticles.
2.3. Colloidal method
Another approach for the synthesis of SnO2-based core–shell nanoparticles is the colloidal synthesis. This method requires three components: core and shell precursors, organic surfactants and solvents.61 Upon heating the reaction mixtures to a sufficiently high temperature, the precursors chemically transform into active atomic or molecular species followed by the formation of core–shell nanocrystals whose subsequent growth is greatly affected by the presence of surfactant molecules. The advantages of this method are that it can be used for large-scale production, it is safe, convenient, energy efficient, etc. Kamat et al.60 have synthesized CdS-capped SnO2 colloids in aqueous medium and this method involves the adsorption of Cd2+ ions onto the interior core of SnO2 followed by the exposure of the solution to H2S. The as-prepared CdS-capped SnO2 colloids were found to be stable for several days. Again, it is possible to vary the thickness of the CdS shell by controlling the concentration of Cd2+. A simple two-step colloidal method has been used by Li et al.62 for the preparation of ZnS coated SnO2 nanowires. Initially, SnO2 core particles are immersed in Na2S solution for a certain time. Then, the samples are immersed in Zn(NO3)2 solution for the same time. The thickness of the ZnS shell is also tuned by controlling the amount of the shell precursor and deposition time.
2.4. Chemical vapor deposition
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is being used to produce high-purity, high-performance core–shell materials. In typical CVD, the wafer (substrate) is exposed to one or more volatile precursors, which react and/or decompose on the substrate surface to produce the desired deposit. The advantages of this technique are (i) uniform distribution over large areas, (ii) absence of compositional gradients across the substrate, and (iii) more selective area deposition because of higher activation energy for reaction with foreign substances. Mathur et al.63 have used two-step chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in combination with the metal-catalyzed vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth mechanism as a new approach to synthesize TiO2 coated SnO2 nanowires. They have utilized the Sn(OtBu)4 and Ti(OiPr)4 complexes in the CVD process. The thickness of the TiO2 shell was adjusted by controlling the precursor flux and deposition time. Kim et al.32 have fabricated core–shell SnO2–ZnO nanofibers by means of a novel two-step process. First, SnO2 core nanofibers were synthesized by electrospinning. Sequentially, ZnO shell layers were grown by CVD in a controlled manner on the core nanofibers. Hotchandani et al.64 have developed a photo-electrochemical cell coupled with an SnO2–CdSe nanocrystalline semiconductor electrode which has been prepared by sequential deposition of SnO2 and CdSe films onto an optically transparent electrode. The disadvantages of the CVD technique are (i) safety and contamination, (ii) poisonous nature of hydrides and carbonyls, and (iii) high cost of chemicals. There are also extensive reports in the literature for the synthesis of SnO2-based core–shell heterostructures.65–74 We briefly summarize some of the recent reports in Table 1. Analysis suggests that several attempts are made to control the thickness and uniform shell coating of core–shell materials.
Table 1 Different SnO2-based core–shell heterostructures using various methods




Core–shell
Synthesis method
Basic reagent
Reference




SnO2–C
Hydrothermal
Potassium stannate trihydrate, glucose

65



SnO2–In2O3
Colloidal
Tin chloride hexahydrate, indium chloride monohydrate, ammonium hydroxide

66



SnO2–polypyrrole
Colloidal
Stannous chloride dehydrate, ferric chloride, pyrrole monomer, glucose

67



SnO2–TiO2
Hydrothermal
Tin chloride pentahydrate, titanium butyloxide, poly-vinyl pyrrolidone

68



SnO2–V2O5
Hydrothermal
Tin(II) chloride, vanadium oxytripropoxide, ammonium metavanadate

69



SnO2–In2O3
Thermal evaporation
Metallic Sn, metallic In, si substrate

70



SnO2–WO3
Colloidal
Tin(II) chloride dihydrate, sodium tungstate dihydrate, sodium chloride

71



SnO2–TiO2
Colloidal
Tin dichloride dihydrate, titanium chloride, polyethylene glycol, N,N-dimethyl formamide

72



SnO2–TiO2
Hydrothermal
Tin dichloride dihydrate, ammonium fluoride, ethylene glycol

73



SnO2–MoO3
Colloidal
Tin dichloride dihydrate, ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate, nitric acid

74





3. Physical properties of core–shell structures
3.1. Structural information
A large number of characterization techniques have been used to get structural information of SnO2-based core–shell nanostructures. Among these techniques, X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) techniques are frequently being used to recognize the structural changes due to the formation of core–shell structures. In this section, we will discuss some of the characterization techniques.

3.1.1. X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique. 
There is a significant change in the XRD pattern of SnO2 nanocrystals after the formation of core–shell structures. Core–shell structures play a significant role on tuning the cell parameters which would influence physical properties. There are numerous reports in the literature where considerable changes are reported in the XRD pattern after formation of core–shell structures of SnO2.32,36,63 Patra et al.36 have found some remarkable changes after surface coating of SnO2 nanorods with CdS nanoparticles. Fig. 2a revealed the XRD patterns of pure SnO2 nanorods, pure CdS nanoparticles, a physical mixture of CdS and SnO2 nanocrystals and core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods. The tetragonal phase of SnO2 and the cubic phase of CdS are observed while core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods showed the peaks at 30.74° (200), 44.24° (220) and 71.62° (331), indicating the existence of the cubic phase of CdS along with the tetragonal phase of SnO2. It is found that the cell parameters are modified due to core–shell structures, indicating the structural change that occurs. Kim et al.32 have confirmed the formation of ZnO shell layers on core SnO2 nanofibers. Mathur et al.63 have observed the rutile phase of SnO2 and no other peak of TiO2, indicating the amorphous nature of the TiO2 layer. Li et al.62 have observed that the tetragonal rutile structure of SnO2 and the wurtzite structure of ZnS appear with increasing the thickness with time in ZnS coated SnO2 nanowires. Gao et al.72 have designed a competent core–shell SnO2–TiO2 for dye-sensitized solar cells. They have observed that all the diffraction peaks of SnO2 can be well indexed to a rutile structure of SnO2. The shifting of diffraction peaks to larger angles in the core–shell structure is observed due to modification of the lattice constant.50 Zhong et al.75 have also observed the shift of diffraction peaks to larger angles located between the cubic CdTe and CdS phases in CdTe–CdS core–shell nanocrystals. Analogous changes in the diffraction pattern are also reported76–78 for previous core–shell nanostructures.79 Kar et al.36 have confirmed the formation of the CdS shell on SnO2 nanorods by XRD investigation and Fig. 2b illustrates the XRD patterns of pure SnO2 nanorods and the as-prepared core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods. The diffraction peaks are shifted to larger angles for the core–shell heterostructure, which confirms the formation of core–shell structures. In reality, the diffraction peaks shift to larger angles in the core–shell heterostructure owing to a smaller lattice constant for core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods compared with pure SnO2 nanorods. XRD analysis reveals that the core–shell structures modify the crystal phase, crystal size and cell parameters which certainly have enormous influence on their physical properties.
 Fig. 2  (a) X-ray powder diffraction patterns of SnO2 nanorods, CdS nanoparticles, SnO2 + CdS mixture and SnO2–CdS heterostructure (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) X-ray powder diffraction patterns of pure SnO2 nanorods and SnO2–CdS heterostructure (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and HRTEM images of SnO2 nanorods (i and ii) and the SnO2–CdS heterostructure (iii and iv). The insets of (ii) and (iv) show the SAED patterns of the SnO2 nanorods and the SnO2–CdS heterostructure. (v) and (vi) are STEM-HAADF images of a single SnO2–CdS heterostructure nanorod. EDS elemental mapping of the spatial distribution of Sn (vii), O (viii), Cd (ix) and S (x) elements (xi) shows an STEM-HAADF image of a single SnO2–CdS heterostructure nanorod and EDS line scans across a single SnO2–CdS nanorod (xii–xv) for Sn, O, Cd and S elements. The TEM-EDS concentration line profile of Sn, O, Cd and S, measured along the line across the length (xvi) (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). 


3.1.2. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
Formation of the SnO2-based core–shell structure can also be confirmed by TEM and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) investigation. TEM provides important information regarding the particle size, core size, shell thickness, uniform or nonuniform shell coating, etc. HRTEM images provide information on crystallinity, lattice fringes and d-spacing of the core–shell materials. An elemental mapping and line scan EDS analysis also confirm the formation of a shell over the core particle. Patra et al.36 have used TEM and HRTEM studies to confirm the formation of the CdS shell over the SnO2 core (Fig. 2c). Fig. 2c(i) shows the TEM image of SnO2 nanorods which are almost uniform in size and shape. From the HRTEM image of a single SnO2 nanorod (Fig. 2c(ii)), the distance between lattice planes (0.335 nm) which corresponds to the (110) plane of the tetragonal phase of SnO2 can be observed. Fig. 2c(iii) shows the successful deposition of CdS nanoparticles on SnO2 nanorods. The measured distance between the lattice plane is 0.341 nm from the HRTEM image of the deposited CdS nanoparticles [Fig. 2c(iv)], which is well matched to the reported value for the (111) plane of the cubic CdS. An elemental mapping and line scan EDS analysis confirm the formation of the CdS shell over SnO2 nanorods which are given in Fig. 2c(v–xvi). Kim et al.32 have confirmed the formation of core–shell SnO2–ZnO by using TEM investigation. From the high-resolution TEM image of a ZnO shell layer, the 0.52 nm d-spacing confirms the formation of ZnO shell layers over SnO2. They have further observed that Zn is localized in the outer surface of the nanofiber in contrast with Sn which is localized in the interior of the nanofiber, demonstrating the formation of core–shell SnO2–ZnO nanofibers. EDS elemental mapping measurements confirm the well-defined spatial distribution of Zn, O, and Sn. The formation of MoO3 coated SnO2 nanobelts by TEM and HRTEM analysis is confirmed by Chen et al.74 The hierarchical assembly of ZnO nanostructures on the SnO2 backbone nanowires by using TEM and HRTEM techniques has been confirmed by Fan et al.57 It is evident that the TEM and HRTEM analysis confirms the core–shell structures of SnO2.


3.1.3. FTIR and Raman spectroscopy. 
Infrared spectroscopy and Raman spectroscopy are used to study vibrational, rotational, and other low-frequency modes. These two spectroscopic techniques are frequently being used to understand the structural changes of SnO2 after core–shell formation. Wu et al.67 have investigated the interaction between polypyrrole and SnO2 hollow spheres by FTIR study and the observed reduced peak intensity is due to the appearance of the Sn–O–Sn band. The reduced peak intensity is attributed to the interaction between polypyrrole and SnO2 hollow spheres. Kim et al.70 have investigated the formation of the In2O3 shell over SnO2 with the help of Raman spectrum and they have observed three normal phonon modes Eg, A1g, and B2g at 474, 629, and 772 cm−1, respectively due to polycrystalline SnO2 with a tetragonal structure. In addition to these classical modes, three weak Raman shifts at 238, 306, and 707 cm−1 were observed which are attributed to the presence of cubic In2O3. Li et al.62 have established a tetragonal rutile SnO2 phase in core–shell SnO2–ZnS nanowires by Raman spectroscopy. They have assigned the Raman peaks at 473, 519, 634, and 773 cm−1 as Eg, A2u, A1g, and B2g modes, respectively. After the SnO2 core is modified by the ZnS shell, new lines at 696 cm−1 and a low-energy shoulder of 634 cm−1 have been observed with a red shift of the 519 cm−1 line to 500 cm−1. The appearance of the new lines in the core–shell sample is attributed to the surface optical phonon modes, which mainly originate from the modification of the crystallographic structure of the ZnS shell and the reconstruction of the SnO2–ZnS interface. Thus, FTIR and Raman spectroscopic techniques are very useful for the analysis of core–shell structures.


3.1.4. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) technique. 
An X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) technique can be reasonably used if the thickness of the shell is in between 3 and 6 Å.80 The binding force between the SnO2 core and the shell material can be analyzed by XPS. Yang et al.81 have analyzed the binding force between the SnO2 core and the ZnO shell with the help of this technique. The presence of Sn–O–Zn bonds between the SnO2 core and the ZnO shell is evidenced by the comparison of the Sn 3d5/2 spectra of the core–shell material and the pure SnO2. It is obtained that the Sn 3d5/2 peak is shifted to a lower energy for the core–shell material (486.20 eV) from that of the pure SnO2 (486.65 eV), indicating the ZnO shell formation on SnO2 nanoparticles. Core–shell SnO2–ZnO heterojunction photocatalysts have been successfully prepared by Toupance et al.82 using a two-step solution route. Liu et al.68 have investigated the chemical composition and the binding energy of core–shell SnO2–TiO2 heterostructures by XPS analysis. The fully scanned spectra demonstrate that Ti, O, and C elements exist in bare TiO2, while Ti, Sn, O, and C exist in core–shell SnO2–TiO2 heterostructures, respectively. The splitting of the 3d doublet of Sn is 8.5 eV which indicates that the valence state of Sn is +4. Again, Wang et al.83 have confirmed the chemical composition and the binding force between the core and the shell of highly porous core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanofibers by an XPS method. The splitting between Ti 2p1/2 and Ti 2p3/2 is 5.7 eV, indicating that the normal state of Ti4+ exists in the SnO2–TiO2 nanofibers. No shifts of the peaks for Ti 2p confirm the unchanged structure of TiO2 after formation of core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanofibers. Qiao et al.84 have investigated the elemental composition and the binding force of SnO2@C spheres. A dominant peak (284.4 eV) is due to the existence of elemental carbon observed and the peak (286.5 eV) indicates the presence of C–O bonds. In the SnO2 nanobelt–ZnO core–shell, the Sn 3d5/2 and Zn 2p3/2 high-resolution spectra with binding energies at 486.7 and 1022.2 eV respectively are observed,85 which are assigned to Sn4+ in SnO2 and Zn2+ in ZnO. The hydrophilic nature of core–shell SnO2–V2O5 nanowires is confirmed by Kang et al.69 The binding energies of S 2p and O 1s in SnO2–SnS2 were observed at about 161.34 and 530.83 eV, respectively, which also suggest the formation of SnS2 and SnO2 crystals.86 The above discussion undoubtedly reveals that the shell material plays a significant role in the modification of chemical composition and binding force which eventually influence their optical, electrical, photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and gas sensing properties.

3.2. Optical and electrical properties
SnO2 is an n-type semiconductor with a large band gap (Eg = 3.6 eV at 300 K)1,3 and oxygen vacancies are known to be the most common defects in SnO2 and usually act as radiative centers in luminescence processes. These oxygen vacancies typically act as deep defect donors in SnO2 and would cause the formation of new donor levels in the band gap.1 The photoluminescence (PL) emission of SnO2 is due to the transition of an electron from a level close to the conduction band edge to a deeply trapped hole in the bulk of the SnO2 nanocrystals.87 Enhancement of luminescence (by elimination of non-radiative pathways) of SnO2 can be achieved by surface coating with another band gap semiconductor material. The choice of the shell material is vital for the localization of the electron–hole pair. A recent review on core–shell semiconducting nanocrystals discusses the fundamental properties of core–shell structures of II–VI, IV–VI, and III–V semiconductors.88 SnO2 nanocrystals can also be coated with an insulating inorganic shell to enhance the fluorescence. Depending on the shell materials, core–shell SnO2 nanostructures may be of the following three types.
1. Type I – where the band gap of core SnO2 is smaller than that of the shell. Both the conduction and valence band edges of the core SnO2 lie within the band gap of the shell, which confines both electrons and holes in the SnO2 core.
2. Reverse Type I – where the core SnO2 has a wider band gap than the shell, and the conduction and valence band edges of the shell lie within those of the core SnO2. The lowest available exciton energy separation occurs when the charge carriers are localized in the shell.
3. Type II – where the valence and conduction band edges of core SnO2 are both lower and higher than the band edges of the shell. The lowest energy separation of the electron and the hole will occur when the hole is confined in the core SnO2 valence band and the electron is confined in the shell conduction band.
A few reports about optical properties have been found in core–shell structures of SnO2 nanocrystals.89,90 Li et al.62 have reported the optical properties of core–shell SnO2–ZnS (Fig. 3a). A broad emission centered at 370 nm for pure SnO2 is attributed to the band-acceptor transition.91–93 A change in the intensity of the PL is observed when SnO2 is coated with a ZnS shell with varying shell thickness. The relative intensity of the samples as a function of ZnS treatment time is presented in the inset of Fig. 3a. The increase of PL intensity in the core–shell structures indicates that the ZnS capping greatly reduces the number of surface states of core SnO2. However, it would passivate most of the dangling bonds on the surface of the SnO2 core for a thick shell by removing the surface states and enhance the PL peak intensity, as shown in Fig. 3a. Fan et al.57 have observed remarkable changes in PL spectra in core–shell SnO2–ZnO nanostructures because the intensity of defect-related emission from SnO2 is remarkably suppressed after surface coated by ZnO nanorods. Kar et al.36 have fabricated core–shell SnO2–CdS heterostructures and studied their decay dynamics by a time resolved photoluminescence study. Fig. 3b demonstrates the time resolved photoluminescence (PL) decay curves for SnO2 nanorods and core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods.36 From the inset plot of Fig. 3b (PL spectra), it is found that the PL intensity of core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods is higher than the uncoated SnO2 nanorods. The decay curves (Fig. 3b) are well fitted with tri-exponential to obtain the average decay time. The average decay time values are 7.2 ns for pure SnO2 nanorods and 11.2 ns for core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods. The enhancement of the average lifetime value (7.2 ns to 11.2 ns) indicates the efficient charge separation that occurs in the core–shell structures. The time resolved photoluminescence (PL) decay of the core–shell sample is being used to understand the mechanism and a schematic model is proposed (Fig. 3c). In the left side of this model, different relaxation processes in SnO2 are introduced. In SnO2, there are three energy levels87viz. the valence band (VB), defect states and conduction band (CB). Upon photoexcitation, first it creates positive holes in the VB and negative electrons in the CB. The hole in the VB and the electron in the CB can radiatively recombine and also the hole in the VB can trap at the oxygen vacancy sites. When the core–shell SnO2–CdS heterostructure is formed, the mechanism is different (right side of the model). SnO2 is a direct wide band gap semiconductor while CdS is a short band gap semiconductor (Eg = 2.40 eV at 300 K).94 The conduction band of CdS (−0.8 V vs. NHE) is also more negative than that of SnO2 (0.0 V vs. NHE). As a result, upon photoexcitation, the photogenerated electrons of CdS can be transferred to the conduction band of SnO2, while the holes of SnO2 can be transferred to the VB of CdS (Fig. 3a). Thus, the electron and hole separation becomes prominent in this heterostructure and this effective charge separation leads to longer exciton decay time. Ju et al.95 have fabricated an efficient white-light-emitting material combining two semiconductors SnO2 and ZnO. Near-band-edge emission at 375 nm and a defect-related emission band at 600 nm for ZnO96 are observed whereas SnO2 shows a broad emission band peaking at 591 nm, which is ascribed to oxygen vacancies.97 Sun et al.98 have observed the PL emission from only the secondary-grown ZnO nanostructures, not from the SnO2 nanobelts which is due to the high-density coverage of ZnO on SnO2. Kim et al.99 have investigated the optical properties of SnO2–ZnO core–shell nanowires. The PL spectrum of the core SnO2 nanowires was found to be a broad emission band which peaks at 2.1 eV around the yellow region. This yellow emission is ascribed to the trapped states within the band gap, which is formed by the interaction of oxygen vacancies with interfacial tin or dangling bonds. For the as-fabricated SnO2–ZnO core–shell nanowires, the PL spectrum is found to be consisted of two peak positions which are located at approximately 2.1 eV and 3.2 eV, respectively. The emission band in the yellow region is assumed to originate from the SnO2 core and the UV emission band around 3.2 eV can be associated with the excitons in the ZnO shell.100
 Fig. 3  (a) PL spectra of core–shell SnO2–ZnS nanowires (i–v) under the same conditions at room temperature. The inset is the relative intensity as a function of ZnS shell treatment time (reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) Photoluminescence (PL) decays of SnO2 nanorods and SnO2–CdS heterostructures at 400 nm emission wavelength (inset plot is the corresponding PL spectrum at 295 nm) (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Schematic model proposed for different relaxation processes in SnO2 nanorods and SnO2–CdS heterostructure nanorods (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) (i) Current vs. voltage characteristics for SnO2 nanorods and the SnO2–CdS heterostructure when the voltage is applied between Au and Au terminals in a forward bias direction and (ii) schematic representation of the band gap alignment in the type-II SnO2–CdS heterostructure to show the electron–hole separation (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
SnO2 acts as both donors and acceptors101 and its electrical conduction owes to the existence of point defects (native and foreign atoms). SnO2 exhibited non-linear electrical properties between current I and potential V, described by the relationship I = CVα (where C is a constant that depends on the microstructure and α is the non-linear coefficient).102 Significant improvement in electrical properties has been observed in core–shell structures of SnO2 nanocrystals. In the type-II interaction between the two semiconductor materials, the efficient charge separation takes place in the core–shell structure.36 Upon photoexcitation, electrons are accumulating in the SnO2 core whereas holes are in the semiconductor shell. As a result, SnO2-based type-II core–shell structures can act as a good charge storage material due to efficient charge separation. Patra et al.36 have reported some interesting changes in electrical properties of core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods. Fig. 3d(i) shows the I–V characteristic for pure SnO2 and the core–shell SnO2–CdS heterostructure. They have found asymmetric and non-linear I–V characteristics for both the samples which indicate the formation of a Schottky barrier.1 The work function value of SnO2 is 4.5 eV, and that of Au is 5.1 eV.1 Thus, the Au electrode is made to facilitate an electron flow from the SnO2 to the Au electrode since the Fermi level of the SnO2 is initially higher than that of Au before the contact was made.103 This process results in the formation of an electron depleted region at the surface of the SnO2 that corresponds to a Schottky barrier between SnO2 and the Au electrode. It is also observed that the conductivity is lower in the core–shell structure compared to SnO2. It is explained with the help of a schematic model (Fig. 3d(ii)). The efficient charge separation occurs; electrons accumulate in the core whereas holes are in the shell (Fig. 3d(ii)). Thus, carrier transport is hampered due to the barrier and thus the conductivity is decreased. Kim et al.70 have shown that the conductivity of the pure SnO2 nanowire is 2.76 S cm−1 at room temperature, whereas the conductivity of the core–shell SnO2–In2O3 nanowires is 145.5 S m−1, which is 2 orders of magnitude higher than that of the pure SnO2 nanowire. The elevated conductivity of the core–shell nanowire is due to the formation of the ITO shell nanostructure caused by the successful incorporation of Sn into the In2O3 lattice. Archer et al.65 reported that the capacity value of core–shell SnO2@C nanocolloids is 440 mA h g−1 at a current density of 300 mA g−1. Park et al.104 have reported higher PCE (2.62%) for a bilayer structure of the SnO2 nanoparticle and the ZnO nanorod. The introduction of ZnO on the SnO2 layer improves significantly the electron transport and lifetime compared to the SnO2 film. It reveals that the significant modification of optical and electrical properties of SnO2 is observed by forming core–shell structures.
3.3. Photo-electrochemical properties
SnO2 does not respond to visible light excitation because of the wide band gap semiconductor (Eg = 3.6 eV).36 Compared with TiO2 and ZnO, SnO2 is a better electron acceptor since its conduction band (ECB = + 0.45 V vs. NHE at pH 1) lies −0.5 V more positive than that of TiO2 and ZnO. A wide variety of organic and organometallic molecules have already been employed to sensitize SnO2 electrodes.105,106 However, the suppression of the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers in SnO2 is essential for improving the efficiency of net charge transfer at the SnO2 electrolyte interface. A variety of approaches are considered to improve the charge separation in SnO2 systems. Most promising one is coupling with another semiconductor with different energy levels.107 Recently, considerable attention108,109 has been paid on studying SnO2-based coupled semiconductor systems such as core–shell structured SnO2–TiO2,37,38 SnO2–CdS,36 SnO2–CdSe,39–41,64,110etc. Such coupled semiconductor systems not only extend the photoresponse of large band gap semiconductors but also rectify the flow of photogenerated charge carriers39 and improve the efficiency of dye sensitization.108 Development of such semiconductor core–shell heterostructures are also considered to be interesting by changing the thickness of the shell.
Kamat et al.111 have reported the charge injection from an excited Ru(II) complex into SnO2 and core–shell SnO2–CdS to clarify the advantageous effect of the core–shell semiconductor systems. The preparation of Ru(II)-modified core–shell SnO2–CdS semiconductor films on a conducting glass electrode (OTE) is represented schematically in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4b illustrates the photocurrent response of OTE/SnO2 and OTE/SnO2/CdS electrodes before and after modification of the Ru(II) complex. It is found that both OTE/SnO2 and OTE/SnO2/CdS electrodes upon modification with the Ru(II) complex exhibit a prominent peak around 470 nm. A proposed mechanism is given for dye sensitized photocurrent generation in a core–shell semiconductor film in Fig. 4c. Nasr et al.64 have fabricated a photoelectrochemical cell with a core–shell SnO2–CdSe nanocrystalline semiconductor electrode and it is found that the coupling of CdSe with SnO2 leads to an improvement in the performance of OTE/SnO2/CdSe over OTE/CdSe cells in terms of photon-to-current conversion efficiency. Sun et al.112 have reported the optoelectronic properties of core–shell SnO2–CdS and it is found that core–shell SnO2–CdS shows an efficient reply to photons in the visible region. The incident photon-to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) is up to 6.5 in the range of 400 to 440 nm. In the visible region, the IPCE observed above is higher than that of the pure SnO2 cell. Bedja et al.107 have effectively prepared core–shell SnO2–TiO2 and have showed advanced photochromic and photocatalytic efficiencies of the as-prepared sample. The improved charge separation in this system has been substantiated by the enhanced efficiency of hole trapping monitored from the absorption peak at 360 nm. This core–shell system is useful for the oxidation of I− and SCN−. Vinodgopal et al.38 have investigated the photoelectrochemical properties of the core–shell SnO2–TiO2 films under both nitrogen- and oxygen-saturated conditions and as a function of varying compositions. Since the conduction band of SnO2 (0 V vs. NHE at pH 7) is lower than that of the TiO2 (−0.5 V vs. NHE at pH 7), the former acts as a sink for the photogenerated electrons.38 The holes move in the opposite direction from the electrons and accumulate on the TiO2 particle, thereby making charge separation more effective and thus enhancing the photoelectrochemical performance. Tennakone et al.113 have fabricated a dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells based on porous core–shell SnO2–ZnO and it is found that the core–shell SnO2–ZnO cell is more stable than the TiO2 cell. The cell made of SnO2–ZnO is superior because of the ballistical injection of the “hot carrier”. The TiO2-coated SnO2 nanoporous electrode is being used for DSSC applications.114 Gao et al.72 have reported a simple procedure to prepare SnO2–TiO2 core–shell photoanodes for DSSCs. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of the SnO2–TiO2 core–shell is 5.11% which is five times higher than that of SnO2 nanotube DSSCs (0.99%). This PCE value is also higher than that of TiO2 nanoparticle (P25) DSSCs (4.82%). Tennakone et al.115 have reported the improvement of photovoltage by a thin oxide layer coating on the surface of SnO2 because the shell layer acts as a barrier layer against recombination due to the higher conduction band edge of the shell material. Core–shell SnO2@AO (A = Ni, Cu, Zn and Mg) films were prepared and the effects of core–shell structures on photovoltaic properties are reported by Park et al.116 They have observed that the dye-sensitized core–shell films exhibit higher performance than the bare SnO2 film. Again, it reveals that the core–shell structure improves the photoelectrochemical property of SnO2 due to well-organized charge separation.
 Fig. 4  (a) A scheme for the preparation of Ru(II)-modified SnO2–CdS composite semiconductor films on a conducting glass electrode (OTE) (reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 1997, American Chemical Society). (b) The photocurrent action spectrum of OTE/SnO2 and OTE/SnO2/CdS electrodes before and after modification with the Ru(II) complex: (i) OTE/SnO2 (electrolyte: 0.02 M, NaOH), (ii) OTE/SnO2/CdS (electrolyte: 0.04 M I2 and 0.5 M LiI in acetonitrile), (iii) OTE/SnO2/Ru(II), and (iv) OTE/SnO2/CdS/Ru(II) (electrolyte: 0.04 M I2 and 0.5 M LiI in acetonitrile) (reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 1997, American Chemical Society). (c) The mechanism of dye sensitized photocurrent generation in a composite semiconductor film (reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 1997, American Chemical Society). 
3.4. Photocatalytic properties
Photocatalytic activity depends on the ability of the catalyst to create electron–hole pairs and formation of free radicals for secondary reactions. Most commonly used heterogeneous photocatalysts are semiconductors,117 SnO2 particularly has attracted great attention.33,118,119 During the photo-excitation, an electron is excited from the valance band to the conduction band, leaving behind a hole. The photogenerated electron and hole can recombine, or else the hole may react with an electron donor such as a reagent (e.g. a pollutant). However, the fast recombination rate of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs in pure SnO2 hampers,120 thus the core–shell structures of SnO2 are being used to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency by increasing the charge separation and extending the photo-responding range into the visible region.
Considering the band structures of a SnO2-based core–shell nanocatalyst,121,122 different work functions lead to the negatively charged carriers moving from SnO2 (the material with low work function) to other semiconductor shell materials (the one with a high work function) until their Fermi levels align; thus, an electrostatic field is created at the interface. At thermal equilibrium, the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) of SnO2 and other semiconductor shell materials bend, and a depletion layer forms around the interface. When the SnO2-based core–shell nanocatalyst is radiated with UV light with photon energy higher or equal to the band gaps of SnO2 and other semiconductors, electrons (e−) in the VB can be excited to the CB with simultaneous generation of the same amount of holes (h+) in the VB. The photogenerated electrons and holes are separated under the influence of the electrostatic field induced by different work functions. Thus, electrons move to the SnO2 side and holes to the shell side. Then, the electronic acceptors like adsorbed O2 can easily trap the photoelectrons to produce a superoxide anion radical (˙O2−).123 The formed ˙O2− might either attack organic molecules or provide hydroxyl radical species (˙OH) by reacting with photogenerated electrons.124 The photoinduced holes can be easily trapped by OH− to further produce a ˙OH species, which is an extremely strong oxidant for the partial or complete mineralization of organic chemicals.
There are a number of studies related to the photocatalytic activity of core–shell SnO2 such as SnO2–TiO2,63,125 SnO2–ZnO,126,127 SnO2–CdS,36etc. Zheng et al.127 have proposed a band structure model of the SnO2–ZnO heterojunction nanocatalyst (Fig. 5). From the proposed band structure model, it is seen that the core–shell SnO2–ZnO exhibits higher photocatalytic activity than pure SnO2 and ZnO. Wang et al.128 have fabricated core–shell SnO2–Fe2O3 heterostructures by a low-cost and environmentally friendly hydrothermal strategy. The as-fabricated SnO2–Fe2O3 exhibits excellent visible light or UV photocatalytic abilities mainly owing to the effective electron–hole separation at the SnO2–Fe2O3 interfaces. Pan et al.63 have investigated the photocatalytic behavior of the core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanowire by decomposition of methyl violet under UV illumination. Fig. 6a summarizes the results of the photocatalytic activity of the pure SnO2 nanowire and the core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanowire. The degradation rate of methyl violet was found to be 4.3% for pure SnO2 nanowire which was enhanced to 95.6% in core–shell structures. The enhanced photocatalytic activity in the core–shell nanowire is attributable to a higher surface area and the change in the electronic structures caused by Sn4+ doping in TiO2. The photocatalytic behavior of the core–shell SnO2–V2O5 nanowires for the photodegradation of toluidine blue “O” dye (TBO) under UV exposure was examined.69 The significant improvement of the photocatalytic activity of the core–shell SnO2–V2O5 nanowires is attributed mostly to its large specific surface area and efficient charge separation at the core–shell SnO2–V2O5 photocatalyst interface. It is demonstrated that photogenerated electrons occur from the conduction band of SnO2 which is then injected into the lower lying conduction band of V2O5, during the photoexcitation of SnO2–V2O5 nanowires. The photogenerated holes in the V2O5 valence band are transferred to the valence band of SnO2, which increases the spatial separation of the charge carriers, thereby reducing the probability of recombination relative to that of interfacial charge transfer. Shao et al.129 have investigated the photocatalytic activity of core–shell SnO2–ZnO nanofibers which is higher than the pure ZnO and SnO2 nanofibers due to the formation of the SnO2–ZnO heterojunction which could improve the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. Liu et al.68 have reported the photocatalytic properties of core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanofibers and it reveals that the core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanofibers exhibit enhanced photocatalytic efficiency. The band gap of anatase TiO2 and rutile SnO2 is 3.2 and 3.6 eV respectively; the work function of TiO2 is around 4.2 eV, its electron affinity is about 4.2 eV; and the work function of SnO2 is around 4.4 eV, its electron affinity is about 0.5 eV larger than that of TiO2.68 Accordingly, a Type II heterojunction is formed in the SnO2–TiO2 interface. The Fermi energy level of TiO2 is higher than that of SnO2 because of its smaller work function, so that electron transfer occurs from the conduction band of light activated TiO2 to the conduction band of light activated SnO2 and, conversely, hole transfer occurs from the valence band of SnO2 to the valence band of TiO2. The efficient charge separation increases the lifetime of the charge carriers and enhances the efficiency of the interfacial charge transfer to adsorbed substrates. Kar et al.36 have reported the photodecomposition of Congo red dye under UV irradiation for pure SnO2 nanorods and core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods. Fig. 6b illustrates the Congo red decomposition rate as a function of UV irradiation time. Pure SnO2 nanorods and core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods are checked for 240 min under identical conditions. It is found that 97% of Congo red dye is degraded by core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods after 240 min of UV irradiation, whereas, only 20% degradation is found for pure SnO2 nanorods. The core–shell SnO2–CdS nanorods enhance the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs due to the potential energy differences between SnO2 and CdS, which increases the photocatalytic activity. Vinodgopal et al.38 have demonstrated the photocatalytic activity of core–shell SnO2–TiO2 in the degradation of textile azo dye. Peng et al.34 have synthesized core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanotubes and found the enhanced photocatalytic property in the core–shell sample. The photocatalytic activity of the core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanotubes is found to be increased with increasing SnO2 content. A schematic diagram of the charge transfer process in the core–shell SnO2–TiO2 nanotube photocatalysts is given to understand the mechanism (Fig. 6c). In core–shell SnO2–TiO2, the absorption of a photon by TiO2 nanotubes leads to the promotion of an electron from the valence band to the conduction band of TiO2 nanotubes and then the electron is transferred to the conduction band of SnO2i.e. the conduction band of SnO2 acts as a sink for photogenerated electrons. While the photogenerated holes moves in the reverse direction, they accumulate in the valence band of the TiO2 nanotubes, which enhances the efficiency of charge separation. Melghit et al.35 have found that the Congo red photo-degradation increases when a core–shell sample is being used. The as-synthesized core–shell SnO2–SnS2 nanosheets show enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity, which is extraordinarily superior to the pure SnS2 and SnO2.86 This discussion clearly reveals that the core–shell structure improves the photocatalytic activity of SnO2 due to efficient charge separation.
 Fig. 5  Energy-band diagram and photocatalytic mechanism of SnO2–ZnO heterojunction nanocatalysts (vac = vacuum level; Ef = Fermi level; CB = conduction band; VB = valence band) (reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 6  (a) Comparison of the decay in absorption for SnO2 wires, SnO2–TiO2 wires, SnO2 films and TiO2 films (reprinted with permission from ref. 63, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) The photodegradation rate of Congo red by different photocatalysts (SnO2 and SnO2–CdS) under UV light irradiation for 4 h (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) A schematic diagram of the charge-transfer process in the SnO2–TiO2 nanotube composite photocatalysts. 
3.5. Gas sensing properties
In principle, gas sensing by semiconducting metal oxide is based on the oxidation–reduction reaction of the detected gases flowing on the semiconductor surface, which causes a significant resistance change in proportion to the gas concentration.130,131 For a given type of material, the sensor performance depends on various factors such as the working temperature, exposed crystal planes, grain size, doping or surface modification, and so on.
Among the different semiconducting metal oxides, an SnO2 gas sensor was initially proposed132 and patented in 1962.133 SnO2 is one of the most significant material for use as a gas sensor for domestic, commercial and industrial purposes due to its low operating temperatures, high sensitivities, mechanical simplicity and low manufacturing costs.134,135 Extensive research has been conducted on understanding the chemical and electronic mechanisms that preside over SnO2 sensor performance and on extending SnO2 sensors to detection of other gases, including trace amounts of toxic gases.136,137 Unfortunately, lot of difficulties exists with SnO2 sensors and this is typically due to the low surface area and low stability. SnO2 sensors often provide an undesired signal when an inert gas is present in the environment. SnO2 sensors also tend to lack long-term stability and require a moderately high operating temperature. SnO2-based sensors also involve long response and recovery times. One fashionable way to overcome these problems is to construct various SnO2-based core–shell heterostructures.
For SnO2, the sensing mechanism is typically explained by the space-charge model.138 In this model, the sensitivity of SnO2 is strongly dependent on the change of the space-charge length under different gas atmospheres, resulting in higher sensitivity of the sensing materials with a smaller size.139 However, the electron transport mechanism of the core–shell heterostructures should be significantly different from that of the pure SnO2 and other shell materials due to the formation of heterojunctions at their interfaces. Electron transport is thus expected to be strongly tuned by the heterojunction barrier. Jin et al.140 have presented energy band structures [Fig. 7(i)] for as-synthesized core–shell SnO2–Fe2O3 heterostructures. The band gaps of SnO2 and Fe2O3 at room temperature are 3.6 eV and 2.1 eV. Thus the energy band structure of the SnO2–Fe2O3 heterojunction is schematically depicted in Fig. 7(i), where φeff denotes the effective barrier height considering the contribution of other factors such as temperature to the barrier height. Therefore, it requires that the transport of electrons should overcome the heterojunction barriers.141 The φeff will increase in air because electrons are trapped both in SnO2 and Fe2O3 induced by adsorbed oxygen species as shown in Fig. 7(i). When the core–shell heterostructures are exposed to ethanol vapor, the reaction between the adsorbed oxygen species and the ethanol molecules leads to the release of the trapped electrons back simultaneously into the conduction bands of the SnO2 and Fe2O3, resulting in a decrease in the width and height of the barrier potential at their interfaces [Fig. 7(i)]. Thus, the conductivity of the heterojunction will consequently be significantly increased and as a result high sensitivity of the SnO2–Fe2O3 heterojunctions to ethanol is observed. Xue et al.142 have fabricated core–shell PN-junction nanorods using N-type SnO2 coated with P-type CuO which is extremely sensitive to H2S at room temperature. They have proposed an energy band diagram which is shown in Fig. 7(ii) to describe the response and recovery process of core–shell CuO–SnO2 PN-junction nanorod sensors against H2S. In air, the barriers at the PN-junctions greatly block the electrons transporting through the nanorods. After putting the sensors in H2S, the CuO nanoparticles are converted to CuS nanoparticles by the following chemical reaction:143 CuO + H2S = CuS + H2O(1)
 Fig. 7  (i) A schematic diagram of the energy band structure of the core–shell SnO2–α-Fe2O3 heterostructures: (a) in air, (b) in ethanol (reprinted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2008, IOP publishing) and (ii) energy band diagram of CuO–SnO2 PN-junction nanorod sensors showing the H2S sensing process (reprinted with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society). 
Since the work function of metallic CuS is lower than that of SnO2, the band bends downward and no barrier exists between them, which makes easy flow of the electrons. Thus, the resistance of the sensors in H2S is much lower than that in air. Chen et al.144 have productively prepared core–shell SnO2–Fe2O3 heterostructures which exhibits a dramatic improvement in ethanol sensing characteristics including strong sensor response, low working temperature and a good selectivity. Here, the heterojunction barrier and the contact barrier are influenced by the adsorption and desorption of oxygen species which control the electron transport in the core–shell nanorods. Liu et al.145 have synthesized core–shell SnO2–Fe2O3 nanotubes and studied the toluene sensing properties. Their results revealed that the optimum operating temperature to detect toluene is 260 °C, the lowest detecting limit to toluene is 50 ppb, and the response value is 2.0. Gao et al.59 have successfully prepared core–shell SnO2–CdS heterostructures with high gas sensing properties. Their results are depicted in Fig. 8a which shows the characteristic response curves of the SnO2 sensors and the core–shell SnO2–CdS sensors. The jump of the conductance is due to the variation of the carrier density in SnO2 that relates to the absorption–desorption of oxygen. From Fig. 6a, an improved ethanol-sensing performance of the core–shell sample is observed. Considering the efficient charge separation in SnO2–CdS core–shell heterostructures, it is suggested that the CdS shell would be served as an additional electron source which significantly improve the electron conduction in SnO2. The SnO2–In2O3 core–shell system exhibits significantly higher gas sensitivities than pure SnO2.66 The In2O3 shell provided improved sensor performance via electronic interaction with SnO2. Jia et al.31 have synthesized a hierarchical arrangement of core–shell SnO2–ZnO for gas sensing applications. A favorable response to ethanol vapor even at a very low concentration of 10 ppm is monitored. They demonstrated that the detection limit of the core–shell SnO2–ZnO sensor is in the range of 10 to 100 ppm of ethanol with timely response and recovery. The improved gas sensitivity of the core–shell SnO2–ZnO sensor is attributed to the larger grain size, porosity and active surface state which would allow the test gases to be adsorbed on its surface. Wang et al.146 have developed an innovative model for a chemical sensor which is Au nanoparticle-decorated porous SnO2 hollow spheres. Their model exhibits outstanding sensing performances by using ethanol as a probe molecule. The improved sensing features are attributable to the improved gas diffusion and mass transport induced by the unique porous structure. Choi et al.32 have investigated the gas sensing properties of core–shell SnO2–ZnO nanofibers. They have measured the dynamic performance of the core–shell SnO2–ZnO nanofiber sensor to O2 and NO2 gas. It is found that the resistance of the sensor increases upon exposure to O2, while it decreases upon the exclusion of O2. The better sensitivity of the core–shell nanofiber sensor is attributed to the change in resistance due to both the surface depletion layer of each core–shell nanofiber and the potential barriers built in the junctions caused by the combination of homo- and hetero-interfaces. Zhang et al.58 have examined the gas sensing properties of the rattle-type SnO2–SnO2 core–shell structure and the results are illustrated in Fig. 8b. Fig. 8b(i) illustrate the response of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 sensors to ethanol under an operating temperature of 300 °C. They have observed 6.4 times elevated gas response for the rattle-type core–shell nanospheres compared to solid nanospheres in Fig. 8b(ii). Fig. 8b(iii) represents the responses of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres to 50 ppm of C2H5OH, H2 and CO. The enhanced ethanol sensing characteristics of rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres are mainly attributed to different morphologies, i.e., a perfect rattle-type structure and hollow structures. They have stated that the increased effective contact surface area will increase the amount of the target gas absorbed onto the surface of materials. Wu et al.67 have synthesized polypyrrole-coated SnO2 hollow sphere core–shell hybrid materials and found that the core–shell hybrid acquires very fast response and enhanced sensitivity to ammonia gas at room temperature. This core–shell hybrid sensor shows almost a linear response to the NH3 concentration which implies that the as-prepared core–shell hybrids have a great potential value for gas sensor applications. They have suggested that the SnO2 hollow spheres are enwrapped and interconnected with polypyrrole coatings, which could be an excellent pathway for electron transfer in the gas sensing process. Core–shell SnO2–Fe2O3 has been synthesized by Rumyantseva et al.147 and the high sensitivity is ascribed to its high specific surface area and reduced grain size. The Ga2O3–SnO2 core–shell nanowire148 sensor showed an order of magnitude higher gas response toward ethanol against other gases, such as H2, CO, and NH3. Yu et al.149 have developed SnO2 nanotubes loaded with Ag2O nanoparticles to improve gas sensing performance towards ethanol and butanone. The enhanced gas sensing behavior is attributed to the improvement of surface reactions involving adsorption, dissociation and the ionization of oxygen by the occurrence of Ag2O. The above discussion ascertains that the gas sensing property of SnO2 is significantly influenced by core–shell structures.
 Fig. 8  (a) Response curves of the SnO2 nanobelt sensors and the SnO2@CdS core–shell heterostructure sensors to 100 ppm ethanol vapors in air at a working temperature of 400 °C (reprinted with permission from ref. 59, Copyright 2004, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) (i) Response transients of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres to various concentrations at 300 °C, (ii) gas sensing principles of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres, and (iii) responses of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres to 50 ppm of C2H5OH, H2 and CO (reprinted with permission from ref. 58, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4. Summary and perspectives
This study undoubtedly demonstrates that the core–shell SnO2 nanocrystals could pave the way for developing new challenging devices because core–shell structures improve different physical properties, e.g. electrical, optical, electrochemical, etc. Novel building blocks can be produced for applications in the areas of solar cells, catalytic support materials, transparent electrodes and solid-state chemical sensors. The significance of these findings goes away from the basic science of core–shell SnO2 nanocrystals and it is found to impact on diverse applications in optical, electrical, gas sensing, photocatalytic and photo-electrochemical fields. The development of SnO2 nanocrystal–graphene composites may offer an imperative landmark for the applications in light energy harvesting and solar cells. The design of innovative optical-based materials based on conjugated polymer nanoparticle-SnO2 nanocrystals will provide new possibilities for optoelectronic applications. Although quite a lot of matters are to be addressed, the broad interest in SnO2-based applications is predictable to develop in the coming years because applications are still in the developing period. Consequently, further investigations in this field are essential for extensive understanding of the phenomenon.
Acknowledgements
“DAE-SRC Outstanding Investigator Award” is acknowledged for financial support. Special thanks to Mr Gopal Krishna Manna, IACS for the graphic design.
References
A. Kar and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4375 CAS .
X. Xu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kar and A. Patra, Trans. Indian Ceram. Soc., 2013, 72, 89 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Harrison and M. J. Willet, Nature, 1988, 332, 337 CrossRef .
S. Ferrere, A. Zaban and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4490 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Wang, Y. J. Zhu and L. X. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 50 CAS .
J. Zhu, Z. Lu, S. T. Aruna, D. Aurbach and A. Gedanken, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2557 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. He, J. C. Campbell, R. C. Murphy, M. F. Arendt and J. S. Swinnea, J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 3131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Jiang and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 16176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xi and J. Ye, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 2302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sain, A. Kar, A. Patra and S. K. Pradhan, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1079 RSC .
Z. Liu, D. Zhang, S. Han, C. Li, T. Tang, W. Jin, X. Liu and C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kolmakov, D. O. Klenov, Y. Lilach, S. Stemmer and M. Moskouits, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Seeger, P. K. Redlich and M. R. Uhle, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Bando, Q. Liu and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 493 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Chang, C. W. Shih, C. D. Chen, W. C. Lai and C. R. Wang, Langmuir, 1999, 9, 1819 Search PubMed .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Chowdhury, S. Saha and A. Patra, Solid State Commun., 2004, 131, 785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cheng, J. M. Russel, W. Shi, L. Zhang and E. T. Samulski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, D. Yang, G. Yu, H. Zhang and K. Yao, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2386 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Zhang, L. D. Sun, J. L. Yin and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1022 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pang, S. Chen, Y. Koltypin, A. Zaban, S. Feng and A. Gedanken, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 723 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gu, S. Wang, H. Cao and C. Li, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095708 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ohgi, T. Maeda, E. Hosono, S. Fujihara and H. Imai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 1079 CAS .
X. L. Ma, Y. Li and Y. L. Zhu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 376, 794 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Dai, J. L. Gole, J. D. Stout and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1274 CrossRef CAS .
M. D'Arienzo, L. Armelao, A. Cacciamani, C. M. Mari, S. Polizzi, R. Ruffo, R. Scotti, A. Testino, L. Wahba and F. Morazzoni, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4083 CrossRef .
Q. Wan and T. H. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3841 RSC .
X. Jia, H. Fan, L. Qin and C. Yang, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2010, 31, 1405 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Choi, J. Y. Park and S. S. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 465603 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wu, H. Cao, S. Yin, X. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17893 CAS .
L. R. Hou, C. Z. Yuan and Y. Peng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 139, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Melghit, M. S. Al-Rubaei and I. Al-Amri, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kar, S. Kundu and A. Patra, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10222 RSC .
K. Vinodgopal and P. V. Kamat, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vinodgopal, I. Bedja and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 2180 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 10769 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vogel, P. Hoyer and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsumoto, T. Matsunaga, T. Sakata, H. Mori and H. Yoneyama, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 4283 CrossRef CAS .
N. Barsan, M. Schweizer-Berberich and W. Göpel, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 365, 287 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. Nanoeng. Nanomanuf., 2012, 2, 143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Batzill, Sensors, 2006, 6, 1345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ortmans, C. Moucheron and A. K. Mesmaeker, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 168, 233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, H. Shen and S. Mathur, J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 2012, 917320 Search PubMed  , (12 pages).
M. A. Olopade, O. E. Awe, A. M. Awobode and N. Alu, The African Review of Physics, 2012, 7, 177 Search PubMed .
H. Wang and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 123 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ghosh Chaudhuri and S. Paria, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kar, A. Datta and A. Patra, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 916 RSC .
S. Khanchandani, S. Kundu, A. Patra and A. K. Ganguli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5558 CAS .
H. Kim, M. Achermann, L. P. Balet, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, M. Horie, M. Konno, B. Rodríguez-GonzaLez and L. M. Liz-Marzan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7420 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Luo, Q. Fan, M. Suzuki, I. S. Suzuki, M. H. Engelhard, Y. Lin, N. Kim, J. Q. Wang and C. J. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bao, J. F. Li, B. Ren, J. L. Yao, R. A. Gu and Z. Q. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 345 CAS .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng, B. Liu, H. Yang, W. Zhou, L. Sun, R. Chen, S. F. Yu, J. Zhang, H. Gong, H. Sun and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, T. Fei, J. Deng, Z. Lou, R. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18111 RSC .
T. Gao and T. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2558 RSC .
R. Kennedy, I. Martini, G. Hartland and P. V. Kamat, Proc. – Indian Acad. Sci., Chem. Sci., 1997, 109, 497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, F. Wu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7225 CAS .
J. Pan, S. Heuhne, H. Shen, L. Xiao, P. Born, W. Mader and S. Mathur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17265 CAS .
C. Nasr, P. V. Kamat and S. Hotchandani, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 420, 201 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, J. S. Chen, P. Chen and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2868 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. McCue and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1009 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Xu, Y. Wang, H. Xia, S. Zhang, X. Guo and S. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1662 CAS .
C. Wang, C. Shao, X. Zhang and Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shahid, I. Shakir, S. Yang and D. J. Kang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, I. Hwang, S. J. Kwon, H. Kang, K. Park, Y. Choi, K. Choi and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, B. He, S. Yuan, L. Xing, Z. Chen and C. Ma, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 395702 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gao, X. Li, B. Lu, L. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Teng, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Pana and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3475 RSC .
X. Wu, S. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Du, H. Fang, Y. Ling and Z. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11151 RSC .
X. Xue, Z. Chen, L. Xing, S. Yuana and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5205 RSC .
Z. Gu, L. Zou, Z. Fang, W. Zhu and X. Zhong, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 135604 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7019 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xie, U. Kolb, J. Li, T. Basch and A. Mews, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 207 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kar and A. Patra, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3608 RSC .
F. C. Hoener, A. A. Kristi, A. J. Bard, A. Campion, M. A. Fox, T. E. Mallouk, S. E. Webber and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 3812 CrossRef .
W. Chen, Y. Qiu, Y. Zhong, K. S. Wong and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 3127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tamez Uddin, Y. Nicolas, C. Olivier, T. Toupance, L. Servant, M. M. Müller, H.-J. Kleebe, J. Ziegler and W. Jaegermann, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 7764 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shi, M. Zhou, D. Song, X. Pan, J. Fu, J. Zhou, S. Ma and T. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 10383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiao, Z. Zheng, L. Zhang and L. Xiao, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 2778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, G. Meng, G. Zhang and L. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1989 Search PubMed .
X. Zhou, T. Zhou, J. Hu and J. Li, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5627 RSC .
A. Kar, S. Kundu and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 118 CAS .
P. Reiss, M. Protière and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Xu, Y. L. Zhu, X. L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Solid State Commun., 2007, 142, 441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Kim and S. H. Shim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 253, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Blattner, C. Klingshirn and R. Helbig, Solid State Commun., 1980, 33, 341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeong, S. P. Choi, C. I. Chang, D. C. Shin, J. S. Park, B. T. Lee, Y. J. Park and H. J. Song, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 595 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Feng, J. Ma, F. Yang, F. Ji, F. J. Zong, C. Luan and H. L. Ma, Solid State Commun., 2007, 144, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cervantes, Q. Williams, M. Cote, O. Zakharov and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 17585 CrossRef CAS .
K. Seo, T. Lim, S. Kim, H.-L. Park and S. Ju, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 255201 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Konenkamp, R. C. Word and C. Schlegel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 6004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Domashevskaya, N. M. A. Hadia, S. V. Ryabtsev and P. V. Seredin, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 10603 CrossRef .
S. Sun, G. Meng, G. Zhang and L. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1988 CAS .
H. W. Kim, M. A. Kebede and H. S. Kim, Opt. Mater., 2009, 31, 1853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Jung, W. I. Park, H. D. Cheong, G.-C. Yi and H. M. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Jarzebski and J. P. Marton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 299 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Pianaro, P. R. Bueno, P. Olivi, E. Longo and J. A. Varela, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 1998, 9, 159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, X. Xia, Z. Wang, Y. Li, J. Li and C. Gu, Microelectron. Eng., 2008, 85, 1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Huu, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, C.-R. Lee and N.-G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1038 CAS .
T. Miyasaka, T. Watanabe, A. Fujishima and K. Honda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6657 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, M. A. Fox and A. J. Fatiadi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bedja and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 9182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotchandani and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1992, 191, 320 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotchandani and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 6834 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and P. V. Kamat, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 347, 451 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nasr, S. Hotchandani, W. Y. Kim, R. H. Schmehl and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7480 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, S. Kang and J. Mu, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2009, 30, 384 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tennakone, G. K. R. Senadeera, V. P. S. Perera, I. R. M. Kottegoda and L. A. A. De Silva, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2474 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chappel, S.-G. Chen and A. Zaban, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3336 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. P. Bandaranayake, M. K. Indika Senevirathna, P. M. G. M. Prasad Weligamuwa and K. Tennakone, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, G.-W. Lee, W. Kang, D.-K. Lee, M.-J. Ko, K. Kim and N.-G. Park, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 3093 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone and A. V. Emeline, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 673 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kong, Y. Li, X. Chen, T. Tian, P. Fang, F. Zheng and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Yang, S. J. An, W. I. Park, G. C. Yi and W. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1661 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, C. Chen, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng, K. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10773 CAS .
R. Konenkamp, R. C. Word and M. Godinez, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1858 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu and W. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 2928 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Wang, B. Xu, J. Zhao, B. Mai, P. Peng, G. Sheng and J. Fu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 168, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dodd, A. McKinley, M. Saunders and T. Tsuzuki, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 692 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, Y. Zheng, C. Chen, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng, K. Wei and J. Zhu, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Niu, F. Huang, L. Cui, P. Huang, Y. Yu and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, L. Zhang, H. Xue, C. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7920 CAS .
G. W. Ho, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2011, 3, 150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yamazoe, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 108, 2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Seiyama, A. Kato, K. Fujiishi and M. Nagatani, Anal. Chem., 1962, 34, 1502 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Ihokura and J. Watson, The Stannic Oxide Gas Sensors, Principles and Applications, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  1994 Search PubMed.
N. Yamazoe, Sens. Actuators, B, 1992, 6, 9 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Jimenez, A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, J. P. Espinos, A. Justo and A. Fernandez, Sens. Actuators, B, 1996, 31, 29 CrossRef CAS .
W. Göpel and K. D. Schierbaum, Sens. Actuators, B, 1995, 26, 1 CrossRef .
N. Yamazoe, Sens. Actuators, B, 1991, 5, 7 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Chen, X. Y. Xue, Y. G. Wang and T. H. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 233503 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Chen, X. Y. Xue, Y. G. Wang and T. H. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 083105 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Zhu, X. Shi, M. Cao and H. Jin, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 205603 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Weis, R. Lipperheide, U. Wille and S. Brehme, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, L. Xing, Y. Chen, S. Shi, Y. Wang and T. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12157 CAS .
A. Chowdhuri, V. Gupta, K. Sreenivas, R. Kumar, S. Mozumdar and P. K. Patanjali, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Chen, C.-L. Zhu, L.-J. Wang, P. Gao, M.-S. Cao and X.-L. Shi, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 045502 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shan, C. Liu, L. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Bo and X. Chi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6376 CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Wu, M. Xu, X. Guo and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6453 RSC .
M. Rumyantseva, V. Kovalenko, A. Gaskov, E. Makshina, V. Yuschenko, I. Ivanova, A. Ponzoni, G. Faglia and E. Comini, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 118, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-G. Jang, W.-S. Kim, D.-H. Kim and S.-H. Hong, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 26, 2322 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Guo, W. Xu, H. Yao, M. Li, J. Liu, X. Huang and S. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2049 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Present address: Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, UK.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Arik Kar	Dr Arik Kar (born 1984) obtained his B.Sc (Hons) in chemistry from Serampore College, University of Calcutta in 2005. Later he obtained his M.Sc in chemistry from the University of Calcutta (Presidency College) with specialization in inorganic chemistry in 2007. Later he completed his Ph.D in Materials Science from Jadavpur University in 2013. He has been awarded a prestigious “Newton International Fellowship” from the Royal Society for the academic year 2014–2016. He is now continuing his research as a “Newton Fellow” in the “University of Cambridge”. His research interests include synthesis and characterization of different colloidal semiconductors, rare earth doped semiconductors and core–shell nanomaterials.
Amitava Patra	Prof. Amitava Patra (born 1965) received his Ph.D (1993) from Jadavpur University, India. He is now Professor at the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, India. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2014. He is the recipient of C. N. R. Rao National Prize for Chemical Research, DAE-SRC Outstanding Investigator Award, A. V. Rama Rao Foundation Prize in Chemistry, AsiaNANO 2010 Award, CRSI Bronze Medal, Ramanujan Fellowship, and MRSI Medal. He is an Advisory board member of Nanoscale and Journal of Physical Chemistry and others. He is an author or co-author of more than 151 scientific papers, 3 book chapters and 2 Indian patents. His research interests include decay dynamics, energy transfer, and electron transfer of QD, Au nanoparticles, polymer and porphyrin based luminescent nanoparticles, and rare-earth based materials for up- and down- conversion luminescence.

 	Fig. 1  (a) A scheme for the preparation of the SnO2–CdS heterostructure (below the figure is the TEM image of a core–shell SnO2–CdS heterostructure) (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the SnO2 rattle-type nanoreactor (below the figure is the TEM image of SnO2 rattle-type nanospheres) (reprinted with permission from ref. 58, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

SnO2–C	Hydrothermal	Potassium stannate trihydrate, glucose	
65

SnO2–In2O3	Colloidal	Tin chloride hexahydrate, indium chloride monohydrate, ammonium hydroxide	
66

SnO2–polypyrrole	Colloidal	Stannous chloride dehydrate, ferric chloride, pyrrole monomer, glucose	
67

SnO2–TiO2	Hydrothermal	Tin chloride pentahydrate, titanium butyloxide, poly-vinyl pyrrolidone	
68

SnO2–V2O5	Hydrothermal	Tin(II) chloride, vanadium oxytripropoxide, ammonium metavanadate	
69

SnO2–In2O3	Thermal evaporation	Metallic Sn, metallic In, si substrate	
70

SnO2–WO3	Colloidal	Tin(II) chloride dihydrate, sodium tungstate dihydrate, sodium chloride	
71

SnO2–TiO2	Colloidal	Tin dichloride dihydrate, titanium chloride, polyethylene glycol, N,N-dimethyl formamide	
72

SnO2–TiO2	Hydrothermal	Tin dichloride dihydrate, ammonium fluoride, ethylene glycol	
73

SnO2–MoO3	Colloidal	Tin dichloride dihydrate, ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate, nitric acid	
74


 	Fig. 2  (a) X-ray powder diffraction patterns of SnO2 nanorods, CdS nanoparticles, SnO2 + CdS mixture and SnO2–CdS heterostructure (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) X-ray powder diffraction patterns of pure SnO2 nanorods and SnO2–CdS heterostructure (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and HRTEM images of SnO2 nanorods (i and ii) and the SnO2–CdS heterostructure (iii and iv). The insets of (ii) and (iv) show the SAED patterns of the SnO2 nanorods and the SnO2–CdS heterostructure. (v) and (vi) are STEM-HAADF images of a single SnO2–CdS heterostructure nanorod. EDS elemental mapping of the spatial distribution of Sn (vii), O (viii), Cd (ix) and S (x) elements (xi) shows an STEM-HAADF image of a single SnO2–CdS heterostructure nanorod and EDS line scans across a single SnO2–CdS nanorod (xii–xv) for Sn, O, Cd and S elements. The TEM-EDS concentration line profile of Sn, O, Cd and S, measured along the line across the length (xvi) (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) PL spectra of core–shell SnO2–ZnS nanowires (i–v) under the same conditions at room temperature. The inset is the relative intensity as a function of ZnS shell treatment time (reprinted with permission from ref. 62, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) Photoluminescence (PL) decays of SnO2 nanorods and SnO2–CdS heterostructures at 400 nm emission wavelength (inset plot is the corresponding PL spectrum at 295 nm) (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Schematic model proposed for different relaxation processes in SnO2 nanorods and SnO2–CdS heterostructure nanorods (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) (i) Current vs. voltage characteristics for SnO2 nanorods and the SnO2–CdS heterostructure when the voltage is applied between Au and Au terminals in a forward bias direction and (ii) schematic representation of the band gap alignment in the type-II SnO2–CdS heterostructure to show the electron–hole separation (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A scheme for the preparation of Ru(II)-modified SnO2–CdS composite semiconductor films on a conducting glass electrode (OTE) (reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 1997, American Chemical Society). (b) The photocurrent action spectrum of OTE/SnO2 and OTE/SnO2/CdS electrodes before and after modification with the Ru(II) complex: (i) OTE/SnO2 (electrolyte: 0.02 M, NaOH), (ii) OTE/SnO2/CdS (electrolyte: 0.04 M I2 and 0.5 M LiI in acetonitrile), (iii) OTE/SnO2/Ru(II), and (iv) OTE/SnO2/CdS/Ru(II) (electrolyte: 0.04 M I2 and 0.5 M LiI in acetonitrile) (reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 1997, American Chemical Society). (c) The mechanism of dye sensitized photocurrent generation in a composite semiconductor film (reprinted with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 1997, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  Energy-band diagram and photocatalytic mechanism of SnO2–ZnO heterojunction nanocatalysts (vac = vacuum level; Ef = Fermi level; CB = conduction band; VB = valence band) (reprinted with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Comparison of the decay in absorption for SnO2 wires, SnO2–TiO2 wires, SnO2 films and TiO2 films (reprinted with permission from ref. 63, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). (b) The photodegradation rate of Congo red by different photocatalysts (SnO2 and SnO2–CdS) under UV light irradiation for 4 h (reprinted with permission from ref. 36, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) A schematic diagram of the charge-transfer process in the SnO2–TiO2 nanotube composite photocatalysts.	 
CuO + H2S = CuS + H2O	(1)

 	Fig. 7  (i) A schematic diagram of the energy band structure of the core–shell SnO2–α-Fe2O3 heterostructures: (a) in air, (b) in ethanol (reprinted with permission from ref. 140, Copyright 2008, IOP publishing) and (ii) energy band diagram of CuO–SnO2 PN-junction nanorod sensors showing the H2S sensing process (reprinted with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Response curves of the SnO2 nanobelt sensors and the SnO2@CdS core–shell heterostructure sensors to 100 ppm ethanol vapors in air at a working temperature of 400 °C (reprinted with permission from ref. 59, Copyright 2004, Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) (i) Response transients of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres to various concentrations at 300 °C, (ii) gas sensing principles of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres, and (iii) responses of solid, hollow and rattle-type SnO2 nanospheres to 50 ppm of C2H5OH, H2 and CO (reprinted with permission from ref. 58, Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
Footnote
† Present address: Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, UK.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
