Development of defective molybdenum oxides for photocatalysis, thermal catalysis, and photothermal catalysis  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC02658A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC02658A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 8466-8479Development of defective molybdenum oxides for photocatalysis, thermal catalysis, and photothermal catalysis

        
          
            Hao 
            Ge
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yasutaka 
            Kuwahara
          
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Hiromi 
            Yamashita
          
          
        
      *ab
aDivision of Materials and Manufacturing Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamada-oka, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. E-mail: kuwahara@mat.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp; yamashita@mat.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
bInnovative Catalysis Science Division, Institute for Open and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives (OTRI), Osaka University, 2-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
cJST, PRESTO, 4-1-8 Hon-Cho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
Received 
      10th May 2022
    , Accepted 30th June 2022First published on 1st July 2022AbstractThe localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of noble metals has been investigated for decades for applications in various catalysis reactions and optical research studies, but its development has been hampered by inefficient light absorption and high costs. In comparison, the creation of less expensive semiconductors (metal oxides) with strong plasmonic absorption is an appealing option, particularly defective molybdenum oxide (HxMoO3−y) has received considerable attention and investigation as a promising plasmonic material for a variety of catalytic reactions (photocatalysis, thermocatalysis, photothermal catalysis, etc.).The LSPR effect of HxMoO3−y can be tuned throughout a broad spectrum range from visible to near-infrared (NIR) by altering the doping amount by electrochemical control, chemical reduction, or photochemical control. Notably, defects (oxygen vacancies) in HxMoO3−y arise in conjunction with the LSPR effect, resulting in the formation of unique and useful active sites in a range of catalytic processes. In this review, we explore the formation mechanism of HxMoO3−y with plasmonic features and discuss its applications in photocatalysis, thermocatalysis, and photothermal catalysis.
Hao Ge
Hao Ge received his master's degree in Chemistry and Materials Science from Shanghai Normal University in 2019. He is currently a PhD course student in the Department of Engineering at Osaka University. His current research interests focus on the plasmonic photothermal catalytic CO2 conversion based on molybdenum-based catalysts.
Yasutaka Kuwahara
Yasutaka Kuwahara received his PhD degree in Engineering from Osaka University in 2011. After the fellowship, he was a researcher at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan, in 2012–2014. He was appointed as an assistant professor at Osaka University in 2014–2019, appointed as a lecturer in 2019, and has been an associate professor since 2021. His current research interests include the design of nanostructured catalysts with multi-functionalities using porous materials and their applications to green chemical reactions and the conversion of energy and resources.
Hiromi Yamashita
Hiromi Yamashita has been a professor at Osaka University since 2004. He received his PhD degree from Kyoto University in 1987. He was an assistant professor at Tohoku University and an associate professor at Osaka Prefecture University. He has been the editor of Applied Catalysis B: Environmental (2006–), the president of Asia-Pacific Association of Catalysis Societies (2019–), and the president of Catalysis Society of Japan (2019–2020). His research interests include the design of single-site photocatalysts and nanostructured catalysts.
1. Introduction
Molybdenum oxide is one of the versatile transition-metal-oxide semiconductors with a broad range of applications in thermal materials, electronics, catalysts, sensors, biological systems, and electrochromic systems. Due to their unique properties, MoO3 is among the most flexible and functional optical and electronic oxides. Importantly, it exists in a variety of stoichiometries, ranging from the full stoichiometry MoO3 with a large bandgap (ca. 3.0 eV) to the more conductive reduced oxides MoO3−x (0 < x < 1). The generation of oxygen vacancies is accompanied by the conversion of Mo6+ ions to Mo5+ or Mo4+. The optical appearance of molybdenum oxide changes with the degree of reduction, from white to blue and eventually up to black.1 This changing redox state holds tremendous potential for photocatalysis and thermal catalysis applications.2–4
For academic research and industrial applications, a variety of synthetic methods (liquid and gas phases) have been developed to synthesize molybdenum-based oxides. By varying the fabrication technique, various nanostructures of molybdenum oxide are achievable, including nanosheets, nanorods, quantum dots, nanobelts, porous nanostructures, and other nano-morphologies.5–9 Typically, crystals of MoO3 show orthogonal, monoclinic, and hexagonal phases, which are composed of side and corner-sharing MoO6 octahedra.10 The modification of layered MoO3 intercalation has been widely reported, particularly, using the intercalation of H+ and alkali ions, which tunes the chemical, physical, and structural properties for expanding the applications in energy storage, photochemical systems, and electrochemical systems.11 Recently, researchers have focused on the optical properties of molybdenum oxide, in which defect states were introduced by intercalating H+ ions into the layers, thereby affecting the optical absorption and photocatalytic activity of MoO3.12 Meanwhile, the generation of oxygen vacancies in molybdenum oxide facilitates the adsorption of reaction substrates (H2O, CO2, N2, etc.), leading to a reduction in the reaction energy barrier and an enhancement of the catalytic activity.13–15 Furthermore, a novel localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect is established on hydrogen-doped MoO3 as a result of the increased surface free electron concentration, exhibiting a promising application in plasmonic-assisted photothermal catalysis.16–20 Importantly, plasmonic semiconductors, unlike conventional plasmonic metals, can modulate the shape, size, type of dopant, and dopant concentration of the semiconductors using a combination of chemical, photochemical, and electrochemical methods to alter the free carrier concentration, overall electron scattering, and surrounding near-field enhancement within the nanocrystal to achieve a tunable LSPR effect. Moreover, when a sufficient number of hydrogen atoms are intercalated, defective HxMoO3−y exhibits a broader plasmonic absorption in the visible region.21
Despite growing interest in molybdenum oxide and a large body of research on the material, comprehensive studies of MoO3 for environmental catalysis remain rare. This paper focuses on the nanostructure, defect engineering, and optical characteristics of molybdenum oxide, summarizes its applications by the utilization of plasmonic effects, oxygen vacancy, and photothermal effects to alleviate environmental and energy crises, and provides theoretical knowledge for future understanding and exploitation of molybdenum oxide materials.
2. Fundamental properties
2.1. Crystal structures of MoO3
Molybdenum oxides and their hydrated compounds are quite structurally diverse (Fig. 1), in which the orthorhombic phase and the sub-stable monoclinic phase are the two most prevalent structural phases of MoO3 based on the MoO6 octahedral structural block, each with unique physicochemical properties. In addition, ε-MoO3 and the relatively stable hexagonal phase h-MoO3 are also well-known.22–24 The unique layered crystal structure of orthorhombic α-MoO3 offers the possibility of building two-dimensional (2D) morphologies that have gained widespread attention in catalytic reactions. The layers consist of a double layer of edge-sharing and distorted MoO6 octahedra with a thickness of 0.7 nm. The distance between the two layers is 1.4 nm. In the [001] direction, planar double-layer sheets of distorted MoO6 octahedra create zigzag rows; in the [100] direction, corner-sharing rows are formed.25 The deformed MoO6 octahedra are connected vertically [010] by weak van der Waals (vdW) forces, resulting in stratification, while their interior interactions are governed by strong covalent and ionic bonds (Fig. 2a).26–28 The electronic energy band structure of DFT-HSE06 in Fig. 2b reveals that the valence and conduction bands of α-MoO3 are composed of O 2p states and hybridized states of Mo 4d and O 2p, respectively. In part of the electron density, the contribution of Mo atoms is very limited except for the conduction band, whereas oxygen orbitals can be found near both band edges simultaneously. Remarkably, oxygen atoms with common corners and edges contribute significantly more to the 2p orbitals than oxygen atoms near the vertical vdW layer.25,29
 Fig. 1  The atomic structure of molybdenum oxide in various crystalline phases. (a) α-MoO3, (b) β-MoO3, (c) h-MoO3, and (d) MoO2. The red sphere represents the oxygen atom. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Atomic and crystal structures of various MoO3 polymorphs α-MoO3. (b) DFT-HSE06 electronic band structures of α-MoO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright © 2017 American Physical Society. 
2.2. H+-doping in α-MoO3
Owing to the layered structure, α-MoO3 as a host is suitable to accommodate a large number of guest ions (e.g. Li+ and H+) without the crystal structure being affected.30,31 Mai et al. revealed that lithiated MoO3 nanobelts have significantly increased the conductivity and electroactivity as compared to unlithiated MoO3 nanobelts.32 As the smallest ion in nature, H+ is an ideal dopant because of its capacity to migrate rapidly into the interstitial locations of inorganic compounds with van der Waals gaps, with theoretical H+/MoO3 ratios as high as 2:1.33 The intercalated H+ ion layers are typically connected to the terminal oxygen atoms of the distorted MoO6 octahedra, which are located at the van der Waals gaps between the double layers of the α-MoO3 crystal structure and at the intralayer locations of the zigzagging chains that run along the channels.34 As shown in Fig. 3a, HxMoO3 exhibits three thermodynamically stable phases, depending on the intercalated H+ concentration.35 In type 1, the intercalated H+ is topological and maintains the orthorhombic crystalline phase. However, as the amount of H+ in the intercalated layers increases, type 2 and type 3 HxMoO3 undergo a phase transition from orthorhombic to monoclinic crystals.36 H+-doping affects the electronic structure of α-MoO3, causing the high-valence Mo6+ species to be reduced to Mo5+ and Mo4+ species, and ultimately the formation of quasi-metals due to the partial filling of the Mo 4d orbital.37–39 The formation of HxMoO3 is accompanied by the injection of a large number of delocalized electrons, thus producing surface plasmon resonances in the visible light region.40,41 Significantly, the HxMoO3 surface behaves with highly reversible redox properties, which means that it has high-performance catalytic activity for chemicals with the appropriate redox potential.42 Fujishima et al. reported the synthesis of visible-light-sensitive reversible photochromic films of MoO3, revealing a reversible redox event in the Mo atom by controlling the storage and release of free electrons. Firstly, the α-MoO3 film produces a strong colour enhancement (deep blue) when irradiated with visible light in the air, displaying a distinct visible absorption peak in the UV-vis NIR spectrum (Fig. 3b). Photochromism can be eliminated using subsequent anodic polarization, and the process of coloration and decoloration can be repeated for at least five cycles (Fig. 3c).43 Apart from photochemical processes, electrochemical reactions can drive color changes in α-MoO3 by injecting a certain number of positive ions (M+) and an equal number of electrons (e−) (reaction: MoO3 + xM+ + xe− → MxMoO3),44 which can be attributed to the formation of local Mo5+ defect states and the transfer of valence charges between Mo5+ and Mo6+ leads to the strong absorption of HxMoO3 in the visible light range. Notably, as evidenced by the formation of water during hydrogen intercalation, molybdenum bronze HxMoO3 eventually loses oxygen atoms along with H ions to form the defective HxMoO3−y.45,46
 Fig. 3  (a) Three crystal structures doped with different H+ concentrations: HxMoO3 with OH groups (type 1), HxMoO3 with OH and OH2 groups (type 2), and HxMoO3 with OH and OH2 groups (type 3). Copyright © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of MoO3: (curve A) original sample, (curve B) after polarization at −0.1 V versus Ag/AgCl, and (curve C) using visible light to irradiate the sample of curve B for 10 min. (c) The absorbance change of MoO3 at 800 nm during visible light irradiation and oxidation reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35,43. Copyright © 1992 Nature Publishing Group. 
2.3. Plasmonic effects of non-stoichiometric HxMoO3−y
Plasmonic effects in heavily doped transition metal oxides with unique optoelectronic properties have garnered substantial interest in the past decade. By altering the doping level and electrochemical potential in semiconductors, LSPRs can be made inherently adjustable, conferring plasmonic absorption at visible, near-infrared (NIR), and mid-infrared wavelengths (Fig. 4a), enabling extremely active catalytic performance in these spectral regions.47 In noble metals, collective oscillations originating from free electrons or holes result in improved optical absorption and scattering, as well as a significant near-field amplification at the surfaces of the nanoparticles.48,49 In order to exhibit the optical properties of metals, doped semiconductors should possess a negative real part of their dielectric function. This requirement is fulfilled when the critical free carrier concentration is exceeded, which is determined by the electrical structure of the material, including the effect of defect states. Numerous oxide semiconductors with a wide bandgap can exceed the threshold for metal optical behavior by introducing oxygen defects. Because of the considerable concentration of free electrons in non-stoichiometric HxMoO3−y, its absorption in the visible light range has been attributed to the LSPR effect.50–52 Benefiting from its small diameter and ambivalent character, hydrogen atoms can be intercalated into α-MoO3 and stored as electron donors or acceptors either in the conduction band or in the defect, serving as the source of plasmonic and electronic effects. The model of hydrogen-doped α-MoO3 shown in Fig. 4b depicts the electronic structure of HxMoO3−y. The unchanging MoO6 octahedron determines the general electronic structure in this model, but the doping of H atoms results in the introduction of new bandgap states.53 The pristine α-MoO3 consists of Mo6+ forming the conduction band and O2− forming the valence band with a bandgap of 3.2 eV. H atoms contribute their electrons to the conduction band, creating protons and the “valence band-like Mo5+ state” (Fig. 4c: green/grey state in the bandgap). The colour of the hydrogenated α-MoO3 film transforms from white to blue by spaced charge transfer between adjacent Mo5+ and Mo6+ under photoexcitation. Mo4+ ions are formed when the doping level of hydrogen in HxMoO3−y exceeds x = 1 (Fig. 4c: width of the electronic states), resulting in the formation of water and hydrogen-free MoO2, consisting of Mo4+ and O2− states. Each absent oxygen atom is balanced by two electrons in the Mo 4d band.54,55 Yamashita et al. developed a plasmonic Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid based on the H-spillover process.56 In addition, by controlling the H2 reduction temperature, the stoichiometric compositions of MoO3 can be adjusted, realizing tunable plasmonic absorption. As shown in Fig. 6a, hydrogen-doped MoO3 is obtained via the facile H-spillover process, in which the hydrogen molecules adsorbed on Pd are transformed into activated hydrogen atoms after dissociation, and subsequently, migrated to the surface of molybdenum oxide and intercalated into the bulk, causing the reduction of MoO3. Compared with the unreduced Pd/MoO3, Pd/HxMoO3−y(RT) displays a distinct absorption peak in the visible light region (Fig. 6b). The first principles DFT calculation was performed to investigate the electronic structures of the hydrogen bronzes. The total density of states (TDOS) and projected density of states (PDOS) of pristine MoO3 (Fig. 6c) show that there is no defect in the pristine MoO3, and the bandgap between them is around 1.9 eV. In contrast, the heavily doped hydrogen–molybdenum bronze (H1.68MoO3) exhibits metallic properties in which the valence band (VB) continuously crosses the Fermi energy level into the conduction band (CB) (Fig. 6d).
 Fig. 4  (a) Normalized optical extinction due to the LSPRs of metal and metal oxide nanocrystals. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Crystal structures of MoO3 and HxMoO3−y. (c) Electronic band structure regulation of MoO3 by H+ intercalation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47,55. Copyright © 2017 Springer Nature. 
The change in the electronic structure of the hydrogen-molybdenum bronzer is caused by the insertion of hydrogen atoms into the MoO3 matrix. The layered structure of the orthorhombic α-MoO3 allows the insertion of a substantial number of H atoms in interlayer positions, which are intensely coordinated with the terminal oxygen atoms, resulting in the deformation of the MoO6 octahedra in the H1.68MoO3 framework (Fig. 6e). The H atoms become protons upon adsorption on the terminal oxygen atoms, and electrons are transferred from H 1s orbitals to O 2p orbitals.57 Subsequently, the charge transfer from the terminal oxygen atom to the coordinated Mo atom leads to a partial reduction of the Mo ion. The electron charge density distribution of H1.68MoO3 (Fig. 6f) shows that the introduced electron charges are uniformly distributed on the Mo atoms, indicating the delocalization properties of Mo 4d electrons. The preceding results indicate that the intercalation of hydrogen ions into MoO3 allows a significant number of free electrons to be stored in the Mo 4d orbital, enabling an LSPR effect in the visible region.58
3. Application of α-MoO3
3.1. The mechanism of plasmonic photocatalysis
The localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) originates from the coherent oscillation of conduction band electrons in a catalyst (e.g., metal or semiconductor) when the frequency of the incident light coincides with the frequency of the surface electrons. Excitation by the LSPR provides a powerful local electromagnetic field that increases the photon absorption rate of the catalyst (Fig. 5a).59 Subsequently, plasmon-mediated excitation of the high-energy charge carrier is involved in the reaction of the adsorbed reactants on the catalyst surface, driving photochemical and solar energy conversion (Fig. 5b). Furthermore, in plasmonic metal/semiconductor hybrids, the plasmonic effect improves the yield of hot electrons with high potential energy on the plasmonic metal, thereby aiding the transit of hot electrons to the semiconductor. The Schottky barrier (SB) at the metal/semiconductor interface prevents transported hot electrons from returning to the noble metal to recombine with the hot hole. This design enhances the lifetime of the hot electrons transferred to the CB of the semiconductor. Consequently, various surface chemical processes can be enhanced (Fig. 5c), including H2O splitting, CO2 reduction, and organic matter conversion.60 Linic et al. have long been dedicated to research on the promotion of plasmonic metals in photocatalytic water splitting (hydrogen and oxygen evolution), demonstrating the transfer mechanism of plasmon-induced hot electrons, in which hot electrons migrate into the semiconductor to improve the charge separation efficiency and thus photocatalytic activity.61–63 Similar catalytic behavior is also found in plasmonic non-metallic catalysts (e.g., BiO3−x, WO3−x, and In2O3−x).64–66 Cu2−xS as a plasmonic semiconductor catalyst, where the collective oscillations of free charge carriers on the valence band drive the LSPR, the plentiful free electrons are attributed to the Cu vacancy production during the synthesis process.67 In addition, Cu2−xS nanomaterials exhibit LSPR effects in the NIR and mid-IR regions compared to noble metals (Fig. 5d) due to their lower order of magnitude of free electrons in them. And then the generated hot electrons will transfer to nearby structures at the level of unoccupied acceptor molecules and induce chemical transformations.68
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the LSPR effect in plasmonic materials. (b) Hot carrier generation and the corresponding absorption spectrum of plasmonic metals. (c) Plasmonic metal/semiconductor compound structures that transfer and utilize LSPR-induced hot electrons to facilitate surface reduction reactions. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) NIR spectra of the prepared Cu2−xS NCs: CuS (x = 1), Cu1.8S (x = 0.2), and Cu1.97S (x = 0.03). Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 and 108. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the hydrogen bronze formation process via H-spillover. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra. TDOS and PDOS of the (c) pristine MoO3 and (d) heavily H-doped HxMoO3−y. (e) Illustration of the structure of HxMoO3−y in the (010) projection. Blue balls are Mo atoms, red balls are O atoms, and green balls are H atoms. (f) Three-dimensional depiction of the Fermi level electronic charge density distribution of HxMoO3−y.56 

3.1.1. Applications of HxMoO3−y. 
Plasmonic non-metallic catalysts absorb photons from solar, inspire photogenerated charges (e− and h+) and transport them to the surface of the catalytic reaction active sites for efficient photocatalytic reactions. Yamashita's group has achieved some significant results in relevant fields. They synthesized blue HxMoO3−y nanosheets by a simple solvothermal method in the absence of a surfactant, exhibiting LSPR absorption in the visible region.69 The obtained blue HxMoO3−y nanosheets have very stable chemical properties, which maintain the color in the air for several months. The X-ray diffraction pattern shows that the as-prepared molybdenum oxide is assigned as an orthorhombic phase, which has a layered structure composed of MoO6 octahedra. Ethanol as a solvent has strong reducibility during the synthesis process, which produced H-doped molybdenum oxide, causing sufficient free carriers to sustain the LSPR effect. The XPS results show that a new peak assigned to Mo5+ species appears in the HxMoO3−y nanosheets, demonstrating the intercalation of H atoms. The as-prepared HxMoO3−y exhibits a strong plasmonic absorption peak in the visible range, and the plasmonic absorption region is tunable from the visible to the near-infrared range by changing alcohols used in the solvothermal synthesis (Fig. 7a). By virtue of its strong plasmonic effect, HxMoO3−y exhibits high hydrogen production activity in photocatalytic ammonia–borane (NH3BH3) hydrogen production reactions. The initial H2 production of HxMoO3−y was 3.7 times faster than that of MoO3 (Fig. 7c). Even under dark conditions, HxMoO3−y still presents the highest activity rates (Fig. 7b). Such positive results are attributed to the significant number of free electrons on the surface of HxMoO3−y, which play a crucial role in hydrogen production.70 However, the preferential production of 2D MoO3 nanosheets during the synthesis resulted in a limited surface area and relatively low catalytic activity, restricting the use of surface free electrons. Therefore, a high surface area MoO3 was prepared by adding a surfactant to the solvent using an evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA) process.71 By injecting heterovalent atoms into semiconductor crystals, doped semiconductors such as aluminum, germanium, indium-doped zinc oxide, and indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) can be synthesized rapidly and efficiently, changing the light absorption intensity and range of their LSPR effects.72–74 We synthesized a plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y material with intense LSPR in the visible light range by a facile non-aqueous solvothermal method (Fig. 7d). Comprehensive analysis revealed that the molybdenum and tungsten ion inter-doping vacancies and the oxygen vacancies formed during crystal growth are the primary causes responsible for the strong plasmonic absorption of the catalyst. Under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), the obtained plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−-y acted as an effective catalyst, greatly increasing the dehydrogenation activity of ammonia borane, with the best performance under the light irradiation at λ = 650 nm (Fig. 7e and f).75
 Fig. 7  (a) UV/Vis–NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the HxMoO3−y samples prepared at 160 °C (1) and 140 °C (2) for 12 h, and commercial MoO3 (3). H2 production test from aqueous NH3BH3 solutions at room temperature (b) in the dark and (c) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).69 (d) Illustration of the possible formation process of crystal defects in MoxW1−xO3−y. (e) H2 evolution from NH3BH3 at room temperature of different materials. (f) Wavelength-dependent initial H2 yield rate enhancement of the MoxW1−xO3–y samples upon irradiation by the LED light.75 


3.1.2. Applications of metal–HxMoO3−y hybrids. 
Single-component materials frequently fail to satisfy the catalytic requirements in heterogeneous photocatalysis due to their intrinsic constraints of limited light absorption and low catalytic efficiency.76,77 Hybrid materials, as composite materials possessing synergistic multiple coupling effects, offer greater potential in catalytic applications. Chen et al. developed a plasmonic Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid via a solution-processed route (NaBH4 reduction) (Fig. 8a), which exhibits a strong LSPR peak in the visible light region (Fig. 8b). The LSPR of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid material exhibits reversible tunability under O2 oxidation and NaBH4 reduction conditions (Fig. 8c). Furthermore, the hybrid of Pd/HxMoO3−y exhibits significant plasmon-enhanced catalysis in NH3BH3 hydrolysis and Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions under visible light, being well beyond that of the single-component HxMoO3−y (Fig. 8d and e).79 For the efficient photocatalytic conversion of p-nitrophenol (PNP) to p-aminophenol (PAP), a Ru/HxMoO3−y hybrid with a plasmonic effect and abundant oxygen vacancies has been developed based on the H-spillover process.80 This hybrid is capable of effectively trapping aromatic nitrocompounds and weakening the N–O bond, thereby providing an abundance of localized electrons for the reduction reaction. Notably, by changing the H2 reduction temperature, the plasmonic absorption range of hybrids can be adjusted (Fig. 9a and b). We also synthesized RuPd/HxMoO3−y hybrids to further improve the efficiency of the photocatalytic conversion of PNP, in which RuPd alloy nanoparticles and plasmonic HxMoO3−y serve as the active and electron donor centers, respectively, resulting in a synergistic effect in the reaction.81 However, because rapid recombination of plasmon-excited charge carriers makes it difficult to boost catalytic activity, it is critical to construct viable multiphase complexes that produce heterojunctions or overcome Schottky barriers for effective charge separation and transfer.82–84 Thus, we presented an interesting approach to improve the utilization of plasmon-induced electrons in photocatalytic nitroaromatic hydrogenation by combining plasmonic HxMoO3−y with Pd/ZIF-8.85 The complexes of Pd nanoparticles with plasmonic HxMoO3−y@ZIF-8 contributed synergistically to the promotion of plasma-induced hot-electron transfer, increasing the catalytic activity. Photoelectrochemical tests and time-resolved transient PL decay spectroscopy showed that Pd/HxMoO3−y@ZIF-8 exhibits the strongest photocurrent density under intermittent illumination and the longest lifetime of hot electrons compared with other samples (Fig. 9c and d), demonstrating that the novel structure of Pd/HxMoO3−y@ZIF-8 effectively facilitates plasmon-excited electron transfer and lifetime. Thus, complexes of Pd/HxMoO3−y@ZIF-8 displayed the best activity performance in the nitrobenzene hydrogenation reaction under visible light irradiation (Fig. 9e), and a possible reaction mechanism is proposed based on the transfer pathway of plasmon-excited electrons (Fig. 9f). Additionally, the abundance of oxygen vacancies on the surface of metal–HxMoO3−y hybrids also plays a crucial role in catalysis. Kuwahara et al. demonstrated for the first time that defective Pt/HxMoO3−y exhibits high catalytic activity for the deoxygenation of sulfoxide at ambient temperature under 1 atm H2, with significantly higher catalytic activity when visible light is introduced compared to the dark environment (Fig. 10a, c and d), and the plasmonic absorption of Pt/HxMoO3−y was controlled by adjusting the H2 reduction temperature (Fig. 10b). Related analyses indicate that the oxygen vacancies formed by the H spillover process are the primary active sites of the reaction, while the reversible redox behavior and high plasmonic absorption of the Mo atoms make a significant contribution to the activity of the reaction.78
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid presenting a redox process under an O2 atmosphere and NaBH4 solution, respectively. (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid and pure MoO3. (c) The evolution of the optical response of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid exposed to air. (d) H2 production rate from NH3BH3 solution under light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), and (e) the catalytic activity of the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction in the dark and under light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).79 
 Fig. 9  (a) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (b) plot of the relative concentration of p-nitrophenol over Ru/HxMoO3−y (T °C) catalysts reduced at different temperatures.76 (c) Photocurrent responses of different samples. (d) Time-resolved transient PL decay curves of different samples. (e) The activity of reduced nitrobenzene over different samples under light and dark conditions, respectively. (f) A possible reaction mechanism for the reduction of nitrobenzene derivatives over plasmonic Pd/HxMoO3−y@ZIF-8.85 
 Fig. 10  (a) Sulfoxide deoxidation reaction mechanism over the Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrid catalyst. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the Pt/HxMoO3–y hybrids with different H2 reduction temperatures. (c) Time course in the sulfoxide deoxygenation over Pt/HxMoO3−y in the dark and under visible light irradiation. (d) The increased yield of activity as a function of the wavelength by LED irradiation.78 


3.1.3. Heterojunctions with HxMoO3−y. 
The fabrication of two-dimensional semiconductor heterostructures has tremendous potential for photocatalytic materials, where the electrical structure of the heterojunction is tailored to enhance light absorption and photogenerated carrier separation.86,87 After analyzing 2D MoO3−xSx/MoS2 heterostructures using density flooding theory (DFT) calculations of the HSE06 functional, Bahers et al. discovered a type II heterojunction in which the bandgap and charge transfer between the MoO3 and MoS2 layers are constantly driven by the S concentration in the MoO3−xSx single layer, providing an efficient direct Z-type system for photocatalytic water splitting.88 Liu et al. grew 0D CdS nanoparticles on two-dimensional plasmonic MoO3−x using a simple co-precipitation approach. The CdS/MoO3−x heterojunction enhances light absorption from 600 nm to 1400 nm by utilizing the LSPR effect of MoO3−x and speeds up the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. As a result, CdS/MoO3−x heterojunctions present a higher photocatalytic hydrogen production rate than pure CdS when irradiated by monochromatic light at 420, 450, 550, and 650 nm and improved photocorrosion properties.89 The hydrogen reduction process can achieve tunable plasmonic absorption and energy band structure in MoO3, allowing for better energy band alignment with the composite semiconductor material and thereby increasing the photoinductive electron production in the heterostructure.90,91 In view of this, Wei et al. produced stable MoO3@MoS2 core–shell nanowires and optimized the energy band structure by H2 reduction to effectively reduce MoO3 and MoS2 interfacial defects and improve electron transfer (Fig. 11a). The constructed plasmonic MoO3@MoS2 catalyst exhibited both broadband light absorption and improved interfacial contact, thus increasing the activity performance in water-splitting (Fig. 11b).92 Dong et al. also developed a WO3−x/MoO3−x heterojunction catalyst with numerous oxygen vacancies, which not only enhances the optical response but also significantly facilitates electron–hole pair separation (Fig. 11c). Simultaneously, the formation of surface oxygen vacancies enhances CO2 adsorption and activation. The results indicate that the WO3−x/MoO3−x heterojunction greatly improves CO2 photoreduction activity, in which CO production was 40.2 μmoL g−1 h−1, approximately 9.5 times that of the pure MoO3−x nanosheets (Fig. 11d).93
 Fig. 11  (a) The nanostructure of the prepared MoS2@MoO3-H2-T nanostructure and (b) photocatalytic hydrogen yield over MoS2@MoO3. Copyright © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) UV-vis-NIR spectra and (d) the total number of electrons consumed during CO2 photoreduction. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92,93. 
To summarize, the metallic behavior of HxMoO3−y directly contributes to the photocatalytic reduction process via plasmon-induced excitation of hot electrons. On the other hand, the hot electrons are transmitted to the composite semiconductor's conduction band or to the loaded noble metal, which then participates in the reaction, boosting the catalytic activity further.

3.2. Thermal catalysis

3.2.1. CO2 hydrogenation. 
Thermal catalytic CO2 hydrogenation is a well-established technology for the conversion of CO2 into value-added C1 or C2+ species. The engineering studies of oxygen vacancies in metal oxides have been of significant attention because of their critical effects on the thermal catalytic activity of metal oxides, including facilitating the adsorption and activation of CO2, and a specific mechanism for providing the active species in the Mars–van Krevelen mechanism.94 As previously stated, the orthorhombic structure of α-MoO3 is composed of a network of MoO6 octahedral bilayers stacked along the [010] crystal direction, with adjacent bilayers connected through vdW forces. According to DFT calculations, the oxygen atoms (Ot) bound to Mo in the [010] crystal direction require the least energy to produce oxygen vacancies. The physical characterization reveals that oxygen vacancies not only typically form in the Ot position but also may form in the Oa and Os positions with a lower probability (Fig. 12a).95 Although the assisted activation of CO2 molecules by oxygen vacancies in metal oxides is regarded as an attractive approach, how to maintain the concentration of oxygen vacancies in the metal oxides during the reaction is crucial for enabling the completion of a continuous catalytic cycle.96,97 We developed the oxygen-defective Pt/HxMoO3−y catalyst to exhibit excellent catalytic activity performance under relatively mild reaction conditions in the reaction of CO2 hydrogenation to methanol (Fig. 12b).98 The in situ Mo K-edge XANES measurement investigates the average valence state of Mo, which changes reversibly under a CO2/H2 gas atmosphere (Fig. 12c). Pt/MoO3 is initially reduced via an H-spillover process, producing oxygen vacancies. CO2 is adsorbed and activated on the oxygen vacancies between the under-coordinated Mo (Mo5+/Mo4+) sites, causing the formation of CO and oxygen vacancy filling, accompanied by the oxidation of Mo atoms. Then, the oxidized Mo atoms are reduced back to the lower valence state for the regeneration of the oxygen vacancies. As the reaction timescale is extended, CO2 is consumed continuously to create methanol, suggesting that oxygen vacancies in Pt/HxMoO3−y can be stabilized during the reaction (Fig. 12d). Therefore, a possible mechanism of CO2 hydrogenation to methanol was proposed based on oxygen vacancy regeneration (Fig. 12e). Firstly, oxygen vacancies are produced in HxMoO3−y during H2 reduction (steps 1 and 2). CO2 is adsorbed onto the oxygen vacancy and activated by the adjacent under-coordinated Mo5+/Mo4+via high adsorption energy electron donation, weakening the CO bond to produce *CO (step 3). The *CO intermediate migrates to the Pt nanoparticle surface (step 4) to react with the dissociated activated H species on the Pt nanoparticles to form the *COH species, which then undergoes multiple hydrogenation reactions to eventually produce methanol (step 5). Very recently, Bao et al. established a typical SMSI state Ru-based CO2 hydrogenation catalyst (Ru/HxMoO3−y) that generates active molybdenum oxide in the presence of Ru metal to boost methane generation (Fig. 13a). When CO2 hydrogenation gas at 250 °C induces the formation of a defective HxMoO3−y overlayer and eventually the encapsulated structure Ru/HxMoO3−y, the product selectivity changes from 100% CH4 selectivity on the Ru particle surface to more than 99.0% CO selectivity (Fig. 13b), and the CO2 hydrogenation selectivity can be flipped between 99.0% CO and 100% CH4 by cyclic reactive oxidation treatment.99 Shimizu et al. discovered that Pt nanoparticles loaded on MoOx/TiO2 can accelerate the creation of reduced MoOx species, hence increasing the methanol yield in the CO2 hydrogenation reaction.100 Due to the flexible redox characteristics of molybdenum oxide, it can function as an active center in reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) reactions, enhancing the industrial application potential of molybdenum-based catalysts.55,101 The Ti3AlC2 MAX phase possesses high thermal stability, toughness, and ductility like ceramics and is also a good conductor of heat and electricity like metals. Shiju et al. constructed MoO3/Ti3AlC2 heterojunctions and demonstrated that the existence of electron-rich Ti3AlC2 increases the redox characteristics of MoO3 in the RWGS reaction, resulting in a significantly reduced surface area with a high proportion of oxygen vacancies.102
 Fig. 12  (a) Possible position for the formation of different oxygen vacancies.95 (b) The catalytic performance of several oxide-supported Pt catalysts in liquid-phase CO2 hydrogenation. (c) Valence changes of the Mo species during the in situ Mo K-edge XAFS measurement. (d) Time course of the product selectivity and CO2 conversion over Pt/HxMoO3−y. (e) Reaction mechanism for methanol production from CO2 hydrogenation over Pt/HxMoO3−y.99 
 Fig. 13  (a) The mechanism of the CO2 hydrogenation reaction based on two SMSI states of Ru/HxMoO3−y. (b) Catalytic performance evolution of the new 1.9 wt% Ru/HxMoO3−y catalyst in CO2 hydrogenation. Copyright © 2022 American Chemical Society. (c) Activity performance in the mixed gas (CO + H2) conversion reaction and the related reaction mechanism. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Surface structure of 3MoOH/Rh(111) in the reaction, and the orange parallelogram shows a unit. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, 105 and 106. 


3.2.2. CO hydrogenation. 
Many researchers have proved that α-MoO3 is a novel sensing material with high sensitivity to CO gas, and this intrinsic sensing performance is derived from the presence of defects in the non-stoichiometric α-MoO3 lattice.103,104 Dumesic et al. developed a variety of transition metal-loaded molybdenum-based catalysts for use in the conversion of mixed gases (H2 + CO) to high-value C2+ oxygenates based on the properties of molybdenum oxide for CO (Fig. 13c). A series of characterization studies, including H2–D2 exchange, the temperature-programmed reaction (TPR), and XANES, indicated that spillover of the activated H atoms from the noble metal to the MoOx surface, promoting the formation of low-valent molybdenum ions and oxygen vacancies, plays a significant role in the enhanced activity. The reaction mechanism suggests that CHx generated at the low-valent molybdenum sites reacts with the adsorbed CO to eventually form C2+ oxygenates.105 Although combining transition metals with MoO3 can improve the yield of oxygenates, the structural details of the catalysts and the role of α-MoO3 in catalytic performance are unknown. F. Bent et al. synthesized atomic-level precise Rh/MoO3/SiO2 catalysts using the ALD (atomic layer deposition) technique and investigated in detail the significance of the features of the catalyst structure in increasing the catalytic performance. α-MoO3 plays two roles: first, the existence of Mo–OH on the catalyst surface promotes CO dissociation; second, hydrogen spills over from the Mo–OH site to the adsorbed species on the Rh surface, increasing the rate of hydrogenation of the reaction intermediate (Fig. 13d).106 The insights obtained from the above results indicate that α-MoO3 is an ideal material to manipulate hydrogenation reactions based on its layered structure, rich multivalent chemistry, high thermal stability, and oxygen vacancy engineering.

3.3. Photothermal catalysis
Plasmonic photothermal catalysis presents a significant difference from typical photothermal catalysis, in which the co-existence of hot electron-driven reactant activation and photothermal effects in catalysts synergistically boost surface chemistry reactions.107,108 The non-radiative decay of the plasmon through transitions either within the CB band or between the CB and d bands results in the generation of hot-electrons.109 These hot electron–hole pairs are then transferred from the bulk of the catalyst to reactant molecules adsorbed on the surface. Furthermore, the excited hot electrons redistribute their energy through electron–phonon conversion, which leads to the heating of the catalyst surface. By the intercalation of hydrogen ions and the introduction of oxygen vacancies between the layers of MoO3, the high valent Mo6+ ions are reduced to Mo4+ and Mo5+ ions, thereby changing the free electron concentration of the bulk and the bandgap, conferring the HxMoO3−y a plasmonic effect, which is applied to a variety of photothermal catalysis methods.110,111

3.3.1. CO2 conversion. 
The benefits of plasmonic photothermal catalytic CO2 reduction are as follows: (1) Activates specific bonds of surface reactants, modifies the reaction pathway, and improves selectivity;111 (2) facilitates the desorption process in surface catalysis to further increase catalytic activity and stability;112 (3) shifting the chemical equilibrium to a higher yield of the final product. This photothermal effect can almost entirely drive the CO2 conversion, or in combination with the hot electron injection process, enhance the reaction collectively.113 Ye et al. synthesized plasmonic HxMoO3−y by a solvothermal method, which exhibits a great potential for harnessing a wide range of visible-infrared light based on the LSPR effect. The simulated energy band structure of HxMoO3−y shows that the generation of oxygen vacancies introduces defective energy levels, leading to a narrowing of the energy gap that can absorb the full spectrum (Fig. 14a). In addition, the oxygen vacancies in HxMoO3−y promote the adsorption of CO2 molecules, lowering the barrier to CO2 hydrogenation and photogenerated electron–hole recombination, achieving efficient thermochemical conversion in photo-thermal synergistic catalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 14b).114 The concentration of free electrons and the number of surface oxygen vacancies in MoO3 are critical factors for the promotion of the plasmonic photothermal CO2 conversion efficiency. We found that the hybrid of Pt/HxMoO3−y with a nanosheet structure exhibits the best plasmonic absorption and the largest number of oxygen vacancies compared with analogues with different morphologies (bulk, rod, and belt), which can be attributed to the MoO3 nanosheets favoring the intercalation of H+/e− during the H2 reduction process (Fig. 14c). Assisted by a combination of oxygen vacancies and plasmonic absorption, Pt/HxMoO3−y(sheet) displayed the best plasmonic photothermal catalytic activity and light enhancement effects (Fig. 14d). Notably, XPS measurements demonstrate the presence of reversible redox processes involving Mo atoms during the reaction, indicating that the oxygen vacancies are active sites and regenerative.115 To broaden the photo-response spectrum range of plasmonic effects, we synthesized near-infrared photoexcited plasmonic Pt/HxMoWOy catalysts. Pt/HxMoWOy has a higher concentration of surface free electrons and oxygen vacancies than single Pt/HxWOy, which facilitates CO2 adsorption, catalyst surface heating, and hot electron transfer processes for efficient plasmon-induced photothermal catalysis in the RWGS reaction (Fig. 14e). The in situ characterization reveals that the multivalent element Mo serves as the active center of the CO2 conversion, with its valence increasing and decreasing in response to the creation and consumption of oxygen vacancies (Fig. 14f).116
 Fig. 14  (a) Calculated band structure of HxMoO3−y and MoO3. (b) Catalytic CO generation over HxMoO3−y and MoO3 under full-spectrum light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (d) the CO production under visible light irradiation and in the dark over Pt/HxMoO3−y with different morphologies.115 (e) Light wavelength dependence of increased CO production on Pt/HxMoWOy under LED light irradiation, and (f) valence changes of Mo and W species during in situ XAFS measurements.116 


3.3.2. Water purification. 
Utilizing the LSPR effect of MoO3 to boost the photothermal conversion efficiency in order to acquire clean water from seawater and wastewater is a viable solution to the freshwater issue.117,118 Jiang et al. report that hydrogenated MoO3, also known as H1.68MoO3, is a material with a low-cost and excellent photothermal efficiency that enables efficient photothermal water evaporation throughout the solar energy spectrum (Fig. 15a). First-principles theoretical calculations indicate that the transformation of the semiconductor energy band structure to a quasi-metallic structure following hydrogenation results in an insulator-to-metal phase transition, endowing H1.68MoO3 with the broad-spectrum solar absorption and high photothermal conversion efficiency (Fig. 15b). Under solar irradiation, the interfacial evaporation system combined with the catalyst produces an unexpectedly high evaporation rate of 1.37 kg m−2 h−1.119 To further enhance the photothermal conversion efficiency of the material, Cui et al. used chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and hydrothermal procedures to develop a novel catalyst composed of graphene (G) and HxMoO3−y-coated porous nickel (Ni). The defective HxMoO3−y increases the light absorption and photothermal conversion efficiency of the material (Fig. 15c). Under solar illumination, the prepared solar evaporators exhibit great light absorption (96%), wettability, and conversion efficiency (95%) (Fig. 15d).120 In addition, due to the growing problem of water pollution, the development of adequate catalysts for water disinfection technologies is critical for public health. Niu et al. recently synthesized a composite material (HxMoO3−y/NCNs) with near-infrared (NIR) light-triggered thermosensitive properties capable of efficiently disinfecting water, including the elimination of Enterobacteriaceae and Staphylococcus aureus, through the synergistic effect of photodynamic and photothermal effects (Fig. 15e and f). Studies indicate that the superior photothermal conversion efficiency (52.6%) induced by the LSPR effect in HxMoO3−y/NCNs facilitates the generation of localized high temperatures that destroy bacterial cell structures.121 Unquestionably, α-MoO3 exhibits excellent solar energy utilization in the Vis-NIR region and contributes significantly to the photothermal catalysis process through the thermal effect introduced by plasmonic absorption.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the solar evaporation test. (b) Surface temperature of the evaporator under a solar power density of 1 kW m−2. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectra of the prepared catalyst. (d) Different energy distribution ratios of the solar evaporation process. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. (e) The mechanisms of charge transfer and bacterial inactivation. (f) Antibacterial activities of the prepared catalysts against S. aureus under NIR light irradiation. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119–121. 

4. Conclusions and future prospects
In conclusion, owing to the unusual optical characteristics and variable multivalent state of defective molybdenum oxide, a vast number of studies have abundantly proved its potential for a wide variety of catalytic applications, including photocatalysis, thermocatalysis, and photothermal catalysis. This article presents an overview of the crystal structure, interfacial modification, plasmonic absorption properties, and associated application advances of molybdenum oxide. Taking advantage of the distinctive crystal structure of α-MoO3, H+ ion intercalation and interfacial modifications are simple to achieve, resulting in plasmonic absorption and substantial surface oxygen vacancies. The defective molybdenum oxide mentioned in this paper demonstrates that strong plasmonic absorption has gained widespread interest and application in photocatalysis, effectively enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency through the construction of hybrid materials and heterojunctions. Additionally, the formation of surface oxygen vacancies and the heating effect of hot electron decay extend the applicability of HxMoO3−y in thermocatalysis and photothermal catalysis, where oxygen vacancies effectively adsorb and activate reactants, and the heating effect enhances the catalytic rate. In the realm of catalysis, molybdenum oxide has remarkable success.
Although molybdenum oxide research has progressed considerably over the past decades, the catalytic mechanism still needs to be further investigated, which will allow us to develop the potential of HxMoO3−y for catalytic applications in the future and to obtain catalysts with higher activity. Considering the interaction between HxMoO3−y nano-structural engineering and H-spillover, multi-dimensional α-MoO3 materials are essential for plasmonic effects and interface engineering, particularly for the synthesis of ultrathin 2-D nanosheets and 3-D structures of α-MoO3, which are still incredibly challenging, but understanding the relationship between the structure and photocatalytic performance is of interest for our development of α-MoO3 plasmonic effects. Various functionalized modifications (e.g. doping and hybridization) have also been attempted to improve the photocatalytic performance of MoO3, such as W-doped HxMoO3−y, and therefore, the development of selective doping of MoO3 with more heterovalent atoms to improve the catalytic performance is a feasible strategy. Furthermore, the optical variations and oxygen vacancy embedding brought about by the doping of other metal oxides with Mo elements show considerable promise for catalytic applications and must be further studied. Also, it is feasible to apply MoO3−y as a template to fabricate MoO3−y/X (X = S, Se) or multi-component heterostructures with enhanced plasmonic absorption, high defect concentration, and hot electron transfer efficiency to improve their catalytic performance in photocatalytic reactions. Importantly, according to numerous studies, the concentration of oxygen vacancies in defective molybdenum oxide plays a crucial role in photocatalysis and photothermal catalysis. It can, to some extent, determine the electronic structure, which is vital for regulating the physicochemical properties of molybdenum oxide. In particular, precise tuning of the carrier concentrations and the corresponding changes in the band structure within HxMoO3−y should be achieved to make explanations for their role in photothermal catalysis. Thus, an in-depth research is required to identify the inherent relationship between the energy band structure of defective HxMoO3−y and better catalytic performance.
In brief, defective molybdenum oxide is an excellent contender for a variety of catalytic applications and should be investigated continually for its intriguing potential. We expect that this article will contribute to a better knowledge of the optical characteristics, interface engineering, catalytic mechanism, and application prospects of defective molybdenum oxide and will serve as a springboard for future study.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The present work was supported by the JST, PRESTO (Grant no. JPMJPR19T3), Japan, and a grant-in-aid for scientific research from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) (no. 19H00838 and 22H00275). A part of this work was supported by the Element Strategy Initiative of MEXT, Japan (No. JPMXP0112101003).
Notes and references
H. Ren, S. Sun, J. Cui and X. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 6326–6369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Xu, B. Huang, Z. Lou and B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10047–10053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sinaim, D. J. Ham, J. S. Lee, A. Phuruangrat, S. Thongtem and T. Thongtem, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 516, 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, L. Wang, C. Cheng, X. Yan, B. Shen and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2893–2896 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Ma, W. Wang, X. Li, Z. Zhang and Y. Qian, Solid State Commun., 2005, 136, 283–287 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rathnasamy, R. Thangamuthu and V. Alagan, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44, 1647–1660 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. de Sá, F. X. Nobre, L. dos, S. Silva, G. da, S. Sousa, M. L. Takeno, E. A. A. Júnior, J. M. E. de Matos and M. R. M. C. de Santos, Int. J. Environ. Res., 2021, 15, 105–124 CrossRef .
D. J. Borah, A. T. T. Mostako and A. Malakar, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 891, 161870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Niu, H. Su, X. Li, J. Li and Y. Qi, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 898, 162863 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Yao, Z. Luo, C. Pan, J. Yang, Y. Fang, H. Deng, C. Liu, Q. Tan, F. Liu and Y. Guo, Molecules, 2019, 25, 18 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tang, S. A. Farooqi, X. Wang and C. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 755–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Liu and W. Wang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3025–3032 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Sadhanala, V. K. Harika, T. R. Penki, D. Aurbach and A. Gedanken, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1495–1502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, G. Wang, S. Zhou, S. Liu, G. Li, H.-G. Liao and S.-G. Sun, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 56, 186–192 CrossRef .
K. Dossumov, G. E. Ergazieva, L. K. Myltykbaeva, M. M. Telbaeva and A. T. Batyrbaev, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2019, 55, 137–142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, J.-H. Lee and J.-M. Nam, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900471 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhan, B.-W. Liu, Y.-F. Huang, S. Hu, B. Ren, M. Moskovits and Z.-Q. Tian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2671 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rej, L. Mascaretti, E. Y. Santiago, O. Tomanec, Š. Kment, Z. Wang, R. Zbořil, P. Fornasiero, A. O. Govorov and A. Naldoni, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5261–5271 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, X. Wang, G. Xing, C. Meng, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, Y. Wan and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 7988–7996 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, C. Xu, B. Deng, Y. Gao, X. Zhu, X. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2103926 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sayed, J. Yu, G. Liu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 10484–10537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, Y. Kuwahara, M. Wen, M. Navlani-García, K. Mori, T. An and H. Yamashita, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2377–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, Y. Xu, D. Jin and Y. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5681–5690 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. McCarron and J. C. Calabrese, J. Solid State Chem., 1991, 91, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yun, W. Jang, T. Lee, Y. Lee and A. Soon, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 7, 024025 CrossRef .
D. D. Yao, J. Z. Ou, K. Latham, S. Zhuiykov, A. P. O’Mullane and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 1865–1870 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Tang, M. Wang, K. L. Wang, A. Shailos, K. Galatsis, R. Kojima, V. Strong, A. Lech, W. Wlodarski and R. B. Kaner, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 429–433 RSC .
F. Ji, X. Ren, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, L. Pang, J. Jiang and S. Frank Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8696–8703 RSC .
D. O. Scanlon, G. W. Watson, D. J. Payne, G. R. Atkinson, R. G. Egdell and D. S. L. Law, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4636–4645 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, H. Xie, D. Li, D. Liu, S. Ding, S. Tao, H. Chen, Q. Liu, S. Chen, W. Chu, B. Zhang and L. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 817–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Mei and Y. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2376–2404 RSC .
L. Q. Mai, B. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Y. Qi, C. S. Lao, R. S. Yang, Y. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3712–3716 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Hu, Y. T. Qian, Z. T. Song, J. R. Huang, R. Cao and J. Q. Xiao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1527–1533 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sha, L. Chen, A. C. Cooper, G. P. Pez and H. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11399–11407 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Zhang, A. Zavabeti, A. F. Chrimes, F. Haque, L. A. O’Dell, H. Khan, N. Syed, R. Datta, Y. Wang, A. S. R. Chesman, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706006 CrossRef .
B. Braïda, S. Adams and E. Canadell, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5957–5969 CrossRef .
L. Xie, T. Chen, H. C. Chan, Y. Shu and Q. Gao, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 641–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xie, Q. Zhu, G. Zhang, K. Ye, C. Zou, O. V. Prezhdo, Z. Wang, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4136–4140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, F. Lu, Y. Li, S. Yang, R. Li, N. Huo, C. Fan, Z. Wei, J. Li and S.-S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1034–1040 RSC .
Q. Huang, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15283–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, H. Zhang, G. Liu, X. Wu, J. Lin, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 1125–1131 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Kadossov, A. R. Soufiani, A. W. Apblett and N. F. Materer, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 97755–97763 RSC .
J. N. Yao, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, Nature, 1992, 355, 624–626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Balach, J. Linnemann, T. Jaumann and L. Giebeler, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23127–23168 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, J. B. Cook, H. Lin, J. S. Ko, S. H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Agarwal and H. Metiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 19252–19264 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agrawal, S. H. Cho, O. Zandi, S. Ghosh, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3121–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
S. Qi, G. Liu, L. Tan, J. Chen, Y. Lou and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4816–4819 RSC .
X. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Liu and W. Wang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3025–3032 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Patil, S. H. Gaikwad and S. P. Mukherjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 21082–21093 CrossRef CAS .
T. He and J. Yao, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 125–143 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ressler, R. E. Jentoft, J. Wienold, M. M. Günter and O. Timpe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 6360–6370 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borgschulte, O. Sambalova, R. Delmelle, S. Jenatsch, R. Hany and F. Nüesch, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 40761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, M. Wen, X. Ma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, Y. Dai, B. Huang and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9316–9324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Q. Li, L. Lin, H. Peng, Z. Liu and D. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12006–12012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuwahara, M. Okada, H. Ge and H. Yamashita, Chem. Lett., 2022, 51, 166–169 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhan, X.-J. Chen, J. Yi, J.-F. Li, D.-Y. Wu and Z.-Q. Tian, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 216–230 CrossRef .
P. Narang, R. Sundararaman and H. A. Atwater, Nanophotonics, 2016, 5, 96–111 CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Ingram, P. Christopher, J. L. Bauer and S. Linic, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1441–1447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, M. Hegde, P. Yin and P. V. Radovanovic, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4970–4979 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, G. Chen, J. Yan, B. Huang, H. Cheng, Z. Lou and B. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118517 CrossRef CAS .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Pan, Y. Lou, X. Qiu, J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 2954–2958 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, X. Wang, E. Sharman, X. Li, L. Yang, G. Zhang and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1075–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Cheng, M. Wen and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8946–8953 RSC .
N. J. Kramer, K. S. Schramke and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5597–5603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, Z. Ni, Y. Ding, M. Sugaya, X. Pi and T. Nozaki, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 415–422 CrossRef CAS .
E. Della Gaspera, A. S. R. Chesman, J. van Embden and J. J. Jasieniak, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9154–9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Cheng, M. Wen, Y. Huo and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23531–23540 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 2139–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuwahara, Y. Yoshimura, K. Haematsu and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, X. Qian, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4616–4621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, M. Che and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3783–3789 RSC .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 3745–3752 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 458–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-D. Xiao, L. Han, J. Luo, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1103–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jun, S. Choi, M. Y. Yang and Y. S. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17254–17260 RSC .
M. Wen, S. Song, Q. Liu, H. Yin, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, G. Li, T. An and H. Yamashit, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119511 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kou, C. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Xu and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1445–1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shahrokhi, P. Raybaud and T. Le Bahers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 36465–36474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, J. Shen, X. Yu, H. Tang, Zulfiqar and Q. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 87–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, J. Melkersson, S. Wu, L. Wang and J. Zhang, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 2630–2639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3908–3920 RSC .
S. Guo, X. Li, X. Ren, L. Yang, J. Zhu and B. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802567 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, X. Dong, Q. Yuan, J. Liang, Y. Zhou, X. Qu and B. Dong, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 621, 126582 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Fang, J. Xu, X. Wang and X. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 9188–9196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Cheng, M. Wen, Y. Huo and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23531–23540 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Frei, C. Mondelli, R. García-Muelas, K. S. Kley, B. Puértolas, N. López, O. V. Safonova, J. A. Stewart, D. Curulla Ferré and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3377 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Larmier, W.-C. Liao, S. Tada, E. Lam, R. Verel, A. Bansode, A. Urakawa, A. Comas-Vives and C. Copéret, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuwahara, T. Mihogi, K. Hamahara, K. Kusu, H. Kobayashi and H. Yamashita, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 9902–9915 RSC .
H. Xin, L. Lin, R. Li, D. Li, T. Song, R. Mu, Q. Fu and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 4874–4882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Toyao, S. Kayamori, Z. Maeno, S. M. A. H. Siddiki and K. Shimizu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8187–8196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Omotayo Akande, A. Chroneos, M. Vasilopoulou, S. Kennou and U. Schwingenschlögl, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9526–9531 RSC .
M. Ronda-Lloret, L. Yang, M. Hammerton, V. S. Marakatti, M. Tromp, Z. Sofer, A. Sepúlveda-Escribano, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, J. J. Delgado, G. Rothenberg, T. Ramirez Reina and N. R. Shiju, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4957–4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, C. Chen, Y. Tian, S. Chen, R. Luo, D. Li, A. Chen and C. C. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 64, 252–256 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, N. Liao, B. Zheng and H. Zhou, Phys. Lett. A, 2020, 384, 126533 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. R. Ball, K. R. Rivera-Dones, S. Wang, T. F. Kuech, G. W. Huber, I. Hermans and J. A. Dumesic, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 365–374 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Asundi, A. S. Hoffman, P. Bothra, A. Boubnov, F. D. Vila, N. Yang, J. A. Singh, L. Zeng, J. A. Raiford, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. R. Bare and S. F. Bent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19655–19668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luo, H. Song, D. Philo, M. Oshikiri, T. Kako and J. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118965 CrossRef CAS .
N. Keller, J. Ivanez, J. Highfield and A. M. Ruppert, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 296, 120320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. He, W. Guo, Y. Hu, J. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2927–2954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Aslam, V. G. Rao, S. Chavez and S. Linic, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 656–665 CrossRef .
E. Cortés, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700191 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, H. Song, H. Liu and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8016–8035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, J. Zhao, S. Feng, X. Liang and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4651–4654 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Ye, L. Ye, F. Su, Z. Ma, J. Huang, H. Xie, D. E. Doronkin, A. Zimina, J.-D. Grunwaldt and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2821–2830 RSC .
H. Ge, Y. Kuwahara, K. Kusu and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13898–13907 RSC .
H. Ge, Y. Kuwahara, K. Kusu, H. Kobayashi and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10854–10864 RSC .
Q. Chen, Z. Pei, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 623–628 RSC .
M. Gao, P. K. N. Connor and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3151–3160 RSC .
Q. Zhu, K. Ye, W. Zhu, W. Xu, C. Zou, L. Song, E. Sharman, L. Wang, S. Jin, G. Zhang, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2502–2509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gong, C. Li, N. Wei, J. Li, J. Shen, R. Xu, Q. Li, J. Tian and H. Cui, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 275, 119139 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Yang, H.-P. Feng, C.-G. Niu, D.-W. Huang, H. Guo, C. Liang, H.-Y. Liu, S. Chen, N. Tang and L. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131902 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Hao Ge
	Hao Ge received his master's degree in Chemistry and Materials Science from Shanghai Normal University in 2019. He is currently a PhD course student in the Department of Engineering at Osaka University. His current research interests focus on the plasmonic photothermal catalytic CO2 conversion based on molybdenum-based catalysts.

Yasutaka Kuwahara
	Yasutaka Kuwahara received his PhD degree in Engineering from Osaka University in 2011. After the fellowship, he was a researcher at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan, in 2012–2014. He was appointed as an assistant professor at Osaka University in 2014–2019, appointed as a lecturer in 2019, and has been an associate professor since 2021. His current research interests include the design of nanostructured catalysts with multi-functionalities using porous materials and their applications to green chemical reactions and the conversion of energy and resources.

Hiromi Yamashita
	Hiromi Yamashita has been a professor at Osaka University since 2004. He received his PhD degree from Kyoto University in 1987. He was an assistant professor at Tohoku University and an associate professor at Osaka Prefecture University. He has been the editor of Applied Catalysis B: Environmental (2006–), the president of Asia-Pacific Association of Catalysis Societies (2019–), and the president of Catalysis Society of Japan (2019–2020). His research interests include the design of single-site photocatalysts and nanostructured catalysts.

 	Fig. 1  The atomic structure of molybdenum oxide in various crystalline phases. (a) α-MoO3, (b) β-MoO3, (c) h-MoO3, and (d) MoO2. The red sphere represents the oxygen atom. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Atomic and crystal structures of various MoO3 polymorphs α-MoO3. (b) DFT-HSE06 electronic band structures of α-MoO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright © 2017 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Three crystal structures doped with different H+ concentrations: HxMoO3 with OH groups (type 1), HxMoO3 with OH and OH2 groups (type 2), and HxMoO3 with OH and OH2 groups (type 3). Copyright © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of MoO3: (curve A) original sample, (curve B) after polarization at −0.1 V versus Ag/AgCl, and (curve C) using visible light to irradiate the sample of curve B for 10 min. (c) The absorbance change of MoO3 at 800 nm during visible light irradiation and oxidation reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35,43. Copyright © 1992 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Normalized optical extinction due to the LSPRs of metal and metal oxide nanocrystals. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Crystal structures of MoO3 and HxMoO3−y. (c) Electronic band structure regulation of MoO3 by H+ intercalation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47,55. Copyright © 2017 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the LSPR effect in plasmonic materials. (b) Hot carrier generation and the corresponding absorption spectrum of plasmonic metals. (c) Plasmonic metal/semiconductor compound structures that transfer and utilize LSPR-induced hot electrons to facilitate surface reduction reactions. Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) NIR spectra of the prepared Cu2−xS NCs: CuS (x = 1), Cu1.8S (x = 0.2), and Cu1.97S (x = 0.03). Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67 and 108.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the hydrogen bronze formation process via H-spillover. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra. TDOS and PDOS of the (c) pristine MoO3 and (d) heavily H-doped HxMoO3−y. (e) Illustration of the structure of HxMoO3−y in the (010) projection. Blue balls are Mo atoms, red balls are O atoms, and green balls are H atoms. (f) Three-dimensional depiction of the Fermi level electronic charge density distribution of HxMoO3−y.56	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) UV/Vis–NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the HxMoO3−y samples prepared at 160 °C (1) and 140 °C (2) for 12 h, and commercial MoO3 (3). H2 production test from aqueous NH3BH3 solutions at room temperature (b) in the dark and (c) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).69 (d) Illustration of the possible formation process of crystal defects in MoxW1−xO3−y. (e) H2 evolution from NH3BH3 at room temperature of different materials. (f) Wavelength-dependent initial H2 yield rate enhancement of the MoxW1−xO3–y samples upon irradiation by the LED light.75	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid presenting a redox process under an O2 atmosphere and NaBH4 solution, respectively. (b) UV-vis-NIR spectra of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid and pure MoO3. (c) The evolution of the optical response of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid exposed to air. (d) H2 production rate from NH3BH3 solution under light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), and (e) the catalytic activity of the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction in the dark and under light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).79	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (b) plot of the relative concentration of p-nitrophenol over Ru/HxMoO3−y (T °C) catalysts reduced at different temperatures.76 (c) Photocurrent responses of different samples. (d) Time-resolved transient PL decay curves of different samples. (e) The activity of reduced nitrobenzene over different samples under light and dark conditions, respectively. (f) A possible reaction mechanism for the reduction of nitrobenzene derivatives over plasmonic Pd/HxMoO3−y@ZIF-8.85	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Sulfoxide deoxidation reaction mechanism over the Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrid catalyst. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the Pt/HxMoO3–y hybrids with different H2 reduction temperatures. (c) Time course in the sulfoxide deoxygenation over Pt/HxMoO3−y in the dark and under visible light irradiation. (d) The increased yield of activity as a function of the wavelength by LED irradiation.78	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The nanostructure of the prepared MoS2@MoO3-H2-T nanostructure and (b) photocatalytic hydrogen yield over MoS2@MoO3. Copyright © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) UV-vis-NIR spectra and (d) the total number of electrons consumed during CO2 photoreduction. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92,93.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Possible position for the formation of different oxygen vacancies.95 (b) The catalytic performance of several oxide-supported Pt catalysts in liquid-phase CO2 hydrogenation. (c) Valence changes of the Mo species during the in situ Mo K-edge XAFS measurement. (d) Time course of the product selectivity and CO2 conversion over Pt/HxMoO3−y. (e) Reaction mechanism for methanol production from CO2 hydrogenation over Pt/HxMoO3−y.99	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The mechanism of the CO2 hydrogenation reaction based on two SMSI states of Ru/HxMoO3−y. (b) Catalytic performance evolution of the new 1.9 wt% Ru/HxMoO3−y catalyst in CO2 hydrogenation. Copyright © 2022 American Chemical Society. (c) Activity performance in the mixed gas (CO + H2) conversion reaction and the related reaction mechanism. Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society. (d) Surface structure of 3MoOH/Rh(111) in the reaction, and the orange parallelogram shows a unit. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99, 105 and 106.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Calculated band structure of HxMoO3−y and MoO3. (b) Catalytic CO generation over HxMoO3−y and MoO3 under full-spectrum light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright © 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (d) the CO production under visible light irradiation and in the dark over Pt/HxMoO3−y with different morphologies.115 (e) Light wavelength dependence of increased CO production on Pt/HxMoWOy under LED light irradiation, and (f) valence changes of Mo and W species during in situ XAFS measurements.116	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the solar evaporation test. (b) Surface temperature of the evaporator under a solar power density of 1 kW m−2. Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectra of the prepared catalyst. (d) Different energy distribution ratios of the solar evaporation process. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. (e) The mechanisms of charge transfer and bacterial inactivation. (f) Antibacterial activities of the prepared catalysts against S. aureus under NIR light irradiation. Copyright © 2021 Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119–121.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
