Functional metallophosphors for effective charge carrier injection/transport: new robust OLED materials with emerging applications   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B819943D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B819943D
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4457-4482Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFunctional metallophosphors for effective charge carrier injection/transport: new robust OLED materials with emerging applications†

        
          
            Wai-Yeung 
            Wong
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Cheuk-Lam 
            Ho
          
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry and Centre for Advanced Luminescence Materials, Hong Kong Baptist University, Waterloo Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, P.R. China. E-mail: rwywong@hkbu.edu.hk;  Fax: +852-3411-7348;   Tel: +852-3411-7074
Received 
      10th November 2008
    , Accepted 28th January 2009First published on 20th March 2009AbstractOrganic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) show great promise of revolutionizing display technologies in the scientific community. One successful approach for improved device efficiency has been to maximize the electron-hole recombination using dopants that emit from the triplet excited state. In this context, heavy transition metal complexes have recently gained tremendous academic and industrial research interest for fabricating highly efficient phosphorescent OLEDs by taking advantage of the 1:3 exciton singlet/triplet ratio predicted by simple spin statistics. Traditional room-temperature phosphorescent dyes are monofunctional materials working only as light-emitting centres but other key issues including charge generation and transport remain to be addressed in the electroluminescence. This Feature Article highlights recent and current advances in developing new synthetic strategies for multifunctional organometallic phosphors, which integrate both luminescent and charge carrier injection/transport functions into the same molecules so that they perform most, if not all, of the necessary functional roles (viz. photoexcitation, charge injection and transport as well as recombination) for achieving high-efficiency devices. Considerable focus is placed on the design concepts towards the tuning capability of charge-transport characteristics and phosphorescence emission colour of this prominent class of metallophosphors. In particular, the latest research endeavor in accomplishing novel triplet emitters with enhanced charge injection/charge transport of both hole and electron carriers is criticially discussed, which can provide good implications regarding their possible routes for future research development in the field.Wai-Yeung WongWai-Yeung Wong obtained his BSc(Hons) and PhD degrees (with Prof. W.-T. Wong) from the University of Hong Kong. After his postdoctoral stays at Texas A&M University (with Prof. F. A. Cotton) and Cambridge University (with Profs. Lord Lewis and P. R. Raithby), he joined Hong Kong Baptist University in 1998 as Assistant Professor and was promoted to Professor in 2007. He published over 270 articles and was named as Croucher Senior Research Fellow in 2009. His interests are on the syntheses of functional metallopolymers and metallophosphors for OLED, solar cell and NLO applications.Cheuk-Lam HoCheuk-Lam Ho received her BSc(Hons) (2004) and PhD (2007) degrees both from the Hong Kong Baptist University. Her PhD and current postdoctoral research in the laboratory of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong mainly deals with the synthesis of new functional metallophosphors and metallopolymers for light-emitting and photovoltaic applications. She has contributed to a total of about 20 scientific papers in the field to date.
1 Introduction
1.1 Research background
Although the first demonstration of organic electroluminescence (EL) on anthracene appeared in 1963,1 the commercial potential of this phenomenon was not realized until 1987 when Tang and Van Slyke reported efficient green EL in an organic thin-film bilayer device using tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminium (Alq3).2 This principle was later extended by the Cambridge group to devices using conjugated light-emitting organic polymers.3 Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are thus emerging as the leading technology for the new generation of full colour flat-panel displays4 used in electrical appliances including mobile phones, car stereos, digital cameras and televisions. The key advantages of OLEDs for flat-panel display applications are their self-emitting property, high luminous efficiency, full colour capability, wide viewing angle, high contrast, low power consumption, low weight, potentially large area colour displays and flexibility.5 With extensive multidisciplinary research efforts, modern OLEDs bring a number of benefits to people over conventional cathode ray tubes and liquid crystal displays, and are anticipated to revolutionalize the display industry. In view of this, the rapidly growing market for OLED technology is driving both the academic and industrial community towards the development of new materials and advanced manufacturing technology.6 Despite these favourable attributes, significant chemical and physicochemical hurdles must be overcome to realize the full potential of OLEDs.
The simplest OLED, with a single-layer geometry, is constructed with an extremely thin layer of organic EL medium sandwiched between two electrodes. When an electrical potential difference is applied between the anode and the cathode, injection of positively charged holes occurs from the anode and electrons are injected from the cathode to the organic layers. The electrons and holes recombine within the thin emitting material layer to form excitons (bound excited-state electron-hole pairs) which eventually give out the light.5 The colour of the photon is a function of the energy difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the electroluminescent molecule. The wavelength of the light emission can thus be controlled by the extent of π-conjugation in the molecule. However, because of the disordered structure in organic materials, it is more difficult to transport the charge carriers to the emitting zone where the excitons are formed in a single-layer device.7 Moreover, another problem related to such device structure is that the charge carriers tend to remain at one of the electrodes and create space charges that prevent further hole and electron injections. The difference in energy levels between layers creates a potential barrier at the interface. A minimization of the energy barrier between the electrodes and the organic materials is a commonly adopted approach to enhance the injection of the carrier. The functionality of the single-layer device could be dispersed over several layers with minimal potential barrier.8 Therefore, multilayered OLED devices have been widely used instead. The basic multilayered structure of a prototypical OLED is shown in Fig. 1. Components include the transparent conducting oxide anode, hole-transport layer (HTL), emissive layer (EML), electron-transport layer (ETL), and metallic low work function cathode. Each layer plays a specific role in producing EL from the device. The basic mechanism of EL is now well-established.9 Under forward bias, the HTL is oxidized as holes are injected (electrons extracted) from the anode into its HOMO, and the ETL is reduced as electrons are injected from cathode into its LUMO. Charge carriers migrate under the applied electric field and recombine to form singlet and triplet excitons within the EML. These excited-state species can return to the ground state via both radiative and nonradiative decay pathways. Energy level offsets of the anode and cathode work functions from the HTL HOMO and ETL LUMO energies, respectively, strongly influence the intrinsic carrier injection barriers. In some cases, a hole-injection layer (HIL) is introduced for the control and enhancement of hole injection into the HTL. Similar to the holes, an electron-injection layer (EIL) is often used to help the electrons to cross the barrier between the cathode and the ETL. Based on this mechanistic description, the following three key electronic processes must be addressed and optimized to improve the OLED performance: (a) charge injection, (b) charge transport, and (c) electron-hole recombination (i.e. exciton formation) efficiency. The greatest advantages of a multilayered device are the ease for the choice of materials for different layers according to their mobility and bandgap properties. The charge carriers could, in this way, be injected and transported more easily, leading to an increase in the efficiency of the device as compared to the single-layer device. A better transport of electrons in a multilayered device requires a lower electrical field and leads to a more power efficient OLED device. Another important issue for high device performance is the design of EL materials. Nowadays, much attention is devoted to the structural modification of emitting materials for optimizing the light emission and charge transport. In order to reduce the fabrication cost and achieve simpler OLED structures, the development of multifunctional EL materials is of pivotal importance.
 Fig. 1  A typical multilayered OLED device configuration. 
An important breakthrough in tackling the recombination efficiency issue in the advance of modern OLED science and technology is largely based on the utilization of triplet emitters rather than singlet emitters, after the first report by Forrest and co-workers,10 and since then, this has triggered tremendous research activities in phosphorescent molecules over the years with much success. This strategy enhances quantum efficiency (photons generated per electron injected) by taking advantage of the 1:3 exciton singlet/triplet ratio predicted by simple spin statistics. Recombination of holes and electrons results in both singlet and triplet excitons. One of the identified problems in OLEDs for small molecular species lies in the generation of 25% emissive singlet excitons and 75% nonemissive triplet excitons. In most purely organic systems, the energy of triplet exciton will be lost by direct deactivation while only the singlet excited state is responsible for the light emission. The advantage of phosphorescent emitters over the fluorescent counterparts is that they can capture energy from both singlet and triplet excited states, lifting the upper limit of the internal quantum efficiency of the usual fluorescent dopant-based devices from 25% to nearly 100%.11 Phosphorescent emitters with heavy metal ions allow for circumvention of this limitation if the excitons generated by hole-electron recombination reside at a site where efficient spin–orbit coupling leads to efficient singlet–triplet state mixing which eliminates the spin-forbidden nature of the radiative relaxation of the triplet state. Since the triplet states constitute the majority of electrogenerated excited states, the successful use of the triplet manifold in heavy metal complexes to produce light should set a new benchmark towards the efficiency enhancement. Among these, [Ir(ppy)3]12 and [Ir(ppy)2(acac)]13 (Hppy = 2-phenylpyridine) represent the most well-known compounds in this area. While the electronic properties of metal-organic materials are typically characterized by preferential hole transport and low carrier mobilities, other efforts are still needed to optimize OLED efficiency by maximizing carrier transport and mobility of both holes and electrons via tailoring the chemical structures of the phosphorescent complex, which currently remain a formidable challenge.
1.2 Synthesis of heavy metal organometallic electrophosphors
The new ligands required as the synthons for the preparation of new phosphorescent IrIII and PtII emitters were largely synthesized by the well-established organic synthetic procedures through a Suzuki- or Stille-type coupling of its boronic acid or tributylstannyl derivative with appropriate aryl halides. The homoleptic IrIII complexes of the type [Ir(C^N)3] were obtained by direct thermal reaction of [Ir(acac)3] with the corresponding cyclometallating (HC^N) ligands in refluxing glycerol.13 The heteroleptic IrIII compounds [Ir(C^N)2(acac)] (Hacac = acetylacetone) can be synthesized in two steps from the cyclometallation of IrCl3·nH2O with the HC^N ligands to form initially the chloride-bridged dimer, followed by treatment with Hacac in the presence of Na2CO3.14 The PtII complexes were also synthesized using a similar protocol to that for the [Ir(C^N)2(acac)] analogue but instead K2PtCl4 was employed as the metal source (Fig. 2).15Purification of the complexes by column chromatography or preparative thin-layer chromatography on silica usually gave the target complexes as air-stable solids in high purity. The overall synthetic yield depends significantly on the nature and solubility of the ligands employed. All of these metal compounds were fully characterized by NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry, and in many cases, by X-ray crystallography. In each case, the geometry of the homoleptic IrIII complex is facial whereas the heteroleptic IrIII one consists of two C^N ligands in a cis-C,C and trans-N,N chelate disposition.
 Fig. 2  Common synthetic pathways towards IrIII and PtII electrophosphors. 
1.3 Design strategies
The synthetic structural modification to produce multifunctional metallophosphors of variable first triplet (T1) energy states and charge-transport properties can be achieved through variation of the types of metal groups and their ligand chromophores.16 Progress with charge-transporting phosphorescent materials in OLEDs will be reviewed here with the molecules being classified according to the molecular structure of the hole-transporting (or electron-donating D) or electron-transporting (or electron-accepting A) moiety (Fig. 3). To date, the use of fluorenyl chromophores and other related derivatives such as carbazoles offers exciting prospects for the design of new molecular and polymeric materials. One advantage of fluorene-bridged materials is the ease of functionalization of the fluorene 9-position. It is known that carbazole and arylamine units are good for hole-injection and -transportation whereas the 1,3,4-oxadiazole, organoboryl, diarylsulfone and triarylphosphine oxide moieties typically serve as promising electron-deficient components. In the following sections, we focus on the conceptual designs of some multifunctional d6iridium(III) and d8platinum(II) phosphorescent complexes with distinct chelating ligand chromophores, which are grouped under different categories including arylamine, fluorene, carbazole, 2-phenylpyridine (ppy) ligands with some main group moieties, oxadiazole as well as their synthetic combinations. The effects of special chromophores in these light-emitting systems will be critically discussed. As aforesaid, the harvesting of triplet energy using metal-containing compounds has proven to be a successful means of making efficient OLEDs. Some examples include metal-porphyrins,10 cyclometalated IrIII and PtII complexes16 and PtII acetylide species.17
 Fig. 3  Common building blocks for HI/HT, EI/ET and EL components. 
1.4 Nature and tailoring of the electronic excited states
It is an important issue to obtain a full-colour emission spectrum for the phosphorescence of the metallophosphors for practical uses. For full-colour displays, efficient OLEDs emitting the three primary colours, blue (∼450–480 nm), green (∼500–530 nm) and red (∼610–650 nm) with matching efficiency are essential. It is now possible to tune the triplet emission wavelength of phosphor from blue to red simply by changing the ligand structure.18 To date, efficient green triplet emitters for OLEDs are more common than the blue and red congeners. Blue triplet emitters remain more challenging due to the large energy gap required between the excited triplet and ground states to obtain this emission energy.19 Chi and Chou have recently accomplished exciting results in this area.20 Owing to the energy-gap law, the design and synthesis of red phosphors with an efficiency comparable to the green ones are a great challenge.21
The nature and energy of the excited state in mixed-ligand IrIII and PtII complexes can be manipulated by deliberate chemical synthesis. Synthetic control is facilitated by the dependence of the excited state on the orbital configurations within a molecule as well as the relative ease by which different parent ligand structures can be coordinated to the metal centre. Consequently, IrIII and PtII complexes can be modified to express unique luminescent properties to serve a specific functional role. There are two common transitions for the long-lived triplet excited state of cyclometallated IrIII and PtII complexes,15,16 namely, (a) metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) in which an electron is promoted from a metal d orbital to a vacant π* orbital on one of the ligands and (b) ligand-centred (LC) transitions in which an electron is promoted between π orbitals on the coordinated ligand(s) (Fig. 4). For the LC transition, it can be a π–π* or an intraligand charge transfer (ILCT) type or a mixture of both in the majority of cases. Strong spin–orbit coupling induced by the heavy metal atoms facilitates intersystem crossing (ISC) to reach energetically similar triplet states and enables the formation of an emissive, mixed (triplet) excited state T1 (expressed as ΨT1 = aΨMLCT + bΨLC) in which the coefficients a and b refer to the contributions of the 3MLCT and 3LC states, respectively, with the corresponding wavefunctions ΨMLCT and ΨLC.
 Fig. 4  Possible decay pathways for the lowest energy excited states, where knr and kr represent the nonradiative and radiative decay rate constants. 
Phosphorescence refers to a delayed emission process and is typically characterised by emission lifetime (τP) in the microsecond range or longer. In general, phosphorescent materials have some intrinsic disadvantages, such as saturation of emissive states due to an excessively long lifetime as well as triplet–triplet (T–T) annihilation and concentration quenching due to strong bimolecular interactions at high doping levels. However, approaches to reduce the efficiency roll-off are still limited. It is documented that τP is a key factor to cause T–T annihilation for the IrIII- and PtII-doped OLEDs.22 The longer τP of the phosphor usually leads to a more severe T–T annihilation. Shorter lifetimes of the new complexes are thus targeted, which can increase spin-state mixing and reduce the chance of device efficiency decay (vide infra) by weakening this annihilation effect. Also, this undesirable effect can be remarkably inhibited by dispersing the emitter into a host matrix. Unfortunately, this strategy becomes unworkable at high current density (J), and such a phenomenon is very common in state-of-the-art electrophosphorescent OLEDs.23 So, there is still much scope for researchers to rationally design and synthesize new complexes with special ligands to overcome or at least largely minimize this problem.
1.5 Spectroscopic and computational studies
Realizing that the electronic transition properties may greatly determine the photophysical behavior of metallophosphors, assignments of these transitions become critical. Empirically, this may be accomplished with the aid of spectroscopic and redox data. For instance, allowed and partially allowed transitions may be differentiated from the associated absorption extinction coefficient, and the emission profile (structureless versus vibronic bands) may be exploited as a tool to assign the property of the lowest-lying triplet excited state (3MLCT versus3π–π*). While these indirect methods were shown to be more qualitative, the density functional theory (DFT) method offers a very accurate approach for the analysis of the electronic structures of transition metal complexes. The optimized structure can be obtained either with the assistance of X-ray crystal structure or geometrical optimization results in the ground state. Time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations can also be performed with the same functional and basis set at the optimized geometry to obtain electronic transition energies and the frontier orbitals. A combination of excited-state lifetime measurements and computational efforts can provide valuable insight into the nature of the excited state in cyclometallated IrIII and PtII complexes. With reference to the literature DFT data,24 it appears feasible for the excited state of these complexes to contain mixed MLCT-LC character where the HOMO and HOMO-1 are characterized by metal and cyclometallating ligand (π) orbitals and the LUMO and LUMO + 1 by the vacant (π*) ligand orbitals. Thus, it is viable to control the lowest excited state by deliberately adjusting the energy of metal and ligand orbitals, which can be accomplished via substituent effects or by changing the parent ligand structure. If the TD-DFT calculations show that the S0 → S1 transitions (S0 and S1 are the ground and first singlet excited states, respectively) correspond to the HOMO → LUMO transitions with non-zero oscillator strengths, we can simplify the subsequent data interpretations by focusing on the HOMO-LUMO analyses. By monitoring the effect of various ligand permutations within the coordination sphere, it is possible to gain insight into the factors that govern the behavior of these heavy metal complexes and to tailor materials with specific excited-state properties.
1.6 Scope of this article
While some multifunctional organic dyes have been recognized in the OLED field, the parallel chemistry of their metallated congeners is still elusive and is worthy of attention. The key interest in this research area is to determine the nature and extent of the electronic coupling between the metal and the cyclometallating or auxiliary ligand units. Recent work by us and others have encompassed both the synthetic chemistry and optoelectronic characterization of a new series of heavy organometallic triplet emitters functionalized with various bifunctional and trifunctional chromophores and they can be used as efficient phosphorescent dopants or the active monolayer in the OLED technology. While several good publications have already adequately reviewed this field in recent years,16 the purpose of this feature article is to evaluate an interesting new class of IrIII and PtII complexes exhibiting different functional properties so as to improve the charge injection and transport for enhanced electrophosphorescence. From such a study, it provides a useful aid to deduce which structural trends might lead to new phosphorescent materials for more advanced applications. All of these compounds possess excellent photophysical properties (e.g. short phosphorescence lifetime, small linewidth, high colour purity and efficiency), which render them extremely valuable for high-performance optoelectronic and display applications (see ESI, Table S1).† We end by discussing the challenges that remain to be addressed to ensure the commercial viability of these functional materials in EL devices.
2 Classification of multifunctional metallophosphors
2.1 Bifunctional metallophosphors with hole-transporting arylamine and mixed arylamine-fluorene moieties
In general, the efficiency of OLEDs is often limited by the hole-injection (HI) barrier for the materials involved next to the hole-generating anode. While it is well-known that aromatic amines such as NPB constitute one of the key components in many of the hole-transporting (HT) compounds25 because of its electron-rich nature in the presence of the nitrogen lone electron pair, the attachment of arylamine moieties into the metallophosphor core should improve the HI/HT properties of the resulting materials. We and others have reported the homoleptic IrIII phosphor Ir-126,27 and its heteroleptic congener Ir-228 functionalised with diphenylamine in the ppy ligand which can be fabricated into doped or polymer-based OLED devices. The X-ray crystal structures of complexes Ir-1 and Ir-2 have confirmed their formulations.27,28 Both triplet emitters Ir-1 and Ir-2 have excellent thermal stabilities (onset decomposition temperatures Tdec ∼450 and 366 °C, respectively) and very similar phosphorescence quantum yields (PHQYs) of 0.13–0.14. By virtue of the electron-donating effect of the diphenylamino group, it tends to destabilize the HOMO level by the mesomeric effect and raise the HOMO levels of Ir-1 and Ir-2 relative to those of [Ir(ppy)3] and [Ir(ppy)2(acac)], causing bathochromic shifts in the PL and EL maxima from the ppy counterpart. The HOMO levels of Ir-1 and Ir-2 are −4.95 and −5.11 eV {versus −5.05 and −5.28 eV for [Ir(ppy)3] and [Ir(ppy)2(acac)], respectively}.29 The NPh2 units can thus promote hole injection and represent facile charge-trapping moieties for effective exciton formation within the metallophosphors so that the OLEDs using Ir-1 doped in CBP showed lower operational voltage and higher EL efficiency than [Ir(ppy)3]-based devices under identical device structures. The bulky size of the diphenylamino group can also help, to a certain extent, in enhancing the EL efficiency by suppressing a self-quenching process. We fabricated highly efficient OLEDs based on 8 wt% Ir-1 which showed low turn-on voltages (Von ≈ 3–4 V) and very impressive maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) at 13.9%, luminance efficiency (LE) at 60.8 cd A−1, power efficiency (PE) at 49.1 lm W−1 and peak luminance (L) of 48576 cd m−2 at 12.3 V. The bright green devices based on 6 wt% Ir-2 can also furnish the peak efficiencies of 10.3%, 36.9 cd A−1 and 28.6 lm W−1 28 whereas those reported by Yamashita gave efficiencies at 11.8% and 23.7 lm W−1 at 100 cd m−2,30 and both of them appear higher in performance than those of [Ir(ppy)2(acac)] fabricated under the same conditions. According to the work by Ono et al., devices doped with 10 wt% Ir-1 gave the EQE of 12.2% at 6.6 V and a high L of 51900 cd m−2 at 13 V using 1,1-bis[4-(di-p-tolylamino)phenyl]cyclohexane as the HTL instead of NPB.27 High-efficiency polymer-based electrophosphorescent devices consisting of an emissive layer of Ir-1:NPB:TPBI blend in the PVK host (TPBI = 1,3,5-tris[N-(phenyl)benzimidazole]benzene, PVK = poly(9-vinylcarbazole)) were also reported by Ma's group which showed LE as high as 25.2 cd A−1 at 0.85 mA cm−2.31 By blending NPB and TPBI with Ir-1 in the PVK layer, the balance of the charge carrier injection and transport was shown to be further improved, and the accumulation of space charge caused by unbalanced charge transport and direct trapping of charge carriers in Ir-1 can be avoided. The use of Ir-1 in these solution-processable polymer devices has good potential to excel in large area displays and the EML can be formed by simple spin-coating and inkjet printing rather than the evaporation processing techniques, and the devices may simplify the fabrication process by utilizing simple single-layer structures. In other relevant studies, the effects of fused ring and aryl ring substitution in some NPh2-ppy-based IrIII complexes were probed by two independent research groups. A comparative study on the effects of diphenylamine, carbazole and phenoxazine moieties on the emission properties of some homoleptic IrIII complexes was presented by Ono and co-workers and they have established an effective method for carrier injection into the electrophosphor.27 Yamashita and co-workers have described a series of colour-switchable [Ir(C^N)2(acac)]-type heteroleptic compounds and they found that the substituent effects are closely related to the HOMO and LUMO levels of the complexes and can notably contribute to the versatile phosphorescence colour-tuning of the complexes from green to red (ca. 516–671 nm).30 The phosphorescence wavelength depends strongly on the π-conjugation length of the cyclometallating C^N ligand and the substitution positions as well as the substituent inductive effect of the pyridyl ring.  
Compared with the efforts paid to the development of highly efficient low-molecular-weight red phosphors based on vacuum deposition technology, the research on solution-processable red phosphors has not progressed very well.16e,32 In such a solution-processing method, the emitters are very often mixed with a host polymer solution instead of CBP solution because of their poor film-forming properties in the latter case. However, the performance is usually poor for the devices prepared by this way. While the dendritic IrIII triplet emitters represent another promising group of metallophosphors in advancing the OLED research,16e the synthetic complication for dendrimers still urges researchers to find good alternatives for high-performance solution-processed devices using molecular materials of definite molecular weight. Keeping this in mind, we have prepared a series of triphenylamine (TPA) based dendritic ligands and their pure red-emitting bifunctional dendrimers of three different generations Ir-3 to Ir-5 where Ir-4 and Ir-5 represent complexes anchored with these HT dendrons (Scheme 1).33 Remarkably, these dendritic materials provide a good channel to iridophosphors with optimised red emission efficiency/colour purity trade-offs for the pure red OLEDs. The TPA dendrons can participate in the electrochemical process and charge transport of the dendrimers in addition to controlling intermolecular interactions. The excellent performance is thought to be caused by the presence of the TPA dendritic structure of the IrIII complexes featuring favourable HI/HT properties. These new metallodendrimers are highly amorphous (glass-transition temperature Tg of 145–220 °C) and thermally stable (Tdec of 417–460 °C) solids. Both Tdec and Tg values were found to increase gradually with increasing the size of TPA dendron. They gave deep red PL bands in CH2Cl2 peaking at 620, 636 and 641 nm for Ir-3, Ir-4 and Ir-5, respectively and their lifetimes of 0.81–1.40 µs in degassed toluene are suggestive of their triplet percentage. From the phosphorescence spectra of the neat film of Ir-3 to Ir-5, a substantial increase of emission intensity with increasing dendritic generation can be observed (Fig. 5), and this is attributed to the depressed self-quenching effect of the triplet-emitting metallic cores upon increasing the dendron size.34 Upon introducing the TPA units, charges can indirectly hop from the outer amine units to the inner Ir core, and hence the problem of carrier-mobility reduction with increasing dendron generation could be overcome, which was also the case in the phenylene-derived dendrimers.16e In the potential range of 0.4–1.5 V, there are one, two and five reversible anodic redox waves for Ir-3, Ir-4 and Ir-5, respectively (Fig. 6). The electrochemically-estimated HOMO energy levels follow the order Ir-5 (−4.96 eV) > Ir-4 (−4.99 eV) > Ir-3 (−5.11 eV), signaling that a dendritic amine structure and its size can markedly improve the HI/HT properties of the IrIII phosphors. True red OLED devices fabricated using Ir-4 and Ir-5 afforded an EL maximum at ca. 640 nm and an excellent Commission Internationale de L'Eclairage (CIE) colour coordinates of (0.70, 0.30) in each case. These coordinates are very close to the National Television System Committee (NTSC) standard for red subpixels (0.67, 0.33) of cathode ray tube displays, and are found to be independent of J. The absence of emission from CBP and Alq3 suggests an efficient energy transfer from the host exciton to the IrIII phosphor upon electrical excitation and the effective hole-blocking effect of 2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP). The best device based on 8 wt% Ir-4 achieved a Von of 4.4 V, a maximum L of 7450 cd m−2 at 17 V, EQE, LE and PE of 11.7%, 5.82 cd A−1 and 3.65 lm W−1, respectively at 5 V, which is a manifestation of the coordination of TPA as functional dendrons in the Ir dopant to improve charge-transporting properties and reduce intermolecular interactions between emissive Ir cores. It is important to note that the conventional HTL was not necessary for getting such good performance, further reflecting the outstanding properties of TPA. Likewise, the red-emitting device with 10 wt% Ir-5 led to a maximum L of 6140 cd m−2 at 16 V, EL efficiencies of 7.36% (at 6 V) and 3.72 cd A−1 and 2.29 lm W−1 (at 5 V). The Ir-5-doped device generally showed a higher J than that of Ir-4-doped device, owing to the better HI/HT characteristics of the dendritic array in Ir-5 than Ir-4. Saliently, the efficiencies of these devices with CIE coordinates of (0.70, 0.30) represent one of the highest ever reported for pure red solution-processed devices and are comparable to, if not better than, those for the vacuum-deposited devices with similar CIE colour.34,35 The lower luminosity of these red OLEDs is due to their characteristic authentic red emission in a spectral region where the eye has poor sensitivity. The device fabricated with 8 wt% Ir-4 also outperformed the best evaporated device doped with Ir-3 in CBP [EQE of 10.3% and CIE coordinates (0.68, 0.32)].18b This work presents an approach for combining the advantages of solution processing and the use of charge-transporting materials with the high efficiency potential of phosphorescent IrIII complexes for the construction of OLEDs. This creates a new profile in a single system to facilitate hole injection for efficient EL.
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of Ir-3 to Ir-5. 
 Fig. 5  The PL spectra for the neat films of Ir-3 to Ir-5 at 290 K. 
 Fig. 6  
            Cyclic voltammograms for Ir-3 to Ir-5. 
Likewise, the synthesis, electrochemistry, photophysics and electrophosphorescence of several bifunctional neutral and ionic IrIII complexes (Ir-6 to Ir-9) derivatized with HI/HT diphenylaminofluorene units in which the HT and EL functional cores are coupled together to result in more efficient charge transport in the electrically-driven light generation.36–38 The HOMO and LUMO levels for Ir-6 to Ir-9 match well with the energy levels for NPB (HOMO: −5.2 eV)38 and TPBI (LUMO: −2.7 eV).38 We demonstrated that the NPh2 end-capping units are capable of lowering the ionisation potential (i.e. elevating the HOMO level), inducing morphologically stable amorphous thin-film formation, and enhancing the thermal stability of Ir-6 and Ir-7 as compared to Ir-10 and Ir-11.36,39 A better HI/HT ability in Ir-6 and Ir-7 can be expected upon adding the terminal NPh2 units. Both of the robust metallophosphors Ir-6 and Ir-7 displayed intense yellow to orange electrophosphorescence with very high EL efficiencies. For optimised devices at 5 wt% Ir-6, the maximum L reached ∼45530 cd m−2 at 12 V and the highest LE is 34.8 cd A−1 at 1 mA cm−2, corresponding to a peak PE of 18.2 lm W−1 and an EQE of 10.5%.36 We also extended the work to the ionic metallophosphors Ir-8 and Ir-9 which are expected to possess many merits for solid-state lighting and display applications and show good charge-transfer properties as compared to the neutral species.38 In spite of the impressive scope that charged complexes can offer in the OLED industry, the poor sublimability of charged IrIII dopant and its inferior compatibility with common hydrophobic polymer host tends to hinder their widespread practical applications. Interestingly, cationic Ir-8 and Ir-9 coordinated by the HT groups can be vacuum-sublimed without significant decomposition to successfully make evaporated orange-emitting OLEDs. The X-ray crystal structure of Ir-9 confirms the cis-C,C and cis-N,N arrangement around the distorted octahedral IrIII centre (Fig. 7).38 Efficient OLEDs doped with 5 wt% Ir-8 can be fabricated with peak efficiencies of 6.5%, 19.7 cd A−1 and 18.4 lm W−1. The work provides a good platform for developing vacuum-sublimable charged metallophosphors for the design of highly efficient OLEDs and light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs). It is envisioned that the use of ionic liquids to enhance charge injection for better device performance would be worthy of future investigation. The multi-component PtII complexes Pt-1 and Pt-2, also became known recently, in which HI/HT and EL functional units co-exist in a single molecule catering for more efficient charge injection/transport.40 The monofunctional Pt-3 was prepared to serve as a control complex for comparison. In the presence of a diarylamino unit, a higher Tg was found for Pt-1 and Pt-2 (∼175 °C) than that of Pt-3 (136 °C). Similar to the IrIII analogue, the HOMO energy level for each of Pt-1 and Pt-2 is elevated (−5.12 and −5.06 eV for Pt-1 and Pt-2, respectively) relative to Pt-3 (−5.29 eV). The fluorene-based cyclometallating ligands substituted with diarylamino units can effectively suppress the nonradiative deactivation due to the strong intermolecular interactions commonly encountered for the [Pt(C^N)(acac)]-type complexes.15 Improved hole injection/transportation and suppressed excimer formation are also achieved in the OLEDs doped with Pt-1 in a CBP host and efficiencies can reach 6.64% and 15.4 cd A−1 at 7.5 V. The present work recognizes the use of robust Pt-based triplet emitters in the fabrication of highly efficient monochromatic OLEDs through the design of multifunctional chelating ligands.
  
 Fig. 7  The X-ray crystal structure of the cation of Ir-9. 

          Exciton-exciton annihilation is a crucial issue in phosphorescent materials because of the longer triplet exciton lifetime, and it typically leads to a decrease of EL efficiency at high J.41 It occurs when two excitons meet and form a single higher excited state, thus resulting in the loss of an exciton. Thus, such process depends on the concentration of excitons: excitons will meet more frequently at high concentrations, leading to a faster decay. Recently, a new molecular design strategy has been developed towards organometallic triplet emitters with minimised T–T annihilation. We have synthesized new orange triplet emitters Ir-12, Ir-13 and Pt-4 as well as the red phosphor Ir-14 bearing fluorene-based derivatives with two sterically bulky TPA moieties42 at the 9-position of fluorene ring which have sufficiently high Tg to avoid crystallization. All of them are thermally stable solids (Td > 320 °C) and possess high Tg (183–250 °C), suggesting the pivotal role of TPA moieties in improving the amorphous nature of the phosphors (versusTg of 118 °C for Ir-10). Such amorphous feature is desirable for OLED applications because of the good morphological stability of the resulting films. We have demonstrated the potential of these amorphous complexes in facilitating HI, alleviating the T–T annihilation problem at high J and fabricating simple solution-processable OLEDs even with the use of a small molecular host only, which makes them good multi-component phosphorescent materials. Remarkably, efficient, stable OLEDs can be obtained in the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/x% dopant:CBP/BCP/Alq3/LiF/Al without the need for a HTL and the peak EQE for these devices occurred at higher J values. The best orange-emitting devices made from Ir-12 (or Ir-13) achieved the peak L value of 25660 (20100) cd m−2 at 24 (25) V, a maximum EQE of 4.63 (6.43)%, an LE of 15.07 (20.42) cd A−1 and a PE of 2.36 (3.05) lm W−1. The pure red-emitting device made from Ir-14 (3 wt%) can achieve a peak L of 6471 cd m−2 at 21 V, a peak EQE of 4.23%, an LE of 1.69 cd A−1 and PE of 0.27 lm W−1. The device with Pt-4 (10 wt%) showed an encouraging performance with a peak L of 16070 cd m−2 at 17 V, a maximum EQE of 3.36%, an LE of 9.55 cd A−1 and a PE of 2.31 lm W−1. It is interesting that the EQE generally increases with increasing J values (even for J ≥ 100 mA cm−2) for Ir-12 to Ir-14, suggesting that saturation of the phosphorescence sites is not severe for these complexes. Negligible or only very weak aggregate interaction is present because the sterically demanding TPA units prevent close contact between the dopant molecules, akin to the system with the bulky aryl side chains at the 9-position of the fluorene.43 Even at the higher doping level, the roll-off of EQE is only gentle with increasing J. This is contrary to most of the literature data where severe T–T annihilation caused by the strong bimolecular quenching effect prevails.41 The results are also consistent with the theoretical data. Assuming that only the dopant triplet excitons participate in the T–T annihilation process and there is a strong spin–orbit coupling for the dopant molecules induced by the heavy-atom perturbation of Ir and Pt, the dependence of EQE on J can be expressed by equation (1):41c (1)
Here, EQE0 is the quantum efficiency in the absence of T–T annihilation, kTT is the T–T annihilation rate, q is the electronic charge, d is the thickness of the exciton formation zone, and J0 is the onset current density at EQE = ½EQE0. The value of J0 for the device with Ir-13 (12 wt%) obtained by the theoretical fitting is 2534 ± 176 mA cm−2 (Fig. 8). It is worth noting that even other Ir complexes with much more bulky dendritic ligands cannot fulfil such behavior within all operational J values.16e,44,45 All of the above results agree with the strong anti-T–T annihilation ability of Ir-12 to Ir-14. The high value above which T–T annihilation would dominate, also confirms the successful exploitation of our approaches to relieve a bottle-neck problem in phosphorescent OLEDs.  
 Fig. 8  (a) EQE versusJ for Ir-13-doped OLEDs. (b) Experimental EQEversusJ data fitted by a theoretical equation involving T–T annihilation for devices doped with Ir-13 (at 12 wt.-%). 
2.2 Bifunctional metallophosphors with hole-transporting carbazole moiety
Many research groups have extensively investigated the use of carbazole, a structural analogue of fluorene and diphenylamine, as the building block for the synthesis of small molecules, oligomers, dendrimers or polymers.27,44c,46 The current interest in carbazole-based materials is largely connected with the development of OLEDs46 and organic photorefractive materials,47 in which their abilities to transport holes and serve as triplet hosts48 are exploited. The relatively high charge carrier mobility, good thermal stability and inexpensive raw materials also render them attractive for truly practical optoelectronic applications. Typically, PVK is a unipolar hole transporter and CBP possesses a more bipolar transport character.49 To date, many carbazole-based organic oligomers are high-mobility HT materials which are characterized by tunable and high-energy triplet levels, and they are widely used as the host materials for different metal-organic guests emitting a wide spectrum of visible colours.48b,50Carbazole derivatives can be easily functionalized at the 3-, 6-, or 9-position, allowing for a variety of functional molecules. Although IrIII phosphors and carbazole derivatives have been widely investigated in the OLED area as phosphorescent dopants and host materials, respectively, a smart combination of both structural groups is still in its infancy in the OLED field and represents a good challenge for effective injection of charge carriers into the phosphor. To design electrophosphors with good charge-balance, we have developed elegant synthetic routes to give a series of substituted 9-arylcarbazole derivatives (Scheme 2) and their bifunctional IrIII complexes Ir-15 to Ir-29 in which the hole-transporting and electrophosphorescent functional groups are integrated into one molecule (Chart 1).51
 Scheme 2  Synthetic routes to the cyclometallating carbazole-derived ligands. 
The robust Ir-carbazolyl complexes Ir-15 to Ir-29 have been recognized for their prominent role in ensuring high EL efficiency by elevating the HOMO levels and hence enhancing the HI/HT or hole-trapping features, enhancing the morphological stability as well as EL efficiencies as compared to the ppy and 1-phenylisoquinolinato (piq) congeners. Since each of them underwent oxidation at a less-positive potential than the parent species without carbazole, the improved capability to favour the injection of holes can be confirmed. These complexes are thus promising dual functional triplet emitters which would have a positive contribution in the hole injection and/or transport and carrier mobility of the thin films in the devices. The effect of isomerism (e.g.Ir-16versusIr-18 or Ir-23versusIr-25) in governing the functional properties of these phosphors and the resulting device performance was also probed. The short τP together with the high PHQY permits the fabrication of highly efficient devices. These molecules are capable of performing separate functional roles (i.e. hole transport as well as triplet emission) in a single molecule and the OLED devices show superior performance to those with the neat ppy or piq ligands. The photophysics, electrochemistry and OLED performance of these materials depend heavily on the ligand substituent effects and their excited state properties. Gratifyingly, these luminescent IrIII compounds provide a demonstration of multiple colours in iridophosphors via facile structural derivatization of the carbazolylpyridyl moiety. We have also expanded similar chemistry to the [Pt(C^N)(acac)] series with equally interesting results.52 The concept was successfully expanded by Ono and co-workers to a homoleptic Ir complex containing 2-(N-carbazolyl)pyridine ligands in which the carbazole ring can serve as a potential functional moiety of [Ir(ppy)3] for enhancing the device performance.27 A number of literature references are also available to exploit various carbazole dendrons in the generation of new cyclometallated IrIII dendrimers of different emission characteristics.53 These dendritic systems are generally superior to the non-carbazole-containing ones in terms of the HT ability.
 Chart 1  9-Arylcarbazole-derived cyclometallated iridium(III) complexes 

Bright green triplet emitters. 
The homoleptic metal chelates Ir-15 to Ir-1751a,51e and their heteroleptic analogues Ir-22 to Ir-2451e emit strong bright green phosphorescence (λem ≈ 514 nm, PHQY ≈ 0.41–0.45) at room temperature in both solution and solid states upon light irradiation. The first triplet energy levels of these complexes (T1 ≈ 2.41 eV) are close to each other and that of fac-[Ir(ppy)3] (2.43 eV),12a indicative of the negligible influence of X on the spectral colour tuning. Each of them shows outstanding EL performance, presumably thanks to the short τP and good HT properties of carbazole, which may help diminish the quenching of the triplet exciton. The performance parameters of the best device for Ir-15 (Ir-17) can reach maximum EQE of 11.6% (12.9%), LE of 38.0 cd A−1 (43.4 cd A−1) and PE of 23.9 lm W−1 (33.4 lm W−1), which outweigh that of fac-[Ir(ppy)3]-based device under a similar device structure.12a


Tuning the colour to blue-green. 
Electron-withdrawing substituents on pyridine can stabilize the HOMO by removing electron density from the metal, whereas the donating moieties show an opposite effect.54 This relationship is convoluted by the fact that withdrawing groups in pyridine also lower the energy of the LUMO (i.e. increasing the electron affinity of the parent ligand) (Fig. 9). The methyl groups essentially contribute to the LUMO of Ir-19 or Ir-26; the inductive effect brought about by the electron-donating substituent raises the LUMO orbital energy and increases the HOMO-LUMO gap relative to Ir-15 (or Ir-22). The electron-donating 4-Me-substituted complexes Ir-19 and Ir-26 show the highest energy gap, thus resulting in a slight spectral blue shift from Ir-15 and Ir-22, respectively (cf. Δλ = 9 nm for both series: Ir-15versusIr-19 and Ir-22versusIr-26).51e The steric effect of the Me group also forces the carbazole-pyridine aromatic rings out of coplanarity and twists the ligand which tends to reduce delocalization and π-acceptor ability of the molecule. This makes the charge transfer event more difficult, and a blue spectral shift becomes apparent. The performance of Ir-26 is particularly impressive with the best EL efficiencies at 6 wt% being 10.8%, 36.0 cd A−1 and 30.7 lm W−1.
 Fig. 9  HOMO and LUMO levels of Ir-16 to Ir-19 and Ir-23 to Ir-26. The dashed lines correspond to the levels for the heteroleptic series Ir-23 to Ir-26. All the energy levels are shown in eV. 


Tuning the colour to yellow and orange. 
Since the pyridine ring contributes mostly to the LUMO level of these Ir-carbazolyl complexes, the electron-withdrawing fluoro-group tends to lower the LUMO energy and thereby decreases the energy gap of the emitting state (Ir-16versusIr-18, Δλ = 15 nm; Ir-23versusIr-25, Δλ = 17 nm). While electron-withdrawing groupsmeta to the site of coordination in Ir-26 and Ir-2751b,51c increase the field strength of the ligand and concomitantly enhance d-orbital splitting, the notable difference in the observed emission energies between them has been attributed to the mesomeric and inductive effect of the F atom as opposed to the purely inductive ability of the CF3group. For Ir-18 and Ir-25 (with the PL peak at 506 and 531 nm, respectively), the CIE coordinates are shifted from (0.23, 0.61) to (0.31, 0.62), with the colour shift from bright green to greenish-yellow. Our results show that optimum device performance can be achieved at the doping level of 8 wt% of Ir-25 with a maximum L of 48340 cd m−2 at 14 V, and peak efficiencies of 10.4%, 38.0 cd A−1 and 13.1 lm W−1. With the bulky, inductively electron-withdrawing CF3group on the pyridyl ring in Ir-27, an interesting orange electrophosphor (λem ≈ 556 nm in EL) is produced which can afford well-performed devices with the highest efficiencies at 40.2 cd A−1, corresponding to an EQE of 12.4% and a PE of 24.0 lm W−1.


Tuning the colour to saturated red. 
For OLEDs to be useful in display applications, true red, green, and blue emissions of sufficient luminous efficiencies and proper chromaticity are required. To date, there is a greater success in the research of a green triplet emitter than that of a red one. Recently, the development of materials for red OLEDs has indeed proceeded through several important evolutional stages.21a The design and synthesis of efficient red emitters is intrinsically more difficult, which manifests the fate of energy gap law.21 Theoretically, the law predicts that the rate of radiationless deactivation increases as the emission gap decreases due to the matching of wavefunctions between the emitting state and highly vibrational levels of the ground electronic state, resulting in a fast T1 → S0 internal conversion, followed by the solvent (or lattice in the solid state) deactivation. This quenching mechanism is intrinsic and hence poses the main obstacle for highly efficient red emitters. Many red organic dyes currently in use do not show a good compromise between device efficiency and colour purity. Among the red-emitting iridium complexes, [Ir(piq)3] is one of the most popular ones.14b,18b To improve the charge injection and transport in [Ir(piq)3], bulky carbazole group in the ligand frame was introduced to reduce the barrier height for hole injection and decrease the triplet-triplet annihilation. Very recently, highly efficient pure red OLEDs based on sublimable and solution-processable IrIII red-emitting derivatives Ir-20, Ir-21, Ir-28 and Ir-29 have been fabricated successfully using carbazole-isoquinoline chromophores.51d The HOMO stability and emission energy are not strongly affected by the identity of X and its inductive influence on the attached aryl ring. From the electrochemical data, addition of the electron-rich carbazole moiety can notably rise the HOMO level, making these four phosphors better HI/HT materials than [Ir(piq)3] and [Ir(piq)2(acac)]. They are made into electrophosphorescent OLEDs either via vacuum thermal deposition or relatively cheaper solution processing techniques. For the former case, a peak EQE of 11.8% (10.2 cd A−1 and 5.25 lm W−1) with excellent CIE colour coordinates of (0.68, 0.33) can be obtained. Such EQE values are some of the highest for saturated red OLEDs. The performance is also superior to the best vacuum-evaporated device doped with [Ir(piq)3] [EQE ≈ 10.3% and CIE (0.68, 0.32)]18b and [Ir(PEQ)2(acac)] {PEQ = 2-[(E)-2-phenyl-1-ethenyl]quinoline, EQE ≈ 7.2% and CIE (0.66, 0.33)}34a in CBP host. It is likely that this excellent performance is related to the carbazolyl structure. The enhanced HT properties of the complexes have been demonstrated for devices based on spin-coated layer without the need for an additional HTL. The best EL efficiencies of 7.65%, 6.18 cd A−1 and 1.07 lm W−1 at a concentration of 5 wt% were observed in the spin-coated device. We believe that the ease of synthesis and the merits of good EL performance as well as ready solution processing that these phosphors can offer pave the way to the advance of true red OLEDs and such work represents an attractive avenue to developing pure red phosphors with optimized efficiency/colour purity trade-offs, which remains a big challenge in the field.
Along this line, a range of morphologically-stable 9-alkylcarbazole-derived heteroleptic IrIII complexes were also reported recently by Yang and co-workers.46d,55 In these reports, a prominent colour tuning strategy of phosphorescence emission from blue-green to almost red is made by altering the ligation of metal with carbon atom at the 2 or 3 position of carbazole unit in these linkage isomers. The more electron-donating C–3 atom of carbazole pushes up the energy of metal d orbital when it is bonded to the metal, resulting in a higher HOMO than that of the less electron-donating 2-position. This approach is obviously different from those commonly observed for other complexes in which the emission wavelength can often be tuned by changing the electronic nature via utilizing the difference of spectrochemical series of ligands16f and/or position of the substituents on the cyclometallated ligands.


New colour tuning strategy. 
To summarize, the aforesaid work blows fresh air into the OLED field by providing a new avenue for the rational design of Ir-carbazolyl electrophosphors via synthetically tailoring the electronic character of the carbazolylpyridine ring (Fig. 10). The approach is different from that described by Chi et al. on IrIII complexes with orthometallated quinoxaline ligands in which the colour tuning is induced by carbon-to-nitrogen atom substitution at the cyclometallating ligand framework.56 The excited-state properties of the Ir-carbazolyl series can be manipulated, which allows the tuning of phosphorescence energies from bluish-green to deep red for Ir-15 to Ir-29. Simply changing the electron-donating and electron-withdrawing nature of the pyridyl ligands gives rise to a variation of the electronic properties at the metal centre, which in turn is manifested in the redox propensity and HT/ET features of the resulting complexes. Therefore, the phosphorescence wavelength maxima follow the orders of Ir-19 < Ir-15 ≈ Ir-16 ≈ Ir-17 < Ir-18 < Ir-20 and Ir-26 < Ir-22 ≈ Ir-23 ≈ Ir-24 < Ir-25 < Ir-27 < Ir-28 (Fig. 11). The work can thus reveal a superior device performance coupled with good colour-tuning versatility suitable for multi-colour display technology.
 Fig. 10  Colour tuning of the phosphorescence spectra of carbazole-based heteroleptic IrIII phosphors by structural modifications of the ligand substituents and their positions. 
 Fig. 11  Facile phosphorescence colour tuning of Ir-carbazolyl phosphors. 

2.3 Metallophosphors with mixed carbazole-fluorene moiety
The use of fluorenyl groups and their derivatives offers exciting perspectives for the design of new molecular and polymeric materials in various domains of optoelectronic research. The fluorene ring contains a rigidly planar biphenyl unit in the chromophore. One advantage of fluorene-bridged materials lies in its ease of functionalization at the C-9 position, which can control the solubility, emission wavelength, processability and interchain interactions in films.46a These materials are synthetically easily accessible and possess high thermal and chemical stability as well as high emission quantum yields. Many fluorene-based IrIII complexes including Ir-10 and Ir-11 have been shown to be promising candidates in OLED studies.39,46b,46d,55,57
Following this, there are also many recent reports on combining both carbazole and fluorene groups elegantly in the design of novel electrophosphorescent complexes. While many literature reports have shown the excellent performance of fluorene-derived organic molecules58 and their metallated derivatives46a in various light-emitting applications, these emitters generally suffer from a large HI barrier. We have therefore accomplished the synthesis of mixed fluorene-carbazole chelating ligands for producing several phosphorescent IrIII cyclometallated complexes Ir-30 to Ir-33 by coupling the HT carbazole units to the fluorene-based ppy moieties.59 Extension of the π-conjugation through incorporation of electron-rich carbazole units to the fluorene fragment increases the HOMO levels and improves the charge balance in the resulting complexes. All of them do not sublime readily under vacuum owing to their high molecular weights and cannot be used for evaporated OLED devices. As compared to the non-carbazole complex Ir-10, both of Ir-30 and Ir-31 show an obvious red shift in the emission profile after adding the carbazole moiety which can destabilize the ground state of the complex by electron donation. The carbazole derivatives also extend the electronic π-conjugation framework of the ligands which can decrease the LUMO energy levels. The HOMO levels are higher for the 3-substituted 9-phenylcarbazole end group than for the N-coordinated carbazole unit (i.e.Ir-31 > Ir-30 and Ir-33 > Ir-32). The HOMO levels of Ir-30 to Ir-33 are relatively close to the Fermi level of PEDOT (−5.0 eV),48a resulting in a good HI contact and an improvement in the hole carrier balance in the OLEDs even without the usual HTL. The vibronic structure in the emission profile suggests a substantial involvement of the LC π–π* transitions in the emission. As the size of the cyclometallating organic group increases, a weakening of the spin–orbit coupling and hence an increasing amount of the 3π–π* character in the lowest energy excited state were observed. Under photoexcitation, all of them emit an intense orange light. While we are aware that orange-emitting EML obtained by spin-coating are very scarce to date, OLEDs using these multi-component complexes as the solution-processed EML have been fabricated which showed very high peak efficiencies (9.6%, 29.8 cd A−1 and 13.4 lm W−1).
Zhu and co-workers have also coupled 9-carbazole ring to the red-emitting Ir-fluorene heteroleptic chromophore with 2-(2-pyridyl)benzimidazolate as the auxiliary ligand by following the post-Suzuki coupling method.60 Here, the fluorene spacers are critical in improving the solubility and solution processability and the HT carbazolyl end groups are shown to be able to shift the phosphorescence into the red region (λem = 622 nm) and increase the morphological stability. Confidently, all of these features would render these carbazole-containing IrIII complexes great potential for use in solution-processable high-efficiency doped OLEDs. Likewise, Bryce and co-workers have reported a series of phosphorescent homoleptic Ir complexes with carbazolyl(fluorenyl)pyridine ligands in which the carbazole moieties are bonded at the C-2 and C-3 positions to the fluroene ring and their redox and photophysical properties studied.46b
  
2.4 Metallophosphors with ligands for effective electron-injection/electron-transport
Attempts were also made to develop new metallophosphors with electron-injection/electron-transporting (EI/ET) properties. Six new homoleptic and heteroleptic IrIII complexes with electron-withdrawing groups on the phenyl ring of ppy (i.e.Ir-34 to Ir-39) have been prepared in our recent studies and the results are systematically compared to those for ppy congeners containing other main group moieties Ir-40 to Ir-47 (Chart 2) as well as the triphenylamine-based analogue Ir-1 and Ir-2 with good HI/HT features.26,28 The π-accepting B(Mes)2 group and inductively electron-withdrawing POPh2 and SO2Ph moieties can provide a favourable destination for electrons in the MLCT processes to stabilize the MLCT states. Relative to [Ir(ppy)3] (511 nm) and [Ir(ppy)2(acac)] (520 nm), there is a large red shift in the phosphorescence wavelength for Ir-34 (581 nm) and Ir-37 (605 nm). This is in contrast to the recent report by You and Park on a heteroleptic Ir species with the B(Mes)2 group attached to a different position of ppy where it shows the opposite trend.61 Complexes Ir-34 and Ir-37 also show significant bathochromic shifts in their MLCT absorption and phosphorescence maxima as compared to other complexes in the same homoleptic and heteroleptic series. This is in complete contrast to the phenomenon commonly observed in the literature in which the emission spectra of IrIII complexes typically show hypsochromic shifts when an inductively electron-withdrawing group (such as F) is introduced to the phenyl moiety of ppy.18g However, for Ir-34 and Ir-37 with an electron-withdrawing boryl group on the phenyl moiety of ppy, they show an opposite trend. A similar phenomenon was also found for Ir-38 (541 nm) and Ir-39 (550 nm), though the extent of red-shift was less significant for Ir-35 and Ir-36 in the homoleptic series. These interesting results can be rationalized from the electronic structures of the heteroleptic series (Ir-37 to Ir-39, Ir-2, Ir-44 to Ir-47) studied by the computational TD-DFT methods (Fig. 12). Here, similar HOMO characters with the major contribution from the π-orbitals of the phenyl ring chelated to Ir and Ir t2g-d orbitals were found in each case (∼89% contribution in HOMOs for Ir-37, Ir-38, Ir-44 and Ir-45, and 65–87% for Ir-2, Ir-39, Ir-46 and Ir-47). The LUMOs, which show large differences among the complexes, are more critical in modulating the optical properties of Ir-37, Ir-38 and Ir-39. While the pyridyl ring π-orbitals contribute 63–71% to the LUMOs of Ir-2, Ir-38 and Ir-44 to Ir-47, they are no longer the major contributor to the LUMOs for Ir-37 and Ir-39 (only ca. 35 and 44%, respectively). For Ir-37, the LUMO is also distributed over the three-coordinate boron atom (21%) and the mesityl groups (12%), as well as the phenyl ring (32%). Similarly, the arylsulfonyl moiety (21% to the LUMO) in Ir-39 would be a good electron sink for the stabilization of MLCT states. Thus, the MLCT process will transfer a significant amount of electron density to the B(Mes)2 unit in Ir-37 and the SO2Ph moiety in Ir-39, while the MLCT processes in other IrIII complexes in both series are much more oriented towards the pyridyl moiety. Owing to the presence of an empty pπ orbital, the B(Mes)2 moiety will tend to stabilize the MLCT states strongly, giving more red-shifted MLCT absorption bands (ca. 513 and 576 nm). Accordingly, the low-energy MLCT state of Ir-37 results in an intense red phosphorescence at 605 nm. The higher oxidation potential (0.66 V) of Ir-39versusIr-37 (0.36 V) also provides a good evidence for the strong inductive electron-withdrawing property of the SO2Ph unit as compared to the inductively donating B(Mes)2 group in Ir-37, accounting for the lower HOMO energy in Ir-39 than Ir-37, and hence Ir-39 emits at a higher energy than Ir-37. The way Ir-39 behaves is quite similar to that observed in some pentafluorophenyl-substituted Ir complexes in which coupling of an electron-withdrawing pentafluorophenyl group to the ppy ring in different substituent positions can achieve emission colour tuning.63 The strong inductive-withdrawing influence of the polar PO group in Ir-38 was shown to lower significantly the LUMO energy, thus red-shifting its emission relative to [Ir(ppy)2(acac)]. In view of the lower oxidation and more negative reduction potentials (0.58 V and −2.40 V, respectively) of Ir-38 relative to Ir-39 (0.66 and −2.26 V), POPh2 should be a weaker electron-withdrawing moiety than SO2Ph. Thus, the pendant phenyl rings in Ir-38 show a weaker electron-accepting ability than that in Ir-39, in agreement with their very minor contribution (2%) to the LUMO in the former case. So, the phenyl pendants are not effective for lowering the MLCT energy in Ir-38, giving rise to a shorter emission wavelength at 541 nm (versus 550 nm for Ir-39). With the electron-withdrawing B(Mes)2, POPh2 and SO2Ph moieties, Ir-34, Ir-35 and Ir-36 are also readily reduced, favouring the EI/ET character. So, Ir-38 and Ir-39 provide the first examples of yellow-emitting IrIII phosphors with enhanced EI/ET features. Since Ir-34, Ir-35 and Ir-36 are more difficult to be oxidized as compared to [Ir(ppy)3], their relatively poorer HI/HT properties together with the good EI/ET features would offer a more balanced carrier-injection to these metallophosphors, catering for an improvement in the overall device performance. Saliently, these results provide a completely new and effective strategy for carrier injection into the electrophosphor to afford high-performance OLEDs suitable for various display applications.
 Chart 2  
Main group element-derived cyclometallated iridium(III) complexes 
 Fig. 12  Plots of the LUMO (top) and HOMO (bottom) for Ir-36, Ir-37, Ir-38 and Ir-39. 

Bright green triplet emitters. 
Remarkably, the homoleptic Ir-1, Ir-35, Ir-36, Ir-40, Ir-41, Ir-43 and heteroleptic Ir-2, Ir-44, Ir-45 and Ir-47 complexes emit intense EL in the green to yellowish-green region whose performance in multilayered doped devices surpassed those of the benchmark [Ir(ppy)3] and [Ir(ppy)2(acac)]. Among these, OLEDs based on Ir-35 and Ir-36 provide the first examples of green-emitting OLEDs with EI/ET functions. They can afford green-emitting devices with encouraging performance, presumably because they can better balance the electrons with a greater number of holes in the host and it is clear that such transport controls aimed at improved charge carrier injection and balanced charge transport can ensure enhanced electrophosphorescence. Doped device consisting of 6 wt% Ir-35 can show the peak EL efficiencies at 9.67%, 34.2 cd A−1, 23.6 lm W−1 and L of 47994 cd m−2 at 13.5 V. The device from 6 wt% Ir-36 exhibited efficiencies of 10.1%, 37.6 cd A−1, 26.1 lm W−1 and L of 48185 cd m−2 at 12.3 V. The devices prepared from Ir-40 and Ir-41 show comparable device performance with a peak L of 48333 (48567) cd m−2 at 15.3 (14.1) V, a peak EQE of 12.3 (13.4)%, an LE of 50.8 (48.4) cd A−1 and a PE of 36.9 (32.6) lm W−1 for Ir-40 (Ir-41). The high EL efficiencies can be correlated to the sufficient steric hindrance of the triphenylsilyl and -germyl groups in Ir-40 and Ir-41. With Ir-43, the best device operated at the peak values of 12.5%, 45.9 cd A−1 and 35.0 lm W−1 with L of 48318 cd m−2 at 12.1 V.


Tuning the colour to blue-green. 
By attaching an ether group to the ppy ligand, bluish-green devices can be produced using Ir-42 (λem ≈ 496 nm) and Ir-46 (λem ≈ 505 nm). Efficiencies of 8.92%, 26.6 cd A−1 and 18.1 lm W−1 for 8 wt% Ir-42 and 11.1%, 35.0 cd A−1 and 26.8 lm W−1 for 10 wt% Ir-46 were achieved.


Tuning the colour to yellow. 
For Ir-38, we can furnish a solution-processed device with itself as a yellow dopant in PVK, showing good EL performance at 3.49%, 11.9 cd A−1 and 2.40 lm W−1. Likewise, efficiencies of 10.7%, 35.1 cd A−1 and 23.1 lm W−1 were obtained for the yellow-emitting evaporated device doped with Ir-39.


Tuning the colour to orange-red and red. 
Both Ir-34 and Ir-37 are distinctive in nature and afford very red-shifted EL emissions (λem ≈ 586 and 609 nm, respectively). The maximum EQE of 9.36%, LE of 10.3 cd A−1 and PE of 5.04 lm W−1 for the red OLED doped with Ir-37 are impressive whereas Ir-34 gave less efficient but not yet optimised devices at the peak values of 3.58%, 11.8 cd A−1 and 5.48 lm W−1.


New colour tuning approach. 
By chemically manipulating the lowest triplet state character of [Ir(ppy)3] and [Ir(ppy)2(acac)] with some functional main-group 13 − 16 moieties on the phenyl ring of ppy, a new family of metallophosphors with high PHQY, short τP and good HI/HT or EI/ET properties can be obtained. The colour tuning can be achieved by shifting the charge-transfer character from the pyridyl groups in some traditional Ir ppy-type complexes to the electron-withdrawing main-group units. Because of the more weakly π-bonding ability of the O atoms in the acetylacetonate (acac) ligand compared to ppy,26 such new colour-tuning venture would be expected to be more effective for the [Ir(ppy-X)2(acac)] series than that of [Ir(ppy-X)3].28 The work obviously provides an adjustable OLED colour platform spanning from bluish-green to red (496–609 nm) with high EL efficiencies suitable for application in multi-colour displays (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  
EL spectra of [Ir(ppy-X)3] and [Ir(ppy-X)2(acac)]. 
Two robust IrIII and PtII red phosphors Ir-48 and Pt-5 with electron-poor fluorenone modules have been prepared recently.64 They represent further examples of multifunctional metallophosphors with enhanced EI/ET characteristics. The significant colour change (from yellow to red for IrIII and from green to red for PtII, see Fig. 14) can be attributed to a switch of the MLCT character of the transition from the pyridyl groups in Ir-11 and Pt-3 to the electron-deficient fluorenone group to give more stable MLCT states in Ir-48 and Pt-5 and the spectral assignments corroborate well with the electrochemical data as well as the TD-DFT calculations. This work has great potential to excel in the future advance of other colour-tunable systems induced by electron-withdrawing groups and deserves further attention. The electron-deficient ring strongly affects the reduction potentials E1/2red of the complexes. The E1/2red for Ir-48 (−1.98 V) and Pt-5 (−1.89 V) becomes much less cathodic relative to that of Ir-11 (−2.53 V) and Pt-3 (−2.47 V), owing to the reduction of the electron-deficient ring for the former. The much less negative E1/2red of the electron-deficient ring compared with that for the pyridyl ring in the ligand of Ir-48 and Pt-5 indicates that the electron-deficient ring is a much stronger electron-acceptor than the pyridyl ring. So, the electron involved in the MLCT event for Ir-48 and Pt-5 will primarily be more localized on the electron-deficient ring rather than the pyridyl moiety (Fig. 15), which is consistent with the discussion in the previous section for Ir-34 and Ir-37. Accordingly, the much lower LUMO levels of Ir-48 and Pt-5 (−2.82 and −2.91 eV, respectively) will facilitate EI/ET process in both complexes.
  
 Fig. 14  
PL spectra of fluorenone-containing metallophosphors relative to their fluorene congeners. 
 Fig. 15  The different MLCT pathways involved in two classes of metallophosphors. 

1,3,4-Oxadiazole heterocycles are widely used as ET building blocks for affording EI/ET and hole-blocking materials owing to their electron deficiency, high emission quantum yield, and good thermal and chemical stability.65 The small molecule 2-(4-biphenylyl)-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole (PBD) is a typical example, however, reported examples of oxadiazole-containing IrIII and PtII phosphors are relatively sparse. Some recent studies have accomplished several heteroleptic IrIII compounds of 2,5-diaryl-1,3,4-oxadiazole derivatives functionalized with various auxiliary ligands such as acac and the stronger ligand-field dithiocarbamate and dithiophosphate.19,66 Careful synthetic design of these molecules can produce some highly efficient blue triplet emitters.19 A new oxadiazole-containing PtII complex Pt-6 was reported and its X-ray structural analysis was carried out.67 Apart from the intense LC absorptions, a broad shoulder band at 421 nm with an extinction coefficient of 3000 M−1 cm−1 was observed in Pt-6 due to the concomitant observation of MLCT transition. This agrees with the DFT data in which the valence orbital picture consists of combined LC and MLCT components in the lowest energy absorption (Fig. 16). The HOMO is derived mainly from the orbitals of the inner phenyl ring of the organic ligand and the metal-acac fragment with a substantial amount of metal character. At 298 K, Pt-6 gives dual emission bands at 422 and 533 nm and the former fluorescence becomes vanished at 77 K.
 Fig. 16  Chemical and electronic structures of Pt-6. 

2.5 Trifunctional metallophosphors
A novel class of bipolar cyclometallating ligands (Scheme 3) and their trifunctional neutral PtII complexes Pt-7 to Pt-10 was nicely developed recently and all of them have the salient structural features of integrating the HT triarylamine, ET oxadiazole and EL metallated groups into a single molecule.67,68 These metal chelates are thermally and morphologically stable. Substituents with different electronic properties were introduced into the bipolar cyclometallating ligands to fine-tune the photophysics of Pt-7 to Pt-10 which were supported by theoretical DFT calculations. Comparison of the photophysical and redox behavior of these multi-component systems to those of the simpler derivatives Pt-6 and Pt-11 was also made (Fig. 17).67 The structural properties of these Pt complexes were examined using X-ray crystallography.67 Intermolecular interactions in the crystal lattices of PtII species are known to play a crucial role in their solid-state emission properties.15 Except for Pt-6 and Pt-9 (Pt⋯Pt distance: 4.953 and 4.605 Å, respectively), the lattice is characterized by the presence of Pt⋯Pt intermolecular interactions (ca. 3.240–3.741 Å) between adjacent molecules and, crystal packing effects may, among other not yet realized factors, contribute to this structural difference, which may be invoked to rationalize the variation in the lower-energy solid-state emission features. With both triarylamino and oxadiazole functional groups added into the ppy ligands, the Pt group has a reduced spin–orbit interaction. As a result, both LC fluorescence and phosphorescence can be observed for Pt-7 to Pt-10 at 298 K but the emission spectra are largely dominated by phosphorescence bands in CH2Cl2 glass at 77 K. The variation in the intensity ratio of these dual emissions (viz. fluorescence versus phosphorescence) can be correlated with the relaxation dynamics of the S1 → T1 intersystem crossing. Although the higher-lying fluorescent emission wavelength follows the order Pt-8 < Pt-7 < Pt-9 < Pt-10 in line with the electronic inductive effect of the R groups, this variation does not seem to alter the phosphorescent emission energies of these complexes. It is anticipated that the singlet state may exist as an zwitterion and so the inductive effect is consistent with the shift observed. For the phosphorescence, the triplet state is better described as a diradical, and so the inductive effect is much less felt and not much shifting of energy would be observed.69 Also, by looking at the fluorescence band, we see no vibronic structure while the phosphorescence has some (ν0–1 ≈ ca. 1407–1506 cm−1). There may have a twist charge transfer phenomenon where a twist angle changes very much in the singlet state.70 From the MO calculations, the diarylamino group principally governs the HOMO (with substantial contribution from the Pt's d orbital character in the HOMO-1) while the LUMO is derived from the π* orbitals of the oxadiazole ring and the ppy group in each case. It was found to have a gentle increase in the oxidative potential along the series OMe < Me < H < F for Pt-7 to Pt-10, which is a good manifestation of the inductive effect induced by the peripheral R units (i.e. negative effect for F and positive effect for both Me and OMe). Saliently, complexes Pt-7 to Pt-10 show intriguing bipolar character. The elevated HOMO energy levels for Pt-7 to Pt-10 relative to Pt-6 (−5.69 eV) indicate lower ionization potentials and better HT for the former series. The LUMO levels of Pt-7 to Pt-10 (−2.48 to −2.77 eV) are lower than that of PBD (−2.40 eV) and prototypical [Pt(ppy)(acac)] (−2.41 eV),15b,71 confirming their good ET ability.
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of bipolar cyclometallating ligands. 
 Fig. 17  (a) X-ray structure and (b) contour plots of the frontier molecular orbitals for Pt-9. 
These vacuum-sublimable Pt complexes can be used to make doped OLEDs in a guest-host system. The triplet level of the CBP host (2.56 eV) is larger than that of the Pt triplet emitter (ca. 2.30–2.31 eV) to prevent reverse energy transfer from the guest back to the host, and to effectively confine triplet excitons on guest molecules. Like the PL spectra, the electrofluorescence energy is a function of the R group, but the electrophosphorescence energy does not change much with R (Fig. 18). At the 5% doping level, the excited state properties of the trifunctional molecules can be adjusted to give blue-green (for Pt-8), green-yellow (for Pt-7 and Pt-9) and greenish-white (for Pt-10) colours. In each case, the EL and thin-film PL spectra resemble each other, indicating that the same optical transition is responsible for light emission. Since Pt-9 showed a better match of its HOMO level with NPB and a more balanced transport of holes and electrons, it afforded the best OLED performance (peak efficiencies of 3.59%, 11.0 cd A−1 and 5.73 lm W−1) among the four trifunctional phosphors investigated. Remarkably, the multifunctional nature of Pt-7 also renders it a suitable candidate for fabricating OLEDs with a simpler configuration.68 A device structure of ITO/CuPc/Pt-7/Ca:Al was constructed with a neat active EML of Pt-7. This device exhibited strong orange-yellow EL band peaking at 538 and 578 nm (with a weak aggregate shoulder at 648 nm) and CIE coordinates of (0.52, 0.47). The device reached peak LE of 1.2 cd A−1 and L of 1065 cd m−2 at 14 V which slightly outperforms those of the Pt-ppy derivative in a multilayered configuration and the single-layer EL devices based on trifunctional rhenium(I) and ruthenium(II) complexes with similar bipolar diimine ligands.72 This is indicative of the roles of TPA and oxadiazole ring in the hole and electron transport processes. This trifunctional approach was also adopted in the design of an ambipolar terpolymer containing [Ir(ppy)2(acac)], TPD and PBD functional side groups for phosphorescence, hole- and electron-transportation, respectively.73 An optimized green phosphorescent polymer-based OLED fabricated from these metallated polymers was shown to afford the best efficiencies of 11.8% and 38.6 lm W−1 using Cs as the electron-injection layer. The high efficiency is ascribed to the combination of good HT and ET abilities for favourably balancing the transport of both holes and electrons.
 Fig. 18  
EL spectra of OLEDs doped with 5 wt% Pt-7 to Pt-10 at 8 V. 
In a related communication, Gordon and co-workers have also discussed the role of electron-poor ET oxadiazole and electron-rich HT terthienyl units in a trifunctional luminescent rhenium(I) diimine carbonyl complex.74 Cyclic voltammetric data suggest a favourable transport of both holes and electrons. Furthermore, Tian and co-workers have prepared a potentially trifunctional [Ir(C^N)2(acac)]-type heteroleptic complex involving 2,5-(N-carbazolyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole moieties in which the two terminal electron-donating carbazole groups lead to a more π-conjugated ligand system.66b
2.6 Implications in white organic light-emitting diodes (WOLEDs)
Research on white organic light-emitting devices (WOLEDs) is blooming rapidly in the scientific community due to their potential to fabricate a full-colour display by combination with colour filters, as a flat-panel display backlight and as in general solid-state lighting applications.75 WOLEDs are attractive candidates as future illumination sources over conventional incandescent bulbs and fluorescent lamps because of their compact size, suitability for fabrication on flexible substrates, low operating voltages, and good power efficiencies.76 However, WOLEDs for these applications have not been considered to be realistic until the recent discovery of organometallic phosphors that can show a much higher theoretical efficiency (close to 100%) over singlet emitters (≤ 25%).16 In many cases, the EL efficiencies of all-fluorescent devices are not high unless triplet emitters are used to sensitize the Förster energy transfer between the phosphor triplet excitons and the singlet excitons in the fluorophore.77 White light emission can be obtained by mixing three primary colours (i.e. red, green and blue) in a multi- or a single-layer structure from small molecules and/or polymers,75c,78 all-fluorescent79 or all-phosphorescent37 two-colour systems involving complementary blue and orange luminophores, exciplex formation,15aphosphor-sensitized fluorescence,80 microcavity techniques75f or a stacked/tandem cell.81 However, interdopant energy transfer is a problem for the red-green-blue triple dopant strategy, leading to an imbalance in the white colour.82 Triple-emission-layer WOLEDs are also popular for their better balanced white light obtained75c but the hurdles of undesired colour chromaticity and poor batch-to-batch reproducibility would produce low image-quality displays.83 The following sections highlight some recent advances in the WOLED research exploiting our functional metallophosphors as the basis.
To date, research work remains scarce for two-colour WOLEDs constructed from phosphors emitting in the blue and orange regions. This approach can eliminate the necessity of excessive emissive dopants in a device, hence reducing structural heterogeneities. Efficient all-phosphor WOLEDs have been fabricated by the vacuum evaporation method which use dual components involving blue phosphor, iridium(III)-bis[(4,6-difluorophenyl)pyridinato-N,C2]picolinate [FIr(Pic)] doped in 1,3-bis(9-carbazolyl)benzene (mCP), and an orange phosphor Ir-6 (with a colour saturation of ∼93%) doped in CBP, and the white device has a good CIE colour coordinates of (0.31, 0.41) with the highest LE and PE being ∼17.8 cd A−1 and 7.6 lm W−1, respectively.36,37 We note a gradual change in intensity from the orange-like emission to the blue-like emission at increasing driving voltage and the voltage dependence is due to the requirement for high energy excitation of the blue phosphor (see ESI, Fig. S1a).† This can also be rationalized by the fact that the holes have higher mobilities at higher electrical field and they will drift to the blue recombination region without being completely recombined in the orange-emitting layer.
Likewise, the orange colour from the Ir-31-doped device can be coupled with [FIr(Pic)] for colour mixing to realize white light emission.38,59 Solution-processed WOLEDs with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/x% Ir-31:CBP/15% [FIrpic]:CBP/BCP/Alq3/LiF/Al appear near-white to the naked eye at 10 V with a blue peak at 472 nm and an orange peak at 560 nm in the EL spectrum. The CIE coordinates at 0.1 wt% Ir-31 are located at (0.36, 0.42) with the peak EL efficiencies at 1.90%, 5.17 cd A−1 and 1.95 lm W−1 (see Fig. S1b).† At 0.3 wt% Ir-31, the efficiencies were improved to 3.38%, 9.99 cd A−1 and 3.69 lm W−1 at the expense of white colour purity. It should be highlighted that the efficiency roll-off was found not to be severe for this WOLED. The fluorene chromophore in Ir-31 might prevent phase segregation and enhance energy transfer from the host to the guest dopant due to efficient overlap of excitonic wave function (Dexter process) and host singlet emission and guest absorption bands (Förster process) which can reduce the loading level needed to generate white light.84
The yellow phosphor Ir-10, which can make monochromatic OLEDs with the highest EQE of 10.3%, LE of 36.7 cd A−1 and PE of 17.7 lm W−1, can be utilized in the fabrication of multilayered WOLEDs with outstanding performance as well as very stable colour even at high L.39 The WOLED device comprises of a four-emissive-layer architecture (made of blue, green, yellow and red colours) sandwiched by some charge-injection and charge-blocking layers without the need for a more sophisticated stacked design. The excitons are effectively confined by the properly positioned hole-blocking material, favouring the formation of the hole-limitation region. Such WOLEDs have been demonstrated to reveal superior white light colour stability/efficiency trade-off. The CIE coordinate differences Δx and Δy are confined to ±0.015 when L increases from 13 to 14806 cd m−2. The colour rendering index (CRI) of the device is also very good, which varies only from 86 to 87 by changing from the normal direction to 80° off-normal at 12 V and the corresponding correlated colour temperature (CCT) is 3864 K (see ESI, Fig. S2).† Luminaire optically coupled to the OLED glass substrate can increase the amount of outcoupled light by reducing wave guiding in the substrate,85 thus enhancing the outcoupling efficiency and improving the overall device performance to reach up to 23.4 cd A−1 and 13.0%, corresponding to a maximum total PE of ∼21.1 lm W−1 (versus 12–17 lm W−1 for a typical incandescent light bulb). In another report, Bryce and co-workers have demonstrated stable and bias-independent WOLEDs (maximum EQE ∼2.80% and LE ∼4.57 cd A−1) using a homoleptic Ir complex containing ter(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-pyridine ligands in which a single active blend layer of this yellow-orange triplet emitter coupled with a blue-emitting host poly[9,9-bis(2-ethylhexyl)fluorene-2,7-diyl] end-capped with bis(4-methylphenyl)phenylamine was used.84 The compatibility between the Ir guest and host ensures an excellent colour mixing and the fluorene-like ligands can prevent phase segregation and enhance energy transfer from the host to the guest. The white colour is defined by CIE coordinates of (0.348, 0.367) in this case.
The novel architectures based on a two-wavelength fluorescent/phosphorescent system comprising the longer lifescan blue fluorophores86 and the highly efficient orange phosphors are less explored but should provide another attractive way to resolve the problems of using blue phosphors (i.e. poor stability and short operational lifetimes).20a,50a Such stratagem provides an improved colour stability as the aging rate is determined by only two emitters.87 This design concept requires less dye, a lower material cost, fewer masks and a simpler fabrication process and gives more stable WOLEDs than all-phosphor two-element systems. To get a stable white emission which is devoid of voltage dependence for the realization of practical WOLEDs, new two-element WOLEDs have been constructed by Wong et al. which exploit the exciton-managed sky blue electrofluorescence complemented with the orange electrophosphorescence using Ir-27.51b,51c Two blue fluorescent dyes have been used with slightly different performance. One device configuration is ITO/MoO3/NPB/2% Ir-27:CBP/NPB/0.75% DSA-Ph:ADN/BAlq/LiF:Al [DSA-Ph = p-bis(p-N,N-diphenyl-aminostyryl)benzene, ADN = 9,10-di(2-naphthyl)anthracene, BAlq = bis(2-methyl-8-quinolinato)-(1,1′-biphenyl-4-olato)aluminium]. Transparent MoO3 acts as a charge generation/injection layer which has a very small hole injection barrier with NPB.51b There is a performance advantage by replacing Alq3 with BAlq as the ET and hole-blocking material since the HOMO of the latter is lower than that of Alq3 by ∼0.2 eV, therefore injection of holes into BAlq is more difficult than Alq3, and a better confinement of excitons in EML can be achieved.88 Introducing a thin spacer layer of NPB between the fluorescent and phosphorescent regions can facilitate HT into the blue layer and block electrons at the blue layer/spacer interface. Here, while the host singlet is resonant with the blue fluorophore singlet state and the host triplet is resonant with the orange phosphor triplet level, this structure can lead to peak EL efficiencies of 26.6 cd A−1 and 13.5 lm W−1 that outperforms other two-element all-fluorophore or all-phosphor OLED counterparts in terms of both colour stability [Δ(x, y) < ±(0.01, 0.01)] and emission efficiency (Fig. 19a). These characteristics can be understood on the basis of the interplay between the blue and orange emission efficiencies. The maximum total PE of the best WOLED can reach 23.0 lm W−1 with CRI of 50 and CCT of 4390 K. If a sky blue styrylamine-type fluorescent material, BUBD-1, uniformly doped in MADN is used instead with a device configuration of ITO/2-TNATA/NPB/x% Ir-27:CBP/TPBI/3% BUBD-1:MADN/TPBI/LiF/Al (2-TNATA = tris[2-naphthyl(phenyl)amino]triphenylamine, MADN = 2-methyl-9-10-di(2-naphthyl)anthracene), the best device reaches peak efficiencies of 19.3 cd A−1 and 11.1 lm W−1.51c The highest total PE can be up to 18.8 lm W−1 for an optimized device and the best CRI is 63. Using this strategy, the blue fluorescent dopant harnesses a majority of singlet excitons, with the remainder of lower energy triplets diffusing through the conductive host to directly excite the orange emitter. Diffusion of singlet excitons to the phosphor dopant is negligible due to their intrinsically short diffusion lengths (Fig. 19b).89 This architecture allows for an increased power efficiency by resonant energy transfer from the host into both the singlet and triplet energy levels, eliminating exchange energy losses that arise from intersystem crossing from the host singlet into a blue phosphor triplet state. These results are among the best records of fluorescent/phosphorescent-mediated two-colour WOLEDs. The work will act as a good benchmark to address the WOLED efficiency/colour purity trade-off issue which is still a key problem for high-performance devices. It will make a positive impact on the advance of both passive and active matrix full-colour OLEDs and has potential to excel in the realization of next generation solid-state indoor lighting sources.
 Fig. 19  (a) EL spectra of the Ir-27-doped WOLED at different voltages (thickness of orange EML = 20 nm) and (b) a proposed simplified energy transfer mechanism in blue fluorescent/orange phosphorescent WOLED. 
Research in single-dopant WOLEDs is another attractive area that draws much recent attention and such an approach would rival those requiring dual or multiple dopants in multilayered devices in terms of device structure.90 Management of the relative EL intensities of the blue host/emitter and the phosphorescent dopant can be a good vehicle for making single-dopant WOLEDs. A simple WOLED through a control of the extent of energy transfer from the blue ADN host91 to the orange dopant Pt-1 was developed.40 A near-white emission with CIE coordinates of (0.34, 0.39) was produced by the simultaneous EL emission of both the blue host and the triplet excitons of dopant. Interestingly, single dopant white light EL was caused by the simultaneous fluorescent/phosphorescent emission of the trifunctional phosphors Pt-8 and Pt-9.67 At 10 wt% Pt-8, a change of applied driving voltage from 10 to 16 V decreases the relative triplet–singlet intensity ratio gradually at the expense of the orange emission, and almost white emission can be observed within this voltage range (see ESI, Fig. S3a).† With 10 and 12 wt% of Pt-9, dual emission peaks characteristic of a white light spectra were observed which allow efficiencies as high as 2.63%, 6.79 cd A−1 and 4.07 lm W−1 (see ESI, Fig. S3b).† The performance of these WOLEDs is comparable to those for some PtII Schiff base emitters (1.1%, 0.79 lm W−1).92 In the literature, interesting multifunctional soluble platinum-containing random terpolymers consisting of HT triphenylamine, ET oxadiazole and emissive Pt-acac modules with different monomer content are also known.93 These metallopolymers emit simultaneously from the monomer and aggregate states in the blue and orange regions, respectively, which can produce near-white light in a solution-processible device (structure: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polymer/BCP/Alq3/LiF/Al) with an efficiency up to 4.6% and the best CIE coordinates at (0.30, 0.43). A higher ratio of non-polar triphenylamine to polar oxadiazole was shown to favour the monomeric form over the excimeric species.
3 Epilogue and outlook
The main focus of this article is to survey transition metal complexes playing multifunctional roles and to investigate the importance of these metallated compounds in the up-and-coming development of high-efficiency monochromatic and white-light sources for multi-colour display technology. Rational design of molecules aiming at colour tuning and multiple functions forms the major theme. The combination of organometallic structural elements with organic charge-transporting systems has led to metallophosphors with many fascinating properties. These molecules are capable of performing separate functional roles in a single molecule so that electrons and holes can be injected, migrate and recombine to produce light emission. We contend that these compounds constitute an attractive class of phosphorescent materials that are easily synthesized, thermally and morphologically stable, structurally diverse, and potentially important in optoelectronic applications. The results, in combination with the fundamental basis, give a conceptual design contributed to the future advances in the field of OLEDs.
Research on new heavy metal phosphors for OLEDs is a highly competitive area. Although there is much literature information about phosphorescent IrIII and PtII complexes, utilization of their derivatives playing multifunctional roles for electrophosphorescent OLEDs was not well elucidated and this innovative area of research is still in its infancy. This gives rise to an open demand for the indicated problems to be addressed, thus opening the door for the development of such metallophosphors. Hence, multifunctional metallophosphors represent a key emerging field and many exciting future challenges as well as opportunities exist for both exploratory and use-oriented research. Multifunctional metallophosphors have demonstrated exceptional promise in the creation of high-efficiency OLEDs and we can look forward to further developments with substantial optimism. We take advantage of the characteristic of third-row transition metal groups (such as long-lived luminescence, large Stokes shift and high photostability) coupled with the bipolar character of new charge balance ligand systems to fill this gap. To access the metallophosphors needed to bring many of these examples to fruition, the synthetic control of these materials must be taken to a new level. The work will definitely contribute to the science and technology of phosphorescent OLEDs, which should have a bright future for hi-tech industry and potential for impact towards commercialization. On the technology front, the high scientific and technological pay-off gained makes a strong case for the relevance of these studies to the social and economic development of our community in the long run. We can expect that they will remain there throughout the foreseeable future. Ionic metallophosphors are also potential candidates for use in light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs). This promising new concept is not only applicable to small molecules, it can also usefully be applied to polymers.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from a GRF grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China (Project No. HKBU202106) and a Faculty Research Grant of the Hong Kong Baptist University (Project No. FRG/08-09/I-20) is gratefully acknowledged for this work. We also thank the Hong Kong Baptist University for the postdoctoral research fellowship awarded to Dr Cheuk-Lam Ho. The author is also indebted to all his postgraduate students, postdoctoral associates and collaborators for their hard work cited in the references of this article.
References
W. Helfrich and W. G. Schneider, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1965, 14, 229 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang and S. A. Van Slyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackey, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Gong, M. R. Robinson, J. C. Ostrowki, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 581 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Köhler, J. S. Wilson and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 701 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. R. Forrest, Org. Electron., 2003, 4, 45 CrossRef .

  (a) S. C. Stinson, Chem. Eng. News., 2000, 78, 22 ; 
  (b) W. E. Howard, Sci. Am., 2004, 290, 76 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. Johnstone, Technol. Rev., 2001, 104, 80 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) O. Gelson, Opto. Laser Eur., 2003, 107, 33 Search PubMed .
J. K. Borchardt, Materials Today, 2004, 7, 42 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Bernius, M. Inbasekaran, J. O'Brien and W. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1737 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. F. So and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 2646 ; 
  (b) Y. Ohmori, A. Fujii, M. Uchida, C. Morishima and K. Yoshino, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 1871 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yersin, Top. Curr. Chem., 2004, 241, 1 CAS .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Adachi, C. M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5048 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. F. O'Brien, M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 442 CrossRef .

  (a) M. A. Baldo, S. Lamansky, P. E. Burrows, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 4 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Tsutsui, M.-J. Yang, M. Yahiro, K. Nakamura, T. Watanabe, T. Tsuji, Y. Fukuda, T. Wakimoto and S. Miyaguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, L1502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, H.-E. Lee, C. Adachi, P. E. Burrows, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4304 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, R. Kwong, I. Tsyba, M. Bortz, B. Mui, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 1704 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Okada, K. Okinaka, H. Iwawaki, M. Furugori, M. Hashimoto, T. Mukaide, J. Kamatani, S. Igawa, A. Tsuboyama, T. Takiguchi and K. Ueno, Dalton Trans., 2005, 1583 RSC .

  (a) V. Adamovich, J. Brooks, A. Tamayo, A. M. Alexander, P. I. Djurovich, B. W. D'Andrade, C. Adachi, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1171 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Brooks, Y. Babayan, S. Lamansky, P. I. Djurovich, I. Tsyba, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 3055 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. W. D'Andrade, J. Brooks, V. Adamovich, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1032 CrossRef .

  (a) P.-T. Chou and Y. Chi, Chem. Eur. J., 2007, 13, 380 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. M. W. Langeveld and U. S Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1109 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Pure Appl. Chem., 1999, 71, 2095 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. C. Evans, P. Douglas and C. J. Winscom, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 2093 CAS ; 
  (e) P. L. Burn, S.-C. Lo and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1675 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Y. Chi and P.-T. Chou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1421 RSC ; 
  (g) J. A. G. Williams, S. Develay, D. L. Rochester and L. Murphy, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 2596 CrossRef .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 2627 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W.-Y. Wong, Dalton Trans., 2007, 4495 RSC ; 
  (c) W.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 971 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. You and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12438 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Tsuboyama, H. Iwawaki, M. Furugori, T. Mukaide, J. Kamatani, S. Igawa, T. Moriyama, S. Miura, T. Takiguchi, S. Okada, M. Hoshino and K. Ueno, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12971 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Jung, Y. Kang, H.-S. Kim, Y.-H. Kim, C.-L. Lee, J.-J. Kim, S.-K. Lee and S.-K. Kwon, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 3415 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. S. Lowry, W. R. Hudson, R. A. Pascal, Jr. and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14129 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. S. Lowry, J. I. Goldsmith, J. D. Slinker, R. Rohl, R. A. Pascal, Jr., G. G. Malliaras and S. Bernhard, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5712 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) V. A. Montes, R. Pohl, J. Shinar and P. Anzenbacher, Jr., Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4523 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. Tamayo, M. Yousufuddin, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 7992 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) C.-J. Chang, C.-H. Yang, K. Chen, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu, M.-L. Ho, Y.-S. Yeh and P.-T. Chou, Dalton Trans., 2007, 1881 RSC .
L. Chen, H. You, C. Yang, D. Ma and J. Qin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1352 RSC .

  (a) C. H. Yang, Y. M. Cheng, Y. Chi, C. J. Hsu, F. C. Fang, K. T. Wong, P. T. Chou, C. H. Chang, M. H. Tsai and C. C. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed, 2007, 46, 2418 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C.-F. Chang, Y. M. Cheng, Y. Chi, Y.-C. Chiu, C.-C. Lin, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, C.-C. Chen, C.-H. Chang and C.-C. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4542 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. H. Fang, Y. L. Chen, C. H. Yang, Y. Chi, Y. S. Yeh, E. Y. Li, Y. M. Cheng, C. J. Hsu, P. T. Chou and C. T. Chen, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 13, 2686 .

  (a) C.-T. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4389 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. D. Cummings and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 1949 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. S. Wilson, N. Chawdhury, M. R. A. Al-Mandhary, M. Younus, M. S. Khan, P. R. Raithby, A. Köhler and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9412 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Reineke, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B., 2007, 75, 12538 ; 
  (b) H. Z. Xie, M. W. Liu, O. Y. Wang, X. H. Zhang, C. S. Lee, L. S. Hung, S. T. Lee, P. F. Teng, H. L. Kwong, H. Zheng and C. M. Che, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1245 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Gong, J. C. Ostrowski, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 439 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y.-L. Tung, L.-S. Chen, Y. Chi, P.-T. Chou, Y.-M. Cheng, E. Y. Li, G.-H. Lee, C.-F. Shu, F.-I. Wu and A. J. Carty, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1615 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Kavitha, S.-Y. Chang, Y. Chi, J.-K. Yu, Y.-H. Hu, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng, G.-H. Lee, Y.-T. Tao, C.-H. Chien and A. J. Carty, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 223 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y.-H. Niu, Y.-L. Tung, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu, J. H. Kim, B. Chen, J. Luo, A. J. Carty and A. K.-Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3532 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. S. Lowry, W. R. Hudson, R. A. Pascal, Jr. and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14129 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. J. Hay, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 1634 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Dedeian, J. Shi, N. Shepherd, E. Forsythe and D. Morton, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4445 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Shirota, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1 RSC ; 
  (b) F. Huang, Y.-J. Cheng, Y. Zhang, M. S. Liu and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4495 RSC .
G.-J. Zhou, Q. Wang, C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, D. Ma, L. Wang and Z. Lin, Chem. Asian. J., 2008, 3, 1830 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ono, M. Joho, K. Saito, M. Tomura, Y. Matsushita, S. Naka, H. Okada and H. Onnagawa, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 3676 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Zhou, C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, Q. Wang, D. Ma, L. Wang, Z. Lin, T. B. Marder and A. Beeby, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 499 CrossRef .
Y. H. Park and Y. S. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2007, 7, 500 CrossRef .
J. Nishida, H. Echizen, T. Iwata and Y. Yamashita, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1378 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. You, Z. P. Qin, J. Fang, D. Ma, X. Zhu and W. Huang, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 805 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Tokito, M. Suzuki, F. Sato, M. Kamachi and K. Shirane, Org. Electron., 2003, 4, 105 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Tavasli, S. Bettington, M. R. Bryce, H. A. Al. Attar, F. B. Dias, S. King and A. P. Monkman, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4963 RSC ; 
  (c) A. J. Sandee, C. K. Williams, N. R. Evans, J. E. Davies, C. E. Boothby, A. Köhler, R. H. Friend and A. B. Holmes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7041 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, B. Yao, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1149 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. K. Rayabarapu, B. M. J. S. Paulose, J.-P. Duan and C.-H. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 349 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Gao, H. You, J. Fang, D. Ma, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, Synth. Met., 2005, 155, 168 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. R. Justin Thomas, M. Velusamy, J. T. Lin, C.-H. Chien, Y.-T. Tao, Y. S. Wen, Y.-H. Hu and P.-T. Chou, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 5677 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. P. J. Markham, S.-C. Lo, S. W. Magennis, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2645 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. M. Lupton, I. D. W. Samuel, R. Beavington, M. J. Frampton, P. L. Burn and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. B., 2001, 63, 5206 .
W.-Y. Wong, G.-J. Zhou, X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and B.-Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 838 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok, W.-Y. Wong and G.-J. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5097 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, G.-J. Zhou, X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 315 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Yu, G.-J. Zhou, C.-S. Lam, W.-Y. Wong, X.-L. Zhu, J.-X. Sun, M. Wong and H.-S. Kwok, J. Organomet. Chem., 2008, 693, 1518 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Zhou, X.-Z. Wang, W.-Y. Wong, X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and Z. Lin, J. Organomet. Chem., 2007, 692, 3461 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. A. Baldo, C. Adachi and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 62, 10967 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. B. Namdas, A. Ruseckas, D. W. Samuel, S. C. Lo and P. L. Burn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86 Search PubMed  091104; 
  (c) S. Reineke, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 75, 125328 CrossRef .
G.-J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, B. Yao, Z. Xie and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1799 RSC .

  (a) W. Li, J. Qiao, L. Duan, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 10161 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Setayesh, A. C. Grimsdale, T. Weil, V. Enkelmann, K. Müllen, F. Meghdadi, E. J. W. List and G. Leising, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 946 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. F. Pognatsch, F. P. Wenzl, E. J. W. List, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Mullen and G. Leising, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1061 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S.-C. Lo, N. A. H. Male, J. P. J. Markham, S. W. Magennis, P. L. Burn, O. V. Salata and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 975 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S.-C. Lo, G. J. Richards, J. P. J. Markham, E. B. Namdas, S. Sharma, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1451 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J.-Q. Ding, J. Gao, Y.-X. Cheng, Z.-Y. Xie, L.-X. Wang, D.-G. Ma, X.-B. Jing and F.-S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 575 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Anthopoulos, M. J. Frampton, E. B. Namdas, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 557 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 971 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Bettington, M. Tavasli, M. R. Bryce, A. Beeby, H. Al-Attar and A. P. Monkman, Chem. Eur. J., 2007, 13, 1423 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Liu, M. Guan, Z. Bian, D. Nie, Z. Gong, Z. Li and C. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1441 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. Yang, X. Zhang, H. You, L. Zhu, L. Chen, L. Zhu, Y. Tao, D. Ma, Z. Shuai and J. Qin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 651 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) T. Tsuzuki, N. Shirasawa, T. Suzuki and S. Tokito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 4151 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) O. Paliulis, J. Ostrauskaite, V. Gaidelis, V. Jankauskas and P. Strohriegl, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2003, 204, 1706 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) K. T. Wong, Y. M. Chen, Y. T. Lin, H. C. Su and C. C. Wu, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 5361 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) J. Li, D. Liu, Y. Li, C. S. Lee, H. L. Kwong and S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1208 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) K. R. J. Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y. T. Tao and C. W. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1949 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) R. Zhu, J. Lin, G. A. Wen, S. J. Liu, J. H. Wan, J. C. Feng, Q. L. Fan, G. Y. Zhong, W. Wei and W. Huang, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1668 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) B. L. Li, L. Wu, Y. M. He and Q. H. Fan, Dalton Trans., 2007, 2048 RSC .

  (a) K. Meerholz, L. B. Volodin, B. Kippelen and N. Peyghambarian, Nature, 1994, 71, 497 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. Z. Wang and A. J. Epstein, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 217 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Van Dijken, J. J. A. M. Bastiaansen, N. N. M. Kiggen, B. M. W. Langeveld, C. Rothe, A. Monkman, I. Bach, P. Stossel and K. Brunner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7718 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Brunner, A. van Dijken, H. Borner, J. J. A. M. Bastiaansen, N. M. M. Kiggen and B. M. W. Langeveld, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6035 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. M. Pai, J. F. Yanus and M. Stolka, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4714 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Kanai, S. Ichinosawa and Y. Sato, Synth. Met., 1997, 91, 195 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S.-J. Yeh, M.-F. Wu, C.-T. Chen, Y.-H. Song, Y. Chi, M.-H. Ho, S.-F. Hsu and C.-H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 285 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M.-H. Tsai, H.-W. Lin, H.-C. Su, T.-H. Ke, C.-C. Wu, F.-C. Fang, Y.-L. Liao, K.-T. Wong and C.-I. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1216 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. R. Justin Thomas, J. T. Lin, Y.-T. Tao and C.-W. Ko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9404 CrossRef ; 
  (d) P. Strohriegl and J. V. Grazulevicius, Adv. Mater., 2003, 13, 445 .

  (a) W.-Y. Wong, C.-L. Ho, Z.-Q. Gao, B.-X. Mi, C.-H. Chen, K.-W. Cheah and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7800 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, Q. Wang, D. Ma, L. Wang and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 928 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C.-L. Ho, M.-F. Lin, W.-Y. Wong, W.-K. Wong and C.-H. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083301 CrossRef ; 
  (d) C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, Z.-Q. Gao, C.-H. Chen, K.-W. Cheah, B. Yao, Z. Xie, Q. Wang, D. Ma, L. Wang, X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 319 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C.-L. Ho, Q. Wang, C.-S. Lam, W.-Y. Wong, D. Ma, L. Wang, Z.-Q. Gao, C.-H. Chen, K.-W. Cheah and Z. Lin, Chem. Asian. J., 2009, 4, 89 CrossRef CAS .

          C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, B. Yao and Z. Xie, J. Organomet. Chem., in press Search PubMed.

  (a) S. C. Lo, E. B. Namdas, C. P. Shipley, J. P. J. Markham, T. D. Anthopolous, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 85 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. B. Namdas, A. Ruseckas, I. D. W. Samuel, S. C. Lo and P. L. Burn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86 Search PubMed  091104; 
  (c) T. Tsuzuki, N. Shirasawa, T. Suzuki and S. Tokito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 1451 ; 
  (d) J. Ding, J. Gao, Y. Cheng, Z. Xie, L. Wang, D. Ma, X. Jing and F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 575 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. Ding, J. Lü, Y. Cheng, Z. Xie, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2754 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lowry and S. Bernhard, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7970 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Chen, C. Yang, Z. Li, K. Zhang, H. Yao, J. Qin, J. Chen and Y. Cao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 422, 386 CrossRef CAS .
F.-M. Hwang, H.-Y. Chen, P.-S. Chen, C.-S. Liu, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu, F.-I. Wu, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng and G.-H. Lee, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 1344 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Z. Chen, C. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Tao, L. Duan, L. Chen, L. Zhu, J. Qin and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3451 RSC .
D. Neher, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 1365 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, G.-J. Zhou, B. Yao, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Sun, X. H. Zhu, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang and Y. Cao, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 6281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You and S. Y. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3820 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. S. K. Mak, A. Hayer, S. I. Pascu, S. E. Watkins, A. B. Holmes, A. Köhler and R. H. Friend, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4708 RSC ; 
  (b) S.-C. Lo, C. P. Shipley, R. N. Bera, R. E. Harding, A. R. Cowley, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5119 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) P. Coppo, E. A. Plummer and L. De Cola, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1774 RSC .
T. Tsuzuki, N. Shirasawa, T. Suzuki and S. Tokito, Adv. Mater., 2005, 15, 1455 .

          G.-J. Zhou, Q. Wang, W.-Y. Wong, D. Ma, L. Wang and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. 10.1039/b814507e.

  (a) A. Kraft, A. C. Grimsdale and A. B. Holmes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 402 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. P. Kulkarni, C. J. Tonzola, A. Babel and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4556 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. T. Kamtekar, C. Wang, S. Bettington, A. S. Batsanov, I. F. Perepichka, M. R. Bryce, J. H. Ahn, M. Rabinal and M. C. Petty, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 39, 3823 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) P. Wang, C. Chai, Y. Chuai, F. Wang, X. Chen, X. Fan, Y. Xu, D. Zou and Q. Zhou, Polymer, 2007, 48, 5889 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) G. Hughes and M. R. Bryce, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 94 RSC ; 
  (f) C. Wang, M. Kilitziraki, L. O. Pälsson, M. R. Bryce, A. P. Monkman and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 4 .

  (a) L. Chen, C. Yang, J. Qin, J. Gao, H. You and D. Ma, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 3519 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Xu, Y. Li, X. Ma, X. Gao and H. Tian, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 1860 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, W.-Y. Wong, X. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and Z. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 10922 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Wong, Z. He, S.-K. So and Z. Lin, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 4079 CrossRef CAS .

          N. J. Turro, Modern Molecular Photochemistry, University Science Books, Mill Valley, CA, USA,  1991 Search PubMed .

  (a) P. D. Harvey and G. J. Durocher, Photochem. Photobio., 1984, 27, 29 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) P. D. Harvey and G. Durocher, Can J. Spectrosc., 1984, 29, 84 CAS .
I. R. Laskar, S. F. Hsu and T. M. Chen, Polyhedron, 2005, 24, 881 CAS .
X. Gong, P. K. Ng and W. K. Chan, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1337 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suzuki, S. Tokito, F. Sato, T. Igarashi, K. Kondo, T. Koyama and T. Yamaguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 103507 CrossRef .
N. J. Lundin, A. G. Blackman, K. C. Gordon and D. L. Officer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2582 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. Dos Santos, J. L. Brédas, M. Lögdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Misra, P. Kumar, M. N. Kamalasanan and S. Chandra, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2006, 21, R35 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. W. D'Andrade and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1585 CrossRef ; 
  (d) A. J. Heeger, Solid State Commun., 1998, 107, 673 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) X. Niu, L. Ma, B. Yao, J. Ding, G. Tu, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 213508 CrossRef ; 
  (f) H. Kanno, Y. Sun and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phy. Lett., 2005, 86, 263502 CrossRef ; 
  (g) T. Fuhrmann and J. Salbeck, MRS Bull., 2003, 28, 354 CAS .

  (a) T. Justel, H. Nikol and C. Ronda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3084 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Tokito, T. Iijima, T. Tsuzuki and F. Sato, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 2459 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2000, 403, 750 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Liu, Q. Zhou, Y. Cheng, Y. Geng, L. Wang, D. Ma, X. Jing and F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 957 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. X. Jiang, Y. H. Xu, W. Yang, R. Guan, Z. Q. Liu, H. Y. Zhen and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1769 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Ho, C. M. Chang, T. Y. Chu and C. H. Chen, SID2006 Digest, 2006, 950 Search PubMed .
P.-I. Shih, C.-F. Shu, Y.-L. Tung and Y. Chi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 251110 CrossRef .

  (a) H. Kanno, R. J. Holmes, Y. Sun, S. Kena-Cohen and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 339 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Kanno, N. C. Giebink, Y. Sun and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 023503 CrossRef .

          M. E. Thompson, EL2006 Technical Digest,  2006, 5 Search PubMed .
J. H. Jou, Y. S. Chiu, C. P. Wang, R. Y. Wang and H. C. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 193501 CrossRef .
H. A. Al Attar, A. P. Monkman, M. Tavasli, S. Bettington and M. R. Bryce, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 121101 CrossRef .
B. W. D'Andrade and J. J. Brown, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 192908 CrossRef .
M.-F. Lin, L. Wang, W.-K. Wong, K.-W. Cheah, H.-L. Tam, M.-T. Lee and C. H. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 121913 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Nishiura, Y. Wang and Z. M. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5592 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Y. Chu, Y. S. Wu, J. F. Chen and C. H. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 404, 121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. C. Kwong, M. R. Nugent, L. Michalski, T. Ngo, K. Rajan, Y. J. Tung, M. S. Weaver, T. X. Zhou, M. Hack, M. E. Thompson, S. R. Forrest and J. J. Brown, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, N. C. Giebink, H. Kanno, B. Ma, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2006, 440, 908 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Mazzeo, V. Vitale, F. D. Sale, M. Anni, G. Barbarella, L. Favaretto, G. Sotgiu, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 34 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Wang, W.-Y. Wong, M.-F. Lin, W.-K. Wong, K.-W. Cheah, H.-L. Tam and C. H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4529 RSC .
J. Shi and C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3201 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Che, S. C. Chan, H. F. Xiang, M. C. W. Chan, Y. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1484 RSC .
P. T. Furuta, L. dan, S. Garon, M. E. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15388 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A summary of the photophysical, redox, thermal and structural properties of the multifunctional metal phosphors; spectra of two-colour WOLEDs for Ir-6 and Ir-31; EL spectra of WOLEDs with a four-emissive-layer structure (blue-red-TPBI-yellow-green) with Ir-10 as the yellow phosphor; and EL spectra of the Pt-8- and Pt-9-doped devices. See DOI: 10.1039/b819943dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
Wai-Yeung Wong	Wai-Yeung Wong obtained his BSc(Hons) and PhD degrees (with Prof. W.-T. Wong) from the University of Hong Kong. After his postdoctoral stays at Texas A&M University (with Prof. F. A. Cotton) and Cambridge University (with Profs. Lord Lewis and P. R. Raithby), he joined Hong Kong Baptist University in 1998 as Assistant Professor and was promoted to Professor in 2007. He published over 270 articles and was named as Croucher Senior Research Fellow in 2009. His interests are on the syntheses of functional metallopolymers and metallophosphors for OLED, solar cell and NLO applications.
Cheuk-Lam Ho	Cheuk-Lam Ho received her BSc(Hons) (2004) and PhD (2007) degrees both from the Hong Kong Baptist University. Her PhD and current postdoctoral research in the laboratory of Prof. Wai-Yeung Wong mainly deals with the synthesis of new functional metallophosphors and metallopolymers for light-emitting and photovoltaic applications. She has contributed to a total of about 20 scientific papers in the field to date.

 	Fig. 1  A typical multilayered OLED device configuration.	 

 	Fig. 2  Common synthetic pathways towards IrIII and PtII electrophosphors.	 

 	Fig. 3  Common building blocks for HI/HT, EI/ET and EL components.	 

 	Fig. 4  Possible decay pathways for the lowest energy excited states, where knr and kr represent the nonradiative and radiative decay rate constants.	 

 		 

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of Ir-3 to Ir-5.	 

 	Fig. 5  The PL spectra for the neat films of Ir-3 to Ir-5 at 290 K.	 

 	Fig. 6  
            Cyclic voltammograms for Ir-3 to Ir-5.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  The X-ray crystal structure of the cation of Ir-9.	 
	(1)

 		 

 	Fig. 8  (a) EQE versusJ for Ir-13-doped OLEDs. (b) Experimental EQEversusJ data fitted by a theoretical equation involving T–T annihilation for devices doped with Ir-13 (at 12 wt.-%).	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthetic routes to the cyclometallating carbazole-derived ligands.	 

 	Chart 1  9-Arylcarbazole-derived cyclometallated iridium(III) complexes	 

 	Fig. 9  HOMO and LUMO levels of Ir-16 to Ir-19 and Ir-23 to Ir-26. The dashed lines correspond to the levels for the heteroleptic series Ir-23 to Ir-26. All the energy levels are shown in eV.	 

 	Fig. 10  Colour tuning of the phosphorescence spectra of carbazole-based heteroleptic IrIII phosphors by structural modifications of the ligand substituents and their positions.	 

 	Fig. 11  Facile phosphorescence colour tuning of Ir-carbazolyl phosphors.	 

 		 

 	Chart 2  
Main group element-derived cyclometallated iridium(III) complexes	 

 	Fig. 12  Plots of the LUMO (top) and HOMO (bottom) for Ir-36, Ir-37, Ir-38 and Ir-39.	 

 	Fig. 13  
EL spectra of [Ir(ppy-X)3] and [Ir(ppy-X)2(acac)].	 

 		 

 	Fig. 14  
PL spectra of fluorenone-containing metallophosphors relative to their fluorene congeners.	 

 	Fig. 15  The different MLCT pathways involved in two classes of metallophosphors.	 

 	Fig. 16  Chemical and electronic structures of Pt-6.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of bipolar cyclometallating ligands.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) X-ray structure and (b) contour plots of the frontier molecular orbitals for Pt-9.	 

 	Fig. 18  
EL spectra of OLEDs doped with 5 wt% Pt-7 to Pt-10 at 8 V.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) EL spectra of the Ir-27-doped WOLED at different voltages (thickness of orange EML = 20 nm) and (b) a proposed simplified energy transfer mechanism in blue fluorescent/orange phosphorescent WOLED.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A summary of the photophysical, redox, thermal and structural properties of the multifunctional metal phosphors; spectra of two-colour WOLEDs for Ir-6 and Ir-31; EL spectra of WOLEDs with a four-emissive-layer structure (blue-red-TPBI-yellow-green) with Ir-10 as the yellow phosphor; and EL spectra of the Pt-8- and Pt-9-doped devices. See DOI: 10.1039/b819943d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
