Stoichiometry-controllable optical defects in Cu x In 2−x S y quantum dots for energy harvesting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA03954C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03954C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12556-12565Stoichiometry-controllable optical defects in CuxIn2−xSy quantum dots for energy harvesting†

        
          
            Addis S. 
            Fuhr
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Anastassia N. 
            Alexandrova
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            Philippe 
            Sautet
          
        
      *acd
aDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. E-mail: sautet@ucla.edu
bChemistry Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. E-mail: ana@chem.ucla.edu
dCalifornia NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
Received 
      11th April 2020
    , Accepted 9th June 2020First published on 10th June 2020AbstractThe large Stokes shift for CuxIn2−xSy (CIS) quantum dots (QDs) reduces reabsorption losses in luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs). However, reabsorption still occurs due to their broad absorption spectra, which, along with below unity quantum yields, hamper device performance. The origin of these optical properties is heavily debated, and makes it difficult to optimize CIS for LSCs and other energy harvesting devices such as solid-state and sensitized solar cells. Here, we show with density functional theory calculations that anti-site defects  form in near-stoichiometric CIS QDs, while copper vacancies charge-compensated by the oxidation of a second Cu atom  form in Cu-deficient structures. Both defects lead to large Stokes shifts, but  defects only localize holes in the excited-state leading to strong intragap absorption, which is suppressed for paramagnetic  defects that localize holes in the ground-state. The relative concentration of each defect and competing defect phases that lead to non-emissive carrier trapping is controllable by stoichiometry and Fermi-level, and optimal chemical processing conditions for energy harvesting applications are discussed.
Introduction
Solar energy currently accounts for only 1.8% of the global electricity supply, but has the potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions if its usage massively expands.1,2 CuxIn2−xSeyS2−y (CIS) quantum dots (QDs) are attractive materials for low-cost solar power conversion schemes. In particular, they have been used in recent Champion device quantum dot sensitized solar cells, and luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) with photovoltaic windows.3–6
Despite growing interest in CIS QDs, the origin of their unusual optical properties is still elusive.7–19 For example, CIS QDs have larger Stokes shifts (270–750 meV), broader absorption and ensemble photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra (>300 meV), and longer radiative lifetimes (100–500 ns) than II–VI QDs.7–19 This is generally attributed to radiative recombination between a delocalized conduction band electron and a hole localized on a Cu atom via either native defects,7–10,13–19 or self-trapped excitons.9,11,12,14 For defect emission, an interruption in the crystal lattice from an “out of place” Cu ion is expected to lead to an intragap hole localized state. The self-trapped exciton model, on the other hand, proposes that the complex shape of d orbitals in CIS causes poor electronic feedback and inability to form delocalized valence band (VB) hole states, and results in defect-like localized d orbitals for “normal” lattice Cu1+ ions.11,12 This leads to strong electron–phonon coupling where each Cu1+ state undergoes a large nuclear reorganization when photoconverted to Jahn–Teller distorted Cu2+. Each of these mechanisms have successfully explained some aspects of absorption and emission. For example, Cu-containing QDs typically exhibit large Huang–Rhys factors, which is consistent with significant excited-state nuclear reorganization.11 However, single particle PL linewidths for CIS can be as narrow as 60 meV, which is in agreement with the defect emission model.18 To address this issue, recently it has been proposed that there are two sets of Cu defects: “Cu1+ defects” that undergo a self-trapped exciton-like reorganization, and “Cu2+ defects,” which do not require excited-state reorganization.20 Stoichiometry-dependent optical spectra confirms this interpretation, but could only hypothesize the precise chemical identity for each of these defects.20
Developing a clear understanding of structure–property relationships in CIS QDs is of significant importance to energy harvesting applications.21–32 For example, a key performance limiting factor for LSCs is reabsorption, which occurs when there is spectral overlap between the fluorophore's absorption and emission.21 These losses scale with PV window size, and the large Stokes shift of CIS QDs is advantageous for reducing reabsorption and improving LSC performance.5,6,21–24 Yet, these advantages are somewhat mitigated by broad spectral linewidths, which if “sharpened” without losing the large Stokes shift would be beneficial for LSCs. Understanding the origin of the broad absorption spectra is also of particular importance to solid-state solar cells where Urbach tailing can reduce the open circuit voltage and limit power conversion efficiency.26,29–32 In addition, for both solar cells and LSCs, the formation of absorptive and/or emissive defects under different chemical processing conditions has not been studied in the context of competing secondary defect phases. These secondary structures can potentially hamper CIS QD performance in energy harvesting devices by increasing the density of non-emissive trap states, which reduce quantum yield (QY) or lead to recombination losses.21
In this letter, we use Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations to identify defects that form in CIS QDs under different growth conditions, and predict their effects on optical spectra by unifying aspects of different proposed emission models. Specifically, we find that anti-site  defect pairs lead to intragap absorption and emission in near-stoichiometric CIS. Cu-deficient CIS, on the other hand, has a larger concentration of copper vacancies that leads to Cu2+ defects , which are paramagnetic and non-absorptive due to a hole in the Cu d shell, thus resulting in intragap emission without intragap absorption. This leads to a similarly large Stokes shift as anti-site defects, but with narrower absorption spectra. Correspondingly, Cu-deficient CIS should have reduced reabsorption losses for LSCs, and weaker Urbach tailing for solar cells resulting in higher power conversion efficiencies for both energy harvesting device schemes. We also identify non-emissive competing defect phases such as  defect pairs that reduce the density of emissive  defects, and isolated hole  and electron  trapping defects that lead to nonradiative recombination. We conclude by discussing the interplay between emissive and non-emissive defect formation as a function of stoichiometry and Fermi level. In addition, we discuss their corresponding implications towards optimizing the chemical process conditions and structure of CIS for different energy harvesting devices such as solid-state solar cells, sensitized solar cells, and LSCs.
Methods
Plane-wave PAW DFT calculations were performed with VASP.33–36 CIS lattice constants and band gap were obtained by relaxing a bulk Chalcopyrite unit-cell and conducting subsequent single-point calculations using the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE06)37 hybrid range separated exchange-correlation functional. Supercells and quantum dots were generated from the HSE06 relaxed bulk. The formation energy of different defects in the CIS supercell were obtained by introducing defects into the supercell, subsequent ionic relaxation using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional,38 and using eqn (1) from ref. 39: (1)where Etot(def) − Etot(no def) represents the energy difference between defective and non-defective supercells, nα is the number of atoms added (−1) or removed (+1) of species α and chemical potential μα, q represents the charge of the defect, EF the Fermi-level, and Ecorr the FNV correction for the effects of a finite-sized supercell on charged defect formation.39 The chemical potential (μα) was determined by calculating the energy per atom (Esolidα) of elemental solid α, and adding the relative chemical potential (Δμα) using the points marked in the CIS stability region of the chemical potential diagram from Fig. 1 (μα = Δμα+Esolidα). Here, a more negative Δμα reflects a greater deficiency in species α (Δμα = 0 corresponds with an α-rich condition). The stability region for CIS in the chemical potential diagram was determined by calculating the formation energy of competing Copper and Indium Sulfide phases under different Δμα conditions. For all stoichiometric, charge-balanced defects only the Etot(def) − Etot(no def) term is used. The correction term (Ecorr) for the finite-size of the supercell is determined by the FNV method described in ref. 39. The magnitude of the correction term is similar to that calculated for related CISe structures (see Fig. S1 in ESI† and ref. 40). The Franck–Condon, or “True Stokes shift” was calculated via the configuration coordinate method used in ref. 39 for anti-site  defect pairs {R}q=−1 − {R}q=0 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 1  Chemical potential diagram predicting the stoichiometry-dependent CIS stability region. 
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Defect formation energies for CIS bulk under more p-type (a, Fermi-level = VB + 0.026 eV) or more n-type (b, Fermi-level = CB − 0.026 eV). Arrows and values represent the energy difference between the lowest energy structure of the series, and the marked defect (e.g. the average formation energy for  is 0.30 eV larger than  under stoichiometric conditions). The chemical potentials associated with “near-stoichiometric” or “Cu-deficient” conditions are marked in the phase stability diagram in Fig. 1. In both (a) and (b), blue bars indicates stoichiometric, green bars near-stoichiometric (slightly Cu-deficient), and red bars Cu-deficient conditions, respectively. (c) The formation energy of anti-site defects is lower than that of intermediate structures required for back-diffusion into their defect-free lattice positions. 
All calculations used an energy cut-off of 280 eV, and the geometries were relaxed until forces were smaller than 0.05 eV per Å per atom. The HSE06 screening parameter was ω = 0.13 as described in previous reports.41,42 Integrals in the unit-cell were calculated by sampling the Brillouin zone with a 6 × 6 × 3 Monkhorst–Pack k-point grid. Defect calculations used a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell with Gamma-centered 2 × 2 × 2 k-points. QDs were calculated at the Gamma point only. Calculations with a single copper vacancy were open shell, using the MAGMOM tag to capture magnetic interactions.
Results & discussion
Stoichiometry & fermi-level dependent stability of defects
HSE06 (ref. 37) was used to calculate lattice constants and electronic structure due to its ability to accurately reproduce the electronic properties of bulk semiconductors,43 while PBE38 was chosen for ionic relaxations and formation energy calculations due to its lower computational expense (see methods and Fig. S2 in ESI†). The formation energy of defects and defect pairs was calculated with a 2 × 2 × 2 (128 atom) supercell in different chemical and electron potential environments (Fig. 1 and 2). Here, the relative chemical potentials used for non-stoichiometric CIS defects are marked in the stability triangle in Fig. 1 and represent Cu-rich, near-stoichiometric (slightly Cu-deficient), and Cu-deficient conditions. Supercells are used instead of a quantum dots to determine formation energies in order to negate the influence of surfaces (Fig. 1 and S3 in ESI†). This approach is justified by experimental studies, which showed that surface passivation with an alloyed ZnS shell does not significantly affect emission energy or linewidth.15,19 This, in addition to the similarly large Stokes shift observed in bulk CIS, suggests that it is unlikely that surface states are responsible for emission.
The charge-balanced, stoichiometric defect pairs we considered (blue bars in Fig. 2) include anti-site defects wherein Cu1+ and In3+ swap lattice positions. Cu at the In site is noted , the primes indicating that two more electrons appear at this site after the swap, although the Cu formal oxidation number remains 1+. Similarly, In at the Cu site is noted , where dots indicate that two more holes appear at the site after the swap). They also include Frenkel pairs, wherein a cation vacancy forms after the cation is ejected from its normal lattice position into an interstitial space . For near-stoichiometric, and Cu-deficient structures, which are often used in devices,44–46 we calculated the formation energy of each of these defects in isolation, as well as off-stoichiometry defect pairs such as  (green and red bars in Fig. 2). For the  defect pair, a copper vacancy introduces an electronic hole in the later described electronic structure calculations, which localizes on a Cu atom, and forms a Cu2+ centre for charge-compensation . In each case, we present the formation energies as a function of the electron potential, or Fermi level (EF), which is defined relative to the VB, and represents p- (near 0 eV, here VB + 0.026 eV or kBT in Fig. 2a) or n-type (near the computational band gap of 1.47 eV, here CB − 0.026 eV or kBT in Fig. 2b) environments.
The formation energies for each defect pair decreases at shorter separation distances due to charge stabilization (Fig. S3 in ESI† shows the distance-dependent energies, the blue bars in Fig. 2 shows their average, and the white dashed lines mark their lowest energy). Anti-site defects have the lowest average formation energy under stoichiometric conditions. At close (<0.5 nm) separation distances (Fig. 2 and S3 in ESI†) anti-site defect pairs have similar formation energies as  (ΔE for  is ∼0.03 eV > ). This suggests that under stoichiometric conditions anti-site defect pairs form in the largest concentrations, but under mildly Cu-deficient, or near-stoichiometric conditions, are close in energy with  defects. Under highly Cu-deficient conditions, however,  form in the largest concentration. We test their stability by calculating the formation energy of several intermediate defect structures required for back-diffusion into the original lattice sites, or “self-purification” (Fig. 2c). These states have high formation energies, and the defects studied here are likely kinetically trapped during synthesis.
Fermi-level (EF) has a significant impact on the formation of competing defect phases. Under more p-type conditions (Fig. 2a) isolated copper vacancies have formation energies slightly higher than the  defect pair (ΔE for  is ∼0.03 eV > ) indicating that while the formation of “Cu2+” defects, or the  defect pair is favourable, a similarly high density of isolated copper vacancies should also form in CIS. If EF is closer to the CB (n-type conditions), isolated  have a much lower formation energy (difference of ∼1.38 eV) than the  defect pair. For isolated anti-site defects, low EF (p-type) conditions strongly favour  whereas high EF (n-type) conditions strongly favour . Interestingly, while Frenkel pairs have significantly higher formation energies than anti-site defect pairs, under p-type conditions the formation energy of copper interstitials  appears to be ∼0.43 eV lower than the  defect pair for near-stoichiometric CIS. For n-type conditions in near-stoichiometric CIS, indium vacancies  have similarly low formation energy (∼0.36 eV lower than  defects), which indicates that the formation of both sets of isolated defects may affect optical transitions. Indium interstitials, on the other hand, have universally high formation energies and therefore are unlikely to form in CIS. These trends also hold for Cu-rich processing conditions (Fig. S4 in ESI†), but with generally lower formation energies for isolated  defects, and higher formation energies for isolated ,  defects.
Impact of defects on spectral shape
The density of states (DOS) for a CIS supercell with anti-site defect pairs (Fig. 3a, left panel) features band-edges (valence band and conduction band, or VB and CB, respectively) separated by the same band gap energy (1.47 eV) as determined by the defect-free unit-cell band structure calculations (see Fig. S2 in ESI†). However, there is an additional intragap state (centred on ) below EF, thus indicating that it is “occupied,” or filled with electrons. On the other hand, while the DOS for a CIS supercell with a copper vacancy (Fig. 3a, right panel) also has a VB and CB separated by the same predicted band gap as the defect-free unit-cell, in this case there is an intragap, unoccupied spin-polarized state (centred on ) above EF. We explore the implications of these two sets of defects on optical transitions by computing the theoretical absorption spectra (Fig. 3b) using linear response theory and eqn (2) and (3): (2) (3)where the linear absorption coefficient (α) is determined via calculating the real ε1(ω) and imaginary ε2(ω) parts of the frequency-dependent dielectric constant. The excitonic transition energies (hυx,a in Fig. 3a and b) are identical and near the predicted band gap (∼1.5 eV) for both structures. However, if CIS has  defects, there is a second lower energy transition (hυCu,a in Fig. 3a and b) due to localization of a VB hole to a  (Cu1+ in ref. 20) state, and excitation of an intragap electron from  to the conduction band (CB). CIS QDs with Cu vacancies , conversely, have a ground-state hole in the d band (, Cu2+ in ref. 20), which instead captures a VB electron in an IR transition (Fig. S5 in ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) DOS for CIS supercells with Cu defects. Copper vacancies lead to a spin polarized intragap “Cu2+” state (right) whereas anti-site defects lead to an intragap “Cu1+” state (left). The predicted optical transitions are shown in coloured arrows. (b) Computed linear absorption spectra for the DOS in (a). (c) Schematic depiction of the calculated “True Stokes shift”, or ΔS,0 in (a), which is due to a Jahn–Teller distortion in excited-state Cu (ΔS,0 = 2δ0). (d, left panel) Anti-site defects lead to intragap absorption (hυCu,a) in addition to band-edge absorption (hυx,a). This causes a “True” Stokes shift (energy difference between hυCu,a − hυCu,PL) and an “Apparent” Stokes shift (energy difference between hυx,a − hυCu,PL). (d, right panel) QDs with copper vacancies only have an “Apparent Stokes shift”. 
These computational predictions imply distinct spectroscopic signatures for each defect, and a link between defect type and stoichiometry. Specifically, the d shell for  is filled with electrons ([Ar]3d10) and more frequently form in (near)-stoichiometric or Cu-rich CIS whereas the d shell for  ([Ar]3d9) has a hole, and forms in larger concentrations in Cu-deficient structures to charge compensate . Transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy has detected the presence of “Cu1+” defects , and confirmed our predictions whereby Cu-rich (mostly ) and near-stoichiometric CIS QDs (similar  depending on the exact Cu:In) have broader spectra than Cu-deficient (more ) structures due to strong overlap between hυCu,a and hυx,a.20 The strength of hυCu,a decreases with increasing Cu-deficiency until eventually the spectral shape evolves into a Bi-Gaussian with a strong hυx,a bleach and weak hυCu,a shoulder.20 As the concentration of  grows, the VB electron →  hole IR transition also becomes stronger, but is outside of the detection range of typical TA experiments, and obscured in FTIR measurements by molecular vibrations of similar energy from surface passivating ligands. However,  centers also lead to dilute magnetic semiconductor (DMS) characteristics, which have been experimentally detected in magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) experiments.20 Specifically, Zeeman splitting increases due to stronger spin-exchange (EEXCH), and is proportional to the concentration of paramagnetic defects.17,20,47–49 The simultaneous decrease in TA linewidth and increase in EEXCH for more Cu-deficient structures is indicative that  (hυCu,a and no DMS characteristics) are being replaced by  (DMS characteristics and no hυCu,a),20 thus, confirming our computational predictions.
Holes (captured from the VB) transiently localize to  in the excited state (Fig. 3c and the left panel of Fig. 3d) whereas they are localized in the ground state for . In the latter case, VB holes are removed by a second defect (here, isolated  as calculated in Fig. 2 and 4) or surface state (Th in the right panel of Fig. 3d and ref. 20 is used to indicate “a hole trap state” that can be either an isolated  or surface state), which prevents transitions faster than defect emission such as non-emissive 3-particle positive trion Auger decay or band-edge recombination.19,20 Band-edge emission can only occur in defect-free structures, which can also exhibit large Stokes shifts due to unique dark-bright exciton splitting from inverted 1S and 1P band-edge hole-levels.13,50,51 Indeed, while a recent two-photon absorption study has confirmed the existence of band-edge hole inversion in spherical CIS QDs with defects, it also confirmed that the expected Stokes shift from dark-bright exciton splitting is too small to account for the experimental Stokes shift.13 Hence, indicating that Cu defect emission dominates PL in CIS due to the high probability of defect formation, and fast carrier localization preventing band-edge emission. However, we note here that the defect emission model does not exclude predictions of large dark-bright exciton splitting, and if defect-free spherical CIS QDs are synthesized, PL would instead be dominated by the model predicted by Efros et. al.13,50,51
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Formation energy of different defects as a function of the Fermi level energy under near-stoichiometric and Cu-deficient conditions, which are calculated at their corresponding points in the CIS stability diagram marked in Fig. 1. The closed circle symbols indicate the charge transition levels. 
Notably, hole localization for  is similar to the self-trapped exciton model, and even though we expect band-edge absorption (hυx,a) to occur in conjunction with defect absorption (hυCu,a), an electron–phonon coupled excited-state nuclear reorganization similar to Jahn–Teller distorted Cu2+ is required to transiently stabilize the photogenerated hole.11,12,20,52 We therefore calculate the Franck–Condon shift (δ0) for anti-site defects ( in Fig. 3c and d), which is 107 meV (see Methods). This corresponds with an emission shift of 214 meV (ΔS,0 = 2δ0). Consistent with ref. 20, we label the resulting shift in emission the “True Stokes shift” (ΔS,0) in Fig. 3a and the left panel of Fig. 3d), which reflects the energy difference between ground-state  and excited-state  anti-site defects (hυCu,a and hυCu,PL in Fig. 3c). This also leads to a larger “Apparent Stokes shift” reflecting the energy separation between band-edge absorption and emission from excited-state anti-site defects (hυx,a and hυCu,PL in Fig. 3d). Here, our calculated true Stokes shift is 214 meV (ΔS,0 = 2δ0) and apparent Stokes shift 586 meV, which are similar to experimental measurements for “Cu1+” defects (210 meV and 420 meV, respectively).20 CIS QDs with  only exhibit the “Apparent Stokes shift” as the ground-state defect is already Jahn–Teller distorted (right panel of Fig. 3d). Removal of the “True Stokes shift” in Cu-deficient structures “sharpens” linear absorption spectra, and reduces overlap with emission.
Competing defect phases, optical losses, & device implications
In order to better understand how competing defect formation mechanisms can affect optical losses, we compare their formation energies and charge transition levels under different chemical processing conditions (Fig. 4). The chemical potentials used for “near-stoichiometric” and “Cu-deficient” conditions are the same as described in Fig. 1 and 2. Cu-rich conditions are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The Fermi-levels (EF) represent p- (near VB) or n-type (near CB) conditions, and can be “pinned” experimentally by a high density of donor or acceptor defects, or shifted by an external moduli such as electrode potentials or charge-transfer molecules.15,16,19 Donor (electron trapping) or acceptor (hole trapping) levels are defined by the EF relative to the band-edges wherein the defect at charge q and q′ are equal, and the charge state of the defect is expected to spontaneously transition via the addition or removal of an electron (marked in Fig. 4 by filled circles). From an optical perspective, a high EF environment “fills” defect states with electrons whereas a low EF environment removes electrons from defects (or, fills them with holes). Hence, at high EF, electron trapping defect states are “passivated” whereas hole trapping defect states are “activated,” and the opposite is expected for low EF.15,19
Copper vacancies have low formation energies for all Fermi-level values in near-stochiometric and Cu-deficient structures. Their expected charge transition (1−/0) is near the VB (VB + 0.03 eV) making them shallow hole traps. However, spectral electrochemistry studies have found that while both “Cu1+” () and “Cu2+” () defect emission can be quenched by electron traps, hole traps do not quench emission for Cu2+ defects, which are already “emission ready” and do not require excited-state hole localization due to the ground-state hole in the Cu2+ d shell.15 Hence, a high density of isolated copper vacancies should only reduce emission efficiency for near-stoichiometric CIS, which have  defects that require photoactivation by a VB hole prior to emission.
Under low EF conditions,  defects have the lowest formation energy of all defects for both Cu-deficient and near-stoichiometric CIS making them likely to form in both structures. The formation of copper interstitials, on the other hand, is strongly dependent on stoichiometry, and these are not likely to form in Cu-deficient structures. Both defects can act as relatively deep electron traps. The double-electron charge transition level for  defects (2+/0) and single electron charge transition level for  defects are CB – 0.53 eV and CB – 0.40 eV, respectively. However, even for very low EF and near-stoichiometric conditions where the formation of  defects appears favourable, the formation energy for  is significantly lower than that of  defects, and we expect  defects to have a more significant impact on electron-trap mediated nonradiative recombination for all conditions other than Cu-rich CIS where  have much higher formation energies (Fig. S4 in ESI†). Moreover, at slightly higher EF (moderately p-type conditions) where  have more comparable formation energies, the  state is significantly lower in energy than , while indium vacancies  simultaneously have very large formation energies. Hence, it is likely that even under these conditions Cu interstitials do not form in high concentrations, and instead act as metastable intermediate defect states that facilitate the diffusion of a Cu1+ ion into an indium vacancy to stabilize it by forming a  defect state. For both  it is unlikely that these transition energies correspond with emission as it has been well-established experimentally that emission in CIS arises from localized hole and delocalized electron states, which indicates that electron localizing defects act as optical traps that limit emission efficiency.9,15,16,19 Indeed, experimentally it has also been observed that the primary deactivation mechanism for CIS emission is electron trapping, which is consistent with our prediction of a high density of  defects.15,16,19
For higher EF conditions, hole trapping defects are expected to contribute more to optical losses. Specifically, the formation energy of isolated vacancies  decreases at high EF, and both shallow (1−/0) = VB + 0.03 eV and deep (3−/2−) = VB + 0.30 eV acceptor levels form for copper and indium vacancies, respectively. As mentioned earlier, this should significantly reduce the emission efficiency for near-stoichiometric and Cu-rich CIS, which have anti-site defects that require excited-state hole localization prior to emission, but is not expected to contribute to optical losses for Cu-deficient CIS where  defects are “emission ready” in the ground state, and hole trapping defects actually aid emission by blocking the faster band-edge or positive trion recombination pathways. Indium vacancies have high formation energies in Cu-deficient structures, while copper vacancies have low formation energies under both near-stoichiometric and Cu-deficient conditions. It is therefore expected that this VB hole removal process for the  defect emission in Cu-deficient structures only occurs via copper vacancies (or, later described surface states) and not indium vacancies. However, both copper and indium vacancies can contribute to hole trapping mediated nonradiative recombination losses for anti-site defects in near-stoichiometric or Cu-rich structures.
A natural prediction from these findings would be that highly Cu-deficient structures are always ideal for improved LSC and solar cell performance as Cu-deficiency facilitates the formation of  defects, leads to higher QY and reduced nonradiative recombination losses due to a decrease in hole trapping, reduced band-tailing corresponding with a higher open circuit voltage in solar cells, and reduced reabsorption losses for LSCs. However, the formation energy of isolated  defects, and  defect pairs also decrease as CIS is made more Cu-deficient (Fig. S6 in ESI†), which eventually lowers QY by either reducing the density of  defects via competition from the  defect pair, or by an increase in the concentration of electron trapping  defects. Hence, decreasing the Cu:In ratio will initially improve LSC and solid-state solar cell performance by reducing reabsorption, band tailing, and nonradiative recombination losses, but eventually further narrowing of the absorption spectra will coincide with an increase in optical trap density, and will lead to larger nonradiative recombination losses for highly Cu-deficient structures. Hence, moderately Cu-deficient structures will generally be “ideal,” but the exact Cu:In ratio will somewhat vary by synthetic methodology due to the fact that kinetic trapping strongly affects defect formation (Fig. 2). Indeed, the presence of  defect pairs has also been evidenced by Raman spectroscopy,38 and experimental QY is generally highest for moderately Cu-deficient structures.7,20 Lastly, for sensitized solar cells, Cu-rich CIS should be ideal. Similar to solid-state solar cells, intragap absorption from anti-site defects can lead to larger open-circuit currents, but unlike solid-state solar cells this will occur without negatively impacting the open-circuit voltage, which is pinned by the energy difference between the excited-state anti-site defect hole and delocalized CB electron due to ultrafast hole capture.20,53
In order to confirm the localized/delocalized nature of these predicted transitions in QDs, we calculate the DOS (Fig. 5) for CIS QDs with anti-site defects and copper vacancies (see Methods). We confirm the identity of each state by plotting iso-energetic contours (purple and green for occupied and unoccupied energy levels, respectively) of the associated charge density (square modulus of the one electron wavefunction), similar to other reports.54–57 We define surface states (SSt) as delocalized across surface atoms, and defect states  as localized to the intentionally created defect coordination sphere. However, the SSt contribution to the DOS is overestimated here due to our inability to include passivation layers of native ligands (e.g. dodecanethiol), which would increase computational expense. Indeed, this is why we computed the absorption spectra for CIS using supercells without dangling bonds. The  state is occupied (below EF), and therefore absorptive and not paramagnetic whereas  is above EF, paramagnetic, and not absorptive. The predicted energy separation between versus the VB (∼590 meV and 740 meV, respectively) are of similar magnitude to our supercell calculations. In addition, the position of the defect affects its energy versus the band-edges (Fig. S7†), and ΔS is impacted by the local defect bonding environment as expected by single-particle spectroscopy studies on CIS QDs, and DFT studies on related Cu-doped ZnSe QDs.18,58 Moreover, the band-edges are delocalized, and we expect both delocalized and localized transitions to occur.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) DOS for CIS QDs with Cu defects. The charge density for each labelled state is depicted in (c and d). For (b), calculations were spin-polarized due to the paramagnetism of Cu2+; the two columns represent different electron spins. In both (c) and (d), the bottom centre panel shows a zoomed-in image of the Cu defect. All unmarked intragap states are surface states (SSt). 
The similarity between the supercell and QD calculations confirms that the nature of the optical transitions between bulk and QD systems is similar. A clear distinction between the two mechanisms is the larger contribution of surface states to optical deactivation mechanisms for QDs in comparison to the bulk. Specifically, QDs have non-surface bulk-like defects that affect absorption, emission, and nonradiative recombination mechanisms, but also have additional optical traps due to dangling bond surface states. Based on the calculated DOS, these dangling bond surface states are expected to mostly be electron traps as the majority of these states lie above the Fermi-level and the emissive copper defects. These conclusions are supported by the large increase in QY typically observed in experiment by passivating the surface of CIS with a ZnS shell, which can increase QY by more than 50% after eliminating most electron traps.9,15,16 However, the increase in QY does not correspond with a significant change in the Stokes shift or linewidth for CIS QDs indicating that the absorption and emission centers are not simply due to dangling bonds, and are indeed the same or similar to bulk structures. This is consistent with our computational results, which show that Cu defects have a similar affect on the electronic structure of CIS bulk and QD structures. Lastly, the inability to achieve 100% QY from simply shelling CIS with ZnS indicates that surface states are not the only source of optical losses in CIS, and other competing bulk-like defects contribute to nonradiative recombination losses. Removal of such defects requires optimizing the stoichiometry and kinetic growth conditions. This, in addition to using a ZnS (or other inorganic) shell to passivate dangling bond surface states can potentially lead to unity quantum yields.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have identified the stoichiometry- and Fermi-level-dependent formation of defects in CIS QDs, and provided an atomistic rationalization for their unusual optical properties. Anti-site defects are common in (near)-stoichiometric or Cu-rich structures, and lead to intragap excitations that broaden absorption spectra and result in stronger reabsorption losses in LSCs and band-tailing in solid-state solar cells. Copper vacancies are more common in Cu-deficient QDs and are charge-compensated by the oxidation of a second Cu atom. This leads to narrower absorption spectra, DMS characteristics, reduced reabsorption in LSCs, and reduced band-tailing in solar cells. These results help explain several experimental findings.7,18,20,52 In particular, the “True Stokes shift”, which occurs at anti-site defects explains the large Huang–Rhys parameter.11,52 However, the occurrence of this shift only at anti-site defects, and the simultaneous presence of delocalized band-edges is still consistent with two-band transient absorption from “Cu1+” defects and narrow single particle emission (∼60 meV) broadened by heterogeneity.7,18,20,58
Our computational predictions imply that the performance of CIS QDs in energy harvesting applications can be improved by tuning the relative concentration of anti-site defects and copper vacancies through stoichiometry. LSCs and solid-state solar cells utilizing Cu-deficient QDs should have reduced reabsorption and nonradiative recombination losses, and improved scaling of device performance. However, if QDs become too Cu-deficient, eventually there will be a reduction in QY due to competition from the  defect phase and/or increased density of electron trapping  defects. For near-stoichiometric or Cu-rich CIS, anti-site defect emission can be deactivated by indium or copper vacancies, which leads to lower QY for LSCs and increased nonradiative recombination losses in solid-state solar cells. This, in addition to stronger reabsorption, makes them less ideal for LSCs and solid-state solar cells, but is not as major of a concern for sensitized solar cells where the open-circuit voltage is pinned by the energy difference between the excited-state anti-site defect hole state and the CB electron, and charge-extraction is trap-mediated.53 Hence, for sensitized solar cells Cu-rich structures may be ideal due to the enhanced sample absorbance from intragap states leading to higher open circuit current density and power conversion efficiency.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
A. S. F. was supported by the LANL African American Partnership Program. A. N. A. acknowledges the support of the NSF CAREER Award CHE-1351968. All authors thank Victor I. Klimov for thoughtful discussion.
Notes and references

          M. J. Brunisholz, IEA-PVPS Annual Report 2016, Imprimerie St Paul: Fribourg, Switzerland,  2017, ISBN 978-3-906042-63-3 Search PubMed .
S. Hallegatte, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Clim. Change, 2016, 6, 663 CrossRef .
J. Du, Z. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 138, 4201 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Zhao, Y. Wang, W. Xue, F. He, Y. Xie and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meinardi, H. McDaniel, F. Carulli, A. Colombo, K. A. Velizhanin, N. S. Makarov, R. Simonutti, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Bergren, N. S. Makarov, K. Ramasamy, A. Jackson, R. Guglielmetti and H. McDaniel, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 520 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Jara, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aldakov, A. Lefrançois and P. Reiss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3756 RSC .
A. C. Berends, F. T. Rabouw, F. C. M. Spoor, E. Bladt, F. C. Grozema, A. J. Houtepen, L. D. A. Siebbeles and C. de Mello Donega, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. van der Stam, M. de Graaf, S. Gudjonsdottir, J. J. Geuchies, J. J. Dijkema, N. Kirkwood, W. H. Evers, A. Longo and A. J. Houtepen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Knowles, H. D. Nelson, T. B. Kilburn and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Hughes, S. R. Ostheller, H. D. Nelson and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 19, 1318 Search PubMed .
G. Nagamine, H. B. Nunciaroni, H. McDaniel, A. L. Efros, C. H. de Brito Cruz and L. A. Padilha, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6353 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Berends, M. J. J. Mangnus, C. Xia, F. T. Rabouw and C. de Mello Donega, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fuhr, H. J. Yun, N. S. Makarov, H. Li, H. McDaniel and V. I. Klimov, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, A. Pandey, D. J. Werder, B. P. Khanal, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Rice, H. McDaniel, V. I. Klimov and S. A. Crooker, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zang, H. Li, N. S. Makarov, K. A. Velizhanin, K. Wu, Y.-S. Park and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pinchetti, M. Lorenzon, H. McDaniel, R. Lorenzi, F. Meinardi, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Fuhr, H.-J. Yun, S. Crooker and V. I. Klimov, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, T. A. Baker, J. Lim, K. A. Velizhanin and H. McDaniel, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1138 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Knowles, T. B. Kilburn, D. G. Alzate, S. McDowall and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9129 RSC .
R. Sumner, S. Eiselt, T. B. Kilburn, C. Erickson, B. Carlson, D. R. Gamelin, S. McDowall and D. L. Patrick, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3252 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, W. Chen, D. Wu, D. Quan, Z. Zhou, J. Hao, J. Qin, Y. Li, Z. He and K. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 5, 17777 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Jara, S. J. Yoon, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7221 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, J. P. Schmidtke, L. Dunn, A. Dodabalapur, P. F. Barbara and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, N. S. Makarov, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1 Search PubMed .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Kim, J. Yang, J. H. Yu, W. Baek, C.-H. Lee, H. J. Son, T. Hyeon and M. J. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Voggu, J. Sham, S. Pfeffer, J. Pate, L. Fillip, T. B. Harvey, R. M. Brown and B. A. Korgel, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 574 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Panthani, C. J. Stolle, D. K. Reid, D. J. Rhee, T. B. Harvey, V. A. Akhavan, Y. Yu and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. So, S. Pradhan and G. Konstantatos, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16776 RSC .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 54, 11169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B, 1994, 49, 14251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 47, 558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Freysoldt, B. Grabowski, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer, G. Kresse, A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2014, 86, 253 CrossRef .
M. Malitckaya, H.-P. Komsa, V. Havu and M. Puska, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600353 CrossRef .
J. Pohl and K. Albe, Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 023509 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, C.-Y. Wang, J.-T. Wang, X.-P. Hu and S.-X. Zhou, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 084513 CrossRef .
T. Le Bahers, M. Rérat and P. Sautet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5997 CrossRef .
Y. Yamamotoa, T. Yamaguchi, T. Tanaka, N. Tanahashic and A. Yoshida, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 399 CrossRef .
P.-H. Chuang, C. C. Lin and R.-S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Houck, E. I. Assaf, H. Shin, R. M. Greene, D. R. Pernik and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 9544 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Furdyna, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 64, R29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pandey, S. Brovelli, R. Viswanatha, L. Li, J. M. Pietryga, V. I. Klimov and S. A. Crooker, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bussian, S. A. Crooker, M. Yin, M. Brynda, A. L. Efros and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Mater., 2008, 8, 35 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Shabaev, M. J. Mehl and A. Efros, Phys. Rev. B, 2015, 92, 035431 CrossRef .
A. Anand, M. L. Zaffalon, G. Gariano, A. Camellini, M. Gandini, R. Brescia, C. Capitani, F. Bruni, V. Pinchetti, M. Zavelani-Rossi, F. Meinardi, S. A. Crooker and S. Brovelli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906629 Search PubMed .
H. D. Nelson, X. Li and D. R. Gamelin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5714 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, R. Singh, I. Fedin, A. S. Fuhr and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 409–417 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, D.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee and J. C. Grossman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 196802 CrossRef .
A. J. Neukirch, K. Hyeon-Deuk and O. V. Prezhdo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263, 161 CrossRef .
M. Vörös, G. Galli and G. Zimanyi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6882 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Fuhr, P. Sautet and A. N. Alexandrova, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5705 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03954cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Chemical potential diagram predicting the stoichiometry-dependent CIS stability region.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Defect formation energies for CIS bulk under more p-type (a, Fermi-level = VB + 0.026 eV) or more n-type (b, Fermi-level = CB − 0.026 eV). Arrows and values represent the energy difference between the lowest energy structure of the series, and the marked defect (e.g. the average formation energy for  is 0.30 eV larger than  under stoichiometric conditions). The chemical potentials associated with “near-stoichiometric” or “Cu-deficient” conditions are marked in the phase stability diagram in Fig. 1. In both (a) and (b), blue bars indicates stoichiometric, green bars near-stoichiometric (slightly Cu-deficient), and red bars Cu-deficient conditions, respectively. (c) The formation energy of anti-site defects is lower than that of intermediate structures required for back-diffusion into their defect-free lattice positions.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) DOS for CIS supercells with Cu defects. Copper vacancies lead to a spin polarized intragap “Cu2+” state (right) whereas anti-site defects lead to an intragap “Cu1+” state (left). The predicted optical transitions are shown in coloured arrows. (b) Computed linear absorption spectra for the DOS in (a). (c) Schematic depiction of the calculated “True Stokes shift”, or ΔS,0 in (a), which is due to a Jahn–Teller distortion in excited-state Cu (ΔS,0 = 2δ0). (d, left panel) Anti-site defects lead to intragap absorption (hυCu,a) in addition to band-edge absorption (hυx,a). This causes a “True” Stokes shift (energy difference between hυCu,a − hυCu,PL) and an “Apparent” Stokes shift (energy difference between hυx,a − hυCu,PL). (d, right panel) QDs with copper vacancies only have an “Apparent Stokes shift”.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Formation energy of different defects as a function of the Fermi level energy under near-stoichiometric and Cu-deficient conditions, which are calculated at their corresponding points in the CIS stability diagram marked in Fig. 1. The closed circle symbols indicate the charge transition levels.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) DOS for CIS QDs with Cu defects. The charge density for each labelled state is depicted in (c and d). For (b), calculations were spin-polarized due to the paramagnetism of Cu2+; the two columns represent different electron spins. In both (c) and (d), the bottom centre panel shows a zoomed-in image of the Cu defect. All unmarked intragap states are surface states (SSt).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03954c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
