Efficient and selective photocatalytic CO 2 reduction over Ga single atom decorated quantum dots under visible light   - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3QI00296A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3QI00296A
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2023, 10, 2731-2741Efficient and selective photocatalytic CO2 reduction over Ga single atom decorated quantum dots under visible light†

        
          
            Li 
            Shi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yingkui 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tingting 
            Bo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Zhou
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohui 
            Ren
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Yanshuo 
            Li
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, P. R. China. E-mail: shili1@nbu.edu.cn; liyanshuo@nbu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Applied Physics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Materials Physics and Preparing Technology, Faculty of Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: weizhou@tju.edu.cn
cThe State Key Laboratory of Refractories and Metallurgy, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430081, China
Received 
      16th February 2023
    , Accepted 29th March 2023First published on 30th March 2023AbstractExploring unique single atoms as catalytic sites is vitally important to improving the activity and selectivity of photocatalytic CO2 reduction but remains challenging. Here, we find that gallium (Ga) single atoms can serve as effective active sites for boosting the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction over CdSe quantum dots (QDs). Specifically, Ga single atom decorated CdSe QDs exhibit a CO evolution rate of 16.1 μmol h−1 and a selectivity of 90.4% with excellent durability over 30 hours, which are much higher than those of bare CdSe QDs. The mechanism investigation indicates that the introduction of Ga single atoms into the lattice of CdSe QDs enables efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and enhanced adsorption ability toward CO2 molecules; meanwhile the surface Ga catalytic sites can effectively trap electrons to activate CO2 and suppress H2 evolution.
1. Introduction
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 using semiconductor based catalysts and solar energy is a promising approach for chemical fuel production, representing a sustainable and economical strategy to address the energy crisis and greenhouse effect.1,2 The development and construction of highly active and robust materials for photocatalytic CO2 reduction have dominated the research of CO2 photoreduction over the past decades.1,3 Compared with the conventional bulk semiconductor photocatalysts, colloidal quantum dots (QDs) (e.g., CdS, CdSe, CuInS2, and ZnSe) possess many distinct properties such as multiple exciton generation capability, large surface area-to-volume ratios, abundant surface sites and short charge-transfer lengths, and are emerging as attractive materials for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.4,5 Many strategies including particle size adjustment, ligand functionalization, and defect engineering have been demonstrated to be effective at modulating the exciton kinetics of QDs, thus boosting their photocatalytic performances.6–8 Apart from that, the introduction of external cocatalysts is another effective method to kinetically promote the multielectron/multiproton photocatalytic CO2 reduction reactions of QDs.9,10 Typically, metal complexes are the most common cocatalysts that have been developed for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.11–13 However, due to the noncovalent assembly between the metal complexes and QDs, it is easy to detach the metal complexes from the QD surface, which leads to a decline of the photocatalytic activities. Moreover, the diffusion-controlled electron delivery process makes the electron transfer from QDs to the active sites of metal complexes quite random, which also limits the reaction rate of CO2 reduction. Therefore, directly decorating a cocatalyst onto the surface of QDs could be a more feasible way to regulate electron transfer pathways as well as to improve the activity and durability of QDs for photocatalysis by avoiding the utilization of bridging organic ligands.
Downsizing the cocatalysts on photocatalysts to a single atom scale holds great potential for improving the photocatalytic performances owing to the maximal atom utilization and accessibility of active sites, which is emerging as a research frontier.14–19 Very recently, single transition metal atoms (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Mn) have been demonstrated to be effective catalytic sites loaded on photocatalysts for promoting photocatalytic CO2 reduction as they can bond with the CO2 molecules via strong hybridization between the 2p and 3d orbitals to decrease the overpotential or the activation energy of CO2 reduction reactions.20–23 However, the unoccupied d-orbitals of transition metal atoms can also bind with the H atoms, leading to fierce competition between the H2 evolution reaction and CO2 reduction reaction. Other than transition metal atoms, post-transition metal atoms are rarely paid attention for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. The post-transition metals usually show poor H2 evolution performance and high selectivity of CO2 reduction products in electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reactions.24,25 It is thus interesting to investigate whether the single post-transition metal atom cocatalysts could improve the activity and selectivity of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Gallium (Ga) is a typical post-transition metal and has been widely utilized for the development of optical materials to achieve long afterglow luminescence, since the photoexcited electron from optical materials can be trapped and stored at the empty p orbital of Ga sites.26 The regional enrichment of photogenerated electrons on Ga sites may show great potential for the activation of CO2 and the improvement of photocatalytic CO2 reduction performances.
Herein, Ga single atom decorated CdSe (Ga–CdSe) QDs have been successfully synthesized and they demonstrated high efficiency in photocatalytic CO2 reduction. The results disclose that the decoration of Ga single atoms on CdSe QDs can significantly improve the activity and selectivity of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Under visible light irradiation, bare CdSe QDs show a CO evolution rate of 3.6 μmol h−1 with a CO selectivity of 26.2%, while Ga–CdSe QDs show a much improved CO evolution rate of 16.1 μmol h−1 and a selectivity of 90.4%, outperforming most of the reported QD based photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. The Ga–CdSe QDs also show high durability in the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction over 30 hours. The investigation based on various characterization techniques including ultrafast transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy, in situ Fourier-transform infrared (in situ FTIR) spectroscopy, and density functional theory (DFT) calculations uncover that the decoration of Ga single atoms on CdSe QDs greatly improves the separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs, promotes the adsorption of gaseous CO2 molecules and facilitates the trapping of photogenerated electrons at surface catalytic sites for activating CO2 and simultaneously suppressing H2 evolution.
2. Experimental methods
2.1 Preparation of pristine and Ga single atom decorated CdSe QDs
CdSe QDs were prepared according to a previously reported method with slight modifications.27 In detail, 10 mL of 100 mM CdCl2 solution was mixed with 5 mL of 240 mM 3-mercaptopropionic acid solution under intense stirring to form solution A. Se powder (50 mM) was dissolved in hydrazine hydrate to form solution B. After that, 10 mL of solution B was added into solution A at room temperature and then held at 100 °C for 60 min under an Ar atmosphere to obtain a yellow colloid. After cooling to room temperature, acetone was added to precipitate the QDs. The above precipitate was obtained by centrifugation, washed with ethanol, and dried under vacuum. The Ga single atom decorated CdSe QDs were synthesized by procedures similar to those of CdSe QDs, except that certain amount of aqueous solution of Ga(NO3)3 was added at the step of synthesis together with CdCl2 (the molar ratio of Ga:Cd in the precursor is 0.5%).
2.2 Characterization
The crystal structures of QDs were measured with an X-ray diffractometer (powder XRD, X'pert Powder, PANalytical B.V., Netherlands). The morphology of QDs was obtained using a TEM machine (FEI, Talos F200X). The optical information of QDs was obtained using an ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy machine (UV-2600 Shimadzu). The chemical states of QDs were determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, VG-ESCA Mark II). The PL spectra were obtained on a JASCO FP-6500 spectrofluorometer with an excitation wavelength of 400 nm. Decay time measurements were performed on a Hamamatsu instrument (Hamamatsu C5680, Japan) with an excitation light wavelength of 400 nm. The measurement of TA spectra was carried out on a commercial femtosecond amplifier laser system (35 fs, 1 kHz, 800 nm, Spitfire Ace, Spectra Physics).
2.3 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
The photocatalytic CO2 reduction performances of QDs were tested in a liquid–solid reaction system at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. Typically, 10 mg of QD powder, 35 mL of DMF and 7 ml of TEOA were mixed in a quartz reactor of 100 mL volume. The above mixture was sonicated for 5 min to get a well-dispersed solution. After that, the reactor was set on an air-closed photocatalytic reaction system and kept under stirring. Subsequently, the system was evacuated for 10 min to ensure that no O2 or N2 gas could be detected. Then, the reaction system was saturated with 101 kPa pure CO2 (purity, 99.999%). A 300 W Xe lamp combined with a UV cutoff filter (λ > 400 nm) was used as the visible light source. Additionally, a cooling water filter was connected between the lamp and reactor to remove the heat effect, and the reaction solution temperature was detected to be around 20 °C during the photocatalytic reaction. Gas chromatography was used to detect the H2 and carbon related products. The cycling experiment was conducted as follows: after one cycle, the used photocatalytic system was evacuated to remove the gas completely, and then the reaction system was saturated with 101 kPa pure CO2 for the next cycle, and each cycle was conducted for 6 hours. The apparent quantum yield (AQY) was measured by using a 300 W Xe lamp (10 mA current input) with monochromatic light band-pass filters as the light source. The number of incident photons was obtained by applying the radiant power energy meter. The AQY of CO evolution was calculated according to the equation:  
2.4 Isotope-labelling experiments
Isotope-labelling experiments were conducted by replacing 13CO2 gas with pure 12CO2 gas as the carbon source with other conditions unchanged as described above, and the CO gas product was analyzed using a GC-MS system equipped with a column (HP-MOLESIEVE, 30 m × 0.32 mm × 25 μm) and helium as the carrier gas. During measurements, the flow of the carrier was 0.5 ml L−1, and the column was maintained at 60 °C for 20 min.
2.5 
          In situ FTIR measurements

In situ FTIR was performed on a home-made spectral cell coupled with an internal reflection element (IRE) made of ZnSe (size: 50 mm × 20 mm × 3 mm, incident angle: 60°). 5 mL QD suspension of 1 mg mL−1 in ethanol was uniformly coated on the IRE surface and dried under vacuum, and then it was set into the home-made spectral cell. 10 ml of reaction solution was purged with pure CO2 gas for 10 min and then added into the home-made spectral cell. During the experiments, the cell was kept under air-closed conditions. The detector of the FTIR spectrometer (FTIR-6300, Jasco Inc.) was cooled with liquid nitrogen and purged with nitrogen during experiments. The in situ FTIR absorbance spectra were obtained by repeated 32 scans with a resolution of 4 cm−1. Before light irradiation, the background was monitored and recorded. Thereafter, the spectra were obtained at every 2 min with light illumination.
2.6 DFT calculations
The calculations of surface systems were conducted using the first principles based on the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). We used the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof, and applied a vacuum thickness more than 15 Å to separate it from its periodic model. The plane wave cutoff energy was set as 400 eV and the van der Waals (vdW) interactions were included by using the PBE-D2 functional. In addition, the convergence criteria of total energy and residual force were 10−5 eV and 0.03 eV Å−1, respectively. Moreover, the Brillouin zone was sampled with a gamma-centered scheme of 3 × 3 × 1 k-points. Furthermore, because of the polarization in the geometric structure, the dipole correction in its normal direction was included throughout the calculation. The Ga single atom decorated system was constructed by replacing a surface Cd atom from the pure phase surface system and labeled Ga@CdSe.
To investigate the effect of Ga single atoms on the performance of the CdSe system, the adsorption energy (Eads) was calculated to estimate the interaction strength between CO2 molecules and surfaces. Specifically, the adsorption energy formula is as follows: Eads = Etotal − Elayer − ECO2(1)where Etotal is related to the total energy of the whole molecule-adsorbed system, Elayer is the energy of the catalytic system, and ECO2 corresponds to the energy of the isolated CO2 molecule. According to this definition, the more negative the Eads value is, the easier it is for the system to adsorb CO2, otherwise, the system shows easy desorption of CO2.
The reaction free energy diagrams of CO2 reduction and the free energy diagram for hydrogen evolution were obtained by applying the plane-wave pseudopotential code PWSCF from the Quantum ESPRESSO package. The exchange and correlation potentials were determined by generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the scheme of Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE). van der Waals correction was employed by the DFT-D2 method. The Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) was calculated according to the equation ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS, where ΔE refers to the total energy change, ΔZPE corresponds to the change of zero-point energies, T is the temperature at 298.15 K and ΔS represents the change in entropy.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Synthesis and characterization of QDs
The CdSe QDs were synthesized by a facile method according to the reported literature.27 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to reveal the surface compositions and chemical states of the CdSe QDs. The high-resolution XPS results of Cd 3d and Se 3d agree well with the values reported for the divalent Cd selenide (Fig. S1†).28,29 Next, a certain amount of Cd2+ ions was substituted by Ga3+ ions during the synthetic process, thus enabling the synthesis of Ga–CdSe QDs (Fig. 1a). The as-prepared CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs can be well dispersed in dimethylformamide (DMF) solution with typical Tyndall effects (inset pictures in Fig. 1b). Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) diffuse reflectance spectra show that the CdSe QDs have an absorption edge of ∼473 nm (Fig. 1b). After Ga single atom decoration, red-shifts of the absorption edge can be observed (∼486 nm for Ga–CdSe QDs, Fig. 1b), which can be ascribed to partial leakage of excitons from CdSe QDs into the introduced metal sites. The calculated bandgaps of QDs are shown in Fig. S2,† and only a slightly decreased bandgap can be observed over Ga–CdSe QDs compared with that of bare CdSe QDs. The band positions of the QDs are estimated by using the Mott–Schottky method.30 As shown in Fig. S3,† the flat-band (FB) potentials of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe are −0.97 V vs. NHE and −0.91 V vs. NHE, respectively. Considering the position of the FB potential being very close to that of the conduction band minimum (CBM) edge for an n-type semiconductor,30 the CBM and valence band maximum (VBM) positions of QDs can thus be estimated as shown in Fig. S3c,† which indicates that the CBM potentials of two QDs can reach the CO2 to CO reduction energy level.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematical illustration of the synthesis procedure of Ga–CdSe QDs; (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs; HRTEM images of (c) CdSe QDs and (d) Ga–CdSe QDs; and (e) XRD patterns of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs. Scale bar: 5 nm. 

Fig. 1c shows the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of CdSe QDs, and the typical lattice distance of ∼0.35 nm is clearly identified, which can be assigned to the (111) facet of CdSe.8 The corresponding size distribution of CdSe QDs is shown in Fig. S4,† whose average particle size is determined as ∼3.6 nm. Fig. 1d shows the HRTEM images of Ga–CdSe QDs, and the measured lattice distance is ∼0.35 nm, ascribed to the (111) facet of CdSe, indicating that a trace amount of Ga decoration has little impact on the lattice change of CdSe QDs. Fig. S5† shows the corresponding size distribution of Ga–CdSe QDs, which reveals an average particle size of ∼3.7 nm, similar to that of CdSe QDs. Fig. 1e shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs. The diffraction peaks of CdSe QDs at 25.6, 42.8 and 50.7° correspond to the (111), (220) and (311) lattice planes of cubic CdSe.30 Compared with CdSe QDs, the (111) peak of Ga–CdSe QDs slightly shifts to a higher degree by 0.1°, due to the fact that the radius of Ga is smaller than that of Cd, largely suggesting that the Cd atoms are substituted by Ga in the crystal lattice of CdSe QDs.
The coordination environment of Ga in the Ga–CdSe QDs was determined by X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy and Ga K-edge extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectrometry. As shown in Fig. 2a, the absorption edge of Ga–CdSe QDs is located between those of the Ga metal and Ga2Se3, suggesting the existence of Ga with a valence lower than +3. The EXAFS spectra indicate that there is only one major peak referring to the Ga–Se coordination (R = 1.86 Å) in the Ga–CdSe QDs (Fig. 2b), which is well consistent with data for a Ga2Se3 reference sample, indicating that Ga atoms interact with CdSe QDs through Ga–Se bonding. As compared to the EXAFS spectra of the Ga metal, the signal at 2.11 Å is absent in Ga–CdSe QDs, which excludes the existence of Ga–Ga coordination bonding, confirming that Ga is dispersed mainly in the form of well-isolated single atoms on the CdSe QDs. The quantitative coordination configuration of the Ga atom can be obtained by least squares EXAFS curve-fitting analysis (Fig. 2c, Fig. S6, and Table S1†), which suggests that the Ga–Se bonds in Ga–CdSe QDs have an average coordination number of 3.3. A direct observation of the atomic dispersion of Ga throughout the whole of Ga–CdSe QDs was realized by the wavelet transform (WT) contour plot, as shown in Fig. 2d–f. The maximum intensity occurring at ca. 5.5 Å−1 is attributed to the Ga–Se coordination, and no Ga–Ga coordination at ca. 7.4 Å−1 can be found that is different from that of the Ga metal. Based on the above analysis, Ga was indeed atomically dispersed on the CdSe QD surface having a tri-coordination with Se atoms.
 Fig. 2  (a) Normalized XANES and (b) k3-weight FT-EXAFS curves of Ga metal, Ga2Se3 and Ga–CdSe QDs; (c) k3-weight FT-EXAFS fitting curve of Ga–CdSe QDs; and WT-EXAFS plots of (d) Ga metal, (e) Ga2Se3 and (f) Ga–CdSe QDs. 
XPS measurements were then conducted to reveal the electronic structure of Ga–CdSe QDs. The high-resolution XPS results of Cd 3d and Se 3d in Ga–CdSe QDs agree well with the values for the divalent Cd selenide (Fig. S7†).28,29 The Cd 3d XPS spectrum displays two apparent peaks at 404.9 eV and 411.8 eV, which are assigned to Cd 3d5/2 and Cd 3d3/2 of Cd2+, respectively. The characteristic peaks at 52.9 eV and 54.5 eV correspond to Se 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 of Se2−, respectively. The XPS peak at 20.1 eV corresponds to Ga 3d,31 which confirms the existence of Ga in Ga–CdSe QDs.
3.2 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction
The photocatalytic CO2 reduction performances of the prepared QDs were then evaluated. The photocatalytic reactions were performed in the presence of the sacrificial reagent triethanolamine (TEOA) in the organic solvent DMF under visible light irradiation and mild conditions (ambient temperature and 1 bar CO2). The evolved products in this photocatalytic system are CO and H2, while neither CH4 nor liquid products are detected, which is consistent with the previously reported works when using TEOA as the sacrificial agent and QDs as photocatalysts, that is, H2 gas is the only by-product of this photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction system.30,32 The time dependent yields of CO and H2 products over CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs are shown in Fig. S8.† It can be seen that the generation of CO and H2 increases with the reaction time, indicating the good stability of the prepared QDs for photocatalytic CO2 reduction reactions. Fig. 3a shows the comparison of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performances over CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs. Bare CdSe QDs are able to reduce CO2 with a CO evolution rate of 3.6 μmol h−1 and a H2 evolution rate of 10.0 μmol h−1, corresponding to a CO selectivity of 26.2%. Interestingly, after decorating single Ga atoms, the H2 evolution is considerably inhibited, while the CO yield increases. Specifically, Ga–CdSe QDs show a CO evolution rate of 16.1 μmol h−1 and a H2 evolution rate of 1.7 μmol h−1, corresponding to a CO selectivity of 90.4%. This indicates that the Ga single atoms might serve as catalytic sites for photocatalytic CO2 reduction, which could promote CO evolution and suppress H2 evolution. The photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance of Ga–CdSe QDs is higher than that of some reported QD based photocatalysts (Table S2†).30,32–36
 Fig. 3  (a) Comparison of photocatalytic CO2 reduction activities over CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs; (b) photocatalytic CO2 reduction activities over Ga–CdSe QDs with different amounts of Ga; (c) cycling stability test over Ga–CdSe QDs; (d) UV-vis spectrum and wavelength-dependent AQE of Ga–CdSe QDs; (e) photocatalytic CO2 reduction activities over Ga–CdSe QDs under different conditions; and (f) GC-MS of CO obtained from the photocatalytic reduction of 13CO2 over Ga–CdSe QDs. 
The effect of the content of Ga on photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance was also investigated. The Ga–CdSe QDs with an atomic ratio of Ga/Cd of 0.5% (atomic ratio of Ga/Cd in precursors) present the optimal photocatalytic properties and help achieve the highest CO production rate and selectivity. Further increasing the Ga content leads to the deterioration of photocatalytic performance (Fig. 3b). The effect of the reaction solvent on the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance over Ga–CdSe QDs was tested. As shown in Fig. S9,† the DMF and acetonitrile aprotic solvents are suitable for the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction, which is ascribed to their high solubility of CO2 molecules.37 However, the photocatalytic performance is greatly suppressed by using H2O as solvent, mainly attributed to the weak chemical affinity of CO2 molecules for H2O. The stability of the Ga–CdSe QDs was tested by cycling the photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 3c). No substantial deterioration of the gas evolution rate and the selectivity of CO is observed after the fifth cycle, demonstrating the good stability of Ga–CdSe QDs for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. After photocatalytic reactions, the reaction solution was collected and measured by the ICP method. The Ga in the reaction solution was not detected, indicating no obvious leaching of Ga after photocatalytic reaction. The used Ga–CdSe QDs were collected and characterized by XRD and XPS, which did not show obvious peak position changes, further suggesting the good stability of Ga–CdSe QDs for photocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. S10 and S11†).
To reveal whether the CO2 reduction reaction undergoes the photocatalytic process, the wavelength-dependent apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) of CO production over Ga–CdSe QDs was measured. Fig. 3d shows the UV-vis absorption spectrum of the Ga–CdSe QD sample along with the AQE of CO generation at different incident light wavelengths. It can be seen that the values of AQE decrease with the increase of incident light wavelength, and the trend is highly consistent with that of the light absorption spectrum of the Ga–CdSe QD sample in the visible light region, demonstrating that the CO2 reduction reaction undergoes the photocatalytic process. The measured AQE at an irradiated light wavelength of 400 nm reaches 5.7%. Fig. 3e shows the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performances over Ga–CdSe QDs under various reaction conditions. The CO and H2 evolution cannot be observed in the absence of visible light or Ga–CdSe QDs, suggesting that the generation of CO and H2 proceeds through visible light driven photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 3e, columns 2 and 3). Without TEOA in the reaction solution, no products are detected, revealing that the TEOA functions as both the electron donor and proton source for photocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 3e, column 4). When Ar is introduced instead of CO2, only H2 evolution is detected, revealing that the produced CO comes from CO2 (Fig. 3e, column 5). The 13CO2 isotopic experiment was further conducted to track the carbon source of evolved CO. Fig. 3f shows the gas chromatogram (GC) and mass spectra (MS) of the generated CO. The peak at a retention time of around 6.5 min corresponds to the CO product, and the other two peaks at the retention time of around 2.4 min and 3.2 min are confirmed to be O2 and N2, respectively, referring to the existing air in the sampling needle. The analysis of the GC peak of CO reveals the m/z = 29 in MS, which is attributed to the 13CO. In contrast, when 12CO2 is used instead of 13CO2, only 12CO is detected (Fig. S12†). These results definitely confirm that the produced CO originates from the CO2 photoreduction.
3.3 Photocatalytic mechanism
To explore the role of Ga single atoms in promoting the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance of CdSe QDs, ultrafast TA spectroscopy was firstly employed through adopting a femtosecond time-resolved pump–probe configuration. Fig. 4a and b show the TA spectra (410–800 nm) collected at several probe delays at 400 nm excitation for CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs, respectively. Usually, the dynamics of surface-trapped electrons can be studied from the TA signals at 500–1500 nm.38 It can be seen that all the QDs display negative TA signals in the range from 500 to 800 nm, featuring a probe bleaching between the excitonic states and near-conduction band minimum (CBM) bands. Compared with the TA spectrum of CdSe QDs, one can see that the decoration of Ga single atoms leads to a faster bleaching signal, which indicates that there must be a rapid electron transfer mainly from excitonic states to new near-CBM states that increases the bleach recovery rate. Fig. 4c exhibits the TA kinetic traces of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs recorded at 550 nm. The analysis of early time kinetics (the relaxation of photoexcited hot electrons within the conduction band under 400 nm excitation) of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs reveals that the exciton generation of both samples takes a time constant time of ∼0.14 ps, which corresponds to the initial build-up process. It can be seen that the Ga–CdSe QDs exhibit a much shorter electron recovery lifetime than CdSe QDs, demonstrating that the decoration of Ga single atoms in the host CdSe QDs introduces an additional pathway for the depletion of excitons, i.e., the charge transfer from the exciton to Ga trap states (Fig. 4d). Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy was further employed to uncover the charge carrier kinetics. As shown in Fig. 4e, the introduction of Ga single atoms significantly quenches the band-edge emission of CdSe QDs, which could be mainly attributed to interfacial electron transfer from CdSe to Ga sites. The emission average lifetime correspondingly decreased from 3.4 ns to 0.4 ns (Fig. 4f and Table S3†), further confirming the interfacial electron transfer from CdSe to Ga sites, which may unveil the significant role of Ga single atoms in promoting the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction.
 Fig. 4  Time-resolved TA spectra of (a) CdSe QDs and (b) Ga–CdSe QDs at an excitation wavelength of 400 nm; (c) TA kinetics probed at 550 nm; (d) schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer process over Ga–CdSe QDs; and (e) PL spectra and (f) PL decay curves of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs. 
The enhanced charge separation and transfer induced by Ga single atoms is crucial to improving photocatalytic performances, whereas the reason why the selectivity for CO2 reduction is increased remains unclear. The adsorption of CO2 on the surface of the photocatalyst is the prerequisite step in the photocatalytic CO2 reduction process, which not only determines the occurrence of the reaction, but also significantly affects the conversion efficiency.39 The adsorption behavior of CO2 over CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs was investigated. As shown in Fig. S13,† Ga–CdSe QDs show higher CO2 adsorption ability than bare CdSe QDs, which indicates that the decoration of Ga single atoms promotes the adsorption of CO2. To unveil the CO2 photoreduction process on Ga–CdSe QDs, in situ FTIR measurements were carried out. As shown in Fig. 5a, the broad absorption peak with a center located at 2337 cm−1 is attributed to the adsorbed CO2.40 Upon light irradiation, the intensity of bands in the region of 1400 to 1800 cm−1 gradually increases, which is due to the generation of intermediate carbonate species, consistent with the mechanism of CO2 reduction to CO in the previous reports.41 The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO leads to the production of an adsorbed formate intermediate (*COOH) according to the reaction equation: *CO2 + H+ + e− → *COOH.40 The FTIR characteristic peaks located at 1504 cm−1 and 1423 cm−1 are attributed to the carbonate-type species (C–O) of the adsorbed formate intermediate (*COOH).21 The peak with a center located at 1640 cm−1 refers to the CO stretching of formate species.21 In addition, the broad FTIR peak located at 1741 cm−1 is attributed to the asymmetric O–CO stretching, also belonging to the formate intermediate.40 The generated formate species is then reduced to adsorbed CO (*CO) through the reaction *COOH + H+ + e− → *CO + H2O. The formation of the *CO species can be confirmed by the FTIR absorption peak located at 2035 cm−1 (Fig. 5b).42 Finally, the CO is produced through the dissociation of the *CO adduct (*CO → CO), which is confirmed by the FTIR absorption peak located at 2165 cm−1 (Fig. 5b).6,42 The in situ FTIR spectra of CdSe QDs for photocatalytic CO2 reduction are also recorded and shown in Fig. S14,† which also reveal the formation of intermediate carbonate species under visible light irradiation. However, the intensity of peaks for CdSe QDs, especially the CO peak in Fig. S14b,† is much weaker than that of Ga–CdSe QDs under the same exposure time of visible light, which manifests the dominant role of Ga single atoms in CdSe QDs for promoting CO2 activation and conversion. The mechanism of the Ga–CdSe QDs in photocatalytic CO2 reduction can be proposed and is illustrated in Fig. 5c. During the photocatalytic reaction, the Ga single atom active site can bind a CO2 molecule to give a Ga@CO2 complex, and then form a Ga@COOH species by accepting a proton from the TEOA. Subsequently, the Ga@COOH species captures another proton from TEOA followed by dehydration to form a Ga@CO complex. Finally, the CO molecule can be released from Ga@CO to complete the reaction cycle.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) In situ FTIR spectra of photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light over Ga–CdSe QDs; (c) proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic CO2 reduction at Ga–CdSe QDs. 
The CO2 adsorption models based on Ga–CdSe QDs are constructed by the DFT method. The corresponding adsorption energies are summarized in Table S4.† For the pristine CdSe, CO2 will be spontaneously adsorbed on the Cd site due to the negative adsorption energy (Eads = −0.29 eV). With the introduction of single Ga atoms, the adsorption energy is significantly decreased (Eads = −1.47 eV), indicating that single Ga atoms promote the adsorption of CO2 on the CdSe surface, which is consistent with the experimental CO2 adsorption result (Fig. S13†). It should be noted that CO2 is more likely to be adsorbed on the Ga atoms instead of Cd atoms due to the more negative adsorption energy. When CO2 approaches the catalyst surfaces, the O atom of the CO2 molecule is bonded with Cd or Ga atoms to form the Cd–O or Ga–O bonds. The bond length of Ga–O bonds (2.5 Å) is shorter than that of Cd–O bonds (2.76 Å, Fig. 6a and b), indicating that the single Ga atoms can promote the electron transfer from the surface of Ga–CdSe to the bonded CO2 molecule, which prevents the electron–hole recombination and activates the CO2 molecule, hence achieving enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance. The strong interaction of the CO2 molecule with the Ga single atom adsorption center leads to further bending of the OCO bond (from 179.28° to 178.72°), indicating that the CO2 can be more efficiently activated on the surface of Ga–CdSe compared with that on pure CdSe. Furthermore, according to the partial density of states (PDOS) (Fig. 6c and d), the interaction between CO2 and single Ga atoms in the Ga–CdSe is stronger than that of Cd atoms in the CdSe, which further indicates that the introduction of Ga single atoms in CdSe promotes the activation of CO2 molecules.
 Fig. 6  Configurations of CO2 adsorption on pure (a) CdSe and (b) Ga–CdSe (green ball: Se, purple ball: Cd, dark green ball: Ga); PDOS of CO2 and adsorption sites in (c) CdSe and (d) Ga–CdSe; (e) reaction free energy diagrams of the CO2 reduction and (f) the calculated free energy diagram for hydrogen evolution over CdSe and Ga–CdSe. 
To further understand the reaction mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction, the reaction Gibbs free energies were calculated by means of DFT calculations. The reaction free energy diagrams along the reaction path of the CO2 reduction over CdSe and Ga–CdSe are obtained and presented in Fig. 6e. The CO2 reduction reaction proceeds through the reduction of adsorbed CO2 (*CO2) and COOH (*COOH) intermediates to generate CO, which was confirmed by in situ FTIR measurements. As for CdSe and Ga–CdSe, the results disclose that their rate-determining procedures of the CO2 reduction reaction are the hydrogenation of CO2* to COOH*, which are 1.54 eV and 1.03 eV, respectively (Fig. 6e). The DFT calculations demonstrate a significant role of Ga single atoms in the CdSe lattice for decreasing the energy barrier of CO2 reduction and thus promoting CO2 reduction, which is consistent with the measured photocatalytic CO evolution activity. Moreover, the free energy profiles of H2 evolution on the photocatalysts were calculated. The results indicate that the energy barrier for H2 evolution follows the expected trend of Ga–CdSe > CdSe, confirming that the H2 evolution reaction is well inhibited after the introduction of Ga single atoms (Fig. 6f). The DFT calculations clearly reveal that the introduction of Ga single atoms can improve the activity and selectivity of CdSe QDs for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.
The unique role of the Ga single atoms as catalytic sites was further evidenced by a control experiment using CdSe QDs and free Ga3+ cations in the reaction system (Fig. S15†) and Ga nanoparticle/CdSe QD composite (Fig. S16†), in which the CO evolution rates are much lower than those with Ga–CdSe, indicating that the introduction of Ga single atoms into the lattice of QDs is a prominent strategy for promoting the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the introduction of Ga single atoms into the lattice of CdSe QDs can dramatically boost the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction. Specifically, Ga–CdSe QDs exhibit a CO evolution rate of 16.1 μmol h−1 and a selectivity of 90.4% with excellent durability over 30 hours, which are much higher than those of pure CdSe QDs. The Ga single atoms in CdSe QDs have four main roles: (1) enabling effective separation of photogenerated charge carriers, (2) promoting the adsorption of CO2 molecules, (3) trapping and localizing electrons at surface catalytic sites for lowering the activation barrier of CO2, and (4) increasing the energy barrier of H2 evolution to suppress the H2 evolution reaction. This work provides the first experimental result that the introduction of Ga single atoms into QDs can promote the CO2 photoreduction reaction with high activity and selectivity.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work received financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of Ningbo (no. 2021J066), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 22209084), the Yongjiang Talent Project (no. 2021A-142-G), the starting-up funding of Ningbo University (no. 422109273), and K. C. Wong Magna Fund in Ningbo University.
References
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into renewable hydrocarbon fuels: state-of-the-art accomplishment, challenges, and prospects, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Wang, Y.-H. Zou, H.-X. Sun, Y. Chen, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Recent progress and perspectives in heterogeneous photocatalytic CO2 reduction through a solid–gas mode, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 438, 213906 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Cocatalysts in semiconductor-based photocatalytic CO2 reduction: achievements, challenges, and opportunities, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Wu, X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Semiconductor quantum dots: an emerging candidate for CO2 photoreduction, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900709 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. K. Xin, M. Y. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. J. Gao, Q. Guo, X. B. Li, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Reductive carbon-carbon coupling on metal sites regulates photocatalytic CO2 reduction in water using ZnSe quantum dots, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, 202207222 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Xia, L. Wang, X. Zheng, Z. Qi, C. Gao, J. Zhu, Z. Li, H. Xu and Y. Xiong, Enabling visible-light-driven selective CO2 reduction by doping quantum dots: trapping electrons and suppressing H2 evolution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16447–16451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Sahm, E. Mates-Torres, N. Eliasson, K. Sokolowski, A. Wagner, K. E. Dalle, Z. Huang, O. A. Scherman, L. Hammarstrom, M. Garcia-Melchor and E. Reisner, Imidazolium-modification enhances photocatalytic CO2 reduction on ZnSe quantum dots, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 9078–9087 RSC .
A. Li, T. Wang, C. Li, Z. Huang, Z. Luo and J. Gong, Adjusting the reduction potential of electrons by quantum confinement for selective photoreduction of CO2 to methanol, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3804–3808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xi, X. Zhang, Y. Shen, W. Dong, Z. Fan, K. Wang, S. Zhong and S. Bai, Aspect ratio dependent photocatalytic enhancement of CsPbBr3 in CO2 reduction with two-dimensional metal organic framework as a cocatalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120411 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, X. Ren, Z. Zhang, Q. Wang, Y. Li and J. Ye, Non-stoichiometric Ag-In-S quantum dots for efficient photocatalytic CO2 reduction: Ag/In molar ratio dependent activity and selectivity, J. Catal., 2021, 401, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lian, M. S. Kodaimati and E. A. Weiss, Photocatalytically active superstructures of quantum dots and iron porphyrins for reduction of CO2 to CO in water, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 568–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Wang, Q. Shen, Y. Zhang, C. Ding, Y. Bai, G. Jiang, Z. Li and N. Gaponik, Boosting photocatalytic CO2 reduction on CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals by immobilizing metal complexes, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1517–1525 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Ren, W. Xia, B.-Y. Deng, J. Liu and F. Wang, Host-guest assemblies of anchoring molecular catalysts of CO2 reduction onto CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots for robust photocatalytic syngas production in water, Mol. Catal., 2022, 520, 112168 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Heterogeneous single-atom photocatalysts: fundamentals and applications, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12175–12216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xia, Y. Zhang, J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Single-atom photocatalysts for emerging reactions, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 39–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiong, C. Mao, Z. Yang, Q. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Gu and T. Zhang, Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction to CO over Ni single atoms supported on defect-rich zirconia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002928 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Y. Du, Y. Li, X. Wu, H. Hu, G. Wang, Y. Xiao, S. Chou and G. Zhang, Atomic-level insight of sulfidation-engineered Aurivillius-related Bi2O2SiO3 nanosheets enabling visible light low-concentration CO2 conversion, Carbon Energy, 2022, 5, 264 CrossRef .
X. Xiong, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, W. Yin, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Selective photocatalytic CO2 reduction over Zn-based layered double hydroxides containing tri or tetravalent metals, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 987–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Peng, X. Wang, R. Wang, Y.-C. Huang, F. Meng, M. Li, C.-L. Dong, Q. Zhang, L. Gu and S. Shen, Anchoring single nickel atoms on carbon-vacant carbon nitride nanosheets for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2022, 38, 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, J. Wang, K. Zhao and Y. Bi, Spatially confined iron single-atom and potassium ion in carbon nitride toward efficient CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 316, 121643 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, X. Ren, Q. Wang, Y. Li, F. Ichihara, H. Zhang, Y. Izumi, L. Ren, W. Zhou, Y. Yang and J. Ye, Stabilizing atomically dispersed catalytic sites on tellurium nanosheets with strong metal-support interaction boosts photocatalysis, Small, 2020, 16, 2002356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ran, Z. Li, B. Ran, J. Cao, Y. Zhao, T. Shao, Y. Song, M. K. H. Leung, L. Sun and J. Hou, Engineering single-atom active sites on covalent organic frameworks for boosting CO2 photoreduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 17097–17109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Jiang, W. Chen, F. Liao, X. Ge, X. Zhou, M. Chen, R. Li, Z. Xue, G. Wang, X. Duan, G. Zhang, Y.-G. Wang and Y. Wu, In-situ polymerization induced atomically dispersed manganese sites as cocatalyst for CO2 photoreduction into synthesis gas, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105059 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xia, H. Yu, H. Xie, P. Huang, R. Menzel, M. M. Titirici and G. Chai, Recent progress of Bi-based electrocatalysts for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 7957–7973 RSC .
J. Medina-Ramos, R. C. Pupillo, T. P. Keane, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, Efficient conversion of CO2 to CO using Tin and other inexpensive and easily prepared post-transition metal catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5021–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Liu, X. M. Jiang, H. Y. Zeng and G. C. Guo, [ABa2Cl][Ga4S8] (A = Rb, Cs): wide-spectrum nonlinear optical materials obtained by polycation-substitution-induced nonlinear optical (NLO)-functional motif ordering, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 10641–10645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Q. Xiang, Y. Liao, T. Wen and H. Zhang, Visible-light-driven CdSe quantum dots/graphene/TiO2 nanosheets composite with excellent photocatalytic activity for E. coli disinfection and organic pollutant degradation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 457, 846–855 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H. Zhao, F. Huang, Q. Jing, H. Cao, Q. Wu, S. Peng and G. Cao, High performance of Mn-doped CdSe quantum dot sensitized solar cells based on the vertical ZnO nanorod arrays, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 438–445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Shen, J. Zhang, W. Zhong and X. Huang, Cu2−xSe/CdS composite photocatalyst with enhanced visible light photocatalysis activity, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 762–769 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, J. Wu, J. C. Hu, S. Sun, M. D. Li, H. Liu, M. Lan and F. Wang, Highly efficient photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO catalyzed by surface-ligand-removed and Cd-rich CdSe Quantum Dots, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4617–4622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, X. Li, Z. Yao, H. Bai, Y. Lu, C. Ma, S. Lu, Z. Peng, J. Yang, A. Pan and H. Huang, Unconventional p–d hybridization interaction in PtGa ultrathin nanowires boosts oxygen reduction electrocatalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18083–18090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-Q. Bi, J.-W. Wang, J.-X. Lv, J. Wang, W. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Selective photocatalytic CO2 reduction in water by electrostatic assembly of CdS nanocrystals with a dinuclear cobalt catalyst, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11815–11821 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Kuehnel, C. D. Sahm, G. Neri, J. R. Lee, K. L. Orchard, A. J. Cowan and E. Reisner, ZnSe quantum dots modified with a Ni(cyclam) catalyst for efficient visible-light driven CO2 reduction in water, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2501–2509 RSC .
M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. E. Dalle and E. Reisner, Selective photocatalytic CO2 reduction in water through anchoring of a molecular Ni catalyst on CdS nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7217–7223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ou, W. Tu, S. Yin, W. Xing, S. Wu, H. Wang, S. Wan, Q. Zhong and R. Xu, Amino-assisted anchoring of CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots on porous g-C3N4 for enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13570–13574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Xu, M. Z. Yang, B. X. Chen, X. D. Wang, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, A CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dot/graphene oxide composite for photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5660–5663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, F. Liang, X.-B. Li, Y.-J. Gao, M.-Y. Huang, Y. Wang, S.-G. Xia, X.-Y. Gao, Q.-C. Gan, Z.-S. Lin, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Efficient and selective CO2 reduction integrated with organic synthesis by solar energy, Chem, 2019, 5, 2605–2616 CAS .
F. Liu, R. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Weng, C. M. Che and Y. Chen, Direct Z-scheme hetero-phase junction of black/red phosphorus for photocatalytic water splitting, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11791–11795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, L. Guo, M. Dan, D. E. Doronkin, C. Han, Z. Rao, Y. Liu, J. Meng, Z. Huang, K. Zheng, P. Chen, F. Dong and Y. Zhou, Modulating electron density of vacancy site by single Au atom for effective CO2 photoreduction, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, P. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Ren, F. Ichihara, W. Zhou, H. Zhang, Y. Izumi, B. Cao, S. Wang, H. Chen and J. Ye, Efficient photocatalytic CO2 reduction mediated by transitional metal borides: metal site-dependent activity and selectivity, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21833–21841 RSC .
A. Li, Q. Cao, G. Zhou, B. Schmidt, W. Zhu, X. Yuan, H. Huo, J. Gong and M. Antonietti, Three-phase photocatalysis for the enhanced selectivity and activity of CO2 reduction on a hydrophobic surface, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14549–14555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hadjiivanov, H. Knözinger and M. Mihaylov, FTIR study of CO adsorption on Ni-ZSM-5, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 2618–2624 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3qi00296aThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:

 		 
Eads = Etotal − Elayer − ECO2	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematical illustration of the synthesis procedure of Ga–CdSe QDs; (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs; HRTEM images of (c) CdSe QDs and (d) Ga–CdSe QDs; and (e) XRD patterns of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs. Scale bar: 5 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Normalized XANES and (b) k3-weight FT-EXAFS curves of Ga metal, Ga2Se3 and Ga–CdSe QDs; (c) k3-weight FT-EXAFS fitting curve of Ga–CdSe QDs; and WT-EXAFS plots of (d) Ga metal, (e) Ga2Se3 and (f) Ga–CdSe QDs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Comparison of photocatalytic CO2 reduction activities over CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs; (b) photocatalytic CO2 reduction activities over Ga–CdSe QDs with different amounts of Ga; (c) cycling stability test over Ga–CdSe QDs; (d) UV-vis spectrum and wavelength-dependent AQE of Ga–CdSe QDs; (e) photocatalytic CO2 reduction activities over Ga–CdSe QDs under different conditions; and (f) GC-MS of CO obtained from the photocatalytic reduction of 13CO2 over Ga–CdSe QDs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Time-resolved TA spectra of (a) CdSe QDs and (b) Ga–CdSe QDs at an excitation wavelength of 400 nm; (c) TA kinetics probed at 550 nm; (d) schematic illustration of the charge separation and transfer process over Ga–CdSe QDs; and (e) PL spectra and (f) PL decay curves of CdSe QDs and Ga–CdSe QDs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) In situ FTIR spectra of photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light over Ga–CdSe QDs; (c) proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic CO2 reduction at Ga–CdSe QDs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Configurations of CO2 adsorption on pure (a) CdSe and (b) Ga–CdSe (green ball: Se, purple ball: Cd, dark green ball: Ga); PDOS of CO2 and adsorption sites in (c) CdSe and (d) Ga–CdSe; (e) reaction free energy diagrams of the CO2 reduction and (f) the calculated free energy diagram for hydrogen evolution over CdSe and Ga–CdSe.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3qi00296a

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
