Magnetic fields affect hot electrons in silicon-based photodetectors at telecommunication wavelengths   - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9MH00295B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9MH00295B
(Communication)
Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1156-1168Magnetic fields affect hot electrons in silicon-based photodetectors at telecommunication wavelengths†

        
          
            Tzu-Yao 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Keng-Te 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ching-Che 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Wei 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lung-Tai 
            Shiu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei-You 
            Chen
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hsuen-Li 
            Chen
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: hsuenlichen@ntu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886 2 2364 4562;   Tel: +886 2 3366 3240
bCenter of Atomic Initiative for New Materials (AI-MAT), National Taiwan University, Taiwan
Received 
      23rd February 2019
    , Accepted 23rd April 2019First published on 3rd May 2019AbstractThe core assumption of Fowler theory is that excited hot electrons are distributed isotropically in momentum space inside a metal, and only a small fraction of the hot electrons within the emission cone perpendicular to the Schottky junction can possibly be injected into the semiconductor contact. A clearer understanding of the direction and momentum space of hot electrons should aid the development of various hot electron-based devices. In this study, in contrast to the assumption of Fowler theory, we first proved experimentally that the direction of hot electrons is highly related to the polarization state of the incident light. Furthermore, the anisotropic movement of hot electrons can be exploited, through the application of a magnetic field, to modulate the optoelectronic response to silicon (Si)-based photodetectors that operate at optical telecommunication wavelengths. Instead of using a noble metal, we applied nickel (Ni), a ferromagnetic material, to construct a hot electron-based photodetector for the detection of infrared (IR) radiation with photon energy well below the band edge of Si. We designed a series of experiments to verify the directionality and transport of hot electrons within the Ni–Si Schottky diode. When a magnetic field was applied to the device, the effects of Lorentz force and anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) greatly affected the transport of hot electrons. Furthermore, taking advantage of the anisotropic movement of hot electrons and magnetic effects, we could selectively enhance or weaken the IR radiation-induced signals. In addition, our device could be switched from polarization-insensitive to polarization-sensitive by applying a magnetic field. To the best of our knowledge, this study, combining the electrical, magnetic, and optical effects of hot electrons and Si-based devices, is the first to modulate the efficiency of Si-based photodetectors working at optical telecommunication wavelengths. This strategy would, presumably, also be potentially very useful when applied to other hot electron-based systems and devices.

New concepts
This study, combining the electrical, magnetic, and optical effects of hot electrons and Si-based devices, is the first to modulate the efficiency of Si-based photodetectors working at optical telecommunication wavelengths. Fowler theory is the key concept to study Si-based photodetectors that can operate at optical telecommunication wavelengths. The core assumption of Fowler theory is that excited hot electrons are distributed isotropically in momentum space inside a metal. In this study, in contrast to the assumption of Fowler theory, we first proved experimentally that the direction of hot electrons is highly related to the polarization state of the incident light. Furthermore, the anisotropic movement of hot electrons can be exploited, through the application of a magnetic field, to modulate the optoelectronic response to Si-based photodetectors that operate at optical telecommunication wavelengths. Instead of using a noble metal, we applied Ni, a ferromagnetic material, to construct a hot electron-based photodetector for the detection of IR light with photon energy well below the band edge of Si. Our device could be switched from polarization-insensitive to polarization-sensitive by applying a magnetic field. This strategy would, presumably, be potentially very useful when applied to various hot electron-based systems and devices.

Introduction
Magneto-optic (MO) effects, including the Faraday effect,1 the magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE),2 and the Zeeman effect,3 are phenomena of optical waves influenced by applied magnetic fields or magnetism. The Faraday and MOKE effects both involve the polarization plane of linearly polarized light rotating when light propagates through materials in a magnetic field.4–8 Because of the relationship between electromagnetic waves and magnetism, the Faraday and MOKE effects have been applied in magnetic sensors, optical data storage,9 and optical isolation and modulation.10–13 As a result of the magnetic field affecting the propagation of optical waves, the MOKE and Faraday effects are also called “optical-Hall effects”.5
In addition to MO effects, which involve the interactions of electromagnetic waves and magnetic fields, the electric currents in materials may also be influenced by magnetic fields—the so-called magnetoresistance (MR) effect. The MR effect is generally used to control the electrical resistance of an electronic device through the application of an external static magnetic field; such approaches include ordinary magnetoresistance (OMR), anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR), giant magnetoresistance (GMR), and tunnelling magnetoresistance (TMR). OMR occurs mainly in non-magnetic materials (e.g., semiconductors and non-magnetic metals). When a non-magnetic material is placed in an external magnetic field, the conducting carriers are scattered in the lattice of the material as a result of the Lorentz force; the deviation of the carriers from their original route of travel results in an increase in resistance. The increase in resistance can be huge: for example, Xue et al.14 generated a large OMR effect, in which the MR ratio increased to greater than 2500%, when applying an external magnetic field of 5 Tesla (T) on a silicon (Si)-based p–n diode. Such magneto-electronic devices would have potential application in spintronic electronic devices.15
From the point of view of electric conduction, the approach described above, based on OMR, controls the “increment in resistance” by applying an external magnetic field in a non-magnetic material. In contrast, the electrical resistance might “decrease” when the electric current is perpendicular to the external magnetic field or magnetization in the magnetic material; this phenomenon is the so-called anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) effect. In ferromagnetic materials, such as nickel (Ni), the resistance varies with respect to the angle between the direction of the current and the external magnetic field because of spin–orbit coupling.16 In the case of two orthogonal orientations—parallel and perpendicular to the external magnetic field—of the applied electric current, the highest resistance appears when the applied current is parallel to the external magnetic field, and the lowest resistance appears when the applied current is perpendicular to the external magnetic field.16,17 Because the AMR effect is very sensitive to the magnetic field, it can be used to measure the Earth's magnetic field and electric current. In the early 1990s, the AMR effect was also used to manufacture the read heads of hard disks. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, the AMR effect has never been applied to any optoelectronic devices. In this paper, we describe how the AMR effect can enhance the quantum efficiency (QE) of optoelectronic devices; if we could incorporate AMR effects, through which the resistance is decreased by applying an external magnetic field, we could, therefore, develop optoelectronic-magnetic devices.
The surface plasmon, the oscillation of delocalized electrons at the interface between metallic and dielectric materials, has been used most commonly to enhance the performance of optoelectronic devices in recent years. Far-field light can be coupled into the near-field to induce resonance within a subwavelength structure and, thus, increase the light harvesting of devices; for example, plasmon-based optical antenna are powerful light-focusing tools for various photoactive devices, including solar cells and photodetectors.18,19 Accordingly, many types of metallic nanostructures—including nanogratings,19 nanoparticles,20 nanostripes,21 and structured waveguides22—have been designed to excite the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) or the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). When used for photodetection, these plasmonic metallic nanostructures have been combined with various optoelectronic devices, including p–n photodiodes,23 metal–semiconductor Schottky diodes,24–26 and photoconductors.27 When the active region of a device is covered by or positioned close to such a metallic nanostructure, the latter can effectively confine the incident light from free space into a nanoscale volume. The absorption of light in a semiconductor can be increased when the range of the “hot spot” created by a metallic nanostructure covers that semiconductor, further enhancing the photoresponse of the device.
The electronic band structure of Si features a band gap energy of approximately 1.12 eV that limits its ability to detect light in the IR regime. Highly efficient infrared (IR) detectors are essential, however, in telecommunications28 and spectroscopy.29 Knight et al.18 developed a Si-based near-infrared (NIR) photodetector by incorporating a Au/n-Si Schottky diode that could detect photons of energy below the band edge of Si but higher than the Schottky barrier of Au/n-Si. Beyond the optical absorption regime of Si, the key concept for photodetection is the use of energetic “hot electrons” generated in a metal from plasmon non-radiative decay. Photoexcited hot electrons having energy above the Fermi level of a metal can be transported to the Au–n-Si interface and step over the Schottky barrier into the conduction band of Si, thereby producing a photocurrent. As a result, the detectable spectral regime of the photodetector is defined by the Schottky barrier height, rather than the Si band edge.26
The main disadvantage of hot electron-based IR photodetectors, however, is their low external quantum efficiency (EQE), which leads to low photo-responsivity. To solve this problem, previous studies24,26 have focused on concentrating the electric field in the near field to increase the absorption of light in the noble metal and enhance the photo-responsivity of the photodetector. The difficulty, however, is that the conversion efficiency of hot electrons, also known as the internal quantum efficiency (IQE), is too low even when the absorption of light reaches 80% or more.26 Some recent attempts have, therefore, been made to increase the bias voltage,30 increase the area of the Schottky junction,24 and depress the dark current by using the rectifying characteristics of a diode31 to improve the IQE of the photodetector. The methods described above can increase the IQE predicted by the modified Fowler equation.18,32
More recently, Knight et al.33 and Chalabi et al.21 paid attention to the directionality of the hot electrons produced by plasmon decay, rather than just the relationship between the photon energy and the potential. There are two central assumptions of Fowler theory: (i) that the hot electrons are excited into an isotropic distribution in the momentum space within the metal and (ii) that only a small fraction of the hot electrons within the emission cone perpendicular to the Schottky junction can possibly be injected into the semiconductor contact.34 It appears, however, that these assumptions are questionable. To challenge Fowler theory, Knight et al.33 and Chalabi et al.21 proposed, using embedded metal and nanostripe structures, respectively, that the direction of the emitted electrons and the polarization of light are correlated. The vertical Schottky contacts dominated the overall photocurrent, as demonstrated using the embedded plasmonic nanostructures. Furthermore, the difference in photocurrent after irradiating with TE and TM polarization in the nanostripe structures could not be explained simply by the difference in the absorption of light; it was, instead, presumably caused by the anisotropic distribution of the momentum direction of the hot electrons. The directionality of hot electrons generated by plasmon decay has remained inconclusive. The directionality may even be affected by the polarization of the light as well as the crystal orientation of the metal, as predicted theoretically by Sundararaman et al.35 Accordingly, an accurate understanding of the momentum direction of hot electrons should greatly assist our ability to collect hot electrons; we should be able to take advantage of the interaction between hot electrons and magnetic fields to further our knowledge in this regard.
Similar to the direct current (DC) bias of an electric current in a material, the current generated by a photoexcited hot electron may be also affected by the Lorentz force and AMR effect in the presence of a magnetic field. If the AMR effect could be integrated into a hot electron-based photodetector, it may be possible to achieve the modulation of photoexcited hot electrons by applying a magnetic field. To the best of our knowledge, this concept has not been proposed or investigated previously.
In this study, we applied a new approach to verify the directionality of hot electrons: using an external magnetic field to control the transport of hot electrons in a nickel–silicon (Ni–Si) Schottky diode. When we applied a magnetic field to the device, the Lorentz force and AMR effect arose and affected the transport of hot electrons, resulting in a change in the motion of the photocurrent. This behavior allowed us to integrate the properties of ferromagnetic (FM) materials into a hot electron-based detector and study the interaction of hot electrons and magnetic fields; furthermore, we could verify the directivity of hot electrons. For the purpose of light harvesting, we used the deep-trench/thin-metal (DTTM) active antenna structure developed in a previous study24 for its ability to increase the absorption of IR light in the optical telecommunication regime. For this study, we considered that the generation of hot electrons in momentum space would be dominated by the polarization of the light, rather than the isotropic distribution assumed by Fowler theory. We have found experimentally that the photocurrent of the DTTM system varied with respect to the orientation between the polarization of light and the external magnetic field. The DTTM system was a polarization-insensitive photodetector when the magnetic field was off; when we examined two orthogonal orientations of polarization of light, parallel and perpendicular to the external magnetic field, we observed a significant difference in the variation in photocurrent between these two orthogonal orientations when the magnetic field was on. Furthermore, taking advantage of “reducing in resistance” caused by the Lorentz force14,15 and AMR effect,16,17 we could increase the hot electron injection efficiency of an IR photodetector. When applying a magnetic field to the device, we observed an enhancement in the IQE of the hot electron-based IR photodetector. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to demonstrate the enhanced IQE of an IR photodetector through the application of an external magnetic field. Because of its low energy consumption, this approach would appear to be suitable also for photovoltaic devices and photocatalysis, and even for logic applications and magnetic field sensors, and opens a pathway for various other hot electron-based optoelectronic devices.
Experimental section
Preparation of samples
The DTTM-based devices were fabricated on n-type Si wafers (doping concentration: 1015 cm−3). A positive photoresist was employed; patterning was performed using electron beam lithography. After development, the width and period of the holes were measured using in-line scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The following parameters were applied for dry etching of the Si wafer: chamber pressure: 12 mT; chamber temperature: 65 °C; power of the top/bottom plate: 310 W/120 W; species of gas/gas flow: HBr/125 sccm, Cl2/35 sccm. After etching, the patterned Si wafer was cleaned using a standard RCA cleaning process to remove the residual photoresist and native oxide. To prevent growth of the native oxide on the surface of the Si wafer, the cleaned sample was immediately placed in a magnetron sputtering system. A 10 nm Ni film was deposited onto the patterned Si wafer and covered the deep-trench structure. Finally, a 100 nm Ti film was deposited, through physical vapor deposition, on the back side of the Si wafer as an ohmic contact.
Measurement and characterization
Absorption spectra of the DTTM-based devices were measured using a Hitachi U4100 optical spectrometer; the absorption [A(%)] was calculated from the reflection [R(%)] and transmittance [T(%)] using the equation A(%) = 100 − R(%) − T(%). The light source for characterizing the optoelectronic devices was a tungsten lamp equipped with a monochromator. The direction of the electric field (polarization) of the incident light was modulated through a polarizer placed in front of the light source. The external magnetic field applied to the device was provided by two neodymium–iron–boron (NdFeB) magnets (diameter: 20 mm; height: 30 mm) coordinated with a tunable component; the intensity of magnetic field was modulated by changing the distance between the two magnets. The current–voltage data from the devices at various wavelengths and external magnetic field strengths were measured using a digital source meter (Keithley 2400). The measured responsivity at distinct wavelengths of incident light was calculated using the following expression: excess current (A)/power of light (W). The excess current is defined as the difference between the photocurrent and the dark current. The hysteresis curve was measured using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID); the magnetization of the DTTM device was calculated using the following equation: magnetization (Gauss) = magnetic moment (emu)/total volume of Ni film (cm3).
Results and discussion
In this study, we used Si-based manufacturing to fabricate a Schottky junction in a deep trench-based structure. The proposed DTTM structure and the measurement set-up are displayed schematically in Fig. 1a. The DTTM-based devices were illuminated under a tungsten lamp with a monochromator in the NIR regime. The current–voltage signals before and after illumination were extracted using a source meter, allowing the photo-responsivity with respect to the wavelength of the incident light also to be calculated with respect to the power of the light. For the transportation of hot electrons, a large-area Schottky junction is important to improve the conversion efficiency of a hot electron-based photodetector;24,33 thus, we employed a deep trench structure because the large area of its horizontal and vertical metal–Si Schottky interfaces would presumably greatly contribute to the efficiency of photodetection. Fig. 1b displays scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the DTTM structure. The top-view image reveals that the holes on the Si substrate were square and positioned in a hexagonal periodic arrangement; the cross-sectional image reveals the trench located on the Si substrate, with the surface of the trench covered with a thin metal film. The width and period of the holes in this structure were 650 and 1300 nm, respectively. The depth of the trench was nearly 1 μm, and the thicknesses of the films of Ni and Au were 10 and 30 nm, respectively. This DTTM-based device is named herein as “H065P13”.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the DTTM-based device and electrical measurement setup. (b) Top-view (left) and cross-sectional (right) SEM images of the Ni-H065P13 device. (c) Measured absorption spectrum of the Ni-H065P13 device. 
For this plasmonic DTTM array-based active antenna, the wavelength of the absorptive peak was tunable upon changing the width and period of the holes. In the near field, the 3D-cavity effect that arises in the structure could concentrate the electric field around the hole, resulting in high absorption of light at the wavelength of resonance. The 3D-cavity effect is a standing wave-like effect in that light can be confined within a cavity having a width of half of the wavelength to induce resonance. For example, when the width of the cavity is 650 nm, the wavelength of resonance caused by the 3D-cavity effect is 1300 nm. Fig. 1c displays the measured absorption spectrum of the 10 nm Ni film-covered DTTM structure of H065P13. The wavelength of the absorptive peak and the absorption value were 1300 nm and approximately 70%, respectively. The measured absorption spectrum confirmed our predicted optical behavior of the DTTM-based structure. In fact, the peak value of the absorption at the wavelength of resonance exceeded 80% when the metal film was sufficiently thick—for example, when using a 20 nm-thick Ni film. Nevertheless, for the purpose of improving the conversion efficiency of hot electrons in the Ni–Si Schottky system, and to facilitate the following discussion, we chose to use a 10 nm-thick Ni film for which the absorption of light was slightly lower than 80%.

Fig. 2a plots a typical current–voltage curve of the DTTM-based device (for more details on the influence of the I–V characteristics by the properties of the ohmic contact on the backside of Ni/n-Si Schottky devices, please refer to the ESI†); the measured data were extracted using a source meter. The 10 nm Ni film contacted with Si to form a Schottky junction, with the system displaying electrical rectification characteristics. The Schottky barrier height of this Ni–Si system is lower than that of our previously studied24 Au–Si system, due to the difference in work function between Si and Ni being lower than that between Si and Au. Because of the lower Schottky barrier height, the leakage dark current of the DTTM Ni–Si device was higher than that of the DTTM Au–Si device. (For more details on characterization of the barrier height, please see the ESI.†) In the dark state, the leakage dark current arises mainly from thermionic emission of electrons from the metal into the semiconductor.36 Therefore, a higher Schottky barrier can suppress the leakage dark current effectively at reverse and zero bias. For a thicker Ni film (e.g., 20 nm), the generation of hot electrons caused by the absorption of light would occur mostly at the surface of the Ni film, away from the Schottky junction, but only the hot electrons generated near the Schottky junction could be injected into the conduction band of Si and further generate photocurrent. Consequently, from the viewpoint of the skin depth of the Ni film, a DTTM Ni–Si device covered with a thin Ni film would be more suitable for the detection of light of weak intensity.
 Fig. 2  (a) I–V curve of the Ni-H065P13 device. (b) Responsivity spectrum of the Ni-H065P13 device under zero bias in the absence of an applied magnetic field; inset: energy band diagram of hot electrons over a metal–semiconductor (Ni–Si) Schottky barrier. (c) Correlation between excess current and incident light power for the Ni-H065P13 device at a wavelength of 1300 nm; inset: correlation between excess current and incident light power for the Ni-H065P13 device at a wavelength of 1550 nm. (d) Correlation between responsivity and polarizing angle of incident light for the Ni-H065P13 device at a wavelength of 1300 nm. 
To characterize the conversion efficiency of hot electrons in the DTTM Ni–Si device, we mounted the sample on a home-built stage and extracted the electric current data (using a source meter) before and after illumination with light at wavelengths in the range from 1300 to 1750 nm under zero bias voltage. Fig. 2b presents the photo-responsivity spectrum of the DTTM Ni–Si device (10 nm Ni film, H065P13); the curve reveals greater responsivity in the higher photon energy regime, with a gradual decline upon decreasing the photon energy of the incident light. We attribute this behavior to the quantum transmission probability, such that the amount of hot electrons that can step over the Schottky barrier height is dominated by the photon energy. At wavelengths of 1300, 1550, and 1750 nm, the DTTM-based Ni–Si photodetector exhibited photo-responsivities of 0.49, 0.33, and 0.2 mA W−1, respectively. We further measured the current of the DTTM device at low temperature (e.g. −50 °C) in order to reduce the thermal impact on the device at room temperature, and the photoresponse of the DTTM device was attributed indeed to the generation of hot electrons but not thermal electrons (for details, please see the ESI†).
The cut-off wavelength of detection was obtained theoretically from the modified Fowler equation (for details, please see the ESI†); in practice, however, the device could not display a distinguishable signal, due to the disturbance of noise (leakage dark current), when the wavelength of incident light was greater than 1750 nm. The inset of Fig. 2b provides the energy band diagram of the Ni–Si Schottky junction and the mechanism of hot electron transport to the Schottky interface and injection into the conduction band of Si.

Fig. 2c displays the correlation between the excess current and the power of the incident light for the DTTM-based Ni–Si device at a wavelength of 1300 nm. The excess current of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device exhibited a high degree of linearity (R2 = 0.9954) when the power of the incident light was in the range from 20 to 165 μW (ca. 8–66 μW cm−2). The inset of Fig. 2c reveals that the DTTM-based Ni–Si device also featured a linear relationship between the excess current and the power of incident light when the wavelength was 1550 nm. Furthermore, the DTTM-based Au–Si structure prepared in our previous study was polarization-insensitive to incident light.24 As indicated in Fig. 2d, the photo-responsivity of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device was also unaffected by the angle of polarization, as a result of the hexagonal symmetry of the DTTM structure. Prior to discussing the difference in photo-responsivity of the device when applying the two orthogonal orientations of polarization under a magnetic field, we first describe how the device was polarization-insensitive in the absence of a magnetic field.
The two orientations of the polarization of the incident light—parallel and perpendicular to the external magnetic field (x-axis) applied on the DTTM-based device—are illustrated in Fig. 3a and b, respectively. In the parallel case, where the incident light propagates along the z-axis [k(−z)] to the sample, the time-varying electric field of the incident light oscillates along the x-axis [E(±x)] parallel to the external magnetic field [H-field(x)]. In the perpendicular case, the time-varying electric field of the incident light oscillates along the y-axis [E(±y)] perpendicular to the external magnetic field [H-field(x)]. Our central assumption for this study was that the initial directionality of the hot electrons generated through plasmon decay would be dominated by the polarization state of the incident light. In other words, hot electrons generated in the metal film would be driven by the electric field of the incident light. Thus, for the parallel case, we assumed that the initial directionality of the hot electrons would be along the x-axis [v(±x)], and along the y-axis [v(±y)] for the perpendicular case. If charged particles (hot electrons) move with a velocity (v) in the presence of an external magnetic field [H-field(x)], they will experience the Lorentz force (F). As presented in Fig. 3c and d, the magnetic flux density [B(x)] in the metal film was induced by the external magnetic field [H-field(x)]; in general, the magnetic flux density (B) in a ferromagnetic material is much greater than that in a non-magnetic material when both are subjected to an external magnetic field of the same intensity. Because the Lorentz force (F) is a vector cross product of two vectors [F = q(E + v × B); E = 0 in this case], its values would be maximized and equal to zero when the direction of the velocity (v) of the charged particles (hot electrons) is perpendicular and parallel, respectively, to the magnetic flux density (B) in the metal film. Fig. 3c and d display the Lorentz forces (F) in the metal film for the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively. In the parallel case, the Lorentz force [F(−z)] does not appear because the orientations of the velocity of the hot electrons [v(±x)] and the magnetic flux density [B(x)] are parallel. Therefore, we mark “F(−z) = 0” in Fig. 3c. That is, the hot electrons in the metal film do not experience the Lorentz force. In contrast, in the perpendicular case, the Lorentz force [F(−z)] is maximized because the orientations of the velocity [v(±y)] of the hot electrons and the magnetic flux density [B(x)] are perpendicular. Accordingly, the hot electrons in the metal film experience a Lorentz force toward the Si layer; the change in the direction of the velocity (v) of the hot electrons is indicated by the white arrow in the y–z plane marked in Fig. 3d. The time-varying electric field of the incident light oscillates along the +y- and −y-axes [E(±y)] for the perpendicular case. In contrast to the effect of the time-varying electric field oscillating along the +y-axis [E(+y)], when the hot electrons are driven by the electric field oscillating along the −y-axis [E(−y)] they would experience a force pushing them away from the Si layer. There is a half chance that the hot electrons in the metal film would experience a reversed direction of the Lorentz force [F(+z)]. From the sum total of these effects, we suspected that this approach would still improve the momentum and conversion efficiency of the hot electrons in the device.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Orientational relationship between the polarization of the incident light and the external magnetic field for the (a) parallel (polarization‖H) and (b) perpendicular (polarization⊥H) cases; the symbols E, H, and k in Cartesian coordinates represent the electric field, magnetic field, and wavevector, respectively, of the incident light, and H-field represents the external magnetic field. (c and d) Orientational relationship among the initial direction of hot electrons (v), the external magnetic field, and the Lorentz force (F) in the metal film in the (c) parallel and (d) perpendicular cases; the white arrows indicate the direction of movement of hot electrons in the metal film after experiencing the Lorentz force. (e) AMR effects for the parallel (I‖H) and perpendicular (I⊥H) cases; the symbols R(x) and R(y) indicate the resistance of the device in the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively. (f) Orientational relationship among the direction of the hot electrons (v), the external magnetic field, and the Lorentz force (F) in the Si substrate for both parallel and perpendicular cases; the white arrows indicate the direction of movement of hot electrons in the Si substrate after experiencing the Lorentz force. 
In addition to the Lorentz force, the AMR effect in a ferromagnetic material can also affect the movement of electrons. Because spin-dependent scattering arises from spin–orbital coupling, the resistance varies with respect to the angle between the direction of motion of the electrons and the external magnetic field.16,17Fig. 3e displays the AMR effects in ferromagnetic materials for both parallel and perpendicular cases. In the parallel case, the resistance [R(x)] of the device increases because the motion of the hot electrons [v(±x)] and the external magnetic field [H-field(x)] are parallel; we mark this arrangement as “I‖H” in Fig. 3e. In contrast, in the perpendicular case, the resistance [R(y)] of the device decreases because the motion of the hot electrons [v(±y)] and the external magnetic field [H-field(x)] are perpendicular; we mark this arrangement as “I⊥H” in Fig. 3e. Taking together the effects of the Lorentz force and the AMR effect, we suspected that the perpendicular alignment would be preferable to the parallel alignment for hot electron-based photodetection in the presence of an external magnetic field. In DTTM-based devices, the hot electrons generated through plasmon decay can be divided into those coming from the top surface and those from the vertical sides of the trenches. The hot electrons generated from the top surface must move down to the Schottky interface before they are injected into the Si layer; therefore, they produce a photocurrent. In contrast to the parallel case, the hot electrons in the perpendicular situation can experience a Lorentz force that aids their movement from the top surface into the Si layer (Fig. 3d). The hot electrons coming from the vertical sides of the trenches must move either left or right to the Schottky interfaces prior to injecting into the Si layer, thereby producing a photocurrent. Moreover, in contrast to the parallel case in which the resistance of the device would increase through the AMR effect, the resistance of the device in the perpendicular situation should decrease as a result of the AMR effect. Accordingly, the hot electrons would move from the vertical sides more easily to the Si layer (Fig. 3e). The Lorentz force in the perpendicular case would also assist the hot electrons generated from the vertical sides if those vertical sides were slightly tilted as a result of loading effects during the etching process. Both the Lorentz force and AMR effect would occur in a ferromagnetic material, with the latter potentially more significant than the former. In a non-magnetic material, only the effect of the Lorentz force would be felt. Thus, we could take advantage of this configuration to determine the accuracy of our assumption about the directivity of the hot electrons. Furthermore, the performance of the photodetector may be improved. Nevertheless, when the hot electrons in Si move from the Schottky interface to the back electrode in the presence of an external magnetic field, they will also experience the Lorentz force. The hot electrons would be scattered in the lattice of the Si layer and would deviate from the original route of travel; as a result, the resistance of the DTTM-based device would increase. As displayed in Fig. 3f, the route of travel for hot electrons in Si will deviate from v(−z). For this scattering effect in Si there would be no differences between the parallel and perpendicular cases. In the following discussion, this scattering effect in Si is the most important reason for the decrease in photo-responsivity when the intensity of the magnetic field applied to the device was strong.

Fig. 4a–d display the spectral responsivity of the DTTM-based devices before and after applying an external magnetic field of 1850 Oe. When we applied this magnetic field, the polarization of incident light (parallel or perpendicular to the magnetic field) had different effects on the spectral responsivity. In Fig. 4a, the responsivity of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device was 0.49 mA W−1 at a wavelength of 1300 nm; after applying the magnetic field, the responsivity decreased to 0.30 and 0.46 mA W−1 in the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively. Fig. 4b reveals that the corresponding variations in the IQE were −39.2 and −6.1% for the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively. As mentioned above, we attribute the decrease in responsivity mainly to the strong Lorentz force in Si, as illustrated in Fig. 3f. Moreover, the decrease in responsivity in the perpendicular case was less than that in the parallel case, possibly because of the Lorentz force and the AMR effect. In the perpendicular case, the Lorentz force and the AMR effect in the Ni film both had positive effects on the responsivity; in the parallel case, however, the AMR effect in the Ni film had a negative effect on the responsivity. Thus, the decrease in responsivity in the parallel case was caused by both the Lorentz force in Si and the AMR effect in Ni. These effects in the Ni film and Si substrate resulted in a dramatic decrease in responsivity for the parallel case, but only a slight decrease for the perpendicular case.
 Fig. 4  (a and c) Responsivity spectra of the (a) Ni-H065P13 and (c) Au-H065P13 devices; the black squares represent the responsivities in the absence of an external magnetic field applied to the device; the red circles and blue triangles represent the responsivities when an external magnetic field of 1850 Oe was applied to the device in the parallel (polarization‖H) and perpendicular (polarization⊥H) cases, respectively. (b and d) Correlation between IQE fractional variation and wavelength for (b) Ni-H065P13 and (d) Au-H065P13 devices; insets: formulae for calculating the IQE fractional variation. (e) Simulated E-fields within the metal film of the DTTM structure for wavelength from 1300 to 1550 nm; inset: position of the E-field monitor in the simulations. (f) Simulated electric field distributions of the Ni-H065P13 structure at distinct wavelengths of incident light. 
Upon increasing the wavelength of incident light from 1300 to 1550 nm, the difference in responsivity between the parallel and perpendicular cases decreased. The responsivity of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device was 0.33 mA W−1 at a wavelength of 1550 nm in the absence of a magnetic field; when the magnetic field was applied to the device, the responsivities decreased to 0.24 and 0.26 mA W−1 in the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively, with the corresponding IQE fractional decreases of −27 and −23%, respectively. The longer wavelength of incident light weakened the intensity of the electric field in the metal because it was further from the designed wavelength of resonance. We used the 3D-FDTD method to simulate the optical behavior of DTTM-based structures illuminated under various wavelengths of incident light. Fig. 4e displays the electric fields in the metal film of the DTTM structure at wavelengths from 1300 to 1550 nm. For hot electrons, the intensity of the electric field is related to the strength of the Coulomb force driving them. That is, the weaker the intensity of the electric field, the lower the velocity of the hot electrons. The Lorentz force is proportional to the velocity of the hot electrons; thus, when the wavelength of the incident light increases, the Lorentz force in the metal film weakens. Because hot electrons in the parallel case do not experience the Lorentz force in the metal film, the difference in responsivity between the parallel and perpendicular cases becomes smaller as the wavelength of the incident light becomes longer. In addition to the Lorentz force, the impact of the AMR effect on the responsivity will also weaken as the wavelength of the incident light increases. Fig. 4f displays the electric field distributions for various wavelengths of incident light. For longer wavelengths of incident light, the spot of the most intense E-field moved away from the trench and the absorption of light at the vertical sides decreased. Thus, the amount of hot electrons generated at the vertical sides of the trench decreased, further minimizing the difference in responsivity, induced by the AMR effect, between the parallel and perpendicular cases.
We use a non-magnetic material (Au) to verify our proposed concept (Fig. 4c and d). Under the same measurement conditions, the responsivity of the DTTM-based Au–Si device was 2.3 mA W−1 at a wavelength of 1300 nm in the absence of a magnetic field. After the magnetic field was applied to the device, the responsivity decreased to 2.19 and 2.27 mA W−1 in the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively. The corresponding IQE fractional variations were −4.65 and −1.13% for the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively (Fig. 4d). The IQE fractional variation is defined as (IQEHon − IQEHoff)/IQEHoff, where IQEHon and IQEHoff represent the IQE with and without applying the magnetic field (H) on the devices, respectively. The decrease in responsivity for the DTTM-based Au–Si device was less than that in the DTTM-based Ni–Si device under an applied magnetic field: for example, −4.56 and −39.2%, respectively, for the parallel case at a wavelength of 1300 nm. The differences in IQE variation between the parallel and perpendicular cases for the DTTM-based Au–Si device were also less than those in the DTTM-based Ni–Si device. We attribute the smaller decrease in responsivity for the DTTM-based Au–Si device, relative to that in the DTTM-based Ni–Si device, to the weaker Lorentz force in its Si substrate. The Lorentz force on the hot electrons in the Si substrate close to the Ni film would be stronger than that close to the Au film, resulting in a more dramatic deviation of the original route of travel of the hot electrons in the former device. On the other hand, the IQE fractional variation between the parallel and perpendicular cases for the DTTM-based Au–Si device was less than that for the DTTM-based Ni–Si device because of the AMR effect. In a non-magnetic material, there is no difference in electrical resistance between the parallel and perpendicular cases; thus, we observed a lower degree of IQE fractional variation between the parallel and perpendicular cases in the DTTM-based Au–Si device. The slight difference in IQE fractional variation between the parallel and perpendicular cases for the DTTM-based Au–Si device was caused only by the Lorentz force in the metal film, as indicated in Fig. 3c and d. For the DTTM-based Au–Si device, similar to the Ni–Si device, when the incident light was of longer wavelength, we observed less of a decrease in responsivity between the parallel and perpendicular cases, because of the change in intensity of the electric field in the metal film, as indicated in Fig. 4e. Because of the ferromagnetic nature of the Ni film, the changes in responsivity of the DTTM-based Ni–Si and Au–Si devices were different when applying a magnetic field. Therefore, we also used the superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) to prove that DTTM-based Ni–Si devices retain the magnetic properties, and the hysteresis curve is displayed in Fig. S1 (further details are provided in the ESI†).
We selected a wavelength of 1300 nm to compare the changes in responsivity of the parallel and perpendicular cases in the presence of external magnetic fields of various strengths. Fig. 5a and b present the behavior of the DTTM-based Ni–Si and Au–Si devices, respectively, graphically as a relationship between the responsivity and the magnetic field strength. In Fig. 5a, the values of the responsivity for the parallel case (red dots) are all below the responsivity obtained in the absence of an applied magnetic field (H = 0; green line). In the regime of low magnetic field strength (H-field <800 Oe), we suggest that the decrease in responsivity was caused by the AMR effect, which is very sensitive to the external magnetic field. In the regime of strong magnetic field strength (H-field >800 Oe), we attribute the significant decrease in responsivity to both the AMR effect and the Lorentz force. The responsivity decreased as the external magnetic field strength increased, because the AMR effect and the Lorentz force are both proportional to the strength of the external magnetic field. In contrast to the situation in the thick Si substrate, the distance over which the hot electrons experience the Lorentz force in the thin metal film was very short. Therefore, the decrease in responsivity in the regime of strong magnetic field would be dominated by the Lorentz force in Si (as displayed in Fig. 3f).
 Fig. 5  Correlation between responsivity and magnetic field strength for the parallel (red dots) and perpendicular (blue dots) cases at a wavelength of 1300 nm for (a) Ni-H065P13 and (b) Au-H065P13 devices. 
In contrast to the situation in the parallel case, the responsivities in the perpendicular case (blue dots) in Fig. 5a were above that obtained in the absence of an applied magnetic field (H = 0) in the regime of relatively low magnetic field strength (H-field <1600 Oe). In the range from 0 to 800 Oe, the responsivity of the perpendicular case was higher than the responsivity when H was equal to 0; we attribute this result to the AMR effect (as displayed in Fig. 3e) and the Lorentz force in the Ni film (as displayed in Fig. 3d). Upon increasing the magnetic field strength from 800 to 1600 Oe, the greater Lorentz force in Si (as displayed in Fig. 3f) gradually decreased the responsivity, but it remained higher than that when H was equal to 0 (because the Lorentz force in Si was not strong). When the magnetic field strength was greater than 1600 Oe, the Lorentz force in Si dominated the responsivity, such that the responsivity in the perpendicular case was below that of the device in the absence of an applied magnetic field (H = 0).
For comparison, we also explored the behavior of the hot electrons in Au, a non-magnetic material. As displayed in Fig. 5b, for the parallel case (red dots) in the regime of a relatively weak magnetic field (H-field <1000 Oe), the responsivity was almost unaffected by the magnetic field because the Lorentz force in Si was not strong enough to deflect the moving hot electrons. In contrast, in the regime of a strong magnetic field (H-field >1000 Oe), the responsivity decreased because of the Lorentz force in Si as the strength of the external magnetic field increased. The decrease in responsivity for the DTTM-based Au–Si device was lower than that of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device at the same external magnetic field strength, because this decrease could only be attributed to the Lorentz force in Si. In contrast to the parallel case, as indicated by the blue dots in Fig. 5b, the responsivities in the perpendicular case in the regime of low magnetic field were slightly lower than that at a value of H of 0 (green line). In the range from 600 to 1600 Oe, the responsivities in the perpendicular case were higher than that in the absence of the magnetic field, presumably because of the positive effect of the Lorentz force in the Au film. In this regime, when applying a magnetic field of greater than 1200 Oe, the Lorentz force in Si resulted in a decrease in responsivity, but it remained higher than that in the absence of a magnetic field because the Lorentz force in Si was not sufficiently strong to offset the positive effect of the Lorentz force in the Au film. In the range from 1600 to 1850 Oe, the strong Lorentz force in Si (as displayed in Fig. 3f) dominated the responsivity of the device, with the responsivity in the perpendicular case being lower than that in the absence of an applied magnetic field. Considering all of the behavior in Fig. 5b, the strengths of the magnetic fields at the onset of the increases and decreases in responsivity for the perpendicular and parallel cases were both larger than those in Fig. 5a because Au is not a ferromagnetic material.
For the perpendicular case of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device in Fig. 5a, the maximum enhancement of responsivity occurred under a magnetic field of 900 Oe. Using this condition, we investigated the effect of incident light of various wavelengths, and recorded the responsivity spectra before and after applying an external magnetic field to the device. As displayed in Fig. 6a, the responsivity of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device was 0.49 mA W−1 at a wavelength of 1300 nm (black square); after applying the magnetic field to the device, the responsivity increased to 0.63 mA W−1 (blue dot). Fig. 6b reveals that the corresponding IQE fractional increase was 28% at a wavelength of 1300 nm. As previously described, the Lorentz force and AMR in a Ni film both have positive effects on the responsivity in the perpendicular case, but the Lorentz force in Si still has a negative effect on responsivity. Thus, we attribute the enhancement in responsivity to a trade-off between the positive and negative effects. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to observe the enhanced performance of a hot electron-based IR photodetector upon applying a magnetic field. When the wavelength of the incident light increased from 1300 to 1550 nm, we observed less of an enhancement in responsivity. The responsivity of the DTTM-based Ni–Si device was 0.33 mA W−1 at a wavelength of 1550 nm in the absence of a magnetic field; after applying a magnetic field of 900 Oe to the device, the responsivity increased to 0.34 mA W−1. The corresponding IQE fractional variation in Fig. 6b was 4.5% at a wavelength of 1550 nm. As discussed earlier, the impacts of the Lorentz force and AMR effect on the responsivity became weaker as the wavelength of the incident light increased (Fig. 4e and f).
 Fig. 6  (a and c) Responsivity spectra of (a) Ni-H065P13 and (c) Au-H065P13 devices; the black dots represent responsivities in the absence of an external magnetic field applied; the blue dots represent responsivities when external magnetic fields of 900 and 1200 Oe were applied to the Ni-H065P13 and Au-H065P13 devices, respectively. (b and d) Correlation between IQE fractional variation and wavelength for (b) Ni-H065P13 and (d) Au-H065P13 devices. 
For the perpendicular case of the DTTM-based Au–Si device in Fig. 5b, the maximum enhancement in responsivity occurred at a magnetic field of 1200 Oe—the result only of the Lorentz force in the Au film. As displayed in Fig. 6c, the responsivity of the DTTM-based Au–Si device was 2.3 mA W−1 at a wavelength of 1300 nm in the absence of a magnetic field; when we applied a magnetic field of 1200 Oe to the device, the responsivity increased to 2.43 mA W−1. Fig. 6d reveals that the corresponding IQE fractional increase was 5.7% at a wavelength of 1300 nm; in comparison, it was 28% for the DTTM-based Ni–Si device. The enhancement for the DTTM-based Au–Si device was relatively low because it was caused only by the Lorentz force in the metal film, not by the AMR effect. Similarly, we observed less of an enhancement in responsivity upon increasing the wavelength of the incident light. In contrast to NIR, electron/hole pairs generated in Si dominated the photocurrent when devices worked in the visible light regime. For comparison, we use the same experimental architecture to test the behavior of the DTTM-based device in the visible light regime (further details are provided in the ESI†).

Table 1 summarizes the effects of external magnetic fields on the responsivities of hot electron-based DTTM photodetectors. It identifies the AMR effects and the Lorentz forces within the Ni, Au, and Si layers of the devices when illuminating with NIR light in cases of parallel and perpendicular polarization, respectively. For example, for perpendicular illumination on the Ni-coated Si-based DTTM device, the AMR effect and Lorentz force were both positive factors in the Ni film.
Table 1 Effects on responsivity of AMR and Lorentz force in various parts of the devices





Table 1

Pol‖H
Pol⊥H




Ni
AMR
Negative effect
Positive effect


Lorentz force
No effect
Positive effect


Au
AMR
No effect
No effect


Lorentz force
No effect
Positive effect


Si
AMR
No effect
No effect


Lorentz force
Negative effect
Negative effect




Silicon photonics is an evolving technology for the next-generation communication system because of its low cost and manufacture using commercial CMOS chip fabrication processes. The current mainstream photodetectors used in Si photonics are p–i–n germanium (Ge) photodiodes.37 Because Si and Ge are heterogeneous materials, the complexity and cost of co-integration of Ge photodetectors and Si waveguides on the same Si chip are both increased. From our present study, the Si-based DTTM photodetector can simply be integrated into on-chip Si photonics.
On the other hand, in fiber-optic communication technology, many mechanisms (e.g., optical absorption, optical scattering, and bending losses) will lead to attenuation during propagation over long distances.38 Therefore, erbium-doped optical fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) that use the interaction of light and matter to amplify the signal strength are used widely in long-distance fiber-optic communication systems. The ideal signal amplifier would have the following characteristics: high gain, low noise figure, and minimum cost.39 Nevertheless, there is a tradeoff between a high gain and a low noise figure, because the stimulated emission and the amplified spontaneous emission (noise) would both increase as the pump power increases.40 In other words, disadvantages (e.g., non-selective gain) remain in such systems. In our present study, the intensity of the signal could be enhanced or weakened under an appropriate magnetic field strength. Thus, we might be able to selectively enhance the intensity of the signal and suppress the intensity of noise; we will continue to study this possibility in the future.
Conclusions
There are two central assumptions of Fowler theory: (i) that hot electrons are excited into isotropic distribution in the momentum space inside a metal and (ii) that only a small fraction of hot electrons within the emission cone perpendicular to the Schottky junction can possibly be injected into the semiconductor contact. In this study, in contrast to Fowler theory, we have proved experimentally that the direction of motion of hot electrons is highly related to the direction of polarization of the incident light. In addition, we have found that the anisotropic movement of hot electrons can be further exploited to modulate the optoelectronic response through the application of magnetic fields to Si-based photodetectors at optical telecommunication wavelengths.
Instead of using a noble metal, we employed a ferromagnetic material, Ni, to construct a hot electron- and Si-based photodetector for the detection of IR light with photon energies well below the band edge of Si. Using this approach, we verified the directionality and transport of hot electrons in the Ni–Si Schottky diode. The relationship between the polarization of light and the orientation of the external magnetic field allowed us to determine the directionality of the hot electrons produced through plasmon decay. When a magnetic field was applied to the device, the Lorentz force and the AMR effect greatly affected the transport of hot electrons, resulting in a change in the motion of the photocurrent. Furthermore, by exploiting the anisotropic movement of the hot electrons, the Lorentz force, and the AMR effect, we could selectively increase or decrease the efficiency of hot electron injection in the hot electron-based photodetector. Accordingly, we could selectively enhance or weaken the IR light-induced signals under an appropriate magnetic field strength. In addition, our device could be switched from polarization-insensitive to polarization-sensitive by applying a magnetic field. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to combine the electrical, magnetic, and optical effects of hot electrons to modulate the photoresponse of Si-based photodetectors operated at telecommunication wavelengths through the application of an external magnetic field. This strategy would presumably be very useful for many other hot electron-based systems and devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, for supporting this study under contracts MOST 106-2221-E-002-105-MY3, MOST 106-2221-E-002-158-MY3, and NTU-107L9008.
Notes and references

          M. Faraday, On the magnetization of light and the illumination of magnetic lines of force, Royal Society,  1846 Search PubMed .
J. Kerr, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1877, 3, 321–343 CrossRef .
P. Zeeman and M. Bôcher, Nature, 1897, 55, 347 CrossRef .
I. Crassee, J. Levallois, A. L. Walter, M. Ostler, A. Bostwick, E. Rotenberg, T. Seyller, D. Van Der Marel and A. B. Kuzmenko, Nat. Phys., 2011, 7, 48–51 Search PubMed .
R. Shimano, G. Yumoto, J. Yoo, R. Matsunaga, S. Tanabe, H. Hibino, T. Morimoto and H. Aoki, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1841 Search PubMed .
W.-K. Tse and A. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 057401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qiu and S. Bader, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2000, 71, 1243–1255 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Argyres, Phys. Rev., 1955, 97, 334 CrossRef .

          M. Siegfried, US Pat., 3475738,  1969 Search PubMed .
L. Bi, J. Hu, P. Jiang, D. H. Kim, G. F. Dionne, L. C. Kimerling and C. Ross, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 758–762 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Espinola, T. Izuhara, M.-C. Tsai, R. M. Osgood and H. Dötsch, Opt. Lett., 2004, 29, 941–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chin, T. Steinle, T. Wehlus, D. Dregely, T. Weiss, V. I. Belotelov, B. Stritzker and H. Giessen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1599 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Subkhangulov, R. Mikhaylovskiy, A. Zvezdin, V. Kruglyak, T. Rasing and A. Kimel, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 111–114 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, F. Wang, Y. Ren, Y. Zuo, Y. Peng, S. Zhou and D. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2918–2923 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, M. Si, D. Yang, Z. Shi, F. Wang, Z. Yang, S. Zhou and D. Xue, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3978–3983 RSC .
D. Rüffer, R. Huber, P. Berberich, S. Albert, E. Russo-Averchi, M. Heiss, J. Arbiol, A. F. I. Morral and D. Grundler, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4989–4995 RSC .
T. Wren and O. Kazakova, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 17E134 CrossRef .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tahmasebpour, M. Bahrami and A. Asgari, Appl. Opt., 2014, 53, 1449–1458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kwon, J. Lee, A. W. Wark and H. J. Lee, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 1702–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chalabi, D. Schoen and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1374–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, J. Khurgin, J. Shappir and U. Levy, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2219–2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lim, W. Mar, P. Matheu, D. Derkacs and E. Yu, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 104309 CrossRef .
K.-T. Lin, H.-L. Chen, Y.-S. Lai and C.-C. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3288 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Akbari, R. N. Tait and P. Berini, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 8505–8514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li and J. Valentine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3510–3514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Berry, N. Wang, M. R. Hashemi, M. Unlu and M. Jarrahi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Campbell, J. Light Technol., 2007, 25, 109–121 CAS .
G. Reich, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2005, 57, 1109–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, A. Klots, D. Prasai, Y. Yang, K. I. Bolotin and J. Valentine, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7440–7444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Long, E. Liu, P. Wang, A. Gao, H. Xia, W. Luo, B. Wang, J. Zeng, Y. Fu and K. Xu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2254–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Fowler, Phys. Rev., 1931, 38, 45 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Knight, Y. Wang, A. S. Urban, A. Sobhani, B. Y. Zheng, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1687–1692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang and Y. K. Gun’ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16616–16631 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, A. S. Jermyn, W. A. Goddard III and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Goykhman, U. Sassi, B. Desiatov, N. Mazurski, S. Milana, D. De Fazio, A. Eiden, J. Khurgin, J. Shappir and U. Levy, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3005–3013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Thomson, A. Zilkie, J. E. Bowers, T. Komljenovic, G. T. Reed, L. Vivien, D. Marris-Morini, E. Cassan, L. Virot and J.-M. Fédéli, J. Opt., 2016, 18, 073003 CrossRef .

          B. Potter, Material Science and Engineering Dept, University of Arizona,  2010, pp. 1–16 Search PubMed .
B. Bouzid, Opt. Rev., 2010, 17, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
R. I. Laming, M. N. Zervas and D. N. Payne, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 1992, 4, 1345–1347 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9mh00295bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

New concepts
This study, combining the electrical, magnetic, and optical effects of hot electrons and Si-based devices, is the first to modulate the efficiency of Si-based photodetectors working at optical telecommunication wavelengths. Fowler theory is the key concept to study Si-based photodetectors that can operate at optical telecommunication wavelengths. The core assumption of Fowler theory is that excited hot electrons are distributed isotropically in momentum space inside a metal. In this study, in contrast to the assumption of Fowler theory, we first proved experimentally that the direction of hot electrons is highly related to the polarization state of the incident light. Furthermore, the anisotropic movement of hot electrons can be exploited, through the application of a magnetic field, to modulate the optoelectronic response to Si-based photodetectors that operate at optical telecommunication wavelengths. Instead of using a noble metal, we applied Ni, a ferromagnetic material, to construct a hot electron-based photodetector for the detection of IR light with photon energy well below the band edge of Si. Our device could be switched from polarization-insensitive to polarization-sensitive by applying a magnetic field. This strategy would, presumably, be potentially very useful when applied to various hot electron-based systems and devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the DTTM-based device and electrical measurement setup. (b) Top-view (left) and cross-sectional (right) SEM images of the Ni-H065P13 device. (c) Measured absorption spectrum of the Ni-H065P13 device.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) I–V curve of the Ni-H065P13 device. (b) Responsivity spectrum of the Ni-H065P13 device under zero bias in the absence of an applied magnetic field; inset: energy band diagram of hot electrons over a metal–semiconductor (Ni–Si) Schottky barrier. (c) Correlation between excess current and incident light power for the Ni-H065P13 device at a wavelength of 1300 nm; inset: correlation between excess current and incident light power for the Ni-H065P13 device at a wavelength of 1550 nm. (d) Correlation between responsivity and polarizing angle of incident light for the Ni-H065P13 device at a wavelength of 1300 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Orientational relationship between the polarization of the incident light and the external magnetic field for the (a) parallel (polarization‖H) and (b) perpendicular (polarization⊥H) cases; the symbols E, H, and k in Cartesian coordinates represent the electric field, magnetic field, and wavevector, respectively, of the incident light, and H-field represents the external magnetic field. (c and d) Orientational relationship among the initial direction of hot electrons (v), the external magnetic field, and the Lorentz force (F) in the metal film in the (c) parallel and (d) perpendicular cases; the white arrows indicate the direction of movement of hot electrons in the metal film after experiencing the Lorentz force. (e) AMR effects for the parallel (I‖H) and perpendicular (I⊥H) cases; the symbols R(x) and R(y) indicate the resistance of the device in the parallel and perpendicular cases, respectively. (f) Orientational relationship among the direction of the hot electrons (v), the external magnetic field, and the Lorentz force (F) in the Si substrate for both parallel and perpendicular cases; the white arrows indicate the direction of movement of hot electrons in the Si substrate after experiencing the Lorentz force.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and c) Responsivity spectra of the (a) Ni-H065P13 and (c) Au-H065P13 devices; the black squares represent the responsivities in the absence of an external magnetic field applied to the device; the red circles and blue triangles represent the responsivities when an external magnetic field of 1850 Oe was applied to the device in the parallel (polarization‖H) and perpendicular (polarization⊥H) cases, respectively. (b and d) Correlation between IQE fractional variation and wavelength for (b) Ni-H065P13 and (d) Au-H065P13 devices; insets: formulae for calculating the IQE fractional variation. (e) Simulated E-fields within the metal film of the DTTM structure for wavelength from 1300 to 1550 nm; inset: position of the E-field monitor in the simulations. (f) Simulated electric field distributions of the Ni-H065P13 structure at distinct wavelengths of incident light.	 

 	Fig. 5  Correlation between responsivity and magnetic field strength for the parallel (red dots) and perpendicular (blue dots) cases at a wavelength of 1300 nm for (a) Ni-H065P13 and (b) Au-H065P13 devices.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and c) Responsivity spectra of (a) Ni-H065P13 and (c) Au-H065P13 devices; the black dots represent responsivities in the absence of an external magnetic field applied; the blue dots represent responsivities when external magnetic fields of 900 and 1200 Oe were applied to the Ni-H065P13 and Au-H065P13 devices, respectively. (b and d) Correlation between IQE fractional variation and wavelength for (b) Ni-H065P13 and (d) Au-H065P13 devices.	 

Ni	AMR	Negative effect	Positive effect
Lorentz force	No effect	Positive effect
Au	AMR	No effect	No effect
Lorentz force	No effect	Positive effect
Si	AMR	No effect	No effect
Lorentz force	Negative effect	Negative effect
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9mh00295b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
