Vibronic coupling in organic semiconductors for photovoltaics  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP03007J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP03007J
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 18813-18830Vibronic coupling in organic semiconductors for photovoltaics

        
          
            Antonietta 
            De Sio
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Christoph 
            Lienau
          
        
      ab
aInstitut für Physik and Center of Interface Science, Carl von Ossietzky Universität, Oldenburg 26129, Germany. E-mail: antonietta.de.sio@uni-oldenburg.de
bResearch Center Neurosensory Science, Carl von Ossietzky Universität, Oldenburg 26111, Germany
Received 
      7th May 2017
    , Accepted 26th June 2017First published on 26th June 2017AbstractLight-induced charge transfer from the photoexcited donor to the acceptor is the fundamental step towards current generation in organic solar cells. Experimental evidence for efficient charge separation on ultrafast time scales has been available for quite some time. Yet even today, the elementary mechanisms underlying this process in organic semiconductors and in particular the role of the coherent wave-like motion of electrons and nuclei for the charge separation are still a matter of considerable debate. In this perspective, we present a survey of the current understanding on the role of quantum coherences in organic semiconductors. Specifically, we discuss the role of vibronic couplings for ultrafast charge separation dynamics with particular attention on the potential implications for the light-to-current conversion process in photovoltaic devices.
1. Introduction
The definition of methods and technologies for efficient conversion of sunlight into electricity is one of the key challenges in current energy research.1 Functional materials like small molecules and conjugated polymers have emerged in the last few decades as a new class of semiconductors which combine unique optical and electronic properties, such as high absorption cross sections and reasonably high charge mobility, with the typical technological advantages of plastics, such as high mechanical flexibility and ease of processing from solution at low temperature.2–4 They have therefore attracted increasing interest as key active materials, not only in photovoltaic cells5–7 and energy storage devices,8 but also in a large variety of applications in flexible, low cost optoelectronic devices such as transistors,9 light emitting diodes,10 and sensors.11 A fascinating feature of organic semiconductors is the possibility of fine tuning their optical and electronic properties via chemical manipulation and thus designing and synthesizing a potentially infinite range of materials and nanostructures tailored for a specific function in applications. The ability of precisely shaping such optoelectronic properties and exploiting them in efficient devices inevitably depends on how deeply we understand the elementary mechanisms that govern their function. For applications in solar cells in particular, the microscopic processes that underlie light-to-current conversion are of high relevance. Interestingly, despite considerable research efforts, the effect of optical excitation on the initial motion of charges in these materials is not yet well understood.
Because of weaker intermolecular interactions compared to conventional inorganic semiconductors, organic materials are characterized by low dielectric constants and more localized electronic wavefunctions.12 Thus, electron–phonon interactions and structural factors, like molecular packing and disorder, assume an important role in the description of the optical and transport properties.13 This typically results in localized Coulomb-bound electron–hole pairs (excitons) with comparatively short exciton diffusion lengths14–16 and puts a limit on the device output current and performance in photovoltaic applications.
It thus came as a surprise, when, very recently, evidence for long-range ballistic transport regimes17 as well as vibrational and vibronic coherences18–21 during the initial charge separation process in technologically relevant conjugated polymers and blends was reported. These results suggest that the coherent coupling between electrons and phonons plays an important role in the observed wave-like transport of optical excitations. They point to an intriguing new perspective to overcome short diffusion lengths in organic materials. It appears that not just the electronic structure but also the interplay between electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom could be a key design parameter. Although still unexplored, the possibility of exploiting quantum mechanical transport in organic materials could pave the way towards completely new design approaches for developing materials and nanostructures with improved performance.
In this perspective, we focus on recent developments in the understanding of coherent charge photogeneration in organic semiconductors and in particular on the role of vibronic couplings in the transport and separation of charges in organic semiconductors.
2. Light-to-current conversion in organic solar cells
Organic solar cells consist of a photoactive thin film sandwiched between two electrodes which serve to extract the charges. The active layer is usually a mixture of electron-donor and electron-acceptor materials. Bilayers of molecular semiconductors were the first devices explored.22 Due to the short diffusion lengths, solar cells based on the bulk-heterojunction concept5 soon became the predominantly investigated configuration. In this structure, the donor and acceptor build a finely interpenetrating network with extended interfaces distributed in the bulk. The donor can be a molecular semiconductor or a conjugated polymer and the acceptor is usually a fullerene derivative.
Because of the low dielectric constants of organic semiconductors, light absorption generates excitons.12 Disorder, inherent in these structures, localizes the exciton wavefunction and results in diffusion-limited transport.
At the interface between donor and acceptor domains, the excitons can undergo spatial charge separation in an ultrafast photoinduced charge transfer reaction.23 This process takes place on extremely short time scales, well below 1 ps,24 which makes it experimentally challenging to track it in the time domain. The spatially separated charges can then be transported to the electrodes of the device and extracted to give rise to the photocurrent.
Recently, organic cells have reached power conversion efficiency exceeding 10%.25,26 Despite this progress, many of the fundamental microscopic mechanisms underlying the optical generation and transport of charges in these materials are still poorly understood.27,28
This holds in particular for light-induced coherence phenomena addressed in this perspective. Another critical issue is the short exciton diffusion length in organic semiconductors. In such disordered materials, exciton transport is usually dominated by incoherent hopping. Typical diffusion lengths are of the order of 10–20 nm and depend on the molecular packing.15,29 This distance is much shorter than the donor and acceptor domain sizes that may reach instead several hundreds of nanometers. Thus, it represents a problem for excitons created in the bulk of a domain to reach interfaces and undergo charge separation. While excitons created within a diffusion length distance from a donor–acceptor interface can readily undergo charge transfer to the acceptor, the ones excited deeper in the bulk of a domain are more likely to relax before reaching the interface and hence are lost. Diffusion-limited transport is thus one of the main bottlenecks in the development of efficient devices. Finding a way to overcome this issue is therefore likely to boost device performance considerably.
To this aim, an interesting strategy would be to design materials or nanostructures where the exciton transport is dominated by coherent wavepacket propagation as opposed to slow particle-like diffusion (Fig. 1). The idea that coherent transport allows for superior performance compared to incoherent random walks is a well-established concept in quantum information30,31 and has recently found applications in a variety of nanoscale material systems, including exciton–plasmon hybrid structures.32 Extraordinarily long exciton diffusion lengths of a few micrometers have been recently demonstrated in highly ordered single molecular fibers33 at room temperature. In these wire-like supramolecular structures, the long-range excitation transport along the fiber axis seems to be limited only by the wire length, and it has been suggested that transport is predominantly coherent. For organic photovoltaics, the challenge thus is to provide unambiguous evidence for coherent transport, analyze the correlation between coherent transport and film morphology and then to identify design rules that allow for precise control of such coherent transport.
 Fig. 1  Diffusive vs. coherent transport. (a) Incoherent, particle-like transport proceeds by hopping of excitons among disorder localized sites. (b) Coherent wavepacket transport of excitation among vibronically coupled, delocalized sites is dominant on ultrafast time scales. 
3. Coherent energy and charge transfer
Spatial coherence is in general associated with the concept of phase correlation between the wavefunction amplitudes of states that might be spatially distant.34,35 In a conjugated polymer domain, for example, coherent excitation transfer would mean that the exciton wavefunctions at different sites in the domain have a well-defined phase relation. Such a phase correlation requires a finite amount of coherent coupling between the sites and thus the formation of collective excitation, delocalized among the sites. In this scenario, as long as the coherence among the sites is maintained, the excitation is delocalized over a broader spatial region and can thus “move forward” much faster than in incoherent random steps. In disordered systems at room temperature, however, the inevitable interaction with the environment and its fluctuations (e.g. those of the phonon bath or the charge environment) will randomize the relative phases and thus induce loss of coherent superposition.36 The latter is usually quantified by the electronic dephasing time T2. For molecules at room temperature, typical T2 times are of the order of few tens of femtoseconds. For this reason, it was long thought that coherence, though present at the very initial, short time scales immediately after excitation, could not survive long enough to significantly influence the process output under real conditions, i.e., at room temperature and in disordered samples. However, in the past decade, increasing experimental evidence for astonishingly long-lived coherences in the photosynthetic apparatus of several light harvesting proteins37–41 has challenged this assumption.
Photoinduced energy and charge transfer reactions are in fact of fundamental importance not only in photovoltaics but in many biological processes and in physical chemistry in general.42 Photosynthesis, DNA repair,43 photoisomerization in the primary event of vision,44 magnetoreception in birds,45 and olfaction46 are just a few examples of biological processes where excitation and/or electron transfer reactions are of vital importance. Recently, coherent oscillations have been observed in ultrafast experiments probing many of these processes and it has been suggested that quantum effects may play a more important role in these systems than previously thought.47–49
The conversion of light into spatially separated charges in photosynthesis and photovoltaics has many similarities. Both photosynthesis and organic photovoltaics benefit from sunlight to initiate a series of reactions and obtain another form of energy, i.e., biofuels or electricity. We can therefore, to a certain extent, regard the photosynthetic machinery as a collection of “natural solar cells”, each consisting of a reaction center surrounded by a light harvesting antenna. The structure of artificial solar cells, however, differs considerably from that of biological light harvesting complexes. In organic photovoltaics, the donor domains can be regarded as light harvesting complexes, whereas the interface between the donor and acceptor domains is responsible for charge separation and mimics, in some sense, the reaction center. In biological light harvesting, the chromophores are arranged in highly sophisticated antennas (light absorption and energy transfer units) that convey the excitation towards the reaction centers (charge transfer units). In photovoltaic devices, instead, the light absorbing units are organized in more or less disordered domains which serve multiple tasks. They perform at the same time the light harvesting and transport of optically created excitons as well as spatially separated charges through the material. In view of these structural differences and functional similarities, lessons that are currently being learned about the role of coherence in photosynthetic light harvesting28,50 may also be relevant for organic photovoltaic systems as they may point out new design principles or lead to conceptually new photovoltaic device architectures. The recent observation that coherence survives unexpectedly long at room temperature in highly disordered environments, like the photosynthetic apparatus of algae and bacteria, has brought about a paradigm shift in the description of energy migration and charge trapping in these systems.37,38,51
Excitation and charge transfer have been long described by semi-classical models, i.e., Förster52 and Marcus53,54 theories, respectively. The fundamental assumption in both models is that the initial and final states are in the weak coupling regime, i.e., they are spatially incoherent, and the transfer is described with a rate constant.42 These classical theoretical models used so far are not sufficient anymore to account for quantum effects observed in recent experiments.47 Given the complexity of the systems, however, the full quantum mechanical treatment of energy and electron transfer reactions is extremely challenging. The development of more sophisticated theoretical models needs close interaction with experiments to verify assumptions and provide the input parameters. To this aim, advanced experimental probes capable of resolving coherent processes both in space and time are indispensable.
4. Coherent multidimensional optical spectroscopy
To extract detailed information on the molecular structure, the excited state dynamics and potential coupling mechanisms among the excitations, coherent multidimensional optical spectroscopy has been demonstrated in recent years as one of the most effective and well suited techniques. Two-dimensional optical spectroscopy (2DOS), in particular, has been the key tool to discover quantum effects in photosynthetic systems.55–57 Developed from multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance,58 2DOS has rapidly evolved to cover the infrared59,60 and visible61,62 frequencies, and more recently has extended to the ultraviolet frequencies,63,64 thus giving access to both vibrational and electronic transitions. For this reason, 2DOS in the infrared and visible/ultraviolet frequencies is usually called 2D vibrational and 2D electronic spectroscopy (2DES), respectively. These spectroscopic techniques have not only been employed for the study of photosynthetic light harvesting, but could provide new insight into the structure and dynamics of molecules,65–67 hydrogen-bonded complexes,68,69 semiconductor nanostructures,70,71 quantum dots,72,73 and more recently atomically thin two-dimensional materials.74
A detailed treatment of the signals involved in a 2DOS experiment has been presented previously.36,55,75–77 In the following sections, we introduce the most relevant features necessary for the understanding of the experiments.
2DOS is a type of transient four-wave mixing spectroscopy in which the third order polarization P(3), induced in the sample by interaction with a sequence of three ultrashort pulses, is resolved in amplitude and phase as a function of the optical frequency and of two experimentally controlled time delays. The time delay between the first and second pulses is called the coherence time τ, whereas the one between the second and third pulses is the population or waiting time T. The non-linear signal radiated from the sample Es(t) ∝ iP(3)(t) emerges as a “fourth wave” after interaction with the third pulse, during the detection time t. The pulse sequence is schematically shown in Fig. 2. In the most general implementation, the three pulses i(,t), with i = 1, 2, 3, impinge on the sample with different wavevectors 1 ≠ 2 ≠ 3. The four-wave-mixing signal s(,t) s then emitted in the direction that satisfies momentum conservation s = ∓1 ± 2 + 3. Depending on the time ordering of the pulse sequence and phase matching, different quantum pathways can be interrogated. Specifically, one is usually interested in rephasing (−++) and non-rephasing (+−+) signals. The sum of such pathway contributions defines the absorptive spectra65 which are more intuitive to analyze for molecular systems. However, third order signals in other phase matched directions are also emitted, as well as fields related to higher order polarization terms.77 A beautiful example illustrating this phase matching concept has been reported, e.g., by Pullerits and coworkers.78
 Fig. 2  Pulse sequence in a 2DOS experiment. The first pulse E1 induces a coherent polarization between ground and excited states which evolves during the coherence time τ. The second pulse E2 interacts with this polarization and creates a spatial population grating which evolves during the waiting time T. The third pulse E3 scatters off this population grating in the phase-matched direction. The re-emitted non-linear field from the sample Es is proportional to the third order non-linear polarization P(3). 
A 2DOS experiment can be understood as follows. The first pulse induces a coherent polarization between ground and excited states in the sample which evolves during the coherence time τ. When the second pulse arrives, it interacts with this polarization thus creating a (spatial) population grating79 in the sample which evolves during the (population) waiting time T. The third pulse scatters off this population grating in the phase-matched s direction. Experimentally, this re-emitted non-linear field from the sample Es(t), induced by the pulse sequence, can be recovered by spectral interferometry with a fourth pulse, called the “local oscillator”, which is passed around the sample to avoid interaction.80 The non-linear polarization in the time domain contains information on the third order optical response function of the sample S(3)(t). In the perturbative approach,36 the non-linear polarization is expressed by the temporal convolution of the response function with the three delayed pulses as (1)where the time delays are shown in Fig. 2 and time zero is defined as the maximum of the third pulse. The temporal structure of this polarization depends on the time sequence and the time delays between the three excitation pulses. Fourier transforms with respect to the coherence and detection time delays, τ and t, are performed to obtain two-dimensional frequency–frequency maps S2D(ωτ,T,ωt) for each waiting time T (2)where ωτ is the excitation frequency and ωt the detection frequency defined by the coherence and detection times, respectively.
The ultimate goal of 2DOS is the full characterization of the non-linear optical response function S(3)(t) which depends on the free evolution of the system. It is thus directly related to the system Hamiltonian and provides all the microscopic information on the system necessary to describe its behavior and the measured signals.36 However, the reconstruction of the optical response function from inversion of the experimental data becomes a formidable task for molecular systems at room temperature, which are usually characterized by congested spectra. In the (ideal) case of impulsive excitation, the electric field associated with the pulses i(,t) can be described by delta functions centered at the respective time delays. Hence, the non-linear polarization induced by the three delta pulses coincides with the third order optical response S(3)(t). This greatly facilitates the computation of the signals, but is hardly the case in practice, where finite pulse durations have to be taken into account and hence the temporal convolution with the three pulses cannot be approximated.
There are basically two experimental configurations of 2DOS: the box and the partially collinear geometry. In the first case, the three pulses are arranged at the corner of a square and cross at the sample under small angles with different wavevectors. The non-linear signal emerges at the fourth corner (background free) and is resolved by spectral interferometry using the local oscillator. This configuration requires interferometric stability of four pulses. While in the infrared range this constraint is met by conventional interferometers, in the visible spectral range this is more challenging due to the higher frequencies involved. Schemes implementing active phase stabilization that ensures robust interferometric locking among the four pulses on long time scales have been demonstrated but they inevitably complicate the experimental implementation.80 Passively stabilized approaches based on diffractive81 and all-reflective optics82,83 have also been reported.
In the partially collinear configuration, the first two pulses are collinear, whereas the third one crosses at a small angle. This geometry is just like a common pump–probe84,85 setup where the pump pulse is replaced by a pair of pulses. The non-linear signal is emitted in the probe direction and can be directly measured without the need of a local oscillator. This scheme has the drawback of a background but the requirements are less stringent because the interferometric stability of only two collinear pulses is necessary. Moreover, it can be easily derived from a pump–probe spectrometer and the phase-locked pulse pair can be generated by pulse shaping86,87 or birefringent delay lines.88 Because rephasing and non-rephasing spectra are emitted collinearly, one can directly measure absorptive lineshapes, whereas the individual rephasing and non-rephasing signals can be still obtained by phase cycling techniques.89 For a comprehensive overview of the experimental implementations of 2DOS, we refer the reader to the recent review of Ogilvie and coworkers.90
4.1 Information encoded in 2DOS spectra and dynamics
A typical 2DOS map is characterized by peaks that may lie at different excitation and detection frequencies. The analysis of such frequency–frequency patterns and their temporal evolution with the waiting time provides plenty of information on the system and its interaction with light, but it usually requires, especially for molecular systems, strong theoretical support. What are the main types of information that are contained in 2DOS spectra and their dynamics? And how can we use this information to reconstruct the microscopic system behavior and possibly find a design strategy to influence it in materials and nanostructures? As introduced above, for a given waiting time, the 2DOS map will show some peak structure as a function of excitation and detection frequencies. In particular, diagonal peaks correspond to the resonance frequencies that are involved in the linear absorption. The ratio of the diagonal to off-diagonal widths of each peak provides quantitative information on the ratio of inhomogeneous to homogeneous lineshape broadening91,92 and can thus allow measuring the dephasing time of single resonances even in disordered environments. The presence of cross-peaks and their temporal behavior with the waiting time reveal possible coupling mechanisms among excitations,55,90 energy and charge transfer processes, or possibly transitions into dark states.93
To understand the formation of these peaks and their dynamical evolution, a model for the light-matter interaction in the system under study is needed. In general, the quantity of interest is the expectation value of the dipole operator 〈〉 as it contains all relevant information about the non-linear polarization shown in eqn (1). It is related to the time evolution of the density matrix as P(t) = 〈(t)〉 = Tr[ρ(t)]. This applies to light-matter interactions of any order, i.e., linear processes, such as linear absorption induced by one pulse, as well as to non-linear processes, such as four-wave-mixing, induced by a series of multiple pulses. The corresponding time evolution of the density matrix contains all the information on the response of the system to a single pulse (linear spectroscopy) or to a sequence of multiple pulses (multidimensional spectroscopy). It follows that the time dependence of the 2DOS spectra can in principle map the density matrix of the system. Hence, the analysis of 2DOS spectra can help to reconstruct the full system Hamiltonian. This is usually done by modeling the experimental data with a starting guess for the Hamiltonian which requires some basic a priori knowledge of the system. This guess is then used as input in the master equation of the density matrix to compute the non-linear signal. The result is compared to the experimental data and, by repeating the procedure, one can develop a model that best fits to the experiment. However, different levels of simplification are usually necessary to relieve the computational complexity. Input parameters, for example resonance frequencies of excitations and their transition dipole moments, can be cross-checked with additional auxiliary experiments or predicted by ab initio calculations that take into account the molecular structure. While it has been recently shown that inversion of the experimental 2DOS data might help characterizing the system response without much a priori knowledge of the microscopic Hamiltonian,94,95 this approach remains challenging when it comes to more complex systems with several excitonic bands and coupled vibrations.
5. Studying charge transfer in donor–acceptor systems using 2DOS
In the following sections, we will show what can be learned about charge transfer reactions in a model donor–acceptor system from the analysis of absorptive 2DOS maps. We are interested in studying photoinduced charge transfer in the active layer of a donor (D)–acceptor (A) solar cell, e.g. a polymer and fullerene mixture. Hence, we are dealing with a complex, disordered molecular structure. Let us assume that we can simplify the system by averaging over disorder and thus consider only the D–A interface, where charge separation occurs, as a dimer model (Fig. 3a). Because of strong intermolecular interactions and disorder in organic semiconductors, the interplay of electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom plays a significant role in the definition of their optical properties. Hence, electron–vibrational interactions have to be taken into account.13,96,97 Specifically, high frequency, underdamped carbon modes, dominating the vibrational spectra around ∼1500 cm−1, are usually coupled to the electronic transitions.98 In our simplified dimer model, we thus assume that both D and A could be described by a single vibrational mode coupled to the electronic states. In the model, this coupled vibrational mode has to be treated quantum mechanically, i.e., it is included in the system Hamiltonian, whereas all the other (weakly coupled) vibrational modes are considered as a dissipative phonon bath. In polymer–fullerene solar cells, D is usually the main absorber at visible frequencies, whereas A can be thought of as a dark state because of the poor absorption cross section of fullerenes in the visible part of the spectrum.99 Therefore, we assume that A is dark in the (visible) excitation frequency range that we are going to investigate. Moreover, we assume that D is initially in its ground state without any vibrational excitations. This means that the whole population is in |Dg,ν = 0〉, where ν is the vibrational quantum number of the mode. Now let us perform a 2DOS experiment on this model system (Fig. 3a) with a sequence of three ultrashort pulses resonant with the ground to exciton transition of D, |Dg〉 → |De〉. We assume the pulses to be finite in duration but short enough with respect to the fastest dynamics of the system, i.e., we are in the semi-impulsive limit.36 In this scenario, the excitation pulses will create a coherent superposition in the excited state |De〉, i.e., a wavepacket. Having assumed finite pulse duration, wavepacket motion with opposite phase initiates also in the ground state |Dg〉. Depending on the time delay τ between the first two pulses, we can vary the contribution of the different vibrational wavefunctions in the coherent superposition, thus performing a kind of coherent control experiment of vibrational motion.100 In other words, we can prepare the system in |De〉 under different conditions by varying the time delay between the first two pulses. The third pulse allows us to probe this excited wavepacket. The non-linear field re-emitted by the system in response to interaction with the three pulses is then visualized, after double Fourier transform according to eqn (2), as a 2DOS map for each waiting time (Fig. 3, right panels).
 Fig. 3  Dimer models for charge transfer in a model donor (D)–acceptor (A) system. We consider electronic transitions D and A that are coupled to a single vibrational mode. (a) An incoherent transfer model where the vibrational mode acts as a spectator. Impulsive excitation of the donor (red vertical arrows (a and d)) initiates vibrational wavepacket motion on the donor side. (b) In the 2DOS map, this results in positive diagonal peaks corresponding to a bleaching of the ground to excited state transitions and positive cross peaks indicating vibrational coherence. (c) Incoherent charge transfer to the acceptor is revealed by the emergence of negative cross peaks which arise from excited state absorption transitions in the acceptor (blue vertical arrow in panels (a and d)). (d) In the vibronic transfer model, strong mixing of electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom generates more states for transfer, thus delocalizing the mixed wavefunction across the donor–acceptor interface. (e) In the strong vibronic coupling regime, the corresponding 2DOS map shows spectral peak splittings suggesting the formation of the new eigenstates. 
5.1 Coherent vibrational motion in the donor
Let us first consider the case where no charge transfer to A occurs. The optically created excited state wavepacket will then oscillate back and forth on the D potential energy surface only. The resulting absorptive 2DOS map (Fig. 3b) shows as many diagonal peaks as the vibrational quanta that the pulses can excite. These positive peaks reflect bleaching of the ground to excited state transition as well as stimulated emission from the excited to the ground state of D. The number of diagonal peaks is determined, apart from experimental factors such as the pulse duration, by the Huang–Rhys factor of D which is a measure of the electron–phonon coupling strength.101 In Fig. 3 for example, we have chosen a Huang–Rhys factor such that only the first two vibrational quanta are clearly visible. This means that the displacement between the minima of the potential energy surfaces of the ground and excited donor states is such that the overlap integral between the wavefunctions |Dg,v = 0〉 and |De,ν〉 is significant mainly for the first two vibrational levels of the excited state ν = 0, 1 and can be neglected for ν > 1. We define the optical frequency of the ground to excited (exciton) state transitions as ℏωDi, where i = 0, 1 indicates the vibrational quantum number of D involved in the transition. The vibrational wavepacket oscillates on the donor potential energy surface for a time determined by the vibrational relaxation time of the coupled mode TDvib. Therefore, along the waiting time, we detect not only oscillating diagonal peaks due to coherent wavepacket motion, but also cross-peaks oscillating with a period corresponding to that of the vibrational mode. The amplitude of the oscillations along the waiting time depends on the strength of the electron–phonon coupling, whereas their temporal persistence is determined by the vibrational relaxation time TDvib of the mode. Hence, by analyzing the waiting time dynamics we can identify the vibrational mode and follow the temporal behavior of the wavepacket motion. In this way, 2DOS allows us to take snapshots of the coherent vibrational motion (vibrational coherence) in the D moiety. The contribution of the ground and excited state vibrational coherences can be distinguished if the waiting time dynamics of rephasing and non-rephasing spectra are available. It has been reported that such contributions result in different beating frequencies for the rephasing and non-rephasing maps and can be thus distinguished analyzing these two quantum pathways separately.20,102,103
It should be noted that similar 2DOS patterns could be also observed for a purely electronic system where two bright excited states are electronically coupled and no vibrational mode is involved. In that case, although the absorptive 2DOS pattern and its temporal evolution might be very similar to that of the displaced harmonic oscillator system (vibrational coherence case) reported in Fig. 3b, the physics that it describes is completely different. In that case, purely electronic coherence is observed. This ambiguity has raised substantial debate on the origin of the long-lived beatings observed in the experimental 2DOS maps of photosynthetic systems.37,38 Initially assigned to long-lived electronic coherences, the timescales observed exceed by far typical electronic dephasing times in molecular systems. It has been shown theoretically that the sole presence of (oscillating) cross-peaks in experimental 2DOS maps cannot be taken as an unambiguous proof of electronic coherence.104–107 There is now increasing evidence that coupling of the electronic system to vibrations plays a fundamental role in generating the oscillatory features in the 2DOS spectra.108–110
5.2 Incoherent transfer to the acceptor
We now analyze the case of incoherent transfer from the excited D to A potential energy surface, i.e., from |De〉 to |Ae〉. This means that |Ae〉 is populated by the relaxation of the |De〉 wavepacket through a dissipative (incoherent) process.42 Let us assume that the transfer occurs on a time scale TDAinc much shorter than the vibrational relaxation TDvib, i.e., TDvib ≫ TDAinc. This is often the case in photoinduced charge transfer reactions in molecular systems which take place on very fast, femtosecond time scales,42 whereas vibrational motion could persist for several picoseconds. In our example, having assumed that the wavepacket is a superposition of essentially the first two vibrational quanta of |De〉, transfer takes place from both |De,ν = 0〉 and |De,ν = 1〉 to |Ae〉. Therefore, we observe the emergence of two cross-peaks in the 2DOS maps at excitation energies ℏωD1 and ℏωD0, and detection energy ℏωA (Fig. 3c). These cross-peaks arise from optical transitions between the exciton state |Ae〉 and the higher excited state |Ae′〉 in our model (Fig. 3a, blue arrow). Hence, they are photoinduced absorption peaks with negative amplitude. Of course, once |Ae〉 is populated, stimulated emission to a lower-lying acceptor ground state |Ag〉 (not shown in Fig. 3a) might also be allowed and should appear as positive cross-peaks in the 2DOS pattern. Since the ground to excited state transition |Ag〉 → |Ae〉 of the acceptor is typically blue-shifted with respect to that in the donor, these positive cross-peaks will likely be at higher detection energies (on the right side with respect to the diagonal). Experimentally, direct excitation of the acceptor should be avoided when looking into the charge transfer from the excited D. We have therefore implicitly assumed that our pulse spectrum does not cover the |Ag〉 → |Ae〉 transition. In addition, since the excited state transition |Ae〉 → |Ae′〉 is not allowed by direct excitation, no diagonal peaks at ℏωA are detected (Fig. 3c).
Because we are considering the scenario TDvib ≫ TDAinc, coherent vibrational motion in D has not decayed yet when the transfer to A takes place. Population transfer by relaxation from one state to another leads to loss of coherence of the D wavepacket. This means that, as the population relaxes from |De〉 to |Ae〉, (part of the) vibrational coherence is lost on the D side. This manifests itself in the waiting time dynamics of the positive peaks (D related peaks) as loss of amplitude modulation with an exponential decay governed by TDAinc. Concurrently, the same time constant is responsible for an exponential rise of the negative cross-peaks, indicating state filling on the A side. Physically, this incoherent transfer regime is equivalent to a weak electronic coupling model in the sense that the electronic coupling strength between |De〉 and |Ae〉 is much weaker than the electronic dephasing rate and thus any coherent population transfer (Rabi oscillations) is promptly and heavily damped. The transfer dynamics thus proceeds as an exponential decay in the initial state and an exponential rise in the final state, respectively. This model can thus be regarded as the limit of Marcus transfer and is described with a rate constant for the transfer. Quantum mechanically, this classical rate model can be implemented by a population relaxation operator in the master equation of the density matrix, as we will briefly discuss in the next section.
5.3 Coherent transfer mediated by vibronic coupling
Finally, we consider a scenario of coherent vibronic transfer between D and A (Fig. 3d). In this model, the vibrations are no longer mere spectators, as in the previous case, but participate actively in the transfer. We assume that both D and A can be described by a dominant vibrational mode with a similar frequency. This is again a reasonable assumption for conjugated polymers and fullerenes.111 In our dimer model (Fig. 3d), the bare excited states |De〉 and |Ae〉 are electronically coupled to each other and mutually strongly coupled to a single vibrational mode. In this scenario, the adiabatic potential energy surfaces of the coupled D and A states show an avoided crossing along the vibrational coordinate (Fig. 3d, solid black) where the diabatic potentials of each component would cross† (Fig. 3d, dashed black). The strong mixing of electronic and vibrational wavefunctions generates delocalized vibronic eigenstates |DAei〉 shared between the excited states of D and A (Fig. 3d, green solid lines). When performing a 2DOS experiment on this system, a coherent superposition of vibronic states, initially localized on the D side of the coupled potential energy surface, is created. This coherent superposition is now no longer purely vibrational and residing exclusively on the D moiety. Instead, it consists of mixed D and A electronic and vibrational wavefunctions shared between D and A. Hence, we define it as a vibronic wavepacket. In the 2DOS pattern, we might therefore detect multiple positive peaks (Fig. 3e) corresponding to bleaching and stimulated emission transitions between the ground |Dg〉 and the mixed excited states. Depending on the vibronic coupling strength, more or less large spectral peak splittings might be detected21 (Fig. 3e, red peaks). These new vibronic states are eigenstates of the full system Hamiltonian and, as such, their associated dephasing times might be significantly different from those of the uncoupled states.
The waiting time dynamics show a richer behavior with frequencies determined not only by the vibrational mode, but also by the vibronic couplings and their beatings. Moreover, the negative cross-peaks associated with population transfer appear almost immediately after excitation and may also show spectral splittings (Fig. 3e, blue cross-peaks). This can be understood as a consequence of the static coupling between the states which is responsible for ultrafast delocalization of the excitation across the D–A interface and can thus favor transfer by reducing the Coulomb barrier for charge separation in real samples.112
For weaker vibronic couplings, splittings become smaller and it might be very challenging to resolve them experimentally. In photosynthetic systems, the coupling to vibrations is typically much weaker than in conjugated polymers and hence such splittings have not yet been observed. It has been shown, however, that another vibronic effect, namely the resonance condition between vibrational mode frequencies and excitonic level splittings can enhance transfer even for weak electron–phonon couplings.113–115
6. Vibronic coupling speeds up population transfer
In this section, we discuss more in detail how vibronic coupling can favor population transfer even in disordered and dissipative environments, a typical situation in organic semiconductors used in solar cell applications. Let us consider again the dimer model with one bright and one dark state, i.e., donor and acceptor, respectively.
In the absence of vibronic coupling, the population transfer dynamics between |De〉 and |Ae〉 states is equivalent to that of two coupled electronic states with the vibrational mode being a simple spectator (Fig. 4a). Thus, if we assume that the excitation initially prepares the system in the bright |De〉 state, we will observe population oscillations between |De〉 and |Ae〉 with a period T = πℏ/J′, where  is the Rabi energy defined by the electronic coupling strength J and the energetic detuning ΔE between the uncoupled |De〉 and |Ae〉 states (Fig. 4a). In this scenario, and in the absence of dephasing processes, the dynamics of the population on the acceptor side PA(t) can be described for impulsive excitation as116 (3)
 Fig. 4  Population dynamics in different donor–acceptor models for charge transfer. (a) An electronic dimer model in the weak coupling regime in which vibrations do not participate in the transfer. (b) Here, the dynamics of the populations in the donor (red) and acceptor (blue) states show faint initial Rabi oscillations that are quickly damped by the fast dephasing. (c) A strong vibronic dimer model in which the donor and acceptor are electronically coupled and mutually coupled to an underdamped vibrational mode. (d) In this case, the dynamics of the donor (red) and acceptor (blue) populations show a much faster build-up on the acceptor side with superimposed long-lived oscillatory components. On top of pronounced oscillations with a period matching that of the coupled vibrational mode, weak oscillations with additional periods are observed. This complex oscillatory behavior is a signature of strong vibronic coupling. 
The oscillation amplitude thus reaches a maximum when the uncoupled states |De〉 and |Ae〉 are resonant, i.e., for ΔE = 0. In this case, the population oscillates completely between |De〉 and |Ae〉 and the transfer rate to |Ae〉 is maximal. Energetic detuning between the uncoupled states ΔE ≠ 0 reduces the oscillation amplitude and at the same time slightly increases the oscillation frequency. In the presence of dissipation, the population oscillations are additionally exponentially damped with a rate γd ≈ ℏ/T2 defined by the electronic dephasing time. To estimate the dynamics of the transfer between D and A, we have calculated the population dynamics on the two moieties for an electronic dimer (Fig. 4a) and for the vibronic dimer model (Fig. 4c). These simulations are depicted in Fig. 4b and d, respectively. To this aim, we compute the time evolution of the density matrix ρ(t) by solving the master equation in the Lindblad form117 (4)Here, the system Hamiltonian H = H0 + Hi describes the free evolution of the system H0 and its interaction with light Hi. We assume that all dissipation processes, such as dephasing and relaxation, are accounted for by the Lindblad superoperators117. In both models, we assume that the donor is strongly coupled to a high frequency vibrational mode ℏωv = 180 meV with a vibrational relaxation time of Tvib = 1 ps. This is often the case for conjugated polymers, where CC stretching vibrations with large Huang–Rhys factors usually dominate the optical spectra and result in the typical vibrational progression in the linear absorption. In both models, we also assume that the electronic dephasing time is T2 = 25 fs (γd ≈ 165 meV) for all states and that population relaxation to the ground state is slow enough (T1 = 10 ps) compared to the investigated time scale (500 fs). Each dimer system (Fig. 4a and c) is excited by a Gaussian pulse with a duration of 10 fs, resonant with the ground-to-exciton state transition of the donor. We assume that the acceptor state does not couple directly to the optical field, i.e., it is a dark state.
In the electronic dimer model (Fig. 4a), we assume an electronic coupling strength of J = 30 meV between |De〉 and |Ae〉, and a typical value for the energetic detuning of ΔE = −200 meV. Hence, we are in the weak coupling regime, J < γd. The corresponding simulated population dynamics of D (red) and A (blue) are reported in Fig. 4b. From this simulation, we can see that the population builds up on the acceptor side (blue) as the one in D decays (red). Moreover, very weak wiggles, due to coherent population exchange between D and A, can be recognized during the first 30 fs after excitation. Because of the fast dephasing time, this coherent transfer regime is promptly damped and thus very inefficient. We therefore expect that it has no significant contribution to the overall population transfer dynamics. These strongly damped coherent oscillations are so weak that they are unlikely to be resolved in experiments. As we can see from Fig. 4b, the population rise time on the acceptor is rather slow and it takes several hundred femtoseconds to reach equilibrium. This weak coupling regime is to a certain extent equivalent to an incoherent transfer and thus might be also described in the limit of classical transfer models based on rate equations. It should be noted that in the Lindblad formalism, the relaxation operators can be chosen such that vibrational phase coherence is preserved during the population relaxation. This is an important difference with respect to classical models and essentially means that vibrational wavepacket motion can be transferred from the donor to the acceptor during population relaxation.
In the strong vibronic coupling model (Fig. 4c), we consider the same long-lived vibrational mode of ℏωv = 180 meV coupled not only to |De〉, but also to |Ae〉 and electronic coupling strength of J = 50 meV between the detuned electronic states (ΔE = −200 meV). The simulated D and A populations reported in Fig. 4d show much more complex and fast dynamics with the populations equilibrating already around 40 fs after excitation. In our model, this means that half of the excited donor population is transferred to the acceptor within only 40 fs and the dynamics of both D and A populations show a much shorter decay and rise time, respectively. The coherent oscillations showing up in both the donor and acceptor population dynamics remain nearly undamped for the whole simulation time. At later times, the period of these long-lived temporal oscillations matches that of the coupled vibrational mode. At early times, however, Fourier transforms of the dynamics reveal oscillations with additional periods reflecting the energetic splitting between the delocalized vibronic states. These weaker additional oscillations are a distinct signature of strong vibronic coupling. It is evident from Fig. 4 that the coupling to the underdamped vibrational mode can induce long-lived vibronic quantum coherences and can greatly accelerate the charge transfer dynamics on ultrafast time scales.
In Fig. 5, we analyze in detail the population dynamics of the acceptor by reporting the estimated rise time of the population dynamics PA(t) for different values of the energetic detuning between |De〉 and |Ae〉 states. In this way, we can investigate the effect of the average detuning on the transfer dynamics for both the electronic dimer (Fig. 5, black) and the vibronic dimer models (Fig. 5, red). To this aim, we fit an exponential rise function to the population dynamics.
 Fig. 5  Rise time of the simulated acceptor population PA(t) as a function of the energetic detuning between the uncoupled electronic states. The electronic dimer is shown in black, whereas the vibronic coupled model in red. Negative (positive) detuning refers to the acceptor state lying lower (higher) in energy with respect to the donor. Adapted from ref. 21 under CC BY License. Copyright the authors 2016. 
For the electronic dimer (Fig. 5, black), the acceptor population rise time varies from less than 10 fs when the states are resonant (zero detuning) to more than 300 fs for detuning of a few hundred meV. Hence, in this model, the energetic detuning between the electronic states of the donor and acceptor has a big impact on the population transfer, as can easily be seen from eqn (3). In polymer–fullerene material systems, the energy levels of |De〉 and |Ae〉 states at the interface between the two moieties, and thus their relative energetic detuning, are determined both by the binding energy of the respective exciton states and the effects of disorder on the energy levels. Ab initio calculations have reported typical excited state offset values of a few hundred meV for conjugated polymers and their blends with fullerene derivatives.118,119 In addition, inherent disorder in the samples induces local fluctuations of the state energies which greatly alter the energetic detuning between |De〉 and |Ae〉. Thus, in such blended samples, it seems unrealistic to assume small values for the detuning between the D and A states when attempting to model 2DOS experiments that are generally performed with limited spatial resolution in the 100 micron range. In such experiments, a spatial averaging over disorder-induced fluctuations of the donor–acceptor potentials is generally performed which inevitably results in a finite effective value for the donor–acceptor detuning. In a purely electronic dimer model, i.e., in the absence of vibronic coupling, such energetic detuning will inevitably slow-down the charge transfer dynamics, as shown in Fig. 4b and 5. In this scenario, we also notice that the transfer integral between |De,νD〉 and |Ae,νA〉 states with different vibrational quantum numbers ν is unity only for ΔνDA = νD − νA = 0, otherwise it is zero. This means that vibrations do not contribute to the transfer dynamics. Temporal oscillations due to vibrational motion could still be detected in spectroscopic probes, for example as modulation of the donor exciton dynamics, but they do not contribute effectively to the transfer process.
In the vibronic coupling model, this is fundamentally different. A finite displacement ΔDA between |De〉 and |Ae〉 states results in transfer integrals that become non-zero also for states with ΔνDA ≠ 0. Hence, population transfer is allowed also between states with different vibrational quanta. As a direct consequence, more paths become available for coherent population transfer through the delocalized vibronic eigenstates, and thus the process can proceed at a faster rate.21 Moreover, because of these additional vibronic states, the energetic detuning between |De〉 and |Ae〉 has only a moderate effect on the transfer dynamics. Thus, in the presence of strong vibronic coupling, fast population transfer is achievable even for large energetic detuning between the electronic states. This suggests that strong vibronic coupling indeed speeds up population transfer dynamics even in the presence of relatively large disorder. Fig. 5 also shows that vibronic coupling makes the population transfer dynamics almost insensitive to the specific value of the detuning, and hence to the precise local disorder potential at the donor–acceptor interface. This effect could be a general feature of vibronically-enhanced charge transfer phenomena.21 Therefore, our simulations suggest that the efficient initial charge transfer that has recently been observed in ultrafast spectroscopic experiments on selected donor–acceptor blends might be a general result for systems with large electron–phonon couplings. Moreover, vibronic coupling might also contribute to the ultrafast and efficient charge generation by hot exciton dissociation in some photovoltaic blends.120
7. Delocalization and vibronic coupling in organic photovoltaics
In photosynthetic systems, there is now growing consensus concerning the existence of quantum coherences38,56,57,110,113,121,122 in the energy and charge transfer dynamics. In organic photovoltaics, instead, still little is known in this regard. If and how coherence plays a role in charge separation and transport in organic photovoltaic materials are at the moment still open questions that are just beginning to be explored. Only very recently, ultrafast optical experiments reported the first evidence for the role of delocalization17,123,124 and long-lived vibronic coherence18,19,21 in some photovoltaic materials.
Excitation of the donor polymer generates excitons on the polymer chains that subsequently undergo spatial charge separation to contribute to the photocurrent. However, unlike in inorganic semiconductors, where wavefunction delocalization allows for band transport of free charges, in highly disordered, low-dimensional environments typical to organic semiconductors, the electronic wavefunction is much more localized making electron–nuclear interaction important.98 As a consequence, charge carriers in organic semiconductors come in the form of polarons, i.e., charges coupled to a lattice distortion, instead of free charges and are thought to move by incoherent hopping among localized disordered sites. At the interface between the donor and acceptor, polymer excitons spatially separate into neutral, bound polaron pair states (charge transfer states). The further dissociation of these neutral quasi-particles into free polarons is one of the debated issues in charge photogeneration in organic solar cells. Experimental evidence for efficient charge separation at the interface of the polymer and fullerene on ultrafast time scales within a few hundred femtoseconds after excitation has been known for long time.24 Although some studies suggest that dissociation from a relaxed charge transfer state125 is responsible for most of the photocurrent in devices, there is increasing experimental and theoretical evidence for the dominant role of hot exciton dissociation, likely assisted by coupled vibrations,126,127 on ultrafast time scales. Delocalization of the charge carriers or neutral species (excitons and polaron pairs) within the single moieties or across their interface might facilitate charge separation123,128 and explain the ultrafast appearance of spatially separated species.
Recently, Friend and coworkers reported that electron delocalization in the acceptor might play a critical role in the generation of charge carriers in blends with high fullerene loads.17 Monitoring the electro-absorption signal (Stark spectroscopy) generated upon charge separation, they demonstrated that electrons and holes spatially separate by about 4 nm within only 40 fs after excitation. The Stark signal at early times was instead suppressed at a lower fullerene concentration in the sample, resulting in devices with poorer performance. This suggests that long range electron–hole separation is strongly dependent on the fullerene content. At high loads or upon annealing, fullerene acceptors are known to form large crystallites.129,130 This could lead to an increased delocalization of the electronic wavefunction within such clusters, similar to the effect of aggregation on Frenkel excitons in molecular dyes.96 Indeed, the authors suggested that electron delocalization in fullerene clusters could allow for band-like transport and thus give rise to the surprising long-range ballistic motion of electrons within the acceptor.17 Moreover, their results also suggested that charge photogeneration cannot be explained on the simple basis of frontier orbital offsets of the donor and acceptor. Instead, quantum mechanical spatial correlations might be the driving force for ultrafast charge separation17,123 at the donor–acceptor interface and thus might potentially be relevant for the device function.
Previous studies by Heeger and coworkers131,132 based on ultrafast pump–probe spectroscopy suggested that delocalization of the polymer exciton could be responsible for efficient charge generation within about 100 fs after excitation. Collini and Scholes124 reported long-lived electronic energy transfer along chains of diluted poly(phenylene vinylene) by anisotropy-detected 2DOS. Coherent exciton transport would support efficient forward propagation of the exciton along the polymer chains and thus promote ultrafast charge separation. These apparently contrasting delocalization mechanisms (neutral polymer exciton and charged electron polaron in the acceptor) might all be hints of the same phenomenon, i.e., the fundamental role of coherent, wave-like transport in the microscopic mechanism leading to ultrafast charge separation.
Recent quantum dynamics simulations by Tamura and Burghardt112,128 indeed suggested an important role of vibronic coupling in the charge separation in model oligomer–fullerene structures. They predicted a lowering of the Coulomb barrier for charge separation due to spatial delocalization of the excitation across the donor–acceptor interface favoring charge transfer on ultrafast time scales. Interestingly, they also suggested that the potential barrier for charge separation is reduced as the π-conjugation length of the donor increases.128 As delocalization can be influenced by ordering within each of the moieties, these results call for more comprehensive investigations of the fundamental relation between nanoscale morphology and charge separation taking into account quantum coherence.
7.1 Vibronically-enhanced transport and charge separation
At present, it is still quite unclear whether purely electronic coherence or coupling of the electronic and vibrational motion plays the dominant role in the charge transfer dynamics. In photosynthetic proteins, coherent transients have now been observed on time scales of several hundreds of femtoseconds. This exceeds typical electronic dephasing times in molecular systems133 by far. Hence, this makes it likely for vibronic coupling to be the key to understanding ultrafast photoinduced energy and charge transfer dynamics in biological109,110,113,115,134 and artificial114,135 light harvesting.
In general, the vibronic coupling strength scales reciprocally with the spatial extent of the electronic wavefunctions.13 Hence, because of disorder and low dimensionality, strong electron–vibrational interactions are decisive for the optical properties of conjugated polymers.136 This suggests that they are also important in the excited state dynamics and photoinduced charge transfer in these materials.98 Experimental evidence for vibronic effects on the dynamics of organic semiconductors has been demonstrated by several reports of coherent vibrational wavepacket motion following photoexcitation.24,137 Yet at present, not much is known about the functional role of vibronic coherence. In particular, it is unclear how vibronic coupling strength could affect the dynamics of photoexcited species during the charge separation process. Most importantly, it is presently unclear whether and how vibronic coupling can be exploited to improve the function of artificial devices.
Only recently, we have shown the first firm evidence for persistent vibronic coherences during the initial charge transfer in a model photovoltaic system.18 We investigated thin film blends of polythiophene (P3HT) and the soluble fullerene derivative PCBM, a reference material system in organic photovoltaics.138 After impulsive, selective excitation of the donor moiety in a pump–probe experiment, we observed the ultrafast transfer of coherent vibrational wavepacket motion from the dominant CC stretching mode of the polymer to vibrational modes of the fullerene. We took these signatures as evidence for a coherent vibronically-assisted charge separation between the polymer and fullerene. The experimental results were corroborated by ab initio time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) calculations showing correlated oscillations of both the electronic density and the nuclear motion on the same time scale18 (Fig. 6). These calculations predict that vibronic coupling promotes delocalization across the donor–acceptor interface and is essential for efficient ultrafast charge separation. These results provide the first evidence for a coherent charge transfer mediated by strong vibronic coupling between the polymer and fullerene in agreement with ab initio calculations.18,112,139
 Fig. 6  
Ab initio simulation of the charge transfer dynamics between thiophene chains and fullerene bucky-balls. The color code allows visualizing the distribution of the charge density over time. The simulation explains the experimental observation of strong vibronic coupling during the charge separation process in the reference photovoltaic blend P3HT:PCBM.18 (Courtesy of Carlo Andrea Rozzi, CNR Nano S3.) 
Using 2DOS, Scholes and coworkers19 reported long-lived vibrational coherence in a similar system, i.e., solutions of P3HT:PCBM nanoparticles. Control measurements on neat P3HT nanoparticles (Fig. 7a) show four positive peaks due to bleaching transitions of the polymer exciton and a positive cross peak around the detection wavelength of 640 nm arising from stimulated emission from the exciton. These features reflect the vibrational progression observed in the linear absorption and can be described by a single displaced harmonic oscillator model accounting for the exciton.140 A broad negative cross peak, overlapping the stimulated emission, attributed to excited state absorption of polaronic species in the donor, is detected only after about 300 fs (Fig. 7b). This formation dynamics can be well described in the limit of weak coherent coupling, as we have schematically shown in Sections 5 and 6 of this Perspective (cf.Fig. 3b, c and 4b). In the blended P3HT:PCBM solutions,19 instead, the negative cross peak appears much more rapidly at a waiting time of only 35 fs. Therefore, the authors take this feature as a signature of charge separation in the blend solution. The vibrational motion of the polymer CC stretching mode, induced by the impulsive excitation, is unaffected by the formation of the negative cross-peak. The authors therefore suggest that vibrational coherence may assist ultrafast charge separation by hot excitons.19
 Fig. 7  Absorptive 2DOS maps of P3HT nanoparticles in solution. (a) The 2DOS map at a waiting time of 30 fs shows the characteristic exciton bleaching peaks expected from linear absorption (cross sections). A positive cross peak (red arrow) at a detection wavelength around 650 nm is due to stimulated emission from the exciton to the ground state. (b) 2DOS maps at later waiting times show the appearance of a negative cross peak overlapped with the stimulated emission, assigned to a hole polaron in P3HT nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Copyright Nature Publishing Group 2014. 
We recently reported ultrafast 2DOS studies of P3HT thin films21 prepared following a recipe used for the fabrication of organic solar cells. Surprisingly, the 2DOS maps of these films show a significantly different pattern than those in Fig. 7. In particular, at early waiting times we observe an unexpected subpeak structure of the positive excitonic peaks with spectral splittings along both detection and excitation energies (Fig. 8a) that cannot be described on the basis of a single displaced harmonic oscillator model. At each of the resonance positions predicted by the excitonic model,140 we detect a quartet21 instead of a single peak. The dynamics of all peaks (Fig. 8b) are dominated by persistent temporal oscillations associated with the CC stretching mode,21 in good agreement with the reports by Scholes and coworkers.19,20 In addition, however, we could also resolve weaker oscillatory components in the 2DOS dynamics which do not match any vibrational mode of the polymer (Fig. 8b, upper panel inset). Moreover, the negative cross-peak signal at lower detection energy around 1.89 eV is well visible already within the first vibrational period (Fig. 8b, bottom panel). In contrast to the previous 2DOS study on nanoparticles, the sub-bandgap cross peak is not dominated by stimulated emission from the exciton in our thin film samples. This positive feature is likely obscured by the strong negative cross peak which reflects the photoinduced absorption of intrachain polaron pairs, in agreement with pump–probe studies of similar P3HT samples.141,142 The quasi-instantaneous appearance of the excited state absorption cross peak (Fig. 8) in the 2DOS maps is a clear signature of the coherent nature of their formation on ultrafast time scales.
 Fig. 8  Ultrafast coherent polaron pair formation in P3HT thin films. (a) Absorptive 2DOS maps at selected waiting times together with cross sections along the detection and excitation energies show a subpeak structure which reflects vibronic coupling between exciton and polaron pair states. The peak positions are marked by blue circles and dashed lines. (b) Waiting time dynamics of positive peaks (upper and middle panels) associated with excitonic transitions and negative cross-peak reflecting excited state absorption of polaron pairs (lower panel). Open circles correspond to the measured data, whereas solid lines are fits with a damped cosine function. Remarkably, the negative polaron pair cross-peak amplitude (lower panel) builds up within less than 100 fs (blue line). The dynamics of all peaks show pronounced, long-lived oscillations, with a dominant period of about 23 fs, corresponding to the CC stretching mode. The Fourier transform spectra (inset) reveal additional low-frequency oscillatory components. Adapted from ref. 21 under CC BY License 2016. Copyright the authors 2016. 
The spectral subpeak structure, multi-frequency dynamics and extremely fast formation of the negative polaron pair cross-peak can all be explained by strong mixing among the electronic exciton and polaron pair states and the CC stretching mode, giving rise to delocalized vibronic states.21 This interpretation is supported by detailed quantum mechanical simulations, in which we describe the polymer with a dimer version of the Holstein model Hamiltonian21,143,144 that has qualitatively been discussed in Fig. 3. These simulations show very clearly that a weak coupling model for polaron pair formation cannot explain our 2DOS experiments (Fig. 9a and b). In this model, the electronic coupling between the exciton and polaron pair states is much weaker than the dephasing rate and the vibrational mode is just a spectator. In the weak coupling limit, the spectral 2DOS pattern consists essentially of two positive excitonic diagonal peaks, corresponding to the vibrational progression in the linear absorption,140 and two positive cross peaks indicating vibrational coherence of the long-lived CC stretching mode (Fig. 9a). At early waiting times, the positive cross peaks at lower detection energy arise from the exciton stimulated emission to the ground state (Fig. 9a). The negative cross peak due to the population transfer to the polaron pair state appears slowly at a detection energy of 1.87 eV (Fig. 9b). The waiting time dynamics of this cross peak is characterized by an exponential signal build-up on a time scale (about 50 fs) governed by the relaxation rate from the bright exciton to the dark polaron pair state overlapped with long-lived oscillations. These dynamics show only a single oscillating component due to the coupled vibrational mode and no other signature of beating frequencies due, for example, to coherent population oscillations. In these simulations, vibrational wavepacket motion has contributions from both the stimulated emission of the exciton and the polaron pair itself. In fact, an important aspect of this incoherent transport model is that the transfer is defined as the relaxation of the electronic population from the exciton to the polaron pair state. As we have qualitatively discussed in Section 6, the parameters of the Lindblad relaxation operator can be chosen such that vibrational coherence is fully preserved during the population transfer from the exciton to the final state. Therefore, vibrational oscillations can be observed in both the exciton and polaron pair state. An important consequence of this model is that the sole observation of long-lived vibrational motion in the polaron pair state cannot be taken as a signature of coherent transport. To prove if population is indeed transferred coherently, additional features need to be present, such as ultrafast population (Rabi) oscillations and new spectral features due to state mixing, which might not be trivial to prove in experiments.
 Fig. 9  Simulated (left panels) absorptive 2DOS map at a waiting time of 6 fs and (right panels) dynamics of the polaron pair cross peak in P3HT. In the incoherent model (a and b), the polymer exciton is described by a displaced harmonic oscillator and the polaron pair is formed by incoherent population relaxation from the exciton state. (a) At early waiting times, the 2DOS pattern shows four positive peaks corresponding to exciton bleaching transitions. Persistent vibrational motion of the impulsively excited exciton vibrational wavepacket gives rise to two off-diagonal peaks. Additional positive cross peaks at lower detection energy are due to stimulated emission of the exciton. (b) These cross peaks are overlapped with the excited state absorption of polaron pairs which sets in on a slower time scale. In the coherent vibronic model (c and d), exciton and polaron pair states are electronically coupled and have both large electron–phonon couplings to the CC stretching mode. (c) This results in the formation of new vibronic states which appear as multiple positive peaks in the 2DOS pattern and (d) much faster build-up of the negative cross peaks of polaron pairs within the first vibrational period. Adapted from ref. 21 under CC BY License. Copyright the authors 2016. 
Simulations of the 2DOS spectra and dynamics in the weak coupling limit seem to nicely reproduce spectral patterns observed by Scholes and coworkers at early waiting times19,20 (cf.Fig. 7 and 9a). In the strong vibronic coupling model, instead, electronic coupling between exciton and polaron pair states and their mutual strong coupling to the long-lived CC stretching mode (large Huang–Rhys factors) result in an effective (vibronic) coupling strength larger than the dephasing rate. Consequently, the corresponding 2DOS spectral pattern shows multiple peaks arranged in quartets around each resonance, just as seen experimentally in Fig. 8 and in the simulations in Fig. 9c. This spectral pattern cannot be resolved in the linear absorption spectrum, because of large inhomogeneous broadening. A unique feature of 2DOS is the ability of discerning homogeneous linewidths behind the inhomogeneous broadening. This makes it possible to resolve the peak splitting. This splitting is consistent with an almost impulsive formation of the polaron pair cross peak (Fig. 9d), showing dynamics with multiple beating components due to the interplay of electronic and vibronic coupling. In this limit, polaron pair absorption is so strong that the spectrally overlapping stimulated exciton emission cannot even be seen at the earliest waiting times. This spectral overlap is a characteristic feature of P3HT and may not exist in other materials.
It is interesting to compare these simulations for the specific case of P3HT (Fig. 9) with the analysis outlined in the previous sections for a hypothetical donor–acceptor dimer (cf.Fig. 3). We have shown that in the strong vibronic coupling model, an impulsive optical excitation induces rapid population oscillations between the coupled vibronic states with complex beating dynamics (cf.Fig. 4d). Strong vibronic coupling thus gives rise to the formation of delocalized eigenstates with mixed electron–vibrational character and results in multiple peaks in the 2DOS spectra. Moreover, such large electron–vibrational coupling can accelerate the transfer dynamics and render it more robust against energetic disorder and fast electronic dephasing (cf. Section 6). This behavior is in agreement with quantum mechanical calculations of 2DOS spectra for a simple dimer model and can fully describe the experimental findings for polaron pair formation in P3HT (Fig. 9). Hence, our experimental 2DOS data (Fig. 8) provide clear experimental evidence of strong vibronic coupling between excitons, polaron pairs and the underdamped CC stretching vibrational mode21 in P3HT thin films.
7.2 Vibronic coupling to many vibrational modes
So far, we have assumed that the effect of vibronic coupling in organic semiconductors can be largely described by coupling the electronic system to a single dominant vibrational mode.96,98 In many conjugated polymers and molecular aggregates, experimental evidence indeed strongly supports that essentially one high frequency vibrational mode around 1500 cm−1 governs the linear and non-linear optical spectra. For prototypical thiophene-based polymers, such as P3HT, the dominant mode is the symmetric CC stretching. Hence, a simplified model including only this coupled vibrational mode is often invoked to describe the optical properties.140 Yet in general, in large molecular systems, a variety of different vibrational modes may couple to the electronic transition, and thus affect the dynamics. In particular, several intramolecular modes specific to the donor and acceptor as well as intermolecular modes could be involved in the dynamics. This may profoundly affect the yield and dynamics of charge transfer reactions. Strong coupling to many vibrational modes may lead to the formation of conical intersections145 between multidimensional potential energy surfaces within the donor and acceptor manifolds as well as between them. Close to conical intersections, the large vibronic coupling induces ultrafast surface crossing of the optically excited wavepacket and efficient decay of the population to the final state within only few femtoseconds.145,146 Moreover, the interplay of many modes with different frequencies may result in complex beatings of the dynamics. Although the theory of multimode reaction dynamics and conical intersections has been intensely studied for many years,147 direct experimental signatures of such non-adiabatic wavepacket dynamics are still challenging to obtain. A typical example for the relevance of conical intersections is the photoisomerization process of rhodopsin in the primary event of vision.44 This process is known to involve ultrafast crossing of a conical intersection and has recently been the subject of intense studies by ultrafast pump–probe type spectroscopy techniques.148–150 Using 2DOS, Jonas and coworkers could observe loss of electronic coherence associated with the crossing of the conical intersection151 in a phthalocyanine molecule known to present a Jahn–Teller type intersection. In spite of these pioneering works, detailed 2DOS experiments addressing the dynamics of multimode vibronic couplings and the role of conical intersections in charge transfer reactions in molecular functional materials have not yet been reported so far. In contrast, theoretical investigations of the signatures of conical intersections in 2DOS spectra for few-mode systems have appeared very recently in the literature.152,153 We therefore believe that experimental 2DOS studies of the effects of multimode vibronic couplings on the light-to-current conversion in organic systems may be highly rewarding. Given the complexity of the problem when considering the coupling of many modes, such studies would greatly benefit from a detailed theoretical analysis. This could provide important guidelines to recognize typical features of conical intersections in 2DOS signals of light-harvesting systems. They would be fundamentally helpful for an unambiguous interpretation of experimental data. We therefore believe that the close interaction between experimental and theoretical work will be of fundamental importance in advancing our knowledge on the role of vibronic effects in photochemical and photophysical processes.
8. Conclusion and outlook
In summary, we have presented a brief survey of the most recent experimental evidence for the role of delocalization and vibronic quantum coherences in conjugated polymers. We have given particular attention to the spectroscopic signatures of strong vibronic coupling in two-dimensional optical spectroscopy. Using a model dimer for an ideal donor–acceptor system, we have attempted to show how to rationalize the physical behavior behind the spectral and dynamical features using a quantum master equation approach. We have shown that strong vibronic coupling results in the formation of new mixed electron–vibrational wavefunctions. These couplings give rise to characteristic peak splittings in two-dimensional optical spectroscopy and result in multi-frequency oscillatory behavior in the waiting time dynamics. Both the spectral peak splittings and multi-frequency dynamics have indeed been resolved in experimental 2DOS of the reference conjugated polymer P3HT. Using 2DOS, we could show that strong coupling of electronic and long-lived vibrational motion can delocalize the excitation along the polymer chains thereby inducing coherent wavepacket transport in this specific conjugated polymer. This results in an essentially impulsive formation of polaron pair excitations in the polymer and in lasting vibronic coherences persisting for several hundreds of femtoseconds at room temperature.
These polymers are characterized by large Huang–Rhys factors, i.e., large coupling to a dominant CC stretching vibrational mode. This selectivity in the electron–vibrational coupling could give rise to directionality of the coherent wavepacket motion along the polymer. This could facilitate reaching charge separation interface in blends, and thus be beneficial for photovoltaic devices.
So far, however, the limits for maximal achievable coherent transport lengths of vibronic wavepackets in blended organic semiconductors typically used in device applications are still not well known. Recent work of Friend and coworkers17 suggested ballistic long-range charge separation across the polymer–fullerene interfaces over lengths of about 4 nm on a timescale of 40 fs. The long-lived vibronic coherences of up to 650 fs observed in P3HT21 might suggest that much longer coherence lengths, exceeding 10 nm by far, could be achieved in optimized polymers and blends.
The direct experimental demonstration of such long coherent transport lengths, as recently shown in molecular fibers,33 would represent a great forward step not only for organic photovoltaics but also for organic-based electronics in general. Resolving such vibronic wavepacket transport in real-time on the nanoscale might require, however, ultrafast spectroscopic techniques which combine both high time resolution in the sub-10 fs range and high spatial resolution in the sub-10 nm range. Since such coherent vibronic coupling has so far only been observed in a few selected polymer systems, an extension of ultrafast spectroscopy work to other types of polymers seems to be urgently needed.
In a similar effort to control coherent transport lengths, a tenfold enhancement of charge carrier mobility could indeed be achieved by strong coupling of electronic wavefunctions to surface plasmons in thin film transistor structures.32 Recent theoretical work also predicted long coherence lengths by strong coupling of molecular excitons to the resonant radiation field in organic microcavities.154 For solar cells, such an enhancement of the coherent transport length in organic semiconductors would be highly beneficial. It could allow one, for example, to employ simpler device geometries such as planar bilayer heterojunctions which are at the moment practically unfeasible in applications due to the short exciton diffusion lengths.
Long coherent transport lengths would not only enhance device performance, but could also completely change the way transport processes are described in organic semiconductors. Current diffusive transport models should be replaced by fully quantum-mechanical ones that account for coherent wavepacket transport. For this, it would be important to extend the simple dimer models used in the present article to more realistic ones accounting for the chain-like structure of polymers and their specific molecular packing and morphology.
Certainly highly interdisciplinary work covering all relevant areas from synthetic chemistry to ultrafast spectroscopy and quantum dynamics modeling are needed to achieve these challenging goals.
In summary, experimental and theoretical evidence for coherent light-induced quantum transport in organic semiconductors is growing rapidly. This suggests that a comprehensive understanding and optimization of the microscopic mechanisms and molecular parameters that control vibronically-assisted transport and charge separation could open up completely new perspectives for innovative device applications and new research directions to improve the efficiency of existing organic semiconductor-based energy conversion devices.
Acknowledgements
Financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SPP1839 and SPP1840), the Korea Foundation for International Cooperation of Science and Technology (Global Research Laboratory project, K20815000003) and the German-Israeli Foundation (Grant no. 1256) is gratefully acknowledged. We cordially thank Ephraim Sommer and Sarah Falke from our group as well as Julien Rehault, Margherita Maiuri, Giulio Cerullo, Jaemin Lim, Susana F. Huelga, Martin B. Plenio, Filippo Troiani, Carlo A. Rozzi and Elisa Molinari for invaluable contributions to this project. We wish to thank G.D. Scholes and Y. Song for providing us with Fig. 7.
Notes and references
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Hadziioannou and P. F. van Hutten, Semiconducting polymers: chemistry, physics, and engineering, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
A. Facchetti, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 733–758 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
P. Novák, K. Müller, K. S. V. Santhanam and O. Haas, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 207–282 CrossRef .
G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 365–377 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. McQuade, A. E. Pullen and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2537–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Barford, Electronic and optical properties of conjugated polymers, Clarendon Press, Oxford,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. Kilina, D. Kilin and S. Tretiak, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5929–5978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Haugeneder, M. Neges, C. Kallinger, W. Spirkl, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, U. Scherf, E. Harth, A. Gügel and K. Müllen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15346–15351 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Lunt, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1233–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Menke and R. J. Holmes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 499–512 CAS .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512–516 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Falke, C. A. Rozzi, D. Brida, M. Maiuri, M. Amato, E. Sommer, A. De Sio, A. Rubio, G. Cerullo, E. Molinari and C. Lienau, Science, 2014, 344, 1001–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, S. N. Clafton, R. D. Pensack, T. W. Kee and G. D. Scholes, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4933 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, C. Hellmann, N. Stingelin and G. D. Scholes, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 212410 CrossRef PubMed .
A. De Sio, F. Troiani, M. Maiuri, J. Réhault, E. Sommer, J. Lim, S. F. Huelga, M. B. Plenio, C. A. Rozzi, G. Cerullo, E. Molinari and C. Lienau, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .
C. J. Brabec, G. Zerza, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, S. Luzzati, J. C. Hummelen and S. Sariciftci, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 232–236 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovol.: Res. Appl., 2016, 24, 905–913 CrossRef .

Heliatek press release, http://www.heliatek.com/en/press/press-releases/details/heliatek-sets-new-organic-photovoltaic-world-record-efficiency-of-13-2.
O. G. Reid, R. D. Pensack, Y. Song, G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 561–575 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Bredas, E. H. Sargent and G. D. Scholes, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 35–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Kozlov, F. de Haan, R. A. Kerner, B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns and M. S. Pshenichnikov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 057402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kempe, Contemp. Phys., 2003, 44, 307–327 CrossRef .
S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio, Contemp. Phys., 2013, 54, 181–207 CrossRef CAS .
E. Orgiu, J. George, J. A. Hutchison, E. Devaux, J. F. Dayen, B. Doudin, F. Stellacci, C. Genet, J. Schachenmayer, C. Genes, G. Pupillo, P. Samori and T. W. Ebbesen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1123–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Haedler, K. Kreger, A. Issac, B. Wittmann, M. Kivala, N. Hammer, J. Kohler, H.-W. Schmidt and R. Hildner, Nature, 2015, 523, 196–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Glauber, Phys. Rev., 1963, 130, 2529–2539 CrossRef .

          M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy, Quantum optics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York,  1997 Search PubMed .

          S. Mukamel, Principles of nonlinear optical spectroscopy, Oxford University Press, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T.-K. Ahn, T. Mancal, Y.-C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 446, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Collini, C. Y. Wong, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi, P. Brumer and G. D. Scholes, Nature, 2010, 463, 644–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Panitchayangkoon, D. Hayes, K. A. Fransted, J. R. Caram, E. Harel, J. Wen, R. E. Blankenship and G. S. Engel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12766–12770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hildner, D. Brinks, J. B. Nieder, R. J. Cogdell and N. F. van Hulst, Science, 2013, 340, 1448–1451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Schlau-Cohen, A. Ishizaki, T. R. Calhoun, N. S. Ginsberg, M. Ballottari, R. Bassi and G. R. Fleming, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 389–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. May and O. Kühn, Charge and energy transfer dynamics in molecular systems, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 3rd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
C. Aubert, M. H. Vos, P. Mathis, A. P. M. Eker and K. Brettel, Nature, 2000, 405, 586–590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Schoenlein, L. A. Peteanu, R. A. Mathies and C. V. Shank, Science, 1991, 254, 412 CAS .
K. Maeda, K. B. Henbest, F. Cintolesi, I. Kuprov, C. T. Rodgers, P. A. Liddell, D. Gust, C. R. Timmel and P. J. Hore, Nature, 2008, 453, 387–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Turin, Chem. Senses, 1996, 21, 773–791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. L. Lande, N. S. Babcock, J. Rezac, B. Levy, B. C. Sanders and D. R. Salahub, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5902–5918 RSC .

          M. Mohseni, Y. Omar, G. S. Engel and M. B. Plenio, Quantum effects in biology, Cambridge University Press,  2014 Search PubMed.
N. Lambert, Y.-N. Chen, Y.-C. Cheng, C.-M. Li, G.-Y. Chen and F. Nori, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, Y.-C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, Science, 2007, 316, 1462–1465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Förster, Ann. Phys., 1948, 437, 55–75 CrossRef .
R. A. Marcus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1964, 15, 155–196 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 599–610 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Jonas, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 425–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Brixner, J. Stenger, H. M. Vaswani, M. Cho, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2005, 434, 625–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zigmantas, E. L. Read, T. Mančal, T. Brixner, A. T. Gardiner, R. J. Cogdell and G. R. Fleming, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 12672–12677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. R. Ernst, G. Bodenhausen and A. Wokaun, Principles of nuclear magnetic resonance in one and two dimensions, Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, Oxford Oxfordshire, New York,  1987 Search PubMed .
P. Hamm, M. Lim and R. M. Hochstrasser, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 6123–6138 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Zanni and R. M. Hochstrasser, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2001, 11, 516–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Hybl, A. W. Albrecht, S. M. Gallagher Faeder and D. M. Jonas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 297, 307–313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang and G. R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 2983–2990 CrossRef CAS .
C. Consani, G. Auböck, F. van Mourik and M. Chergui, Science, 2013, 339, 1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Selig, C.-F. Schleussner, M. Foerster, F. Langhojer, P. Nuernberger and T. Brixner, Opt. Lett., 2010, 35, 4178–4180 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Khalil, N. Demirdöven and A. Tokmakoff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 047401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Ginsberg, Y.-C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1352–1363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nuernberger, S. Ruetzel and T. Brixner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11368–11386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Fecko, J. D. Eaves, J. J. Loparo, A. Tokmakoff and P. L. Geissler, Science, 2003, 301, 1698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Elsaesser, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1220–1228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, T. Zhang, C. N. Borca and S. T. Cundiff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 057406 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Cundiff, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 4639–4664 CrossRef PubMed .
K. J. Karki, J. R. Widom, J. Seibt, I. Moody, M. C. Lonergan, T. Pullerits and A. H. Marcus, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Harel, S. M. Rupich, R. D. Schaller, D. V. Talapin and G. S. Engel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075412 CrossRef .
K. Hao, G. Moody, F. Wu, C. K. Dass, L. Xu, C.-H. Chen, L. Sun, M.-Y. Li, L.-J. Li, A. H. MacDonald and X. Li, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 677–682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukamel, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 51, 691–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cho, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1331–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Hamm and M. Zanni, Concepts and methods of 2D infrared spectroscopy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2011 Search PubMed .
B. Brüggemann and T. Pullerits, New J. Phys., 2011, 13, 025024 CrossRef .
A. D. Bristow, D. Karaiskaj, X. Dai and S. T. Cundiff, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 18017–18027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Bristow, D. Karaiskaj, X. Dai, T. Zhang, C. Carlsson, K. R. Hagen, R. Jimenez and S. T. Cundiff, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80, 073108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Cowan, J. P. Ogilvie and R. J. D. Miller, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 386, 184–189 CrossRef CAS .
U. Selig, F. Langhojer, F. Dimler, T. Löhrig, C. Schwarz, B. Gieseking and T. Brixner, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2851–2853 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Meyer, C. Ott and T. Pfeifer, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 356–358 CrossRef PubMed .
L. P. DeFlores, R. A. Nicodemus and A. Tokmakoff, Opt. Lett., 2007, 32, 2966–2968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Shim and M. T. Zanni, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 748–761 RSC .
E. M. Grumstrup, S.-H. Shim, M. A. Montgomery, N. H. Damrauer and M. T. Zanni, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 16681–16689 CrossRef PubMed .
F. D. Fuller, D. E. Wilcox and J. P. Ogilvie, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 1018–1027 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Brida, C. Manzoni and G. Cerullo, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 3027–3029 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Myers, K. L. M. Lewis, P. F. Tekavec and J. P. Ogilvie, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 17420–17428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Fuller and J. P. Ogilvie, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 667–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tokmakoff, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4247–4255 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Siemens, G. Moody, H. Li, A. D. Bristow and S. T. Cundiff, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 17699–17708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Tollerud, S. T. Cundiff and J. A. Davis, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 097401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuen-Zhou and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 134505 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Dostál, B. Benešová and T. Brixner, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 145, 124312 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Spano, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2006, 57, 217–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Pochas and F. C. Spano, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 244902 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tretiak, A. Saxena, R. L. Martin and A. R. Bishop, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 097402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schlaich, M. Muccini, J. Feldmann, H. Bässler, E. O. Göbel, R. Zamboni, C. Taliani, J. Erxmeyer and A. Weidinger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 236, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Weinacht, R. Bartels, S. Backus, P. H. Bucksbaum, B. Pearson, J. M. Geremia, H. Rabitz, H. C. Kapteyn and M. M. Murnane, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 344, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Shreve, E. H. Haroz, S. M. Bachilo, R. B. Weisman, S. Tretiak, S. Kilina and S. K. Doorn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 037405 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Caram, A. F. Fidler and G. S. Engel, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 024507 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Egorova, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 10259–10267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Egorova, M. F. Gelin and W. Domcke, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 074314 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Butkus, D. Zigmantas, L. Valkunas and D. Abramavicius, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 545, 40–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Plenio, J. Almeida and S. F. Huelga, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 235102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Egorova, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 034314 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nemeth, F. Milota, T. Mančal, V. Lukeš, J. Hauer, H. F. Kauffmann and J. Sperling, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 184514 CrossRef .
N. Christensson, H. F. Kauffmann, T. Pullerits and T. Mančal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 7449–7454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tiwari, W. K. Peters and D. M. Jonas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 1203–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cardona and G. Guntherodt, Light Scattering in Solids Viii, 2000, 76, 1–26 CAS .
H. Tamura and I. Burghardt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16364–16367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Fuller, J. Pan, A. Gelzinis, V. Butkus, S. S. Senlik, D. E. Wilcox, C. F. Yocum, L. Valkunas, D. Abramavicius and J. P. Ogilvie, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 706–711 CAS .
J. Lim, D. Paleček, F. Caycedo-Soler, C. N. Lincoln, J. Prior, H. von Berlepsch, S. F. Huelga, M. B. Plenio, D. Zigmantas and J. Hauer, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7755 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Novoderezhkin, E. Romero and R. van Grondelle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30828–30841 RSC .

          C. Cohen-Tannoudji, F. Laloèe and B. Diu, Quantum mechanics, Wiley, New York,  1997 Search PubMed .
B. Palmieri, D. Abramavicius and S. Mukamel, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 204512 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Borges, A. J. A. Aquino, A. Köhn, R. Nieman, W. L. Hase, L. X. Chen and H. Lischka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18252–18255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huix-Rotllant, H. Tamura and I. Burghardt, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1702–1708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, M. Maiuri, D. Fazzi, A. Petrozza, H. J. Egelhaaf, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and G. Lanzani, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 29–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Romero, R. Augulis, V. I. Novoderezhkin, M. Ferretti, J. Thieme, D. Zigmantas and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 676–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chenu and G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 69–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Collini and G. D. Scholes, Science, 2009, 323, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking, G. F. Burkhard, A. Sellinger, J. M. J. Fréchet, A. Amassian, M. K. Riede, M. D. McGehee, D. Neher and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 63–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tamura, J. G. S. Ramon, E. R. Bittner and I. Burghardt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 495–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Pensack and J. B. Asbury, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15986–15987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tamura and I. Burghardt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15020–15025 CAS .
A. Swinnen, I. Haeldermans, M. vande Ven, J. D'Haen, G. Vanhoyland, S. Aresu, M. D'Olieslaeger and J. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 760–765 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. K. J. van Duren, M. T. Rispens, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 802–806 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Kaake, J. J. Jasieniak, R. C. Bakus, G. C. Welch, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19828–19838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Kaake, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2264–2268 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Prezhdo and P. J. Rossky, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 5294–5297 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Chin, J. Prior, R. Rosenbach, F. Caycedo-Soler, S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Rozzi, S. M. Falke, N. Spallanzani, A. Rubio, E. Molinari, D. Brida, M. Maiuri, G. Cerullo, H. Schramm, J. Christoffers and C. Lienau, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1602 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Spano, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 234701 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lanzani, G. Cerullo, C. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 047402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Ludwigs, P3HT revisited – from molecular scale to solar cell devices, Springer, Heidelberg,  2014 Search PubMed .
H. Tamura, R. Martinazzo, M. Ruckenbauer and I. Burghardt, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 22A540 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Clark, C. Silva, R. H. Friend and F. C. Spano, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206406 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guo, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6154–6164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14866–14876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. P. Su, J. R. Schrieffer and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1980, 22, 2099–2111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mančal, L. Valkunas and G. R. Fleming, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 432, 301–305 CrossRef .
G. A. Worth and L. S. Cederbaum, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 55, 127–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Köuppel, W. Domcke and L. S. Cederbaum, Adv. Chem. Phys., John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2007, pp. 59–246 Search PubMed .
L. S. Cederbaum, H. Köppel and W. Domcke, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1981, 20, 251–267 CrossRef .
D. Polli, P. Altoe, O. Weingart, K. M. Spillane, C. Manzoni, D. Brida, G. Tomasello, G. Orlandi, P. Kukura, R. A. Mathies, M. Garavelli and G. Cerullo, Nature, 2010, 467, 440–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schnedermann, M. Liebel and P. Kukura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2886–2891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. M. Johnson, A. Halpin, T. Morizumi, V. I. Prokhorenko, O. P. Ernst and R. J. D. Miller, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 980–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Kitney-Hayes, A. A. Ferro, V. Tiwari and D. M. Jonas, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 124312 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Krčmář, M. F. Gelin, D. Egorova and W. Domcke, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 2014, 47, 124019 CrossRef .
M. Sala and D. Egorova, Chem. Phys., 2016, 481, 206–217 CrossRef CAS .
F. Herrera and F. C. Spano, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 238301 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† In a more complex scenario in which the electronic states are strongly coupled to more than one vibrational coordinate, the avoided crossing is likely replaced by a conical intersection.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Diffusive vs. coherent transport. (a) Incoherent, particle-like transport proceeds by hopping of excitons among disorder localized sites. (b) Coherent wavepacket transport of excitation among vibronically coupled, delocalized sites is dominant on ultrafast time scales.	 

 	Fig. 2  Pulse sequence in a 2DOS experiment. The first pulse E1 induces a coherent polarization between ground and excited states which evolves during the coherence time τ. The second pulse E2 interacts with this polarization and creates a spatial population grating which evolves during the waiting time T. The third pulse E3 scatters off this population grating in the phase-matched direction. The re-emitted non-linear field from the sample Es is proportional to the third order non-linear polarization P(3).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Dimer models for charge transfer in a model donor (D)–acceptor (A) system. We consider electronic transitions D and A that are coupled to a single vibrational mode. (a) An incoherent transfer model where the vibrational mode acts as a spectator. Impulsive excitation of the donor (red vertical arrows (a and d)) initiates vibrational wavepacket motion on the donor side. (b) In the 2DOS map, this results in positive diagonal peaks corresponding to a bleaching of the ground to excited state transitions and positive cross peaks indicating vibrational coherence. (c) Incoherent charge transfer to the acceptor is revealed by the emergence of negative cross peaks which arise from excited state absorption transitions in the acceptor (blue vertical arrow in panels (a and d)). (d) In the vibronic transfer model, strong mixing of electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom generates more states for transfer, thus delocalizing the mixed wavefunction across the donor–acceptor interface. (e) In the strong vibronic coupling regime, the corresponding 2DOS map shows spectral peak splittings suggesting the formation of the new eigenstates.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Population dynamics in different donor–acceptor models for charge transfer. (a) An electronic dimer model in the weak coupling regime in which vibrations do not participate in the transfer. (b) Here, the dynamics of the populations in the donor (red) and acceptor (blue) states show faint initial Rabi oscillations that are quickly damped by the fast dephasing. (c) A strong vibronic dimer model in which the donor and acceptor are electronically coupled and mutually coupled to an underdamped vibrational mode. (d) In this case, the dynamics of the donor (red) and acceptor (blue) populations show a much faster build-up on the acceptor side with superimposed long-lived oscillatory components. On top of pronounced oscillations with a period matching that of the coupled vibrational mode, weak oscillations with additional periods are observed. This complex oscillatory behavior is a signature of strong vibronic coupling.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  Rise time of the simulated acceptor population PA(t) as a function of the energetic detuning between the uncoupled electronic states. The electronic dimer is shown in black, whereas the vibronic coupled model in red. Negative (positive) detuning refers to the acceptor state lying lower (higher) in energy with respect to the donor. Adapted from ref. 21 under CC BY License. Copyright the authors 2016.	 

 	Fig. 6  
Ab initio simulation of the charge transfer dynamics between thiophene chains and fullerene bucky-balls. The color code allows visualizing the distribution of the charge density over time. The simulation explains the experimental observation of strong vibronic coupling during the charge separation process in the reference photovoltaic blend P3HT:PCBM.18 (Courtesy of Carlo Andrea Rozzi, CNR Nano S3.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Absorptive 2DOS maps of P3HT nanoparticles in solution. (a) The 2DOS map at a waiting time of 30 fs shows the characteristic exciton bleaching peaks expected from linear absorption (cross sections). A positive cross peak (red arrow) at a detection wavelength around 650 nm is due to stimulated emission from the exciton to the ground state. (b) 2DOS maps at later waiting times show the appearance of a negative cross peak overlapped with the stimulated emission, assigned to a hole polaron in P3HT nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Copyright Nature Publishing Group 2014.	 

 	Fig. 8  Ultrafast coherent polaron pair formation in P3HT thin films. (a) Absorptive 2DOS maps at selected waiting times together with cross sections along the detection and excitation energies show a subpeak structure which reflects vibronic coupling between exciton and polaron pair states. The peak positions are marked by blue circles and dashed lines. (b) Waiting time dynamics of positive peaks (upper and middle panels) associated with excitonic transitions and negative cross-peak reflecting excited state absorption of polaron pairs (lower panel). Open circles correspond to the measured data, whereas solid lines are fits with a damped cosine function. Remarkably, the negative polaron pair cross-peak amplitude (lower panel) builds up within less than 100 fs (blue line). The dynamics of all peaks show pronounced, long-lived oscillations, with a dominant period of about 23 fs, corresponding to the CC stretching mode. The Fourier transform spectra (inset) reveal additional low-frequency oscillatory components. Adapted from ref. 21 under CC BY License 2016. Copyright the authors 2016.	 

 	Fig. 9  Simulated (left panels) absorptive 2DOS map at a waiting time of 6 fs and (right panels) dynamics of the polaron pair cross peak in P3HT. In the incoherent model (a and b), the polymer exciton is described by a displaced harmonic oscillator and the polaron pair is formed by incoherent population relaxation from the exciton state. (a) At early waiting times, the 2DOS pattern shows four positive peaks corresponding to exciton bleaching transitions. Persistent vibrational motion of the impulsively excited exciton vibrational wavepacket gives rise to two off-diagonal peaks. Additional positive cross peaks at lower detection energy are due to stimulated emission of the exciton. (b) These cross peaks are overlapped with the excited state absorption of polaron pairs which sets in on a slower time scale. In the coherent vibronic model (c and d), exciton and polaron pair states are electronically coupled and have both large electron–phonon couplings to the CC stretching mode. (c) This results in the formation of new vibronic states which appear as multiple positive peaks in the 2DOS pattern and (d) much faster build-up of the negative cross peaks of polaron pairs within the first vibrational period. Adapted from ref. 21 under CC BY License. Copyright the authors 2016.	 
Footnote
† In a more complex scenario in which the electronic states are strongly coupled to more than one vibrational coordinate, the avoided crossing is likely replaced by a conical intersection.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
