A monolithic device for solar water splitting based on series interconnected thin film absorbers reaching over 10% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42519C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42519C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3676-3683A monolithic device for solar water splitting based on series interconnected thin film absorbers reaching over 10% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency†

        
          
            T. Jesper 
            Jacobsson
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Viktor 
            Fjällström
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Martin 
            Sahlberg
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marika 
            Edoff
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Tomas 
            Edvinsson
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemistry – Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 538, 75121 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: Jesper.jacobsson@kemi.uu.se;   Tel: +46 (0)70-5745116
bDepartment of Engineering Sciences, Solid State Electronics division, Uppsala University, Box 534, 75121 Uppsala, Sweden
Received 
      25th July 2013
    , Accepted 17th September 2013First published on 17th September 2013AbstractEfficient production of hydrogen from solar energy is anticipated to be an important component in a future sustainable post-carbon energy system. Here we demonstrate that series interconnected absorbers in a PV-electrolysis configuration based on the compound semiconductor CIGS, CuInxGa1−xSe2, are a highly interesting concept for solar water splitting applications. The band gap energy of CIGS can be adjusted to a value close to optimum for efficient absorption of the solar spectrum, but is too low to drive overall water splitting. Therefore we connect three cells in series, into a monolithic device, which provides sufficient driving force for the full reaction. Integrated with a catalyst this forms a stable PV/photo-electrochemical device, which when immersed in water reaches over 10% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency for unassisted water splitting. The results show that series interconnected device concepts, which enable use of a substantial part of the solar spectrum, provide a simple route towards highly efficient water splitting and could be used also for other solar absorbers with similar electro-optical properties. We discuss how the efficiency could be increased for this particular device, as well as the general applicability of the concepts used in this work. We also briefly discuss advantages and disadvantages of photo-electrochemical cells in relation to PV-electrolysis with respect to our results.

Broader context
Solar energy is one of the most attractive renewable energy sources as it is abundant, wide spread and basically free. The price for capturing this energy is now starting to get compatible with other energy sources which raises the concern of the intermittent nature of solar irradiation. The production of solar generated hydrogen is both a possible alternative for dealing with this intermittency, as well as for providing a potent fuel and an important feedstock for the industry. Much research has been done in the development of materials usable as photo-electrochemical cells for this purpose. An inherent problem in the design of these devices is the mismatch between the solar spectrum and the thermodynamic and kinetic requirements for the solar water splitting reaction. The standard proposed solution to this problem is to construct tandem devices. Here we instead explore the idea of connecting efficient photo-absorbers in series to obtain the required photo-potential and discuss the similarities between PEC and PV-electrolysis cells. To demonstrate the potential of this approach we manufacture a monolithic device based on series interconnected CIGS cells that reach 10% solar to hydrogen efficiency.

A necessary prerequisite to realize the vision of a hydrogen economy1–3 is the development of an economically compatible route for sustainable hydrogen production. In a post-carbon energy system hydrogen could act both as a fuel, as feedstock for the industry and as a means to deal with the intermittent nature of renewable wind and solar power production. Today almost all of the world production of hydrogen is based on steam reforming from coal and natural gas2 which is not compatible with a clean hydrogen economy. There are several possible routes towards sustainable hydrogen production,4–6 but here the focus will be on utilizing solar energy. The combination of high solar absorption and high hydrogen generation in a single device has turned out to be difficult and has resulted in a large amount of research since the Nature article in 1972 by Fujishima and Honda demonstrating solar water splitting with TiO2.7
To systematically analyze the problem of converting water and solar radiation into hydrogen, the process can be divided into a number of subsequent steps. This separation will unavoidably be somewhat arbitrary, but much is to be gained by identifying and addressing the process in terms of well identified sub-steps. The overall process can be divided into absorption, charge separation, charge transport and catalysis. Accordingly the external quantum efficiency, EQE, can be described according to eqn (1), where LHE is the light harvesting efficiency, λ the wavelength, ϕsep the charge separation efficiency, ϕtrans the charge transport efficiency and ηcat the quantum efficiency of catalytic charge transfer to the desired redox species in the solution. EQE(λ) = LHE(λ)ϕsep(λ)ϕtransηcat(1)
The first necessary step is efficient absorption of the photons in the solar spectrum and generation of electron hole pairs, which sets demands on the band gap and extinction coefficients. Once created, the excited electrons need to be separated from the holes and transported to where they can be utilized. Up to this point the working principles are the same as for a solar cell. For a water-splitting device the additional step of a catalytic pathway for the charge carriers at the electrolyte interface must be included. ηcat in eqn (1) can then be divided into a quantum efficiency for the oxygen evolution reaction, ηOER, and a quantum efficiency for the hydrogen evolution reaction, ηHER. The reaction efficiencies are in turn dependent on the electrochemical potential of the electrons at the respective electrode and thus on the photovoltage that can be generated. The maximum photocurrent, Jph, that can be utilized for water splitting in the AM 1.5 solar spectrum between λ1 and λ2, is given by eqn (2) where E(λ) is the spectral photon flux of the AM 1.5 solar spectrum. (2)
A large part of the research in solar water splitting has been directed towards the development of functional materials, with a long standing goal to find a single material that together with a suitable electrolyte can perform all the necessary steps to drive the overall reaction, and to do so at a technically relevant level. There are hundreds of materials described in the literature investigated with this in mind.8–10 So far no material is described in the literature capable of effectively performing all the necessary steps by itself. Given the set of constraints set upon such a material it is not very surprising that such a material has not been found. Instead strategies have been developed to work around some of the constraints by combining different materials.
While investigating candidate materials the first dilemma is the mismatch between the solar spectrum and the driving force for the water splitting reaction. A band gap of 1.35 eV is most suitable for harvesting as much power as possible from solar light,11 whereas the Gibbs free energy of the water splitting reaction of 1.23 eV together with the necessary overpotential requires a band gap of about 2 eV and above for a single band gap device.12 It has, however, turned out to be difficult to perform the overall reaction even with high band gap materials, in part due to the requirement of matching of the band edges with the reduction and oxidation potential of water. The most common approach is therefore to investigate materials capable of performing only one of the half reactions. n-Type semiconductors, for example Fe2O3,13,14 ZnO,15,16 TiO2,17,18 WO3 (ref. 19 and 20) and BiVO4 (ref. 21 and 22), with low-lying conduction band energies are investigated for the oxygen half reaction, and p-type materials like Cu2O23,24 are investigated for the hydrogen half reaction. A crucial problem often faced with these concepts is the one of efficiency. Some of the well-studied semiconductors have band gaps preventing them from absorbing a large enough fraction of the light, whereas others show problems with charge carrier separation and charge transport. Problems with catalytic efficiency and stability are also frequently encountered.
Another inherent problem faced by any material capable of driving only one of the half reactions is the need to be combined with a material capable of driving the other half reaction. The standard suggestion for solving this problem is to construct a tandem device with two different semiconductors. The argument is often implicit, implying that if the investigated material system is demonstrated to work properly it may later, possibly, be integrated with another working material into a device for the overall reaction. It also happens that specific tandem combinations are spelled out like the suggestion that a Fe2O3 photocathode could be combined in a tandem configuration with a DSSC.14,25 The most efficient concepts found in the literature also turn out to be realized as tandem concepts. Two of the most notable are the 12.3% efficient PV/PEC GaAs/GaInP2 cell from Khaselev and Turner26 and their 16.5% efficient analog cell.27 Peharz et al. have also demonstrated a 15% efficient device based on GaInP and GaInAs connected to a PEM cell and a solar concentrator.28 Some promising results have also been demonstrated based on triple-junction amorphous silicon,28 where the most notable are the 7.8% efficient cell by Rocheleau et al.29 and the 4.7% efficient “artificial leaf” from Nocera et al.30,31 These concepts still suffer from some important problems, like the stability and cost for Turner's GaAs/GaInP2 device6,32 and the efficiency for Nocera's device. Another problem, maybe even a harder constraint for the tandem concepts, is the same as when used in solar cells for the PV-market, where the increase in efficiency tends to come at a premium in terms of higher cost per unit of produced power.
A two terminal tandem concept where cells are connected in series on top of each other is, however, not the only possible way to utilize materials capable of performing only one of the half reactions. An alternative way to absorb more photons in the solar spectrum and transform them into higher chemical potential in order to increase the voltage difference between the anode and the cathode is to connect several absorber units in series side by side.33,34 Once having a module capable of absorbing light and efficiently separating and transporting the photo-generated charge carriers, several of these can be connected in series. As in the two terminal tandem device referred to above, each of the cells will absorb sunlight and the voltage is the sum of the voltage from the sub-cells in the device. The photocurrent density will decrease by a factor equal to the number of connected cells, but the voltage difference between the cathode and the anode will increase by the same factor which would be enough for driving the overall reaction. It is important to stress the point that even as the photocurrent density over the complete area of the device decreases in a series interconnection, the active area efficiency is only marginally reduced as compared to a single solar cell.
The important parameter here is the amount of electrons with a potential above the threshold for water splitting, or the current density at the required voltage. In Table 1, the current density of the PV-electrolysis cell in this work is presented together with the record device by Khaselev and Turner26 and some proposed alternative materials and concepts. For three interconnected single junction CIGS solar cells with a band gap of 1.2 eV, the maximum current density, assuming 100% absorption of photons above the energy threshold and collection of all resulting electrons, will be 40 mA cm−2 for the AM 1.5 solar spectrum (G-173-03, 2012).35 For three interconnected cells, the current density will be divided by 3 to give 13.3 mA cm−2. In a tandem device, the complete surface area belongs to the same cell, but also in this case the device consists of cells which are connected in series, albeit being stacked on top of each other instead of being arranged besides each other. In the tandem junction used in the device in Khaselev and Turner's Science paper,26 the bottom cell has a band gap of 1.4 eV with an upper limit to the current density of 33 mA cm−2, and the top cell has a band gap of 1.8 eV with a corresponding maximum current density of 17 mA cm−2. Provided the current match between the two stacked cells is perfect, this gives an upper limit to current density of around 16 mA cm−2 at 1 sun for the total cell. To design a single junction device which can perform the full process, theoretically GaP based solar cells could be a feasible alternative. Compared to the band gaps of the realized devices, however, a material with an even higher band gap would probably be required to compensate for internal cell losses and to provide sufficient overvoltage for the reaction. For a 3.2 eV band gap material, which is close to the value obtained by summing up the band gaps of the cells used in Turner's tandem cell, the maximum amount of photons that can be absorbed from sunlight is very low and the corresponding current density is only 1.1 mA cm−2.
Table 1 Comparisons of possible efficiencies for different concepts.






CIGS
CIGS 3 cells
GaP
ZnO
Tandem





E
g [eV]
1.2
3.6 (3·1.2)
2.26
3.3
3.2 (1.8 + 1.4)



J
max [mA cm−2]
40
13.3
9.7
0.8
16.4



J
max measured in PV electrolysis [mA cm−2]


8.2




120 at 11 suns


11 at 1 sun (calculated)




Series interconnected cells are an elegant solution to the problem of utilizing efficient materials with a too low band gap or with the wrong band edge alignment for driving both half reactions.
Despite its simplicity the concept of series interconnections is almost absent from the context of solar water splitting. Over the decades the idea has surfaced a few times,33,34,36–38 but has never integrated itself as a part of the standard toolbox for device production, nor has it been properly recognized for its potential. By series interconnection of individual cells it is possible to avoid both the low solar absorption in high band gap materials and the inherent cost problems in tandem cells by opting for reasonable cost absorber materials with more ideal band gaps.
In this paper we demonstrate how an efficient device for overall water splitting can be fabricated by a modular approach involving series interconnection of solar absorber units based on CIGS, CuInxGa1−xSe2. CIGS is a well-known thin film solar cell material found in the commercial domain with a record cell efficiency of 20.3%.39 In a water splitting context only a few articles dealing with CIGS are found,40–44 and among them is one where we recently demonstrated CIGS to be a promising material for the reduction half reaction.45 Using pure CIGS as a photocathode for water reduction gives rise to problems both with charge transport, catalytic activity and stability, as well as only providing a driving force for one of the half reactions. The potential of CIGS is best realized by utilizing it as a photo-absorber for which it has excellent properties. For the charge separation at least two approaches have been tested. The necessary electric field can be created directly at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface, SEI, or more efficiently by the use of a solid state p–n junction.45 The device used in this work consists of a multilayer structure where the CIGS absorber is synthesized by co-evaporation from elemental sources on top of a sputtered Mo-layer on soda lime glass. The CIGS layer is grown with a somewhat higher gallium content than for conventional CIGS used in solar cells in order to tune the band gap to match the requirements of the catalyst. The p–n junction is made by depositing a CdS buffer layer by chemical bath deposition, followed by a thin sputtered layer of non-intentionally doped ZnO and a thicker layer of aluminum doped ZnO (ZnO:Al). A TEM cross-section illustrating the thickness of the different layers is given in Fig. 1. There are several benefits obtained from performing charge separation through a solid state p–n junction where one of the most important advantages is that the fragile absorber material can be physically protected from the corrosive electrolyte. It also opens up a straightforward way for constructing modules of series interconnected cells, which is considerably harder to do in systems where the charge carrier separation depends on charge imbalance in the SEI.
 Fig. 1  TEM cross-section of the CIGS absorber. The thickness of the CIGS layer is approximately 2 μm. The CIGS layer consists of single crystalline grains of up to 2 μm in width. Some of the grains exhibit twin defects within one grain, which gives changes of contrast within one grain. TEM image by Timo Wätjen. 
The band gap of CIGS can be tuned between 1.0 and 1.7 V by changing the indium to gallium ratio,46 which is very beneficial in terms of designing a series interconnected module with the most suitable voltage for the water splitting reaction. The combination of high absorption, high efficiency, low fabrication cost and tunable band gap gives CIGS a clear advantage for this application as compared to other materials. The band gap and the resulting driving force can thus be tailor made to suit the demands set by specific catalysts as well as the local light conditions. To provide the 1.23 V thermodynamically required for driving the full reaction, as well as the necessary overpotential, three or four cells in series would be optimal, depending on the quality of the catalyst and the composition of the CIGS. In this work three cells with a Ga:(Ga + In) ratio of 0.4 and open circuit voltage of each cell in the order of 650 mV have been synthesized and connected in series. The principal configuration of the series interconnection is given in Fig. 2b. This interconnection scheme is the same as that used by industry today. The first scribe line, P1, is made by laser ablation of the Mo-layer to allow for separation of the back contacts for the individual cells. The second scribe line, P2, is made after the CIGS and buffer layer deposition, but before the deposition of the ZnO:Al window layer. The scribe line is designed to open a conductive path in the CIGS down to the Mo back contact, allowing the subsequent cell interconnection of the front and back contact with ZnO:Al. The last scribe line, P3, is made after the deposition of the ZnO:Al window layer, and isolates the cell front contacts from each other, thereby forcing the current to pass through the Mo-layer to the next cell. The band diagram of this device is given in Fig. 2a. The contact electrodes are made of pre-tinned metal bands, often called tab wires, soldered to the Mo with some additional indium. This gives a module with a Voc of 1.97 V and a Jsc of 11.7 mA cm−2 and an aperture area efficiency of 17%, under AM 1.5G illumination when characterized as a solar cell module. The I–V-curve of this module is given in Fig. 3a. Although this device is made for water splitting purposes, the manufacturing technology is the same as that for the conventional CIGS solar cell technology that has reached the commercial domain, and the construction of the device can thus be anticipated to be cost effective. The efficiency of this device is clearly state-of-the art and close to the world record efficiency for a monolithic thin film solar cell module, which is 17.4%.47
 Fig. 2  (a) Band diagram for the series interconnected module. (b) Principal structure for the way the individual cells are connected. The arrows indicate the direction of conventional current flow. 
 Fig. 3  (a) The golden line represents the I–V-curve under AM 1.5 illumination for a CIGS module with three cells in series. The crimson curve displays the I–V characteristics for the two platinum electrodes in 3 M H2SO4 measured in a two electrode setup. The shaded region represents the expected efficiency when the absorber is connected to the catalysts. (b) Geometrical setup for the PV-electrolysis configuration. (c) Photocurrent against time under chopped illumination for the setup given in (b). 
Up to this point the construction is capable of absorption, charge carrier separation and charge transport, and to complete the device a catalyst module needs to be incorporated. The catalyst module employed in this work consists of two 4 cm2 thin platinum foils, on which platinum nanoparticles have been electrodeposited to increase the surface area. The catalyst can be perceived as two independent modules, one for the oxygen evolving reaction, OER, and one for the hydrogen evolving reaction, HER, whose performance can be evaluated individually by cyclic voltammetry measured in a three electrode setup. They can also be viewed as one independent module where the performance is measured by evaluating the current as a function of potential in a two-electrode setup as given in Fig. 3a. Platinum catalysts are used because they are experimentally forgiving and can relatively easily be optimized to give high current densities with reasonably low overpotentials. It is therefore common practice to use platinum for demonstrating proof of concepts,24,26,27 but in a commercial product for large scale employment it needs to be replaced with something more cost effective. An important point is that using metal electrodes as catalysts makes the device independent of band edge matching, which is highly beneficial as it enables a larger set of absorber materials.
The simplest way to connect the CIGS absorber with the catalyst module is by wires as illustrated in Fig. 3b, where the contact structure to the CIGS-module is created by soldering tab wires to the molybdenum layer. This first configuration can be used to perform what generally is described as PV-electrolysis, and the working point of the device is given by the intercept between the I–V-curves for the absorber and the catalyst module as indicated in Fig. 3a. The expected solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, SHE, is given by the product of the current density at the intercept and the 1.23 V that is thermodynamically required for the reaction as illustrated in Fig. 3a. Ideally the working point should coincide with the maximum power point of the CIGS module, and the STH efficiency is thereby given by eqn (3), where ηsc is the efficiency of the absorber module and Ump is the voltage at the maximum power point of the solar module. As can be seen, there is still some room for improvement in this respect, e.g. by slightly adjusting the Ga/(Ga + In) ratio in the CIGS layer, by using concentrated light to enhance the photo-voltage as in the device by the Turner group26 or by active cooling of the device, but we choose to use solar cell standard test conditions to facilitate comparisons with other types of devices for solar energy conversion. (3)
This geometrical configuration has several advantages over what is described as a photoelectrochemical cell, PEC, where the absorber material is immersed directly in the electrolyte, and where one of the catalysts usually is deposited on top of the absorber material. Low stability is a common problem faced by these cells, which is crucial to solve for a working device. In our device the problem of absorber degradation is completely avoided by transporting the electrons to the free standing catalyst by the use of a short electron conducting wire. It also avoids the unavoidable absorption losses caused by having one of the catalysts on top of the absorber in the path of the incident light. The choice of electrolyte can have a large impact on the efficiency of the device,45 and this concept enables the use of a wider range of more corrosive but also more potent electrolytes, exemplified by the 3 M H2SO4 used here, which worked well together with the Pt catalyst. However, it is clear that the parallel development of efficient low cost catalysts–electrolyte systems will be the next bottleneck to tackle.
The performance of the device under chopped AM 1.5G illumination is given in Fig. 3c where the current is measured as a function of time in a two electrode setup with no external bias. The bubble formation causes the effective surface area to vary somewhat during illumination causing corresponding fluctuations in the current density, which is centered around 8.5 mA cm−2 corresponding to 10.5% STH. The highest photocurrents give as high as 11% STH. This correlates well with what could be expected from Fig. 3a. The results are very promising and can also be sustained when constructing a monolithic PV/PEC device immersed in water as shown below. The area refers to the active area of the CIGS absorber, and does not take into account the contact structure, which for an optimized device would be a few percent of the area.
When the light is turned on, a current spike followed by a decrease down to a stable value, is observed. The initial current spike is caused by both a non-Faradaic process caused by the charging of the double layer and conversion of reaction intermediates already bound to the surface. The subsequent decrease is a consequence of mass transport limitation, which rapidly reaches a stable level. When the light is turned off, a slight negative current is observed. This is also caused by both Faradaic processes in relation to changes in the configuration of the double layer and by the back reaction of reaction intermediates close to, or bound to, the surface.48 After longer times in the dark, the current stabilizes at a level close to zero.
The photocurrent could be improved somewhat by improving the mass transport by stirring the electrolyte. This does, however, increase the demand for separate anode and cathode compartments connected by a salt bridge, since otherwise cycling of the reaction products would occur. To maintain the simplicity of the demonstration device and avoid making separate compartments, no stirring has been employed here, after verifying that cycling of reaction products was not a significant problem in the used setup. The operation of the system is stable, and the high photocurrents have been measured for times corresponding to a full working day without signs of permanent degradation.
In the solar water splitting literature the ultimate design is often conceived as a monolithic design, where the monolith refers to a neat, one piece device that when immersed in water and illuminated will produce both hydrogen and oxygen. It turns out that the step between the PV-electrolysis cell in Fig. 3b and a monolithic PV/PEC design is small and that one easily could be transformed into the other. The stability of the CIGS absorber in the electrolyte is a known problem45 and for a series interconnected module it is also important to prevent the electrolyte from short circuiting the individual cells. Several possible strategies for surface protection are available, where maybe the most obvious for a material scientist would be some form of gas phase deposition like ALD or CVD of a transparent and stable semiconductor, like TiO2. We have however chosen to exemplify this with a more low cost approach, where the CIGS absorber module is encapsulated by a laminating technique utilizing a polymer film of ethylene vinyl acetate and a glass slide and where seals are covered by epoxy resin. Details on the design are found in the Experimental section. The platinum catalyst modules are placed at the back side of the absorber module oriented perpendicular from the backside, which gives a high degree of flexibility. The current transport between the catalyst and the absorber is performed in a tin stripe connected to the molybdenum back contact with an indium solder and to the platinum by silver glue. The device structure is then analogous to the PV/PEC configuration used by Khaselev and Turner26,27 but with a series interconnection concept and without external wiring. A sketch of the device is given in Fig. 4d, and a photograph is given in Fig. 4e.
 Fig. 4  (a) Volume of gas produced under AM 1.5 solar illumination versus time. A measurement over a longer time period is found in the ESI.† (b) Detection of reaction products. (c) Photo of the device in action. (d) Sketch of the monolithic PV/PEC configuration seen from above. (e) Photo of the device. 
To measure the efficiency of the standalone device immersed in water, the photocurrents cannot be measured directly. Instead the volume of the evolved gases was measured and analyzed. Under AM 1.5G illumination the device generates a constant gas flow of 1.57 μl s−1 cm−2 as seen in Fig. 4a. By combining Faraday's law of electrolysis with the ideal gas law eqn (4) gives the volume flow of the gas, where t is the time, R the ideal gas constant, T absolute temperature, F Faraday's constant, P pressure, z number of electrons involved and i the internal photocurrent. For the water splitting reaction as written in eqn (5) four electrons are transferred while three units of gas are formed, giving a z value of 1.33 if the volume refers to the total gas flow. (4) 2H2O(l) → 2H2(g) + O2(g)(5)
The gas flow of 1.57 μl s−1 cm−2 would, according to eqn (4), correspond to an internal photocurrent of 8.2 mA cm−2 which is the same as a STH efficiency of 10%. A convenient number is that 1 mA cm−2 corresponds to a STH efficiency of 1.23% and that 1% STH corresponds to 0.155 μl s−1 cm−2 evolved gases including both oxygen and hydrogen. A mass spectrometer verified that the gases evolved were oxygen and hydrogen as seen in Fig. 4b. The measured molar ratio between hydrogen and oxygen is close to the expected 2:1, with a slight overweight for hydrogen due to some back reaction of produced oxygen.
The efficiency of the device in Fig. 4 which in the literature would be characterized either as a PEC or a PV/PEC device26,29,49 is thus almost equal to the one in Fig. 3 which would be described in terms of PV-electrolysis.
As demonstrated in this work it is easy, both practically and conceptually, to, by only doing small changes in the device design, alternate between photoelectrochemical cells and PV-electrolysis if a p–n junction is included in the design, as they include the very same fundamental processes. It is all about absorbing light, generating, separating, transporting and transferring charge carriers at a catalytic pathway at an electrolyte interface as illustrated in eqn (1) and (2). The only thing that differs is the distance of charge transport and the substrate for the catalyst.
Chen et al.50 have suggested a standardized path for accelerating the investigation of materials for solar water splitting, for which this device only has the 5000 hours stability test left until it reaches the stage where they state that a commercial prototype could be of interest. This device most likely has the potential to pass this test, and the Achilles heel would instead be the cost of the catalyst module. Platinum foils with platinum particles are good for demonstrating proof of concepts, but are not optimal for the efficiency of the oxygen evolution reaction and too expensive for a commercial device. Replacing the catalyst should however be a manageable task. By using the modular approach used in this study the catalyst unit could easily be replaced with another catalyst without affecting the efficiency of the rest of the device. Also important is that by spatially disconnecting the absorber material from the catalyst module, the constraints of the catalyst are much smaller than while they are deposited on top of the absorber material. The catalyst, for example, need not be transparent; it could be combined with any suitable electrolyte and could take virtually any shape possible. Examples of potential water reduction catalysts not involving noble metals described in the literature are for example nanocrystalline MoS2 (ref. 51) and NiMoZn.31 The water oxidation involving the transfer of four electrons is generally considered to be a more challenging process but suggestions found in the literature involve for example cobalt-phosphate,52,53 amorphous FeCoNiO54 and Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ.55 To some extent it is still an open question which catalyst will turn out to be the most competitive in terms of efficiency and cost.
An important but maybe not obvious consequence of having a metal catalyst deposited on a separate electrode instead of directly depositing at the absorber material is that it removes the constraint that the band edges of the absorber need to straddle the redox potential of water. By spatially separating the absorber from the catalyst the Fermi levels in the metal/catalyst interfaces will tune themselves towards the water redox levels, allowing the device to utilize the full driving force in terms of the potential difference between the two poles of the absorber module.
What we have in this second configuration is a neat PV-electrolyser, or alternatively a PV/PEC device, with high efficiency. It represents one of rather few high efficiency devices found in the literature reaching 10% STH efficiency, which is the threshold a device is considered to reach in order to have a chance of being economically and technologically compatible. The series interconnection concept also opens the way for many other photo-absorbers that previously have been disregarded due to their band edge positions or a too low band gap. It should also be pointed out that although the solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies presented here are relatively high, there is still room for further improvements. We are currently working on improved CIGS absorbers, and improved matching of the maximum working point of the absorber module with the catalyst. Thereby several percentage points increase in efficiency is within reach in the near future. One important step is also the inclusion of improved and cheaper catalysts, both the ones found in the literature as well as new concepts, where much could be gained, especially in terms of cost.
Summary and conclusions
In this work we have demonstrated how modules of series interconnected solar absorbers can be used to construct efficient devices for solar hydrogen production. This is an efficient alternative to tandem devices, with the purpose of utilizing efficient solar cell materials with a too low band gap to drive the overall water splitting reaction by itself. Although not a new concept, this is a solution that until now has been almost absent from the literature concerning solar water splitting. We also show how such a device by simple means can be taken from PV-electrolysis into a PV/PEC configuration and be made highly stable in an otherwise corrosive environment, either by encapsulating with glass and polymers or by simply placing the absorber outside the electrolyte. The prototype device presented here is based on series interconnected CIGS absorbers, with which solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies beyond 10% are demonstrated at a solar intensity of 1000 W m−2, both in a PV-electrolysis- and in a PV/PEC configuration.
References
L. Barreto, A. Makihira and K. Riahi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 267–284 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Crabtree, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. V. Buchanan, Phys. Today, 2004, 57, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dunn, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 235–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Turner, G. Sverdrup, M. K. Mann, P. C. Maness, B. Kroposki, M. Ghirardi, R. J. Evans and D. Blake, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 379–407 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 4494–4500 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson and T. Edvinsson, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10298–10305 RSC .
X. Y. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. M. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2331–2336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nowotny, T. Bak, M. K. Nowotny and L. R. Sheppard, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2609–2629 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Su, L. J. Guo, N. Z. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Cristino, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, L. Meda, G. L. Marra and C. A. Bignozzi, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7276–7284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Li, W. J. Luo, M. L. Zhang, J. Y. Feng and Z. G. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 CAS .
Y. Q. Liang, T. Tsubota, L. P. A. Mooij and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17594–17598 CAS .
A. Paracchino, J. C. Brauer, J. E. Moser, E. Thimsen and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7341–7350 CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Brillet, J. H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 823–827 CrossRef .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev, A. Bansal and J. A. Turner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peharz, F. Dimroth and U. Wittstadt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3248–3252 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Rocheleau, E. L. Miller and A. Misra, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Gray, Eng. Sci., 2008, 26–31 Search PubMed .
H. S. Park, H. C. Lee, K. C. Leonard, G. Liu and A. J. Bard, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2277–2287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Standard tables for reference solar spectral irradiances: direct normal and hemispherical on 37° tilted surface, ASTM Standard G173-03, 2012.
S. Haussener, C. X. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922–9935 CAS .
M. T. Winkler, C. R. Cox, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E1076–E1082 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Dhere and A. H. Jahagirdar, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480, 462–465 CrossRef .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 894–897 CAS .
B. Marsen, B. Cole and E. L. Miller, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1054–1058 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Maeda, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, A. Yamada, M. Konagai and K. Domen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 851–853 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moriya, T. Minegishi, H. Kumagai, M. Katayama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3733–3735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Valderrama, P. J. Sebastian, J. P. Enriquez and S. A. Gamboa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 88, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
B. Neumann, P. Bogdanoff and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20980–20989 CAS .
J. T. Jacobsson, C. Platzer-Björkman, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.09.094 .
S. H. Wei, S. B. Zhang and A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 3199–3201 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wallin, U. Malm, T. Jarmar, O. Lundberg, M. Edoff and L. Stolt, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 851–854 CAS .
L. M. Peter, K. G. U. Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 309–322 RSC .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 109–114 RSC .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prévot, R. D. Fagan, Z. Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. J. Siu, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2013, 340 CAS .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures. Movie depicting hydrogen production from the monolithic device. Additional figures for the PV-electrolysis configuration. Data for a longer stability test. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee42519cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar energy is one of the most attractive renewable energy sources as it is abundant, wide spread and basically free. The price for capturing this energy is now starting to get compatible with other energy sources which raises the concern of the intermittent nature of solar irradiation. The production of solar generated hydrogen is both a possible alternative for dealing with this intermittency, as well as for providing a potent fuel and an important feedstock for the industry. Much research has been done in the development of materials usable as photo-electrochemical cells for this purpose. An inherent problem in the design of these devices is the mismatch between the solar spectrum and the thermodynamic and kinetic requirements for the solar water splitting reaction. The standard proposed solution to this problem is to construct tandem devices. Here we instead explore the idea of connecting efficient photo-absorbers in series to obtain the required photo-potential and discuss the similarities between PEC and PV-electrolysis cells. To demonstrate the potential of this approach we manufacture a monolithic device based on series interconnected CIGS cells that reach 10% solar to hydrogen efficiency.

EQE(λ) = LHE(λ)ϕsep(λ)ϕtransηcat	(1)
	(2)


E
g [eV]	1.2	3.6 (3·1.2)	2.26	3.3	3.2 (1.8 + 1.4)

J
max [mA cm−2]	40	13.3	9.7	0.8	16.4

J
max measured in PV electrolysis [mA cm−2]	
	8.2	
	
	120 at 11 suns
11 at 1 sun (calculated)

 	Fig. 1  TEM cross-section of the CIGS absorber. The thickness of the CIGS layer is approximately 2 μm. The CIGS layer consists of single crystalline grains of up to 2 μm in width. Some of the grains exhibit twin defects within one grain, which gives changes of contrast within one grain. TEM image by Timo Wätjen.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Band diagram for the series interconnected module. (b) Principal structure for the way the individual cells are connected. The arrows indicate the direction of conventional current flow.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The golden line represents the I–V-curve under AM 1.5 illumination for a CIGS module with three cells in series. The crimson curve displays the I–V characteristics for the two platinum electrodes in 3 M H2SO4 measured in a two electrode setup. The shaded region represents the expected efficiency when the absorber is connected to the catalysts. (b) Geometrical setup for the PV-electrolysis configuration. (c) Photocurrent against time under chopped illumination for the setup given in (b).	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Volume of gas produced under AM 1.5 solar illumination versus time. A measurement over a longer time period is found in the ESI.† (b) Detection of reaction products. (c) Photo of the device in action. (d) Sketch of the monolithic PV/PEC configuration seen from above. (e) Photo of the device.	 
	(4)
2H2O(l) → 2H2(g) + O2(g)	(5)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental procedures. Movie depicting hydrogen production from the monolithic device. Additional figures for the PV-electrolysis configuration. Data for a longer stability test. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee42519c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
