Progress and development in structural and optoelectronic tunability of supramolecular nonbonded fullerene assemblies  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC00889F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00889F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6194-6216Progress and development in structural and optoelectronic tunability of supramolecular nonbonded fullerene assemblies

        
          
            Saunak 
            Das
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Martin 
            Presselt
          
          
        
      *abcd
aInstitute of Physical Chemistry (IPC), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Helmholtzweg 4, 07743 Jena, Germany
bLeibniz Institute of Photonic Technology (IPHT), Albert-Einstein-Str. 9, 07745 Jena, Germany. E-mail: martin.presselt@leibniz-ipht.de
cCenter for Energy and Environmental Chemistry Jena (CEEC Jena), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Philosophenweg 7a, 07743 Jena, Germany
dSciclus GmbH & Co. KG, Moritz-von-Rohr-Str. 1a, 07745 Jena, Germany
Received 
      15th February 2019
    , Accepted 29th April 2019First published on 29th April 2019AbstractAssembly of fullerenes utilizing self-organization at solvent/non-solvent interfaces or by introducing hydrophobic(philic) end-groups have yielded diverse molecularly-ordered structures. Taking advantage of the multiple π–π interaction between adjacent C60-moieties, structurally elegant and functionally promising fullerene assemblies were synthesized by several groups over the last 20 years. Considerable improvement of device parameters is witnessed if non-covalent fullerene layers assembled using interfacial self assembly are used as electron extraction layer, for example in hybrid solar cells. Thus a pre-determined choice of C60-nanostructures for photovoltaic application stems from an understanding of fullerene–fullerene interaction, a priori from the molecular level. Could we eventually define the outcomes of the last three decades of fullerene aggregation chemistry? This review summarises the course of understanding of optoelectronic properties of fullerene-morphologies, bridging the gap between single molecule and device scale which shall be significant for their judicious implementation in molecular electronics.
Saunak Das
Saunak Das is a final year PhD researcher at the Institute for Physical Chemistry in Friedrich-Schiller University Jena Germany, supervised by Dr Martin Presselt and Professor Dr Benjamin Dietzek. After his bachelors in Chemistry (BSc Hons) from St. Xavier's College, Kolkata (2012) he topped in Masters (MSc General Chemistry) from VIT University, Vellore (2014). His doctoral thesis deals with optoelectronic properties of self-organized fullerenes for hybrid solar cell applications. After obtaining University of Fribourg sponsored Vice Chancellor's research scholarship in 2018 he worked with Dr Michael Saliba at the Adolphe Merkle Institute in Switzerland on fullerene intercalations in perovskite solar cells. He worked under Professor Benjamin Dietzek in Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technologies (IPHT Jena) on transport properties of gel electrolytes for dye sensitized solar cell applications. Saunak will join the Curtis Berlinguette laboratory at University of British Columbia, Vancouver in Canada as a post-doctoral research scientist. His overall research interests include molecular self-assembly, functional interfaces, solar cells, electrochemistry and quantum chemistry.
Martin Presselt
Dr Martin Presselt is currently heading a group at the Leibniz Institute for Photonic Technologies, and is teaching at the Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, and is CSO of the company SciClus GmbH & Co. KG. He obtained his Diploma in Chemistry from FSU Jena in 2004 and his PhD from FSU Jena in Prof. Jürgen Popp's group in 2009. From 2009 to 2011 Dr Presselt joined the groups of Prof. Gerhard Gobsch and Prof. Erich Runge in the Experimental and Theoretical Solid State Physics Departments, respectively, at TU Ilmenau. After a research stay in the group of Prof. Mikalai Kruk, Institute of Molecular and Atomic Physics, National Academy of Sciences, Minsk, he became a postdoctoral fellow of the Carl-Zeiss-Foundation in 2011 and joined the group of Prof. Todd Martínez at the Stanford University from 2012 to 2013. From 2013 to 2016 he headed a research group at the FSU Jena. His research interests include functional interfaces, organic layers and membranes, sensing, optoelectronics, and quantum chemistry.
1. Introduction
Since their first inception in 1985 by Harry Kroto and co-workers, fullerenes and its derivatives have been proven to be ubiquitous electron acceptors.1,2 However, their application in all branches of organic electronics1,3–7 (organic solar cells (oSCs), organic field-effect transistors (oFETs) and hybrid solar cells (hSCs)) bloomed when Krätschmer and coworkers could synthesize them in bulk quantities.8,9 Their unique shape (reminiscent of geodesic domes) with icosahedral (Ih)-symmetry, 12 pentagonal and 20 hexagonal benzene-like rings bearing conjugated π-bonds with sp2-hybridization, reversible hexa-electron accepting9,10 property, small reorganization energy11 and high charge mobility12 have attracted molecular engineers and rendered it significant as n-type organic semiconductor.1,13–15 In spite of these exceptional qualities, fullerene C60 is limited by its poor visible light absorption, limited energy levels with high electron affinities and high synthetic costs.16 The traditional way-around to these issues is molecular variation i.e. by functionalizing C60 with suitable side chains to distort molecular symmetry and improve light absorption (see Fig. 1A), tailor conduction bands and excited states.1 C60-Based donor–acceptor multi-ads (dyads, triads and polyads) with molecular bridges for photo-induced electron transfer reactions with long-lived charged separated states,1,9,17–20 or charged fullerene-polyelectrolyte structures to instigate photo-induced polaron formation with electron-transfer cascades,21 stable enough to mimic biological photosynthesis, are two examples falling in this category. As reported by Imahori and coworkers,11 electron transfer in these fullerene based dyads (e.g. C60-porphyrins) are characterized by reorganization energies much smaller than reference 2-D planar systems (e.g. naphthalenediimides). A second study by Fukuzumi and others,22 reveals the presence of a Markus inverted region by careful analysis of electron transfer rates in a bimolecular reaction between fullerenes (C60, C76, C78) and several arene radicals in solvents of different polarities. Both the above reports unequivocally demonstrate the importance of small reorganization energies in fullerene electron transfer reactions favouring photoinduced charge separation and delaying charge recombination, beneficial for photovoltaic applications. Thanks to the invaluable pioneering works from the research teams of Guldi,1,2,23 Nakamura,24,25 Martin,26–28 Nierengarten,15,29,30 Wudl,31,32 Hirsch,33,34 Troshin,35,36 Echegoyen,37,38 Bonifazi,39,40 Fukuzumi,12,41 Imahori,42,43 D’Souza44 and Diederich,39 a large chemical bank of substituted fullerene derivatives and supramolecular structures with outstanding physicochemical and electron-transport capabilities have been introduced with application in photovoltaics,1 photocatalysis,45 artificial photosynthesis46 and sensors.47
 Fig. 1  Effects of fullerene structure variation and morphologies from few-molecules to device scale (panel A) fullerene single molecule and its derivatives: functionalization usually occurs at C-spiro atom (for one/two side chains) or N-spiro atom (three side chains). (panel B) Chemical structural events which determine optoelectronic properties: 1-D assembly-distance variation between two adjacent buckyballs, symmetry variation at equilibrium intermolecular distance; 2-D assembly (at fixed 1-D assembly structure) variation of number of nearest neighbours in a packing motif, structured or random aggregate growth; (3-D assembly) (at fixed 1 or 2-D structure)-increase in aggregated film thickness. (panel C) Self-assembly of fullerenes occur at several length scales extending from few -nm to -mm scale. (panel D) Device scale: incorporation of assembled morphologies into functional electronic devices. The reference number is provided adjacent to each figure (coloured red/brown within parenthesis). 
Fullerenes can form self-assembled structures extending from sub-nano, meso-, micro- to macro-scales into defined functional materials (see Fig. 1B and C).14,15,48–52 The optoelectronic properties of organic materials largely depend on the nature and propensity of intermolecular interactions, shape, size, packing geometry, mechanical/thermodynamic stability, which eventually controls the functional response of the self-organized material. The major noncovalent forces that dictate fullerene self-assembly are π–π and van der Waals (vdW) interactions.53 Other forces like hydrogen bonding, dipolar, electrostatic or hydrophobic(philic) interactions become important for substituted fullerenes.54 Utilizing these interactions diverse supramolecular architectures of non-covalent oligomeric-C60 are produced from monomeric-fullerene units, upon aggregation.51,53,55–58
In the past decade, reports and reviews have been written on such non-covalent fullerene assemblies and their applications.23,48,53,59–61 Noncovalent fullerene nanostructures produced by directed self-assembly, like dots or disks, wires, sheets, vesicles, cubes etc. are known in literature.53,62 However, reports on the optoelectronic properties of such nonbonded fullerene assemblies have been scarce and demand compilation. As remarked by Nakanishi, the optoelectronic and material properties of supramolecular fullerene-aggregates depend on the precise fullerene arrangement in the assembly.60 Recent reports are reminiscent of Nakanishi's statement and have demonstrated the influence of fullerene's intermolecular interactions on optoelectronic properties.63,64–66 Thus, in contrast to molecular variation/derivatization to alter optoelectronic properties the purpose of this review is to survey the state of the art in supramolecular control of fullerene's optical and electronic properties for implementation in photovoltaics. Therefore, specific reports dealing with fullerene–fullerene non-covalent interactions, the effect of aggregate size, symmetry and intermolecular packing on optoelectronic properties are reviewed here to bridge the gap between single molecule and device level.
The reason to focus on non-covalent instead of covalent aggregates stems from the observation that covalent fullerene oligomers deteriorate optoelectronic parameters in oSCs.5 While, photoinduced covalent dimers cause severe short-circuit current (JSC) losses,67 photon-triggered polymeric fullerene nanowires diminish efficiency (η), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and JSC in fullerene solar cells.56 The deterioration in VOC is often attributed to lower LUMO-energies with respect to single molecules in covalently bonded fullerene assemblies and JSC-loses occur due to formation of trap-states and reduced charge carrier mobility in covalently bound fullerene dimers. Additionally, these oligomers dispose into rigid conformations reducing morphological flexibility.56 A careful literature search thus belittles their significance in organic photovoltaics.
Any three-dimensional assembly can be imagined as a build-up in the third dimension, following growth in one- and two-dimensions. In a self-assembly process first the distance between two fullerenes shrinks up to their equilibrium distance in one-dimension (1-D), with the neighbouring fullerenes placed into their energetically favourable orientation, possibly falling into a typical point group with high or low symmetry elements. Keeping distance and symmetry fixed this 1D-assembly can grow in 2D, when more fullerenes bind to it. Next, keeping distance, symmetry and number of nearest neighbours fixed structured/disordered assembly growth can occur producing a 2D assembly with extended surfaces. Any film, with a typical thickness can be imagined as the above-mentioned 2D assembly stacked on one another. Considering this simple picture, the produced non-covalent morphologies can be subsequently employed for electronic applications. Fig. 1 shows a pictorial demonstration of the above-described situation.
How does single molecules self-interact and assemble into structurally and functionally diverse nanostructures that can be utilized to tune the optical and electronic properties of organic (opto) electronic devices? This essential question can be largely answered by surveying the presently available literature on optoelectronic properties of supramolecular fullerene structures. This is done systematically at increasing supramolecular length scales, cf.Fig. 1 panels:
Panel A: the influence of single-molecule modification on fullerene properties is already reviewed in numerous excellent papers,1,2,13,61,68–74 which is why this topic is not discussed here again.
Panel B: here, we focus on nearest neighbour interactions that are discussed in Section 2 “Nonbonded fullerene clusters”. First, synthesis, preparation and morphologies of nonbonded fullerene structures are discussed. Next, considering nearest neighbour interactions, their optical and electronic properties, and finally correlations between LUMO energies to supramolecular structures are highlighted. A transition to morphological scales is provided by considering the difference between the number of nearest neighbour interactions for bulk and surface states, whose number ratio varies with morphology.
Panel C and D: here, fullerene supramolecular structures and morphologies, which are deemed useful for photovoltaics, are categorized and reviewed and discussed in detail in Section 3 “Morphologies for photovoltaic applications”. Finally, based on the above sequence, design rules are laid forward to construct fullerene supramolecular architectures for functional photovoltaics.75–79
2. Nonbonded fullerene clusters
While covalent fullerene aggregation is primarily photo-assisted, non-covalent aggregation is induced by solvation chemistry,80–82 Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique,83 time-dependent or thermal methods,84 drop drying or ultrasonication.49 Each method, takes advantage of the highly hydrophobic core of fullerene, shape and polarity of the side chains, the solvent polarity and geometry to organize fullerenes into one-, two- or three-dimensional motifs. Controlling symmetry structures in thin films is important considering that optical and charge transfer properties are strongly dependent on supramolecular symmetry.85,86 An estimation of the supramolecular structures of amphiphilic fullerenes can be made from the work of Israelachvili et al. by considering critical packing parameter (CPP). CPP, a dimensionless quantity, can be defined as the ratio of the tail volume and the product of the head area with tail length of a typical surfactant, here amphiphilic fullerenes. Based on the CPP value (0 < CPP < 1), the probable supramolecular structure of amphiphilic fullerene molecules upon aggregation e.g. conical, spherical, cylindrical etc. can be predicted.48,87
More recently, with the advancement of molecular dynamics simulations and high-resolution TEM and AFM measurements, atomistic details of structural orientation and surface properties of fullerene aggregates on thin films are better understood.88 In 2007, Liu et al. visualized single molecules of pyrrolidine-anchor-derivatized C60 with remarkable contrast, on single walled nanotubes (SWCNT).89 This step in single-molecule microscopy was pushed further in 2009, when Koshino et al. demonstrated a high-resolution TEM-movie on the chemistry of fullerene dimerization (nonbonded, single-bonded and [2+2] cycloadducts) reaction inside a CNT, catalysed by changing electron doses.90 This research is of extreme relevance because growth-mechanisms of nonbonded fullerene super-structures begin with the formation of a fullerene-dimer, followed by larger clusters employing the intermolecular interaction between the two buckyballs. Thus, before delving into complicated morphologies, we shall focus on fullerene-dimers, and other smaller clusters (also see Fig. 1).
2.1. Synthesis and molecular structure of fullerene aggregates
Small nonbonded fullerene clusters have not been extensively studied experimentally,63,91 though theoretical studies on their optical absorption spectra92 and electronic characteristics92 considering intermolecular interactions93 have been reported. The reason is the difficulty to experimentally program the intermolecular distance between the two buckyballs above the covalent limit of ∼1.5 Å, and defining the conditions to synthesize clusters with controlled size and symmetry (see Fig. 1B). Synthesis of substituted fullerene dimers has been reported in solution with controlled symmetry by tuning solvent polarity.94 Here the change in dielectric constant (increasing water content in THF/water mixed solvent) resulted in dynamic equilibrium (monomers ↔ H-aggregates ↔ J-aggregates) between fullerenes.94 Though the solvent polarity and concentration onset for fullerene-aggregation in solution is reported for example ∼100 μM in benzonitrile,95 and 0.06 g dm−3 in neat CS2-solvent,96 in the absence of a matrix molecule larger aggregates appear quickly on solvent evaporation due to increase in concentration. Thus, templating C60-aggregates with controlled dimensionalities from pure solution-phase onto solid support is challenging.
Electrodeposition can be one method of choice in order to achieve optically thick fullerene films to achieve reasonable photocurrent (∼0.2 mA cm−2) from C60-aggregate at the toluene/ACN interface, as shown in the past by Kamat and co-workers.97 However, molecularly ordered clusters <100 nm with controlled point group symmetry98 which is necessary for targeted optoelectronic properties and directed charge transfer, is presumably difficult to be fabricated by this method.
To produce fullerene films with controlled symmetry, hydrophilic PEG chains were introduced as an anchoring side groups to C60 and embedded in a fatty acid matrix for controlled aggregate size and thin-film stability.85 A similar approach, but to alter the polarizability of the surrounding medium was taken by Torrente and coworkers99 by mixing hydrocarbons to fine-tune inter-fullerene and fullerene–substrate (Au(111)) interaction. For PEG-substituted C60, the first onset of dimerization was observed at ∼48 μM, below which single molecules exist as confirmed by Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) measurements.85 For thin-film fabrication, the LB technique (dominated by dimers belonging to C2v-point group, as revealed by quantum chemistry; their non-vanishing dipole moment and net amphiphilicity cause the hydrophobic-C60 moiety float above the water surface), and spin-coating (SC) technique (where the variety of dimers might be represented by ensembles of D2h, D2d, C2h, Cs, and also C2v-symmetric dimers) were used (see Fig. 1B, left).85 In the following sections, optical and electronic properties of fullerene aggregates, which are controlled by size, symmetry and supramolecular order are described.
2.2. Optical properties
Optical properties of fullerene aggregates are influenced by the aggregate's size, intermolecular packing, molecular symmetry and supramolecular order. After briefly explaining the UV-vis spectrum of pure fullerene in solutions below, the influence of each of above-mentioned factors are reviewed in this section from available literature.
The optical absorption spectra of fullerene in solutions have been reported for a wide range of solvents,85,95,100 in thin-films8 using different casting methods,85 and in the gas-phase.101 The first extensive report on the absorption spectrum of C60 was reported by Leach and coworkers102 and a complete theoretical description can be found in the work of Orlandi and Negri.103 The electronic transitions in a C60-monomer is dominated by several strong and prominent UV-absorption primarily to the nT1u-excited states (n = 3, 6 and 8). The visible region is contributed by transitions that are symmetry-forbidden in Ih-C60 (due to centrosymmetry) but gain intensity because of Herzberg–Teller intensity borrowing.104 Furthermore, combination bands contribute to these transitions, comprising totally symmetric and nontotally symmetric Jahn–Teller active modes.103 Both symmetry breakdown by molecular variation and morphological changes due to intermolecular aggregation can lead to changes in the optical absorption spectra.85,95

2.2.1. Influence of aggregate size and intermolecular packing. 
Colloidal suspensions of C60 and its derivatives induced by ultrasonication or by concentration overload can induce change in the visible-region of the spectra identified by positive deviation from Lambert–Beer's linearity as noted by Nath et al. in 1998 (Fig. 2).95 Enhanced molar absorption coefficient in the visible region was explained by the Herzberg–Teller intensity borrowing mechanism whereby, the Laporte-forbidden HOMO(hu) → LUMO(t1u) transition becomes partially allowed due to aggregation and symmetry-breakdown. Similar enhancement of visible absorption in fullerene/H2O-suspensions, associated with bathochromism of both peaks (∼270 and ∼350 nm) as a linear function of aggregate size was noticed by Kato and coworkers in 2009 (Fig. 2).105 Here, the aggregates with sizes ranging between 80 and 250 nm were separated using asymmetrical flow field-flow fractionation-technique, and discerned using multi-angle light scattering-technique. In contrast to Nath et al., who observed larger extinction coefficients at large C60-concentration and virtually no spectral shifts of the absorption features at wavelengths shorter than 650 nm but development of low-energy absorption tails, Kato et al. reports systematically bathochromic shifted absorption spectra upon increasing C60's particle size (see Fig. 2, bottom left). This indicates that increasing fullerene concentration not only increases particle 0.2 size but also produces aggregates with different structures for e.g. different intermolecular packing or different solute–solvent interactions. Kato et al. reports that absorption wavelength increases proportionally with particle size when other structural parameters are kept constant (see Fig. 2, bottom right).
 Fig. 2  (Top left) Dependence of optical density at 535 nm to C60-concentration in benzonitrile and (top right) DLS results of the aggregates at 400 μM concentration with (inset) SEM-micrograph of the involved aggregates. (bottom left) UV-vis spectra of C60/H2O clusters of different sizes, and (bottom right) shift in wavelength maxima versus particle size. 
A reasonably good theoretical description of the electronic excitations of isolated C60 and C60-aggregates represented as (C60)N (N = 2, 4, 6, 13) was recently propounded by Alejo and coworkers.92 In line with the above mentioned experimental reports, the authors provide theoretical evidence of appearance of low-energy transitions due to clustering (see Fig. 3). Molecular modelling of large fullerene clusters was followed from the pre-consideration of fcc-crystal. A closer look at the absorption features of (C60)2 revealed appearance of a new peak at 2.82 eV and its successive growth with diminishing fullerene centre-to-centre distance (∼13–10 Å). The region above 3.5 eV presents spectral features formed upon splitting of optically active electronic states making forbidden states weakly active. As the cluster size increases low energy transitions become more prominent given by the formation of interconnecting collective states. However, for both quadrumer and the tridecamer the vis-absorption was diminished due to molecular symmetry. These above-mentioned and a few other reports94,106,107 shed light on the absorption features of fullerene aggregates theoretically and experimentally in solution (for cluster size d > 100 nm). Nevertheless, for viable optoelectronics, aggregates of predefined size and tunable properties should be fabricated on thin-films as discussed in the following section.
 Fig. 3  (A) Effect of intermolecular distance between fullerene centres on the absorption spectra and, (B) CNDOL theoretical absorption spectra of (C60)N models. The low energy region of the spectrum has been inset amplified 30 times (left). The other inset (right) shows half-widths of the c, e and g bands (Bauernschmitt notation108) for the(C60)N models.92 


2.2.2. Influence of symmetry and order. 
In 2016, the absorption properties of PEG-chain functionalized fullerene (MPEGC60)-aggregates with controlled dimensionalities in thin films was reported.85 This study is reminiscent of the report reviewed in the preceding section, about the lack of experimental evidence to account for the absorption spectra of small fullerene clusters. In this context, electronic transitions were controlled both experimentally and theoretically for small fullerene clusters, taking into account a picture of the symmetry effect mentioned by Alejo.92
The salient outcome of this research (see Fig. 4) was that spectroscopic changes instigated by fullerene aggregation were found not just dependent on size as noted by Kato105 and others,109 (see Fig. 3) but also due to intermolecular packing and molecular point group symmetry of the involved aggregates. The aggregate size was controlled by systematic loading of MPEGC60 in stearic acid matrix in LB and spin-coated thin films. The molecular point-group symmetry of these aggregates was altered from parallel C2v (in LB technique110–115) to randomly oriented clusters (spin-coating). Stochastic aggregation in spin-coated films lead to huge visible-absorption. To understand the effect of molecular-symmetry, dimers with ranging point-groups were quantum chemically treated using time dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT). Their low energy electronic transitions were found to be dependent on the angle of π-orbital overlap and dipole–dipole interaction between the monomeric-units in the dimeric species. The experimentally determined spectral signature at 5.3 eV (232 nm) was observed just for dimers but not for fullerene monomers, and can be used as fingerprint to spectrally discriminate non-covalent fullerene aggregates.
 Fig. 4  (right) Cartoon representing the aggregated thin film using LB and spin-coating technique prior to deposition on a solid support; (left) PDS measurements on MPEGC60-dilution series showing effect of random symmetry in spin-coated aggregates (B) and pure concentration induced changes for LB-aggregates (A).85 
In a subsequent report, post-processing annealing on spin-coated MPEGC60 morphologies as a function of temperature was performed to induce formation of molecularly packed and differently sized morphologies.15 The visible spectral features undergo significant red-shifts while the UV-features shift, but marginally. This is because the UV-region comprises of intramolecular allowed or monomeric transitions103 that are rather insensitive to particle growth while the visible part of the spectrum comprises of π-delocalized states, which are both size and packing dependent.85,92 It was proposed that aggregate growth cannot provide a holistic description to temperature induced morphological changes.15 Thus, this change was assigned to denser molecular packing, which enhances the degree of noncovalent π-delocalization promoting low-energy transitions, in-line-with the results of Alejo.92 A decreased molecular symmetry also causes enhanced oscillator strengths of the transitions in the visible part of the spectrum.95 Between fullerene LB films and buckled fullerene nanosheets made by liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation (LLIP), the latter shows a decreased molecular symmetry. Thus, the LLIP structures show higher vis-absorption in spite of being less densely packed. From these reports, the influence of fullerene aggregation on absorption spectra could be explained, both theoretically and experimentally.

2.3. Electronic properties
The strong electron-accepting property of fullerenes is primarily attributed to its low-lying lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies.10,116,117 The five-fold degenerate HOMO(h1u) and three-fold degenerate LUMO(T1u)118 with small energy-gap offer the possibility to accept multi-electrons by a single buckyball. Further, fullerene anions comprise of low lying excited states (∼0.2–0.4 eV), which were quantum-chemically shown to promote charge separation rate without affecting the charge recombination rate.119 Discussion of unoccupied states are of particular importance in fullerene films, because electron-injection from potential photo-excited donor molecules occurs to them.120 Thus, relative energies and number of unoccupied states determine the efficiency of charge transfer at the donor/fullerene interface.119 Next, in organic donor containing fullerene solar cells, fullerene LUMO energies play significant role in determining donor's photo-stability mediated by generation of superoxide anions (O2−). Particularly, fullerenes with high LUMOs readily transfers its photogenerated electrons to oxygen leading to superoxide anion formation which degrades the donor counterpart. In addition, the air stability of fullerene acceptor layers also depend on fullerene LUMO energies and energetic disorder. Tailoring fullerene LUMOs below that of the trap energy of environmental oxidants (oxygen and water), has been suggested as possible means to achieve air-stable fullerene films. Because of these reasons tuning the frontier orbital energies of fullerenes by aggregation/structural-modification are of particular importance to push the resultant parameters of electronic devices.1,121 Electroactive functional groups modulate the electronic structure of fullerenes by pushing/withdrawing electronic cloud from the buckyball. Naturally, the degeneracy of LUMO is lost and the frontier-orbital energies tend to move either towards, or away from vacuum depending on the substitution. For example, the LUMO-energy of phenyl butyric acid derivatized C60 (PCBM) has its LUMO-energy vacuum-shifted by 1.5 eV w.r.t. pristine C60.122 Many articles are already focussed on several fullerene derivatives and their unique electronic properties with stress on their LUMO energies.121,123,124 In contrast, here we focus on how self-assembly of fullerenes into supramolecular structures influence their LUMO energies and subsequently electronic devices.
The evaluation of the frontier orbital energies of fullerene and its derivatives have been primarily done in the solution phase, using electrochemical techniques (cyclic voltammetry,10,125–127 square-wave,128 or Osteryoung square-wave voltammetry10). Nevertheless, few reports focus on gas-phase low temperature photoelectron spectroscopy,116 scanning tunnelling spectroscopy,99,129 ultraviolet (HOMO) and solid state inverse photoelectron130 or laser two-photon photoemission spectroscopy131 (LUMO) to derive the same in gaseous phase or in solid films. Most of these reports feature evaluation of orbital energies at the monomeric level, which are then compared/validated using DFT-based simulation.
It is well known that electronic properties vary substantially based on processing conditions when optoelectronic materials are processed for device application. For e.g. the ionization energy of pentacene molecule can be varied up to 550 meV when processed on Au(111) or SiOx substrates based on their orientation, i.e. flat-lying or upstanding relative to the substrate.132,133 Therefore, a pre-consideration to employ fullerenes, or any molecule in photovoltaics is to carefully scan optoelectronic properties at single molecule, small nonbonded clusters and finally at the device scale to develop a holistic idea about photovoltaic applications (also see Fig. 1). Thus, in the following section we shall discuss electronic property variations taking into consideration aggregate size, packing and whether or not a molecule resides at the surface or bulk component of fullerene assemblies.

2.3.1. Influence of aggregate size, intermolecular packing nearest neighbour interactions. 
Distinguishing the frontier orbital energies between monomer and van der Waals (vdW)-fullerene dimer is challenging experimentally. Shubina et al. employed a peptide-bridged fullerene in order to deliberately induce non-covalent dimerization.91 Between the fullerene compounds 6 and the bridged compound 7 (see Fig. 5) the latter experiences nonbonded interaction between the buckyballs unlike the former. At lower cyclic voltammetry scan rates (0.005 V s−1) an irreversible first reduction wave of 7 was noticed in contrast to the reversible reduction feature of 6, whereas both 6 and 7 present quasi-reversible first-reduction wave at 0.02 V s−1. This electrochemical irreversibility was assigned to a more fiercely binding of electrons by singly reduced vdW-fullerene dimers as compared to monomers. The formation of this so called ‘deep-electron trap’, makes the reversible extraction of the charge non-feasible at low scan-rates. Note a shift of ∼0.1–0.2 V in the reduction wave for the irreversible 7 wave represented by the arrow (see Fig. 5). This suggests that dimer-formation is also associated with a shift in LUMO energies away from vacuum.
 Fig. 5  (top) Chemical structures of the peptide derivatized compounds 6 and 7. (bottom) Cyclic voltammograms of 6 and 7 with scan rates of 0.005 and 0.200 V s−1. Further description of results and experimental methods can be found in ref. 91. 
Taking into account how morphology controls fullerene photonic properties and Shubina's work, further insights were laid forward on the electronic properties of fullerene clusters on thin films in a recent report.15 As mentioned before, both photonic and electronic properties of fullerene clusters depend on three prime factors, namely size, symmetry and packing. Though aggregate symmetry is an independent parameter w.r.t. packing or size, in reality concentration induced fullerene aggregation doesn’t follow rules of symmetry at the molecular level, unless shape dependent self-assembly is enforced while synthesizing aggregates. The probability of formation of centrosymmetric clusters decreases with aggregate size because symmetry elements decreases as cluster size becomes increasingly large. Thus, the influence of centrosymmetry on optoelectronic properties is relevant to monomers, dimers or smaller clusters. Within the periphery of the limited research done, we shall focus on the influence of size and intermolecular packing on the electronic properties of fullerene aggregates.
As the fullerene aggregate size increases, the LUMO energies are stabilized.15,91 Plotting the results from the DFT-calculations on (C60)N (N = 1, 2, 3, 4) for CN-substituted fullerene C61(CN)2,15 demonstrates that ELUMO decreases almost linearly with the number of fullerene units (see Fig. 6A). Shubina et al. also computed the influence of aggregate size on electron affinities and found a similar trend, i.e. electron affinities seem to fall as aggregate size increases.134 It is noteworthy, that packing density or crudely the inter-fullerene distances should be kept constant to understand the dependence of aggregate size on orbital energies because of their strong interdependence, cf.Fig. 6B.
 Fig. 6  (top) Change in LUMO energies relative to monomer with increasing number of molecules calculated by means of TDDFT (BP86/SVP) for molecular clusters with increasing size being in vacuum and in a solvent with infinite relative permittivity (εr). (bottom) Influence of packing density on dimer binding energy (right y-axis) and LUMO energies (left y-axis) for C61(CN)2-dimers computed using TDDFT (TZV/BP86). Shaded part in red in the energy profile represents thermally accessible energy change with respect to intermolecular distance at room temperature. Zero on the right y-axis refers to non-interacting monomers.15 
To understand the effect of molecular surroundings (polarizability screening) on electronic properties scanning tunnelling microscopic (STM) measurements have been performed on organic thin films. Such measurements in its spectroscopic version (ST-spectroscopy) can be performed on metal/electrode surfaces to extract electronic,135 vibrational136 and magnetic information137 at the single molecule regime. Favourable surface adsorption, small charge transfer from the metal to buckyball and the fact that LUMO-resonance alignment of C60/Au(111) composite is largely separated from the Fermi energy (Ef) of C60, allows for the study of fullerenes on Au-surface using STM.56,138–140
In 2008, a significant contribution in this area was made by the Pascual group.99 It dealt with the low temperature scanning tunnelling spectroscopic measurements on C60-units deposited on Au(111) surface (Fig. 7). This report discusses the influence of fullerene aggregate size on frontier orbital energies. At first, isolated C60s were trapped at sufficiently low temperatures (80 K) to prevent molecular aggregation. The alignment of HOMO and LUMO energies were determined by the peaks recorded at negative (−1.7 eV) and at positive biases, respectively (1.1 eV). Annealing-induced aggregation (at room temperature) led to charge screening at a single buckyball by six neighbouring C60-units, leading to 65 meV LUMO-energy stabilization per nearest neighbour and a total ∼400 meV shift in LUMO energy owing to the highly polarizable molecular environment reducing the partial charges in a single fullerene unit (see Fig. 7). The change in HOMO-energies in this case was rather negligible.
 Fig. 7  (a) Individual C60 molecules as deposited on a cold (80 K) Au(111) surface (I = 0.13 nA, V = 2 V) and (c) isosurfaces of constant density of states. (b) Hexagonal phase of C60 deposited on Au(111) after room temperature annealing (I = 0.86 nA, V = −1 V). (d) Comparison of STS-spectra obtained on the systems shown in (a) (top plot, I = 1.1 nA, V = 2 V) and (b) (bottom plot, I = 1.9 nA, V = 2.5 V).99 
Shubina et al. extracted the binding energy versus intermolecular distance profile for singly reduced fullerene dimer (Fig. 8), simulated using different density functionals. To evaluate if their previous result suggesting the higher stability of nonbonded C60-dimer in comparison to the corresponding covalent species is a result of self-interaction error in DFT, they tuned the weight-percentage of Hartree–Fock in a modified hybrid-B3LYP functional and also performed calculations using the long-ranged corrected functional CAM-B3LYP. From the obtained binding energy profiles, they concluded on the higher stability of the vdW dimer anion in comparison to the covalently bound or comparable to [2+2]-cycloadduct analogues, in the same oxidation states. The shallow binding energy minima were noted between 2.4–2.9 Å. From their results they concluded that the first electron affinity of fullerene-oligomers is stabilized by at least 1 eV compared to isolated fullerene and second electron affinity by up to ∼2 eV. They commented about the existence of these interstitial electronic trap states exhibited by vdW-fullerene crystalline or amorphous aggregates, which can severely modulate device performance and limit their applicability as n-type semiconductor channels in electronics.91
 Fig. 8  Calculated potential energy diagrams for the dissociation of (C60)2˙−.91 
One obvious result of their research is the strong connection between intermolecular packing and frontier orbital energies in fullerene aggregates. A realistic scenario where such increased molecular packing can be envisaged is during annealing until its phase transition at elevated temperature, cf. thermal phase transition of fullerene from face centred cubic arrangement to graphite-like phase occurs at temperatures >950 K.141 Annealing can also result in changing of the lattice structure from cubic to face-centred cubic or to a hexagonal closed shell packed structure offering denser packing and/or increased aggregate size.15,64 The effect of intermolecular distances on the total and frontier orbital energies (Fig. 6B) was modelled using DFT calculations (at TZV basis set and BP-86 functional).15 The intermolecular distance between the buckyballs was varied using the symmetry-axis connecting the spiro-carbons. The optimised DFT-results were compared with that of the respective single point geometries at the same distances that were constructed from a pre-optimised dimer having D2d-point-group symmetry. Constrained geometry optimization makes the dimers attain the energetically favourable intermolecular distance of ∼3.0 Å, and with a maximum intermolecular distance of 2.8 Å that can be achieved at ambient conditions.


2.3.2. Joint consideration of supramolecular structure and morphology. 
The two properties aggregate-size and -packing have been discussed in the previous sections for cluster sizes ranging from one to five fullerenes. In these small aggregates almost all molecules might be considered to reside on surface sites. Naturally, for spherical growth the ratio between molecules residing in the bulk versus those residing at surfaces (Nbulk/Nsurface) increases, thus changing the relative impact between surface and bulk states on electronic properties. To conclude on mean electronic properties not just the relative number of bulk and surface states needs to been known, but also their specific properties, such as the LUMO energies. As discussed in the previous section, the LUMO energies depend on the interactions with nearest neighbours, which are naturally less at a surface as compared to the bulk. If the effective LUMO energy difference between bulk and surface molecules (ΔNnnΔELUMO) and the bulk LUMO energy (EbulkLUMO) can be estimated, then the mean LUMO energy can be easily calculated from morphological parameters, according to the following recently introduced equation:15  EbulkLUMO is needed to be extrapolated to the lowest LUMO energy at maximum number of neighbours, if necessary using literature values. LUMO energies can be measured by basic lab-experiments using STM129,138 or electrochemistry116 and ΔNnn, Nbulk and Nsurface can be derived from microscopy analysis (TEM/AFM).15 For semi/non-rigid molecules, where obtaining microscopic single molecular resolution is challenging on thin films, packing information can be derived from absorption spectra142 or X-ray scattering measurements.143
The proposed function can be prospective to extract the LUMO energies for many nonbonded aggregates where the bulk LUMO energy, the shape and packing pattern of the molecular aggregate can be estimated. This function is fitted to experimental data in Fig. 9, the individual points (morphologies) were generated by chemically inducing fullerene aggregation on thin-films using a suite of interfacial sample preparation techniques (Fig. 9). The involved methods (LB, spin-coating (SC), drop-coating (DC), liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation (LLIP) and post-processing annealing were employed for generating structurally different morphologies with systematically increasing size. Fig. 9 demonstrates that aggregates with smaller Nbulk/Nsurface ratios are prone to feature energetically stable LUMO.
 Fig. 9  Dependence of the mean ELUMO on the ratio between bulk and surface molecules Nbulk/Nsurface for different values of effective LUMO energy differences between bulk and surface states ΔNnnΔELUMO. Offsets, i.e. the bulk LUMO energy, of −4.40 eV (solid lines) and −4.30 eV (dashed lines) are assumed. Experimental data with error bars as determined electrochemically and via AFM are included for comparison.15 

3. Morphologies for photovoltaic applications
A large number of reports connecting morphologies of donor (D)–acceptor (A)-systems to overall device performance were published in the last decade.144–147 For binary or ternary systems, the active layer morphology comprises of intermixed and phase separated, crystalline or amorphous phases.148 The morphological vs. optoelectronic property information from these intermixed DA-systems can be better understood, if the exact connection between isolated D- and A-morphologies and that of intermixed phases with resultant device parameters could be explored.149 However, studies on morphology vs. optoelectronic properties in isolated systems are rare in literature, though morphological tunability of many organic optoelectronic materials are well known.149,150 For example, in 2010, Babu et al. published a comprehensive review on the contemporary progress in fullerene morphologies and their photovoltaic implications, especially that of DA-heterojunctions.53 Pure C60 and its derivatives as non-covalent assemblies, polymorphic structures of fullerene derivatives, amphiphilic (conventional and π-hydrophobic fullerene derivatives), and functional liquid crystalline assemblies with their possible applications were discussed. In Table 1, we introduce a comprehensive list of morphology, structure, preparation strategy, domain-size, chemical property, possible applications and reference details of fullerene morphologies based on available literature. The parent fullerenes in Table 1 consist of photoactive and π-electron bearing side-groups which are crucial in determining the structure and properties of the resultant supramolecular assembly. Recent morphologies with demonstrated application in photovoltaics are reviewed in the subsequent sections.
Table 1 Few major classes of fullerenes generating nonbonded morphologies, their structural, physicochemical properties and field of application




Fullerene class
Morphology
Preparation
Domain-size
Physicochemistry
Applications
Ref.




Pristine and small C60 derivatives: nanoribbons, nanowhiskers
Nanosheet/nanoribbon
Liquid/liquid interfacial precipitation
Time-dependent growth >1 μm (length), 500 nm (width) <30 μm (length), 5 μm (width)
Kinetically controlled self assembly into thin nanoribbons. Antisolvent acts as an interfacial glue. Solvent evaporation leads to pure crystalline phases
Photodetectors, single crystal FETs
Hongbing et al.151


Li et al.152


Ogawa et al.153


Miyazawa et al.66


Sathish et al.154


Larsen et al.155


Sathish et al.55






Ionic fullerenes, e.g. oligothiophene chain substituted, C60/porphyrin derivatives, alkylated fulleropyrrolidiniums
Spheres for short-chained derivatives. Nanorods for long-chained, nanotubules for porphyrin substituted.
Periodic sonication in fullerene water-dispersion
Spheres (diameter: 0.5–1.2 μm); nanorods (diameter: 4 nm, length >3 μM) nanotubules (diameter: 30 nm, length: 500 nm)
Hydrophobicity and length of side chain control π–π interaction dictating self-assembly
Optoelectronics (envisioned)
Georgakilas et al.58


Nakanishi et al.156


Guldi157


Sun et al.158


Fullerene D/A dyads: amphiphilic hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene fullerene dyad, fullerene triaryl-amine conjugates, etc.
Spherical micelles for racemic mixtures and bundles of nanofibers for enantiomeric pure compounds
Liquid/liquid interfacial precipitation (CH2Cl2/MeOH)
Spheres (mean diameter: 300 nm); nanofibres (10 μm length)
Sharp Soret band (410 nm) in CH2Cl2; red shifted (450 nm) broader band (spheres); less broad band (440 nm) for fibres. One order of magnitude higher intrinsic charge-carrier mobility of nanofibers (10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1) w.r.t. spheres.
Organic/hybrid photovoltaics
Hizume et al.159


Charvet et al.160


Yamamoto et al.161


Busseron et al.150


Fullerene composite systems: C60/oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) hybrid gelator, C60 porphyrin composite clusters with carbon nanotube wiring.
Photoconducting hybrid nanorods, ellipsoids, cross-linked structure formation.
C60 doping in OPVA. Temperature dependent gelation.
Hybrid nanorods (length: 1–2 μm, width: 125 nm); yield and dimensions increase with C60 loading.65
Gel melting temperature increases with C60 loading until saturation at 6 eq. photoconductivity increases up to ∼22 folds for 1 (OPVA):6 (C60) nanorod morphologies w.r.t. OPVA (1.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1).65
Optoelectronics
Nair et al.65




Composites like C60/porphyrins assembled in pure and mixed solvents.
Photocurrent depends on fullerene's complexation ability.162




Ghosh et al.163






Ellipsoid grains (1.5–2.7 mm) in long and ∼500 nm in the short axis. H2Por-ref/C60-composite show cubic structures (∼50–100 nm).
H2Por–C60 deposited on FTO electrodes show high sum carrier mobility (0.30 cm2 V−1 s−1). Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of H2Por–C60 system (11%) exceeds (H2Por–C60 + C60ref) systems (4%). Sum carrier mobility of wired SWCNT/H2Por–C60 rises to 3 cm2 V−1 s−1. IPCE of 22% reveal large electric communication between C60/porphyrins and SWCNT upon cross linked wiring.


Babu et al.164






XRD patterns of H2Por–C60 depicts weak diffraction peak at 11.6° leading to an interplane distance of ∼7.3 Å.




Xue et al.165






C60/porphyrins form cross-linked ellipsoidal aggregates on wiring with single walled nanotubes (SWCNT).




Imahori et al.162












Umeyama et al.166


H-Bonded fullerene adducts, e.g. C60-barbituric adducts
Ribbons like single crystals
Single crystal development by solvent inter-diffusion for e.g. CHCl3 into o-DCB
Ribbons organized in FCC lattice: center to centre distance of ∼16 Å, along b and c-axes, ∼10 Å along a
Single crystals of adducts present bathochromically shifted polarized fluorescence emission, due to directed H-bonded self assembly
OFETs, photovoltaics
Bassani et al.167


Sanchez et al.168


Hydrophobic substitutions, e.g. C60-adamantane based systems
Spheres, plates, nanoflowers, plicated and cuboid blocks determined by C60:adamantine ratio
LLIP technique in several solvent systems
Micrometer sized structures in CHCl3/DMSO. In MeOH, hexagonally packed long-ranged order structures.
Super-hydrophobicity demonstrated on surfaces; water contact angles for DMSO-mediated structures: 157°; other solvents (145–150°)
Photo-electronics, anti-wetting coatings
Li et al.169


Nakanishi et al.60,62


Hotta et al.170


Fullerene phthalocyanine derivatives
Liquid crystal (LC) columnar motifs
Recrystallization and drop casting
Formation of LC phases above glass transition temperatures. Birefringence texture at 160 °C which is retained after cooling at 25 °C.
Ambipolar charge transport character; hole/electron mobility increases many folds upon heating/cooling. High μh = 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μe = 0.11 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Liquid crystalline fullerene materials for optoelectronics
Hayashi et al.171




The last decade witnessed a massive outburst in the application of fullerene self-assembled monolayers or non-covalent nanostructures in integrated electronic circuits and in photovoltaics (also see Fig. 1D). In 2008, Kennedy et al. introduced ‘shuttlecock-shaped’-fullerenes which are capable of forming 1-D self-assembled structures as discussed below.172 The structural motif of such a fullerene (Fig. 10) was closely related to the penta-aryl Cu-derivatives of fullerenes contributed by Nakamura.173 The advantage of such a derivative lies in their self-assembly into columnar motifs in solid state, which highly favours electron-mobility in the fullerene network. Interestingly, the geometry of fullerene self-assembly is controlled by the substitution on the aryl-group. Particularly, molecular modelling demonstrated that the propensity of fullerenes to assemble with short inter-fullerene distance increases if the aryl group is substituted with a tert-butyl group at the para-position.172 This observation was proven to be correct considering that the molecule 1a behaved as a ‘universal stacker’ (1-D stacking favoured in many solvents, for e.g. ODCB, CS2, PhCl) in contrast to the 3-tolyl system 1b which tends to form solvent dependent morphologies (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  (A) Synthetic strategy and molecular structures of 1a and 1b. (B) Crystal structure of 1a·(C5H12)3. (a) Antiparallel a-axis stacks, viewed along the (a) bc plane and (b) a-axis. (C) Crystal structure of 1b·CHCl3. (a) ac layer, viewed along the b-axis, with disordered CHCl3 solvent shown in space-filling representation. (b) Single b-axis chain, viewed along the a-axis. Carbon atoms with close contacts (3.412–3.551 Å) are highlighted. (c) Crystal structure of 1b·(C6H5Cl)1.875. Single bc layer, viewed along the a-axis. (d) Crystal structure of 1b·C6H4Cl2. Single bc layer, viewed along the a axis, with the solvent removed for clarity. (e) bc layers for 1b C6H4Cl2 viewed along the b axis. The corresponding solvent molecules shown in space-filling representation and hydrogens are removed for clarity.172 
The crystal structure of 1b, represented in Fig. 10 is the only packing structure with the respective casting solvent molecules occupying the interstitial spaces. In contrast, 1b·CHCl3 or 1b·CS2 presents a closed 3-D diamond like network, while alternating nearly hexagonally packed fullerene layers take shape for 1b·PhCl and 1b·PhMe. However, their packing arrangement is different due to different evaporation rates of the two solvents. Thus, while 1a always features a 1-D packing arrangement, 1b displays crystallized forms with non-specific morphologies. This difference is attributed to the side chain functionality of the two fullerenes. As suggested by the authors the fullerene cavity offered by the t-butyl-aryl moieties in 1a is particularly deep causing the formation of 1-D networks in comparison to 1b where the shallowness of the cavity results in wide range of structural motifs. The 1-D stacking nature of 1a produced more interconnected networks or percolation paths beneficial for charge mobility. Thus, a BHJ-solar cell using 1a as the electron acceptor showed an improved short-circuit current (JSC) in comparison to the 1b based device. A statement was made that 1a and 1b have ideal LUMO-energies, owing to minor differences in their side-chain functionality. Therefore, here the nanoscale morphology of the fullerene components was proposed to contribute to higher VOC in 1a-devices w.r.t. 1b. Their morphological differences cause differences in charge trap densities and space-charge builds up; therefore directly contributing to varying built-in potential and finally VOC. A second proposition was that fullerene morphology affects polymer self-organization resulting in modulated polymer conjugation and thus spatially averaged polymer HOMO energies influencing the overall VOC of the devices. These results can also be reassessed using the factors (packing, size and symmetry) influencing fullerene LUMO energies as we presented earlier in Section 2.3.2. Though the precise fullerene–fullerene distances in their device can’t be quantified, we do expect larger 3-D aggregates in 1b w.r.t. 1a-devices. Since LUMO energies decrease quasi-linearly with aggregate size the authors witnessed a reduction in open-circuit voltage for 1b-devices.
In 2015, Zhang et al.174 demonstrated enhanced charge transport in fullerene films containing co-assembled crystalline fullerene domains. Using a high conducting (20 mS cm−1) ionic fullerene tertiary amine derivative (FPI-1) as co-assembling agent, crystalline property of four analyte fullerene derivatives was tuned systematically (see Fig. 11). The three bulky alkylated side chain of FPI-1 prohibits crystallization in FPI-1 only films. Solvent dependent morphology studies demonstrate formation of tubular domains (width ∼20–100 nm) in methanol. This must be due to the critical packing parameter and solute/solvent interaction in 3-chain substituted fullerene derivatives.48 Here, the bulky side chain presumably yields a large tail volume and hence a large packing parameter yielding tubular structures. Also, bulky hydrophilic tails prevents π–π interaction between the buckyballs reducing crystallinity. With 80% loading of FPI-1 in different fullerenes (FPI-2, 3, C60 or Sc3N@C80 and pristine C60), arrays of well-organized fullerenes were observed using TEM. These methanofullerenes and C60 are usually insoluble in polar solvents (methanol in this case), but can form distinct intercalated phases in presence of FPI-1. Thus, crystalline fullerene films with distinct supramolecular order (different lattice spacing derived by selected area diffraction pattern) was fabricated. Next, these structures were studied as electron transport layer in a functional FET device. In contrast to pure FPI-1, co-assembled crystalline structures exhibited one order of magnitude higher current. The authors ascribed this increment of higher conductivity to increased packing and supramolecular order governed by π–π interactions in crystalline co-assemblies.
 Fig. 11  (A) Fullerenes used by Zhang et al.174 (B) Schematic crystalline co-assembly between fullerene derivatives FP-1 and C60. (C) (a) Fullerene oFET device architectures and, (D) Idsvs. Vgs for the fullerene films and co-assembled mixtures M1, M2, M3 and M4.174 
The conventional hydrophobic (C60-head group)/hydrophilic (end-group) based fullerenes lead to a wide pool of diverse functional structures and was pioneered mainly by Nakamura and Hirsch.25,32,175 A relatively newer approach to enable a greater size-control, enhanced hydrophobicity, robustness, and charge carrier mobility of fullerene assemblies is achieved using fully hydrophobic C60-amphiphiles, as investigated by Nakanishi and Imahori.59,170,176 Strategically, these π-hydrophobic C60 amphiphiles comprise of lyophobic long alkyl-chain end-groups that, due to marginally different polarity than the C60-core dispose into supramolecular structures. Fig. 12 demonstrates a small library of alkylated fullerene-assemblies with different length scales.
 Fig. 12  Different supramolecular architectures derived from alkylated-C60 derivatives.60 
In 2014, Hollamby et al. demonstrated high photoconductivities of self-assembled, fully hydrophobic fullerenes, which can assemble into micelles or gel-fibres depending on the bulk of the alkyl side chain upon addition of n-alkanes (Fig. 13).177 The self-assembly is driven by the solvophobic interaction between C60 and n-alkanes that due to energetic mismatch, dispose into phase separated structures. Initially, addition of the n-alkanes leads to an isotropic structure, which reversibly forms gels (commonly called π-gels65) upon cooling. Using a combination of absorption spectroscopy, cryo-TEM and small angle X-ray scattering/small angle neutron scattering, the structure of the aggregates was investigated. Using flash photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (FP-TRMC) measurements the gelled state was found to have higher photoconductivity in comparison to the non-conductive isotropic component. Addition of pristine C60 enhanced the photoconductivity of pristine 1 with the maximum enhancement observed for the 1:10 (C60:1) ratio. The authors suggested that the additive C60 act as a seed towards mesophase growth due to their affinity towards the C60-core.
 Fig. 13  (a) Reversible gel formation upon addition of n-alkane to alkylated fullerene and cooling; (b) solution-state FP-TRMC data for 42 wt% 2 with n-decane, taken at 23 °C (gelled state, 12 h ageing) and 48 °C (isotropic state), λex = 355 nm. Upon laser excitation at t = 0 s, the gelled state gives a clear transient photoconductivity peak (given by the product of quantum efficiency of charge generation (φ) and charge carrier motilities (μ). φΣμmax gives the maximum transient photoconductivity), in the FP-TRMC, indicating its ability to transport charge, while the isotropic state gives no clear signal above the baseline.177 
The pivotal method for organising pristine C60 into complex supramolecular networks is the liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation, or solvent inter-diffusion, whereby the high-hydrophobicity of the C60-core is utilized to organise fullerenes at the interface of two solvents of opposing polarities (Fig. 14).66 Furthermore, not only the fullerene molecular structure, rather the solvent geometry becomes highly important in controlling the geometry of the self-assembled aggregate.81 The pioneering works from Miyazawa and Choi creates the possibility of assembling pristine C60 into nanowires, rods, dots, hexagonal plates and microtubes, nanoballs, nanowhiskers and more recently nanoflowers of ranging sizes and structures.51,178 As a matter of fact, the specific applications of most of these structures remain unexplored. In the following sections, we shall focus on the photovoltaic applications of few recently introduced morphologies with the aid of fullerene supramolecular chemistry discussed in the preceding sections.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of the nanowhiskers and schematic representation of the selective precipitation of (b)–(d) fullerene nanosheets and the structural transformation from 2D nanosheets to (e) 1D nanorods (from (c), (d)) and (f) nanosheets (from (b)).179 
The persistent aim in fullerene based self-assembly is to eradicate the size-limitation of fullerene nanostructures, and synthesize aggregates with exceptional size control, cf. aggregates matching the exciton diffusion length (∼4–10 nm) in organic photovoltaics.49 Unfortunately, most of the crystallization methods, like fast solvent evaporation, surface-templating, solvent-vapour annealing and liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation lead to aggregates larger than ∼150 nm.169,180 Another disadvantage stems from the residual solvents in these nanostructures resulting in poor electron mobility, which requires a further post-processing annealing step to force the solvents out of the morphologies. Annealing induces morphological order but influences the structural-motif of the fullerene layer severely.64,181
In 2015, the Wågberg group published a report on forming PCBM-nanoribbons with ideal dimensions (width of 3.8 ± 0.3; and lengths ∼20–400 nm) without any trapped solvent by adding a second sonication step to the traditional LLIP method (see Fig. 15).49 These nanostructures are synthetically straightforward, and the yield of the nanoribbons can be increased by tuning the polarity of the second solvent during synthesis. At first, the authors synthesised PCBM-nanosheets at the interface of CHCl3/CH3OH made by extended sonication. This resulted in the formation of 1-D nanorod-like structures without solvent molecules what was confirmed by electron-energy loss spectroscopy. The known hexagonal packing of PCBM-crystallites as reported by Zheng et al.182 was confirmed using HRTEM (high-resolution transmission electron microscopy). Considering this to be the starting structure the authors investigated several hexagonal and square mono- and bilayers using DFT-simulations to predict the energetically most stable conformation. These calculations yielded a hexagonal bilayer structure of PCBM-nanorods with A–B stacking pattern (HA,B-1b), with the side chains pointing outwards and the C60s interacting through space, as the energetically most favourable supramolecular structure. This configuration featured a unit cell length of 9.8 Å in the direction ‘a’ and 8.1 Å in the direction ‘b’. Upon sonication this bilayer structure demonstrated a micellar structure where the relatively hydrophilic side chains of PCBM protects the C60-hydrophobic core from the polar methanol units resulting in solvent exclusion. Next, these micellar units break down into multiple smaller structures, which the authors refer to as nanoribbons. These nanoribbons were stable at room temperature and are a result of sonication-induced fissure in large PCBM bilayers. These constitute uniform width equivalent to four PCBM, and lengths ranging between 20–400 nm. Since their width matched the exciton diffusion length (∼4–10 nm) the authors were hopeful that these nanoribbons can behave as ideal electron acceptors in photovoltaics.
 Fig. 15  1. TEM micrographs of 1D PCBM nanostructures. (a) High-resolution TEM image of nanorods, comprising stacks of individual nanoribbons. (b) Larger magnification displays that each nanoribbon is four PCBM molecules wide (3.8 ± 0.3 nm) packed in hexagonal arrangement; 2. Top and side view of a hexagonal PCBM bilayer with an AB stacking (labeled HA,B-1b). White dots represent hydrogen atoms, gray dots represent carbon atoms, and red dots represent oxygen atoms. The most favorable configuration exhibits side chains pointing outward, which helps to minimize the contact of C60 with the polar solvent. The interlayer distance is ∼8.1 Å as determined by dispersion-corrected DFT. 3. MD-simulated and HRTEM micrographs of PCBM nanoribbons. 
Recently, Ran et al. have demonstrated the applicability of these PCBM-nanoribbons (they rename them as nanorods) as additives in lead halide perovskite solar cells, which enhances device efficiency.75 An efficient PL-quenching demonstrated by the perovskite/1D PCBM nanorods evinced efficient charge separation and extraction provoked by a large interfacial contact area offered by these nanorods. In contrast to a pristine PCBM additive,183 adding these nanorods with gradually increasing concentration led to an overall increment in grain size (see Fig. 16). Larger grain size diminished the inter-grain interfacial area, which helps in suppressing charge trap states to remove hysteresis in perovskite devices. Also, lower bulk defect density, efficient charge separation and large carrier mobility was favoured by the formation of a homogeneously wrinkled but bicontinuous network. Sequentially, increasing nanorod concentration from zero to 240 μg ml−1 enhanced the photovoltaic performance from 9.5% to 14.34%. Simultaneously, all other photovoltaic parameters (JSC, FF, VOC) demonstrated significant improvement. The incident photon-to-current conversion was 85% at 490 nm. In contrast to 1D PCBM nanorod devices, normal PCBM perovskites demonstrated poorer performance, for example the best PCBM-device was ∼3% less efficient than the corresponding 1D PCBM nanorod device. The authors also reported enhanced photostability of 1D PCBM nanorod of over 3600 s under constant simulated sunlight irradiation. Particularly, the JSC and FF for the 1D PCBM nanorod devices demonstrated lesser reduction upon irradiation in comparison to pure PCBM ones. Interestingly, VOC remain constant throughout the photostability test.
 Fig. 16  (left) Concentration dependent morphology evolution of PCBM nanorods. (right) Current–voltage curve for the best performing 1-D PCBM nanorod perovskite device. The device architecture is added as an inset with the magnified active layer morphology showing the interfacial exciton diffusion and charge transport pathway.75 
Thus, fullerene-nanostructures synthesized by the simple LLIP/sonication method harbours the possibility to employ them in viable organic electronics. Indeed, an important criteria to employ these structures is to have their size small enough matching exciton diffusion length (∼4–10 nm)49 at the vicinity of the donor, and extended 1D growth, cf. organic nanowires for electron transport towards respective electrodes. Secondly, the Nbulk/Nsurface ratio in the characterized fullerene layer should be tunable by morphology variation effect pushing the LUMO energies towards the conduction band of the electron donor to achieve higher VOC values of the resultant solar cell. In a recent work, both these criteria were accounted for through interfacially assembled amphiphilic fullerenes defining the desired supramolecular structure.15 Liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation yields two structures, one between ∼4 and 10 nm and the other in the size regime ∼100–1000 nm. TEM provided evidence of nanosheets (lateral dimension 100–1000 nm) with fullerenes disposed into supramolecularly ordered structure (within each strip (a = 17.8 ± 1.6 Å) and between strips (b = 23.2 ± 2 Å). In contrast, at the air–water interface LB technique enables formation of locally ordered but globally disordered fingerprint-like layers. The local packing displays distances within and between the fullerene-lines, a = 9.6 ± 0.6 Å and b = 10.2 ± 0.5 Å, respectively (see Fig. 17). In comparison to LB the LUMO energy of the LLIP-structures is vacuum-shifted by 120 mV, due to different Nbulk/Nsurface ratios, (cf.Fig. 9) in different interfaces.
 Fig. 17  (a) Device architecture of the fabricated a-Si:H/MPEGC60 HSCs, (b) band diagram, without contact between the layers, shows energy levels of all components in the device. The HOMO, LUMO energies of MPEGC60 morphologies are added from electrochemical data. (Eg: fundamental band gap, EF: Fermi energy, Ev: vacuum energy, ϕ: work function, X: electron affinity, CB: conduction band, VB: valence band). (c) Differences between supramolecular structures of LLIP and LB films of fullerenes incorporate into the device structure in (a).15 
To test the effect of supramolecular structure variation on solar cell parameters, particularly on VOC, hybrid solar cells were prepared using amorphous-silicon (a-Si) as the p-type donor-absorber layer. Supramolecularly tuned fullerene films served as n-type layer. Because the difference between the quasi-Fermi energy of electrons in MPEGC60 and LUMO-energy is material specific VOC scaled-up linearly with the LUMO-energies from the different morphologies. The device-architecture, sequential variation of LUMO energies and band-energies of all the constituent components of the cell are presented in Fig. 17. Fullerene nanosheet devices with power conversion efficiency (P.C.E.) nearly 2.94%, JSC value of 9.3 mA cm−2 and a VOC of 680 mV set record performances in a-Si:H/fullerene photovoltaics.
3.1. Designing fullerene morphologies for nanoelectronics
Based on the discourse presented in above chapters, we put forward design rules to prepare and judiciously incorporate ideal fullerene morphologies in photovoltaics. ‘Ideal’ in this regard refers to a fullerene, assembled at the device scale, which have the following characteristics:
(a) Absolute LUMO energy: the LUMO energy of the fullerene assembly should be closer to the donor LUMO and have surface dipoles oriented to favourable electronic coupling for efficient charge transfer. Vacuum shifted LUMO particularly improves VOC of the fabricated device. This can be ensured by formation of spatially separated extended fullerene domains. Measures should be taken to prevent 3-D aggregation, since LUMO decreases quasi-linearly with aggregate size.
(b) Supramolecular order: the fullerene assembly should have high local and global supramolecular ordering. This enables excellent continuous electron percolation pathways to the cathode and prevents geminate recombination right after exciton dissociation. Most solar cell parameters (JSC, FF and η) are affected in this regard, cf. LLIP fullerene solar cell data w.r.t. those of LB solar cells. Inter-fullerene separation should not be smaller than 3.0 Å. Singly reduced nonbonded fullerenes behave as charge traps at their binding energy minima (2.8–3.0 Å), which influence both JSC and VOC.
To ensure formation of fullerene assemblies with properties a and b, self-aggregation properties of fullerene in suitable solvent media (film casting solvent) needs to be verified. Using concentration dependent UV-vis spectroscopy (deviation from Lambert–Beer's linearity), DLS measurement and microscopic methods like TEM/AFM both aggregate size, packing and structural morphology can be estimated to ensure no solution phase pre-aggregation. Synthetic methods enabling significant morphology control like the LB technique or LLIP can be utilized to construct assemblies with tunable structure. If uncontrolled 3-D domains form in solution phase, extended sonication results in disruption of large aggregates, and subsequent nucleation and growth of energetically favourable structures. If extended 2-D domains are observable with high supramolecular order, the fullerene assembly can be hypothesized to have reasonable conductivity.15,167 These morphologies have large surface states and minimal bulk states with vacuum shifted-LUMO energies. Thus, using the above systematic and sequential bottom-up protocol structurally unique fullerene morphologies can be composed which may turn out to be potential candidates in organic/hybrid photovoltaics.
4. Conclusions and outlook
Fullerene morphologies as self-assembled photovoltaic materials have revolutionized supramolecular electronics in the last twenty years. Of particular interest are fullerene derivatives constituting amphiphilic and relatively short spacers with excellent physicochemical properties. Suitable synthetic methods like LLIP, and deposition techniques like LB, yields mechanically and thermodynamically stable assemblies imparting robustness, if used in a supramolecular device. Not just novel fullerene derivatives, significant development to synthesize chemically unique morphologies have been realized. We emphasize that, structural, optical and electronic band properties of fullerene non-covalent morphologies needs to be understood in depth to explore and utilize their full potential in electronics. In this review, we particularly discussed optoelectronic properties at the few molecular (small cluster) level to bridge the research gap between single molecule and device scales. We shed light on the effect of aggregate size, packing, supramolecular order and suggested means to gather optoelectronic information from structural parameters for e.g. using number of molecules in bulk versus surface of a 3-D aggregate. In addition, a comprehensive discussion and list of morphologies either envisioned or proven to be beneficial for self-assembled photovoltaics is provided. Most of the current research is focussed on molecular physics at the single molecule regime or in complete fabricated devices in intercalated complex and pure bulk phases. We anticipate that for programmed large scale industrial processing of these morphologies with excellent structure/function control further research in the few-molecular scale is needed.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the “Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung” (FKZ: 03EK3507). The authors thank Professor Dr Benjamin Dietzek for fruitful discussions and remarks during the preparation stages of this manuscript. The authors are indebted to all past and present collaborators and contributors involved in the fullerene project.
References
D. M. Guldi, B. M. Illescas, C. M. Atienza, M. Wielopolski and N. Martin, Fullerene for organic electronics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(6), 1587–1597 RSC .
S. Kirner, M. Sekita and D. M. Guldi, 25th Anniversary Article: 25 Years of Fullerene Research in Electron Transfer Chemistry, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(10), 1482–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Presselt, M. Bärenklau, R. Rösch, W. J. D. Beenken, E. Runge, S. Shokhovets, H. Hoppe and G. Gobsch, Sub-Bandgap Absorption in Polymer-Fullerene Solar Cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97(25), 253302 CrossRef .
K. A. Mazzio and C. K. Luscombe, The future of organic photovoltaics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(1), 78–90 RSC .
M. Presselt, F. Herrmann, H. Hoppe, S. Shokhovets, E. Runge and G. Gobsch, Influence of Phonon Scattering on Exciton and Charge Diffusion in Polymer-Fullerene Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2(8), 999–1003 CrossRef CAS .
M. Presselt, F. Herrmann, S. Shokhovets, H. Hoppe, E. Runge and G. Gobsch, Sub-bandgap absorption in polymer-fullerene solar cells studied by temperature-dependent external quantum efficiency and absorption spectroscopy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 542, 70–73 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, O. Acton, S. K. Hau, F. Huang and A. K. Y. Jen, A Simple and Effective Way of Achieving Highly Efficient and Thermally Stable Bulk-Heterojunction Polymer Solar Cells Using Amorphous Fullerene Derivatives as Electron Acceptor, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21(13), 2598–2600 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kratschmer, L. D. Lamb, K. Fostiropoulos and D. R. Huffman, Solid C60: a new form of carbon, Nature, 1990, 347(6291), 354–358 CrossRef .
C. M. Jäger, T. Schmaltz, M. Novak, A. Khassanov, A. Vorobiev, M. Hennemann, A. Krause, H. Dietrich, D. Zahn, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and T. Clark, Improving the Charge Transport in Self-Assembled Monolayer Field-Effect Transistors: From Theory to Devices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(12), 4893–4900 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, F. Arias, L. Echegoyen, L. P. F. Chibante, S. Flanagan, A. Robertson and L. J. Wilson, Reversible Fullerene Electrochemistry: Correlation with the HOMO-LUMO Energy Difference for C60, C70, C76, C78, and C84, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117(29), 7801–7804 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, H. Yamada, D. M. Guldi, Y. Endo, A. Shimomura, S. Kundu, K. Yamada, T. Okada, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, Comparison of Reorganization Energies for Intra- and Intermolecular Electron Transfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41(13), 2344–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. M. Guldi and S. Fukuzumi, The Small Reorganization Energy of Fullerenes, in Fullerenes: From Synthesis to Optoelectronic Properties, ed. D. M. Guldi and N. Martin, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2002, pp. 237–265 Search PubMed .
C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Functional fullerenes for organic photovoltaics, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(10), 4161–4177 RSC .
T. Nakanishi, N. Miyashita, T. Michinobu, Y. Wakayama, T. Tsuruoka, K. Ariga and D. G. Kurth, Perfectly Straight Nanowires of Fullerenes Bearing Long Alkyl Chains on Graphite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(19), 6328–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, J. Preiß, J. Plentz, U. Brückner, M. von der Lühe, O. Eckardt, A. Dathe, F. H. Schacher, E. Täuscher, U. Ritter, A. Csáki, G. Andrä, B. Dietzek and M. Presselt, Controlling Intermolecular Interactions at Interfaces: Case of Supramolecular Tuning of Fullerene's Electronic Structure, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(32), 1801737 CrossRef .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, K. Barthelmes, M. Wächtler, A. Winter, U. S. Schubert and B. Dietzek, Energy versus Electron Transfer: Controlling the Excitation Transfer in Molecular Triads, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23(20), 4917–4922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D’Souza and O. Ito, Supramolecular donor–acceptor hybrids of porphyrins/phthalocyanines with fullerenes/carbon nanotubes: electron transfer, sensing, switching, and catalytic applications, Chem. Commun., 2009,(33), 4913–4928 RSC .
I. Hiroshi, Creation of Fullerene-Based Artificial Photosynthetic Systems, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80(4), 621–636 CrossRef .
T. Umeyama and H. Imahori, Electron transfer and exciplex chemistry of functionalized nanocarbons: effects of electronic coupling and donor dimerization, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3(4), 352–366 RSC .
R. C. Huber, A. S. Ferreira, R. Thompson, D. Kilbride, N. S. Knutson, L. S. Devi, D. B. Toso, J. R. Challa, Z. H. Zhou, Y. Rubin, B. J. Schwartz and S. H. Tolbert, Long-lived photoinduced polaron formation in conjugated polyelectrolyte-fullerene assemblies, Science, 2015, 348(6241), 1340–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, K. Ohkubo, H. Imahori and D. M. Guldi, Driving Force Dependence of Intermolecular Electron-Transfer Reactions of Fullerenes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2003, 9(7), 1585–1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Guldi, F. Zerbetto, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, Ordering Fullerene Materials at Nanometer Dimensions, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38(1), 38–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Itoh, B. Kim, R. I. Gearba, N. J. Tremblay, R. Pindak, Y. Matsuo, E. Nakamura and C. Nuckolls, Simple Formation of C60 and C60-Ferrocene Conjugated Monolayers Anchored onto Silicon Oxide with Five Carboxylic Acids and Their Transistor Applications, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23(4), 970–975 CrossRef CAS .
T. Homma, K. Harano, H. Isobe and E. Nakamura, Preparation and Properties of Vesicles Made of Nonpolar/Polar/Nonpolar Fullerene Amphiphiles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(16), 6364–6370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Insuasty, C. Atienza, J. L. Lopez and N. Martin, Supramolecular pentapeptide-based fullerene nanofibers: effect of molecular chirality, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(52), 10506–10509 RSC .
G. Fernandez, L. Sanchez, D. Veldman, M. M. Wienk, C. Atienza, D. M. Guldi, R. A. J. Janssen and N. Martin, Tetrafullerene conjugates for all-organic photovoltaics, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73(8), 3189–3196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giacalone and N. Martín, Fullerene Polymers: Synthesis and Properties, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106(12), 5136–5190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Nierengarten, Chemical modification of C60 for materials science applications, New J. Chem., 2004, 28(10), 1177–1191 RSC .
J.-F. Nierengarten, N. Armaroli, G. Accorsi, Y. Rio and J.-F. Eckert, [60]Fullerene: A Versatile Photoactive Core for Dendrimer Chemistry, Chem. – Eur. J., 2003, 9(1), 36–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Sariciftci, D. Braun, C. Zhang, V. I. Srdanov, A. J. Heeger, G. Stucky and F. Wudl, Semiconducting Polymer-Buckminsterfullerene Heterojunctions – Diodes, Photodiodes, and Photovoltaic Cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62(6), 585–587 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Hirsch, M. Brettreich and F. Wudl, Fullerenes: Chemistry and Reactions, Wiley,  2005 Search PubMed .
H. Andreas, The Chemistry of the Fullerenes: An Overview, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32(8), 1138–1141 CrossRef .

          A. Hirsch, M. Brettreich and F. Wudl, Fullerenes: Chemistry and Reactions, Wiley,  2006 Search PubMed .
P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, J. Renz, M. Egginger, J. Y. Mayorova, A. E. Goryochev, A. S. Peregudov, R. N. Lyubovskaya, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, Material Solubility-Photovoltaic Performance Relationship in the Design of Novel Fullerene Derivatives for Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19(5), 779–788 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Troshin and R. N. Lyubovskaya, Organic chemistry of fullerenes: the major reactions, types of fullerene derivatives and prospects for practical use, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2008, 77(4), 323 CrossRef .
D. I. Schuster, K. Li, D. M. Guldi, A. Palkar, L. Echegoyen, C. Stanisky, R. J. Cross, M. Niemi, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Echegoyen and L. E. Echegoyen, Electrochemistry of Fullerenes and Their Derivatives, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31(9), 593–601 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bonifazi, O. Enger and F. Diederich, Supramolecular [60]fullerene chemistry on surfaces, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36(2), 390–414 RSC .
P. Brough, D. Bonifazi and M. Prato, Self-organization of amphiphilic [60]fullerene derivatives in nanorod-like morphologies, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62(9), 2110–2114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi and K. Ohkubo, Long-lived photoinduced charge separation for solar cell applications in supramolecular complexes of multi-metalloporphyrins and fullerenes, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42(45), 15846–15858 RSC .
H. Imahori, Porphyrin–fullerene linked systems as artificial photosynthetic mimics, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2004, 2(10), 1425–1433 RSC .
H. Imahori and Y. Sakata, Fullerenes as Novel Acceptors in Photosynthetic Electron Transfer, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 1999,(10), 2445–2457 CrossRef CAS .
F. D'Souza, G. R. Deviprasad, M. E. El-Khouly, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, Probing the Donor–Acceptor Proximity on the Physicochemical Properties of Porphyrin-Fullerene Dyads: “Tail-On” and “Tail-Off” Binding Approach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123(22), 5277–5284 CrossRef .
A. K. Vorobiev, R. R. Gazizov, A. Y. Borschevskii, V. Y. Markov, V. A. Ioutsi, V. A. Brotsman and L. N. Sidorov, Fullerene as Photocatalyst: Visible-Light Induced Reaction of Perfluorinated α,ω-Diiodoalkanes with C60, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121(1), 113–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rudolf, S. V. Kirner and D. M. Guldi, A multicomponent molecular approach to artificial photosynthesis - the role of fullerenes and endohedral metallofullerenes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45(3), 612–630 RSC .
R. Jain, J. A. Rather and A. D. Vikas, Highly Sensitive and Selective Voltammetric Sensor Fullerene Modified Glassy Carbon Electrode for Determination of Cefitizoxime in Solubilized System, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22(21), 2600–2606 CrossRef CAS .

          J. F. Nierengarten, Fullerenes and Other Carbon-Rich Nanostructures, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2014 Search PubMed .
E. Gracia-Espino, H. R. Barzegar, T. Sharifi, A. Yan, A. Zettl and T. Wågberg, Fabrication of One-Dimensional Zigzag [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-Butyric Acid Methyl Ester Nanoribbons from Two-Dimensional Nanosheets, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(10), 10516–10522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nakanishi, T. Michinobu, K. Yoshida, N. Shirahata, K. Ariga, H. Möhwald and D. G. Kurth, Nanocarbon Superhydrophobic Surfaces created from Fullerene-Based Hierarchical Supramolecular Assemblies, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(3), 443–446 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, C. Park, I. Song, M. Lee, H. Kim and H. C. Choi, Unique Crystallization of Fullerenes: Fullerene Flowers, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nakanishi, Y. Shen, J. Wang, S. Yagai, M. Funahashi, T. Kato, P. Fernandes, H. Möhwald and D. G. Kurth, Electron Transport and Electrochemistry of Mesomorphic Fullerenes with Long-Range Ordered Lamellae, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(29), 9236–9237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Babu, H. Mohwald and T. Nakanishi, Recent progress in morphology control of supramolecular fullerene assemblies and its applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39(11), 4021–4035 RSC .

          X. Chen and H. Fuchs, Soft Matter Nanotechnology: From Structure to Function, Wiley,  2015 Search PubMed .
R. G. Shrestha, L. K. Shrestha, A. H. Khan, G. S. Kumar, S. Acharya and K. Ariga, Demonstration of Ultrarapid Interfacial Formation of 1D Fullerene Nanorods with Photovoltaic Properties, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(17), 15597–15603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Maeyoshi, A. Saeki, S. Suwa, M. Omichi, H. Marui, A. Asano, S. Tsukuda, M. Sugimoto, A. Kishimura, K. Kataoka and S. Seki, Fullerene nanowires as a versatile platform for organic electronics, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 600 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Bairi, K. Minami, J. P. Hill, W. Nakanishi, L. K. Shrestha, C. Liu, K. Harano, E. Nakamura and K. Ariga, Supramolecular Differentiation for Construction of Anisotropic Fullerene Nanostructures by Time-Programmed Control of Interfacial Growth, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(9), 8796–8802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Georgakilas, F. Pellarini, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, M. Melle-Franco and F. Zerbetto, Supramolecular self-assembled fullerene nanostructures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99(8), 5075–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Shen and T. Nakanishi, Exotic Self-Organized Fullerene Materials Based on Uncommon Hydrophobic–Amphiphilic Approach, in Fullerenes and Other Carbon-Rich Nanostructures, ed. J.-F. Nierengarten, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2014, pp. 1–21 Search PubMed .
T. Nakanishi, Supramolecular soft and hard materials based on self-assembly algorithms of alkyl-conjugated fullerenes, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46(20), 3425–3436 RSC .
F. Giacalone and N. Martín, New Concepts and Applications in the Macromolecular Chemistry of Fullerenes, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(38), 4220–4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, S. S. Babu, S. T. Turner, D. Neher, M. J. Hollamby, T. Seki, S. Yagai, Y. Deguchi, H. Moehwald and T. Nakanishi, Alkylated-C-60 based soft materials: regulation of self-assembly and optoelectronic properties by chain branching, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1(10), 1943–1951 RSC .
O. G. Poluektov, J. Niklas, K. L. Mardis, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc, C. Villegas, S. Erten-Ela, J. L. Delgado, N. Martín, A. Sperlich and V. Dyakonov, Electronic Structure of Fullerene Heterodimer in Bulk-Heterojunction Blends, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(7), 1301517 CrossRef .
E. Orgiu, M. A. Squillaci, W. Rekab, K. Borjesson, F. Liscio, L. Zhang and P. Samori, The dramatic effect of the annealing
temperature and dielectric functionalization on the electron mobility of indene-C60 bis-adduct thin films, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(25), 5414–5417 RSC .
V. S. Nair, R. D. Mukhopadhyay, A. Saeki, S. Seki and A. Ajayaghosh, A π-gel scaffold for assembling fullerene to photoconducting supramolecular rods, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(9), e1600142 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kun’ichi, Synthesis of fullerene nanowhiskers using the liquid–liquid interfacial precipitation method and their mechanical, electrical and superconducting properties, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16(1), 013502 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Heumueller, W. R. Mateker, A. Distler, U. F. Fritze, R. Cheacharoen, W. H. Nguyen, M. Biele, M. Salvador, M. von Delius, H.-J. Egelhaaf, M. D. McGehee and C. J. Brabec, Morphological and electrical control of fullerene dimerization determines organic photovoltaic stability, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(1), 247–256 RSC .
N. Martín, L. Sánchez, B. Illescas and I. Pérez, C60-Based Electroactive Organofullerenes, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98(7), 2527–2548 CrossRef .
P. A. Troshin, H. Hoppe, A. S. Peregudov, M. Egginger, S. Shokhovets, G. Gobsch, N. S. Sariciftci and V. F. Razumov, [70]Fullerene-Based Materials for Organic Solar Cells, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4(1), 119–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Collavini and J. L. Delgado, Fullerenes: the stars of photovoltaics, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2(11), 2480–2493 RSC .
R. Ganesamoorthy, G. Sathiyan and P. Sakthivel, Review: Fullerene based acceptors for efficient bulk heterojunction organic solar cell applications, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 102–148 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Deng, S.-Y. Xie and F. Gao, Fullerene-Based Materials for Photovoltaic Applications: Toward Efficient, Hysteresis-Free, and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4(10), 1700435 CrossRef .
O. Vostrowsky and A. Hirsch, Heterofullerenes, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106(12), 5191–5207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, S. M. Seifermann, P. Pierrat and S. Bräse, Synthesis of highly functionalized C60 fullerene derivatives and their applications in material and life sciences, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13(1), 25–54 RSC .
C. Ran, Y. Chen, W. Gao, M. Wang and L. Dai, One-dimensional (1D) [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) nanorods as an efficient additive for improving the efficiency and stability of perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(22), 8566–8572 RSC .
H. Ma, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Interface Engineering for Organic Electronics, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20(9), 1371–1388 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, O. Acton, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Interfacial modification to improve inverted polymer solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18(42), 5113–5119 RSC .
T. Schmaltz, A. Khassanov, H.-G. Steinrueck, A. Magerl, A. Hirsch and M. Halik, Tuning the molecular order of C-60-based self-assembled monolayers in field-effect transistors, Nanoscale, 2014, 6(21), 13022–13027 RSC .
H. R. Barzegar, C. Larsen, N. Boulanger, A. Zettl, L. Edman and T. Wågberg, Self-Assembled PCBM Nanosheets: A Facile Route to Electronic Layer-on-Layer Heterostructures, Nano Lett., 2018, 18(2), 1442–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. I. Prylutskyy, A. S. Buchelnikov, D. P. Voronin, V. V. Kostjukov, U. Ritter, J. A. Parkinson and M. P. Evstigneev, C60 fullerene aggregation in aqueous solution, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15(23), 9351–9360 RSC .
C. Park, H. J. Song and H. C. Choi, The critical effect of solvent geometry on the determination of fullerene (C60) self-assembly into dot, wire and disk structures, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4803–4805 RSC .
A. Cid, Ó. A. Moldes, M. S. Diniz, B. Rodríguez-González and J. C. Mejuto, Redispersion and Self-Assembly of C60 Fullerene in Water and Toluene, ACS Omega, 2017, 2(5), 2368–2373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Tang, E. Watkins, J. Majewski and H.-L. Wang, Synthesis and Characterization of Amphiphilic Fullerenes and Their Langmuir–Blodgett Films, Langmuir, 2005, 21(4), 1416–1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Xiao, W. c. Ho, L. y. Chow, K. K. Fung and J. Zheng, Physical vapor deposition of highly oriented fullerene C60 films on amorphous substrates, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77(7), 3572–3574 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, F. Herrmann-Westendorf, F. H. Schacher, E. Tauscher, U. Ritter, B. Dietzek and M. Presselt, Controlling Electronic Transitions in Fullerene van der Waals Aggregates via Supramolecular Assembly, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(33), 21512–21521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sukegawa, C. Schubert, X. Zhu, H. Tsuji, D. M. Guldi and E. Nakamura, Electron transfer through rigid organic molecular wires enhanced by electronic and electron–vibration coupling, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6(10), 899–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Israelachvili, D. J. Mitchell and B. W. Ninham, Theory of self-assembly of hydrocarbon amphiphiles into micelles and bilayers, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1976, 72, 1525–1568 RSC .
E. Nakamura, Atomic-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopic Movies for Study of Organic Molecules, Assemblies, and Reactions: The First 10 Years of Development, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50(6), 1281–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Suenaga and S. Iijima, Imaging the Structure of an Individual C60 Fullerene Molecule and its Deformation Process Using HRTEM with Atomic Sensitivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129(21), 6666–6667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Koshino, Y. Niimi, E. Nakamura, H. Kataura, T. Okazaki, K. Suenaga and S. Iijima, Analysis of the reactivity and selectivity of fullerene dimerization reactions at the atomic level, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2(2), 117–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Shubina, D. I. Sharapa, C. Schubert, D. Zahn, M. Halik, P. A. Keller, S. G. Pyne, S. Jennepalli, D. M. Guldi and T. Clark, Fullerene van der Waals Oligomers as Electron Traps, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(31), 10890–10893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Montero-Alejo, E. Menendez-Proupin, M. E. Fuentes, A. Delgado, F. P. Montforts, L. A. Montero-Cabrera and J. M. Garcia de la Vega, Electronic excitations of C60 aggregates, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(37), 13058–13066 RSC .
S. E. Huber, M. Gatchell, H. Zettergren and A. Mauracher, A precedent of van-der-Waals interactions outmatching Coulomb explosion, Carbon, 2016, 109, 843–850 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kumar and A. Patnaik, Solvent-Polarity-Tunable Dimeric Association of a Fullerene (C60)–N,N-Dimethylaminoazobenzene Dyad: Modulated Electronic Coupling of the Azo Chromophore with a Substituted 3D Fullerene, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17(19), 5327–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nath, H. Pal, D. K. Palit, A. V. Sapre and J. P. Mittal, Aggregation of Fullerene, C60, in Benzonitrile, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102(50), 10158–10164 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Bokare and A. Patnaik, Self-Organization of C60 Nanoparticles in Carbon Disulfide Solution, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(25), 6079–6086 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, S. Barazzouk, K. G. Thomas and S. Hotchandani, Electrodeposition of C60 Cluster Aggregates on Nanostructured SnO2 Films for Enhanced Photocurrent Generation, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104(17), 4014–4017 CrossRef CAS .
K. Van Workum and J. F. Douglas, Symmetry, equivalence, and molecular self-assembly, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2006, 73(3), 031502 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Isabel Fernández, J. F. Katharina and P. Jose Ignacio, Spectroscopy of C60 single molecules: the role of screening on energy level alignment, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20(18), 184001 CrossRef .
M. Alfè, B. Apicella, R. Barbella, A. Bruno and A. Ciajolo, Aggregation and interactions of C60 and C70 fullerenes in neat N-methylpyrrolidinone and in N-methylpyrrolidinone/toluene mixtures, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 405(1–3), 193–197 CrossRef .
G. Qihuang, S. Yuxing, H. Ziwen, Z. Xihuang, Z. N. Gu and Q. Di, Absorption spectrum of gas-phase C 60 in the 200-400 nm region, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 1994, 27(9), L199 CrossRef .
S. Leach, M. Vervloet, A. Desprès, E. Bréheret, J. P. Hare, T. John Dennis, H. W. Kroto, R. Taylor and D. R. M. Walton, Electronic spectra and transitions of the fullerene C60, Chem. Phys., 1992, 160(3), 451–466 CrossRef CAS .
G. Orlandi and F. Negri, Electronic states and transitions in C-60 and C-70 fullerenes, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1(5), 289–308 RSC .
G. Orlandi and W. Siebrand, Theory of vibronic intensity borrowing. Comparison of Herzberg–Teller and Born–Oppenheimer coupling, J. Chem. Phys., 1973, 58(10), 4513–4523 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, A. Nakamura, K. Takahashi and S. Kinugasa, Size effect on UV-Vis absorption properties of colloidal C60 particles in water, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11(25), 4946–4948 RSC .
U. Makhmanov, O. Ismailova, A. Kokhkharov, E. Zakhidov and S. Bakhramov, Features of self-aggregation of C60 molecules in toluene prepared by different methods, Phys. Lett. A, 2016, 380(24), 2081–2084 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rudalevige, A. H. Francis and R. Zand, Spectroscopic Studies of Fullerene Aggregates, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102(48), 9797–9802 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bauernschmitt, R. Ahlrichs, F. H. Hennrich and M. M. Kappes, Experiment versus Time Dependent Density Functional Theory Prediction of Fullerene Electronic Absorption, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120(20), 5052–5059 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nath, H. Pal and A. V. Sapre, Effect of solvent polarity on the aggregation of C60, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327(3–4), 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Yamauchi, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, 25th Anniversary Article: What Can Be Done with the Langmuir-Blodgett Method? Recent Developments and its Critical Role in Materials Science, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(45), 6477–6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Presselt, F. Herrmann-Westendorf, M. Kaufmann, S. Das, M. Hupfer and B. Dietzek, In Colored soaps for photonics, ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY, AMER CHEMICAL SOC 1155 16TH ST, NW, WASHINGTON, DC 20036 USA, 2017.
M. Kaufmann, M. L. Hupfer, T. Sachse, F. Herrmann-Westendorf, D. Weiß, B. Dietzek, R. Beckert and M. Presselt, Introducing double polar heads to highly fluorescent Thiazoles: Influence on supramolecular structures and photonic properties, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 526, 410–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Hupfer, M. Kaufmann, F. Herrmann-Westendorf, T. Sachse, L. Roussille, K. H. Feller, D. Weiss, V. Deckert, R. Beckert, B. Dietzek and M. Presselt, On the Control of Chromophore Orientation, Supramolecular Structure, and Thermodynamic Stability of an
Amphiphilic Pyridyl-Thiazol upon Lateral Compression and Spacer Length Variation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(50), 44181–44191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Hupfer, M. Kaufmann, L. Roussille, J. Preiß, D. Weiß, K. Hinrichs, V. Deckert, B. Dietzek, R. Beckert and M. Presselt, Arylic vs. Alkylic – Hydrophobic Linkers Determine Supramolecular Structure and Optoelectronic Properties of Tripodal Amphiphilic Push–Pull-Thiazoles, Langmuir, 2019, 35(7), 2561–2570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Habenicht, S. Schramm, S. Fischer, T. Sachse, F. Herrmann-Westendorf, A. Bellmann, B. Dietzek, M. Presselt, D. Weiß, R. Beckert and H. Görls, Tuning the polarity and surface activity of hydroxythiazoles - extending the applicability of highly fluorescent self-assembling chromophores to supra-molecular photonic structures, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(5), 958–971 RSC .
B. W. Larson, J. B. Whitaker, X.-B. Wang, A. A. Popov, G. Rumbles, N. Kopidakis, S. H. Strauss and O. V. Boltalina, Electron Affinity of Phenyl–C61–Butyric Acid Methyl Ester (PCBM), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(29), 14958–14964 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Andreoni, The Physics of Fullerene-Based and Fullerene-Related Materials, Springer, Netherlands,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. D. Diener and J. M. Alford, Isolation and properties of small-bandgap fullerenes, Nature, 1998, 393(6686), 668–671 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu and A. Troisi, What makes fullerene acceptors special as electron acceptors in organic solar cells and how to replace them, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(7), 1038–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Berhe, M. T. Rodriguez, E. Park, V. N. Nesterov, H. Pan and W. J. Youngblood, Optoelectronic Tuning of Organoborylazadipyrromethenes via Effective Electronegativity at the Metalloid Center, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53(5), 2346–2348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Han, A. Maurano, J. G. Weis, V. Bulović and T. M. Swager, VOC enhancement in polymer solar cells with isobenzofulvene–C60 adducts, Org. Electron., 2016, 31, 48–55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Derouiche, S. Saidi and A. B. Mohamed, The Effect of Energy Levels of the Electron Acceptor Materials on Organic Photovoltaic Cells, Smart Grid Renewable Energy, 2011, 2(3), 4 Search PubMed .
F. Matsumoto, T. Iwai, K. Moriwaki, Y. Takao, T. Ito, T. Mizuno and T. Ohno, Design of Fullerene Derivatives for Stabilizing LUMO Energy using Donor Groups Placed in Spatial Proximity to the C60 Cage, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77(20), 9038–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-I. Aihara, Correlation found between the HOMO–LUMO energy separation and the chemical reactivity at the most reactive site for isolated-pentagon isomers of fullerenes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2(14), 3121–3125 RSC .
X. Zhang, X.-D. Li, L.-X. Ma and B. Zhang, Electronic and electrochemical properties as well as flowerlike supramolecular assemblies of fulleropyrrolidines bearing ester substituents with different alkyl chain lengths, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(104), 60342–60348 RSC .
S. H. Yoo, J. M. Kum and S. O. Cho, Tuning the electronic band structure of PCBM by electron irradiation, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6(1), 545 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Kutner, P. Pieta, R. Nowakowski, J. W. Sobczak, Z. Kaszkur, A. L. McCarty and F. D'Souza, Composition, Structure, Surface Topography, and Electrochemical Properties of Electrophoretically Deposited Nanostructured Fullerene Films, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(23), 5635–5645 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xie, E. Perez-Cordero and L. Echegoyen, Electrochemical detection of C606- and C706-: enhanced stability of fullerides in solution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114(10), 3978–3980 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sánchez, R. Otero, J. M. Gallego, R. Miranda and N. Martín, Ordering Fullerenes at the Nanometer Scale on Solid Surfaces, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109(5), 2081–2091 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Andreas, Energy level alignment at planar organic heterojunctions: influence of contact doping and molecular orientation, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29(13), 133001 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Dutton and X. Y. Zhu, Unoccupied States in C60 Thin Films Probed by Two-Photon Photoemission, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106(23), 5975–5981 CrossRef CAS .
I. Salzmann, S. Duhm, G. Heimel, M. Oehzelt, R. Kniprath, R. L. Johnson, J. P. Rabe and N. Koch, Tuning the Ionization Energy of Organic Semiconductor Films: The Role of Intramolecular Polar Bonds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(39), 12870–12871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Koch, A. Vollmer, S. Duhm, Y. Sakamoto and T. Suzuki, The Effect of Fluorination on Pentacene/Gold Interface Energetics and Charge Reorganization Energy, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19(1), 112–116 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Zhan, J. A. Nichols and D. A. Dixon, Ionization Potential, Electron Affinity, Electronegativity, Hardness, and Electron Excitation Energy: Molecular Properties from Density Functional Theory Orbital Energies, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107(20), 4184–4195 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Dai, Y.-F. Geng, Q.-D. Zeng and C. Wang, Photo-regulation of 2D supramolecular self-assembly: On-surface photochemistry studied by STM, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28(4), 729–737 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Voigtländer, Vibrational Spectroscopy with the STM, Scanning Probe Microscopy: Atomic Force Microscopy and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2015, pp. 335–340 Search PubMed .
S.-H. Phark and D. Sander, Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy with quantitative insights into magnetic probes, Nano Convergence, 2017, 4(1), 8 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jung, D. Shin, S.-D. Sohn, S.-Y. Kwon, N. Park and H.-J. Shin, Atomically resolved orientational ordering of C60 molecules on epitaxial graphene on Cu(111), Nanoscale, 2014, 6(20), 11835–11840 RSC .
P. Nirmalraj, D. Thompson, A. Molina-Ontoria, M. Sousa, N. Martín, B. Gotsmann and H. Riel, Nanoelectrical analysis of single molecules and atomic-scale materials at the solid/liquid interface, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(10), 947–953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nirmalraj, D. Thompson, C. Dimitrakopoulos, B. Gotsmann, D. Dumcenco, A. Kis and H. Riel, A robust molecular probe for Ångstrom-scale analytics in liquids, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Álvarez-Murga and J. L. Hodeau, Structural phase transitions of C60 under high-pressure and high-temperature, Carbon, 2015, 82, 381–407 CrossRef .
D. Rolland, J. C. Brauer, L. Hartmann, L. Biniek, M. Brinkmann, N. Banerji and H. Frauenrath, Charge separation in an acceptor–donor–acceptor triad material with a lamellar structure, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(6), 1383–1393 RSC .
B. Drasler, D. Drobne, A. Sadeghpour and M. Rappolt, Fullerene up-take alters bilayer structure and elasticity: A small angle X-ray study, Chem. Phys. Lipids, 2015, 188, 46–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Khatiwada, S. Venkatesan, Q. Chen, J. Chen, N. Adhikari, A. Dubey, A. F. Mitul, L. Mohammed and Q. Qiao, Improved performance by morphology control via fullerenes in PBDT-TBT-alkoBT based organic solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(29), 15307–15313 RSC .
S. Lan, H. Yang, G. Zhang, X. Wu, W. Ning, S. Wang, H. Chen and T. Guo, Impact of Fullerene Structure on Nanoscale Morphology and Miscibility and Correlation of Performance on Small Molecules: Fullerene Solar Cell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(38), 21317–21324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, E. J. Kramer, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells: Morphology and Performance Relationships, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(14), 7006–7043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Love, C. M. Proctor, J. Liu, C. J. Takacs, A. Sharenko, T. S. van der Poll, A. J. Heeger, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Film Morphology of High Efficiency Solution-Processed Small-Molecule Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23(40), 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scarongella, J. De Jonghe-Risse, E. Buchaca-Domingo, M. Causa’, Z. Fei, M. Heeney, J.-E. Moser, N. Stingelin and N. Banerji, A Close Look at Charge Generation in Polymer:Fullerene Blends with Microstructure Control, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(8), 2908–2918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ostroverkhova, Organic Optoelectronic Materials: Mechanisms and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(22), 13279–13412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Busseron, J.-J. Cid, A. Wolf, G. Du, E. Moulin, G. Fuks, M. Maaloum, P. Polavarapu, A. Ruff, A.-K. Saur, S. Ludwigs and N. Giuseppone, Light-Controlled Morphologies of Self-Assembled Triarylamine–Fullerene Conjugates, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(3), 2760–2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, J. Yao and H. Fu, Solvent-Assisted Self-Assembly of Fullerene into Single-Crystal Ultrathin Microribbons as Highly Sensitive UV-Visible Photodetectors, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(9), 7573–7582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, B. C. K. Tee, J. J. Cha, Y. Cui, J. W. Chung, S. Y. Lee and Z. Bao, High-Mobility Field-Effect Transistors from Large-Area Solution-Grown Aligned C60 Single Crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(5), 2760–2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ogawa, T. Kato, A. Ikegami, H. Tsuji, N. Aoki, Y. Ochiai and J. P. Bird, Electrical properties of field-effect transistors based on C60 nanowhiskers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88(11), 112109 CrossRef .
M. Sathish, K. Miyazawa and T. Sasaki, Nanoporous Fullerene Nanowhiskers, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(10), 2398–2400 CrossRef CAS .
L. Christian, B. Hamid Reza, N. Florian, W. Thomas and E. Ludvig, On the fabrication of crystalline C60 nanorod transistors from solution, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23(34), 344015 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, M. J. Hollamby, T. Seki, S. Yagai, H. Moehwald and T. Nakanishi, Multifunctional, Polymorphic, Ionic Fullerene Supramolecular Materials: Self-Assembly and Thermotropic Properties, Langmuir, 2011, 27(12), 7493–7501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Guldi, Fullerene–porphyrin architectures; photosynthetic antenna and reaction center models, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31(1), 22–36 RSC .
X. Sun, W. Chen, L. Liang, W. Hu, H. Wang, Z. Pang, Y. Ye, X. Hu, Q. Wang, X. Kong, Y. Jin and M. Lei, Construction of Electron Transfer Network by Self-Assembly of Self-n-Doped Fullerene Ammonium Iodide, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28(23), 8726–8731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hizume, K. Tashiro, R. Charvet, Y. Yamamoto, A. Saeki, S. Seki and T. Aida, Chiroselective Assembly of a Chiral Porphyrin–Fullerene Dyad: Photoconductive Nanofiber with a Top-Class Ambipolar Charge-Carrier Mobility, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(19), 6628–6629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Charvet, Y. Yamamoto, T. Sasaki, J. Kim, K. Kato, M. Takata, A. Saeki, S. Seki and T. Aida, Segregated and Alternately Stacked Donor/Acceptor Nanodomains in Tubular Morphology Tailored with Zinc Porphyrin–C60 Amphiphilic Dyads: Clear Geometrical Effects on Photoconduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(5), 2524–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamamoto, G. Zhang, W. Jin, T. Fukushima, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, T. Minari, K. Tsukagoshi and T. Aida, Ambipolar-transporting coaxial nanotubes with a tailored molecular graphene–fullerene heterojunction, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106(50), 21051–21056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Imahori, M. Ueda, S. Kang, H. Hayashi, S. Hayashi, H. Kaji, S. Seki, A. Saeki, S. Tagawa, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda, M. Shiro, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, Effects of Porphyrin Substituents on Film Structure and Photoelectrochemical Properties of Porphyrin/Fullerene Composite Clusters Electrophoretically Deposited on Nanostructured SnO2 Electrodes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13(36), 10182–10193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, S. Das, A. Saeki, V. K. Praveen, S. Seki and A. Ajayaghosh, A Hybrid Organogel of a Low Band Gap Diketopyrrolopyrrole with PC71BM: Phase Separated Morphology and Enhanced Photoconductivity, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 831 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Babu, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Functional π-Gelators and Their Applications, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(4), 1973–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xue, R. Lu, L. Zhao, D. Xu, X. Zhang, K. Li, Z. Song, X. Yang, M. Takafuji and H. Ihara, Hybrid Self-Assembly of a π Gelator and Fullerene Derivative with Photoinduced Electron Transfer for Photocurrent Generation, Langmuir, 2010, 26(9), 6669–6675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, F. Kawashima, S. Seki, Y. Matano, Y. Nakao, T. Shishido, M. Nishi, K. Hirao, H. Lehtivuori, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, Carbon Nanotube Wiring of Donor–Acceptor Nanograins by Self-Assembly and Efficient Charge Transport, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(20), 4615–4619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chu, G. Raffy, D. Ray, A. D. Guerzo, B. Kauffmann, G. Wantz, L. Hirsch and D. M. Bassani, Self-Assembly of Supramolecular Fullerene Ribbons via Hydrogen-Bonding Interactions and Their Impact on Fullerene Electronic Interactions and Charge Carrier Mobility, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(36), 12717–12723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sánchez, N. Martín and D. M. Guldi, Hydrogen-Bonding Motifs in Fullerene Chemistry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44(34), 5374–5382 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhou, L. Wang, M. Chen, B. Liu, X. Sun, M. Cai and H. Li, Superstructures with diverse morphologies and highly ordered fullerene C60 arrays from 1:1 and 2:1 adamantane–C60 hybrid molecules, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(42), 16375–16385 RSC .
H. Hotta, S. Kang, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda and H. Imahori, Effects of Fullerene Substituents on Structure and Photoelectrochemical Properties of Fullerene Nanoclusters Electrophoretically Deposited on Nanostructured SnO2 Electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(12), 5700–5706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hayashi, W. Nihashi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Seki, Y. Shimizu and H. Imahori, Segregated Donor–Acceptor Columns in Liquid Crystals That Exhibit Highly Efficient Ambipolar Charge Transport, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(28), 10736–10739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Kennedy, A. L. Ayzner, D. D. Wanger, C. T. Day, M. Halim, S. I. Khan, S. H. Tolbert, B. J. Schwartz and Y. Rubin, Self-Assembling Fullerenes for Improved Bulk-Heterojunction Photovoltaic Devices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(51), 17290–17292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Matsuo and E. Nakamura, Selective Multiaddition of Organocopper Reagents to Fullerenes, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108(8), 3016–3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C.-Z. Li, S. T. Williams, S. Liu, T. Zhao and A. K. Y. Jen, Crystalline Co-Assemblies of Functional Fullerenes in Methanol with Enhanced Charge Transport, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(6), 2167–2170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nitta, K. Harano, M. Isomura, E. H. G. Backus, M. Bonn and E. Nakamura, Conical Ionic Amphiphiles Endowed with Micellization Ability but Lacking Air–Water and Oil–Water Interfacial Activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(23), 7677–7680 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Hollamby, C. F. Smith, M. M. Britton, A. E. Danks, Z. Schnepp, I. Grillo, B. R. Pauw, A. Kishimura and T. Nakanishi, The aggregation of an alkyl-C60 derivative as a function of concentration, temperature and solvent type, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20(5), 3373–3380 RSC .
M. J. Hollamby, M. Karny, P. H. H. Bomans, N. A. J. M. Sommerdjik, A. Saeki, S. Seki, H. Minamikawa, I. Grillo, B. R. Pauw, P. Brown, J. Eastoe, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Directed assembly of optoelectronically active alkyl–π-conjugated molecules by adding n-alkanes or π-conjugated species, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6(8), 690–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Shrestha, Q. Ji, T. Mori, K. I. Miyazawa, Y. Yamauchi, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Fullerene Nanoarchitectonics: From Zero to Higher Dimensions, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8(8), 1662–1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sathish, K. I. Miyazawa, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Solvent Engineering for Shape-Shifter Pure Fullerene (C60), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(18), 6372–6373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tada, Interplay between annealing temperature and optimum composition and fullerene aggregation effects in bulk heterojunction photocells based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) and unmodified C60, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120(Part A), 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Wu, Y.-H. Li, C.-J. Tsou, K.-C. Tung, C.-T. Yen, F.-S. Chou, F.-C. Tang, W.-Y. Chou, J. Ruan and H.-L. Cheng, Synergistic Effects of Binary-Solvent Annealing for Efficient Polymer–Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(34), 18967–18976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng and Y. Han, Solvated Crystals Based on [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric Acid Methyl Ester (PCBM) with the Hexagonal Structure and Their Phase Transformation, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116(5), 1598–1604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Perovskite–fullerene hybrid materials suppress hysteresis in planar diodes, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Saunak Das
	Saunak Das is a final year PhD researcher at the Institute for Physical Chemistry in Friedrich-Schiller University Jena Germany, supervised by Dr Martin Presselt and Professor Dr Benjamin Dietzek. After his bachelors in Chemistry (BSc Hons) from St. Xavier's College, Kolkata (2012) he topped in Masters (MSc General Chemistry) from VIT University, Vellore (2014). His doctoral thesis deals with optoelectronic properties of self-organized fullerenes for hybrid solar cell applications. After obtaining University of Fribourg sponsored Vice Chancellor's research scholarship in 2018 he worked with Dr Michael Saliba at the Adolphe Merkle Institute in Switzerland on fullerene intercalations in perovskite solar cells. He worked under Professor Benjamin Dietzek in Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technologies (IPHT Jena) on transport properties of gel electrolytes for dye sensitized solar cell applications. Saunak will join the Curtis Berlinguette laboratory at University of British Columbia, Vancouver in Canada as a post-doctoral research scientist. His overall research interests include molecular self-assembly, functional interfaces, solar cells, electrochemistry and quantum chemistry.

Martin Presselt
	Dr Martin Presselt is currently heading a group at the Leibniz Institute for Photonic Technologies, and is teaching at the Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, and is CSO of the company SciClus GmbH & Co. KG. He obtained his Diploma in Chemistry from FSU Jena in 2004 and his PhD from FSU Jena in Prof. Jürgen Popp's group in 2009. From 2009 to 2011 Dr Presselt joined the groups of Prof. Gerhard Gobsch and Prof. Erich Runge in the Experimental and Theoretical Solid State Physics Departments, respectively, at TU Ilmenau. After a research stay in the group of Prof. Mikalai Kruk, Institute of Molecular and Atomic Physics, National Academy of Sciences, Minsk, he became a postdoctoral fellow of the Carl-Zeiss-Foundation in 2011 and joined the group of Prof. Todd Martínez at the Stanford University from 2012 to 2013. From 2013 to 2016 he headed a research group at the FSU Jena. His research interests include functional interfaces, organic layers and membranes, sensing, optoelectronics, and quantum chemistry.

 	Fig. 1  Effects of fullerene structure variation and morphologies from few-molecules to device scale (panel A) fullerene single molecule and its derivatives: functionalization usually occurs at C-spiro atom (for one/two side chains) or N-spiro atom (three side chains). (panel B) Chemical structural events which determine optoelectronic properties: 1-D assembly-distance variation between two adjacent buckyballs, symmetry variation at equilibrium intermolecular distance; 2-D assembly (at fixed 1-D assembly structure) variation of number of nearest neighbours in a packing motif, structured or random aggregate growth; (3-D assembly) (at fixed 1 or 2-D structure)-increase in aggregated film thickness. (panel C) Self-assembly of fullerenes occur at several length scales extending from few -nm to -mm scale. (panel D) Device scale: incorporation of assembled morphologies into functional electronic devices. The reference number is provided adjacent to each figure (coloured red/brown within parenthesis).	 

 	Fig. 2  (Top left) Dependence of optical density at 535 nm to C60-concentration in benzonitrile and (top right) DLS results of the aggregates at 400 μM concentration with (inset) SEM-micrograph of the involved aggregates. (bottom left) UV-vis spectra of C60/H2O clusters of different sizes, and (bottom right) shift in wavelength maxima versus particle size.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Effect of intermolecular distance between fullerene centres on the absorption spectra and, (B) CNDOL theoretical absorption spectra of (C60)N models. The low energy region of the spectrum has been inset amplified 30 times (left). The other inset (right) shows half-widths of the c, e and g bands (Bauernschmitt notation108) for the(C60)N models.92	 

 	Fig. 4  (right) Cartoon representing the aggregated thin film using LB and spin-coating technique prior to deposition on a solid support; (left) PDS measurements on MPEGC60-dilution series showing effect of random symmetry in spin-coated aggregates (B) and pure concentration induced changes for LB-aggregates (A).85	 

 	Fig. 5  (top) Chemical structures of the peptide derivatized compounds 6 and 7. (bottom) Cyclic voltammograms of 6 and 7 with scan rates of 0.005 and 0.200 V s−1. Further description of results and experimental methods can be found in ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 6  (top) Change in LUMO energies relative to monomer with increasing number of molecules calculated by means of TDDFT (BP86/SVP) for molecular clusters with increasing size being in vacuum and in a solvent with infinite relative permittivity (εr). (bottom) Influence of packing density on dimer binding energy (right y-axis) and LUMO energies (left y-axis) for C61(CN)2-dimers computed using TDDFT (TZV/BP86). Shaded part in red in the energy profile represents thermally accessible energy change with respect to intermolecular distance at room temperature. Zero on the right y-axis refers to non-interacting monomers.15	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Individual C60 molecules as deposited on a cold (80 K) Au(111) surface (I = 0.13 nA, V = 2 V) and (c) isosurfaces of constant density of states. (b) Hexagonal phase of C60 deposited on Au(111) after room temperature annealing (I = 0.86 nA, V = −1 V). (d) Comparison of STS-spectra obtained on the systems shown in (a) (top plot, I = 1.1 nA, V = 2 V) and (b) (bottom plot, I = 1.9 nA, V = 2.5 V).99	 

 	Fig. 8  Calculated potential energy diagrams for the dissociation of (C60)2˙−.91	 

 		 

 	Fig. 9  Dependence of the mean ELUMO on the ratio between bulk and surface molecules Nbulk/Nsurface for different values of effective LUMO energy differences between bulk and surface states ΔNnnΔELUMO. Offsets, i.e. the bulk LUMO energy, of −4.40 eV (solid lines) and −4.30 eV (dashed lines) are assumed. Experimental data with error bars as determined electrochemically and via AFM are included for comparison.15	 

Pristine and small C60 derivatives: nanoribbons, nanowhiskers	Nanosheet/nanoribbon	Liquid/liquid interfacial precipitation	Time-dependent growth >1 μm (length), 500 nm (width) <30 μm (length), 5 μm (width)	Kinetically controlled self assembly into thin nanoribbons. Antisolvent acts as an interfacial glue. Solvent evaporation leads to pure crystalline phases	Photodetectors, single crystal FETs	Hongbing et al.151
Li et al.152
Ogawa et al.153
Miyazawa et al.66
Sathish et al.154
Larsen et al.155
Sathish et al.55


Ionic fullerenes, e.g. oligothiophene chain substituted, C60/porphyrin derivatives, alkylated fulleropyrrolidiniums	Spheres for short-chained derivatives. Nanorods for long-chained, nanotubules for porphyrin substituted.	Periodic sonication in fullerene water-dispersion	Spheres (diameter: 0.5–1.2 μm); nanorods (diameter: 4 nm, length >3 μM) nanotubules (diameter: 30 nm, length: 500 nm)	Hydrophobicity and length of side chain control π–π interaction dictating self-assembly	Optoelectronics (envisioned)	Georgakilas et al.58
Nakanishi et al.156
Guldi157
Sun et al.158
Fullerene D/A dyads: amphiphilic hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene fullerene dyad, fullerene triaryl-amine conjugates, etc.	Spherical micelles for racemic mixtures and bundles of nanofibers for enantiomeric pure compounds	Liquid/liquid interfacial precipitation (CH2Cl2/MeOH)	Spheres (mean diameter: 300 nm); nanofibres (10 μm length)	Sharp Soret band (410 nm) in CH2Cl2; red shifted (450 nm) broader band (spheres); less broad band (440 nm) for fibres. One order of magnitude higher intrinsic charge-carrier mobility of nanofibers (10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1) w.r.t. spheres.	Organic/hybrid photovoltaics	Hizume et al.159
Charvet et al.160
Yamamoto et al.161
Busseron et al.150
Fullerene composite systems: C60/oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) hybrid gelator, C60 porphyrin composite clusters with carbon nanotube wiring.	Photoconducting hybrid nanorods, ellipsoids, cross-linked structure formation.	C60 doping in OPVA. Temperature dependent gelation.	Hybrid nanorods (length: 1–2 μm, width: 125 nm); yield and dimensions increase with C60 loading.65	Gel melting temperature increases with C60 loading until saturation at 6 eq. photoconductivity increases up to ∼22 folds for 1 (OPVA):6 (C60) nanorod morphologies w.r.t. OPVA (1.1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1).65	Optoelectronics	Nair et al.65

	Composites like C60/porphyrins assembled in pure and mixed solvents.	Photocurrent depends on fullerene's complexation ability.162	
	
	Ghosh et al.163

	
	Ellipsoid grains (1.5–2.7 mm) in long and ∼500 nm in the short axis. H2Por-ref/C60-composite show cubic structures (∼50–100 nm).	H2Por–C60 deposited on FTO electrodes show high sum carrier mobility (0.30 cm2 V−1 s−1). Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) of H2Por–C60 system (11%) exceeds (H2Por–C60 + C60ref) systems (4%). Sum carrier mobility of wired SWCNT/H2Por–C60 rises to 3 cm2 V−1 s−1. IPCE of 22% reveal large electric communication between C60/porphyrins and SWCNT upon cross linked wiring.	
	Babu et al.164

	
	XRD patterns of H2Por–C60 depicts weak diffraction peak at 11.6° leading to an interplane distance of ∼7.3 Å.	
	
	Xue et al.165

	
	C60/porphyrins form cross-linked ellipsoidal aggregates on wiring with single walled nanotubes (SWCNT).	
	
	Imahori et al.162

	
	
	
	
	Umeyama et al.166
H-Bonded fullerene adducts, e.g. C60-barbituric adducts	Ribbons like single crystals	Single crystal development by solvent inter-diffusion for e.g. CHCl3 into o-DCB	Ribbons organized in FCC lattice: center to centre distance of ∼16 Å, along b and c-axes, ∼10 Å along a	Single crystals of adducts present bathochromically shifted polarized fluorescence emission, due to directed H-bonded self assembly	OFETs, photovoltaics	Bassani et al.167
Sanchez et al.168
Hydrophobic substitutions, e.g. C60-adamantane based systems	Spheres, plates, nanoflowers, plicated and cuboid blocks determined by C60:adamantine ratio	LLIP technique in several solvent systems	Micrometer sized structures in CHCl3/DMSO. In MeOH, hexagonally packed long-ranged order structures.	Super-hydrophobicity demonstrated on surfaces; water contact angles for DMSO-mediated structures: 157°; other solvents (145–150°)	Photo-electronics, anti-wetting coatings	Li et al.169
Nakanishi et al.60,62
Hotta et al.170
Fullerene phthalocyanine derivatives	Liquid crystal (LC) columnar motifs	Recrystallization and drop casting	Formation of LC phases above glass transition temperatures. Birefringence texture at 160 °C which is retained after cooling at 25 °C.	Ambipolar charge transport character; hole/electron mobility increases many folds upon heating/cooling. High μh = 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μe = 0.11 cm2 V−1 s−1.	Liquid crystalline fullerene materials for optoelectronics	Hayashi et al.171

 	Fig. 10  (A) Synthetic strategy and molecular structures of 1a and 1b. (B) Crystal structure of 1a·(C5H12)3. (a) Antiparallel a-axis stacks, viewed along the (a) bc plane and (b) a-axis. (C) Crystal structure of 1b·CHCl3. (a) ac layer, viewed along the b-axis, with disordered CHCl3 solvent shown in space-filling representation. (b) Single b-axis chain, viewed along the a-axis. Carbon atoms with close contacts (3.412–3.551 Å) are highlighted. (c) Crystal structure of 1b·(C6H5Cl)1.875. Single bc layer, viewed along the a-axis. (d) Crystal structure of 1b·C6H4Cl2. Single bc layer, viewed along the a axis, with the solvent removed for clarity. (e) bc layers for 1b C6H4Cl2 viewed along the b axis. The corresponding solvent molecules shown in space-filling representation and hydrogens are removed for clarity.172	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Fullerenes used by Zhang et al.174 (B) Schematic crystalline co-assembly between fullerene derivatives FP-1 and C60. (C) (a) Fullerene oFET device architectures and, (D) Idsvs. Vgs for the fullerene films and co-assembled mixtures M1, M2, M3 and M4.174	 

 	Fig. 12  Different supramolecular architectures derived from alkylated-C60 derivatives.60	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Reversible gel formation upon addition of n-alkane to alkylated fullerene and cooling; (b) solution-state FP-TRMC data for 42 wt% 2 with n-decane, taken at 23 °C (gelled state, 12 h ageing) and 48 °C (isotropic state), λex = 355 nm. Upon laser excitation at t = 0 s, the gelled state gives a clear transient photoconductivity peak (given by the product of quantum efficiency of charge generation (φ) and charge carrier motilities (μ). φΣμmax gives the maximum transient photoconductivity), in the FP-TRMC, indicating its ability to transport charge, while the isotropic state gives no clear signal above the baseline.177	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of the nanowhiskers and schematic representation of the selective precipitation of (b)–(d) fullerene nanosheets and the structural transformation from 2D nanosheets to (e) 1D nanorods (from (c), (d)) and (f) nanosheets (from (b)).179	 

 	Fig. 15  1. TEM micrographs of 1D PCBM nanostructures. (a) High-resolution TEM image of nanorods, comprising stacks of individual nanoribbons. (b) Larger magnification displays that each nanoribbon is four PCBM molecules wide (3.8 ± 0.3 nm) packed in hexagonal arrangement; 2. Top and side view of a hexagonal PCBM bilayer with an AB stacking (labeled HA,B-1b). White dots represent hydrogen atoms, gray dots represent carbon atoms, and red dots represent oxygen atoms. The most favorable configuration exhibits side chains pointing outward, which helps to minimize the contact of C60 with the polar solvent. The interlayer distance is ∼8.1 Å as determined by dispersion-corrected DFT. 3. MD-simulated and HRTEM micrographs of PCBM nanoribbons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (left) Concentration dependent morphology evolution of PCBM nanorods. (right) Current–voltage curve for the best performing 1-D PCBM nanorod perovskite device. The device architecture is added as an inset with the magnified active layer morphology showing the interfacial exciton diffusion and charge transport pathway.75	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Device architecture of the fabricated a-Si:H/MPEGC60 HSCs, (b) band diagram, without contact between the layers, shows energy levels of all components in the device. The HOMO, LUMO energies of MPEGC60 morphologies are added from electrochemical data. (Eg: fundamental band gap, EF: Fermi energy, Ev: vacuum energy, ϕ: work function, X: electron affinity, CB: conduction band, VB: valence band). (c) Differences between supramolecular structures of LLIP and LB films of fullerenes incorporate into the device structure in (a).15	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
