Organic–inorganic halide perovskite/crystalline silicon four-terminal tandem solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP03788J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03788J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619-1629Organic–inorganic halide perovskite/crystalline silicon four-terminal tandem solar cells†

        
          
            Philipp 
            Löper
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Soo-Jin 
            Moon
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sílvia 
            Martín de Nicolas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bjoern 
            Niesen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Martin 
            Ledinsky
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Sylvain 
            Nicolay
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Julien 
            Bailat
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jun-Ho 
            Yum
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Stefaan 
            De Wolf
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Christophe 
            Ballif
          
        
      ab
aÉcole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Institute of Microengineering (IMT), Photovoltaics and Thin-Film Electronics Laboratory, Rue de la Maladière 71b, 2002 Neuchâtel, Switzerland. E-mail: philipp.loeper@epfl.ch;   Tel: +41-21-6954562
bCentre Suisse d’Électronique et de Microtechnique (CSEM), Jaquet-Droz 1, 2002 Neuchâtel, Switzerland
cLaboratory of Nanostructures and Nanomaterials, Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, v. v. i., Cukrovarnická 10, 162 00 Prague, Czech Republic
Received 
      23rd August 2014
    , Accepted 14th November 2014First published on 17th November 2014AbstractTandem solar cells constructed from a crystalline silicon (c-Si) bottom cell and a low-cost top cell offer a promising way to ensure long-term price reductions of photovoltaic modules. We present a four-terminal tandem solar cell consisting of a methyl ammonium lead triiodide (CH3NH3PbI3) top cell and a c-Si heterojunction bottom cell. The CH3NH3PbI3 top cell exhibits broad-band transparency owing to its design free of metallic components and yields a transmittance of >55% in the near-infrared spectral region. This allows the generation of a short-circuit current density of 13.7 mA cm−2 in the bottom cell. The four-terminal tandem solar cell yields an efficiency of 13.4% (top cell: 6.2%, bottom cell: 7.2%), which is a gain of 1.8%abs with respect to the reference single-junction CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell with metal back contact. We employ the four-terminal tandem solar cell for a detailed investigation of the optical losses and to derive guidelines for further efficiency improvements. Based on a power loss analysis, we estimate that tandem efficiencies of ∼28% are attainable using an optically optimized system based on current technology, whereas a fully optimized, ultimate device with matched current could yield up to 31.6%.
I. Introduction
The photovoltaic market has been dominated for decades by crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells, which account for a market share of about 90%.1 Recently, efficiencies as high as 25.6% were reported for wafer-sized devices,2 approaching the single-junction limit of ≈29% for c-Si solar cells.3 Additionally, the costs of photovoltaic installations scale mainly with the system area, and the key driver to reduce the price of electricity is thus the module efficiency (power per area).4 Consequently, cell concepts enabling ultra-high efficiencies beyond the c-Si single-junction limit with low-cost fabrication are needed to ensure long-term competitiveness of photovoltaics with conventional energy sources. The most promising way towards this aim is to construct a dual-junction tandem solar cell based on c-Si solar cell technology combined with a high-efficiency solar cell with higher band gap. Until recently, the lack of a suitable high-efficiency top cell compatible with low-cost processing was inhibiting the fabrication of such c-Si-based tandem devices. However, this situation changed drastically recently with the rise of organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells.5,6
Since their first application as photovoltaic materials,7,8 perovskites have demonstrated their photovoltaic potential with confirmed solar cell efficiencies of up to 20.1% to date.9 They can be either solution-10,11 or vacuum-processed,12 allowing for simple and cost-effective device fabrication, and can be deposited on glass and also on flexible materials13,14 and prepared at temperatures <150 °C.15,16 Especially interesting for the application in a Si-based tandem solar cell is the reported band gap of methyl ammonium lead triiodide (CH3NH3PbI3) between ∼1.50 eV (ref. 17) and 1.57 eV.18 So far, CH3NH3PbI3 has been reported to be the perovskite material with the best efficiency, exhibiting a steep absorption edge19 and exceptionally low sub-gap absorption.
This renders CH3NH3PbI3 a promising candidate for the high-band gap top cell in a dual-junction tandem solar cell with the bottom cell made of a lower band-gap material such as copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) or c-Si.20
The tandem device can either be designed as a mechanical stack of independently connected cells (four-terminal) or as a monolithic device (two-terminal). In a four-terminal tandem device, the perovskite module, deposited on glass, could also serve as module glass encapsulating the bottom cell. Such a four-terminal tandem device would require only marginal changes to the c-Si bottom cell, and could thus facilitate significantly the market entry for perovskite photovoltaics in the short term.21 The monolithic tandem device requires the adaptation of both cells and their interconnection with a recombination junction, representing thus a more advanced device to be realized in a longer term.
While the virtues of perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cells have been pointed out by several authors,5,20–25 the solutions that have to be delivered to realize efficient systems have not yet been addressed in detail.
In either the four- or two-terminal case, the first critical step towards a perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cell is the realization of a top cell with broad-band transparent electrodes and excellent infrared (IR) transparency.
Semi-transparent perovskite solar cells have been reported using a thin (10 nm) Au layer as a back electrode,26 reaching conversion efficiencies of 3% to 7.5% and showing a transmittance of 20% at 800 nm (ref. 26, ESI†). In another approach, thin layers of aluminium-doped zinc oxide (AZO) and Ag were combined to a AZO/(9 nm Ag)/AZO stack electrode, leading to perovskite solar cell efficiencies of up to 7%, but the transmittance was not reported in this study.27 For organic solar cells, semi-transparent electrodes based on silver (Ag) nanowires (NWs) have been employed,28 but require yet an additional layer for lateral transport to the Ag NW grid and ohmic contact with low resistivity.29
Moreover, metal-based electrodes inherently suffer from their intrinsic absorption, especially in the infrared region.30 Therefore, for high IR transparency, non-metallic electrodes have to be developed. For the application in a monolithic tandem device, the electrode should also be applicable to wafer-sized devices (>100 cm2), and be compatible with industrial metallization schemes such as screen printing or copper plating.
In this article, we present an IR-transparent CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell featuring a transparent back contact free of metallic components. We use this IR-transparent CH3NH3PbI3 solar cell to realize a four-terminal perovskite/c-Si tandem device. Finally we perform a detailed opto-electrical analysis of the tandem system and assess the efficiency potential of optimized perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cells.
II. Broad-band transparent CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells
High-efficiency perovskite solar cells are commonly prepared as a layer stack comprising a transparent conducting oxide electrode on glass, coated with either a planar12 or a scaffold-structured10 charge (electron or hole) transport layer, the perovskite absorber layer, the second charge transport (hole or electron) layer, and a metal rear electrode. Light enters the solar cell through the glass substrate, such that the metal rear electrode acts as a back reflector to boost the photocurrent. For the four-terminal tandem device presented in this article we employ the preparation route presented by Burschka et al. because of its high efficiency of up to 15%,10 but replace the Au back contact by a dedicated transparent hole-collecting electrode. This cell structure, shown in Fig. 1(a), comprises fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) as TCO on glass, which is coated by a compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) layer and a mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) layer. After a 2-step preparation of the perovskite layer, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) is spin-coated and serves as a hole transport material (HTM).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the perovskite solar cell architecture based on preparing the perovskite absorber on a compact TiO2 electrode, which is deposited on FTO-coated glass. Gold (Au) or silver (Ag) is most commonly employed as the hole collecting electrode. For the four-terminal tandem, the metal hole collecting electrode has to be replaced by a broad-band transparent material. (b) Also, for a monolithic perovskite/c-Si tandem, to be realized at a later stage, the transparent hole collecting electrode is a key building block as it would enable using the established top cell preparation route also used in (a). 
Importantly, the transparent rear electrode is not only the first necessary development for a four-terminal tandem device, but also the missing building block for the integration in a monolithic device, sketched in Fig. 1(b).
First, we prepared a transparent electrode made of 100 nm indium tin oxide (ITO) by sputter deposition directly on the spiro-MeOTAD layer. Even though the sputter process is optimized for soft deposition, the current–voltage (IV) curves, shown in Fig. 2, do not even show rectifying characteristics. Reference samples that received an evaporated Au electrode instead of the sputtered ITO on top of the spiro-MeOTAD layer exhibited decent cell results. From this, we conclude that the deteriorated junction characteristics in the case of the ITO electrodes are likely related to damage caused by the ITO sputter deposition process, a phenomenon well-known to detrimentally affect other solar cell technologies as well, including silicon heterojunction solar cells.31
 Fig. 2  Current–voltage curves in dark and under illumination of perovskite solar cells with ITO (dotted line), MoOx/ITO (line), and MoOx/Ag (dashed line) back contact. 
Recently, efficient hole-collectors for a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunction32 and perovskite solar cells33 were realized based on thin layers of evaporated molybdenum oxide (MoOx). The MoOx-based hole collectors were proven to provide a remarkably high transparency without inducing sputter damage in the active layers underneath.32
Inspired by these results, we tested here MoOx layers as hole-collecting buffer layers, capped with 100 nm ITO to provide lateral conductivity to the metallization. With this design, rectifying properties were obtained both in the dark and under illumination as shown by the IV curves in Fig. 2, resulting in a conversion efficiency of 6.2% with an active area of 0.2773 cm2. This result was achieved with a 30 nm MoOx buffer layer, yielding an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 821 mV, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 14.5 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 51.9%. Fig. 2 also shows the IV curves of a reference cell, which was co-processed with the IR-transparent cell but received an evaporated Ag electrode instead of the sputtered ITO. This cell exhibits a decent performance (JSC = 18.51 mA cm−2, VOC = 938 mV, and FF = 67%) with an efficiency of 11.6%.
Obviously, replacing the Ag back contact by ITO strongly affects all cell parameters. The cell with Ag back contact exhibits higher external quantum efficiency (Fig. S1, ESI†) over the full spectral range, especially at higher wavelengths (500 nm to 800 nm), demonstrating better light trapping due to the back reflecting properties of the Ag back contact.
The discrepancy in VOC between the two cells can most likely be explained by the process-induced damage of the ITO sputter deposition – also known from a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunction solar cells31 – being insufficiently shielded by the MoOx layer.
To analyse the origin of the FF loss, we calculate the cells’ series resistances from their dark and light IV curves according to Dicker (eqn (3) in ref. 34). The cell with MoOx/Ag back contact has a series resistance of 7.3 Ω sq−1, and an associated FF loss of 11.4%. However, the cell with transparent MoOx/ITO back contact is affected by a series resistance of 19.6 Ω sq−1, resulting in a FF loss of 24.6%abs. Interestingly, the two cells differ only marginally in their series-resistance-free FF (1.6%abs), indicating that the FF is not affected by the ITO sputter process, but rather the additional series resistance due to lateral transport in the ITO.
While the perovskite cell with transparent MoOx/ITO back contact does not yet attain the performance of high-efficiency devices, its efficiency is comparable to that of other recently presented results obtained with semi-transparent electrodes.26,27 In contrast to the latter, however, the cell presented here features transmission not only in the visible spectral region, but also in the near-infrared spectral region up to 1200 nm (discussed below), which makes this device suitable as a top cell for a c-Si-based tandem device.
Owing to the decent VOC and FF values of the MoOx/Ag reference cell, we expect that the performance of the IR-transparent cell can be boosted to the level of state-of-the-art perovskite devices by fine-tuning the ITO deposition.
III. Four-terminal CH3NH3PbI3/c-Si tandem solar cell
As in a tandem device the c-Si bottom cell operates with reduced generated excess carrier density with respect to standard conditions (0.1 W cm−2 irradiance), it has to be adequately designed to convert the light transmitted through the top cell in an optimal way. In brief, the bottom cell should fulfil two requirements. First, it should exhibit an excellent IR response to utilize the transmitted light as far as possible. Secondly, it should feature well-passivated surfaces and contacts to enable a high open-circuit voltage even at low excess carrier densities. The class of c-Si solar cells that fulfils these two requirements best are a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunction solar cells because of their low parasitic absorption in the infrared region35 and also excellent surface passivation at low excess carrier density.36
Combining the top cell with a transparent MoOx/ITO electrode discussed above with an a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunction bottom cell, we realized the first perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cell, shown in Fig. 3a. We evaluated the performance of this four-terminal tandem solar cell with EQE measurements of the two subcells, i.e. the top cell and the top-cell-filtered bottom cell, and IV measurements of the two cells under the illumination conditions in the tandem configuration.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the mechanically stacked four-terminal tandem. The system consists of a high-efficiency a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunction solar cell and a high-efficiency CH3NH3PbI3 top cell with a metal-free MoOx/ITO transparent electrode. (b) External quantum efficiency and (c) current–voltage curves of the two individually connected subcells in the four-terminal perovskite/Si tandem solar cell. 
The EQE of the four-terminal tandem solar cell is shown in Fig. 3b. The top cell EQE peaks between 400 nm and 460 nm with 76%, and then decreases monotonically towards the CH3NH3PbI3 band gap at ∼800 nm. For comparison, we also plot in Fig. 3b the absorbance A of a CH3NH3PbI3 layer, calculated with the absorption coefficient α reported in ref. 19 in the single pass limit (A = 1 − exp(−α·d)) for a typical absorber thickness of d = 200 nm. The EQE decreases towards the band gap and its similarity to the single pass limit suggests that the degree of light trapping in the top cell is low. Photons between 500 nm and 800 nm that are not converted in the top cell contribute at least partially to bottom cell current. The total tandem EQE is approximately constant up to the CH3NH3PbI3 band gap. For photon energies below the CH3NH3PbI3 band gap (>800 nm), up to 58% of the photons that are incident on the tandem system are transmitted through the top cell and utilized by the c-Si bottom cell.
The bottom cell JSC calculated from the EQE measurement is 13.7 mA cm−2. Please note that only light with wavelengths >500 nm reaches the bottom cell in the tandem configuration. As the SHJ cell employed exhibits excellent surface passivation its collection efficiency does not depend on the incident spectrum. To obtain the correct IV curve of the bottom cell at the illumination conditions in the tandem configuration, we therefore adjusted the illumination intensity using grey filters such that the bottom cell JSC matched the value calculated from the EQE measured in tandem configuration. With this current, the bottom cell exhibits an open-circuit voltage of 689 mV and a fill factor of 76.7%. The IV curves of both subcells of the tandem device are shown in Fig. 3c. In a final tandem module, the two (top and bottom) submodules will have different maximum power points, which makes an individual connection of each submodule to a separate inverter necessary. The total four-terminal tandem device efficiency is thus the sum of the individual subcell efficiencies. The efficiency sum of the four-terminal tandem device presented here is 13.4%, which is 1.8%abs higher than the efficiency of the reference perovskite solar cell with MoOx/Au back contact mentioned above. Table 1 summarizes the parameters of the four-terminal tandem system.
Table 1 Cell parameters of the transparent and reference perovskite solar cells, the SHJ bottom solar cell, and the resulting tandem efficiency (sum)




Cell
Hole contact

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (mV)
FF (%)
Efficiency (%)




Perovskite reference
MoOx/Ag
18.5
938
67.0
11.6


Perovskite top
MoOx/ITO
14.5
821
51.9
6.2


SHJ bottom


13.7
689
76.7
7.2


Perovskite/SHJ tandem








13.4




The total EQE of the tandem system is above 70% for λ < 750 nm, but strongly drops for longer wavelengths as the top cell does not contribute to photocurrent anymore. We remark that without the top cell, the bottom cell features an EQE >90% from 400 nm to 1000 nm, virtually utilizing all photons in this spectral region. The low tandem EQE observed not only in the infrared region, but also in the visible region, therefore hints at parasitic light filtering by the perovskite top cell.
We remark that an efficiency gain of 1.8%abs relative to a single-junction perovskite cell cannot justify the cost of adding a c-Si bottom cell. From the perspective of c-Si photovoltaics, the top cell is far from being sufficiently efficient and transparent to boost the efficiency of state-of-the-art c-Si cells. However, it has to be taken into account that the top cell efficiency is severely affected by at least two significant drawbacks: firstly, the JSC (low lightrapping degree), VOC (sputter-induced damage) and FF (additional series resistance) losses induced by the MoOx/ITO transparent electrode, and secondly the parasitic absorption in the top cell. As the IV characteristics prove that the junction is well formed and rectifying, we expect that further process and material optimization will likely increase the top cell VOC and FF towards state-of-the-art performance.
In the meantime, the four-terminal tandem device presented here constitutes a valuable test platform for an experimental power loss analysis and enables us to assess the tandem device efficiency potential.
The preliminary results presented in this article thus point out not only the complexity of realizing efficient perovskite/c-Si tandem devices, but also which solutions have to be found to compete with and even surpass high-efficiency c-Si solar cells.
IV. Current loss analysis
In the following, we present a detailed opto-electrical analysis to quantify current and power losses and assess the efficiency potential of optimized systems.

Fig. 4 depicts the transmittance (TTop) spectra of the perovskite top solar cell as well as its 1-reflectance (1 − RTop) and absorbance (ATop = 1 − RTop − TTop) spectrum. We also replot in Fig. 4 the EQEs shown in Fig. 3b for comparison. The EQE and the absorptance of the top cell exhibit a similar spectral shape in the visible region, but are offset by about 15%abs. The difference between absorptance and EQE can be attributed to parasitic absorption losses, i.e. absorption processes not contributing to the top cell photocurrent.
 Fig. 4  Transmittance, 1-reflectance and absorbance spectra of the top cell and the external quantum efficiency spectra of the top and bottom cells. 
Excellent agreement can be seen between the top cell transmittance and the EQE of the bottom cell up to 1000 nm, indicating that the bottom cell efficiently converts the incident photons to photocurrent. For wavelengths >1000 nm, the two curves begin to deviate as the bottom cell EQE decreases near the c-Si band gap. Ideally, the top cell should transmit 100% of the incident photons below the CH3NH3PbI3 band gap. However, the data shown in Fig. 4 demonstrate that the realized top cell transmits ∼55% of the light between 800 nm and 1200 nm, and absorbs between 25% and 35% of the incident photons despite the excellent sub-bad gap transparency of CH3NH3PbI3 itself.19

Fig. 4 thus clearly demonstrates that the tandem performance is limited by parasitic absorption in the top cell in the visible spectral region but even more in the infrared spectral region. As CH3NH3PbI3 itself does not lead to undesired sub-band gap absorption,19 the encountered top cell absorption losses rather have to be related to the specific top cell architecture. To elucidate the origin of the parasitic absorption, we plot the absorptance of incrementally built-up layer stacks in Fig. 5. The layer stacks were prepared identically to the perovskite cells and resemble the structure, morphology and layer thicknesses of the perovskite cells. The FTO front electrode alone is highly transparent in the visible spectral range, but does exhibit pronounced absorption in the infrared spectral region. Adding the compact TiO2 layer leaves the absorptance almost unchanged. With the mesoscopic TiO2/perovskite compound layer, the absorptance is already close to that of the finished cell in the visible and slightly increases in the infrared spectral region. The spiro-MeOTAD layer and the MoOx/ITO electrode (in this device configuration) do not influence the visible absorption considerably, but both induce increased infrared absorption. In summary, Fig. 5 shows that absorption losses in the infrared are caused by the top cell components FTO, spiro-MeOTAD and ITO. These layers are highly doped, and the absorption can be attributed to free carrier absorption (FCA), which is proportional to the charge carrier density and the square of the wavelength.37 In spiro-MeOTAD, the high doping is needed for efficient hole extraction.38,39 FTO and ITO have to provide lateral conductivity over several millimetres, and a reduced charge carrier density would compromise the fill factor. Consequently, the four-terminal tandem architecture faces a trade-off between TCO electrical properties (top cell fill factor), and minimized FCA (bottom cell current).
 Fig. 5  Absorbance spectra of incremental layer stacks. 
To quantify the associated power losses, we separate the spectrally resolved current losses in the top cell from those in the bottom cell according to the procedure outlined in the Appendix. Fig. 6 illustrates the current loss spectra of each subcell according to the loss mechanism (reflection from or parasitic absorption in the top cell). Reflection by the top cell causes current losses of 1.64 mA cm−2 in the top cell and 2.06 mA cm−2 in the bottom cell. The most dominant current loss is caused by parasitic absorption, which accounts for 3.81 mA cm−2 in the top cell and 5.67 mA cm−2 in the bottom cell. In total, the current losses translate to efficiency losses of 2.4%abs in the top cell, and 4.2%abs in the bottom cell.
 Fig. 6  Current loss spectra separated into top cell and bottom cell current losses. 
V. Efficiency potential
In this section, we consider different model perovskite/c-Si tandem systems, moving from the realized perovskite/c-Si tandem device presented in this article towards more optimized systems. We start with the four-terminal tandem device shown in Fig. 3, denominated Case 1 in Table 2. Assuming that the VOC- and FF-related losses caused by the transparent MoOx/ITO electrode can be overcome by process and architecture optimizations, we recalculate the efficiency with state-of-the-art junction parameters (VOC and FF) taken from ref. 10. To account for the VOC illumination-dependence we recalculate VOC using the one-diode model40 (see Appendix) using an ideality factor of 1. This yields a tandem efficiency of 17.6% (Case 2). As the next step toward an ultimate, but still realistic limit of the tandem efficiency we use record values for the bottom cell VOC and FF. Si solar cells are already close to their “technical” limit, and published world-record devices are therefore good approximates of a realistic ultimate bottom cell. The world-record c-Si solar cell is a back-contacted solar cell featuring a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunction contacts2. For tandem applications, however, the IR response rather than JSC under full spectrum illumination is decisive. As the best reported IR performance was realized with a both-side contacted SHJ device by carefully designing the rear contact,35 we use the record values for both-side contacted SHJ cells, VOC = 750 mV, JSC = 39.5 mA cm−2, and FF = 83.2% for an illumination of 0.1 W cm−2, as the ultimate bottom cell.41 We account for the VOC illumination dependence using the one-diode model40 and an ideality factor of 0.7,3 and obtain a tandem efficiency of 18.7% (Case 3).
Table 2 Photovoltaic conversion efficiencies of perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cells. Case 1 summarizes the demonstrator device discussed in section III. Cases 2 and 3 are theoretical efficiencies calculated with the published record VOC and FF values. For Case 4, the current losses, calculated from the device of Case 1, were added to the respective cells. Case 5 corresponds to the ideal current matched tandem discussed in Section I. Values that change with respect to the preceding case are indicated in red. “Experiment” denotes experimental results presented in this paper











Even though this tandem cell is composed of record VOC and FF values for both subcells, its efficiency still falls short behind single-junction c-Si solar cells. This illustrates how severely the current losses due to reflection and parasitic absorption affect the tandem efficiency. Assuming that these optical losses can be overcome by an appropriate optical design, including anti-reflective coatings and intermediate light reflectors/couplers between the perovskite and the c-Si cell, we add the JSC losses determined in Section IV to the JSC of the respective cell and recalculate their efficiencies. Such an optimized system, free of any parasitic absorption attains an efficiency of 27.6% (Case 4). The efficiency improvement relative to Case 3 results from a JSC gain of 5.45 mA cm−2 in the top cell and 7.73 mA cm−2 in the bottom cell, corresponding to a efficiency gain of 4.04% and 4.85%, respectively. Interestingly, the tandem device of Case 4 is very close to current matching conditions. As stated above, we consider a perovskite top cell with VOC = 1050 mV and FF = 80% to be a realistic performance goal. In a current matched tandem device, represented by Case 5, an efficiency of 31.62% would be attainable with this top cell. Even with a current loss of 0.5 mA cm−2 for each of the subcells, the tandem efficiency would still be >30%.
VI. Large-area four-terminal modules
The most straightforward way to realize perovskite/c-Si tandem modules is to mechanically stack a large-area perovskite module with – and couple it optically to – c-Si solar cells. In this device architecture, both subcells can be fabricated independently, yielding thus great engineering flexibility for optimization. Interconnection would be done by laser patterning the top cell to a perovskite top module as sketched in Fig. 8 (see Appendix), and then wiring the top and bottom modules. Alternatively to laser patterning, the top cell could also be contacted with a metal grid, but this solution is likely to be too costly. In any case, however, lateral conductance through the top cell TCOs over one cell stripe width w is needed, and can cause resistive power losses depending on the TCO sheet resistance. As free carriers in the TCOs also cause absorption, and thus current losses in the bottom cell, the total tandem efficiency is a delicate balance between minimized resistive losses in the top module and minimized current losses in the bottom cell due to parasitic absorption in the top cell (see the Appendix for details). The trade-off between absorption and sheet resistance of a TCO can be described by the figure of merit 〈FOM〉, defined here as the inverse of the product of the effective top cell sheet resistance RSh and its weighted sub-band gap absorptance 〈A〉 (see Appendix): (1) We evaluate the tandem efficiency according to the analytical model developed in the Appendix (eqn (16)) for a photo-inactive interconnection width of 100 μm, which is a typical value for state-of-the-art processing, assuming an average transparency of the interconnection area m of 50%. We plot the four-terminal tandem module efficiency using the cell parameters of Case 5 (Table 2), optimized with respect to the cell stripe width, as a function of the top cell TCO sheet resistance and the figure of merit in Fig. 7 (color contours). To illustrate the effect of the TCO optical properties more explicitly, we also plot in Fig. 7 the weighted top cell sub-band gap absorptance 〈A〉 (black dashed equiabsorptance lines) according to eqn (1).
 Fig. 7  Four-terminal tandem module efficiency (color contours with white labels) and weighted top cell sub-band gap absorptance (black dashed lines with black labels) calculated with the cell parameters of Case 5 (Table 2) as a function of the sheet resistance and the weighted figure of merit of the top cell TCOs. The module efficiency was calculated for an interconnection stripe width and a transparency of 100 μm and 50%, respectively, and optimized with respect to the cell stripe width. A maximum module efficiency >30% is attained at sheet resistances of 8–13 Ω sq−1 with a FOM > 3.5 sq Ω−1. 
For 〈FOM〉 < 1 sq Ω−1, the top cell is increasingly transparent for higher sheet resistances and the tandem efficiency increases. For higher FOM (>1.5 sq Ω−1), the tandem efficiency first increases with an increase in the sheet resistance (0 < RSh < 15 Ω sq−1) as the TCO becomes increasingly transparent, and then decreases due to the resistive losses in the top cell. An efficiency >30% can be reached with a TCO which yields a 〈FOM〉 ≥ 3.5 sq Ω−1 for a sheet resistance range of 8–13 Ω sq−1.
The transparent top cell presented above yields an effective figure of merit of 0.07, calculated from the sub-band gap absorptance shown in Fig. 4 and its average sheet resistance of 52.5 Ω sq−1 (average of the employed FTO and ITO layers with 15 Ω sq−1 and 90 Ω sq−1 respectively). We remark that this value is an effective value, which includes absorption of the entire top cell and is moreover affected by absorption enhancement due to scattering and multiple reflections.
Finally, we evaluate the properties of single layer TCOs optimized for solar cell applications. With ITO layers optimized for infrared transmittance,42 a 〈FOM〉 of 0.97 can be attained when neglecting absorption in any other layers. Even higher transparency can be achieved with hydrogen-doped tin oxide (IO:H)42 or plasma-treated zinc oxide (ZnO).43 These materials provide weighted figure of merits of 2.41 and 2.97, respectively, and according to Fig. 7 would thus enable tandem module efficiencies of 30% for a wide range of TCO parameters.
VII. Outlook
The results presented here illustrate that perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cells have the potential to surpass the c-Si efficiency record (25.6%),2 but they also point out the challenges that are associated with their realization.
In detail, the following development steps have to be accomplished to achieve tandem efficiencies of 30%:
(a) Marginal sub-band gap absorption of the perovskite absorber material,
(b) Top cell efficiency improved to the level of >18% for wafer-sized devices,
(c) Transparent top cell electrodes that do not compromise VOC and FF (values in the range of 1000 mV and 80%, respectively),
(d) A broad-band (500–1200 nm) transparent top cell resulting in a total parasitic absorption loss of <1 mA cm−2, and, for four-terminal tandem devices, yield a weighted figure of merit of >2.
For the CH3NH3PbI3 material, criterion (a) is fulfilled.19 Criterion (b) is met when considering the recent record values on small devices,9,44 but module efficiencies have not exceeded ∼5% so far.45
The transition from a top cell with >18% efficiency (b) to a top cell with transparent electrodes showing 18% efficiency (c) can likely be achieved by process and material optimization. Broad band transparency (c), however, is limited by the device architecture, as our results indicate that the standard architecture employed here induces parasitic absorption losses of 5.45 mA cm−2 and 7.73 mA cm−2, respectively, in the top and bottom cells.
As the four-terminal device requires lateral conductivity, and thus sufficient doping and thickness of the two intermediate TCOs, it is inherently affected by parasitic absorption. Moreover, upscaling requires micropatterning of the top cell and interconnection to minimodules, further increasing optical losses. These losses can be mitigated by monolithically interconnecting the two cells, relaxing the requirements to lateral conductance and potentially eliminating completely the two intermediate TCOs (cf.Fig. 1b).
Importantly, the monolithic device also facilitates upscaling because it requires lateral conductivity only in the topmost electrode. Our results also illustrate the importance of implementing highly transparent alternatives for the doped layers (FTO, ITO and spiro-MeOTAD), such as tetrathiafulvalene derivative,46 IO:H42 or ZnO films.43 The most promising candidates for the bottom cell appear to be Si heterojunction devices. Besides their excellent open-circuit voltages they feature a record-high infrared response.35 Moreover, as a bottom cell they are not affected by optical losses in the blue region, which is their most important drawback at full-spectrum illumination, and can thus easily be optimized for the spectrum and illumination intensity in a tandem device. In addition, Si heterojunction solar cells already feature a built-in recombination junction47 (between doped amorphous Si and TCO) which is required for a monolithic interconnection of the bottom and top cells.
Finally, we remark that for optimum spectral utilization, a material with slightly higher top cell band gap (1.7–1.8 eV) and thus also higher VOC would be beneficial. This underlines the importance of alternative absorber materials such as mixed iodide–bromide perovskites.48,49 Using this material system, Noh et al. were able to achieve a band gap of 1.7 eV for a composition of CH3NH3Pb(I0.75Br0.25)3, a promising result in view of tandem applications.48
IX. Conclusion
In this article, we presented a four-terminal perovskite/c-Si tandem solar cell and derived limiting efficiencies of practical perovskite/c-Si tandem devices.
The realized four-terminal tandem device is based on a c-Si heterojunction bottom cell and a CH3NH3PbI3 top cell featuring a transparent MoOx/ITO hole contact. With the transparent MoOx/ITO hole contact, the top cell features an impressive infrared-transparency of up to >55%. The four-terminal tandem device yields an efficiency of 13.4%, with similar contributions of the top cell (6.2%) and the bottom cell (7.2%). We employed the four-terminal tandem solar cell as a test device for an experimental power loss analysis, splitting the current losses into reflection- and parasitic absorption-induced losses based on an optical analysis, and separating them according to the respective subcell. Assuming the published record values for the individual subcells, an efficiency of 27.6% would be attainable with an optimized system. Anticipating improved values for the top cell voltage (1050 mV) and the fill factor (80%), we identify a tandem efficiency >30% as a mid-term goal.
Appendix
Spectral analysis of current losses
In order to quantify the power losses in the tandem solar cell, we split the photon current losses to those photons that would have contributed to top cell current and to those that would have contributed to bottom cell current if they were not lost by reflection or parasitic absorption.
Photons that are incident on the tandem system can either be reflected by the top cell, or transmitted through it, or generate a photocurrent, or be absorbed without generating photocurrent. We denote the probabilities of the respective processes as RTop, TTop, EQETop and PATop, with the parasitic absorption PATop defined as the difference between absorbed photons and photons that are absorbed and collected as photocurrent, PATop = ATop − EQETop. These four processes fulfill the identity 1 = RTop + TTop + EQETop + PATop.(2)For photons that are not reflected, we can calculate the probabilities of the other three processes, ,  and , by normalizing with 1 − RTop (rearranging eqn (1)): , , and . In analogy to eqn (1), the identity (3)holds for these three expressions. The reflected photon flux, (4)can thus be split up according to (5)ϕAM1.5G denotes the AM1.5G solar spectrum50 and λ is the wavelength. For those photons that are neither reflected nor parasitically absorbed, we calculate the probabilities for transmission and photocurrent generation by normalization with one minus the internal fraction of not parasitically absorbed photons,  (rearranging eqn (2)): , and , for which the identity  holds. We can then split up the current loss caused by parasitic absorption in the top cell, (6)into the parts affecting the top and bottom cells, (7)
Using eqn (4) and (6) we can now separate the losses affecting the top cell short-circuit current density, (8)from those that affect the short-circuit current density of the bottom cell, (9)Eqn (7) and (8) allow us to determine the light-generated current of the corresponding cell if the current losses were mitigated, J0L = JExpSC + JLoss. Here we omit the indices Top and Btm for better clarity, und use the superscript Exp (JExpSC, VExpOC and ηExp) for the experimentally determined values of the loss-affected device.
We account for the illumination-dependence of the open-circuit voltage using the one-diode model40 (10)with the light-generated current density JL, the diode ideality factor m, the absolute temperature T, and the Boltzmann constant kB. Throughout this paper the temperature is fixed at 25 °C. We model the top cell using an ideality factor of 1 and the bottom cell using an ideality factor of 0.7. J0 is the diode saturation current density, which is a lumped expression for all recombination pathways, and is calculated from eqn (10) with the experimental values JExpSC and VExpOC. For simplicity, we assume the fill factor to not depend on the illumination.
The efficiency of the loss-free cell can then be calculated as η0 = FF·J0L·VOC(J0L)/Pin,(11)with Pin being the incident light power, and the efficiency loss caused by reflection and parasitic absorption is η0 − ηExp = FF·{J0L·VOC(J0L) − JExpSC·JExpOC}/Pin.(12)
Four-terminal module model
Thin-film photovoltaic modules are commonly fabricated by laser patterning of the large-area solar cell layer stack, see Fig. 8. This results in an active area lw for an aperture area l(w + m), with l being the length and w the width of one cell stripe and m the total width lost due to laser scribing. With state-of-the-art techniques, the required three laser scribes result in m ≈ 100 μm. The interconnection between individual cells within the module is ensured by the front and back TCOs, causing a relative power loss of51 (13)due to their respective lateral sheet resistance RSh, and J and V the current through and the voltage at the TCO. The module efficiency is thus (14)JMPP,Top and VMPP,Top are the top cell current density and voltage at the maximum power point (MPP), respectively. The factor of 2 comes from the two TCOs. Please note that we neglect shadowing of the top cell by the front TCO, because most TCOs are highly transmittive in the top cell spectral region.
 Fig. 8  Interconnection scheme for thin-film minimodules. Three laser scribes are employed to (1) pattern the front TCO (yellow), (2) pattern the absorber, and (3) pattern the back TCO to isolate the cells. The photo-active cell width is w, and the width of the photo-inactive interconnection area is m. 
However, the light intensity incident on the bottom cell in the tandem module is reduced by the top cell due to free carrier absorption in the top cell TCOs and the partially non-transparent nature of the top cell interconnection. The doping in the top cell TCOs causes absorption by free carriers and thus reduces the light intensity that is incident on the bottom cell. The efficiency of the bottom cell whose short-circuit current is reduced by the weighted absorptance 〈A〉 and the absorptance of the interconnection areas Am is (15)and the tandem module efficiency is ηTotal = ηBtm + ηTop.(16)The weighted absorptance 〈A〉 is the integrated spectral absorbance of the top cell below the top cell absorber band gap λGap, weighted with the bottom cell current at each wavelength: (17)
To calculate 〈A〉 we assume the top cell band to be at 800 nm and use the external quantum efficiency EQEBtm of an ideal, 110 μm thick c-Si solar cell.3
Sample preparation
Silicon heterojunction solar cells were prepared from phosphorus-doped 1 Ω cm, 250 μm thick (100) c-Si wafers as described in ref. 52.
Perovskite devices were prepared as described in ref. 10 except for the back contact. PbI2 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and the material CH3NH3I was synthesized following the procedure described in ref. 53. A compact TiO2 layer was deposited onto the patterned and cleaned FTO (Solaronix, TCO 22-15) substrate by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C using titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) (75 wt% in 2-propanol, Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in ethanol. A 300 nm thick mesoporous TiO2 layer was then deposited on the c-TiO2/FTO substrate by spin coating followed by annealing at 500 °C. PbI2 was dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide at a concentration of 1 M at 70 °C. A PbI2 solution was then spin coated on the m-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO substrate at 6500 rpm for 30 s. After drying the PbI2-coated glass at 70 °C for 10 min, the substrate was dipped in a solution of CH3NH3I in 2-propanol (10 mg ml−1) for 30 s, rinsed with 2-propanol, and dried at 100 °C for 10 min. Spiro-MeOTAD solution was prepared by dissolving in 1 ml of chlorobenzene 72.3 mg of spiro-MeOTAD (Merck), 28.8 μl of 4-tert-butylpyridine (Sigma-Aldrich), 17.5 μl of a stock solution of 520 mg ml−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Sigma-Aldrich) in acetonitrile and 14 μl of a stock solution of 300 mg ml−1 tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (FK209) in acetonitrile, and spin coating on the perovskite/m-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO substrate at 4000 rpm for 30 s. The cells were then finished with either a MoOx/ITO stack electrode or a MoOx/Ag electrode. A metal grid was not applied to the perovskite solar cell.
Characterization
Reflection and transmission spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer Lambda 900 photospectrometer using an integrating sphere. The external quantum efficiency of the top cell was measured using an IMT spectral response setup designed for Si thin-film solar cells, and equipped with a grating monochromator and a xenon lamp. The bottom cell EQE was measured using a commercial PVtools system dedicated for c-Si wafer solar cells. The short-circuit currents were calculated from the EQE measurements. Current–voltage curves were measured using a WACOM sun simulator with 0.25 cm2 and 4 cm2 shadow masks to define the active cell areas of the top and bottom cells, respectively. For the top cell I–V curve, the illumination was set to 0.1 W cm−2. To measure the I–V curve of the bottom cell, the illumination was adjusted using grey filters such that the bottom cell JSC matched the value calculated from the EQE measured in tandem configuration.
Acknowledgements
The project comprising this work was evaluated by the Swiss National Science Foundation and funded by Nano-Tera.ch with Swiss Confederation financing and by the Office Fédéral de l'Energie, Switzerland, under Grant SI/501072-01.
Notes and references
SEMI, International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaics (ITRPV), http://www.itrpv.net/Reports/Downloads/2014/, accessed 30.07.2014.

          K. Masuko, M. Shigematsu, T. Hashiguchi, D. Fujishima, M. Kai, N. Yoshimura, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Ichihashi, T. Yamanishi, T. Takahama, M. Taguchi, E. Maruyama and S. Okamoto, Achievement of more than 25% conversion efficiency with crystalline silicon heterojunction solar cell, Denver (CO), USA, 2014.
A. Richter, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, IEEE J. Photovol., 2013, 3, 1184–1191 CrossRef .
D. M. Powell, M. T. Winkler, H. J. Choi, C. B. Simmons, D. B. Needleman and T. Buonassisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5874 Search PubMed .
P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448 CAS .
G. Hodes, Science, 2013, 342, 317–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, T. Miyasaka and Y. Shirai, Meet. Abstr., 2006, MA2006–02, 397 Search PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL Efficiency Chart, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed 17.11.2014.
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 CAS .
K. Wojciechowski, M. Saliba, T. Leijtens, A. Abate and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1142–1147 CAS .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–7,  DOI:10.1038/srep00591 .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys.
Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CAS .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2013, 342, 794–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2014, 344, 458 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. McGehee, Optimizing Perovskite Semiconductors for Tandem Solar Cells, MRS Spring Meeting, San Francisco, CA, USA,  2014 Search PubMed .
P. Löper, B. Niesen, S. Moon, S. Martin de Nicolas, J. Holovsky, Z. Remes, M. Ledinsky, F. Haug, J. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, IEEE J. Photovol., 2014, 4, 1545–1551 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 591–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed  , ESI†.
C. Roldán-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Soriano, G. Mínguez Espallargas, A. Garcia, P. Reinecke, T. Kroyer, M. I. Dar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 994 Search PubMed .
Z. M. Beiley, M. G. Christoforo, P. Gratia, A. R. Bowring, P. Eberspacher, G. Y. Margulis, C. Cabanetos, P. M. Beaujuge, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 7020–7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Margulis, M. G. Christoforo, D. Lam, Z. M. Beiley, A. R. Bowring, C. D. Bailie, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1657–1663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gjessing, E. S. Marstein and A. Sudbø, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 5481–5495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Demaurex, S. De Wolf, A. Descoeudres, Z. Charles Holman and C. Ballif, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 171604 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Battaglia, S. Martín de Nicolás, S. De Wolf, X. Yin, M. Zheng, C. Ballif and A. Javey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 113902,  DOI:10.1063/1.4868880 .
Y. Zhao, A. M. Nardes and K. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 213906 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pysch, A. Mette and S. W. Glunz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1698–1706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Holman, A. Descoeudres, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, IEEE J. Photovol., 2013, 3, 1243–1249 CrossRef .
S. De Wolf, A. Descoeudres, Z. C. Holman and C. Ballif, Green, 2012, 2, 7–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. A. Smith, Semiconductors, Cambridge University Press, New York, USA,  1978 Search PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N.-L. Cevey-Ha, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042–18045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells - From Principles to New Concepts, Wiley-Vch Verlag GmbH & Co KgaA, Weinheim,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Taguchi, A. Yano, S. Tohoda, K. Matsuyama, Y. Nakamura, T. Nishiwaki, K. Fujita and E. Maruyama, IEEE J. Photovol., 2014, 4, 96–99 CrossRef .
L. Barraud, Z. C. Holman, N. Badel, P. Reiss, A. Descoeudres, C. Battaglia, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 115, 151–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ding, S. Nicolay, J. Steinhauser, U. Kroll and C. Ballif, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5177–5182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Matteocci, S. Razza, F. Di Giacomo, S. Casaluci, G. Mincuzzi, T. M. Brown, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia and A. Di Carlo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3918–3923 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Qin, X. Yang, T. Yasuda, A. Islam, K. Zhang, W. Peng, W. Chen and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014 10.1039/c4ee01589d .
A. Kanevce and W. K. Metzger, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105 DOI:10.1063/1.3106642 .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CAS .
S. A. Kulkarni, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9221 CAS .

          IEC, Photovoltaic devices - part 3: measurement principles for terrestrial photovoltaic (PV) solar devices with reference spectral irradiance data, International Electrotechnical Commission, 2008 Search PubMed.

          A. Shah, Thin-Film Silicon Solar Cells, EPFL Press,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. Descoeudres, Z. C. Holman, L. Barraud, S. Morel, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, IEEE J. Photovol., 2013, 3, 83–89 CrossRef .
J.-H. Im, J. Chung, S.-J. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 353,  DOI:10.1186/1556-276X-7-353 .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03788jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the perovskite solar cell architecture based on preparing the perovskite absorber on a compact TiO2 electrode, which is deposited on FTO-coated glass. Gold (Au) or silver (Ag) is most commonly employed as the hole collecting electrode. For the four-terminal tandem, the metal hole collecting electrode has to be replaced by a broad-band transparent material. (b) Also, for a monolithic perovskite/c-Si tandem, to be realized at a later stage, the transparent hole collecting electrode is a key building block as it would enable using the established top cell preparation route also used in (a).	 

 	Fig. 2  Current–voltage curves in dark and under illumination of perovskite solar cells with ITO (dotted line), MoOx/ITO (line), and MoOx/Ag (dashed line) back contact.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the mechanically stacked four-terminal tandem. The system consists of a high-efficiency a-Si:H/c-Si heterojunction solar cell and a high-efficiency CH3NH3PbI3 top cell with a metal-free MoOx/ITO transparent electrode. (b) External quantum efficiency and (c) current–voltage curves of the two individually connected subcells in the four-terminal perovskite/Si tandem solar cell.	 

Perovskite reference	MoOx/Ag	18.5	938	67.0	11.6
Perovskite top	MoOx/ITO	14.5	821	51.9	6.2
SHJ bottom	
	13.7	689	76.7	7.2
Perovskite/SHJ tandem	
	
	
	
	13.4

 	Fig. 4  Transmittance, 1-reflectance and absorbance spectra of the top cell and the external quantum efficiency spectra of the top and bottom cells.	 

 	Fig. 5  Absorbance spectra of incremental layer stacks.	 

 	Fig. 6  Current loss spectra separated into top cell and bottom cell current losses.	 



	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Four-terminal tandem module efficiency (color contours with white labels) and weighted top cell sub-band gap absorptance (black dashed lines with black labels) calculated with the cell parameters of Case 5 (Table 2) as a function of the sheet resistance and the weighted figure of merit of the top cell TCOs. The module efficiency was calculated for an interconnection stripe width and a transparency of 100 μm and 50%, respectively, and optimized with respect to the cell stripe width. A maximum module efficiency >30% is attained at sheet resistances of 8–13 Ω sq−1 with a FOM > 3.5 sq Ω−1.	 
1 = RTop + TTop + EQETop + PATop.	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
η0 = FF·J0L·VOC(J0L)/Pin,	(11)
η0 − ηExp = FF·{J0L·VOC(J0L) − JExpSC·JExpOC}/Pin.	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 8  Interconnection scheme for thin-film minimodules. Three laser scribes are employed to (1) pattern the front TCO (yellow), (2) pattern the absorber, and (3) pattern the back TCO to isolate the cells. The photo-active cell width is w, and the width of the photo-inactive interconnection area is m.	 
	(15)
ηTotal = ηBtm + ηTop.	(16)
	(17)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03788j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
