Biopolymer-based electrospun fibers in electrochemical devices: versatile platform for energy, environment, and health monitoring  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2MH00879C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2MH00879C
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 2914-2948Biopolymer-based electrospun fibers in electrochemical devices: versatile platform for energy, environment, and health monitoring

        
          
            Seyedeh Nooshin 
            Banitaba
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Seyed Vahid 
            Ebadi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Pejman 
            Salimi
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Ahmad 
            Bagheri
          
        
      ce, 
      
        
          
            Ashish 
            Gupta
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Waqas Ul 
            Arifeen
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Vishal 
            Chaudhary
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Yogendra Kumar 
            Mishra
          
        
      i, 
      
        
          
            Ajeet 
            Kaushik
          
        
      jk and 

        
          
            Ebrahim 
            Mostafavi
          
          
        
      *lm
aDepartment of Textile Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran 159163-4311, Iran. E-mail: nooshin_bt@yahoo.com
bDepartment of Textile Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan 84156-83111, Iran
cIstituto Italiano di Tecnologia, via Morego 30, Genova 16163, Italy
dDepartment of Chemistry and Industrial Chemistry, University of Genova, via Dodecaneso 31, I-16146 Genova, Italy
eFaculty of Chemistry and Food Chemistry and Center for Advancing Electronics Dresden (cfaed), Technische Universitate Dresden, Dresden 01062, Germany
fDepartment of Physics, National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra, Haryana, India
gSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Yeungnam University, 280 Daehak-ro, Gyeongsan-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do, 38541, South Korea
hResearch Cell & Department of Physics, Bhagini Nivedita College, University of Delhi, Delhi 110043, India
iMads Clausen Institute, NanoSYD, Smart Materials, University of Southern Denmark, Alsion 2, 6400, Sønderborg, Denmark
jNanoBioTech Laboratory, Health Systems Engineering, Department of Natural Sciences, Florida Polytechnic University, Lakeland, Florida, USA
kSchool of Engineering, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies (UPES), Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India
lStanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
mDepartment of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. E-mail: ebimsv@stanford.edu; ebi.mostafavi@gmail.com
Received 
      12th July 2022
    , Accepted 7th September 2022First published on 20th September 2022AbstractElectrochemical power tools are regarded as essential keys in a world that is becoming increasingly reliant on fossil fuels in order to meet the challenges of rapidly depleting fossil fuel supplies. Additionally, due to the industrialization of societies and the growth of diseases, the need for sensitive, reliable, inexpensive, and portable sensors and biosensors for noninvasive monitoring of human health and environmental pollution is felt more than ever before. In recent decades, electrospun fibers have emerged as promising candidates for the fabrication of highly efficient electrochemical devices, such as actuators, batteries, fuel cells, supercapacitors, and biosensors. Meanwhile, the use of synthetic polymers in the fabrication of versatile electrochemical devices has raised environmental concerns, leading to an increase in the quest for natural polymers. Natural polymers are primarily derived from microorganisms and plants. Despite the challenges of processing bio-based electrospun fibers, employing natural nanofibers in the fabrication of electrochemical devices has garnered tremendous attention in recent years. Here, various natural polymers and the strategies employed to fabricate various electrospun biopolymers are briefly covered. The recent advances and research strategies used to apply the bio-based electrospun membranes in different electrochemical devices are carefully summarized, along with the scopes in various advanced technologies. A comprehensive and critical discussion about the use of biopolymer-based electrospun fibers as the potential alternative to non-renewable ones in future technologies is briefly highlighted. This review will serve as a field opening platform for using different biopolymer-based electrospun fibers to advance the electrochemical device-based renewable and sustainable technologies, which will be of high interest to a large community. Accordingly, future studies should focus on feasible and cost-effective extraction of biopolymers from natural resources as well as fabrication of high-performance nanofibrous biopolymer-based components applicable in various electrochemical devices.
Seyedeh Nooshin Banitaba
Dr Banitaba (Textile Eng., PhD), born in Iran, is currently in a Postdoctoral position at Amirkabir University of Technology. She has over ten years of research experience in the field of fabricating and analyzing electrospun nanostructures. Her main research interests are the design and development of solvent-free electrospun electrolytes incorporating active and inert materials to synthesize all-solid-state and flexible LIBs. Dr Banitaba has authored over 25 peer-reviewed scientific publications with 257 citations.
Ebrahim Mostafavi
Dr Ebrahim Mostafavi has so far received training at Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine (PostDoc), Northeastern University (PhD), Harvard Medical School (Researcher), and University of Tehran (MSc and BSc). His research interests revolve around the engineering and development of (nano)biomaterials, nanocarriers, and 3D in vitro models (hydrogels, 3D bioprinted constructs, nanoporous scaffolds, organoids, and vascular grafts) to create biologically complex systems for tissue engineering, regenerative/translational medicine, cancer therapy, biosensing, and infectious diseases. Dr Mostafavi serves as Associate Editor-in-Chief of several prestigious and high-impact journals within Elsevier, Springer, Dove Medical Press, T&F, Frontiers, etc. He is also an Editorial Board Member of 25+ prestigious biomedical and materials science journals. His scholarly work comprises >135 publications with an H-index of 26 (i10-index = 62). So far, he has also contributed to writing more than 35 book chapters and has edited several books.
1 Introduction
Electrochemical devices are tools that can generate electricity through chemical reactions or that use electrical energy to activate chemical reactions. These power tools are key building blocks in a world that is becoming increasingly reliant on fossil fuels to meet the challenges associated with rapidly depleting fossil fuel supplies.1,2 Actuators, batteries, fuel cells, sensors, and supercapacitors are known as growing electrochemical devices that work by conversion of chemical reactions into electrical energy.3,4 Electrochemical actuators have the potential to assist disabled people via providing efficient artificial muscles that mimic the function of natural skeletal muscles.5,6 Living without portable power tools, such as cellphones, laptops, and so on, is meaningless in today's world. Batteries are an essential component of the vast majority of the devices we use on a daily basis.7,8 Clean energy with no carbon dioxide emissions could be generated using fuel cells. These devices are capable of providing the electrical energy required in inaccessible areas such as buses, boats, spacecraft, and so on.9,10 According to the available literature, supercapacitors could also be beneficial power tools through providing many rapid charge/discharge cycles for elevators, buses, automobiles, etc.11,12 Moreover, electrochemical sensors can be employed in a wide range of applications, including biological or chemical warfare, food industries, medicine, and home monitoring.13,14 Polymeric components are assumed to be an integral element in fabrication of the above-mentioned electrochemical devices. Besides polymeric membranes, nanofibers fabricated through electrospinning set-ups have also paved the way for the development of higher performance electrochemical devices.4,15–17 Although one goal of using electrochemical tools is to apply fewer fossil fuels and reduce pollution, both are increased by producing synthetic polymers.
In recent decades, pollution from petrochemical products as well as fossil fuels has received wide attention due to its numerous adverse effects on human health and well-being.18,19 Alternative sustainable, environmentally friendly, renewable, and biodegradable substances that are less harmful to the environment have been the subject of numerous research efforts over the years.18,19 Based upon the findings, the use of biomaterials is becoming more popular to reduce the consumption of nonrenewable resources.20,21 Biopolymers are commonly referred to as biomolecules made up of multiple monomeric units covalently linked together. The term “bio” denotes that the materials used are derived from plants or living organisms and are biodegradable.22–24 In contrast to the simple and random structure of synthetic polymers, biopolymers possess a complex 3D network. Besides biocompatibility and non-toxicity, sustainability is the main feature that distinguishes biopolymers from synthetic ones. After the usage, these polymers are reabsorbed in the environment via natural processes. Biological degradation of these polymers occurs easily as a result of their exposure to bacteria in compost, soil, and other environments which efficiently reduces emission of CO2, pollution, and global warming. Moreover, the rising cost of petroleum fuel sources, as well as a growing interest in the use of renewable and environmentally friendly resources, has led to the development of natural biopolymers in a variety of fields.25–27
Biopolymers are classified in different ways such as based on their rate of degradability, type of polymer backbone, structural repeating unit, resource, and application. In terms of repeating units, they could be categorized into polynucleotides, polypeptides, and polysaccharides. In addition, they are generally grouped into natural and semi-synthetic categories based on the source of biopolymers.25–27Fig. 1 depicts natural biopolymers frequently applied in various electrochemical devices. Structural features along with the processing of the electrospun natural biopolymers are detailed in the following section.
 Fig. 1  Structure and resource of the most applied natural polymers. 
As a result of biopolymer's beneficial characteristics, natural polymer-based components have been extensively utilized in various electrochemical devices in different forms of meso/microporous polymer films, micro/nanofibrous membranes, etc. Among them, the use of biopolymer-based nanofibers has led to the fabrication of high-performance and versatile electrochemical devices. This can be attributed to the high surface-to-volume ratio of the nanofibers, the presence of tiny pores between the fibers, and the porous structure of the nanofibrous membranes.
The electrospinning method is the main production technique for biopolymer-based nanofibrous components applicable in the various electrochemical devices mentioned above. Apart from the electrospinning technique, several methods have been developed to produce nanofibers, such as self-assembly, phase separation, drawing, and template synthesis. However, none of them have the advantages and versatility of the electrospinning method. The main advantages of this technique compared to other methods are simplicity, low cost, ability to produce continuous nanofibers with a diameter of several tens of nanometers to several tens of micrometers, and fabrication of highly interconnected porous structures with a very high specific area. These interpenetrating network structures have excellent potential for exposure to different electrolytes to transport ions in electrochemical devices. Also, structures with completely different morphologies and properties can be easily achieved by controlling the electrospinning process conditions: for example, nanofibers with a porous surface, bi-component or multi-component fibers, hollow fibers, and core–sheath fibers. The capability of spinning a wide range of synthetic and natural polymers, ceramics, and combinations, and also the facility of surface functionalization to impart desired properties are other advantages of this technique. Moreover, today, industrial electrospinning machines have been developed, which have opened up the possibility of mass and fast production of these fibers. Due to these advantages, nowadays electrospun nanofibers have gained much attention in a wide range of applications, such as sensors, actuators, supercapacitors, fuel cells, solar cells, batteries, tissue engineering, drug delivery, wound dressing, and filtration. Despite the advantages, this method also faces some challenges that limit the use of this method for some natural and synthetic polymers, such as the need for precise control of electrospinning parameters and environmental conditions (i.e., polymer concentration, voltage, spinning distance, flow rate, temperature, humidity, etc.), insolubility of some polymers, toxicity of chemical solvents, and lack of complete evaporation of solvent from produced nanofibers. The following section provides approaches to the fabrication of homogeneous electrospun fibers from biopolymer resources and their current challenges.
2 Biopolymer-based electrospun fibers
Polysaccharides are the main class of natural biopolymers which could be subdivided into natural, anionic, and cationic groups. These biopolymers consist of long monosaccharide chains bonded through glycosidic linkages. Cellulose, chitosan, and alginate have been widely employed in numerous electrochemical tools as cost-effective, abundant, and renewable polysaccharides.28–30
Cellulose, the agriculture waste biomass, is formed via the linking of linear chains of D-glucose. It is the most frequent and affordable natural biopolymer. This biopolymer has appropriate thermal and mechanical characteristics. Meanwhile, the fabrication of electrospun cellulose is challenging due to its high crystalline structure. Dissolution of cellulose requires expensive solvents and sometimes applying a high temperature. Co-Solvent systems and microwave irradiation are other methods applied for dissolving cellulose. The mentioned challenges have resulted in employing cellulose derivatives such as cellulose acetate (CA). This biopolymer can be easily dissolved in common solvents (e.g., acetic acid, acetone, etc.) and then electrospun. Afterward, the fabricated CA fibers can be re-converted to cellulose electrospun fibers via deacetylation. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is commonly utilized to obtain cellulose nanofibers from an electrospun CA mat. Complete regeneration could be achieved through using alcoholic NaOH, while an aqueous one results in the regeneration of cellulose only on the surface of the electrospun fibers. It is worth noting that many studies apply electrospun cellulose mats to produce carbon nanofibers (CNFs).31–33
Chitosan could be obtained from chitin which is a frequent biopolymer on the earth. Crab shells and fungi cell walls are the primary chitin resource that are disposed of in seafood industries daily. Fluoroacetic acid, trifluoroacetic acid, and dichloromethane are the solvents used for preparing an electrospinning solution containing the chitosan biopolymer. Meanwhile, the low viscosity of the solution is a challenging factor toward the fabrication of chitosan electrospun fibers. Electrospinning of chitosan with the association of a synthetic polymer and deacetylation of chitin nanofibers are the most applied methods to get defect free chitosan nanofibers.34–36
Alginate, algin, or alginic acid is a linear copolymer that could be found in brown algae (seaweed). Source, maturity, season, and other factors affect the repeating alginate unit. The worm-like structure of the alginic acid residues has restricted the electrospinnability of this polymer. In other words, low viscosity and lack of entanglement between the polymer chains are the main challenges toward the fabrication of alginate electrospun fibers. In addition, the cationic structure of alginate results in enhancement of the electrical conductivity in the polymer solution, leading to difficulties during the electrospinning process. Based on the findings, an increase of the polymer concentration from 1 to 6 wt% only results in the formation of droplets. The use of co-solvents (such as glycerol and water) and hydrosoluble polymers (e.g., PVA, PEO, etc.) and modification of the structure (sulfation, esterification, etc.) have been widely reported as efficient strategies for the formation of bead-free alginate electrospun fibers.37,38
Gelatin is another well-known natural polymer obtained from the hydrolysis of collagen extracted from the skin and bones of animals. It can be easily dissolved in hot water (above 40 °C) and form electrospun fibers. Kotatha et al.39 maintained the syringe temperature at 45 to 50 °C to fabricate gelatin nanofibers from the gelatin/water electrospinning solution. Naghibzadeh et al.40 also dissolved gelatin in glacial acetic acid solvent and produced electrospun nanofibers by maintaining the syringe at a constant temperature of 35 °C.
Lignocellulosic plants are the main resources of the natural lignin polymer. Lignin is available as a waste product from the paper and pulp industry and is also available commercially in a purified form from most renowned chemical industries. Two different methods, Kraft and Organosolv, are commonly used to produce lignin. In the first procedure, sodium hydroxide and sodium sulfide assist in extracting the polymer, while organic solvents are employed in the second process. In 2007, electrospun lignin fibers were synthesized via dissolving lignin in ethanol. In addition, curly lignin fibers were fabricated by García-Mateos et al. by applying H3PO4/ethanol as solvent. Since the extracted lignin has a low molecular weight, its electrospinning is difficult. Therefore, a small amount of an electrospinnable polymer with high molecular weight such as PAN, PVA, PVP, and PEO is usually used in its electrospinning process to improve its electrospinning ability and thus produce desirable nanofibers. But anyway, the renewable lignin biopolymer is used as the main component of nanofibers in these studies. Notably, lignin is a cost-effective precursor for the preparation of carbon nanofibers (CNFs).41–44 Although the formation of natural nanofibers is challenging, environmental concerns have led to increasing evaluation and examination of these membranes applicable in various electrochemical devices as illustrated in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  (a) General network visualization (constructed via VOSViewer v.1.6.11) and (b) the number of publications on using electrospun natural-polymer based fibers in various electrochemical devices. (c) The number of articles for application in various fields. (d) The number of articles for application in electrochemical devices. 
3 Electrochemomechanical actuators
Artificial muscles have been developed to mimic the function of natural skeletal muscles by utilizing various structures and mechanisms. In natural muscles, when an electrical signal is sent from the brain through the nerve cells, calcium ions are released in the muscle cell membrane. This phenomenon causes intramuscular interactions and changes in the length of actin and myosin myofibrils, resulting in changes in muscle volume.
Polymeric actuators are intelligent materials that can respond mechanically to external stimuli from various sources such as electrical signals,49,50 pH,51 pressure,52 light,53,54 magnetic fields,55 and temperature changes.56 While polymeric actuators are commonly referred to as artificial muscles in the literature, electroactive actuators are more functionally similar to natural muscles (Fig. 3A). Electromechanical and electrochemomechanical muscles have been developed using electronic and ionic electroactive polymers, respectively. While electrostatic forces and electric dipole rearrangements in the electronic group cause dimensional changes, the ion exchange mechanism is responsible for volume changes in ionic electroactive polymers.57 The required voltages for actuation of the electromechanical artificial muscles are too high, limiting their use in many practical applications, particularly in medical fields. In contrast, the electrochemomechanical artificial muscles can be actuated by very low voltages, on the order of 1 V, compared to more than 1 kV in electromechanical artificial muscles.58 Also, dimensional changes remain stable in the electrochemomechanical muscles even after cutting off the electrical potential, and the reverse potential is required to return to the initial situation. Meanwhile, in electromechanical muscles, dimensional changes return immediately after cutting off the potential, so the electrical signal is always essential to maintain their position.59 In addition, the wireless electrochemical actuation of electrochemomechanical artificial muscles has recently been investigated, which could open up new horizons in this field by eliminating the need for a direct physical connection to an electric power supply.60–62
 Fig. 3  (A) The structure of natural skeletal muscle (from smart.servier.com). (B) (a) The mechanism of actuation of natural skeletal muscles and (b) electrochemomechanical artificial muscles. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier. (C) A nanofibrous conducting polymer-based bending artificial muscle under electrochemical actuation. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Elsevier. (D) Nanofibrous conducting polymer actuators for controlled drug release application: (a) passive drug delivery from biodegradable nanofibers before and after coating with a conducting polymer, and (b) active drug delivery using the electrical actuation of conducting polymer nanofibers. (c) Cumulative mass release of the drug from biodegradable nanofibers (black squares) and conducting polymer-coated nanofibers without electrical actuation (red circles) and with electrical actuation (blue triangles), (d) the UV spectra of the drug released from conducting polymer nanofibers after 16 h (black), 87 h (red), 160 h (blue), and 730 h (green). Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Wiley. (E) Controllable pore sizes of the nanofibrous membrane under electrochemical actuation for tunable filtration: (a) measuring the pore size variation using a confocal microscope setup, (b) the pore size changes under two oxidation–reduction cycles, confocal microscopy images of the membrane for (c) oxidized and (d) reduced state. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The use of biopolymers such as chitosan, silk, cellulose, cellulose acetate, gelatin, and others in the design of actuators has always been considered, particularly in biological and medical applications where the non-toxicity, biocompatibility, and biodegradability of components are critical. On the other hand, due to the biocompatibility and doping ability with biomolecules, conducting polymers could be used as biomaterials in conjunction with other biopolymers to fabricate fibrous bioactuators for in vitro or in vivo applications.63,64 Moreover, bioactuators should be able to operate at neutral pH and in biological fluids of the body such as blood, urine, sweat, and so on for practical in vivo applications.65 However, the actuation performance of electrochemomechanical bioactuators in biological fluids may be inferior to that of organic electrolytes. Ismail et al.66 investigated the performance of a chitosan/polyaniline fibrous linear actuator. This actuator demonstrated an actuation strain of 0.4% in a potential cycle between −0.2 and +0.8 V. A chitosan/polypyrrole (PPy) fibrous actuator with an actuation strain of 0.54% has also been produced in another effort.67
In recent years, various nanomaterials such as nanoparticles, nanotubes, and nanofibers have been used to synthesize artificial muscles and improve their mechanical, electrical, and electrochemical properties.68–74 The diffusion of ions is expected to be facilitated as a determining factor of the actuation stress and strain as well as the response time of the electrochemomechanical artificial muscles by using highly porous nanofibrous structures. It has been shown, for example, that the response time of fibrous electroactive actuators made from polymeric gels decreases with decreasing fiber diameter.75 Asai et al. developed a novel nanofibrous actuator and investigated the effect of electrospinning solution concentration on nanofiber diameter. The results showed that using a lower solution concentration results in the formation of nanofibers with a smaller diameter, which increases the specific surface area and actuation strain of the produced actuator.76,77 As a result, much attention has been paid to the use of nanofibrous structures in the fabrication of conducting polymer-based actuators. Despite the efforts made, direct fabrication of conducting polymer nanofibers using the electrospinning process is challenging due to their low molecular weight, inherent brittleness and poor solubility in common solvents.78 It should be noted that the formation of fibers from a polymer using the electrospinning technique needs minimum requirements that are influenced by various parameters. One of the most important requirements is dissolving the polymer in a suitable solvent and obtaining a desirable polymer solution in terms of molecular weight, concentration, viscosity, electrical conductivity, and surface tension. For instance, if the viscosity of the polymer solution is too low, the entanglement of molecular chains will be insufficient to stabilize the balance of surface tension and electric forces of the solution, and thus a stable and uniform jet is not formed. The low inherent solubility of most conductive polymers in common solvents is caused by their strong inter- and intramolecular interactions. Also, if the solution of these polymers is prepared, they have insufficient viscosity for the electrospinning process, which is caused by their low molecular weight.79 Blending conducting polymers with electrospinnable ones,80,81 using the co-axial electrospinning method to produce core–shell nanofibers (the core is the conducting polymer),82 and in situ polymerization of conducting polymers on the surface of the substrate nanofibers83–85 are the most common alternative methods. However, blending the conducting polymers with a non-conducting component or using them in the core portion results in a nanofibrous layer with low electrical conductivity and poor electrochemomechanical properties for use as an actuator. Electrospinning followed by in situ chemical or electrochemical polymerization, on the other hand, is a simple and versatile technique for producing conducting polymer nanofibers. In fact, a core–shell structure is also created using this method, but the conducting polymer is on the surface of the fibers, which lays the groundwork for producing an effective nanofibrous conducting polymer-based actuator.
As a result, in recent years, researchers have used the method mentioned above to fabricate nanofibrous electrochemomechanical actuators based on conducting polymers (Fig. 3B).46,86–89 Based on the results, the actuation mechanism of conducting polymer nanofibers could be anionic or cationic exchange, or a combination of both, depending on the type and size of cations and anions in the electrolyte solution. In a potential cycle between −0.8 and +0.8 V, the prepared nanofibrous actuators could have an angular displacement of more than 720°. Moreover, the produced nanofibrous actuators exhibit faradaic behavior, so their angular speed and bending angle are under the control of applied current and consumed charge, respectively. These actuators can also act as a sensor to detect working conditions. Furthermore, the geometry effect of the nanofibrous layer on the actuator's final responses was investigated. The results indicated that a multilayered cylindrical structure of the nanofibrous layer has superior actuation performance than a single layer because it increases the active surface area of the actuator and thus facilitates the diffusion of the ions.90
The CA biopolymer has been used to make high-performance nanofibrous bioactuators. The electric dipole arrangement of CA is responsible for the actuator's actuation when an electric current is applied.91 The use of conducting polymers, such as polyaniline nanoparticles, can improve the actuation performance of CA nanofibrous actuators even up to four times.92 In this case, the ion exchange mechanism of conducting polymers, in addition to the piezoelectric actuation of cellulose acetate, plays the main role in the final performance of these actuators. The bacterial cellulose biopolymer has also gained interest in biomedical applications due to its excellent biocompatibility, non-toxicity, hydrophilicity, porosity, and mechanical properties. The nanofibrous bacterial cellulose/conducting polymer actuators have good actuation performance in terms of bending mechanical movement, response time, and stability.93
Silk fibroin is another biopolymer that has been used in nanofibrous bioactuators. This natural biopolymer is an ideal candidate for various in vivo and in vitro biomedical applications due to its unique properties such as non-toxicity, biocompatibility, biodegradability, mechanical properties, and excellent processability.94–98 By coating the silk fibers with conducting polymers, an electrochemomechanical bioactuator that mimics natural muscles can be fabricated. Severt et al.99 synthesized aligned silk/PPy nanofibrous bundles using electrospinning and sequential chemical and electrochemical polymerization processes (Fig. 4A). In the electrochemical polymerization process, they used two different dopants, namely para-toluene sulfonic acid and sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate. Moreover, a biologically compatible electrolyte, phosphate-buffered saline solution, was used to assess the stress and strain generated during the electrochemical actuation of these linear bioactuators. While both anionic and cationic ion-exchange behavior was observed in silk/PPy nanofibrous bioactuators doped with para-toluene sulfonic acid, only the cationic exchange mechanism was observed in the phosphate-buffered saline electrolyte in the sample doped with sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate. Poly(hydroxymethyl-3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT–OH) was also electrochemically polymerized on the surface of silk nanofibers in this study. The results showed that the actuation stress and response time of the silk/PEDOT–OH nanofibrous actuator are more appropriate than those of the silk/PPy sample (Fig. 4(Ae–h)). The strain generated by both of these nanofibrous actuators is several orders of magnitude higher than the actuation strain reported in silk/PPy film-based actuators.100
 Fig. 4  (A) Photograph (a) and SEM images of the lateral surface (b) and cross-section (c and d) of the silk/conducting polymer nanofibrous bundle as an electrochemomechanical bioactuator. Actuation stress and strain generated by silk/PPy (e and f) and silk/PEDOT–OH (g and h) nanofibrous actuators. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) The actuation performance of gelatin–glucose/PPy nanofibrous actuators synthesized with DBS and TF dopants: (a) generated strain and (b) stress by actuators in a potential cycle between 1 V and −0.55 V, (c) strain under square wave potential at 0.0025 Hz frequency, and (d) actuation stability of actuators up to 1000 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Public Library of Science. 
Researchers are also interested in electrospun gelatin nanofibers coated with conducting polymers as biocompatible electrodes in electrochemical applications. Harjo et al.102 recently used the chemical polymerization process to coat PPy on the surface of gelatin–glucose nanofibers to prepare a linear bioactuator. The results of electrochemomechanical responses showed that the obtained bioactuators have good actuation strain and stress with high stability. These actuators have been shown to perform better in an aqueous solution than in a propylene carbonate solution. Also, the generated gelatin–glucose/PPy nanofibrous actuators have simultaneous sensing capability for monitoring the surrounding conditions such as the applied current density and mechanical load and can be used as dual function actuator-sensor devices. Furthermore, the electrochemical actuation properties of gelatin/glucose coated with PPy were examined in a cell culture medium as the electrolyte solution. The actuation in this electrolyte was based on the cationic (sodium and partly calcium ions) ion-exchange mechanism.103
It should be noted that conducting polymers synthesized using electrochemical polymerization are likely to have more desirable electrical conductivity and electroactivity characteristics than those formed via the chemical method due to their more molecular arrangement and fewer structural defects.104,105 Therefore, researchers have been interested in coating the surface of electrospun nanofibers by electrochemical polymerization to create high-performance nanofibrous actuators. That is why the highest reported actuation strain among the nanofibrous electrochemomechanical actuators, i.e., 18%, has been achieved by a gelatin–glucose/PPy bioactuator produced using the electrochemical polymerization process and dodecylbenzenesulfonate as a dopant.102 This significant performance has also been related to the properties of the gelatin–glucose nanofibrous substrate. The generated stress of this actuator was 0.14 MPa, which is within the range of natural skeletal muscles. Using tetrabutylammonium triflouromethanesulfonate as a dopant in the polymerization process instead of dodecylbenzenesulfonate led to lower actuation stress and strain (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, these nanofibrous actuators exhibited remarkable actuation stability even up to 1000 cycles, making them promising bioactuators for use in practical applications.
The eggshell membrane with a 3D fibrous and porous biopolymeric structure similar to electrospun membranes has recently piqued the interest of researchers, especially for biomedical applications owing to its high specific surface area, high porosity, flexibility, biocompatibility, non-toxicity, low cost, and easy availability.106–108 Coating the eggshell membrane surface with conducting polymers could make it potential to be used in electrochemical biodevices. Beregoi et al.109 evaluated the actuation performance of the PPy coated ESM actuators. Electrochemical actuation of these bioactuators in a potential cycle between −0.6 and +0.6 V revealed that PPy oxidation and reduction result in the insertion and expulsion of electrolyte ions and solvent molecules into and out of the structure and mechanical movements.
Developing dry bioactuators that can operate in the air without being immersed in an electrolyte solution, which enables more practical applications, has always been of interest to researchers. A dry actuator is typically constructed from two electroactive electrodes and a polymeric electrolyte layer. When one electrode is oxidized, the other electrode is electrochemically reduced, and electrolyte ions are transferred from one electrode to the other. As a result, this actuator experiences a bending movement. However, dry linear actuators can also be fabricated if the actuation of two conducting polymer electrodes is based on two different ion-exchange mechanisms.65,110 Using ionic liquids in polymeric electrolytes has recently attracted the attention of many researchers to improve the actuation performance of dry nanofibrous actuators.77,111–113
Finally, the results show that in recent years, much progress has been made in designing and understanding the actuation mechanisms of nanofibrous actuators. Despite the advantages of nanofibrous actuators based on biopolymers, not much research has been reported on these devices. Therefore, investigation of the performance of nanofibrous actuators based on biopolymers such as lignin, gelatin, and alginate can be a topic of future studies in this regard. In most cases, the biopolymeric nanofibrous substrate plays a passive role, which provides biocompatibility to the actuator. However, some biopolymers, such as cellulose acetate, have intrinsically electrical actuation ability, which enhances the final actuation performance of the bioactuators due to the synergistic effect with the active component. It can be stated that the performance of nanofibrous bioactuators has reached close to that of natural skeletal muscles in terms of generated actuation strain and stress. However, the main challenges for the commercialization of these actuators are related to lifetime, durability, and, more importantly, their response time. One of the problems faced by biopolymer actuators based on conducting polymers is the potential drop along the actuator, which causes all parts of the device not to participate in electrochemical reactions. As a solution, metallization of the surface of electrospun biopolymer nanofibers and then coating with conducting polymers is suggested for further research. Developments in nanofibrous bioactuators as electrochemomechanical artificial muscles are promising for future advanced applications such as smart wearable devices, bio-robotics, computer-integrated surgery, drug delivery, e-skin, and smart textiles.
4 Application of nanofibrous biopolymers in rechargeable batteries focusing on anode materials and separators
The tremendous need to tackle fossil-fuel-based energy storage problems requires preparing, engineering, and formulating green materials for use in sustainable electrochemical energy storage technology (SEEST).114–116 Rechargeable batteries are regarded as an indispensable component of sustainable technology for stationary and mobile energy storage in industrial and domestic settings.117–120 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), as the most reliable energy storage devices, are considered as key tools in both developed and developing countries.121,122 LIBs are the dominant energy storage devices in today's electric vehicle markets, while lithium–sulfur technology has revealed an extremely high gravimetric energy density of 2600 W h kg−1 as the next generation of LIBs.123,124 However, the growing success and safe operation of rechargeable batteries in SEEST will necessitate the development of effective methods and the application of sustainable, cost-effective materials that are abundant around us.125,126 Combining sustainable bio-battery materials with nanotechnology and an electrospinning strategy can help us to get closer to designing an advanced, safe SEEST.
Biologically inspired synthetic methods of polymers have attracted widespread attention in SEEST.125 Carbonization of biopolymers at high temperature results in unique properties such as a 3D connected architecture and high surface area, making them ideal structural templates for engineering a wide range of nanoscale bio-based materials.127 Additionally, the inherent N,O-doped feature of carbon derived from biopolymers leads to interlayer space expansion of the graphitic carbon domains, providing active sites for charge storage.128,129 Moreover, as a low-cost, versatile, and straightforward setup, electrospinning can synthesize ultrathin nanofibers with exceptional performance.130,131 The study of nanofibrous biopolymers as rechargeable battery electrodes and separators is seldom reported and overviewed, but it could be very interesting for future battery technology development. This section focuses on biopolymers that have been fabricated using the electrospinning technique for lithium/sodium-ion (Li/Na-ion) battery components, particularly anode electrodes and separators.
4.1 Enhancement of lithium/sodium storage device electrodes
Li/Na-ion batteries include Li/Na intercalation compounds as the cathode and anode materials. The working principle of rechargeable batteries is based on the reversible redox reaction between these materials.132 The anode and cathode are physically separated by a porous membrane and ionically are connected through a Li/Na-based electrolyte.4,133 Typical cathode materials in Li/Na-ion batteries are transition metal oxides that receive Li/Na ions and electrons during discharge.134 Graphite and hard carbon are also the most commonly used anode electrodes.135–137 When the battery is charging, these negative electrodes store the Li/Na ions, which are then released with the flow of electrons to the cathode side during the discharge process.132Fig. 5A(a) shows a schematic illustration of the charge–discharge process in Li/Na-ion batteries.
 Fig. 5  (A) (a) The schematic illustration of the charge–discharge process in Li/Na-ion batteries. Digital images of the PL5/5-1300 electrode (b) before and (c) after cycling, and (d) SEM images of the PL5/5-1300 electrode after 200 charge–discharge cycles. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier. (B) (a) Schematic of phase separation for lignin/PLA fibers. TEM images of (b) lignin/TPU-50:50 and (c) lignin/PLA-50:50. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Wiley. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the half-cell including the prepared flexible electrode in the first, second, and third cycles. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Elsevier. (e) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of Fe3O4@CNFs and FexOyNFs at 0.2 A g−1 in lithium half-cell configuration. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
It is important to note that although the function of Na-ion batteriesis similar to that of Li-ion batteries, the cost, sustainability, and electrochemical performance of Na-ion batteries differ from that of their Li-ion counterparts.138,139
The electrodes' characteristics determine the performance of the battery.140 The structural stability, porous architecture, and flexibility of the electrodes should be considered the main parameters to be applied for improving portable SEEST.3 Shifting from powder-form to fiber-based materials can help overcome the potential bottlenecks of battery systems such as electrode structural changes, low electronic conductivity, dendrite growth, short life, and low energy density.141,142 In addition to electrochemical performance, in line with the philosophy of a reduced environmental impact, choosing renewable resources and viable and sustainable low-cost precursors could potentially mitigate the negative effects of CO2 emissions and develop a competitive battery system.143,144 The recent advances in engineering bio-based materials as nanofibrous electrodes with the electrospinning technique for rechargeable batteries are presented in the following.
Graphite and other carbonaceous materials are the most commonly utilized anode electrodes in Li/Na-ion batteries owing to their high availability, processability, and suitable structural stability.145 Meanwhile, many researchers are looking for new materials to replace graphite due to its low theoretical capacity (372 mA h g−1vs. Li+/Li), which is considered the primary issue with conventional batteries.146 Unlike carbon nanostructures based on graphene, carbon nanotubes, and mesoporous carbon, these new materials are expected to be low in cost while having a large production potential.137,147–149 CNFs produced by electrospinning are promising candidate electrodes for low-cost and large-scale commercial production of rechargeable batteries.150,151 The most common precursor material used to synthesize CNFs is petroleum-based polyacrylonitrile (PAN).152,153 However, due to the high preparation cost and the environmental issues associated with greenhouse gas emissions, this precursor is not recommended for battery application.154 Apart from PAN, cellulose and lignin are viable and sustainable precursors for the production of CNFs. Cellulose and lignin biopolymers have recently been used to fabricate electrodes, mostly for application in flexible rechargeable batteries, owing to their unique structure, surface chemistry, CO2 neutrality, biocompatibility, and most importantly, their abundance and low cost.155–157 Jin et al.143 investigated a sustainable and freestanding electrode based on biomass waste lignin to design Na-ion batteries. Due to the robust morphology of bio-based carbon fibers, the mechanically stable and 3D interconnected electrode exhibited a high specific capacity of 292.6 mA h g−1 at 0.02 A g−1 and excellent cycling performance in this study. Fig. 5A(b) confirms the structural integrity of the electrodes after cycling. Aside from the Na-ion battery, bio-derived CNFs from lignin were also applied in LIBs. In this work, lignin was blended with two other bio-based polymers, namely thermoplastic elastomer polyurethane (TPU) and polylactic acid (PLA), to compare the electrochemical and physical properties of carbonized lignin/TPU and lignin/PLA electrodes.121 This research showed that the compatibility of lignin with different polymers is critical in the ultimate carbonized CNF morphology. In contrast to the homogeneous structures of lignin/TPU, lignin/PLA demonstrated well-defined porosity, leading to additional sites for Li-ion insertion (Fig. 5B(c)).
In comparison to graphite, which is the most common anode electrode in rechargeable batteries, transition metal oxides (TMOs) such as cobalt, iron, nickel, and titanium oxides have attracted great attention to maximize the utilization of Li/Na-ion batteries through a novel conversion mechanism.158,159 However, TMOs have significant volume changes during the insertion and de-insertion of Li/Na ions, as well as surface instability and low electronic conductivity, which hinder direct use of these materials as the electrode in batteries.152,160,161 To address the above-mentioned issues, Xiaojing et al.126 proposed an electrospinning technique to design a flexible Fe2O3 nanoparticle electrode based on lignin. Lignin-derived electrospun CNFs with an average fiber diameter of ∼200 nm were used as a substrate to functionalize Fe2O3 nanoparticles in order to accelerate the reversible conversion reaction of the metal oxide with lithium and improve the electrochemical stability of a half-cell battery. The engineered sample showed a high specific discharge capacity of 715 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles at 50 mA g−1 current density. Fig. 5B(d) demonstrates the charge/discharge profiles of the half-cell including the prepared flexible electrode in the first, second, and third cycles. Other researchers also have confirmed the mentioned findings. For example, to promote the electrochemical performance of the Fe3O4 phase as the anode material in LIBs, lyotropic CA as the CNF phase was introduced to fabricate the Fe3O4@CNF electrode via electrospinning.162 The synergetic effect of Fe3O4 and CNFs was observed to form disordered structures with a large surface area, which increases the porosity, electrolyte penetration, and Li+ ion transferability in the designed electrode. In terms of capacity and electrochemical stability, Fe3O4@CNFs performed better than FexOyNFs as the blank electrode (Fig. 5B(e)).
4.2 Electrospun biopolymer-based separators
As mentioned earlier, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are composed of an anode, a cathode, a liquid electrolyte, and a separator. The separator is placed between the cathode and the anode in the presence of a liquid electrolyte which prevents physical contact of the electrodes and allows transportation of ions between electrodes. An ideal separator must be highly porous, have excellent wettability toward liquid electrolytes, and be thermally stable and mechanically strong enough to withstand the winding operation during the assembly of LIBs.163–165 In the past decade, cellulose-based biopolymer separators have been successfully explored for application in LIBs owing to their good wettability.166 Various electrodes such as LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, and LiFePO4 cathodes with graphite anodes have been used to examine the compatibility of cellulose-based separators and compare their performance with commercially available polypropylene (PP), polyethylene (PE), and PP/PE/PP separators. Since the micro-scale diameter of biopolymers brings some limitations in the porous structure and physical properties, these polymers are currently applied as a separator for the LIBs. On the other hand, nanofiber biopolymers possess a well-controlled and uniform porous structure. These structures have lengths and diameters of up to several microns and offer the best physical properties.166,167 Sheng et al.168 summarized major types of cellulose such as cellulose, nanocellulose, and cellulose derivatives, as well as various methods for the preparation of cellulose-based LIB separators, including electrospinning, force spinning, paper making, solution casting, conventional coating, and phase inversion method, and concluded that the papermaking process could be a good choice for low-cost bulk production. Chen et al.169 presented a detailed study on the advancements in the structural and physical characteristics of nanocellulose in energy storage applications such as Li/Na ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, and supercapacitors. They also presented the various methods of nanocellulose fabrication and their impacts on the structure and surface chemistry of nanocellulose. In the literature, a lot of cellulose derivatives or composite cellulose separators are also studied. Sun et al.170 introduced the zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF) in the cellulose nanofibers to make an eco-friendly composite separator membrane using the vacuum filtration method and examined the increment of the porosity from 42 to 55%. Liu et al.171 also introduced an environmentally friendly composite separator (PVA/cellulose nanofiber-Li+) prepared by a non-solvent induced phase separation method and claimed that the designed composite separator showed a porosity of over 60% and an ionic conductivity of 1.1 mS cm−1. In addition, the engineered separator exhibited a reversible capacity retention of 93% compared to the commercial PP separator which showed only 80% capacity retention after 50 cycles. Asghar et al.172 prepared a cellulose/polyvinylidene fluoride–hexafluoropropylene blend separator using the phase inversion method. They declared improvement of the porosity from 40 to 85%, enhancement of electrolyte uptake from 170 to 310%, and increment of ionic conductivity from 0.89 to 1.89 mS cm−1 compared to the pure polyvinylidene fluoride–hexafluoropropylene membrane. Liu173 focused on the safety and better performance of the LIBs and prepared a polyformaldehyde/cellulose nanofibrous separator by a thermally induced phase separation method. They obtained a tensile strength of 116 MPa and a puncture strength of 9.4 MPa for the prepared separator, which were significantly higher than those of the commercial PE separator (85 MPa and 5.1 MPa). Moreover, they declared an ionic conductivity of 1.39 mS cm−1 and 0.76 mS cm−1 for the formaldehyde/cellulose blend separator and commercial PE separator, respectively. Zhang et al.174 fabricated a thermally stable northern bleached softwood craft/polysulfonamide/nanofibrillated cellulose composite separator by using a papermaking procedure. The thermal shrinkage of the prepared composite membrane was 0%, while the commercial Celgard separator showed 55 and 66% thermal shrinkage, respectively, in vertical and horizontal directions after exposing to 180 °C for 1 h. Furthermore, the composite and the Celgard separator membranes exhibited a capacity retention of 78 and 71% in the application of LIBs.
Song et al.175 explored a composite separator with the polymer substrate of sodium alginate and attapulgite as inorganic additives with the help of a phase inversion method and achieved thermal stability with almost no thermal shrinkage at 250 °C for 2 hours. Also, the composite separator retained a capacity of 82% after 700 cycles at 5C. Uddin et al.176 prepared a non-woven PVA/lignin membrane using electrospinning. The separator was thermally stable and lost only 1% weight at 248 °C. In addition, a weight loss of about 40% was displayed after 400 °C, whereas the Celgard separator lost 99% of its weight at 260 °C. Liu et al.177 established an environmentally friendly, low-cost, biodegradable composite separator (CNF-LS). The composite membrane showed thermal stability at 270 °C and electrochemical stability in the voltage range of 3 to 4.8 V exhibiting a capacity of 188 mA h g−1 at 0.2C.
Despite the above-mentioned advancements in biopolymer-based CNFs via the electrospinning technique for fabrication of environmentally friendly electrodes and separators with fine diameter, excellent mechanical and physical properties, high electrical conductivity, and outstanding architecture, much work remains to be done to achieve batteries suitable for practical applications. For this goal, we propose an investigation of cellulose-based LiFePO4 as an alternative to nickel or cobalt-based cathode materials to combine with the CNF anode in a full-cell LIB configuration. This strategy introduces a practical green battery with respect to both anode and cathode. In addition to conventional LIBs, electrospun CNF biopolymers with their hierarchical porous structure could be composited with the sulfur cathode in lithium–sulfur batteries to suppress the shuttle effect, the most common challenge for this kind of battery.178 Although there are countless reports of engineering the cathode side of lithium–sulfur batteries, finding a suitable substituent for lithium metal has received less attention.179 Researchers working on sulfur-based batteries should consider the potential of CNF biopolymers as anodes in the fabrication of lithium–metal-free sulfur batteries for practical applications. Additionally, a lot of efforts have been put on a variety of biopolymer-based separators with various structures and components by using different fabricating strategies. Although biopolymer separators have been successfully developed for high performance LIBs, there are still some issues that need to be resolved in the future, such as flammable property, hygroscopic nature, and thermal shutdown. To overcome these issues, the chemical modification method can be employed to graft the polymer on the surface of biopolymer separators at the molecular level to get the low moisture absorption, best flame retardancy, and shutdown enabled biopolymer separator. It is also noteworthy that, to the best of our knowledge, there is no report regarding the application of both biopolymer-based electrodes and separators in rechargeable batteries. Therefore, it is of great value to design and characterize bio-polymer based electrospun electrodes and separators in a battery structure.
5 Electrospun biopolymers applicable in the synthesis of fuel cells
This section representatively describes the various applications of natural polymer nanofibers in fuel cell (FC) energy conversion devices. In recent decades, many researchers have dedicated their attempts to develop fuel cells as an alternative renewable, environmentally friendly energy source (with an electrical energy conversion efficiency of more than 60% with lower emission than conventional combustion engines).180–187 By considering some of their notable advantages, including high energy density, cycle stability, desirable thermal and mechanical stability, and high power density, which outperform conventional combustion-based technologies, FCs can act as a bridge between the present and forthcoming energy demand in a sustainable way.188–192 Owing to higher energy conversion efficiency, FCs can pave the way to find more applications in housing power, electronics, power plants, passenger vehicles, and military applications (see Fig. 6).187,193–195 The rationale behind FCs is the redox reaction at the anode and cathode electrodes.196,197 At the anode side, hydrogen molecules undergo an oxidation reaction (H2 → 2H+ + 2e−), where H+ ions migrate to the cathode side from the electrolyte, and electrons flow towards the cathode side through the external circuit. At the counterpart electrode, the reduction reaction occurs at the cathode side, where oxygen is reduced to water (O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O).196,198,199 Based on this concept, FCs are composed of anode, cathode, and electrolyte; also, water is the main by-product. According to Table 1, FCs can be categorized according to their electrolyte into proton exchange membrane FCs (PEMFCs), alkaline FCs (AFCs), solid oxide FCs (SOFCs), phosphoric acid FCs (PAFCs), molten and carbonate FCs, (MCFCs) and microbial FCs (MFCs). By considering the importance of FCs as a green energy source, lots of materials have been investigated to improve the performance of their components; among them, natural polymer nanofibers due to their high surface area and eco-friendly nature have received researchers’ attention.192,200,201 As public awareness about natural resources and the environment has grown, renewable and environmentally friendly materials have received much attention.202 In this regard, natural polymer nanofibers are of great interest as a choice for several industrial applications.203 They are eco-friendly, abundant in nature, cheap, non-hazardous, recyclable, and relatively inexpensive than synthetic reinforcements such as glass/carbon fibers; consequently, they can provide several environmental and economic benefits.192,200,201 Notably, the appropriate usage of natural polymer nanofibers can reduce environmental pollution and resolve waste disposal complications.204,205 Incorporating natural polymer nanofibers in different components of FCs can improve the performance and provide appropriate properties, especially in PEMFCs, AFCs, and MFCs.204,206 It is worth mentioning that natural polymer nanofibers can reinforce proton conduction because they can establish order and so enhance the fuel cell's performance.206,207 In addition, the incorporation of natural polymer nanofibers can have a profound effect on ionic conductivity (due to the presence of functional groups) and control the swelling properties in ion-exchange membranes.208 Furthermore, they can greatly increase the mechanical properties of prepared membranes due to their high tensile strength.202,209 Also, natural polymeric nanofibrous substrates are promising candidates for GDL in FC applications due to their outstanding mechanical properties, tunable surface chemistry, anisotropic character, renewable nature as well as biocompatibility.208
 Fig. 6  Schematic of some FC applications based on the required power output scale. 
Table 1 Classification and characteristics of different FCs




Type of fuel cell
Type of electrolyte
Type of anode feed
Type of cathode feed
Operation temperature
Ref.




PEMFC
Proton exchange membrane
Pure hydrogen
Oxygen or air
<100 °C

210



DMFC
Proton exchange membrane
Liquid methanol
Oxygen or air
90–120 °C

211



AFC
Concentrated (30–50%) KOH in H2O
Pure hydrogen
Oxygen or air
50–200 °C

212



MCFC
Molten carbonate salt suspended in a porous ceramic matrix
Coal-derived fuel gas, methane or natural gas
Oxygen or air
About 650 °C

199



PAFC
Phosphoric acid
Pure hydrogen
Oxygen or air
>200 °C

213



SOFC
Solid ceramic
Gasoline or natural gas
Oxygen or air
500–600 °C

196



MFC
Membrane
Microorganism's activity
Oxygen or air
15–45 °C

214





As mentioned before, PEMFCs are one of the prominent FCs that natural polymer nanofibers have been investigated for application in their components, including the membrane and gas diffusion layer (GDL). In one investigation, the application of nano cellulosic fibers and cellulose nanocrystals in a high-temperature proton conduction membrane was reported, and the prepared slurries are shown in Fig. 7A(a and b).215 As presented in Fig. 7AI, the nano cellulosic fibers and cellulose nanocrystals were prepared using the vacuum filtration method followed by hot pressing. The freestanding film was achieved for nano cellulosic fibers, while the film was more brittle for cellulose nanocrystals (SEM images of nano cellulosic fibers and cellulose nanocrystals are displayed in Fig. 7A(d and e)). Hydrogen gas was used as a fuel and vacuum filtered cellulose nanocrystals and nano cellulosic fibers were incorporated as a proton exchange membrane into a membrane electrode assembly as shown in Fig. 7A(f and g) and in the corresponding SEM images in Fig. 7A(h and i). Proton conductivity at different temperatures and humidity was investigated, and the cellulose nanocrystal sample achieved higher proton conductivity (0.05 mS cm−1 at 100 °C for nano cellulosic fibers compared to 4.57 mS cm−1 at 120 °C for the cellulose nanocrystal). It could be linked with carboxylic and sulfuric acid groups and more crystallinity which was confirmed by AFM and XRD examinations. Also, power density was measured for the cellulose nanocrystal and cellulose nanofiber based membrane electrode assembly, and the results are illustrated in Fig. 7A(h and i).
 Fig. 7  (A) Slurry prepared from (a) cellulose nanofiber and (b) cellulose nanocrystal, and (c) (left to right) conventional cellulose-based paper, cellulose nanofiber paper, and cellulose nanocrystal paper (thicknesses for all was ∼90 μm). SEM images of (d) cellulose nanofiber and (e) cellulose nanocrystal paper. Images of prepared MEAs based on a (f) cellulose nanofiber membrane and (g) cellulose nanocrystal membrane. Postoperation cross-sectional SEM images of (h) cellulose nanofiber and (i) cellulose nanocrystal membrane. Polarization and power density curves of FCs based on cellulose nanocrystal and cellulose nanofiber membrane electrode assemblies operated at 80 °C and 95% RH for the (j) 32 μm thick cellulose nanofiber membrane and (k) 30 μm thick cellulose nanocrystal membrane. Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) SEM images of P-Cell membranes and the corresponding fiber size distribution: (a) P-Cell-0.1M, (b) P-Cell-0.15M, (c) P-Cell-0.2M, and (d) P-Cell-0.25M. SEM images of the phosphoric acid treated cellulose nanofiber/SPES composite membrane: cross-sections of (e) P-Cell/SPES-0.2M, (f) P-Cell/SPES-0.1M, (g) 0.15M-P-Cell/SPES-0.15M, (h) P-Cell/SPES-0.2M Ind and (i) P-Cell/SPES-0.25M. Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Elsevier. 
As previously stated, electrospun biopolymers can have a positive role in facilitating proton conductivity. Xu et al.216 prepared cellulose nanofibers via the solution blowing method and embedded these natural polymer nanofibers in a sulfonated poly(ether sulfone) membrane as a proton-conducting membrane in DMFCs. The incorporation of nanofibers improved the mechanical, thermal, and morphological properties of the prepared membranes. Embedding solution-blown nanofibers enhanced the proton conductivity, methanol permeability as well as dimensional stability of the provided membranes.209 According to the proton conductivity measurement at different temperatures, the composite membrane with 5 wt% nanofibers at 80 °C exhibited a maximum value of 0.13 S cm−1. The result showed that incorporating electrospun biopolymers improved the proton conductivity by around 1.6 times compared to the pristine membrane. Cellulose can create effective interactions with sulfonic acid groups in sulfonated poly(ether sulfone) and construct some proton-conducting channels by possessing a large number of hydroxyl groups.217,218 Although these membranes were not applied in an FC setup, methanol permeability and selectivity values (4.45 × 10−7 cm2 S−1, and 8.9 × 104 S s cm−3, respectively) were quite promising.
By considering the reinforcing properties of electrospun biopolymers in PEMs, Cai et al.207 treated nano cellulosic fibers with different concentrations (0.1, 0.15, 0.2, and 0.25 mol L−1) of phosphoric acid solutions and then embedded them in sulfonated poly(ether sulfone) for use as a PEM. As shown in Fig. 7B, SEM images and size distributions of phosphoric acid treated nano cellulosic fibers as well as their composite membrane with sulfonated poly(ether sulfone) were investigated. Furthermore, the effect of different phosphoric acid concentrations on the physicochemical characteristics of prepared membranes was studied. The composite membrane doped with 0.25 mol L−1 phosphoric acid exhibited a maximum proton conductivity of 0.154 S cm−1 at 80 °C and 100% RH, a minimum methanol permeability of 4.41 × 10−7, and a maximum selectivity of 17.6 × 104 S s cm−3. It is worth noting that hydroxyl groups of cellulose nanofibers and phosphate groups of phosphoric acid can create some hydrogen bonding interactions. Moreover, as depicted in SEM images (Fig. 7B), this can change the morphology of the nanofibers. According to the results, phosphoric acid-treated nanofibers can potentially be applied in FCs.
Embedding imidazole groups in cellulose nanofibers is another strategy to improve their compatibility and the proton-conducting ability for PEMFC application. In one approach,217 imidazole groups were incorporated in solution-blown cellulose nanofibers in the presence of an acid–base pair. The acid–base pair can facilitate protonation/deprotonation and consequently improve the proton transfer ability of the final membrane.220 The imidazole-treated nanofibers could effectively reduce fuel crossover through the membrane. The interaction between nitrogen groups in imidazole and functional groups in the membrane could form a cross-linked structure and narrow transportation channels, preventing fuel permeation (SEM images depicted in Fig. 8A(a–d)). The proton conductivity of the composite membrane reached up to 0.132 S cm−1 by introducing imidazole-treated nanofibers into the sulfonated poly(ether sulfone) polymeric matrix at 80 °C and 100% RH.
 Fig. 8  (A) SEM images and the corresponding fiber diameter distribution: (a) cell and Cell/Im nanofibers: (b) Cell/Im-10, (c) Cell/Im-20, and (d) Cell/Im-30. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from IOPscience. (e) SEM image and (f) cross-sectional image of the H-CNF-1550 membrane, and (g and h) polarization curves of cellulose nanofiber membranes as a function of surface charge density and thickness. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) SEM images of (a) cellulose nanofibers and (b) Cell-Ser nanofibers, TEM images of (c and d) single Cell-AAs nanofibers stained with OSO4, (e–g) the EDS mapping of single Cell-AAs nanofibers, and (h) the corresponding EDX data of the single Cell-AAs nanofibers stained with OSO4. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from Elsevier. 
In another investigation, Guccini et al.218 used carboxylated cellulose nanofibers directly as a PEM in PEMFCs and obtained a maximum proton conductivity of 1 mS cm−1 at 30 °C and 95% RH. A high aspect ratio, the great affinity of carboxylated cellulose nanofibers to water, and a homogeneous membrane morphology, as depicted in Fig. 8A(e and f), were some noticeable factors that facilitated the proton transfer ability of the membrane. As shown in Fig. 8A(g and h), the carboxylated cellulose nanofiber membranes with different thicknesses (13, 14, 23, 24, and 37.5 μm) and surface charge density (1550 and 600 μmol g−1) were tested in a fuel cell setup at 30 °C and 95% RH and compared with the Nafion 112 membrane. Although the prepared carboxylated cellulose nanofibers showed desirable performance, they still had a higher resistance than Nafion. The lower performance of the designed membrane compared to Nafion 112 was related to the lower acidity of the carboxylic functional groups and the different morphological structure of the carboxylated cellulose nanofibers. The reported results implied that carboxylated cellulose nanofibers could be a promising candidate for PEMFC application by considering their environmentally friendly and desirable fuel cell performance.
In DMFCs, the contribution of the PEM is more critical than in PEMFCs, because the membrane in DMFCs not only acts as a proton conductive medium but it also has an inevitable role in establishing a direct contact between oxidant and methanol.181,189,221 Notably, methanol crossover from the anode to the cathode side can have some poisonous effect on the cathode's electrocatalyst.206,222 In another attempt,220 different amino acids were immobilized onto cellulose nanofibers to shape clusters as proton transfer pathways. It is worth mentioning that acid–base pairs can facilitate proton transfer by the Grotthuss mechanism.212 In this regard, acid groups in the polymeric backbone (–SO3H) and base groups in amino acids (–NH2) can assemble an acid–base pair and facilitate proton conduction. In addition, the 3D network of functionalized cellulose nanofibers can be helpful in creating proton pathways through the membrane. Also, the suitability of amino acid-incorporated cellulose nanofibers was confirmed by FC performance analysis. According to Fig. 8B and SEM images, all immobilized amino acid cellulose nanofibers maintained three-dimensional networks. Also, the modification with amino acids was confirmed by TEM images as well as EDS mapping. Sulfonated polysulfone was used to fill the inter-fiber voids of the amino acid modified cellulose nanofibers. Moreover, physicochemical investigation was conducted on prepared composite membranes formed by sulfonated polysulfone and amino acid modified cellulose nanofibers. The hybrid membrane with 20% Cell-Ser cluster exhibited a maximum proton conductivity of 0.264 S cm−1 at 80 °C. Furthermore, the fuel cell performance of all amino acid-functionalized cellulose nanofiber incorporated SPSF composite membranes tested at 60 °C and 100% RH and the sulfonated polysulfone-Ser PEM reached 87.22 mW cm−2. Based on the evaluations, the Cell-AAs embedded sulfonated polysulfone membrane can be a promising candidate for DMFC application.
AFCs are another well-known class of FCs in which natural polymer nanofibers are utilized. This kind of FC has demonstrated significant potential as a source of energy due to its considerable properties, such as faster reaction kinetics, inexpensive materials for its electrocatalyst part, and simple operating system in comparison to PEMFCs. Although AFCs are a promising approach in FCs, there are still some challenges toward finding an appropriate anion exchange membrane.
Recently, some researchers have investigated the incorporation of natural-polymer based nanofibers in the anion exchange membrane. It has been shown that cellulose can tolerate an alkaline medium. Das et al.223 have employed the cellulose nanofiber isolated from Citrus tangerine for application in AFCs. The cellulose extraction steps from the orange peel are shown in Fig. 9A(a). First, they quaternized cellulose nanofibers with 1,4-diazabicyclo-[2.2.2]-octane, and then they incorporated them in a quaternized polysulfone backbone to achieve an AEM. The cross-linked structure of quaternized polysulfone and quaternized cellulose nanofibers could efficiently prevent the membrane from excessive swelling and improve the mechanical and chemical stability in an alkaline medium. Also, AFM images of polysulfone crosslinked with dibromobutane and quaternized polysulfone with 5 wt% quaternized cellulose are depicted in Fig. 9A(b–d). Furthermore, a maximum ionic conductivity of 74.23 mS cm−1 was achieved for a membrane consisting of 15 wt% quaternized cellulose nanofibers in quaternized polysulfone, which was 2.7 fold higher than that of the membrane without quaternized cellulose nanofibers. As shown in Fig. 9A(e and f), the cross-linked structure along with quaternized cellulose nanofibers gave the membrane desirable durability in KOH solution after five days, making it a promising candidate for AFCs for long-term application.
 Fig. 9  (A) Cellulose nanofiber preparation. (a) Cellulose extraction steps from Citrus tangerine, (b) AFM images of (b) quaternized polysulfone/dibromobutane, and (c) amplitude and (d) phase images of quaternized polysulfone/quaternized cellulose, (e) ionic network illustration, and (f) possible crosslinked and non-cross-linked structures in the nanocomposite membranes. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Synthesis steps of quaternary ammonia poly(ether ether ketone) and sulfonated nano bamboo fibers, and their composite membrane. Single-cell performance of APEFCs using quaternary ammonia poly(ether ether ketone) membranes and the composite membranes (b) at 60 °C without backpressure and (c) at 60 °C with 0.1 MPa backpressure. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic construction and working mechanism of MFCs; photos of carbon cloth (e) before and (f) after coating with esterified cellulose nanofibers; and (g) power density performance curves of MFCs with ACPTFE and ACE-CNF. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Improvement of proton conductivity should help maintain mechanical stability, and tuning between these two crucial parameters without sacrificing the other is a bottleneck that researchers have to confront. In a case study, according to Fig. 9B(a), sulfonated nano bamboo fibers were introduced into the quaternary ammonia poly(ether ether ketone) matrix to maintain its mechanical properties as well as prevent it from excessive swelling. Upon reinforcing with sulfonated nano bamboo fibers, the swelling ratio diminished significantly from 27.5 to 7.5% at 80 °C, whereas IEC was as high as 1.76 mmol g−1. By taking into account the noticeable properties provided by sulfonated nano bamboo fibers, the prepared membrane not only exhibited desirable mechanical stability, but also showed a proton conductivity of up to 0.069 Ω cm−2 at 30 °C and 0.0124 Ω cm−2 at 80 °C, which is suitable for AFC applications.224 Also, the single cell performance of the sulfonated nano bamboo fibers/quaternary ammonia poly(ether ether ketone) membrane was measured at 60 °C without and with different backpressures with a peak power density of 930 mW cm−2 (see Fig. 9B(b and c)).
As another approach, a freestanding and mechanically flexible mat was synthesized from lignin-derived cellulose nanofibers with supercritical CO2, followed by thermal treatment at 180 °C. Next, an electrocatalyst was produced by deposition of Ag nanoparticles on the surface of the prepared mat to evaluate its application for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in a 0.1 M KOH aqueous solution. Lignin-derived cellulose nanofibers exhibited high specific surface area (∼583 m2 g−1), a desired mat structure, excellent electrical conductivity, as well as higher resistance against corrosive electrolyte in the fuel cell environment. Also, by considering that lignin is a by-product of cellulose, it is abundant, and consequently, the utilization of lignin is environmentally friendly and cost-effective. The prepared electrocatalyst was tested for ORR in an alkaline medium (0.1 M KOH), and its performance in terms of silver loading, limiting current density, and mass activity was also evaluated. The electrocatalytic activity of lignin-based nanofibers was compared to that of commercial HiSPEC 4100 TM Pt/C, and the mass activity of the prepared electrocatalyst (15 wt% Ag/lignin-derived cellulose nanofibers) was 119 mA mg−1, which was greater than that of the commercial one (98 mA mg−1).225
Also, natural polymer nanofibers have found application in microbial FCs (the schematic working principle of a MFC is depicted in Fig. 9B(d)). An esterified cellulose nanofiber (E-CNF) from corncob was mechanochemically treated to produce GDL material with application in MFCs. As shown in Fig. 9B(e and f), carbon cloth as a GDL was coated with esterified cellulose nanofibers, and the electrochemical performance of MFCs containing a uniformly esterified cellulose nanofiber-based GDL was evaluated. According to Fig. 9B(g), the power density for the esterified cellulose nanofiber-based air cathode (ACE-CNF) reached 1518.3 ± 39 mW m−2, 30.1% higher than that of the reference sample (1166.7 ± 29 mW m−2, for PTFE based air cathode (ACPTFE) containing MFCs prepared by a traditional brushing method). Although the reported results were promising about the application of natural polymer nanofibers in MFCs, there is a need for further enhancement that can be achieved by optimizing the structure and thickness of the esterified cellulose nanofibrous layer.226
In conclusion, FCs are one of those renewable energy systems that have been drawn the interest of many researchers as an alternative green energy resource and can play an essential role in the transition from fossil fuel to more green sources, as endorsed by the Paris climate change agreement.227,228 In this regard, some efforts have been focused on decreasing the cost of final FCs, including improving the performance of individual cells, minimizing the usage of expensive electrocatalysts and electrolytes, and finding cost-effective alternative materials. As an environmentally friendly and cost-effective material, natural polymer based nanofibers can provide us desirable properties, such as high surface area and fully interconnected pores, and this review sheds light on some practical applications of natural polymer nanofibers in different components of FCs. The electrospun biopolymers have been used as the membrane and GDL in PEMFCs. Also, they have found some applications in GDL and membrane preparation of AFCs. Furthermore, these structures have been applied as a GDL as a component of MFC devices. By considering these aspects, incorporation of natural polymer based nanofibers in different components of the fuel cell can impart desired functions including water retention, enhancement of mechanical and thermal stability, and construction of proton transfer channels, in addition to playing an effective role in fuel barrier properties of fuel cell's proton exchange membrane.
The future offers high hopes for natural polymer nanofibers as a promising bio-based component for FCs since these materials are appropriate materials with application in ion exchange membranes and electrocatalyst layers.
6 Electrochemical sensors using bio-polymeric nanofibers
Sensors are integral to developing next-generation electronics for numerous applications, including environmental and healthcare monitoring.229 The electrochemical (EC) module of sensors over other strategies (optical, calorimetric, chemiresistive, and hybrid modes) enables the detection of low trace levels of harmful and infectious pathogens, biomarkers, and gaseous and water pollutants.230–235 The state-of-the-art EC sensors are related to developing novel nanomaterials and rapid data processing techniques to attain high-performances. Polymer-based functional nanomaterials have been extensively explored to replace currently available inorganic material-based commercial sensors due to their energy efficiency, cost-effectiveness, mechanical and physicochemical flexibility and scalable fabrication.236,237 However, the massive utilization of sensors to design smart connected societies has raised a probable threat of solid-waste management and ecosystem contamination 2. To attain sustainability in EC sensors, biopolymers have emerged as promising eco-friendly, economical and energy-efficient materials for environmental and healthcare monitoring.238,239 The biocompatible attribute and high aspect ratio of biopolymers with nanofibrous morphology facilitate long-term in vitro and in vivo stability in EC sensors. Moreover, due to the ease of fabrication, high surface-to-volume ratio, robust charge transport, controllable physicochemical attributes and processing flexibility, electrospun biopolymer nanofibres are compatible with devising miniature and sensing devices. However, although there is much literature dedicated to electrospun biopolymers, reports on their utilization to architect EC environmental sensors and biosensors are still in their infancy.
Majorly, biome-derived polysaccharide, polypeptide and polyphenol nanofibres fabricated by electrospinning have been employed to design modern-age EC sensors.239 However, they have been utilized in nanocomposites, additives, substrates and functional materials rather than in pristine form to architect EC sensors. Their role in architecting EC sensors employed for healthcare and environment monitoring is critical, where biocompatibility, optimization and non-toxicity are prerequisites. They are used for multipurpose in architecting EC biosensors, including immobilization, fabricating substrates and electrodes and surface functionalization.
In healthcare sectors, electrospun nanofibre-based EC sensors are employed for early, real-time and point-of-care monitoring of various biomolecules, biomarkers and pathogens. For instance, Ahmadi et al.240 developed an EC paper-based analytical device utilizing an alkaline regenerated electrospun nanocellulose-paper substrate for blood glucose monitoring. Further, the EC biosensor was architected with three screen-printed electrodes, with a working electrode fabricated from reduced graphene oxide (rGO) modified Au deposited over a cellulose nanofibre substrate. The biosensor array demonstrated excellent selectivity, reproducibility, stability and sensitivity (around 9.9 × 10−4 kΩ−1 mM−1) towards 3.3–27.7 mM glucose with the lowest detection limit (LDL) of 0.1 mM. The fabricated biosensor demonstrated the prospects for flexible, portable and degradable devices addressing biocompatibility and solid-waste management issues.
On the other hand, Kim et al.241 developed a wearable and non-invasive epidermal glucose EC biosensor based on cellulose/β-cyclodextrin electrospun over a reverse iontophoresis electrode. An excellent in vitro interstitial fluid glucose (linear range sensitivity: 0–1 mM) monitoring was observed with a significant diffusion coefficient (9.0 × 10−5 cm2 s−1) and low LDL (9.35 × 10−5 M). These outcomes reveal the potential of electrospun biopolymer nanofibre-based EC sensors to be employed for personalized diabetes monitoring and diagnosis, one of the most considerable inventions required in the field of non-invasive blood glucose monitoring at a global scale. Moreover, the use of two biopolymer blended electrospun nanofibres to architect EC sensors has also been reported to include the merits of both the precursors due to probable synergistic effects. Following this, Yezer et al.242 demonstrated the excellent glucose monitoring efficacy of a cellulose acetate–chitosan blended electrospun nanofibre based EC biosensor. The improved glucose monitoring behaviour of the fabricated EC sensor was attributed to both the biopolymers' merits and synergistic effects. However, the energy required to operate EC biosensors is another bottleneck hindering their commercial and wearable prospects. In this context, Lv et al.243 reported a self-powered and highly flexible biosensor based on a Au-modified bacterial cellulose-based substrate for ultralow facial glucose monitoring with a broad linear detection range (0–50 mM).
Moreover, there are reports on the utilization of biopolymers to fabricate nanogenerators based on the principle of harvesting triboelectricity.244,245 For instance, Zhang et al.244 demonstrated the use of a bio-derived gelatin-based triboelectric nanogenerator integrated with a polyaniline hybrid sensor for ammonia detection. It proposes that the combination of two different biopolymers can be utilized for devising biocompatible self-operational EC sensors by following the same technique. Thus, these modern-age energy-efficient glucose biosensors possess latent capacity to replace the current invasive diabetes detecting strategies, solving a major global issue of premature and diabetic mortalities, regular harsh invasive screening, and associated issues of kidney failure, blindness, heart strokes and lower limb amputation.
The utilization of electrospun biopolymer nanofibre-based biosensors is extended to the detection of micronutrients. For instance, Chauhan et al.246 demonstrated enhanced detection of 25-hydroxy vitamin-D3 with a sensitivity of 0.16 μA ng−1 mL cm−2 and LDL of 10.0 ng mL−1 utilizing an electrospun cellulose acetate fiber based EC biosensor (Fig. 10A and B). The obtained outcomes were according to ELISA measurements, and hydrophilic conducting paper substrate utilization turned it into an ecofriendly, cost-effective, disposable and portable module. EC biosensors can also be utilized for understanding and investigating cellular functioning and genetic molecules. For example, Civan et al.247 reported an electrospun cellulose monoacetate/tetraethyl orthosilicate nanofibre based EC biosensor to investigate guanine oxidation in single strand deoxyribonucleic acid molecules. On the other hand, Pavinatto et al.248 detected 17α-ethinylestradiol (EE2), which is a female synthetic hormone possessing high estrogenic action and latent potential to disrupt the endocrine system, through an electrospun PVP/chitosan/rGO nanofibre based EC biosensor.
 Fig. 10  (A) Cellulose nanofibre based biosensor for healthcare monitoring. (a) SEM image of electrospun cellulose acetate nanofibres for an EC biosensor, (b) response outcomes of the fabricated biosensor towards 25-hydroxy vitamin-D3 for different monitoring parameters. (B) Sensing parameters of the fabricated EC biosensor. (a) Selectivity, (b) reproducibility, and (c) repeatability of the fabricated sensing device. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from American Chemical Society. (C) Chitosan–gelatin composite fibre based EC sensor to monitor hydrogen peroxide at environmental and biological levels. (a) Fabrication route for electrospun chitosan–gelatin composite nanofibres, (b) amperometric sensitivity evaluated using nanofiber (A) and thin film (B) modified electrodes for consecutive addition of 1 mM hydrogen peroxide at −0.3 V, (c) cyclic voltammograms recorded for different electrodes (a) pristine, (b) nanofibers, (c) glutaraldehyde, and (d) HRP at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, and (d) amperometric outcomes observed from electrospun chitosan–gelatin composite nanofiber-modified electrodes for consecutive addition of 1 mM hydrogen peroxide at −0.2 V. Reproduced from ref. 249 with permission from MDPI. 
Additionally, these sensors have been employed to detect and monitor life-threatening diseases and toxic chemicals. Vasudevan et al.250 reported a cellulose acetate–MoS2 hybrid-based EC sensor for early-stage diagnosis of severe cardiac disease and acute myocardial infarction, and for detecting the troponin I level. The fabricated EC biosensor was also evaluated to detect other biomolecules in human serum, illustrating the latent ability to transform healthcare diagnosis by detecting multiple biomolecules through a single EC sensor. Further, ochratoxin A is an abundant mycotoxin teratogenic, nephrotoxic, and neurotoxic to humans and animals. Al-Dhabi et al.251 and El-Moghazy et al.252 reported innovative ultrasensitive strategies for its selective and low trace detection employing hybrids of electrospun biopolymer based EC sensors.
Moreover, Liberato et al.253 designed a label-free EC biosensor based on electrospun polyamide-6 (PA6)/chitosan nanofibres to detect Leishmania braziliensis in human serum. The addition of chitosan into the hybrid system surged the charge carrier transport, which effectively enhanced the detection efficacy of the fabricated biosensor. The outcomes revealed the detection range to be 2.5 to 10 pg mL−1 with LDL of 0.2 pg mL−1, which was significantly lower than that of the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Furthermore, the biosensor could detect two nonspecific antibodies (T. cruzi and β-actin) with the integration of principal component analysis strategies. Thus, EC biosensors based on electrospun biopolymer nanofibres cover a wide range of biomolecules and biomarkers, possessing huge potential in designing personalized healthcare sensors.
Electrospun biopolymer-based EC sensors have also been reported to monitor several environmental conditions and contaminants. For instance, Nath et al.254 demonstrated EC detection of pH using a membrane made of red cabbage extracted anthocyanin hybridized with gelatin nanoparticles and captured inside electrospun ethyl cellulose nanofibres which can also be utilized for monitoring milk spoilage. On the other hand, Teepoo et al.249 demonstrated the utilization of chitosan–gelatin hybrid electrospun nanofibres in architecting EC sensors to detect hydrogen peroxide, which is a critical molecule in numerous environmental, industrial and physiological processes (Fig. 10C). They immobilized horseradish peroxidase through composite biopolymer nanofibres and observed excellent sensitivity (44 μA mM−1 cm−2), optimum selectivity and low LDL (0.05 mM). The demonstrated outcomes revealed the potential prospect of a designed EC biosensor for detecting hydrogen peroxide for healthcare and environmental monitoring. The reports on monitoring water contamination by detection and adsorption of numerous heavy metals and radionuclides are significant in number and have already been discussed in the previous section. However, the potential of electrospun biopolymer nanofibre-based EC sensors is yet to be evaluated for gas/vapour monitoring and requires dedicated research and development.
Hence, the electrospun biopolymer nanofibre-based EC sensors are promising for healthcare and environmental monitoring. However, their detection and monitoring efficacies can be improved using various strategies, including incorporating advanced nanomaterials such as metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes),233,234 borophene,229,255 and others,239 integrating rapid-data processing techniques and improving device architecture. Moreover, the integration of modern-age technologies such as artificial intelligence, cloud computing, 5G generation and internet-of-things with EC sensors has the potential to develop future-generation, sustainable, personalized and remotely accessible monitoring and sensing strategies.229 Considering these features, biopolymer-based EC biosensors have the potential to transform the personalized healthcare sector due to their biocompatible nature. Thus, the smart, miniature and self-powered biosensors can be utilized in skin-embedded modules by incorporation of triboelectric fundamentals and are the near future of personalized healthcare.
In addition, the sensors are a crucial vector for developing intelligent and connected societies, which also creates a threat of massive solid-waste generation. Owing to their biocompatible and eco-friendly nature, biopolymer-based EC sensors exhibit considerable potential to address this challenge and develop sustainable sensing strategies. They can be easily reused, recycled, degraded or repurposed compared to conventional inorganic-material-based sensors, which is required for ecosystem preservation and attaining a circular economy.
7 Biopolymer-based electrospun supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are devices with the ability to store electrochemical energy with a fast delivery rate.256 These electrochemical tools are classified into two main categories, including electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors.257 A supercapacitor device comprises electrodes, a separator, and an electrolyte as the main components. Although each part is important, the performance of the supercapacitor majorly depends on electrode materials. The electrodes of EDLCs are generally made up of carbonaceous materials. In addition, they are based on the energy storage principle arising from the electrostatic charge separation on the interface of porous conducting electrodes and absorbed electrolytes. To approach a highly efficient EDLC behavior, the electrodes should possess a high surface area and suitable porosity (containing sufficient meso- and micropores) as well as appropriate mechanical strength or flexibility, conductivity, and chemical stability.258 Electrospun carbon nanofibers are being explored to meet these specific requirements. Meanwhile, pseudocapacitance has been observed in the case of most metal oxides, polymers specifically conductive polymers, metal complexes (nitrides, sulfides, and hydroxides), etc. These materials display faradaic behavior involving redox reactions at the surface or interface, similar to the battery materials. Compared to EDLC materials, pseudocapacitive materials suffer from poor conductivity along with a low accessible surface area to the electrolyte component.259 In addition, despite higher power density than that of the battery structures, lower energy density has restricted their use in energy storage devices.
Freestanding and flexible supercapacitors are becoming popular among worldwide researchers due to their application in wearable electronics. Electrospun CNFs are emerging as electrode materials for flexible supercapacitor applications. In most attempts, PAN and pitch-based CNFs have been utilized for the synthesis of versatile electrodes due to their high carbon content and ideal thermal stability. However, these materials are petroleum-based and non-renewable resulting in the release of toxic and harmful gases during processing. Therefore, natural polymers have been recently considered as the only hope for the fabrication of electrospun carbon nanofibers from nontoxic and highly abundant resources. As a result, biopolymers have emerged as new eco-friendly raw materials to prepare the supercapacitor electrodes. Further advantages of biopolymers over the PAN polymer are requirement of shorter or no stabilization process due to their pre-aromatic structure, higher stability, easy extraction process and availability which make them a better substitute for carbon nanofiber formation. Also, biopolymers on conversion into carbon nanofibers provide a more porous structure and hence good surface area, which is required for EDLC type supercapacitor applications. This section gives an insight into the most recent application of biopolymer-based electrospun nanofibers as the electrode element in supercapacitor devices. In this regard, several related approaches are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summarization of recent approaches related to biopolymer-based electrospun supercapacitors




Fiber components
Thermal treatment condition
Electrochemical performance
Ref.




Poplar lignin/PAN-based CNFs (5:5 and 7:3)
220 °C@0.2 °C min−1 and 950 °C@2 °C min−1 for 2 h
339.2 F g−1 (5:5) and 243.8 F g−1 (7:3) over 0–1.0 V

260



Pine lignin/PAN-based CNFs (5:5 and 7:3)


302.5 F g−1 (5:5) and 228.4 F g−1 (7:3) over 0–1.0 V




Corn stalk lignin/PAN-based CNFs (5:5 and 7:3)


280.7 F g−1 (5:5) and 189.8 F g−1 (7:3) over 0–1.0 V




Lignin (corn stalk)/PAN-based CNFs (1:1)
220 °C@0.5 °C min−1 for 4 h and 1000 °C@4 °C min−1 for 4 h, and activation in KOH at 800 °C for 1 h in N2
442.2 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 over −1.0 to 0.0 V, ED ∼ 37.1 W h kg−1 at PD ∼ 400 W kg−1, and CR ∼ 97.1% after 10000 cycles

262



Lignin/PAN-based CNFs (9:1)
240 °C in air@1 °C min−1, 1200 °C@5 °C min−1 in N2, and cooling@10 °C min−1
201.27 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1

263



Lignin/PAN-based CNFs incorporated with SnCl2·2H2O
200, 300 or 400 °C for 2 h in air and 800 °C for 2 h in N2
229 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, ED ∼ 7.2 W h kg−1, PD ∼ 3.6 W kg−1, and CR ∼ 99% after 10000 cycles

281



Lignin/PAN-based CNFs embedded with NiCo2O4
280 °C@1.0 °C min−1 for 1 h in air and 1000 °C@5 °C min−1 for 1 h in N2
1757 F g−1 at 2 mA cm−2 over 0 to 6.0 V, ED ∼ 47.75 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 799.53 W kg−1

265



Lignin/PEO-based CNFs (9:1)
200 °C in air and 800 °C in N2
30 F cm−3 and ED ∼ 6 W h L−1 at 0.1 A g−1

270



Lignin/PEO-based CNFs (99:1) loaded by iron nitrate
250 °C in air@0.5 °C min−1 for 1 h and 900 °C@10 °C min−1 for 2 h in N2
102, 216, and 107 F g−1 and ED ∼ 43 W h kg−1 over −0.6 to 0.6 V

269



Kraft lignin/PVA-based CNFs (9:1) having a total polymer concentration of 21 wt%
250 °C@2 °C min−1 in air and 600, 800, and 1000 °C@5 °C min−1
5.6, 196.6, and 163.0 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 for 600, 800, and 1000 °C, ED ∼ 62.65 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 1250 W kg−1

257



Lignin/PVP-based CNFs embedded with Zn(NO3)
150 °C and 350 °C@1 °C min−1 for 4 h in air along with 800 °C@3 °C min−1 in Ar
289 F g−1 over 0.0 to 0.9 V device: 217 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, and 152 F g−1 at 20 A g−1

271



Lignin based-CNF laminated redox-active-mixed metal sulfides
Surface-embedded Ni–Mn sulfide nano grains on the 3D LCNFs
652.3 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, CR ∼ 91.3% after 5000cycles, ED ∼ 52.4 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 800 W kg−1

283



CA-based CNFs loaded by rGO
800 °C@5 °C min−1 in N2
46 F cm−3, ED ∼ 1.46 W h L−1, and PD ∼ 1.09 kW L−1

275



CA-based interbonded CNFs
240 °C@3 °C min−1 for 1 h in air, 1000 °C@5 °C min−1 for 2 h in N2, and 850 °C for 1.5 h in CO2
241.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, CR ∼ 99.9% after 10000 cycles, and PD ∼ 84.1 kW kg−1

277



CA-based CNFs incorporated with ZnCl2
20–200 °C@3 °C min−1, 200–220 °C@2 °C min−1 in air, and 700 °C@3 °C min−1 3 h in N2
202 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and CR ∼ 92% after 5000 cycles

279



CA/soy protein-based CNFs
240 °C@1 °C min−1 for 2 h in air and 800 °C@2.5 °C min−1 in N2
219.3 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and CR ∼ 98.9% after 50000 cycles

276



Cellulose-based CNFs loaded by ZIF-67(Co)
800 °C@2 °C min−1 for 3 h in N2
433 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and CR ∼ 84% after 3000 cycles

263



CA-based CNFs loaded by vapor grown (VG) CNFs and silver nanoparticles
250 °C@5 °C min−1 for 1 h in air and 800 °C@10 °C min−1 for 1 h in N2
216 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

284



Lignin/cellulose-based CNFs
220 °C@2 °C min−1 for 2 h in air and 800 °C@5 °C min−1 for 1 h in N2
346.6 at 0.1 A g−1 over 0.0–1.0 V, ED ∼ 24.3 W h kg−1 at PD ∼ 400 W kg−1

281



Acetylated sugarcane bagasse/PAN-based CNFs (5:5)
280 °C for 4 h in air and 800 °C@8 °C min−1 for 2 h
289.5 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, ED ∼ 18.9–56.0 W h kg−1, PD ∼ 3.16–1.26 kW kg−1

276



Chitosan/PVP-based CNFs doped with N/P
270 °C@2 °C min−1 for 2 h in air, 500 °C for 2 h, and 700 °C@1 °C min−1 for 2 h
358.7 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, 94 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, ED ∼ 13.1 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 248 W kg−1

282





In 2021, Du et al.260 extracted lignin from three different plant species, including poplar, pine, and corn stalk. In this method, lignin was first extracted and separated by using an ethanol–water mixture, followed by processing and purifying lignin through an Organosolv treatment method. As mentioned earlier, the short length of the lignin polymer chains and their highly complex aromatic structure have made it impossible to fabricate pure electrospun lignin.261 So, the PAN polymer was used as a support polymer, with a weight ratio of 30 to 50% to the lignin weight to obtain homogeneous and bead-free electrospun fibers. Then, a smooth carbon nanofibrous network was gained after a heat treatment procedure at 950 °C. From this attempt, the surface area of carbon fibers decreased in all three cases with an increase in lignin content. The carbon nanofibers obtained from poplar tree-derived lignin possess the highest surface area owing to their better morphology than CNFs prepared from the other cases, i.e., pine- and corn-based lignin. In addition, the surface area for a low lignin content (50%) extracted from poplar, pine, and corn stalk was estimated as 1063, 986, and 930 m2 g−1, respectively. Moreover, the final electrochemical performance was broadly influenced by the type of lignin structure. The poplar lignin-based CNFs (50% PAN) showed the highest capacitance value of 339.2 F g−1 as compared to pine-sourced (302.5 F g−1) and corn stalk-based (280.7 F g−1) lignin nanofibers in the voltage window of 1 V. The reason can be assigned to the effect of morphology on the enhancement of ion diffusion through the electrolyte and therefore improvement of ion exchange between the electrodes. A higher surface area (2048 m2 g−1), as well as a superior electrochemical capacitance of 428 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, was achieved by applying heat treatment at a temperature of 1000 °C and using KOH for activation of corn stalk-based lignin.262 As compared to an acid or base electrolyte, a neutral electrolyte offers stability at big voltage windows resulting in higher capacitance. Also, it prevents the formation of O2 and H2 species during charging–discharging. Similarly, Wu et al.263 utilized lignin/PAN-based carbon nanofibers (1:1) with a total polymer concentration of 28 wt% to obtain a capacitance value of 207 F g−1 at 0.5 F g−1 current density. Due to the fabulous characteristics of the lignin/PAN-based electrospun electrodes and a high demand for supercapacitors with superior electrochemical performance, recent researchers have tried to combine the obtained CNFs with the oxide materials. Such electrospun composites can exhibit both EDLC and pseudocapacitive behaviors due to the existence of carbonaceous and metal oxide structures, respectively. Therefore, the carbon-based materials were incorporated with several oxide materials such as SnO2 and NiCo2O4 resulting in enhanced morphology along with high electrochemical performance features. As an example, Cao et al.264 prepared highly porous core–shell CNFs from lignin–PAN material as the core and tin chloride as the shell. After the electrospinning process, the composite nanofibers were heat-treated at 200, 300, and 400 °C for 2 h under room conditions to complete the tin oxide (SnOx) formation as the shell component and stabilization of the lignin/PAN structure. Then, further heat treatment was carried out in the N2 atmosphere to carbonize the lignin/PAN core section. Meanwhile, a temperature of 400 °C caused the covering of micropores in the CNF core component through the formation of SnOx material and so reduction of surface area (29 m2 g−1) compared to the lower temperature heat treatment (554 m2 g−1 at 300 °C). Finally, the prepared nanofibers at 300 °C were crushed and mixed with conductive carbon black and PTFE binder to form a slurry and examined in the presence of an alkaline electrolyte (6 M KOH). The obtained specimen presented a capacitance retention of 229 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 current density showcasing a high energy density of 7.2 W h kg−1 and an appropriate power density of 3.6 kW kg−1. Lei et al.265 fabricated PAN/lignin-based CNFs doped with Ni and Co salts. The proposed method incorporated Ni and Co salts through the immersion method after the electrospinning procedure. Based on the declared results, the fabricated smooth electrospun fibers were changed into a peculiar hierarchical morphology by applying the heat treatment optimized stabilization and carbonization conditions. In addition, a high capacitance value of 1757 F g−1 was obtained at a current density of 2 mA cm−2. Also, 138% capacity retention was gained after 5000 charge/discharge cycles. Moreover, in the PVA–KOH gel electrolyte, hierarchical nanofibers demonstrated a good capacitance value of 134.3 F g−1 even at a high current density of 1 A g−1 in an asymmetrical supercapacitor device with N doped rGO as the negative electrode. Besides the PAN support polymer, several polymers with more affordable costs such as PEO, PVP, and PVA have also been applied to fabricate electrospun lignin-based CNFs.257,266–268 These polymers are also able to provide higher concentration of lignin for the electrospinning procedure compared with the PAN polymer. However, it seems that using the PAN polymer with good thermal stability as a common precursor for the production of carbon materials is considered an ideal option for fabrication of lignin-based nanofibrous supercapacitors.269,270 In a case study, Hérou et al.270 fabricated electrospun fibers from a lignin–PEO (9:1) alkaline solution followed by a pressing process. The pressed fibers were then thermally treated for stabilization (200 °C) and carbonization (800 °C) to develop CNFs with a higher surface area of 716 m2 g−1. The pressing mechanism led to the formation of a more dense and connected electrospun network without any side effect on the micropore content. Consequently, they could achieve a volumetric capacitance value of 30 F cm−3 over a 0.1 A g−1 current density with an energy density of 6 W h L−1. Butnoi et al.269 applied iron nitrate material as an additive with lignin/PEO-based fibers to get a versatile composite containing CNFs and Fe3O4 or Fe2O3 by varying the iron nitrate content from 10 to 20%, respectively. The provided pure CNFs revealed a low specific capacitance value of 102 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1. On the other hand, the addition of Fe3O4 in the composite structure led to an increase in the specific capacitance up to 216 F g−1 and a high energy density of 43 W h kg−1 at the same current density, which could be linked with the double pseudo capacitance effect in the presence of Fe2+ and Fe3+. In another study, Singh et al.257 demonstrated flexible and free-standing Kraft lignin/PVA based CNFs as an efficient electrode for supercapacitor devices. Despite having a low surface area, they obtained a high energy density (62.6 W h kg−1) and an appropriate power density (1.2 kW kg−1) which displayed the possibility of designing high-performance materials without having the pseudocapacitive effect. The obtained high capacity was attributed to the morphology and stability of the CNF structure that withstands the high working voltage up to 2 V (Fig. 11A). In addition, the reported method involved a higher lignin content compared with that in other attempts made for fabrication of the lignin/PVA based CNFs by Lai et al.225 and Ago et al.266 Ma et al.271 utilized the lignin/PVP resource with the zinc nitrate hexahydrate additive to synthesize hierarchically porous CNFs. Pre-oxidation and carbonization conditions caused the migration of the Zn species toward the surface of CNFs as well as increment in the fiber shrinkage to a larger extent (∼83 nm). The use of lignin also contributed to higher shrinkage (in comparison to PAN or phenolic resin polymers) in the nanofiber diameters during the heat treatment procedure, which is beneficial for increasing the surface area.126,272,273 Notably, as a special treatment, composite nanofibers have also been subjected to acid treatment (2 M HCl) to etch ZnO, known as ‘pickling’.274 This treatment resulted in the formation of a highly mesoporous surface on the CNF structure, which helps to store charges via reversible ion adsorption at the electrode/electrolyte interface. For example, Ma et al.126 figured out 289 F g−1 capacitance for the electrospun lignin fibers embedded with zinc nitrate hexahydrate. The symmetric device fabricated using the optimized fibers showed a capacitance of 217 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 with proper flexibility as well.
 Fig. 11  (A) Lignin-based nanofiber preparation. (a) Steps of preparing carbon nanofibers from lignin, (b) SEM images of C-800 nanofibers, (c) FTIR spectral comparison of lignin and its carbon nanofibers, (d) cyclic voltammetry graph for different carbon nanofibers, and (e) Nyquist plot for symmetric aqueous and solid-state device. Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from Elsevier. (B) Synthesis of CNF/rGO composite nanofibers. (a) Synthesis steps of the CNF/rGO composite electrode, (b) GCD curve at different current densities, and (c) cyclic stability of the composite electrode over 4000 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Despite challenges during the electrospinning of cellulose, it has been extensively considered a powerful resource for the fabrication of supercapacitors. So, most researchers have synthesized electrospun cellulose through the treatment of CA electrospun fibers in an alkaline aqueous solution (e.g., NaOH).197,263,275–277 Nevertheless, pure CA-based CNFs have shown low specific capacitance and poor stability.278 Hence, several attempts have been made to enhance their capacitance via activation, doping heteroatoms, and the addition of high capacitance additives. Ramadoss et al.279 fabricated inter-bonded CNFs by electrospinning the CA polymer. The nanofibers were then activated in a CO2 atmosphere to achieve a capacitance of 241.4 F g−1 and a power density of 84.1 kW h kg−1 at 1 A g−1. The resulting capacitance value was much higher than the one obtained by Fan et al. (202 F g−1). In another work, Kuzmenko et al.275 prepared CNFs from CA/reduced graphene oxide (CA-rGO) through direct carbonization at 800 °C after fabrication of CA-GO nanofibres through electrospinning and immersion methods (Fig. 11B). The prepared electrode demonstrated a volumetric capacitance of 46 F cm−3 (voltage 0–1 V). In addition, the packing density of the obtained material was highest among other reported cases280 and thus suitable for high volumetric demand supercapacitors. Doping with heteroatoms, especially nitrogen, is also an important factor in enhancing the capacitance value. Despite synthetic sources, N-doping could be carried out using natural products. Recently, Wang et al.197 fabricated N-doped CNFs from CA along with soy protein, a natural dietary protein obtained from soybeans. The electrospun nanofibers revealed a capacitance of 219 F g−1 at 0.2 mA g−1, a low resistance, and an excellent EDLC behavior. Also, in a two-electrode system, the capacitance value reached 85 F g−1 at 0.2 mA g−1 current density. In addition, a capacitance retention of 94.1% was reported after 50000 cycles. In another study, the combination of lignin and cellulose (1:1) was applied to enhance the performance of the produced CNFs. The fibers were treated with different concentrations of phosphoric acid. Based on the results, the treated nanofibers with 40% of H3PO4 (PL-5) showed the highest surface area of 837 m2 g−1. Moreover, the applied solvent eliminated the chance of polymer phase separation during electrospinning and so improved the fiber spinnability. They also achieved a capacitance of 346.6 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 by using the KOH (6 M) electrolyte. Finally, the combined biopolymer-based nanofibers revealed a high energy density of 24.3 W kg−1 at a high power density of 4000 W kg−1.281
Besides lignin and cellulose, chitosan and biomasses have also been explored in the field of supercapacitors. Chen et al.276 used acetylated sugarcane bagasse along with the PAN polymer (5:5) to yield defective porous CNFs, which led to the formation of a highly flexible nanofiber sheet. The synthesized CNFs showed a proper capacitance value of 289.5 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1. Solid-state symmetric devices were also fabricated using a PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte which resulted in providing a high energy density of 56 W h kg−1 and a high power density of 1.26 kW kg−1. The obtained electrochemical performance was attributed to plenty of pores in the electrospun structure, narrow distribution of the pores, and high membrane flexibility. As discussed earlier, heteroatom doping in CNFs causes an increment of surface area, enhancing adsorption of the electrolyte ions, and improvement of the electrochemical performance. Chitosan possesses self-doped nitrogen groups in the structure, while its spinnability is limited due to the formation of a highly viscous solution. Taking advantage of chitosan N-doping, Chen et al.282 electrospun a chitosan/PVP polymer to obtain smooth and homogeneous nanofibers. The prepared nanofibers were further doped with P-atom via immersion of the blend nanofibers in a KNO3/NH4H2PO4 solution. Wettability and electrolyte contact features were improved due to N-doping, while P-doping helped to achieve a high electron capacity delivery. The fabricated CNFs exhibited a high surface area of 1529.4 m2 g−1 and a high capacitance of 358.7 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. The reported high performance was linked with the co-doping of N and P atoms causing increment of the carbon interlayer spacing and easier diffusion. Furthermore, conductivity was enhanced due to alternating fiber connections as well as the formation of a network-like structure which caused enhancement of the Faraday redox reaction and so the improvement of the electrochemical performance.
The above discussion shows that lignin and cellulose are the most popular biopolymers among all other biopolymers in the fabrication of carbon nanofibers for supercapacitor applications. The use of biopolymers as a carbon nanofiber precursor offers an alternative to the high cost conventional petroleum based precursors. These nanofibers have shown tremendous performance in terms of specific capacitance, energy density, power density and flexibility. These carbon nanofibers can be further treated to increase the active surface area without sacrificing their flexibility property for wearable electronics applications.285 However, the work on biopolymers except lignin and cellulose is still limited and exploration of other biopolymers is still needed. This review also illuminates that the main reason for non-exploration of other biopolymers for carbon nanofibers is the challenges in the direct spinnability of biopolymers via electrospinning. So, there is a strong need to modify the structure of existing biopolymers to make them spinnable and heat stable so that a good conductive carbon nanofiber network can be devised for supercapacitor applications.
8. Conclusion and future perspective
In the current energy-dependent world, the development of electrochemical power tools for converting and storing energy plays a crucial role. Academic research on fabricating versatile electrochemical devices is developing at an incredibly fast pace. Actuators, batteries, fuel cells, sensors, and supercapacitors are the main electrochemical devices that have attracted the interest of numerous researchers as well as various industries.
Polymeric structures serve as the foundation for all electrochemical power tools. Various forms of these structures, such as films, fibers, particles, etc., are used to synthesize different components of the devices mentioned above. In recent decades, the findings have confirmed fabulous and superior advantages of electrospun polymers compared with those of the other polymeric configurations. This could be linked with the unique characteristics of the nanofibrous networks such as interconnected fine fibers, tiny pores, high surface to volume ratio, and porous network. Meanwhile, there is a growing awareness regarding the danger of the petroleum-derived material applications and their negative impacts on the environment. Based on the historical data, the amount of polymer waste will rise to around 12500 million tons by 2030, while each 100 million ton can damage the ecosystem amounting to US $ 13 billion a year. This growing issue has rendered many researchers to explore novel materials that can be used in a variety of devices while reducing the usage of fossil fuels and their derivatives.
Owing to the rising sustainability and environmental concerns, the development of novel biocompatible and eco-friendly resources is in high demand. In this area, biopolymers have been considered as safe materials for a wide range of applications. In addition, there is increasing motivation to use natural resources such as microorganisms and plants to fabricate nanofibrous functional materials applicable in electrochemical tools. These renewable and biodegradable polymers are stiff, non-corrosive, lightweight, and cost-effective. They assist in preserving petroleum-based raw materials and decreasing the CO2 volume released into the atmosphere. Electrospun biopolymers are regarded as a promising choice for providing electrochemical actuators by facilitating ion diffusion in a non-toxic, biocompatible, and biodegradable fibrous matrix. In addition, electrospun bio-derived CNFs from cellulose and lignin resources have represented well-defined porous structures as anode materials, leading to the formation of more sites for Li/Na insertion in lithium and sodium-ion batteries. Also, cellulose-based nanofibers have resulted in the preparation of battery separators with high strength and proper electrolyte uptake. Moreover, high surface-to-volume ratio, cost-effectiveness, and interconnected pores of natural-polymer based electrospun fibers have enabled their practical usage as a gas diffusion layer and membrane in PEMFCs and AFCs. Furthermore, electrospun membranes derived from biopolymer and biomass sources could be beneficial in the creation of efficient, freestanding, and flexible supercapacitors with appropriate capacitance retention and energy density by using an eco-friendly route.
It is worth noting that several factors have limited the practical usage of electrospun biopolymers. As a result, renewable polymers account for beyond 5% of the commercial market. The current review paper may encourage and motivate scientists and manufacturers to overcome eco-centric trepidation by investing in the development and growth of novel bio-based fibrous materials while taking into account the following recommendations and crucial aspects. First, the limited production rate of biopolymers has remained a significant challenge, particularly from an economic point of view. New procedures and methodologies for the feasible and affordable fabrication of bio-based materials are valuable to be designed and engineered. Novel natural resources should be explored and characterized in order to broaden the application of biopolymers and substitute hazardous synthetic polymers. Moreover, standard processes for polymer extraction and electrospun fiber preparation should be defined and evaluated to save cost, energy, and time of exploring raw materials. For instance, water as the solvent in the electrospinning process is not only a safe and low-cost alternative but also improves the nanofibers’ stability by increasing crosslinking. Second, the inherent characteristics of biopolymers have restricted their electrospinnability. As a result, various strategies such as adding a synthetic polymer, structural modification, employing co-solvents, specific electrospinning conditions, and even more should be employed to ease the fabrication procedure, as several cases have been stated in this paper. As an example, designing hybrid or composite biopolymer-based materials can optimize the performance of the fibrous structures in terms of tensile strength, flexural strength, and Young's modulus. Third, most efforts have declared the durability of bio-based nanofibrous membranes in lab-scale experimentation, while to our knowledge, no research has been conducted so far to arrive at a durable final commercial product that can meet electrochemical application requirements. Therefore, in situ evaluations are extremely valuable to be monitored in future works along with developing new experimental methods. Fourth, less attention has been devoted to end-of-life treatment and reuse of the biopolymer. A detailed study on the recycling and degradation behavior of these materials will be very vital for a circular bioeconomy. Fifth, the procedure of biopolymer carbonization should be optimized to gain major biopolymer conversion and minimize the unwanted side-products through modifying the reaction time, temperature, and other impactful parameters. Last, application of synthetic polymers as a support material for electrospinning of the biopolymers is inevitable, which should be reduced by employing modified electrospinning devices or novel synthesizing methods. The above-mentioned scenarios are summarized in Fig. 12 and could be effective and globally beneficial in the energy section, in addition to environmental and economic benefits.
 Fig. 12  Pros, challenges, and future remarks of the biopolymer-based electrospun fibers applicable in electrochemical devices. 
The value of this review comes in its extensive study of the literature on current advancements in the electrospinning of biopolymers for application in various electrochemical devices. It is a broad field of science and engineering, despite the fact that there have been few studies in this area and that not all biopolymers have received the same level of attention. This paper, in our opinion, is the most thorough and comprehensive assessment of the previously published research efforts. Overall, as an emerging field, more evaluations are required to guarantee prosperous and influential fabrication of natural-polymer based electrospun fibers that may one day be used in various electrochemical power tools.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
E. Mostafavi would like to acknowledge the support from the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (5T32EB009035). S. N. Banitaba would like to appreciate the support from the Iran National Science Foundation (98025579). Y. K. Mishra thanks Interreg Deutschland-Denmark with money from the European Regional Development Fund, project number 096-1.1-18 (Access and Acceleration) and also to Mads Clausen Institute, SDU Denmark for infrastructure related supports. A. Gupta would like to thank CSIR for SRA fellowship.
References
Y. Ding, P. Cai and Z. Wen, Electrochemical neutralization energy: from concept to devices, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1495–1511 RSC .
Y. Wen, M. D. Kok, J. P. V. Tafoya, A. B. J. Sobrido, E. Bell and J. T. Gostick, 
            et al., Electrospinning as a route to advanced carbon fibre materials for selected low-temperature electrochemical devices: a review, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 59, 492–529 CrossRef CAS .

          S. N. Banitaba, Application of electrospun fibers for the fabrication of high performance all-solid-state fibrous batteries, in Nanosensors and Nanodevices for Smart Multifunctional Textiles, ed. A. Ehrmann, T. A. Nguyen and P. Nguyen Tri, Elsevier,  2021, ch. 14, pp. 229–244 Search PubMed .
S. N. Banitaba and A. Ehrmann, Application of Electrospun Nanofibers for Fabrication of Versatile and Highly Efficient Electrochemical Devices: A Review, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cho, D. Kang, H. Lee and W.-G. Koh, Multi-stimuli responsive and reversible soft actuator engineered by layered fibrous matrix and hydrogel micropatterns, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 130879 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Z. Zhu, H. Zhang and S. Fu, Superhydrophobic light-driven actuator based on self-densified wood film with a sandwich-like structure, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2022, 109278 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, M. Karimi, E. Heydari-Soureshjani, B. Rezaei and A. A. Ensafi, A comparative analysis on the morphology and electrochemical performances of solution-casted and electrospun PEO-based electrolytes: the effect of fiber diameter and surface density, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 368, 137339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhang, N. E. Courtier, Z. Zhang, K. Liu, J. J. Bailey and A. M. Boyce, 
            et al., A Review of Lithium-Ion Battery Electrode Drying: Mechanisms and Metrology, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dimitrova and W. B. Nader, PEM fuel cell as an auxiliary power unit for range extended hybrid electric vehicles, Energy, 2022, 239, 121933 CrossRef .
K. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Ding, H. Xu, P. Mueller-Welt and T. Stuermlinger, 
            et al., Assembly techniques for proton exchange membrane fuel cell stack: a literature review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2022, 153, 111777 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, R. Ma and X. Wang, Ultrafast, long-life, high-loading, and wide-temperature zinc ion supercapacitors, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 46, 233–242 CrossRef .
G. C. Zhang, M. Feng, Q. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Fang and Z. Niu, 
            et al., High Energy Density in Combination with High Cycling Stability in Hybrid Supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 2674–2682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tabata and Y. Miyahara, From new materials to advanced biomedical applications of solid-state biosensor: a review, Sens. Actuators, B, 2022, 352, 131033 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zandi and M. Fani, Target genes used for biosensor development in COVID-19 diagnosis, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2022, 200, 113924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, E. Heydari-Soureshjani, B. Rezaei and A. A. Ensafi, Electrospun core–shell nanofibers based on polyethylene oxide reinforced by multiwalled carbon nanotube and silicon dioxide nanofillers: a novel and effective solvent-free electrolyte for lithium ion batteries, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 7000–7014 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, E. Heydari-Soureshjani, B. Rezaei and A. A. Ensafi, The effect of concentration and ratio of ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate plasticizers on characteristics of the electrospun PEO-based electrolytes applicable in lithium-ion batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2020, 347, 115252 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, B. Rezaei and A. A. Ensafi, Morphology and electrochemical and mechanical properties of polyethylene-oxide-based nanofibrous electrolytes applicable in lithium ion batteries, Polym. Int., 2019, 68, 746–754 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gholami and M. Pirsaheb, Review on effective parameters in electrochemical hydrogen storage, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 783–795 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Lee, K.-J. Jeon, P. L. Show, S.-C. Jung, Y. J. Choi and G. H. Rhee, 
            et al., Mini review on H2 production from electrochemical water splitting according to special nanostructured morphology of electrocatalysts, Fuel, 2022, 308, 122048 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Pandey and R. Jain, Polymer-Based Biomaterials: An Emerging Electrochemical Sensor, Handbook of Polymer and Ceramic Nanotechnology,  2021, pp. 1309–1327 Search PubMed .

          R. S. Salunke and D. J. Shirale, The sources of heavy metals, its impact on human life and the progress in electrochemical sensor, Functionalized Nanomaterials Based Devices for Environmental Applications, Elsevier,  2021, pp. 349–378 Search PubMed .
E. Lizundia and D. Kundu, Advances in Natural Biopolymer-Based Electrolytes and Separators for Battery Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reddy, D. Ponnamma, R. Choudhary and K. K. Sadasivuni, A comparative review of natural and synthetic biopolymer composite scaffolds, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Banitaba, A. A. Gharehaghaji and A. A. A. Jeddi, Fabrication and characterization of hollow electrospun PLA structure through a modified electrospinning method applicable as vascular graft, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2021, 44, 1–7 CrossRef .
H. Liu, V. Kumar, L. Jia, S. Sarsaiya, D. Kumar and A. Juneja, 
            et al., Biopolymer poly-hydroxyalkanoates (PHA) production from apple industrial waste residues: a review, Chemosphere, 2021, 284, 131427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pei, L. Wang, K. Tang and D. L. Kaplan, Biopolymer Nanoscale Assemblies as Building Blocks for New Materials: A Review, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008552 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sivasankarapillai, S. Das, F. Sabir, M. Sundaramahalingam, J. Colmenares and S. Prasannakumar, 
            et al., Progress in natural polymer engineered biomaterials for transdermal drug delivery systems, Mater. Today Chem., 2021, 19, 100382 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz, A. S. Asnawi, M. F. Z. Kadir, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad and Y. M. Yusof, 
            et al., Structural, Electrical and Electrochemical Properties of Glycerolized Biopolymers Based on Chitosan (CS): Methylcellulose (MC) for Energy Storage Application, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jaleh, M. Nasrollahzadeh, A. Nasri, M. Eslamipanah, A. Moradi and Z. Nezafat, Biopolymer-derived (nano) catalysts for hydrogen evolution via hydrolysis of hydrides and electrochemical and photocatalytic techniques: a review, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 182, 1056–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Meng, M. Zhang, T. Liu and C. Zhang, Recent advances in conductive polymer hydrogel composites and nanocomposites for flexible electrochemical supercapacitors, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 185–207 RSC .
A. Frenot, M. W. Henriksson and P. Walkenström, Electrospinning of cellulose-based nanofibers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 103, 1473–1482 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Frey, Electrospinning cellulose and cellulose derivatives, Polym. Rev., 2008, 48, 378–391 CrossRef CAS .
N. Angel, L. Guo, F. Yan, H. Wang and L. Kong, Effect of processing parameters on the electrospinning of cellulose acetate studied by response surface methodology, J. Agric. Food Res., 2020, 2, 100015 CrossRef .
S. B. Qasim, M. S. Zafar, S. Najeeb, Z. Khurshid, A. H. Shah and S. Husain, 
            et al., Electrospinning of chitosan-based solutions for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2018, 19, 407 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qin, X. Jia, Q. Liu, B. Kong and H. Wang, Enhancing physical properties of chitosan/pullulan electrospinning nanofibers via green crosslinking strategies, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 247, 116734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, L. Li, B. Chen, S. Shi, J. Nie and G. Ma, Functionalized chitosan electrospun nanofiber
membranes for heavy-metal removal, Polymer, 2019, 163, 74–85 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Taemeh, A. Shiravandi, M. A. Korayem and H. Daemi, Fabrication challenges and trends in biomedical applications of alginate electrospun nanofibers, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 228, 115419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Ju, S. Wu, M. Lin, K. Sui and Y. Xia, 
            et al., Electrospinning of biocompatible alginate-based nanofiber membranes via tailoring chain flexibility, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 230, 115665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kotatha, M. Hirata, M. Ogino, S. Uchida, M. Ishikawa and T. Furuike, 
            et al., Preparation and characterization of electrospun gelatin nanofibers for use as nonaqueous electrolyte in electric double-layer capacitor, J. Nanotechnol., 2019, 2019, 2501039 Search PubMed .
M. Naghibzadeh, S. Firoozi, F. S. Nodoushan, M. Adabi, A. Khoradmehr and F. Fesahat, 
            et al., Application of electrospun gelatin nanofibers in tissue engineering, Biointerface Res. Appl. Chem., 2018, 8, 3048–3052 CAS .
J. C. Ruiz-Cornejo, D. Sebastián and M. J. Lázaro, Synthesis and applications of carbon nanofibers: a review, Rev. Chem. Eng., 2020, 36, 493–511 CAS .
I. Dallmeyer, F. Ko and J. F. Kadla, Electrospinning of technical lignins for the production of fibrous networks, J. Wood Chem. Technol., 2010, 30, 315–329 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar, M. Hietala and K. Oksman, Lignin-based electrospun carbon nanofibers, Front. Mater., 2019, 6, 62 CrossRef .
R. Ruiz-Rosas, J. Bedia, M. Lallave, I. Loscertales, A. Barrero and J. Rodríguez-Mirasol, 
            et al., The production of submicron diameter carbon fibers by the electrospinning of lignin, Carbon, 2010, 48, 696–705 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Otero, Towards artificial proprioception from artificial muscles constituted by self-sensing multi-step electrochemical macromolecular motors, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 368, 137576 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Ebadi, D. Semnani, H. Fashandi, B. Rezaei and A. Fakhrali, Gaining insight into electrolyte solution effects on the electrochemomechanical behavior of electroactive PU/PPy nanofibers: introducing a high-performance artificial muscle, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 305, 127519 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Abidian, D. H. Kim and D. C. Martin, Conducting-polymer nanotubes for controlled drug release, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 405–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Kerr-Phillips, V. Woehling, R. Agniel, G. T. Nguyen, F. Vidal and P. Kilmartin, 
            et al., Electrospun rubber fibre mats with electrochemically controllable pore sizes, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4249–4258 RSC .
Y. Bar-Cohen and I. A. Anderson, Electroactive polymer (EAP) actuators—background review, Mech. Soft Mater., 2019, 1, 5 CrossRef .
Y. Bar-Cohen and Q. Zhang, Electroactive polymer actuators and sensors, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 173–181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, C. Meng, S. Tang, J. Qin and X. Liu, Construction of dendritic structure by nano-SiO2 derivate grafted with hyperbranched polyamide in aramid fiber to simultaneously improve its mechanical and compressive properties, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 119, 367–375 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yang, M. H. Kim and O. O. Park, In situ synthesis of gold nanocrystal-embedded poly(dimethylsiloxane) films with nanostructured surface patterns, Microelectron. Eng., 2017, 179, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. A. Bhatti, E. Bilotti, H. Zhang, S. Varghese, R. C. Verpaalen and A. P. Schenning, 
            et al., Ultra-high actuation stress polymer actuators as light-driven artificial muscles, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33210–33218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Verpaalen, S. Varghese, A. Froyen, M. P. Da Cunha, M. J. Pouderoijen and J. R. Severn, 
            et al., Fast, light-responsive, metal-like polymer actuators generating high stresses at low strain, Matter, 2020, 2, 1522–1534 CrossRef .
J. Thévenot, L. Etienne-Mesmin, S. Denis, S. Chalancon, M. Alric and V. Livrelli, 
            et al., Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157: H7 survival in an in vitro model of the human large intestine and interactions with probiotic yeasts and resident microbiota, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2013, 79, 1058–1064 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Malik, A. Hussain, A. Maqbool, A. Zaman, C. W. Ahn and J. U. Rahman, 
            et al., Temperature-insensitive high strain in lead-free Bi0.5(Na0.84K0.16)0.5TiO3–0.04SrTiO3 ceramics for actuator applications, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2015, 98, 3842–3848 CrossRef CAS .

          K. J. Kim and S. Tadokoro, Electroactive polymers for robotic applications, Artificial Muscles and Sensors, Springer: London, United Kingdom,  2007, p. 291 Search PubMed .
F. Carpi, R. Kornbluh, P. Sommer-Larsen and G. Alici, Electroactive polymer actuators as artificial muscles: are they ready for bioinspired applications?, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2011, 6, 045006 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Valero, J. Arias-Pardilla, J. Cauich-Rodríguez, M. Smit and T. Otero, Characterization of the movement of polypyrrole–dodecylbenzenesulfonate–perchlorate/tape artificial muscles. faradaic control of reactive artificial molecular motors and muscles, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3721–3726 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Gupta, Effect of polyester weight reduction treatment on fabric performance, Int. Dyer., 2016, 201, 34–37 Search PubMed .
V. K. Gupta and P. Kohli, Characterisation of nano-silicone emulsion – A textile finishing agent, Int. Dyer, 2018, 43–45 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Tian, D. Li, L. Quan and C. Zhu, The high performances of SiO2-coated melt-blown non-woven fabric for lithium-ion battery separator, J. Text. Inst., 2018, 109, 1254–1261 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Guimard, N. Gomez and C. E. Schmidt, Conducting polymers in biomedical engineering, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 876–921 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nezakati, A. Seifalian, A. Tan and A. M. Seifalian, Conductive polymers: opportunities and challenges in biomedical applications, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6766–6843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Smela, Conjugated polymer actuators for biomedical applications, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Ismail, S. R. Shin, K. M. Shin, S. G. Yoon, K. Shon and S. I. Kim, 
            et al., Electrochemical actuation in chitosan/polyaniline microfibers for artificial muscles fabricated using an in situ polymerization, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 129, 834–840 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Ismail, J. G. Martínez, A. S. Al Harrasi, S. J. Kim and T. F. Otero, Sensing characteristics of a conducting polymer/hydrogel hybrid microfiber artificial muscle, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 160, 1180–1190 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kwon, H. J. Yoo and J. W. Cho, Conducting core-sheath polyurethane-PEDOT nanofibres for conducting polymer actuator, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2013, 10, 661–670 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fereydonian, D. Semnani, M. Morshed, B. Rezaei and S. Behtaj, Investigation of electroactive behavior of PVA/TiO2 nanofibers webs coated with polyaniline, J. Compos. Mater., 2016, 50, 1321–1330 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kosidlo, M. Omastová, M. Micusík, G. Ćirić-Marjanović, H. Randriamahazaka and T. Wallmersperger, 
            et al., Nanocarbon based ionic actuators—a review, Smart Mater. Struct., 2013, 22, 104022 CrossRef .
G. M. Spinks, S. R. Shin, G. G. Wallace, P. G. Whitten, I. Y. Kim and S. I. Kim, 
            et al., A novel dual mode actuation in chitosan/polyaniline/carbon nanotube fibers, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 121, 616–621 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mottaghitalab, B. Xi, G.
M. Spinks and G. G. Wallace, Polyaniline fibres containing single walled carbon nanotubes: enhanced performance artificial muscles, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 796–803 CrossRef CAS .
K. McKeon-Fischer, D. Flagg and J. Freeman, Poly(acrylic acid)/poly(vinyl alcohol) compositions coaxially electrospun with poly(ε-caprolactone) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes to create nanoactuating scaffolds, Polymer, 2011, 52, 4736–4743 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. García-Gallegos, I. Martín-Gullón, J. Conesa, Y. I. Vega-Cantú and F. J. Rodríguez-Macías, The effect of carbon nanofillers on the performance of electromechanical polyaniline-based composite actuators, Nanotechnology, 2015, 27, 015501 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. Matsuo and T. Tanaka, Kinetics of discontinuous volume–phase transition of gels, J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 89, 1695–1703 CrossRef CAS .
H. Asai, T. Kawai, N. Shimada, T. Sakai and K. Nakane, Effect of spinning condition and fiber alignment on performance of ionic polymer gel actuators with nanofiber mat electrodes, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 214, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Asai, T. Okumura, H. Sakamoto and K. Nakane, Effect of polymer type on the performance of a nanofiber mat actuator, Polym. J., 2019, 51, 523–528 CrossRef CAS .
T. Blachowicz and A. Ehrmann, Conductive electrospun nanofiber mats, Materials, 2019, 13, 152 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-X. Wang, G.-F. Yu, J. Zhang, M. Yu, S. Ramakrishna and Y.-Z. Long, Conductive polymer ultrafine fibers via electrospinning: preparation, physical properties and applications, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 115, 100704 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bittencourt, B. H. de Santana Gois, V. J. Rodrigues de Oliveira, D. L. da Silva Agostini and C. de Almeida Olivati, Gas sensor for ammonia detection based on poly(vinyl alcohol) and polyaniline electrospun, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47288 CrossRef .
F. F. Garrudo, C. A. Chapman, P. Hoffman, R. W. Udangawa, J. C. Silva and P. E. Mikael, 
            et al., Polyaniline-Polycaprolactone Blended Nanofibers for Neural Cell Culture, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 117, 28–37 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang and F. Zeng, Visible light-activated cadmium-doped ZnO nanostructured photocatalyst for the treatment of methylene blue dye, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 2155–2161 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dong, M. Körber, V. L. Esguerra and R. Bodmeier, Stability of poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) and leuprolide acetate in in situ forming drug delivery systems, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 115, 158–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, X. Gao, L. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Chen and X. Lin, Electrochemical activation of polyethyleneimine-wrapped carbon nanotubes/in situ formed gold nanoparticles functionalised nanocomposite sensor for high sensitive and selective determination of dopamine, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 692, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laforgue and L. Robitaille, Production of conductive PEDOT nanofibers by the combination of electrospinning and vapor-phase polymerization, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4194–4200 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Gu, Y. A. Ismail, G. M. Spinks, S. I. Kim, I. So and S. J. Kim, A linear actuation of polymeric nanofibrous bundle for artificial muscles, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 511–515 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Ebadi, D. Semnani, H. Fashandi and B. Rezaei, Synthesis and characterization of a novel polyurethane/polypyrrole-p-toluenesulfonate (PU/PPy-pTS) electroactive nanofibrous bending actuator, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2019, 30, 2261–2274 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Ebadi, H. Fashandi, D. Semnani, B. Rezaei and A. Fakhrali, Electroactive actuator based on polyurethane nanofibers coated with polypyrrole through electrochemical polymerization: a competent method for developing artificial muscles, Smart Mater. Struct., 2020, 29, 045008 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Ebadi, A. Fakhrali and D. Semnani, Systematic investigation of parameters of an electrospinning process of poly(acrylic acid) nanofibres using response surface methodology, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2019, 42, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Ismail, M. K. Shin and S. J. Kim, A nanofibrous hydrogel templated electrochemical actuator: from single mat to a rolled-up structure, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 136, 438–443 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Vadahanambi, C.-D. Kee and I.-K. Oh, Electrospun fullerenol-cellulose biocompatible actuators, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 2048–2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Hong, S.-J. Ki, J.-H. Jeon, H.-L. Che, I.-K. Park and C.-D. Kee, 
            et al., Electroactive bio-composite actuators based on cellulose acetate nanofibers with specially chopped polyaniline nanoparticles through electrospinning, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 87, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, C. Wang, M. Zhang, M. Jian and Y. Zhang, Feeding Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes or Graphene to Silkworms for Reinforced Silk Fibers, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6695–6700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Catto, S. Farè, I. Cattaneo, M. Figliuzzi, A. Alessandrino and G. Freddi, 
            et al., Small diameter electrospun silk fibroin vascular grafts: mechanical properties, in vitro biodegradability, and in vivo biocompatibility, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 54, 101–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, M. Sharma, D. Saharia, K. K. Sarma, E. M. Muir and U. Bora, Electrospun silk-polyaniline conduits for functional nerve regeneration in rat sciatic nerve injury model, Biomed. Mater., 2017, 12, 045025 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Miguel, D. Simões, A. F. Moreira, R. S. Sequeira and I. J. Correia, Production and characterization of electrospun silk fibroin based asymmetric membranes for wound dressing applications, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 121, 524–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Nguyen, C. M. Vu, B. T. Phuc and N. H. Tung, Simultaneous effects of silanized coal fly ash and nano/micro glass fiber on fracture toughness and mechanical properties of carbon fiber-reinforced vinyl ester resin composites, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2019, 59, 584–591 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Park, C. S. Ki, Y. H. Park, H. M. Jung, K. M. Woo and H. J. Kim, Electrospun silk fibroin scaffolds with macropores for bone regeneration: an in vitro and in vivo study, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2010, 16, 1271–1279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Severt, S. Maxwell, J. Bontrager, J. Leger and A. Murphy, Mimicking muscle fiber structure and function through electromechanical actuation of electrospun silk fiber bundles, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8105–8114 RSC .
C. V. Fengel, N. P. Bradshaw, S. Y. Severt, A. R. Murphy and J. M. Leger, Biocompatible silk-conducting polymer composite trilayer actuators, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 055004 CrossRef .
M. Harjo, M. Järvekülg, T. Tamm, T. F. Otero and R. Kiefer, Concept of an artificial muscle design on polypyrrole nanofiber scaffolds, PLoS One, 2020, 15, e0232851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Harjo, Z. Zondaka, K. Leemets, M. Järvekülg, T. Tamm and R. Kiefer, Polypyrrole-coated fiber-scaffolds: concurrent linear actuation and sensing, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 48533 CrossRef CAS .
M. Harjo, J. Torop, M. Järvekülg, T. Tamm and R. Kiefer, Electrochemomechanical behavior of polypyrrole-coated nanofiber scaffolds in cell culture medium, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gaihre, S. Ashraf, G. M. Spinks, P. C. Innis and G. G. Wallace, Comparative displacement study of bilayer actuators comprising of conducting polymers, fabricated from polypyrrole, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) or poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene), Sens. Actuators, A, 2013, 193, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sadki, P. Schottland, N. Brodie and G. Sabouraud, The mechanisms of pyrrole electropolymerization, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 283–293 RSC .
X. Li, Z. Cai, D. U. Ahn and X. Huang, Development of an antibacterial nanobiomaterial for wound-care based on the absorption of AgNPs on the eggshell membrane, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 183, 110449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Mensah, S. B. Jo, H. Kim, S.-M. Park, K. D. Patel and K. J. Cho, 
            et al., The eggshell membrane: a potential biomaterial for corneal wound healing, J. Biomater. Appl., 2021, 08853282211024040 Search PubMed .
S. Park, K. S. Choi, D. Lee, D. Kim, K. T. Lim and K.-H. Lee, 
            et al., Eggshell membrane: review and impact on engineering, Biosyst. Eng., 2016, 151, 446–463 CrossRef .
M. Beregoi, N. Preda, A. Evanghelidis, A. Costas and I. Enculescu, Versatile actuators based on polypyrrole-coated metalized eggshell membranes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10173–10181 CrossRef CAS .
E. Smela, Conjugated polymer actuators, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Kim and C.-D. Kee, Electro-active polymer actuator based on PVDF with bacterial cellulose nano-whiskers (BCNW) via electrospinning method, Int. J. Precision Eng. Manuf., 2014, 15, 315–321 CrossRef .
N. Terasawa, Effect of ruthenium on superior performance of cellulose nanofibers/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(4-styrenesulfonate)/ruthenium oxide/ionic liquid actuators, Synth. Met., 2020, 261, 116306 CrossRef CAS .
N. Terasawa and K. Asaka, Self-standing cellulose nanofiber/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(4-styrenesulfonate)/ionic liquid actuators with superior performance, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 33149–33155 RSC .
K. Chaitra, R. Vinny, P. Sivaraman, N. Reddy, C. Hu and K. Venkatesh, 
            et al., KOH activated carbon derived from biomass-banana fibers as an efficient negative electrode in high performance asymmetric supercapacitor, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 56–62 CrossRef .
J. L. Goldfarb, G. Dou, M. Salari and M. W. Grinstaff, Biomass-based fuels and activated carbon electrode materials: an integrated approach to green energy systems, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 3046–3054 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Norouzi, P. Salimi, F. Di Maria, S. Pourhosseini and F. Safari, Synthesis and design of engineered biochars as electrode materials in energy storage systems, Production of Materials from Sustainable Biomass Resources, Springer,  2019, pp. 233–265 Search PubMed .
F. Hall, J. Touzri, S. Wußler, H. Buqa and W. G. Bessler, Experimental investigation of the thermal and cycling behavior of a lithium titanate-based lithium-ion pouch cell, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 17, 109–117 CrossRef .
S. Javadian, P. Salimi, H. Gharibi, A. Fathollahi, E. Kowsari and J. Kakemam, Effect of imidazolium-based ionic liquid as electrolyte additive on electrochemical performance of 18650 cylindrical Li-ion batteries at room and 60 °C temperatures, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2019, 16, 2123–2134 CrossRef CAS .
V. Muenzel, A. F. Hollenkamp, A. I. Bhatt, J. de Hoog, M. Brazil and D. A. Thomas, 
            et al., A comparative testing study of commercial 18650-format lithium-ion battery cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1592 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, B. Rezaei and A. A. Ensafi, Evaluating the electrochemical properties of PEO-based nanofibrous electrolytes incorporated with TiO2 nanofiller applicable in lithium-ion batteries, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2019, 30, 1234–1242 CrossRef CAS .
M. Culebras, H. Geaney, A. Beaucamp, P. Upadhyaya, E. D. Dalton and K. M. Ryan, 
            et al., Bio-derived carbon nanofibers from lignin as high performance Li-ion anode materials, ChemSuSChem, 2019, 12, 4516–4521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Salimi, S. Javadian, O. Norouzi and H. Gharibi, Turning an environmental problem into an opportunity: potential use of biochar derived from a harmful marine biomass named Cladophora glomerata as anode electrode for Li-ion batteries, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2017, 24, 27974–27984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cano, D. Banham, S. Ye, A. Hintennach, J. Lu and M. Fowler, 
            et al., Batteries and fuel cells for emerging electric vehicle markets, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279–289 CrossRef .
K. S. Han, J. Chen, R. Cao, N. N. Rajput, V. Murugesan and L. Shi, 
            et al., Effects of anion mobility on electrochemical behaviors of lithium–sulfur batteries, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9023–9029 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, N. Solin and O. Inganäs, Bio Based Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2003713 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, A. L. Smirnova and H. Fong, Flexible lignin-derived carbon nanofiber substrates functionalized with iron(III) oxide nanoparticles as lithium-ion battery anodes, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2019, 241, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jia and J. Huang, A bio-inspired nanofibrous silicon/carbon composite as an anode material for lithium-ion batteries, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 4887–4900 RSC .
P. Salimi, S. Tieuli, S. Taghavi, E. Venezia, S. Fugattini and S. Lauciello, 
            et al., Sustainable lithium-ion batteries based on metal-free tannery waste biochar, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 4119–4129 RSC .
M. Lu, W. Yu, J. Shi, W. Liu, S. Chen and X. Wang, 
            et al., Self-doped carbon architectures with heteroatoms containing nitrogen, oxygen and sulfur as high-performance anodes for lithium-and sodium-ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 251, 396–406 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Andleeb and M. Yar, Application of Electrospun Materials in Industrial Applications, Electrospun Materials and Their Allied Applications,  2020, pp. 215–242 Search PubMed .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, E. Heydari-Soureshjani, W. U. Arifeen, T. J. Ko and B. Rezaei, 
            et al., Fabrication and performance evaluation of CuO, NiO, and Co3O4-embedded electrospun electrolytes: suitable for lithium polymer solvent-free batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 924, 166482 CrossRef CAS .
D. Linden, Handbook of batteries, Fuel Energy Abstr., 1995, 265 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Bi, X. G. Sun, R. R. Unocic, M. P. Paranthaman and S. Dai, 
            et al., Mesoporous TiO2–B microspheres with superior rate performance for lithium ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3450–3454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Lu, C. Zhao, Y.-S. Hu, M.-M. Titirici and H. Li, 
            et al., Recent advances of electrode materials for low-cost sodium-ion batteries towards practical application for grid energy storage, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 7, 130–151 CrossRef .
S. Afzal, W. A. Daoud and S. J. Langford, Superhydrophobic and photocatalytic self-cleaning cotton, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18005–18011 RSC .
G. Tan, R. Xu, Z. Xing, Y. Yuan, J. Lu and J. Wen, 
            et al., Burning lithium in CS 2 for high-performing compact Li2 S–graphene nanocapsules for Li–S batteries, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–10 Search PubMed .
K. Xu, Y. Li, J. Xiong, X. Ou, W. Su and G. Zhong, 
            et al., Activated amorphous carbon with high-porosity derived from camellia pollen grains as anode materials for lithium/sodium ion batteries, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 366 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Abraham, C. R. A. Arro, H. A. Tariq, R. Kahraman, S. Al-Qaradawi and R. Shakoor, Sodium and lithium incorporated cathode materials for energy storage applications-A focused review, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230098 CrossRef .
K. Abraham, How comparable are sodium-ion batteries to lithium-ion counterparts?, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3544–3547 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salimi, O. Norouzi, S. Pourhoseini, P. Bartocci, A. Tavasoli and F. Di Maria, 
            et al., Magnetic biochar obtained through catalytic pyrolysis
of macroalgae: a promising anode material for Li-ion batteries, Renewable Energy, 2019, 140, 704–714 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, C. Xu, R. Li, R. Zhang, B. Wang and X. Jiang, 
            et al., Biomass-derived carbon paper to sandwich magnetite anode for long-life Li-ion battery, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11901–11911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Pampal, E. Stojanovska, B. Simon and A. Kilic, A review of nanofibrous structures in lithium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 199–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, B.-J. Yu, Z.-Q. Shi, C.-Y. Wang and C.-B. Chong, Lignin-based electrospun carbon nanofibrous webs as free-standing and binder-free electrodes for sodium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 800–807 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Emerging applications of biochar-based materials for energy storage and conversion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1751–1779 RSC .
J. Shi, N. Ehteshami, J. Ma, H. Zhang, H. Liu and X. Zhang, 
            et al., Improving the graphite/electrolyte interface in lithium-ion battery for fast charging and low temperature operation: fluorosulfonyl isocyanate as electrolyte additive, J. Power Sources, 2019, 429, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Han, D.-W. Jung, J.-H. Jeong and E.-S. Oh, Effect of pyrolysis temperature on carbon obtained from green tea biomass for superior lithium ion battery anodes, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 254, 597–604 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, E. Heydari-Soureshjani, B. Rezaei and A. A. Ensafi, Nanofibrous poly(ethylene oxide)-based structures incorporated with multi-walled carbon nanotube and graphene oxide as all-solid-state electrolytes for lithium ion batteries, Polym. Int., 2019, 68, 1787–1794 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Banitaba, D. Semnani, E. Heydari-Soureshjani, B. Rezaei, A. A. Ensafi and A. Taghipour-Jahromi, Novel electrospun polymer electrolytes incorporated with Keggin-type hetero polyoxometalate fillers as solvent-free electrolytes for lithium ion batteries, Polym. Int., 2020, 69, 675–687 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Lyu, X. Liu and Y. Zhao, 
            et al., Lithium ion capacitor with identical carbon electrodes yields 6 s charging and 100000 cycles stability with 1% capacity fade, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 2867–2877 CrossRef .
D. Nan, Z.-H. Huang, R. Lv, L. Yang, J.-G. Wang and W. Shen, 
            et al., Nitrogen-enriched electrospun porous carbon nanofiber networks as high-performance free-standing electrode materials, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19678–19684 RSC .
L. Qie, W. M. Chen, Z. H. Wang, Q. G. Shao, X. Li and L. X. Yuan, 
            et al., Nitrogen-doped porous carbon nanofiber webs as anodes for lithium ion batteries with a superhigh capacity and rate capability, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2047–2050 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Ding, Z. Shen, Q. Sun, F. Zheng and H. Fong, 
            et al., High-strength electrospun carbon nanofibrous mats prepared via rapid stabilization as frameworks for Li-ion battery electrodes, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 11574–11584 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Zhang, B.-R. Lu, F.-H. Cao, Z.-L. Yu, H.-P. Cong and S.-H. Yu, Hierarchically structured Co3O4@carbon porous fibers derived from electrospun ZIF-67/PAN nanofibers as anodes for lithium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12962–12968 RSC .
S. Das, Life cycle assessment of carbon fiber-reinforced polymer composites, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2011, 16, 268–282 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Adam, J. Ojur Dennis, Y. Al-Hadeethi, E. Mkawi, B. Abubakar Abdulkadir and F. Usman, 
            et al., State of the art and new directions on electrospun lignin/cellulose nanofibers for supercapacitor application: a systematic literature review, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. D. Petroudy, S. A. Kahagh and E. Vatankhah, Environmentally friendly superabsorbent fibers based on electrospun cellulose nanofibers extracted from wheat straw, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 251, 117087 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Thakur, M. K. Thakur, P. Raghavan and M. R. Kessler, Progress in green polymer composites from lignin for multifunctional applications: a review, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1072–1092 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salimi, O. Norouzi and S. Pourhosseini, Two-step synthesis of nanohusk Fe3O4 embedded in 3D network pyrolytic marine biochar for a new generation of anode materials for Lithium-Ion batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 786, 930–937 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, D. Su, J. Yang and J. Wang, Fe3O4/C composite with hollow spheres in porous 3D-nanostructure as anode material for the lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Xie, W. Shi and P. Cheng, Coordination compounds in lithium storage and lithium-ion transport, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1624–1642 RSC .
X. Tan, Y. Wu, X. Lin, A. Zeb, X. Xu and Y. Luo, 
            et al., Application of MOF-derived transition metal oxides and composites as anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 4939–4955 RSC .
W. Han, Y. Xiao, J. Yin, Y. Gong, X. Tuo and J. Cao, Fe3O4@ Carbon nanofibers synthesized from cellulose acetate and application in lithium-ion battery, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 11237–11244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. U. Arifeen, J. Choi, K. Yoo, J. Shim and T. J. Ko, A nano-silica/polyacrylonitrile/polyimide composite separator for advanced fast charging lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 128075 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Arifeen, M. Kim, J. Choi, K. Yoo, R. Kurniawan and T. J. Ko, Optimization of porosity and tensile strength of electrospun polyacrylonitrile nanofibrous membranes, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 229, 310–318 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Arifeen, M. Kim, D. Ting, R. Kurniawan, J. Choi and K. Yoo, 
            et al., Hybrid thermal resistant electrospun polymer membrane as the separator of lithium ion batteries, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 245, 122780 CrossRef .
T.-W. Zhang, T. Tian, B. Shen, Y.-H. Song and H.-B. Yao, Recent advances on biopolymer fiber based membranes for lithium-ion battery separators, Composites, Communications, 2019, 14, 7–14 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Ke, K. Shen, L. Zhu and C. Yuan, A Critical Review on Materials and Fabrications of Thermally Stable Separators for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 2100772 Search PubMed .
J. Sheng, S. Tong, Z. He and R. Yang, Recent developments of cellulose materials for lithium-ion battery separators, Cellulose, 2017, 24, 4103–4122 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. Yu, S.-Y. Lee, T. Wei, J. Li and Z. Fan, Nanocellulose: a promising nanomaterial for advanced electrochemical energy storage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2837–2872 RSC .
X. Sun, M. Li, S. Ren, T. Lei, S. Y. Lee and S. Lee, 
            et al., Zeolitic imidazolate framework-cellulose nanofiber hybrid membrane as Li-Ion battery separator: basic membrane property and battery performance, J. Power Sources, 2020, 454, 227878 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Shao, J. Wang, C. Lu and Z. Wang, Eco-friendly polyvinyl alcohol/cellulose nanofiber–Li+ composite separator for high-performance lithium-ion batteries, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 97912–97920 RSC .
M. R. Asghar, Y. Zhang, A. Wu, X. Yan, S. Shen and C. Ke, 
            et al., Preparation of microporous Cellulose/Poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene) membrane for lithium ion batteries by phase inversion method, J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, K. Yang, Y. Mo, S. Wang, D. Han and M. Xiao, 
            et al., Highly safe lithium-ion batteries: high strength separator from polyformaldehyde/cellulose nanofibers blend, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 502–510 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Liu, M. Guan, Z. Shang, Y. Sun and Z. Lu, 
            et al., Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) as a pore size mediator in the preparation of thermally resistant separators for lithium ion batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4838–4844 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, A. Li, L. Shi, C. Qian, T. G. Feric and Y. Fu, 
            et al., Thermally stable, nano-porous and eco-friendly sodium alginate/attapulgite separator for lithium-ion batteries, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 22, 48–56 CrossRef .
M.-J. Uddin, P. K. Alaboina, L. Zhang and S.-J. Cho, A low-cost, environment-friendly lignin-polyvinyl alcohol nanofiber separator using a water-based method for safer and faster lithium-ion batteries, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2017, 223, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, S. Li, Z. Jiang, J. Du, Y. Tao and J. Lu, 
            et al., A renewable membrane with high ionic conductivity and thermal stability for Li-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2022, 521, 230947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raulo, S. Bandyopadhyay, S. Ahamad, A. Gupta, R. Srivastava and P. Formanek, 
            et al., Bio-inspired poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrene sulfonate)-sulfur@ polyacrylonitrile electrospun nanofibers for lithium–sulfur batteries, J. Power Sources, 2019, 431, 250–258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Q. Fan, S. Chou, Z. Guo, K. Konstantinov and H. Liu, 
            et al., Li2S-Based Li-Ion Sulfur Batteries: Progress and Prospects, Small, 2021, 17, 1903934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Awang, M. Yajid and J. Jaafar, Impact of exfoliated structure on the performance of electrospun SPEEK/cloisite nanocomposite membranes as proton exchange membranes for direct methanol fuel cell application, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105319 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bagheri, M. Javanbakht, H. Beydaghi, P. Salarizadeh, A. Shabanikia and H. S. Amoli, Sulfonated poly(etheretherketone) and sulfonated polyvinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene based blend proton exchange membranes for direct methanol fuel cell applications, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39500–39510 RSC .
A. Bagheri, M. Javanbakht, P. Hosseinabadi, H. Beydaghi and A. Shabanikia, Preparation and characterization of SPEEK/SPVDF-co-HFP/LaCrO3 nanocomposite blend membranes for direct methanol fuel cells, Polymer, 2018, 138, 275–287 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hooshyari, B. Amini Horri, H. Abdoli, M. Fallah Vostakola, P. Kakavand and P. Salarizadeh, A Review of Recent Developments and Advanced Applications of High-Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membranes for PEM Fuel Cells, Energies, 2021, 14, 5440 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Khalifa, A. M. Omer, M. H. Abd Elmageed and M. S. Mohy Eldin, Titanium Dioxide/Phosphorous-Functionalized Cellulose Acetate Nanocomposite Membranes for DMFC Applications: Enhancing Properties and Performance, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 17194–17202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ottman, L. Ruokolainen, A. Suomalainen, H. Sinkko, P. Karisola and J. Lehtimäki, 
            et al., Soil exposure modifies the gut microbiota and supports immune tolerance in a mouse model, J. Allergy Clin. Immunol., 2019, 143, 1198–1206.e12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Salarizadeh, M. Javanbakht, M. B. Askari, K. Hooshyari, M. Moradi and H. Beydaghi, 
            et al., Novel proton conducting core–shell PAMPS-PVBS@Fe2TiO5 nanoparticles as a reinforcement for SPEEK based membranes, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. A. Sharif, M. Farooq, I. Hussain, M. Ali, M. Mujtaba and M. Sultan, 
            et al., Recent innovations for scaling up microbial fuel cell systems: significance of physicochemical
factors for electrodes and membranes materials, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2021, 129, 207–226 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bagheri, P. Salarizadeh, M. S. A. Hazer, P. Hosseinabadi, S. Kashefi and H. Beydaghi, The effect of adding sulfonated SiO2 nanoparticles and polymer blending on properties and performance of sulfonated poly ether sulfone membrane: fabrication and optimization, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 875–890 CrossRef CAS .
H. Beydaghi, M. Javanbakht, A. Bagheri, P. Salarizadeh, H. Ghafarian-Zahmatkesh and S. Kashefi, 
            et al., Novel nanocomposite membranes based on blended sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone)/poly(vinyl alcohol) containing sulfonated graphene oxide/Fe3O4 nanosheets for DMFC applications, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 74054–74064 RSC .
H. Beydaghi, L. Najafi, S. Bellani, A. Bagheri, B. Martin-Garcia and P. Salarizadeh, 
            et al., Functionalized metallic transition metal dichalcogenide (TaS2) for nanocomposite membranes in direct methanol fuel cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6368–6381 RSC .
Q. T. Phan, K. C. Poon and H. Sato, A review on amorphous noble-metal-based electrocatalysts for fuel cells: synthesis, characterization, performance, and future perspective, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 14190–14211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. Zhang, H. Chen and Y. Cao, A review of online electrochemical diagnostic methods of on-board proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Appl. Energy, 2021, 286, 116481 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Beydaghi, M. Javanbakht, P. Salarizadeh, A. B. Kharepouei and A. A. Zadeh, Nanocomposite blend membrane, US Pat., 10603639,  2020 .
N. Kannan and P. Donnellan, Algae-assisted microbial fuel cells: a practical overview, Bioresource Technol. Rep., 2021, 15, 100747 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Prasad and S. Kalla, Plant-microbial fuel cells-A bibliometric analysis, Process Biochem., 2021, 111, 250–260 CrossRef .
D. J. Kim, M. J. Jo and S. Y. Nam, A review of polymer–nanocomposite electrolyte membranes for fuel cell application, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 21, 36–52 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Ma, J. Gao, T. Li, G. Jiang and Z. Sun, Review on water management methods for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 12206–12229 CrossRef CAS .
R. Haider, Y. Wen, Z.-F. Ma, D. P. Wilkinson, L. Zhang and X. Yuan, 
            et al., High temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells: progress in advanced materials and key technologies, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1138–1187 RSC .
A. J. Slate, K. A. Whitehead, D. A. Brownson and C. E. Banks, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 101, 60–81 CrossRef .
L. Fan, Z. Tu and S. H. Chan, Recent development of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies: a review, Energy Rep., 2021, 7, 8421–8446 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, X. Ye, Y. Hao, G. Xu, G. Xu and D. Liu, Ultrasound-assisted extraction of hesperidin from Penggan (Citrus reticulata) peel, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2008, 15, 227–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Moulefera, M. Trabelsi, A. Mamun and L. Sabantina, Electrospun Carbon Nanofibers from Biomass and Biomass Blends—Current Trends, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shaari and S. Kamarudin, Chitosan and alginate types of bio-membrane in fuel cell application: an overview, J. Power Sources, 2015, 289, 71–80 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mashkour, M. Rahimnejad, M. Mashkour and F. Soavi, Increasing bioelectricity generation in microbial fuel cells by a high-performance cellulose-based membrane electrode assembly, Appl. Energy, 2021, 282, 116150 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, H. Zhao, X. Zhuang, L. Shi, B. Cheng and X. Xu, 
            et al., Nanofiber hybrid membranes: progress and application in proton exchange membranes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3729–3766 RSC .
Y. Duan, C. Ru, J. Li, Y.-N. Sun, X. Pu and B. Liu, 
            et al., Enhancing proton conductivity and methanol resistance of SPAEK membrane by incorporating MOF with flexible alkyl sulfonic acid for DMFC, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 641, 119906 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, R. Li, X. Xu, G. Sun, X. Zhuang and Y. Liu, 
            et al., Embedding phosphoric acid-doped cellulose nanofibers into sulfonated poly(ether sulfone) for proton exchange membrane, Polymer, 2018, 156, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kinumoto, T. Matsumura, K. Yamaguchi, M. Matsuoka, T. Tsumura and M. Toyoda, Material processing of bamboo for use as a gas diffusion layer in proton exchange membrane fuel cells, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1374–1380 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Jia, F. Pan, Z. Jiang and Q. Cheng, Enhanced anti-swelling property and dehumidification performance by sodium alginate–poly(vinyl alcohol)/polysulfone composite hollow fiber membranes, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 407, 211–220 CrossRef .
M. B. Karimi, F. Mohammadi and K. Hooshyari, Recent approaches to improve Nafion performance for fuel cell applications: a review, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28919–28938 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kamarudin, F. Achmad and W. R. W. Daud, Overview on the application of direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) for portable electronic devices, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6902–6916 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hren, M. Božič, D. Fakin, K. S. Kleinschek and S. Gorgieva, Alkaline membrane fuel cells: anion exchange membranes and fuels, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 604–637 RSC .
Y. Sudhakar, M. Selvakumar and D. Bhat, Biopolymer electrolytes for fuel cell applications, Biopolym. Electrolytes, 2018, 151–166 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. M. Yusof, B. Babgi, Y. Alghamdi, M. Aksu, J. Madhavan and M. Ashokkumar, Physical and chemical effects of acoustic cavitation in selected ultrasonic cleaning applications, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2016, 29, 568–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bayer, B. V. Cunning, R. Selyanchyn, M. Nishihara, S. Fujikawa and K. Sasaki, 
            et al., High temperature proton conduction in nanocellulose membranes: paper fuel cells, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4805–4814 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, S. Srichuwong, M. Campbell and J.-L. Jane, Characterization of maize amylose-extender (ae) mutant starches. Part III: structures and properties of the Naegeli dextrins, Carbohydr. Polym., 2010, 81, 885–891 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Di and X. Yin, Reinforced proton conductivity through imidazole-loaded cellulose nanofibers for proton exchange membranes, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 116403 CrossRef CAS .
V. Guccini, A. Carlson, S. Yu, G. Lindbergh, R. W. Lindström and G. Salazar-Alvarez, Highly proton conductive membranes based on carboxylated cellulose nanofibres and their performance in proton exchange membrane fuel cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25032–25039 RSC .
X. Xu, R. Li, C. Tang, H. Wang, X. Zhuang and Y. Liu, 
            et al., Cellulose nanofiber-embedded sulfonated poly(ether sulfone) membranes for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 184, 299–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, X. Xu, Y. Di, H. Wang, B. Cheng and L. Shi, 
            et al., Amino acid clusters supported by cellulose nanofibers for proton exchange membranes, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227035 CrossRef CAS .
H. Beydaghi, M. Javanbakht, P. Salarizadeh, A. Bagheri and A. Amoozadeh, Novel proton exchange membrane nanocomposites based on sulfonated tungsten trioxide for application in direct methanol fuel cells, Polymer, 2017, 119, 253–262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Beydaghi, M. Javanbakht, A. Bagheri, H. Ghafarian-Zahmatkesh and K. Hooshyari, Preparation and Characterization of Electrocatalyst Nanoparticles for Direct Methanol Fuel Cell Applications Using β-D-glucose as Protection Agent, Iranian, J. Hydrogen Fuel Cell, 2017, 4, 1–11 CAS .
G. Das, B. J. Park and H. H. Yoon, A bionanocomposite based on 1,4-diazabicyclo-[2.2.2]-octane cellulose nanofiber cross-linked-quaternary polysulfone as an anion conducting membrane, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15554–15564 RSC .
Y. Peng, Y. Wang, X. Wei, J. Zhou, H. Peng and L. Xiao, 
            et al., Sulfonated nanobamboo fiber-reinforced quaternary ammonia poly(ether ether ketone) membranes for alkaline polymer electrolyte fuel cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33581–33588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lai, P. Kolla, Y. Zhao, H. Fong and A. L. Smirnova, Lignin-derived electrospun carbon nanofiber mats with supercritically deposited Ag nanoparticles for oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline fuel cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ci, C. Cao, S. Kuga, J. Shen, M. Wu and Y. Huang, Improved performance of microbial fuel cell using esterified corncob cellulose nanofibers to fabricate air-cathode gas diffusion layer, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9614–9618 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, A. Kim, A. Lee, B. Lee and H. Lim, Optimized H2 fueling station arrangement model based on total cost of ownership (TCO) of fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV), Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 34116–34127 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. McCollum, W. Zhou, C. Bertram, H.-S. De Boer, V. Bosetti and S. Busch, 
            et al., Energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris Agreement and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 589–599 CrossRef .
V. Chaudhary, A. K. Kaushik, H. Furukawa and A. Khosla, Towards 5th generation ai and iot driven sustainable intelligent sensors based on 2d mxenes and borophene, ECS Sensors Plus, 2022 DOI:10.1149/2754-2726/ac5ac6 .
A. K. Kaushik, J. S. Dhau, H. Gohel, Y. K. Mishra, B. Kateb and N.-Y. Kim, 
            et al., Electrochemical SARS-CoV-2 sensing at point-of-care and artificial intelligence for intelligent COVID-19 management, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 7306–7325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chaudhary, A. Gautam, Y. K. Mishra and A. Kaushik, Emerging MXene–polymer hybrid nanocomposites for high-performance ammonia sensing and monitoring, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sheth, S. Dharaskar, V. Chaudhary, M. Khalid and R. Walvekar, Prospects of titanium carbide-based MXene in heavy metal ion and radionuclide adsorption for wastewater remediation: a review, Chemosphere, 2022, 133563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chaudhary, Charge Carrier Dynamics of Electrochemically Synthesized Poly(Aniline Co-Pyrrole) Nanospheres Based Sulfur Dioxide Chemiresistor, Polym.-Plast. Technol. Mater., 2022, 61, 107–115 CAS .
V. Chaudhary, A. Royal, M. Chavali and S. Yadav, Advancements in research and development to combat COVID-19 using nanotechnology, Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng., 2021, 6, 1–15 CrossRef .
N. Kaur, A. Khunger, S. L. Wallen, A. Kaushik, G. R. Chaudhary and R. S. Varma, Advanced green analytical chemistry for environmental pesticide detection, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2021, 30, 100488 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Zhang, B. Yang, J. Tan, X. Ding and W. Li, Recent advances in multidimensional (1D, 2D, and 3D) composite sensors derived from MXene: synthesis, structure, application, and perspective, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2100409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, J. Yang, D. Qi, P. Sonar, L. Liu and Z. Lou, 
            et al., Flexible sensors based on organic–inorganic hybrid materials, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2000889 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kailasa, M. S. B. Reddy, M. R. Maurya, B. G. Rani, K. V. Rao and K. K. Sadasivuni, Electrospun nanofibers: materials, synthesis parameters, and their role in sensing applications, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2021, 306, 2100410 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Chen, H. Bera, X. Guo, D. Cun and M. Yang, Engineering of biopolymer-based nanofibers for medical uses, Tailor-Made and Functionalized Biopolymer Systems,  2021, pp. 383–424 Search PubMed .
A. Ahmadi, S. M. Khoshfetrat, S. Kabiri, L. Fotouhi, P. S. Dorraji and K. Omidfar, Impedimetric paper-based enzymatic biosensor using electrospun cellulose acetate nanofiber and reduced graphene oxide for detection of glucose from whole blood, IEEE Sens. J., 2021, 21, 9210–9217 CAS .
K. O. Kim, G. J. Kim and J. H. Kim, A cellulose/β-cyclodextrin nanofiber patch as a wearable epidermal glucose sensor, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 22790–22794 RSC .
I. Yezer and D. O. Demirkol, Cellulose acetate–chitosan based electrospun nanofibers for bio-functionalized surface design in biosensing, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 10183–10197 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lv, H. Zhou, A. Mensah, Q. Feng, D. Wang and X. Hu, 
            et al., A highly flexible self-powered biosensor for glucose detection by epitaxial deposition of gold nanoparticles on conductive bacterial cellulose, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 351, 177–188 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Xu, D. Wang and C. Du, An eco-friendly gelatin based triboelectric nanogenerator for a self-powered PANI nanorod/NiCo2O4 nanosphere ammonia gas sensor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10935–10949 RSC .
Y. Han, Y. Han, X. Zhang, L. Li, C. Zhang and J. Liu, 
            et al., Fish gelatin based triboelectric nanogenerator for harvesting biomechanical energy and self-powered sensing of human physiological signals, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16442–16450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chauhan and P. R. Solanki, Hydrophilic and Insoluble Electrospun Cellulose Acetate Fiber-Based Biosensing Platform for 25-Hydroxy Vitamin-D3 Detection, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 1613–1623 CrossRef CAS .
S. Civan, S. Aydin, N. Aladag Tanik and Y. Aykut, Cellulose monoacetate/tetraethyl orthosilicate hybrid nanofibers for electrochemical DNA biosensors, Fibers Polym., 2021, 22, 981–988 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pavinatto, L. A. Mercante, M. H. Facure, R. B. Pena, R. C. Sanfelice and L. H. Mattoso, 
            et al., Ultrasensitive biosensor based on polyvinylpyrrolidone/chitosan/reduced graphene oxide electrospun nanofibers for 17α–Ethinylestradiol electrochemical detection, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 458, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Teepoo, P. Dawan and N. Barnthip, Electrospun chitosan-gelatin biopolymer composite nanofibers for horseradish peroxidase immobilization in a hydrogen peroxide biosensor, Biosensors, 2017, 7, 47 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vasudevan, M. J. Tai, V. Perumal, S. C. Gopinath, S. S. Murthe and M. Ovinis, 
            et al., Cellulose acetate-MoS2 nanopetal hybrid: a highly sensitive and selective electrochemical aptasensor of Troponin I for the early diagnosis of Acute Myocardial Infarction, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2021, 118, 245–253 CrossRef CAS .

          A. M. Al-Dhahebi, S. C. B. Gopinath, M. S. M. Saheed and M. Mustapha, Detection of Ochratoxin A using Cellulose Acetate Nanofibers Modified with Silver Nanoparticle, in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Sensors and Nanotechnology (SENNANO), 2021, pp. 146–149.
A. Y. El-Moghazy, N. Amaly, G. Istamboulie, N. Nitin and G. Sun, A signal-on electrochemical aptasensor based on silanized cellulose nanofibers for rapid point-of-use detection of ochratoxin A, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Liberato, R. S. Mancini, I. M. Factori, F. F. Ferreira, V. L. de Oliveira and J. B. Carnielli, 
            et al., Peptide-based assemblies on electrospun polyamide-6/chitosan nanofibers for detecting visceral leishmaniasis antibodies, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 2086–2095 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. N. V. Raja, M. M. Leena, J. Moses and C. Anandharamakrishnan, Co-electrospun-electrosprayed gelatin-ethyl cellulose nanocomposite pH-sensitive membrane for food quality applications, Food Chem., 2022, 133420 Search PubMed .
P. K. Sharma, A. Ruotolo, R. Khan, Y. K. Mishra, N. K. Kaushik and N.-Y. Kim, 
            et al., Perspectives on 2D-borophene flatland for smart bio-sensing, Mater. Lett., 2022, 308, 131089 CrossRef .
K. Sharma, A. Arora and S. K. Tripathi, Review of supercapacitors: materials and devices, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 21, 801–825 CrossRef .
M. Singh, A. Gupta, S. Sundriyal, K. Jain and S. Dhakate, Kraft lignin-derived free-standing carbon nanofibers mat for high-performance all-solid-state supercapacitor, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 264, 124454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, H. Zhao, L. Yue, G. Fan, T. Li and S. Lu, 
            et al., Recent advances in electrospun nanofibers for supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16747–16789 RSC .
J. Wang, S. Dong, B. Ding, Y. Wang, X. Hao and H. Dou, 
            et al., Pseudocapacitive materials for electrochemical capacitors: from rational synthesis to capacitance optimization, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 71–90 CrossRef CAS .
B. Du, H. Zhu, L. Chai, J. Cheng, X. Wang and X. Chen, 
            et al., Effect of lignin structure in different biomass resources on the performance of lignin-based carbon nanofibers as supercapacitor electrode, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 170, 113745 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schreiber, S. Vivekanandhan, P. Cooke, A. K. Mohanty and M. Misra, Electrospun green fibres from lignin and chitosan: a novel polycomplexation process for the production of lignin-based fibres, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 7949–7958 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, H. Liu, Q. Cao, H. Zheng, D. Xu and H. Guo, 
            et al., Electrospun lignin-based carbon nanofibers as supercapacitor electrodes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12831–12841 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, C. Liu, Z. Jiang, Z. Yang, X. Mao and L. Wei, 
            et al., Electrospun flexible lignin/polyacrylonitrile-based carbon nanofiber and its application in electrode materials for supercapacitors, Text. Res. J., 2021, 92, 456–466 CrossRef .
M. Cao, D. Wang, J. Lu, W. Cheng, G. Han and J. Zhou, Electrospun porous carbon nanofibers@ SnOx nanocomposites for high-performance supercapacitors: microstructures and electrochemical properties, Composites, Part A, 2021, 143, 106278 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lei, X.-D. Li, M.-K. Seo, M.-S. Khil, H.-Y. Kim and B.-S. Kim, NiCo2O4 nanostructure-decorated PAN/lignin based carbon nanofiber electrodes with excellent cyclability for flexible hybrid supercapacitors, Polymer, 2017, 132, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ago, M. Borghei, J. S. Haataja and O. J. Rojas, Mesoporous carbon soft-templated from lignin nanofiber networks: microphase separation boosts supercapacitance in conductive electrodes, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85802–85810 RSC .
R. A. P. Jayawickramage and J. P. Ferraris, High performance supercapacitors using lignin based electrospun carbon nanofiber electrodes in ionic liquid electrolytes, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 155402 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lai, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Zhou and Y. Zhao, 
            et al., Free-standing and mechanically flexible mats consisting of electrospun carbon nanofibers made from a natural product of alkali lignin as binder-free electrodes for high-performance supercapacitors, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
P. Butnoi, A. Pangon, R. Berger, H.-J. Butt and V. Intasanta, Electrospun nanocomposite fibers from lignin and iron oxide as supercapacitor material, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2021, 12, 2153–2167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hérou, J. J. Bailey, M. Kok, P. Schlee, R. Jervis and D. J. Brett, 
            et al., High-Density Lignin-Derived Carbon Nanofiber Supercapacitors with Enhanced Volumetric Energy Density, Adv. Sci., 2021, 2100016 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ma, L. Wu, M. Dirican, H. Cheng, J. Li and Y. Song, 
            et al., ZnO-assisted synthesis of lignin-based ultra-fine microporous carbon nanofibers for supercapacitors, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 586, 412–422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, Electrospun preparation of microporous carbon ultrafine fibers with tuned diameter, pore structure and hydrophobicity from phenolic resin, Carbon, 2014, 66, 705–712 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ra, E. Raymundo-Piñero, Y. Lee and F. Béguin, High power supercapacitors using polyacrylonitrile-based carbon nanofiber paper, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2984–2992 CrossRef CAS .

          C. I. Woodard, 10-wastes from industries (case studies), Industrial waste treatment handbook, Butterworth-Heinemann, Burlington,  2006, 2nd edn, pp. 409–496 Search PubMed .
V. Kuzmenko, N. Wang, M. Haque, O. Naboka, M. Flygare and K. Svensson, 
            et al., Cellulose-derived carbon nanofibers/graphene composite electrodes for powerful compact supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45968–45977 RSC .
W. Chen, H. Wang, W. Lan, D. Li, A. Zhang and C. Liu, Construction of sugarcane bagasse-derived porous and flexible carbon nanofibers by electrospinning for supercapacitors, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 170, 113700 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramadoss, K.-Y. Yoon, M.-J. Kwak, S.-I. Kim, S.-T. Ryu and J.-H. Jang, Fully flexible, lightweight, high performance all-solid-state supercapacitor based on 3-dimensional-graphene/graphite-paper, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 159–165 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Abouelamaiem, M. J. Mostazo-López, G. He, D. Patel, T. P. Neville and I. P. Parkin, 
            et al., New insights into the electrochemical behaviour of porous carbon electrodes for supercapacitors, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 19, 337–347 CrossRef .
Q. Fan, C. Ma, L. Wu, C. Wei, H. Wang and Y. Song, 
            et al., Preparation of cellulose acetate derived carbon nanofibers by ZnCl2 activation as a supercapacitor electrode, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 6419–6428 RSC .
F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Carbons and electrolytes for advanced supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Cao, M. Zhu, J. Chen, Y. Song, Y. Li and J. Zhou, Novel lignin-cellulose-based carbon nanofibers as high-performance supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 1210–1221 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, J. Liu, H. Bian, W. Wang, F. Wang and Z. Shao, Dexterous and friendly preparation of N/P co-doping hierarchical porous carbon nanofibers via electrospun chitosan for high performance supercapacitors, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 878, 114473 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ranjith, G. S. R. Raju, N. R. Chodankar, S. M. Ghoreishian, Y. L. Cha and Y. S. Huh, 
            et al., Lignin-derived carbon nanofibers-laminated redox-active-mixed metal sulfides for high-energy rechargeable hybrid supercapacitors, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 8018–8029 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gaminian, M. Montazer, A. Bahi, M. Karaaslan and F. Ko, Capacitance performance boost of cellulose-derived carbon nanofibers via carbon and silver nanoparticles, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 2499–2512 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, A. Gupta, S. Sundriyal, P. Dubey, K. Jain and S. Dhakate, Activated green carbon-based 2-D nanofabric mats for ultra-flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 49, 104193 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Seyedeh Nooshin Banitaba
	Dr Banitaba (Textile Eng., PhD), born in Iran, is currently in a Postdoctoral position at Amirkabir University of Technology. She has over ten years of research experience in the field of fabricating and analyzing electrospun nanostructures. Her main research interests are the design and development of solvent-free electrospun electrolytes incorporating active and inert materials to synthesize all-solid-state and flexible LIBs. Dr Banitaba has authored over 25 peer-reviewed scientific publications with 257 citations.

Ebrahim Mostafavi
	Dr Ebrahim Mostafavi has so far received training at Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine (PostDoc), Northeastern University (PhD), Harvard Medical School (Researcher), and University of Tehran (MSc and BSc). His research interests revolve around the engineering and development of (nano)biomaterials, nanocarriers, and 3D in vitro models (hydrogels, 3D bioprinted constructs, nanoporous scaffolds, organoids, and vascular grafts) to create biologically complex systems for tissue engineering, regenerative/translational medicine, cancer therapy, biosensing, and infectious diseases. Dr Mostafavi serves as Associate Editor-in-Chief of several prestigious and high-impact journals within Elsevier, Springer, Dove Medical Press, T&F, Frontiers, etc. He is also an Editorial Board Member of 25+ prestigious biomedical and materials science journals. His scholarly work comprises >135 publications with an H-index of 26 (i10-index = 62). So far, he has also contributed to writing more than 35 book chapters and has edited several books.

 	Fig. 1  Structure and resource of the most applied natural polymers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) General network visualization (constructed via VOSViewer v.1.6.11) and (b) the number of publications on using electrospun natural-polymer based fibers in various electrochemical devices. (c) The number of articles for application in various fields. (d) The number of articles for application in electrochemical devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The structure of natural skeletal muscle (from smart.servier.com). (B) (a) The mechanism of actuation of natural skeletal muscles and (b) electrochemomechanical artificial muscles. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier. (C) A nanofibrous conducting polymer-based bending artificial muscle under electrochemical actuation. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Elsevier. (D) Nanofibrous conducting polymer actuators for controlled drug release application: (a) passive drug delivery from biodegradable nanofibers before and after coating with a conducting polymer, and (b) active drug delivery using the electrical actuation of conducting polymer nanofibers. (c) Cumulative mass release of the drug from biodegradable nanofibers (black squares) and conducting polymer-coated nanofibers without electrical actuation (red circles) and with electrical actuation (blue triangles), (d) the UV spectra of the drug released from conducting polymer nanofibers after 16 h (black), 87 h (red), 160 h (blue), and 730 h (green). Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Wiley. (E) Controllable pore sizes of the nanofibrous membrane under electrochemical actuation for tunable filtration: (a) measuring the pore size variation using a confocal microscope setup, (b) the pore size changes under two oxidation–reduction cycles, confocal microscopy images of the membrane for (c) oxidized and (d) reduced state. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Photograph (a) and SEM images of the lateral surface (b) and cross-section (c and d) of the silk/conducting polymer nanofibrous bundle as an electrochemomechanical bioactuator. Actuation stress and strain generated by silk/PPy (e and f) and silk/PEDOT–OH (g and h) nanofibrous actuators. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) The actuation performance of gelatin–glucose/PPy nanofibrous actuators synthesized with DBS and TF dopants: (a) generated strain and (b) stress by actuators in a potential cycle between 1 V and −0.55 V, (c) strain under square wave potential at 0.0025 Hz frequency, and (d) actuation stability of actuators up to 1000 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Public Library of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) (a) The schematic illustration of the charge–discharge process in Li/Na-ion batteries. Digital images of the PL5/5-1300 electrode (b) before and (c) after cycling, and (d) SEM images of the PL5/5-1300 electrode after 200 charge–discharge cycles. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier. (B) (a) Schematic of phase separation for lignin/PLA fibers. TEM images of (b) lignin/TPU-50:50 and (c) lignin/PLA-50:50. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Wiley. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the half-cell including the prepared flexible electrode in the first, second, and third cycles. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Elsevier. (e) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of Fe3O4@CNFs and FexOyNFs at 0.2 A g−1 in lithium half-cell configuration. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of some FC applications based on the required power output scale.	 

PEMFC	Proton exchange membrane	Pure hydrogen	Oxygen or air	<100 °C	
210

DMFC	Proton exchange membrane	Liquid methanol	Oxygen or air	90–120 °C	
211

AFC	Concentrated (30–50%) KOH in H2O	Pure hydrogen	Oxygen or air	50–200 °C	
212

MCFC	Molten carbonate salt suspended in a porous ceramic matrix	Coal-derived fuel gas, methane or natural gas	Oxygen or air	About 650 °C	
199

PAFC	Phosphoric acid	Pure hydrogen	Oxygen or air	>200 °C	
213

SOFC	Solid ceramic	Gasoline or natural gas	Oxygen or air	500–600 °C	
196

MFC	Membrane	Microorganism's activity	Oxygen or air	15–45 °C	
214


 	Fig. 7  (A) Slurry prepared from (a) cellulose nanofiber and (b) cellulose nanocrystal, and (c) (left to right) conventional cellulose-based paper, cellulose nanofiber paper, and cellulose nanocrystal paper (thicknesses for all was ∼90 μm). SEM images of (d) cellulose nanofiber and (e) cellulose nanocrystal paper. Images of prepared MEAs based on a (f) cellulose nanofiber membrane and (g) cellulose nanocrystal membrane. Postoperation cross-sectional SEM images of (h) cellulose nanofiber and (i) cellulose nanocrystal membrane. Polarization and power density curves of FCs based on cellulose nanocrystal and cellulose nanofiber membrane electrode assemblies operated at 80 °C and 95% RH for the (j) 32 μm thick cellulose nanofiber membrane and (k) 30 μm thick cellulose nanocrystal membrane. Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) SEM images of P-Cell membranes and the corresponding fiber size distribution: (a) P-Cell-0.1M, (b) P-Cell-0.15M, (c) P-Cell-0.2M, and (d) P-Cell-0.25M. SEM images of the phosphoric acid treated cellulose nanofiber/SPES composite membrane: cross-sections of (e) P-Cell/SPES-0.2M, (f) P-Cell/SPES-0.1M, (g) 0.15M-P-Cell/SPES-0.15M, (h) P-Cell/SPES-0.2M Ind and (i) P-Cell/SPES-0.25M. Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) SEM images and the corresponding fiber diameter distribution: (a) cell and Cell/Im nanofibers: (b) Cell/Im-10, (c) Cell/Im-20, and (d) Cell/Im-30. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from IOPscience. (e) SEM image and (f) cross-sectional image of the H-CNF-1550 membrane, and (g and h) polarization curves of cellulose nanofiber membranes as a function of surface charge density and thickness. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) SEM images of (a) cellulose nanofibers and (b) Cell-Ser nanofibers, TEM images of (c and d) single Cell-AAs nanofibers stained with OSO4, (e–g) the EDS mapping of single Cell-AAs nanofibers, and (h) the corresponding EDX data of the single Cell-AAs nanofibers stained with OSO4. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Cellulose nanofiber preparation. (a) Cellulose extraction steps from Citrus tangerine, (b) AFM images of (b) quaternized polysulfone/dibromobutane, and (c) amplitude and (d) phase images of quaternized polysulfone/quaternized cellulose, (e) ionic network illustration, and (f) possible crosslinked and non-cross-linked structures in the nanocomposite membranes. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (a) Synthesis steps of quaternary ammonia poly(ether ether ketone) and sulfonated nano bamboo fibers, and their composite membrane. Single-cell performance of APEFCs using quaternary ammonia poly(ether ether ketone) membranes and the composite membranes (b) at 60 °C without backpressure and (c) at 60 °C with 0.1 MPa backpressure. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic construction and working mechanism of MFCs; photos of carbon cloth (e) before and (f) after coating with esterified cellulose nanofibers; and (g) power density performance curves of MFCs with ACPTFE and ACE-CNF. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Cellulose nanofibre based biosensor for healthcare monitoring. (a) SEM image of electrospun cellulose acetate nanofibres for an EC biosensor, (b) response outcomes of the fabricated biosensor towards 25-hydroxy vitamin-D3 for different monitoring parameters. (B) Sensing parameters of the fabricated EC biosensor. (a) Selectivity, (b) reproducibility, and (c) repeatability of the fabricated sensing device. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from American Chemical Society. (C) Chitosan–gelatin composite fibre based EC sensor to monitor hydrogen peroxide at environmental and biological levels. (a) Fabrication route for electrospun chitosan–gelatin composite nanofibres, (b) amperometric sensitivity evaluated using nanofiber (A) and thin film (B) modified electrodes for consecutive addition of 1 mM hydrogen peroxide at −0.3 V, (c) cyclic voltammograms recorded for different electrodes (a) pristine, (b) nanofibers, (c) glutaraldehyde, and (d) HRP at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, and (d) amperometric outcomes observed from electrospun chitosan–gelatin composite nanofiber-modified electrodes for consecutive addition of 1 mM hydrogen peroxide at −0.2 V. Reproduced from ref. 249 with permission from MDPI.	 

Poplar lignin/PAN-based CNFs (5:5 and 7:3)	220 °C@0.2 °C min−1 and 950 °C@2 °C min−1 for 2 h	339.2 F g−1 (5:5) and 243.8 F g−1 (7:3) over 0–1.0 V	
260

Pine lignin/PAN-based CNFs (5:5 and 7:3)	
	302.5 F g−1 (5:5) and 228.4 F g−1 (7:3) over 0–1.0 V	

Corn stalk lignin/PAN-based CNFs (5:5 and 7:3)	
	280.7 F g−1 (5:5) and 189.8 F g−1 (7:3) over 0–1.0 V	

Lignin (corn stalk)/PAN-based CNFs (1:1)	220 °C@0.5 °C min−1 for 4 h and 1000 °C@4 °C min−1 for 4 h, and activation in KOH at 800 °C for 1 h in N2	442.2 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 over −1.0 to 0.0 V, ED ∼ 37.1 W h kg−1 at PD ∼ 400 W kg−1, and CR ∼ 97.1% after 10000 cycles	
262

Lignin/PAN-based CNFs (9:1)	240 °C in air@1 °C min−1, 1200 °C@5 °C min−1 in N2, and cooling@10 °C min−1	201.27 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	
263

Lignin/PAN-based CNFs incorporated with SnCl2·2H2O	200, 300 or 400 °C for 2 h in air and 800 °C for 2 h in N2	229 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, ED ∼ 7.2 W h kg−1, PD ∼ 3.6 W kg−1, and CR ∼ 99% after 10000 cycles	
281

Lignin/PAN-based CNFs embedded with NiCo2O4	280 °C@1.0 °C min−1 for 1 h in air and 1000 °C@5 °C min−1 for 1 h in N2	1757 F g−1 at 2 mA cm−2 over 0 to 6.0 V, ED ∼ 47.75 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 799.53 W kg−1	
265

Lignin/PEO-based CNFs (9:1)	200 °C in air and 800 °C in N2	30 F cm−3 and ED ∼ 6 W h L−1 at 0.1 A g−1	
270

Lignin/PEO-based CNFs (99:1) loaded by iron nitrate	250 °C in air@0.5 °C min−1 for 1 h and 900 °C@10 °C min−1 for 2 h in N2	102, 216, and 107 F g−1 and ED ∼ 43 W h kg−1 over −0.6 to 0.6 V	
269

Kraft lignin/PVA-based CNFs (9:1) having a total polymer concentration of 21 wt%	250 °C@2 °C min−1 in air and 600, 800, and 1000 °C@5 °C min−1	5.6, 196.6, and 163.0 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 for 600, 800, and 1000 °C, ED ∼ 62.65 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 1250 W kg−1	
257

Lignin/PVP-based CNFs embedded with Zn(NO3)	150 °C and 350 °C@1 °C min−1 for 4 h in air along with 800 °C@3 °C min−1 in Ar	289 F g−1 over 0.0 to 0.9 V device: 217 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, and 152 F g−1 at 20 A g−1	
271

Lignin based-CNF laminated redox-active-mixed metal sulfides	Surface-embedded Ni–Mn sulfide nano grains on the 3D LCNFs	652.3 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, CR ∼ 91.3% after 5000cycles, ED ∼ 52.4 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 800 W kg−1	
283

CA-based CNFs loaded by rGO	800 °C@5 °C min−1 in N2	46 F cm−3, ED ∼ 1.46 W h L−1, and PD ∼ 1.09 kW L−1	
275

CA-based interbonded CNFs	240 °C@3 °C min−1 for 1 h in air, 1000 °C@5 °C min−1 for 2 h in N2, and 850 °C for 1.5 h in CO2	241.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, CR ∼ 99.9% after 10000 cycles, and PD ∼ 84.1 kW kg−1	
277

CA-based CNFs incorporated with ZnCl2	20–200 °C@3 °C min−1, 200–220 °C@2 °C min−1 in air, and 700 °C@3 °C min−1 3 h in N2	202 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and CR ∼ 92% after 5000 cycles	
279

CA/soy protein-based CNFs	240 °C@1 °C min−1 for 2 h in air and 800 °C@2.5 °C min−1 in N2	219.3 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and CR ∼ 98.9% after 50000 cycles	
276

Cellulose-based CNFs loaded by ZIF-67(Co)	800 °C@2 °C min−1 for 3 h in N2	433 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and CR ∼ 84% after 3000 cycles	
263

CA-based CNFs loaded by vapor grown (VG) CNFs and silver nanoparticles	250 °C@5 °C min−1 for 1 h in air and 800 °C@10 °C min−1 for 1 h in N2	216 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	
284

Lignin/cellulose-based CNFs	220 °C@2 °C min−1 for 2 h in air and 800 °C@5 °C min−1 for 1 h in N2	346.6 at 0.1 A g−1 over 0.0–1.0 V, ED ∼ 24.3 W h kg−1 at PD ∼ 400 W kg−1	
281

Acetylated sugarcane bagasse/PAN-based CNFs (5:5)	280 °C for 4 h in air and 800 °C@8 °C min−1 for 2 h	289.5 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, ED ∼ 18.9–56.0 W h kg−1, PD ∼ 3.16–1.26 kW kg−1	
276

Chitosan/PVP-based CNFs doped with N/P	270 °C@2 °C min−1 for 2 h in air, 500 °C for 2 h, and 700 °C@1 °C min−1 for 2 h	358.7 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, 94 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, ED ∼ 13.1 W h kg−1, and PD ∼ 248 W kg−1	
282


 	Fig. 11  (A) Lignin-based nanofiber preparation. (a) Steps of preparing carbon nanofibers from lignin, (b) SEM images of C-800 nanofibers, (c) FTIR spectral comparison of lignin and its carbon nanofibers, (d) cyclic voltammetry graph for different carbon nanofibers, and (e) Nyquist plot for symmetric aqueous and solid-state device. Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from Elsevier. (B) Synthesis of CNF/rGO composite nanofibers. (a) Synthesis steps of the CNF/rGO composite electrode, (b) GCD curve at different current densities, and (c) cyclic stability of the composite electrode over 4000 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Pros, challenges, and future remarks of the biopolymer-based electrospun fibers applicable in electrochemical devices.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
