Natural gas hydrate resources and hydrate technologies: a review and analysis of the associated energy and global warming challenges  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE02093E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE02093E
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5611-5668Natural gas hydrate resources and hydrate technologies: a review and analysis of the associated energy and global warming challenges

        
          
            Yi-Song 
            Yu
          
          
        
      abcdef, 
      
        
          
            Xianwei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jian-Wu 
            Liu
          
          
        
      abde, 
      
        
          
            Yohan 
            Lee
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Xiao-Sen 
            Li
          
          
        
      *abde
aKey Laboratory of Gas Hydrate, Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: lixs@ms.giec.ac.cn
bGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of New and Renewable Energy Research and Development, Guangzhou, 510640, China
cChemical & Biological Engineering Department, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA
dGuangzhou Center for Gas Hydrate Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510640, China
eUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
fGuangzhou Chemical Co., Ltd. of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510650, China
Received 
      7th July 2021
    , Accepted 6th August 2021First published on 8th August 2021AbstractThe new scenario involving the rapid energy supply transition from oil-based to natural gas-based undoubtedly affects the future carbon capture and storage (CCS) and offers an opportunity for the use of natural gas hydrates (NGHs). NGHs account for one-third of the mobile organic carbon on Earth, acting as a carbon storage reservoir in the carbon cycle. Hydrate-based technologies including CO2 capture, CO2 separation, and natural gas storage and transportation can also be used to reduce greenhouse gas (CO2, CH4) emissions and have excellent application potential. However, the implications of the energy supply transition, NGH extraction, and hydrate-based technologies for future climate change mitigation have not been deeply recognized. This paper comprehensively discusses the global energy supply and environmental challenges and transitions, and NGHs and their role in the energy supply, carbon cycle, and historical and future climate change, and summarizes the state-of-the-art developments in hydrate-based technologies and NGH exploitation methods and their potential environmental impacts, thereby providing a perspective on the roles of NGHs and their related technologies in the future energy supply and climate change mitigation. In all of these areas, we focus on identifying future CCS challenges and the technological development risk imposed by a natural gas-based global economy and NGH utilization, which should be highlighted in the next several decades.
Yi-Song Yu
Dr Yi-song Yu received his PhD in engineering thermophysics (2018) from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. From 2018 to 2019, he worked at the Center of Gas Hydrate Research in Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Currently he performs postdoctoral research at Colorado School of Mines, USA, on flow assurance. His research areas include the thermodynamics and kinetics of gas hydrates, hydrate-based CO2 capture, utilization and storage, hydrate-based energy storage and transportation, and natural gas hydrate exploitation.
Xianwei Zhang
Xianwei Zhang received his PhD in 2017 in chemical engineering at Colorado School of Mines under the supervision of Prof. Amadeu Sum. His research was in the field of hydrate-related flow assurance. During his post-doctoral research, he expanded his research interest to more hydrate-related science and engineering challenges.
Jian-Wu Liu
Jian-Wu Liu is currently an assistant research scientist under the guidance of Prof. Xiao-Sen LI at Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion (GIEC), Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his PhD in Fluid Mechanics at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. De-Tang LU in the field of fluid flow within porous media. His research interests include fluid flow and fluid–solid coupling effect in unconventional reservoirs and other porous media.
Yohan Lee
Dr Yohan Lee is a postdoctoral fellow in Colorado School of Mines, USA from 2019. He received his PhD in environmental engineering from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea, in 2017. He has also worked in GEOMAR – Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Germany, with Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship. His research interests are flow assurance, natural gas hydrate exploitation, and carbon capture, utilization and storage.
Xiao-Sen Li
Xiao-Sen Li, PhD, Professor, graduated from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University with a Doctoral Degree in 2000. From April 2000 to July 2005, he worked at the University of Alberta and University of British Columbia. From August 2005 to now, he works at the Center of Gas Hydrate Research in Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), as a chief scientist and a professor. He is a director of the Key Laboratory of Gas Hydrate, CAS. His research interests are in thermodynamics and kinetics of gas hydrates, production and utilization of natural gas hydrates and hydrate-based application technology. He has published more than 260 academic papers, obtained 65 patents of invention and won the second prize of the National Technological Invention Award.

Broader context
The transition of the global economy from oil-based to natural gas-based affects future carbon capture and storage (CCS) and offers an opportunity for natural gas hydrate (NGH) use. NGHs with one-third of the mobile organic carbon on Earth can act as a carbon storage reservoir. Hydrate-based technology for carbon (CO2 and CH4) capture and storage can also support climate change mitigation. This paper provides a perspective on the relationship between the upcoming energy supply scenario, NGH utilization, hydrate-based technologies, and climate change mitigation; summarizes the state-of-the-art developments related to these aspects; and highlights key research challenges. Importantly, this perspective balances the risks related to the development of technologies, the CCS capacity, and climate change mitigation targets.

1. Introduction
Climate change is a practical issue in the modern world. To reduce and eliminate excessive greenhouse gas emissions, countries and regions have united and developed various plans. The Paris Agreement1 and the Kyoto Protocol2 are the two best examples of the determination and cooperation of human beings. Because of the urgency of the situation, these plans are usually aggressive and challenging. For example, the European Union's target is to reduce emission by 20% by 2020, at least 40% by 2030, and to reach climate neutral levels by 2050.3,4 It is well-known that the efforts to reduce emission are arduous, and a considerable proportion of the CO2 emission reduction burden is born by the current energy sector because of its huge emissions. In general, the approaches to carbon emission control mainly include the reduction of fossil fuel usage and the reduction of carbon emissions from fossil fuel usage. Although alternative renewable and nuclear energy sources have been developed and deployed at a fast pace, the speed has still not been fast enough to significantly reduce fossil fuel usage. The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)5 estimated that global energy consumption will increase by 50% in the next few decades (from 2018 to 2050). However, no energy source is expected to see an obvious decline in terms of the absolute amount used. Fossil fuels accounted for 80% of the global energy consumption in 2018 and are expected to still account for 68% in 2050. Therefore, it is expected that most of the energy will still mainly come from fossil fuels in the foreseeable future.
Among the types of fossil fuels, natural gas (NG) has been rapidly replacing the others due to its economical price and lower pollution. The consumption of natural gas is expected to increase by 44%, from 137 quadrillion BTU in 2018 to 198 quadrillion BTU in 2050.5 It is well known that natural gas hydrates (NGHs) are one of the major materials that contain extractable natural gas. Because of the upward trend in natural gas usage, NGHs are seen as an alternative natural gas resource. Current studies have shown that NGHs are widely distributed around the world. The total amount of organic carbon in NGHs may be more than twice that of all other known sources of conventional fossil fuels. Undoubtedly, NGHs act as a carbon sink and play an important role in Earth's carbon cycle. Typically, most hydrates are found in marine and permafrost environments. The development of NGH extraction techniques and production trials has advanced rapidly in the last decade. Hydrate reservoirs have been sampled and characterized during numerous expeditions around the world. Both onshore and offshore expeditions have been conducted. Although the diversity of hydrate reservoirs imposes challenges in the development of extraction and hazard mitigation strategies, current results have demonstrated the feasibility and promising future of NGH utilization.
Moreover, hydrates can be made artificially. Techniques based on artificial hydrates can contribute to carbon capture and storage, which is critical to achieving the reduction of carbon emissions. One of the potential applications is methane (CH4) capture, storage, and transportation. CH4 itself is a strong greenhouse gas. Both burning and leakage can cause greenhouse effects. Currently, CH4 is mainly stored and transported by pipelines and in the form of liquified natural gas (LNG), and compressed natural gas (CNG). However, these methods have their individual issues, which make them unsuitable for long-term natural gas storage and transportation, especially for storage. Besides, due to the limitations of these approaches, CH4 from small-scale production or fields usually cannot be effectively used, and it has to be burnt, which not only causes unnecessary financial losses but also produces CO2. Recent studies have shown that hydrate-based CH4 capture, storage, and transportation may be a promising economic approach.
Another application of hydrate-based techniques is to separate and store carbon dioxide (CO2), which is a common hydrate former and a greenhouse gas. The generation of CO2 in the energy industry is unavoidable, given the irreplaceable utilization of fossil fuels. Therefore, the application of carbon capture and storage (CCS) is crucial to reaching emission reduction goals. Hydrate-based separation is a promising CCS process due to its simplicity and high selectivity. High purity separated CO2 can be easily retrieved via hydrate dissociation. Moreover, CO2 hydrates can be permanently stored in the deep subsurface. As long as the pressure is high enough, the solid hydrate will remain stable without any concerns regarding gas leakage. Besides, using the CH4–CO2 replacement method, not only can CO2 be permanently stored in the deep subsurface in the form of solid hydrates, but also CH4 can be extracted from the hydrates simultaneously. In addition, as an auxiliary method, CO2 storage in the deep sea can help to stabilize the seafloor failure caused by NGH exploitation.
Hydrate studies have been popular for years. Many existing reviews have attempted to summarize the resulting advancements (Table 1). However, the challenges and opportunities regarding hydrate extraction and hydrate-based techniques have not been reviewed in detail. The implications of hydrate extraction and hydrate-based techniques to the future climate change mitigation have also not been reviewed. This paper aims to address these aspects by summarizing the state-of-the-art achievements related to NGH- and hydrate-based techniques, illustrating the relationship between the upcoming energy supply scenario and the future climate change mitigation, and suggesting future directions for the development of NGH- and hydrate-based techniques. This paper includes discussions of the global energy and environmental challenges, NGHs and their role in the energy supply and carbon cycle, NGH exploitation and its potential environmental impacts, hydrate-based natural gas storage and transportation techniques, hydrate-based CO2 capture and storage techniques, and outlooks for the role of NGHs and relevant techniques on climate change mitigation.
Table 1 List of reviews of hydrate extraction and hydrate-based techniques from 2010 to 2020




Article title
Year
Review scope




Challenges, uncertainties and issues facing gas production from gas hydrate deposits6
2010
Status of the efforts toward commercial gas production of hydrates


Review on the gas hydrate development and production as a new energy resource7
2011
Knowledge of gas hydrate and the scope of gas hydrate research


Current perspectives on gas hydrate resources8
2011
History and current status of gas hydrate resource assessment


Application of gas hydrate formation in separation processes: A review of experimental studies9
2012
Introduction to hydrate-based techniques related to separation processes


Review of progress in evaluating gas hydrate drilling hazards10
2012
History of gas hydrate shallow hazard assessment


A review on research on replacement of CH4 in natural gas hydrates by use of CO211
2012
Research advances in replacement of CH4 with CO2 in Natural Gas Hydrates (NGHs) and discussion of its advantages and disadvantages


Review of CO2–CH4 clathrate hydrate replacement reaction laboratory studies – properties and kinetics12
2013
Research progress in replacement reactions and analytical methods with a special focus on laboratory studies


Review of the findings of the Iġnik Sikumi CO2–CH4 gas hydrate exchange field trial13
2014
Findings of the Iġnik Sikumi CO2–CH4 gas hydrate exchange field trial


The status of natural gas hydrate research in China: a review14
2014
Gas hydrate research in China


Recent advances in gas hydrate-based CO2 capture15
2015
Chemical additives and the mechanical methods used to improve the CO2 separation efficiency and energy consumption through hydrate-based carbon capture techniques


A review of the hydrate-based gas separation (HBGS) process for carbon dioxide pre-combustion capture16
2015
Summary of the data for the hydrate-based gas separation (HBGS) process related to the capture of CO2 from fuel gas mixtures


Evaluation of natural gas hydrates as a future methane source17
2016
Evaluation of the potential of methane gas from NGHs as a future unconventional energy source


Investigation into gas production from natural gas hydrate: a review18
2016
Current hydrate research scope and main achievements


Review of natural gas hydrates as an energy resource: prospects and challenges19
2016
Resource potential of natural gas hydrates, current research progress in laboratory settings, and several recent field trials


Review of fundamental properties of CO2 hydrates and CO2 capture and separation using hydration method20
2016
Research on CO2 hydrates and hydrates of gas mixtures of CO2/N2/H2/CH4, including the fundamental thermo-physical properties, molecular structures and hydrate formation equilibrium conditions


Energy-efficient natural gas hydrate production using gas exchange21
2016
State-of-the-art gas exchange concept for NGH production and several recent international NGH field production tests


Review of exploration and production technology of natural gas hydrate22
2018
Natural gas exploitation techniques


A review of solidified natural gas (SNG) technology for gas storage via clathrate hydrates23
2018
Methods of improving the kinetics of hydrate formation and increasing the gas storage capacity


Research progress in hydrate-based technologies and processes in China: A review24
2019
Current status of hydrate-based technology research in China


Carbon dioxide sequestration via hydrates: a potential pathway towards decarbonization25
2020
A brief overview of biological and non-biological CO2 sequestration methods




2. Global energy and environmental challenges
Energy use is a crucial element in our society. The discovery and application of various energy resources facilitate the transitions in our technology, our lives, and our society. The energy industry is also a key economic element in many countries. However, simultaneously achieving economic growth, environmental protection and climate change prevention has been a challenge in many countries and areas.26–28 This complex challenge requires us to balance the short- and long-term interests, the interest of countries and areas, industry sectors, etc.
Typically, the use of a certain energy source is a compromise between availability, economical affordability, environmental affordability and historical reasons. Table 2 compares the common energy sources and their recent consumptions. Most of the data are for 2019 and are the newest available data. Some of the data, such as the fossil-fuel-fired electricity plant capacities, are from 2017. The data sources from different years may contain some inconsistencies, but the values are still comparable as the changes are usually small within one to two years. Despite having the same units, the energy sources are consumed in different ways. Most renewable and nuclear energy sources are used in the form of electricity, while fossil fuels are directly used for heating, transportation, and manufacturing. The global potential is based on the current technological setting, which changes over time. Although the estimates are not necessarily accurate, they are still the best available data for administration to use to determine energy policies, industrial investments and energy production. Only the renewable energy sources have annual energy flow values since they are replenished continuously. The flow represents the maximum amount that can be used every year. In contrast, fossil fuels are single-use on a practical time scale.
Table 2 Comparison of energy resources






Consumption in 201829a
Electrical plant capacity in 20195,30
Global potential31
Earth's energy flow17


Energy source
Exajoules
GW
EJ
EJ





a The electricity generation from renewable sources is considered on an equivalent basis assuming ∼40% thermal efficiency compared to fossil fuels. The values are based on the gross electricity output.





Hydro
37.66
1310
50–95
130–160






Wind
5.146
622 (594 onshore, 28 offshore)
48–600
28400


Solar
2.607
586 (580 photovoltaic, 6 concentrated)
118–2592
3.9 × 106


Bio
1.88
124 (87 solid biofuel, 3 liquid biofuel, 19 biogas)
27–1500
3000


Ocean
0.0036
0.531
1.8–33
700


Geothermal
0.318
13.909
1.1–22
1300


Nuclear
24.92
39732
1000 EJ (uranium with current reactors)33
N/A


Coal
157.9 (36.45 electricity)
1631.9 (in 2017)
N/A
N/A


Oil
193.03
107.7 (in 2017)
N/A
N/A


Natural gas
141.5 (22.5 electricity)
460.3 (in 2017)
N/A
N/A




Renewable energy consists of various types, such as hydropower, wind, solar power, biomass, etc. Their geological distributions and the total energy flows are diverse and are often limited. They can usually act as a good complement to the energy supply, but they have rarely become dominant. The utilization of renewable energy requires as comprehensive a consideration as that of conventional energy sources.
Hydropower currently has the highest electrical plant capacity and the highest consumption among the renewable sources at 1310 GW and 37.66 EJ, respectively. It involves the conversion of the potential energy of water into the turbine kinetic energy and eventually to electricity. Unlike other renewable sources, at least 1/3 of the hydropower potential on the Earth has been utilized. Further capacity expansion is possible but limited. Hydropower generation at many locations is subject to seasonal changes. Hydropower dams can block the rivers and greatly impact their ecosystems, which is another drawback.34 Despite these concerns, hydropower is currently the main source of electricity production in Latin America and the Caribbean region,31 and it is also an import component of the energy supply around the world. More than 50% of the hydropower capacity is built in China, Brazil, the US, Canada, and India.
Wind energy utilization is rapidly growing. The power plant capacity reached 622 GW in 2019. It has the second-highest capacity in the renewable energy category. However, the related infrastructure has not caught up. Much of the electricity is off-grid and is not used. The consumption is only 5.146 EJ. Wind energy is abundant on Earth with 28400 EJ of energy flow per year, which is second only to that of solar energy. It still has a great deal of potential. Full utilization of wind energy would satisfy the entire current global electricity consumption. However, wind energy is relatively unstable and is subject to day–night changes and seasonal changes. Wind power is converted into electricity and has tough requirements in terms of the power grid adjustment capability and energy storage methods, which are currently not met by the current technological status. Wind power can affect the environment in several aspects, such as loss of wildlife habitats and climate change. Climate change is caused by the extraction of kinetic energy, which alters the circulation of the atmospheric boundary layer.35 Most of the economical wind energy exists on the west coast of Alaska, northern Canada, and the west coasts of Northern Europe and South America. Currently, China and the US dominate the wind power increase.30
Solar power is the most abundant renewable energy on Earth, with 3900000 EJ of energy flow per year, but a large portion is hard to collect due to the low energy density and distant locations. Even so, similar to wind energy, solar power still has a great potential. Its utilization is rapidly growing. Its power plant capacity has reached 586 GW, and its consumption has reached 2.607 EJ. Similar to wind energy, much of the electricity generated is wasted due to the lack of infrastructure. Solar power is mainly collected through concentrated solar power and photovoltaic power methods. The former concentrates light, generates heated steam, and generates electricity using a conventional turbine. The latter converts sunlight into direct current via the photovoltaic effect. Solar power utilization faces challenges similar to those of wind power, which can only be solved by proper energy distribution and storage methods. Solar power utilization is closely related to the weather and climate. It is more economic under less cloudy skies. Thus, rich solar power mainly exists in desert areas, including southwestern North America, southwestern Latin America, North Africa, South Africa, the Middle East, and Southern Asia. Asian countries, including China, Japan, South Korea, India, and Vietnam, have achieved the highest solar capacity increases. Solar power technologies are clean, but the production of the required equipment usually emits pollutants and greenhouse gases, but this is commonly less than a quarter of that of the fossil fuel counterparts.36
Biomass is in fact a traditional energy resource in human history. It includes a wide variety of organic materials, mainly wood and biofuels. The biomass electricity plant capacity is 124 GW, and the total energy consumption from biomass is 1.88 EJ. Biomass is a unique renewable energy source. It can be burned directly to provide heat or electricity. It can also be converted into other forms, such as ethanol or biodiesel. Because the utilization is the same as that of fossil fuels, CCS techniques apply to biomass in terms of reducing carbon emissions and reaching a carbon-negative scenario. Biomass is considered renewable because biomass, mainly plants, can regenerate within a relatively short period of time. Because the regeneration still takes time, not all of the available biomass can be used. For example, bio-ethanol production from corn effectively reduces its use as food. Biomass usage (e.g., wood) can cause soil erosion, damage wildlife habitat, and reduce biodiversity. Moreover, its use is also limited in terms of efficiency, cost, and possible loss of biodiversity.37,38 Large-scale biomass utilization is meaningful when the plants can grow rapidly. Areas with notable biomass resources include western North America, eastern South America, Eastern Europe, northeastern Northeast Asia, Central Africa, and the coast of Australia.
Ocean and geothermal energy sources are less utilized due to their relatively small accessibilities, which are one to two orders of magnitudes lower than those of other sources. Their electricity power plant capacities are only 0.531 and 13.9 GW, respectively. Their energies are only 0.0036 and 0.18 EJ, respectively. They can contribute to the CO2 emission reduction, but the proportions are not comparable to those of other renewable energy sources. Ocean energy includes tidal, current, wave, and thermal energy. The usage of these sources has been very limited. Geothermal energy usage is environmentally friendly and is actually preferable in certain locations. Geothermal energy can utilize the heat in the Earth's interior. The heat can be used directly or can be extracted to drive a steam engine and produce electricity.39,40 In 2019, the installed electricity capacity of geothermal energy reached 13.9 GW,30 but the use for heating is even larger, reaching 70.885 GW in 2015.40 Despite geothermal energy can be used on a large scale in theory, it's accessibilities sites has not been mapped in detail. The lack of data and the expense of their characterization (due to well drilling) result in geothermal energy usually being at the bottom of the energy option list, unless the availability is obvious.
Overall, renewable energy sources face challenges and are not expected to replace fossil fuels in the next few decades. Renewable energy sources only account for a portion of the current energy use. For example, renewable energy accounted for only 24.4% of electricity generation in 2018.30 The majority was provided by other energy sources, mainly fossil fuels and some nuclear energy. Moreover, most renewable energy sources are only economic in certain areas in the current technological setting. In addition, most renewable energy sources are not flexible. They need to be converted into electricity in order for most customers to use them. Unfortunately, the current electricity storage techniques rely on batteries, the performance and cost of which are often not competitive.41
Nuclear energy may be the cleanest and most abundant energy on Earth. Although it is not renewable, for the current popular reactor setup, uranium alone can provide a total of 1000 EJ. The new reactors are expected to increase the potential by at least 100 times.42 Nuclear fusion is even thought to have the potential to replace all other energy resources in the future. Nuclear energy is unique in its pros and cons. Its share in energy utilization is surprisingly limited even in the most optimistic predictions. Currently, its electrical power plant capacity is 397 GW, providing 24.92 EJ of energy per year. It is providing 10% of the total electricity production. However, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) predicts that this proportion will merely remain similarly by 2050 if there are no technological breakthroughs.31 Nuclear energy cannot be used directly and is mainly transformed into electricity. The major obstacle to nuclear energy is safety concerns. Even though nuclear power plants are very reliable overall, the rare plant failures that occur can be disastrous. A few examples have given the public a pessimistic impression of nuclear energy. For example, the recent Fukushima disaster resulted in a turning point in nuclear energy policy for many countries.43 Nuclear energy development will probably be limited in the next few years.
Because of the limitations of renewable and nuclear energy sources, we will continue using fossil fuels for a long period of time. Fossil fuels are a large category. In terms of primary energy, they can be categorized into coal, natural gas, crude oil, etc. Based on their reservoir characteristics, they can be categorized as conventional or unconventional. At present, the conventional fossil fuels include onshore and offshore oil and gas pools in high-permeability formations. The term unconventional is not a precise description, but it is widely used. The concept definitively changes over time. Unconventional fossil fuels include hydrocarbons that have only recently become economically accessible. Examples include shale gas, coal seam gas, tight sand gas, shale oil, and oil sands. This concept can also broadly include the hydrocarbons that are not conventional, such as NGHs.
Coal is a sedimentary combustible rock, which mainly consists of carbon. Coal originates from plants that grew millions of years ago and were deeply buried and converted by heat and pressure over geological periods.44 The impurities such as sulfur can generate toxic pollutants during burning. Coal plays an important role in power generation and industrial manufacturing, such as iron and steel production. Despite environmental concerns, coal is still an attractive option in many areas due to its accessibility and affordability. The major climate issue for coal comes from its carbon intensity for power generation. The global coal demand has been stable since 2010, fluctuating around 5500 Mtce.45 Two-thirds of the global coal production was used for electricity production in 2019. In 2018, coal accounted for 27% of worldwide energy consumption (157.9 EJ) and 38% of electricity generation.46 Coal-fired power plants had a 1631.9 GW capacity in 2017.
Crude oil and natural gas have origins similar to that of coal. They are converted into different forms due to the different environmental conditions. Oil and natural gas are often found together in one reservoir. They provided 19.03 and 141.5 EJ of energy in 2018, respectively. Oil and natural gas are not only energy resources but also important raw materials for chemical production. They are both hydrocarbons. Crude oil can have complex compositions which may vary vastly in different reservoirs. Thus, crude oil cannot be fully used without further treatment. A large portion of the crude oil end products is gasoline, which is used for transportation. The oil-fired power plant capacity was small in 2017, merely 107.7 GW. However, natural gas is a gaseous mixture mainly consisting of CH4. Because of the compositional differences, the burning of natural gas generates fewer pollutants and CO2 than oil while generating the same amount of energy. The uses of oil and natural gas only slightly overlap. Most oil is used for transportation, while natural gas is used for electricity generation. The natural-gas-fired power plant capacity is growing, and it reached 460.3 GW in 2017.
Global energy consumption will continue to increase given the economic development and the increasing population. By 2050, the energy demand could reach 800–1000 EJ based on the current trajectory.47 On the opposite side of the definite demand increase, the consumption of each energy source is much more uncertain. They can be influenced greatly by environmental and energy policies. Fig. 1 shows the current consumption of the global energy sources and projections estimated by the EIA in 2019.5 At present, renewable energies can only provide part of the energy consumed, mainly electricity. The rest of the energy demand for electricity, transportation, and heating still has to be mainly met using conventional sources, i.e., fossil fuels. The EIA predicts that the total global energy consumption will increase by 50% in the next few decades, from 2018 to 2050. The consumption of renewable energy, natural gas, and other petroleum liquids will all increase. No energy source is expected to experience a decline in terms of the absolute amount used. Renewable energy is expected to experience the quickest and largest increase, but fossil fuels will still be irreplaceable. Fossil fuels together accounted for 80% of the global energy consumption in 2018 and are expected to still account for 68% in 2050. Among fossil fuels, the consumption of natural gas is expected to increase the most (by 44%), i.e., from 137 quadrillion BTU in 2018 to 198 quadrillion BTU in 2050.
 Fig. 1  Consumption of energy sources and projections. 
The energy trajectories may not exactly follow the EIA's forecast because the energy policy is rapidly changing globally. Many countries and areas, including the European Union, China, and the United States, have proposed ambitious plans to eliminate carbon emissions. These plans are aimed at controlling the use of fossil fuels with high-intensity CO2 emissions and promoting the use of renewable energy. Therefore, renewable energy consumption could accelerate beyond the previous EIA prediction. However, it is unrealistic to expect a large-scale reduction in fossil fuel consumption until at least 2050, because the basic settings that rely on fossil fuels are difficult to change in the short term.
Another aspect is that our planet has entered an era in which the climate is changing faster than at any time in human history. The main reason for this is the excessive emission of CO2 into the atmosphere. Due to the growing energy demand, billions of tons of CO2 from the burning of fossil fuels is emitted into the atmosphere every year. In fact, the excessive emission of CO2 has caused an increase in atmospheric CO2 concentration of over 44% from the mid-1800s to 2016, and the mean temperature of the Earth has increased by approximately 1 °C compared to the pre-industrial age.48,49 After decades of research and discussions, most people agree that failure to mitigate the climate change challenge would have disastrously far-reaching effects. As an international collaboration, 192 countries and economies have joined Kyoto Protocol since 19972 and 189 parties also signed the Paris Agreement in 20151 in an attempt to restrict and reduce CO2 emissions and limit climate change. In addition, the reduction of other greenhouse gases, such as CH4, is also included in these agreements. The United Nations estimated that, in 2010, 16% of global greenhouse gases (GHGs) in terms of CO2 equivalent was contributed by CH4, while 76% was contributed by CO2.50
Although many efforts have focused on renewable energy sources and conventional energy sources in an effort to reduce CO2 emissions, as was previously mentioned, renewable energy sources are not expected to completely replace fossil fuels in the next few decades. Besides, it should be noted that even though renewable energy sources are good tools to tackle climate change, they are not harmless. Each renewable energy source also has its own environmental impacts. For example, the utilization of wind energy, hydropower, and solar power requires a large area of land, changes the local environment, and may jeopardize biodiversity. When still using fossil fuels, the current approaches of using fossil fuels and venting exhaust into the atmosphere should be changed due to the rapid climate change they cause, but this change will be a long and gradual process. Actually, to meet the energy demand but minimize the climate effect, the use of natural gas has been booming in the past decade, and this trend is expected to continue. Natural gas is superior to other fossil fuels in that it produces fewer CO2 emissions and fewer pollutants (e.g., SO2, NOx, and particulates). In particular, it is considered to be a replacement of the current coal system and a bridge to future zero-emission systems.51,52 A typical reduction is 50% emissions per MWh for the change from coal to gas for electricity generation due to the increased energy efficiency.53 The true value depends on the actual energy utilization processes and the CCS application used. Undoubtedly, using a relatively clean fossil fuel, i.e., natural gas, is a good option for maintaining energy consumption and reducing CO2 emissions.
Additionally, CCS techniques are considered to be essential given the urgency to stop climate change, but they will probably not be applied globally within a short period of time.43 Kelemen et al. reviewed the latest progress in CCS techniques.54 In 2019, the operation of large-scale CCS facilities reached 39.2 Mtpa (million tons per annum), while that of all of the facilities in the development stages reached 97.5 Mtpa.55 Despite the fast growth, the CCS capacity is far from being enough to sufficiently mitigate climate change. In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimated that the annual CO2 emissions need to decrease by at least 1.2 Gtpa in order to reach the carbon-neutral goal and the 1.5 °C temperature change goal.56 The goal is expected to be reached through a combination of tools, but currently CCS applications do not contribute a significant portion. CCS techniques have been limited by their cost and complexity. The introduction of CCS techniques and the current deployment of CCS facilities will be presented in Section 5.
In summary, fossil fuels are expected to remain a major energy source in the coming decades. Due to the urgency of tackling climate change, people have started using comprehensive approaches to reduce CO2 emissions from fossil fuel usage, including changing the energy supply structure and using CCS techniques. When the balance between energy security, climate change, and economic growth is considered, using natural gas becomes a realistic option. The transition is occurring globally and is driving the rapid growth of the natural gas demand. The use of natural gas can also address other environmental issues, such as air pollution.
3. Natural gas hydrates and their role in the energy supply and carbon cycle
3.1. Introduction to gas hydrates
Natural gas hydrates, also known as flammable ice, are crystalline solids that are usually formed at high pressures and low temperatures.58 Their clathrate molecular structure consists of water cages trapping small guest molecules. Depending on the sizes and the configurations of the water cages, hydrates can mainly be categorized into different structures, including structure I (sI), structure II (sII), and structure H (sH). Table 3 lists the common molecular hydrate structures and major characteristics. Depending on the guest molecule's structures and sizes, the guest molecules occupy certain cages. The cage sizes in Table 3 are only approximate values because the cage assembly and guest molecule occupancy can slightly distort the cage size. The cage size determines the guest species entering the cage, resulting in a high selectivity in hydrate formation. Besides, in many cases, the guest molecules only occupy a portion of the cages and leave some empty. For example, pure CH4 typically forms an sI hydrate under moderate conditions, and CH4 can occupy both large and small cages. Uchida et al. calculated the occupancy of this hydrate based on the peak intensity of the Raman spectra.59 They confirmed that, at various temperatures and pressures, the large-cage(51262) occupancy is ∼0.98 and the small-cage(512) occupancy is 0.7–0.8. The overall hydrate number (water/CH4) was found to be ∼6.2. However, because typical natural gas also has some heavier components, such as C2H6, C3H8, etc., sII hydrates can also form.60
Table 3 Common hydrate structures




Structure













Cage
512
51262
512
51264
512
51268
435663


Cage ratio
1
3
2
1
3
1
2


Cage size (nm)57
0.395
0.433
0.391
0.473
0.391
0.571
0.406




The earliest documentation of gas hydrate observations can be traced to Priestley in 1778,61 but his research did not attract much interest until 1934 when Hammerschmidt discovered that natural gas and water can form solids and plug a gas pipeline.62 Hydrate research surged after this due to the industrial demand for oil and gas production. The formation of hydrates in pipelines need to be prevented or properly managed to ensure the successful flow of the hydrocarbon stream from the wellheads to the customers. This research direction has continued until today.58
In the 1960s, people discovered that gas hydrates can exist in nature.63 Due to the efforts of numerous researchers, we now know that gas hydrates actually widely exist, not only on our planet but also elsewhere in the universe.64 Due to the high reserves of NGHs in nature, they play an important role on Earth, i.e., as a carbon sink.65,66 In the meantime, as with other organic carbon occurrences, exploration and test production have gradually demonstrated that the gas hydrates can serve as an unconventional energy resource.67 Compared to other energy resources, NGHs mainly exist in the seafloor and in permafrost, and they represent a large energy reservoir. Currently, many research and development projects striving towards commercial extraction are ongoing and have shown encouraging results, although the production and utilization of NGHs still face challenges in terms of economic feasibility, geohazards, and climate influences. The unique properties of NGHs have also driven the development of hydrate-based techniques, which can be used for gas storage, gas separation, water purification, and so on.
3.2. Natural gas hydrates’ role in the energy supply
Given the rapid energy supply transition towards natural gas, it is necessary to discuss its recoverable reserves. It is well known that natural gas sources are diverse. Table 4 shows the current estimates of the recoverable reserves of different natural gas sources. It should be noted that the values change greatly even year to year due to improvements in the extraction technique and improvements in our understanding of their geological characterization. Until the 20th century, most natural gases were produced onshore from conventional gas reservoirs. They could be associated or not with oil reservoirs. Since the late 20th century, offshore gas reservoirs have been identified and exploited. In these reservoirs, the gas exists in the pores of the rocks. The recovery depends on the depressurization of the well and the permeability of the rock. Unconventional gas production has recently emerged due to technological advances. The global production data for each type are not available, but data for certain countries have been released. Canada, the US, China, and Australia are the main producers, on the order of 100 trillion cubic feet (Tcf).68 Notably, unconventional gas production has been rapidly increasing in recent years. The geological distribution of conventional and unconventional natural gas resources is not even. About 20% of the total proven reserves are located in Russia, 40% in the Middle East, and 10% in North America.29,68
Table 4 Reserve comparison of natural gas resources




Source
Description
Proven technically recoverable/Tcf
Ref.




Conventional gas reservoir
Gas migration through porous media until reaching a sealed impermeable trap
6599 (2015)

68



Tight sand gas
Gas trapped in low-permeability sandstone and carbonates
6954 (2015)

69



Shale gas
Gas trapped in pores and fractures in low-permeability shale rock


Coalbed methane
Gas absorbed by the coal particles in the coal mines
275–11296 (1992)

70



Gas hydrates
Gas solidified with water
∼105 (unproved, 2004)

71



Others
Gas from various sources, including biomass, land fill waste, crude oil cracking, etc.
N/A





Total




198.8 (2019, all resources)


29





Tight sand gas and shale gas exist worldwide. In practice, these two resources are not distinguished in most statistics. The major difference is their reservoir permeability. Normally, the reservoir permeability of both gases is much smaller than that of conventional reservoirs. The total reserve of the two gases is comparable to that of conventional reservoirs. The extraction only became profitable in the last decade, but it has been so successful that it has significantly changed the global energy supply. The noticeable breakthroughs in extraction techniques include horizontal wells and hydraulic fracturing. Currently, the production has been largely in the US, but it is also rapidly growing in China. The major challenges include economic viability and environmental damage (e.g., water contamination and geological hazards).
Coalbed methane is a byproduct of coal. It is often adsorbed onto coal particles. The gas recovery relies on the gas diffusion from the coalbed to the cracks. The amount of adsorbed CH4 depends on many geological factors and varies greatly. The actual gas to coal ratios can range from 1 to 25 m3 t−1 when the coal mine is at 1200 m.70 The major component of coalbed gases is CH4, but up to 20% impurities can also exist, including ethane, propane, and CO2. Because of the huge reserve of coal, the potential for coal bed CH4 is huge. However, majority of the economic reserves are only located in a few countries, including the US, Russia, and China.
Natural gas hydrates are another unconventional natural gas resource. They are a promising natural gas resource due to their vast availability and accessibility. Compared to other resources, the extraction techniques are still immature. Collett et al.72 and Makogon67 reviewed the current discovery of hydrate reservoirs around the world. Their expeditions have revealed the wide NGH distribution in the seafloor close to continental slopes, making it accessible in most countries with a coastline. NGHs are attractive to countries with large energy imports, large natural gas demands, and a lack of conventional resources, such as China, South Korea, Japan, and India. NGHs are relatively scarce in deeper water (deeper than 4000 m) due to the lack of microbial and CH4 generation. The total hydrate reserves are undoubtedly huge, but the specific amount and the amount that is accessible are still uncertain. The early estimate of the global reserve was up to the order of 1018 m3. With our improved understanding of geological surveys, the estimate has decreased over time and is now on the order of 1015 m3 (105 Tcf).71 These different estimates have not hindered the potential of NGHs as an energy resource because the economic extraction only requires locally concentrated NGHs. Actually, even based on the most conservative estimate, the NGH reserves are much larger than the sum of the other sources (Table 4). Besides, even the relatively small onshore reserves can be profitable in many circumstances. For example, the total proven reserves of dry natural gas are 9 Tcf in Alaska and 475 Tcf in the US,73 but the unproven estimated NGH reserves are 53.8 Tcf in the onshore region of Alaska alone.74 The two values are not directly comparable, but the potential is clear. It has been impossible to evaluate the technically accessible amount of NGHs due to the immature extraction techniques. The current estimations are undoubtedly going to change with the development of extraction techniques. Based on the comparison of the existing energy sources, NGHs are a promising option for producing natural gas, reducing CO2 emissions, and limiting climate change. The NGH reserves are enough to supplement natural gas and provide energy on a scale comparable to any other natural gas source.
Overall, the increasing demand for natural gas offers an opportunity for NGH production and use. Due to their large reserves and wide distributions, NGHs are a promising supply of natural gas in the near future. Extraction techniques have recently been developed and tested, providing encouraging results, and they will be discussed in detail in Section 4.
3.3. Natural gas hydrates’ role in the carbon cycle and climate change

3.3.1. Natural gas hydrates and the carbon cycle. 
Carbon-based molecules are the fundamental building blocks of many substances on Earth, including humans. Different molecules can aggregate to form bulk occurrences, i.e., reservoirs. Different molecules can also convert into each other under various conditions. The network of reservoirs and the conversion fluxes are known as the carbon cycle. CO2, CH4, and NGHs are all important components of the carbon cycle (Fig. 2), which are described in detail below.
 Fig. 2  Carbon cycle components related to NGHs. 
The components of the carbon cycle is always in balance. A change in one carbon reservoir will always be reflected in the other reservoirs. It is well known that two major greenhouse gases are CO2 and CH4. These gases absorb and reduce the heat radiated from Earth into space, thus warming the Earth's ground within the atmosphere. Therefore, we are particularly interested in the flows of CO2 and CH4. Human activities, including using fossil fuels, have caused atmospheric CO2 and CH4 concentrations to increase. According to the ice core data from the Antarctic, the atmospheric concentrations of CH4 and CO2 and the global temperature have strong positive correlations.75 The current concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere is greater than 400 ppm, and the concentration of CH4 is approximately 2 ppm.76 However, due to the strong potential for heat absorption, the contribution of the atmospheric CH4 to the greenhouse effect is equivalent to a quarter of the contribution of the CO2.
CO2 circulates on Earth as part of the carbon cycle. Atmospheric CO2 is converted into biomass by plants through photosynthesis. Some of the biomass is consumed by plants or other life forms, which releases CO2 into the atmosphere. The remaining biomass, i.e., the plants after death and burial, is converted into soil carbon (complex organic and inorganic matter) by microbial activity. CO2 is also generated during these microbial processes. Crustal movement and sediment formation bury the soil carbon. Pressure and heat eventually convert the buried carbon into coal, oil, and/or natural gas over hundreds of millions of years. A similar process also occurs in the oceans, where the plants (e.g., phytoplankton) convert atmospheric CO2 into biomass. Some of the biomass is consumed, and the rest precipitates and forms sediments on the seafloor.
CH4 also circulates on Earth. It can be naturally generated through microbial activities, animal digestion, plant decay, biomass burning, and fossil fuel formation. A large portion of the CH4 on Earth is generated during microbial biomass consumption. Thus, CH4 generation is connected to the CO2 circulation, as biomass is essentially produced by photosynthesis, which requires CO2. CH4 generation is also related to human activities, such as waste disposal, waste decomposition, and hydrocarbon production. The generated CH4 can escape into the atmosphere, remain in a geological trap, or form NGHs under permafrost or in the seafloor. Atmospheric CH4 undergoes oxidation and eventually becomes CO2 and H2O. After entering the atmosphere, CH4 gradually degrades through oxidation by hydroxyl radicals (OH˙). An estimation indicates that 90% of the annual CH4 emissions will degrade within 10 years.76,77 Assuming first-order kinetics, the half-life of CH4 in the atmosphere is approximately 3 years. The final oxidation product is CO2, but many other greenhouse species can also be produced. The oxidation does not reduce the greenhouse effect because the combined greenhouse potency of the oxidation products is still comparable to that of CH4.
In nature, NGHs contain mixed gas components, but CH4 is the dominant gas in most cases, and it usually results in an sI structure. The CH4 sources and sinks in the marine environment are particularly associated with hydrate formation and dissociation. In marine sediments, CH4 sources can be biogenic or thermogenic. NGHs from biogenic gases are more common. The biogenic gases are predominantly CH4 and are generated by microbial activities. The generation sites are often close to the seafloor and are associated with sediments rich in organic carbon. In contrast, thermogenic gases are generated at deeper depths, where the high pressure and high temperature degrade and crack kerogen. The gas compositions are usually more complex in the initial stage and CH4 may become dominant only in the final cracking stage.
Due to the pressure–temperature conditions of hydrate formation, hydrates mainly exist in deep water sediments or beneath the permafrost in high-altitude or high-latitude areas. Approximately 99% of gas hydrates exist in marine sediments72 where the pressure is high, the temperature is low enough, and the supply of water and gas is sufficient.
The areas with suitable hydrate formation conditions are called the gas hydrate stability zone (GHSZ). The GHSZ has a hydrate formation potential, but NGHs do not necessarily exist in all parts of this zone. Hydrate formation also depends on the supply of water and gas. The P–T conditions and the water–gas existence together define the upper and lower boundaries of the GHSZ and the actual existence of hydrates. Fig. 2 shows the GHSZ in the subsurface area. Generally, hydrates are limited to the shallow stratum but can extend for tens to hundreds of meters. Once hydrates form, they expand in the sediments, but their growth is affected by the physical properties of the sediments. Core data show that hydrate formation is usually heterogeneous, and the hydrate saturation is usually low, but it can vary from low to high values.78
NGHs are an important and large sink for CH4 and thus for carbon. However, the total amount of NGHs on Earth has not been reliably determined yet. Estimations of different orders of magnitudes exist.71 The estimations indicate that the portion of organic carbon on Earth contained in NGHs is within the range of 5%-53% assuming that the estimates of other types of organic matters are accurate. Despite the uncertainty of the estimates, studies have shown possible historical changes in NGHs and their correlations to climate change. Studies have also revealed possible trajectories of released CH4, which provides insights into the current climate change situation. These studies are helpful for evaluating the possible consequences of hydrate extraction and the necessity of preventing CH4 release.


3.3.2. Natural gas hydrates and climate change. 
Because of the strong greenhouse effect of CH4 and the huge amount of CH4 that is fixed in the form of gas hydrates, it is natural to speculate the role that NGHs play in the Earth's climate. In fact, studies have shown that NGHs are associated with climate change in many ways.
The current climate change situation is driving the atmosphere and the ocean temperature to increase, which can disturb the stability of NGHs. If NGHs dissociate and CH4 is released into the atmosphere, climate change will be strengthened. Any CH4 released into the ocean and the atmosphere can subsequently contribute to climate change. As shown in Fig. 2, the process forms a positive feedback loop that accelerates climate change. Multiple climate changes that occurred in geologic history may have been associated with NGH dissociation. Moreover, NGH dissociation can be caused by human activities, such as NGH extraction. In addition, CH4 leakage has been a challenge in the current natural gas extraction processes.79 Considering the NGH reservoir characteristics, unexpected methane leakage could be more challenging.
NGH dissociation in nature is a source of atmospheric CH4 and wide dissociation would result in disastrous climate change. However, our knowledge of NGH dissociation is still limited. Ruppel and Kessler summarized and discussed the current estimations of NGH distribution and the dissociation potential in the current climate change setting65,80 (Table 5). CH4 release from permafrost and shallow sediments has been observed.81–83 Possibly due to several sinking mechanisms, there is currently no evidence that the CH4 from hydrate dissociation in deep water can escape and reach the atmosphere.
Table 5 Methane hydrate distribution and dissociation potentials (modified from Ruppel and Kessler65)




Location
Estimated CH4 in hydrates
Major methane source
Susceptibility to climate change




Notes: 1 Gt (gigaton) C (carbon) corresponds to 1.33 Gt CH4.




Onshore permafrost
20 Gt C84
Thermogenic
Intermediate: hydrates are deeply buried but are affected by substantial climate warming and permafrost thawing at high latitudes


Subsea permafrost in the Arctic
Unknown
Thermogenic
Intermediate: hydrates are deeply buried but will continue to dissociate as warming from inundation propagates to deeper depths in the Arctic Ocean shelves


Subglacial in Antarctica
80–400 Gt C85
Microbial and thermogenic
Low: global warming will be less obvious in Antarctica over the next few centuries


Upper continental slope
63 Gt C80
Microbial
High: due to the warming of intermediate ocean waters and the very small magnitude of offsetting stabilization effect associated with rising sea level


Deep marine
1717 Gt C
Microbial
Low: due to the long-term stability of deep ocean temperatures and the fact that the hydrates are generally far inside the stability zone




As summarized in Table 5, the hydrate resources in the Arctic continental shelves have not been evaluated yet. The hydrates in the permafrost and upper continental slopes are of similar orders of magnitude, ∼101 Gt C. The subglacial and marine hydrates are of the highest orders of magnitude, ∼102 Gt C or higher. The CH4 sources in onshore NGHs are mainly thermogenic, and those in marine NGHs are microbial. Due to the different geological conditions and sinking mechanisms, the hydrates in the upper continental slopes are at the highest risk. They lack dense seals, have relatively small buffer regions, and are sensitive to environmental changes.
Numerous studies have been conducted on the interactions between climate changes and hydrate reservoirs on geological time scales.65,86,87 Without any climate change, spontaneous hydrate formation and dissociation are relatively slow. Any formation or dissociation will take hundreds to thousands of years to produce a significant effect. However, hydrate dissociation during climate change can be abrupt and fast. A possible reason for this is the positive feedback between hydrate dissociation and climate change. Recently, from the analysis of a large multi-disciplinary and multi-scale dataset in the western South Atlantic, Ketzer et al.88 presented the first evidence that the contemporary southern hemisphere ocean warming can accelerate natural gas hydrate dissociation. It is worth mentioning that since the current carbon-release rate is on a much larger scale than those in the pre-human times,89 the current climate change can increase the temperature to a higher value than that the Earth has experienced before.90
When hydrates dissociate, they act as a CH4 source. The CH4 sinks will determine the fate of the CH4. The geological conditions of the hydrate reservoirs are critical to the release of CH4. Under certain conditions, the low permeability sediments can act as a barrier to the dissociated gas. They can act as a seal to slow the release of the gas for thousands of years,65 although the CH4 may eventually escape in many cases. In the ocean, even though the solubility of CH4 in sea water is small and is often neglected, the maximum potential of soluble CH4 is still considerably large given the large quantity of sea water and the present negligible CH4 concentration. The CH4 released from the seafloor starts as a bubble, gradually dissolves into the sea water, and finally disappears.91–93 If the water depth is within the hydrate formation region, a hydrate shell can form around the bubble. However, studies have shown that the hydrate shell may merely delay the dissolution process but not prevent it. To complicate the problem more, CH4 dissolution in seawater is not the final event for the released gas. As is well known, CH4 is not saturated in the atmosphere, and the current atmospheric concentration is very low. Therefore, the CH4 dissolution into the ocean can delay its release into the atmosphere by several hundred years, but the dissolved gas will gradually be released into the atmosphere. By the way, the release can be accelerated by strong stirring, such as wind storms.94
Other carbon sinks also exist, which prevent CH4 from escaping from the ocean into the atmosphere. One important sink is the anaerobic oxidation of CH4 (AOM). The oxidation is driven by microbes and is coupled with sulfate reduction. Reeburgh estimated that up to 80–90% of the CH4 moving upward through the seafloor is consumed by AOM.95 This process is less efficient when the gas quickly flows upwards due to the reduced contact with the sediments. AOM can couple with carbonate precipitation, which is an efficient step to removing carbon in the carbon cycle. Bohrmann et al. tried to use the characteristics of the carbonates, i.e., isotopic properties, to study the historical destabilization of hydrates.96
Aerobic microbial oxidation (MOx) is another sink for CH4. This process is normally slow,97 but field studies98,99 have shown that the oxidation rate can be accelerated by increasing the CH4 concentration. Because the most current measurement is based on samples at certain locations and times, the actual effect of this process may require a more systematic global evaluation. The current estimated oxidation rate varies over a large range. Assuming first-order kinetics, the rate constant can range from 0.001 to 0.2 d−1, which results in a wide range from 16 to 3200 Tg year−1.99–101 This large uncertainty poses the question of whether the oxidation can effectively offset the increase in the CH4 concentration. The metabolic path of the oxidation should be helpful to evaluating the MOx, but the details are poorly understood. In addition, the oxidation process may deplete the oxygen, increase the amount of CO2 in the ocean, and change the pH of the environment.102,103 As a result, an increase in the CH4 concentration may drastically change the sea environment, change the microbial species, and cause unexpected consequences. However, based on the current measurements, typical marine CH4 concentrations are 2–300 nM, typical marine concentrations of CO2 are 30 μM, and the typical amount of dissolved inorganic carbon is 2260 μM. These values suggest that the increase in the CO2 concentration due to the CH4 oxidation is small and should not become significant in the near future.65
Onshore CH4 hydrates in the cold region, i.e., underneath the permafrost, have a different sinking route from that in the deep oceans. After dissociation, CH4 migrates towards the top soil. Aerobic and anaerobic oxidation can occur, but the metabolic pathways are different from those in the ocean.104 Rocks and sediments can act as barriers to slow the migration of the CH4. When ice exists in the pores or on top of the soils, it can also reduce the CH4 migration rate.
Possibly due to the sinking mechanisms, current studies have not fully determined the long-term effect of NGH dissociation on climate change. However, studies of historical atmospheric CH4 concentrations may have shed some light. The approaches to studying the historical changes mainly include radioisotope dating and chemical tracer analysis. In nature, the isotope ratios of a certain element are usually constant. However, the ratios cannot be maintained after the substances become buried and naturally decayed. The accurate measurement of the isotope ratios can provide temporal information about a specific substance. Hydrate studies mainly use 14C105 and 18O.106 The usual difficulty is the fact that the CH4 in the hydrates is usually old. Sometimes the CH4 is even too old to use 14C dating. Another method is to use chemical tracers. The tracers are uncommon components in the CH4 sources, such as hydrocarbons with higher carbon numbers and noble gases.107,108 They are trapped within the NGHs during the NGH formation. They can be used to estimate the CH4 hydrate formation process and the geological environment at the time of formation.
The Neoproterozoic was one of the main glaciation periods with possible gas hydrate dissociation. Evidence of this comes from carbon isotope measurements of carbonates. During the Neoproterozoic, cap carbonates formed in thin layers on top of the siliciclastic glacial sediments. The cap carbonates have characteristics similar to those of the CH4 in the cold seep, including δ13C (<5‰ excursion) and related δ34S anomalies. These similarities are presumably caused by a large quantity of δ13C CH4 being released and oxidized during the time period when the carbonates formed. The source of the CH4 is thus hypothesized to be the widespread gas hydrate dissociation from permafrost and marine reservoirs. Moreover, this change in the CH4 level is believed to have changed the chemical nature of the environment and the biological life forms.109
The Early Jurassic is another period in which worldwide hydrate dissociation may have occurred. At the end of this epoch, three distinct negative δ13C excursions occurred.110 The carbon signatures are larger than those in the Neoproterozoic and the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum. The δ13C anomaly (5–7‰ excursion) suggests large-scale CH4 release, most likely due to gas hydrate dissociation. A previous study reported that, during this period, 5000 Gt of C may have been injected into the ocean-atmosphere system.111 This dissociation was likely triggered by astronomical changes and a long warming period.112 Several ocean geochemical changes occurred in the same periods, along with widespread extinctions.113
The Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) was an abrupt global warming event. The temperature of the atmosphere increased by 5 °C and that of the ocean probably increased even more. This warming coincided with a negative δ13C excursion (3.5–5‰) in the marine sediments.114–116 The possible reasons again include hydrate dissociation. Based on the isotopic measurement, Dickens et al. speculated that 1100–2100 Gt of C was released into the ocean-atmosphere system due to hydrate dissociation.117 Besides, Zebe et al. reported that the estimated upper boundary of the carbon release rate was 1.1 Pg year−1.89 Interestingly, this value lies between the current estimated ranges of the global CH4 release rate, indicating that, at the very least, the current CH4 release has the potential to cause a warming event similar to that of the PETM.
The Quaternary is the latest period with abrupt global warming. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that the CH4 concentration increased at the end of the Quaternary, including paleoceanographic records,118 biomarkers,119 and carbon isotopic records.120 Again, hydrate dissociation is considered to be responsible for this warming event.
These cases mentioned above demonstrate the possible consequences of climate change and CH4 release. However, the causal relationship is hard to determine. It is likely that the two phenomena mutually affect each other. In the meantime, the actual reason for the CH4 release has not been fully determined yet. Many studies support the hypothesis that marine hydrate dissociation was the cause of the increase in the CH4 concentration.120,121 However, other evidence and hypotheses are also available, such as CH4 release from wetlands.122 Among all hypotheses, hydrate dissociation is one of the most convincing candidates for CH4 release. In fact, many simulations have shown that global warming can destabilize hydrate reserves and cause hydrate dissociation and CH4 leakage.66,88
The historical CH4 concentration changes highlight the possible consequences of CH4 release from NGHs due to the current climate change situation. However, this release may not be an immediate concern. In the ocean, various CH4 sinks can delay methane migration into the atmosphere. Ecological and climate changes may not be obvious on a decade or longer scales. It should be noted that the dissociated CH4 from an onshore permafrost gas hydrate can release faster since there are fewer carbon sink mechanisms.
What we should note is that the extraction of CH4 from NGHs can potentially accelerate CH4 release and global warming. Several researchers have pointed out that hydrate sediments often occur with free gas underneath them. The extraction of hydrates may disturb the gas seal and release this gas.123,124 CH4 leakage has been an issue in present natural gas production.125 Therefore, future NGH extraction should include CH4 leakage management strategies. CH4 leakage monitoring and modeling for different production techniques need to be conducted to evaluate the potential climate impacts. In the current stage, it is appropriate to be more conservative and more cautious.

3.4. Summary
The increasing demand for natural gas offers an opportunity for NGH exploration and use. Although NGH reserves can provide a large-scale natural gas supply, there are risks associated with releasing CH4 into the atmosphere. NGHs are an important carbon sink in the carbon cycle. Historical global warming events were related to an increase in the atmospheric CH4 level. CH4 from hydrate dissociation was probably the major reason for these increases. Global warming and hydrate dissociation may form a positive feedback loop, in which the two events strengthen each other. Further studies of NGHs in nature will need to be conducted to better characterize the causal relationship between NGH dissociation and historical climate change. Such knowledge will also be helpful in developing management strategies for CH4 leakage during NGH extraction.
4. Natural gas hydrate exploitation and its potential environmental impacts
Driven by the potential of NGHs to be a new energy resource, intensive research, including field trials, has been conducted within the last few decades. NGHs exist stably in the deep ocean sediments of continental margins and in permafrost regions above certain temperature and pressure conditions.
Extraction techniques are the basis of utilizing NGH resources. These techniques include many stages, such as well drilling, hydrate dissociation, gas separation and transportation, etc. To reduce costs and increase reliability, most engineers prefer to use existing techniques whenever possible. For example, the current vertical and horizontal well drilling techniques can be used to drill the wells. The equipment currently used in offshore gas fields can be used in the gas separation and transportation processes. Among the stages, only hydrate dissociation is a new problem unique to natural gas extraction. Currently, based on decades of lab research and field tests, many hydrate dissociation methods have been proposed. Because hydrates are only stable within a certain pressure–temperature range, the fundamental mechanism of all of these methods is to change the temperature and/or pressure conditions, dissociate the hydrates, and collect the gas. The method evaluation criteria include the ratio of the energy input to the energy output, the capital expenditures (CAPEX), the operating expenses (OPEX), and the environmental impacts.
In the current stage, the proposed hydrate production methods include thermal stimulation (heating), depressurization, inhibitor injection, CH4–CO2 replacement, fluidization, etc. The first two methods aim to change the system conditions to a range outside of the hydrate formation zone, dissociate the hydrates, and recover the gas.126 The inhibitor injection method shifts the hydrate equilibrium conditions to outside the hydrate stability zone. CH4–CO2 replacement refers to the displacement of the natural gas inside hydrates using CO2.127 This method is possible because CO2 hydrates are more thermodynamically stable than NGHs. In theory, the replacement process can be spontaneous. The fluidization method is relatively new.128 In this method, the hydrates are extracted as solids and are dissociated later in the pipeline and on the platform.
A given natural gas extraction method may be suitable for certain types of hydrate reservoirs. Thus, hydrate reservoirs need to be categorized. Four categories of hydrate bearing sediments and four categories of well settings have been proposed.129,130 Here, the term well setting refers to the local reservoir conditions in the production areas but not necessarily for the entire reservoir. One reservoir can have different well settings in different production areas. The well settings are divided into Classes 1 to 4. Class 1 refers to a hydrate layer underlain by free gas and water. It can be further categorized into 1G and 1W, which have free gas and free water in the hydrate bearing zone, respectively. Class 2 is similar to Class 1W, but the free water is located under the hydrate layer. Class 3 refers to a hydrate layer surrounded by and imbedded in an impermeable formation, such as shale. Class 4 includes bands of hydrates in sediments that are usually dispersed over a large area. They usually have relatively low hydrate saturation values (5–20%) and are unconfined.
All of the exploitation methods have been theoretically and experimentally studied and tested to some extent in trial field production settings. This chapter focuses on providing a better understanding of the hydrate exploitation methods, their impacts on the surrounding environment, and their role in future global warming mitigation.
4.1. Dissociation-based natural gas hydrate exploitation method

4.1.1. Depressurization. 
Depressurization is the most economical and mature technique. The concept is to reduce the pressure to less than the hydrate equilibrium pressure and promote hydrate dissociation (Fig. 3). The depressurization decomposes the NGHs near the wells into natural gases and water, and it subsequently decreases the NGH saturation and enlarges the lower pressure regions. The efficacy of depressurization depends on the depressurized area, the duration, and the heat transfer. These factors are related to the geological properties of the hydrate reservoirs, such as permeability, temperature change, heat and mass transfer, and thermal conductivity. For example, a low permeability will limit the depressurized area, thereby limiting the pressure gradient and the extraction efficiency.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of NGH reservoirs affected by depressurization. 
Because of the endothermic nature of hydrate dissociation and the Joule–Thomson effect, the temperature decrease during the application of the depressurization method is significant, especially for a high driving force.131 This decrease in temperature may interrupt the NGH dissociation or cause hydrate reformation once the P–T conditions reenter the gas hydrate stability zone. For example, Sun et al.132 reported that the water generated during hydrate dissociation is rapidly converted into ice on the hydrate surfaces. To prevent this, Moridis et al.133 suggested that uniform and mild P and T gradients should be achieved and a sufficient distance should be established between the top of the production interval and the impermeable initial hydrate interface.
The depressurization-induced production method is very effective for Class 1 and Class 2 deposits. However, it is less effective for Class 3 deposits because Class 3 deposits have a hydrate-bearing layer without underlying free-fluid phase zones. The absence of a hydrate-free zone underneath the hydrate-bearing layer restricts the propagation of hydrate dissociation due to permeability limitations. Consequently, the permeability limitations in Class 3 deposits lead to low natural gas hydrate dissociation and gas production rates and a localized systematic response that is expected to be limited to the area around the production well.
Hydrate dissociation using the depressurization method may change the hydrate-bearing sediments. Sultaniya et al.134 examined the impact of dissociation induced by depressurization on the stiffness of hydrate-bearing sediments. They demonstrated that there is a nonlinear relationship between the stiffness and hydrate volume, and the hydrate formation and dissociation can result in significant changes in the stiffness. Specifically, they reported that the initial depressurization led to an ∼20% decrease in the stiffness of the hydrate-bearing sediments, and 60% of hydrate dissociation would lead to a decrease of up to 76% in the stiffness. Hyodo et al.135 also investigated the effects of depressurization on the deformation behavior of hydrate-bearing sediments. They found that the depressurization rate has little effect on the ultimate deformation of natural gas hydrate-bearing sediments, and the collapse of CH4 hydrate-bearing sediments will not occur during depressurization. However, it may occur during pore pressure recovery by water.


4.1.2. Thermal stimulation. 
Thermal stimulation, or heating, is also an effective method of extracting hydrates, but it is not economical in most cases due to the large energy input required. The concept is to supply heat to the hydrate reservoir, increase the temperature above the hydrate equilibrium temperature, offset the latent heat of the phase change, and dissociate the hydrates (Fig. 4). Many heating methods have been proposed, including direct fluid injection (including heated water,136 brine,137 and gas exhaust138), microwave heating,139 and electromagnetic heating.140 The production can be continuous or periodic using the huff and puff process.141 The huff and puff process includes heat injection, reservoir soaking, and gas production. This may increase the heated area and the gas production quantity. However, the process may not be efficient because of the limited heat transmission to the target hydrate-bearing sediments (HBSs). A large portion of the heat is lost to the environment. Thus, at present, heating is mainly considered to be an auxiliary method.
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of the NGH reservoir affected by thermal stimulation. 
One common and easy thermal stimulation method is hot water or brine injection. Sakamoto et al.136 suggested that such dissociation consists of 4 stages: displacement of the free CH4 gas caused by the water injection; permeability reduction due to additional CH4 hydrate formation in the downstream zone; actual CH4 hydrate dissociation; and complete hydrate dissociation. Pang et al.142 investigated the possibility of recovering CH4 from hydrates by injecting hot (288.25–313.15 K) water at a rate of 2.0–6.0 L min−1 into two reservoirs with different temperatures, i.e., 268.15 and 277.15 K. They found that increasing the hot water flux had little effect on the hydrate dissociation rate, and the heat transfer and the thermodynamic driving force were the two key factors affecting the hydrate dissociation. They also reported that the dissociation rate rapidly decreased due to the endothermic nature of melting ice (if it exists) and hydrate dissociation. This is called ‘‘buffered dissociation”. It is in fact inevitable. Ahn et al.143 conducted another study on the production characteristics of hot-brine stimulation in CH4 hydrate-bearing sediments. The production trends were observed in the temperature range of 283.85–303.15 K for injection of 3.0 wt% NaCl solutions at rates of 10 and 15 cm3 min−1. Hydrate reformation was observed in all of the experiments. Although the higher temperature accelerated the heat transfer and thus improved the CH4 production efficiency, no significant inhibitory effect on the hydrate reformation was observed. Besides, they confirmed that the gas production efficiency for 294.55 K and an injection rate of 15 cm3 min−1 is similar to that for 303.15 K and an injection rate of 10 cm3 min−1.
Because the hot fluid is not in direct contact with the dissociation front and cannot efficiently exchange heat with it due to the gas migration occurring in the opposite direction, hot water or brine injection involves significant heat loss. Therefore, direct heating without fluid injection has been suggested.
One example is microwave heating. Li et al.139 investigated the dissociation behavior of NGHs in a closed system using microwave heating. In their study, the hydrates dissociated more rapidly under microwave heating than under hot water injection. Besides, the hydrate dissociation rate increased with increasing microwave power, and the temperature increased linearly with time during the microwave radiation. He et al.144 used 2.45 GHz microwaves with various radiation densities to dissociate hydrate sediments obtained from the South China Sea. They found that the limitations of microwave penetration may lead to the gradual transition of microwaves from direct heating to macroscopic heat transfer through increasing temperature gradients, thereby dissociating the far-field hydrate layer at equilibrium.
Electromagnetic heating has also been proposed as a direct heating method. Islam145 studied electromagnetic heating through a series of numerical simulations and demonstrated its feasibility. Their study suggested that electromagnetic heating can achieve a higher energy efficiency than steam and hot brine stimulation. Besides, they found that the radius of the heating does not have to be very large to produce a continuous gas stream. Syoev146 also determined the energy efficiency and the spatial and temporal distributions of the temperature, pressure, and hydrate saturation under electromagnetic heating. His results show that this hydrate exploitation method has a competitive advantage over traditional methods in terms of energy costs, and the hydrate dissociation efficiency largely depends on the choice of frequency.
Another alternative method is in situ CH4 combustion. Schicks et al.147 investigated heat stimulation using in situ CH4 combustion in a pilot-scale counter-current heat-exchange reactor. In their study, the heat from the flameless, catalytic oxidation of CH4 was used to induce hydrate decomposition. To enhance the catalytic reaction, different self-prepared catalysts were tested. The highest CH4 conversion rate (>99%) occurred with Pt/Ir supported on ZrO2 at 450 °C. The production tests of the in situ combustion reactions revealed that about 15% of the recovered CH4 was needed to successfully decompose all of the hydrates in the sediments.
Thermal stimulation may also cause deformation of hydrate-bearing sediments and affect the long-term hydrate stability. Actually, for similar changes in the hydrate volume, thermal stimulation results in a greater decrease in the stiffness of the hydrate-bearing sediments than depressurization. Hyodo et al.135 compared the thermal stimulation and depressurization methods in terms of the shear strength and the deformation behaviors of the CH4 hydrate-bearing sediments during hydrate dissociation. They found that thermal stimulation causes the failure of hydrate bearing sediments when the axial load is greater than the strength of the sediments after dissociation. However, as discussed in Section 4.1.1, the depressurization method does not cause the sediments to collapse until the water pressure is recovered.


4.1.3. Chemical inhibitor injection. 
Inhibitor injection primarily changes the hydrate equilibrium conditions rather than the environmental conditions. It usually changes the water activity and shifts the hydrate equilibrium curve toward the high pressure and lower temperature region, causing hydrate dissociation148 (Fig. 5). Common inhibitors include methanol, monoethylene glycol (MEG), and diethylene glycol (DEG). In particular, methanol and ethylene glycol (EG) are two of the most common thermodynamic inhibitors due to their high availability, low toxicity, and excellent performances in inducing hydrate dissociation. To increase the efficiency, the inhibitor can also be heated to accelerate the hydrate dissociation.137 Although inhibitor injection is effective, the method faces various challenges, including high costs, low efficiency, and potential environmental pollution. The method requires direct contact between the solid hydrate and the inhibitor(s), but achieving rapid distribution of chemicals in porous media is difficult, especially under low sediment permeability conditions. To rapidly dissociate hydrates, a large quantity of inhibitor(s), i.e., comparable to the amount of water, need to be injected. A high dose can be economically disadvantageous for hydrate extraction because the majority of the material produced after hydrate dissociation is water. Finally, many inhibitors are not environmentally friendly. High doses can easily pose environmental concerns, especially for hydrate production from shallow strata. The use of an inhibitor may also increase monitoring and prevention costs.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of NGH reservoirs affected by inhibitor injection. 
Many studies have been conducted on inhibitor injection. Sira et al.149 studied hydrate dissociation behaviors by introducing methanol and EG and found that inhibitors are effective and the hydrate dissociation rate is a function of the inhibitor concentration, inhibitor injection rate, pressure, temperature, and hydrate–inhibitor interfacial area. Li et al.150 also investigated the effect of EG on CH4 hydrate dissociation in porous sediments to characterize the gas production behavior at different concentrations and different injection rates in a one-dimensional apparatus. Their results revealed that both the concentration and the injection rate of the EG solution significantly affect the gas production efficiency. The highest efficiency was observed for an EG concentration of 60 wt%. Several recent studies have also found that the inhibiting effect of volatile chemical inhibitors such as methanol, ethanol, and EG decrease with increasing volatility.151 Moreover, the volatility of the inhibitor also affects the operating pressure.152

4.2. CH4–CO2 replacement
The dissociation-based methods can destabilize the sediments and subsequent seafloor subsidence (Fig. 6). To eliminate these potential geohazards, recent studies have proposed a non-destructive exploitation method, i.e., CH4–CO2 replacement. The CH4–CO2 replacement method circumvents these potential geo-hazards because the NGHs are simultaneously converted into CO2 hydrates during CH4 recovery from the GHSZ (Fig. 7). Besides, CH4–CO2 replacement is an attractive method because it is nearly to carbon neutral, which is essential for energy production while facing the current climate change challenges. As an added advantage, the simultaneous CO2 hydrate formation can also help to maintain the stability of the reservoir. However, due to the low diffusion of the guest molecules through the solid–solid interface, the major limitation of this method is its relatively slow kinetics and low efficiency.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the potential geo-mechanical repercussions of hydrate dissociation-based production methods. 
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of NGH reservoirs affected by the CH4–CO2 replacement. 
The thermodynamic aspects of the CH4–CO2 replacement process were reviewed by Komatsu et al.12 The concept was proposed and tested in the 1990s using pure CO2 and CH4 hydrate solids.153,154 Ota et al.,155 Lee et al.,156 and Baldwin et al.157 in later studies showed that the CO2–CH4 exchange rate can vary greatly under different conditions. Under optimal conditions, the exchange can be fast and can almost reach the thermodynamic limit. The thermodynamic CH4 recovery limit of pure CO2 exchange is approximately 68% compared to more than 95% for depressurization. The limit is due to the fact that the molecule size of CO2 restricts the CH4–CO2 replacement to occur only in the large cages (51262) of NGHs (sI). The thermodynamic limit can be raised by adding other guest molecules, such as N2, which can undergo exchange with the CH4 in the small cages (512).158–161
The molecular mechanism of CH4–CO2 replacement has been widely studied. These studies have improved our understanding and have helped establish kinetic models. Two hypotheses regarding the replacement mechanisms have been proposed.
Several studies have suggested that the exchange actually starts with the CH4 hydrate dissociation, followed by CO2 hydrate formation. Specifically, the CH4 hydrates will decompose when the CH4 vapor phase is changed by the CO2. Then, the melt water reacts with the injected CO2 to form CO2 hydrates. It should be noted that the compositions of the newly formed hydrates can include CH4, CO2, and even other components if applicable. Ota et al.155 investigated the kinetics of the CH4–CO2 replacement reaction using liquid CO2. They found that the surfaces of the CH4 hydrates become thermodynamically unstable when the CO2 molecules come in contact with their interfaces. Subsequently, the hydrate layers are partially decomposed, and the CO2 molecules penetrate the partially decomposed layers and form mixed CH4 + CO2 hydrates. It was also found that the decomposition of the large cages in the CH4 hydrates proceeds faster than that of the small cages. This phenomenon could be due to the stability of the small cages or the reformation tendency after decomposing the hydrate structure. Similarly, Xu et al.162 examined CH4 exploitation of NGHs via CH4–CO2 replacement. Pure CO2, CO2/N2, CO2/H2, and CO2/He gas mixtures were used as the injected gases. The results of the in situ Raman and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analyses suggest that the CO2 breaks the balance between the two phases, i.e., CH4 and CH4 hydrates, resulting in the deformation or dissociation of the CH4 hydrates, finally forming CO2 hydrates with free water via reconstitution of the hydrate structure. Bai et al.163 performed molecular dynamics simulations on a microsecond scale to study the CH4–CO2 replacement mechanism. Their study showed that the initial CH4 hydrate dissociation occurs near the hydrate's surface, followed by the formation of an amorphous CO2 hydrate layer. In the simulations, the CO2 hydrates nucleated on the residual hydrate rings of the cages after the CH4 hydrate dissociated.
Several other studies have suggested that the CH4–CO2 replacement proceeds without significant hydrate dissociation or reformation. The main dispute regarding these two viewpoints is whether the exchange of guest molecules occurs without a transition to liquid water or ice as intermediaries. Baldwin et al.157 and Ersland et al.164 investigated the spontaneous conversion of CH4 hydrates to CO2 hydrates in porous media using in situ magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In their study, CH4 hydrates were exposed to liquid CO2. The conversion of the CH4 hydrates to CO2 hydrates spontaneously occurred after contact without notable hydrate dissociation to liquid water. At the molecular level, Falenty et al.165,166 used a combination of cryo-SEM, Raman, and neutron diffraction measurements to monitor the gas hydrate interface during CH4–CO2 exchanges and obtained time-resolved data. Their observations supported the hypothesis that CH4–CO2 replacement is a two-step process: (1) a fast surface reaction followed by (2) a slow permeation-limited gas exchange. It should be noted that the second step is the main part of the replacement reaction, which is supported by the “hole-in-cage-wall” diffusion mechanism.167–169 This supports the conclusion that CH4–CO2 replacement can occur without destroying the hydrate lattice.
The “hole-in-cage-wall” diffusion mechanism is based on a water-vacancy-assisted diffusion, in which the water vacancy between the cages enables the guest molecules to hop from an occupied donor cage to an adjacent acceptor cage. To describe the non-equilibrium binary permeation of the guest molecules during gas replacement based on the microscopic “hole-in-cage-wall” diffusive mechanism, Salamatin et al.170 investigated a diffusion model for gas replacement in an isostructural CH4–CO2 hydrate system. Their model was constrained and validated using time-resolved neutron diffraction data for isostructural CO2 replacement in CH4 hydrates. Their results revealed that the gas molecules migrate between occupied and empty neighboring cages without any significant destruction of the lattices. The gas exchange kinetics exhibit two stages, including the rapid formation of a mixed hydrate layer on the hydrate's surface and a much slower diffusion-controlled process.
Moudrakovski et al.171 and Liang et al.172 obtained more evidence of the “hole-in-cage-wall” diffusion mechanism. Moudrakovski et al.171 used 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and the CO2 molecular dynamics in the binary structure II hydrate of tetrahydrofuran (THF)/CO2 and isobutane/CO2 to provide direct molecular evidence of cage-to-cage transport. They concluded that the relatively rapid inter-cage guest molecule dynamics in THF/CO2 hydrates are a result of synergistic guest A–host water–guest B interactions. This knowledge enabled the fine-tuning of the guest transport properties in the hydrates by choosing appropriate guest molecules. The synergistic hydrogen bonding interactions between the THF and CO2 guests and the water lattice were found to enhance the transport of CO2 between the small cages at a rate of 2–3 × 106 hops per s at 263 K. The other guest molecule combinations, isobutane + CO2 and CO2 hydrates, did not exhibit synergistic interactions, and the cage-to-cage transport of CO2 was much slower (<104 hops per s). Liang et al.172 also investigated CO2 cage-to-cage transport in the hydrate phase with direct observations from molecular dynamics simulations. Their results showed that at least one water vacancy is required for the CO2 molecules to pass through five-membered water rings, whereas only the distortion of the local ring structure is required for the CO2 molecules to pass through the six-membered water rings.
CH4–CO2 replacement was also studied in the various types of hydrate reservoirs (sI, sII and sH). Lee et al.173–178 investigated the influence of CO2/flue gas (CO2 + N2) injection into the hydrate layer by focusing on the thermodynamic stability, physicochemical properties, and thermal behavior. The powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), 13C NMR, and Raman spectroscopy results revealed that the CH4 + NH (neohexane)–CO2 replacement reaction is accompanied by a structural transition from sH to sI.176 In addition, a partial structural transition (sII → sI) was also observed in the CH4 + C3H8−CO2 replacement system.173,175 Interestingly, no significant endothermic or exothermic reactions were observed during the CH4–CO2, CH4–flue gas replacement (sI-isostructural replacement) and the CH4 + NH–flue gas replacement (sH-isostructural replacement). These observations indicate that substantial portions of the hydrate's structure were maintained during the isostructural replacement despite the possible partial breakup and restoration of some of the cage structures. However, the sH–sI structure-transitional replacement system involves the dissociation of the sH hydrates and the reformation of the sI hydrates and alters the cage-filling characteristics of the guest molecules and the guest molecule distributions in each cage. Besides, in the replacement that occurs in sII hydrates, the initial sII CH4 + C3H8 hydrates are converted not only into CH4 + C3H8 + CO2 hydrate (sII) but also into CO2-rich sI hydrates due to the abundance of CO2 molecules and the depletion of the C3H8 molecules. Moreover, it was also found that the replacement rate increases as the partial pressure of CO2 (PCO2) increases, and the higher replacement efficiency at a higher PCO2 is attributed to the higher portion of the CO2-rich sI hydrates.
4.3. Fluidization method
The fluidization method is used to target specific unconfined hydrates in the shallow strata of the seafloor, which are hard to extract via other methods such as depressurization.128,179 The concept is similar to that of mineral mining. It is to mechanically crush the hydrates and sediments, fluidize the solid slurry, dissociate the hydrates in the topside of the flow line, separate the gas from the slurry, and return the remaining sediments. The method transfers the hydrates before they are dissociated, which minimizes the CH4 leakage and possibly controls the dissociation process better. The method is relatively new (proposed in 2014) and is less mature than the other methods. In 2017, the China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) conducted the world's first solid fluidization well test and production of the marine non-diagenetic hydrates at well Li Wan 3 in the South China Sea. The water depth was 1310 m, and the depth of the hydrate sediment layers was 117–196 m. The validity of this method was verified in this test.128 Ma et al.180 experimentally analyzed the thermodynamic stability and methane leakage when using the solid fluidization method to extract CH4 from hydrates. They confirmed that the fluidization rate affects the amount and the rate of the hydrate dissociation and that the amount of CH4 leakage is small but increases with increasing water temperature. Overall, this method is not yet mature and sounds aggressive. The feasibility of this method needs to be examined further, especially in terms of its environmental disruption, mining efficiency, and mining area.
4.4. Combined methods
As discussed in previous sections, each NGH production method has its advantages and disadvantages. Depressurization has been reported to be the most energy-efficient method due to its simplicity, but it has a low productivity. Thermal stimulation and chemical injection have the disadvantages of high energy inputs and high costs due to the need to heat the injection fluid and pump the inhibitor into the hydrate sediments. The CH4–CO2 replacement method has the advantage of eliminating the geo-stability problems caused by hydrate dissociation, but it has the disadvantage of slow kinetics. Therefore, recent studies have proposed using combinations of those methods to improve the energy consumption, increase the gas recovery and gas production rate, and reduce the environmental impacts.
One representative example of a combined method is depressurization combined with thermal stimulation. The huff-and-puff method with depressurization is a representative example of this combination of methods. Due to the increase in the system pressure and the hydrate reformation during the soaking and production periods, thermal stimulation above the equilibrium pressure is impractical for dissociation of hydrates with a low gas saturation, so it should be combined with the depressurization method to improve the gas recovery.181 Wang et al.182 investigated the effect of this combined method on the intrinsic reservoir permeability using a two-dimensional axisymmetric model. Their simulation results indicate that the average gas production rate from hydrate deposits can be enhanced by additional thermal stimulation, but the enhancement effect decreases as the reservoir permeability increases. They also confirmed that an increase in permeability will result in a shift from thermal-stimulation-governed radial hydrate dissociation to depressurization-governed uniform dissociation.
Combining hydraulic fracturing and depressurization is also an option. Feng et al.183 evaluated the efficiency of this combined method under two different temperature conditions using a fractured CH4 hydrate reservoir model. They found that this combination of methods is more efficient than the single depressurization method in terms of gas production. The hydrate dissociation and gas production can be significantly enhanced during the early depressurization stage rather than during the later stage after fracturing of a high-temperature reservoir. The enhancement was also noticeable in a low-temperature reservoir, but the absolute production rate remains low due to the temperature. Besides, they found that increasing the initial reservoir temperature can strongly enhance the advantages of fracturing because gas production from a low-temperature reservoir is very sensitive to the initial temperature.
Due to the potential risks of the mechanical destabilization of the reservoir after hydrate dissociation, it is recommended that dissociation-based methods be combined with the CH4–CO2 replacement method to maintain the mechanical strength and integrity. The combination of thermal stimulation and CH4–CO2 replacement was investigated by Tupsakhare et al.184 In their study, they investigated the enhancements of CH4 extraction from hydrates using the pure thermal stimulation method and the combination of injection of the CO2 + N2 gas mixture and the in situ combustion method. A mixture of CO2 (85%)–N2 (15%) gas was injected into the initial hydrates with a saturation of 10% at a rate of 300 ml min−1. Three different heating rates were applied: 20, 50, and 100 W. The results confirmed that thermal stimulation combined with CO2 + N2 injection can enhance the CH4 recovery, and the CO2 sequestration efficiency increases as the heating rate decreases. Gambelli et al.185 also investigated this combination method with a comparison of CH4–CO2 replacement followed by thermal stimulation and thermal stimulation followed by CH4–CO2 replacement. Their results indicate that the extraction efficiency of thermal stimulation does not increase when the CH4–CO2 replacement process is added. However, much less thermal energy is required when thermal stimulation is followed by CH4–CO2 replacement.
Supercritical CO2 injection combined with thermal stimulation is another option. Deusner et al.186 investigated CH4 hydrate exploitation by injecting supercritical CO2, and their results suggest that the additional heat caused by the injection of supercritical CO2 triggers the dissociation of the CH4 hydrates. Moreover, the thermally balanced CO2 will react with the pore water. Continuous CH4 production can be achieved when some initial heat is introduced with the CO2. In their study, the reservoir temperature was determined to be a crucial factor in the extraction strategy. Rapid cooling of the injected liquid CO2 can induce the formation of CO2 hydrates, causing congestion of the fluid pathways. However, the hot supercritical CO2 can efficiently activate the CH4 hydrate reservoir, overcoming the limitations of the mass transfer.
CH4–CO2 replacement can also be combined with the depressurization method. Lee et al.187 investigated the potential effects of this combination of methods on the geomechanical properties of hydrate-bearing sediments. They found that the total CH4 recovery was increased by using the combination of methods. The mechanical strength of the replaced hydrate-bearing sediments also recovered significantly after the CO2 hydrate formation. However, the stress–strain behavior of the partially or completely dissociated hydrate-bearing sediments exhibited hardening–softening behavior, and the peak strength was lower than that of the initial CH4 hydrate-bearing sediments. This suggests that the mechanical behavior is strongly dependent on the dissociation ratio and the gas hydrate saturation. Therefore, to preserve the geomechanical properties of the hydrate-bearing sediments, the authors suggest optimum recovery at a dissociation ratio of 20% in this system.
4.5. Field production tests in permafrost and offshore natural gas hydrate reservoirs
To validate the developed techniques, several production tests have been carried out around the world (Table 6). Even though they are not listed, there are usually a couple of drilling and logging expeditions before each production test. Drilling and logging are pre-requisites for characterizing the hydrate reservoirs and customizing extraction plans. The test sites included both onshore and offshore sites. The factors that need to be considered when identifying potential target deposits for hydrate exploitation include the hydrate saturation, the sediment reserves, and the infrastructure of the gas markets. In this section, we will discuss the relevant field trials.
Table 6 Timeline of recent natural gas hydrate test production expeditions




Location
Project
Time
Method
Cumulative production (m3)
Average production rate per day (m3)
Ref.




Japan
Daini-Atsumi Knoll
2013
Depressurization
6 d, 11.9 × 104
2 × 104

188



Daini-Atsumi Knoll
2017
Depressurization
12 d, 3.5 × 104
2.9 × 103

189



Daini-Atsumi Knoll
2017
Depressurization
24 d, 20 × 104
8.3 × 103 m3

189



China
Shenhu
2017
Depressurization
60 d, 30.9 × 105
5.2 × 103 m3 (1.6 × 104 m3 in the initial 8 days)

126



Shenhu
2020
Depressurization
30 d, 8.614 × 105
2.9 × 104 m3

190



Canada
Mallik
2002
Heating
125 h, 468
3.7 m3

191



Mallik
2007
Depressurization
12.5 h, 830
66 m3

192



Mallik
2008
Depressurization
6 d, 1.3 × 104
2.2 × 103 m3

192



USA
Prudhoe Bay
2012
CO2 replacement
31.5 d, 2.83 × 104
90 m3

13 and 127





The first hydrate extraction on record was conducted in the Messoyakha natural gas hydrate field. The hydrate deposits with a free gas zone underneath in Messoyakha were first discovered in 1967, and the first gas production field test was performed in 1969–1970.193 It may be the only natural gas hydrate field from which natural gas has been successfully commercially produced.193 However, this success has not been replicated. This onshore field is located in the Arctic, on the eastern border of Western Siberia, Russia, with a field area of about 19.5 × 12 km2. The history of NGH exploitation in the Messoyakha field suggests that the NGHs are a readily producible source and conventional methods (simple depressurization using a standard well design) can be used to maintain natural gas production.152 The field was initially considered and designed as a conventional gas field, but gas hydrates were later discovered due to the presence of an anomalous constant field pressure for more than 25 years. The natural gas hydrates gradually decomposed due to the pressure drop caused by natural gas extraction, releasing natural gas and maintaining the pressure. In the reservoir, the free gas and the hydrate layer are close to each other without any lithological separation. The total pore volume of the reserve is estimated to be 0.41 × 109 m3, including 0.32 × 109 m3 of free gas and 0.09 × 109 m3 of gas hydrates. At present, approximately 1/3 of the gas production is thought to come from hydrate dissociation. Although there is still debate as to whether the produced gas is from the free gas zone or hydrate dissociation,194 NGH production in the Messoyakha field is regarded as the only example of successful commercial production. The production in the Messoyakha field has undoubtedly played a catalytic role in global NGH research.
Several onshore production tests were conducted in the Mackenzie Delta, Northwest Territories, Canada, with the collaboration of Canadian and Japanese researchers. The project is known as the Mallik project. As early as 1974, hydrates were discovered in the Mallik L-38 well. In 1998, the Japan Petroleum Exploration Co., Ltd. (JAPEX), the Japan National Oil Corporation (JNOC), and the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC) conducted the first drilling test to collect natural gas hydrate core samples and basic physical and engineering data on the permafrost regions. At the production site, the NGHs are located at depths of 892–1107 m. The lithology consists of thickly layered sandstone interbedded with conglomerates and siltstone. The hydrate sediments have a high saturation of 50–90%.
Two field production tests have been performed in the Mallik area. The first trial was conducted in 2002 using hot-water circulation. The test depth range was 892–930 m. The results revealed that the sand-dominant gas hydrate deposits with different hydrate saturations and sediment characteristics can be effectively exploited.195 However, only 468 m3 of gas was produced in 5 days due to the low thermal efficiency.191,196 A large amount of injected heat dissipated, and only a small part of the heat was used for hydrate dissociation. In fact, this is the only reported production trial that mainly used thermal stimulation. In 2007, another trial was conducted in well Mallik L-38, which mainly used the depressurization method. The results confirmed that the hydrate reservoirs exhibit significant reservoir heterogeneity, which verified the laboratory results.197 In addition, the importance of sand control near the wellbore was confirmed. Sans control can prevent operational problems that can limit the extent of the pressure drawdown.198 In the second field test, the production was initially stopped due to sand problems. In 2008, the production was restarted with the addition of a sand prevention screen. During the 2008 test, a stable gas production of 2000–3000 m3 d−1 and a water production of 10–20 m3 d−1 were achieved. Finally, a total of 13000 m3 of gas was recovered within 6 days, and no problems were reported. Besides, field tests have revealed that the collapse or deformation of the high permeability conduits in the initial phase may cause a decrease in the gas production rate.198
US and Japanese research teams conducted their first onshore production test on the northern slope of Alaska in 2012, which is known as the Ignik Sikumi gas hydrate field trial.13,127 Hunter et al.199 used advanced well surveys and modular dynamic formation test data for the northern slope of Alaska to provide an overview of the program. The Modular Dynamics Pressure and Formation Testing (MDT) results showed that even at very high hydrate saturations there was still a mobile water phase in the hydrate reservoir. This well program provided substantial information about the hydrate reservoir and helped determine the Prudhoe Bay Unit (PBU) L-Pad area for the subsequent Iġnik Sikumi field gas hydrate production test.200,201
The production trial on the northern slope of Alaska provided particularly valuable information as it tested the CH4–CO2 exchange method. Prior to the trial production, a non-vertical well had been drilled and logged in 2011. The natural gas hydrate reservoirs have multiple hydrate bearings. The porosity was about 40% and the pore volume was composed of up to 80 vol% hydrates and up to 20 vol% water, which is superior for hydrate production tests. In this test, CO2–N2 (23/77 mol%) mixed gas rather than pure CO2 gas was used to increase the CH4 recovery. The CO2–N2 mixture was injected for 14 days with totally 6.1 metric standard cubic meter (MS m3) of injected fluid during the CH4–CO2 replacement production test. Then, a depressurization flow-back test for long-term production was performed in 2012. The production lasted for 31.5 days and the total gas production was 2.83 × 104 m3. The production successfully achieved CH4 production while storing CO2, but it also confirmed the challenges posed by the slow gas exchange rate. Most of the injected N2 and half of the injected CO2 were recovered during the flow-back test. If the CO2–CH4 exchange is to be operated continuously, production will be more challenging. Even though the objective of continuous production is to increase the CH4 recovery, the gas injection and extraction lines still need to be well designed and well positioned. Incomplete gas exchange can result in the production of mixed gas (CO2/CH4/N2). This mixed gas requires further separation, which has already been a complex subject.202 The Iġnik Sikumi field test successfully demonstrated that CO2 can be injected into a hydrate-filled reservoir under conditions suitable for possible secondary CO2 hydrate formation, and CH4–CO2 replacement could be commercially feasible in the future.203
Japan was the first country promoting offshore hydrate production, which reflects its unique geographical conditions and the demand for a secure energy source. In the eastern Nankai Trough area south of the Japanese coast, 16 CH4 hydrate concentrated zones (MHCZs) with an estimated CH4 reserve of 20 Tcf have been discovered.204 These zones have relatively high hydrate saturations and are potential production sites.
Following the success of the depressurization method in onshore tests, a production trial was conducted in the Daini-Atsumi Knoll area of the Eastern Nankai Trough, Japan, using the depressurization method under the direction of the Methane Hydrate 2001 (MH21) Consortium.188,205,206 The offshore production test began on 12 March 2013 and was completed on 19 March 2013, which was not consistent with the initial plan, but severe weather conditions and sand production required changes to the original plan. The hydrate reservoir used for production was located 276–337 mbsf (meters below seafloor). The water depth was 998 m. The hydrate saturation was 60–80%. The lithology included thin silts with fine clay, mud sediments, and coarse sand containing silts. The permeability was relatively high, at least tens of millidarcies. In the first production test, a total of 119500 m3 of gas and 1300 m3 of water were recovered before an abrupt sand problem (blocking the production line) occurred on day 6.
The second trial was conducted in a nearby location in 2017 and was led by the Agency for Natural Resources and Energy, Japan (ANRE) and the Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC).189 The geological features were similar to those of the first production site. Based on the previous experience of sand interruption, a customized sand-control device was designed. A gas–liquid separation device was also used to better manage the flow assurance. The production results were encouraging. In this test, two separate wells were tested using the depressurization method. The energy output/input ratios were greater than 100. The gas and water production rates of both wells were stable. More than 99.9% of the collected gas was CH4. The production from the first well lasted for 12 days, and 41000 m3 of gas was produced. Production was terminated due to the uncontrollable sand problem. After analyzing the data, it was suspected that the sand production problem was attributed to an unclosed check valve and was not related to the sand-control device. After fixing the problem, the second well's production lasted for 24 days, producing 222500 m3 of gas, and sand problems were not encountered. However, due to the unexpected quantity of water flow, the production system failed to manage the risk of flow assurance, hydrates formed in the production line, and the production was terminated again. The large quantity of water, as well as the well pressure distribution data, suggests that most of the water originates as a pore fluid. Before the next production test, the reservoir needs to be better characterized and modeled.
China is another country with a strong interest in hydrates. Various research teams have reported on both onshore and offshore expeditions. In 2017, the China Geological Survey (SCS) initiated its first production test in the Shenhu area of the South China Sea in the Pearl River Mouth Basin.126 The test mainly used the depressurization method. The water depth at the test site was 1266 m, and the NGH system in the test site can be divided into (a) 1495–1530 m (201–236 mbsf), with pore spaces filled with solid NGHs and liquid water; (b) 1530–1545 m (236–251 mbsf), with pore spaces filled with three phases: solid NGHs, free hydrocarbon gas, and liquid water; and (c) 1545–1572 m (251–278 mbsf), with pore spaces filled with two phases: free hydrocarbon gas and liquid water. The hydrate-bearing sediment was composed of clay silt. The hydrate-bearing sediments had a low permeability (0.4–2 mD) and a hydrate saturation of 40–70%. The geological features have been reported by Fu et al.207 and Li et al.208 Before the production trial, three expeditions were conducted in 2007, 2015, and 2016, including drilling, logging, and sampling. The data revealed the presence of multiple high-quality hydrate deposits with production potential. The hydrate reservoir used for the production trial had an area of 6.42 km2 and a mean thickness of 57 m. It was located 201 m under the seafloor and had a water depth of 1266 m. During the production, a sand control pipe was used to prevent sand from entering the borehole. Based on the lab tests, this sand control pipe can prevent sand grains of 44 μm from entering the borehole. Li et al. discussed the sand control system in detail.209 A gas–water separation system and mono-ethylene glycol injection were also used during the production to avoid secondary hydrate formation. The production lasted for 60 days, and 3.09 × 105 m3 of gas was extracted. The mean daily production rate was 5151 m3 per day. No CH4 leakage was observed based on the CH4 concentration measurements on the sea surface, in the sea water, and near the seafloor. The environmental monitoring results indicate that no major landslides were induced, which indicates that this test represents a significant breakthrough in the safety control of NGH production. After the test, the production test string was removed, and the well was abandoned.
The second production trial in the Shenhu area was conducted in 2020.190 The water depth at the production site was 1225 m. Hydrate deposits extended from 207 mbsf to approximately 277 mbsf (∼70 m). The porosity of the hydrate reservoir was approximately 35%, but the hydrate saturation decreased from 31% at the top to 11.7% at the bottom. The free gas content increased with depth, and there was a free gas layer from 278 to 297 mbsf. In this production trial, a horizontal well was used for the first time. A horizontal well may have advantages over a vertical well due to the increase in the single-well controlled reserve, increased single-well production, and simplified production management. In addition, a newly developed sand-control system was tested during this production trial. The new system effectively prevented sand intrusion, given that the median particle size of the reserve is only 8–16 μm. During the production, hydrate inhibitors were injected to prevent secondary hydrate formation in the flowline. The production lasted for 30 days, and accumulatively 8.614 × 105 m3 of gas was extracted. The daily production reached 5.57 times that of the production trial in 2017. Based on continuous monitoring, no CH4 leakage or geological hazards occurred. These results set a hydrate extraction record and will inspire more exploitation and production trials around the world. In this production trial, some challenges also emerged in the natural gas extraction techniques. For example, the gas production rates are still relatively small for commercialization. The rate was also observed to gradually decrease. The possible reasons for this decrease include a larger hydrate dissociation area, a larger flow resistance, and the collapse of the sediments after hydrate dissociation. A decrease in the production rate is common, but the decrease in this trial occurred much faster than in a typical well in a conventional reservoir or a shale gas reservoir, raising doubts regarding long-term natural gas hydrate exploitation.
In addition to the production trials described above, small-scale field production tests have also been conducted in China. One production test was conducted by the China Geological Survey in the Qilian Mountain permafrost in 2011.210 The permeability of the hydrate reservoir was of 100 mD in scales, and the hydrate saturation was less than 10%. The production used depressurization and thermal stimulation methods. The depressurization test lasted for 84 h, and 82 m3 of gas was produced. The thermal stimulation test using 50 °C hot air lasted for 11 h, and 9.7 m3 of gas was produced. The thermal stimulation test using 150 °C steam and the huff-puff process lasted for 0.7 h, and 3.3 m3 of gas was collected. Another production test was conducted by the CNOOC in the South China Sea using the fluidization method.128 The hydrates in this test were unconfined hydrates in the shallow stratum and mud. The hydrate deposits were located 196 mbsf and the water depth was 1310 m. The test validated the technical feasibility, and 81 m3 of gas was collected.
Overall, onshore and offshore NGHs are potential natural gas resources. Their accessibility has attracted attempts at utilization. Theories concerning hydrate extraction have been developed. Their extraction is a comprehensive engineering project. Each component of the process is still undergoing examination. The limited number of field production trials has demonstrated the feasibility of extraction and has validated some of the theories. The extraction is different from that of a conventional gas reservoir or shale gas reservoir due to the occurrences of hydrate dissociation, but many techniques and a great deal of knowledge can be repurposed to enhance the extraction. Thus far, depressurization appears to be the most economic and effective method of extracting gas hydrates. Other methods such as thermal stimulation and inhibitor injection can be used as auxiliary methods. In addition to the current production tests in the USA, Canada, Japan, and China, many other countries, such as India and South Korea, also plan to produce hydrates.
4.6. Environmental impacts of natural gas hydrate dissociation
One general concern about the environmental impacts of NGH dissociation is the potential risk of releasing additional CH4 into the atmosphere. Since the global warming potential of CH4 is 15–26 times larger than that of CO2, the release of a large amount of CH4 would accelerate global warming and further destabilize NGH reservoirs. Fortunately, the current amount in the atmosphere is not very large.211 Besides, the vast amount of CH4 dissolved in seawater as a result of NGH dissociation would aggravate ocean acidification after oxidation, thereby damaging the marine ecosystem.
NGH dissociation can also cause geohazards, including naturally occurring geohazards from natural geological processes and operational geohazards triggered by anthropogenic activities. The most representative geohazard associated with NGH dissociation is slope instability because high saturations of gas hydrates are related to a high shear strength, high stiffness, and strong sediment dilatancy.212,213 Naturally occurring NGH dissociation is generally caused by continuous sedimentation or increased bottom water temperature.214 Operational geohazards are mostly related to NGH exploitation, including drilling activities and installation of subsea infrastructures. The risks include casing collapse, gas leakage outside the conductor casing, and gas blowouts.215 Although these risks impose additional constraints on exploiting NGHs, the results of several NGH drilling programs have shown that operational geohazards related to drilling can be managed by carefully controlling the drilling parameters.216,217 Because of the limited number of field trials, our knowledge of preventing geological hazards is still lacking. In the future, longer-term NGH drilling tests will likely provide more knowledge about the risks related to sediment-wellbore instability.
4.7. Summary
Field tests and laboratory studies of NGH production in both permafrost and offshore NGH reservoirs have significantly improved our understanding of the properties of NGHs and have confirmed the potential of NGHs as a natural gas source. Depressurization has been reported to be the most energy-efficient method. The energy output/input of the production trial had a very high ratio, making it comparable to conventional energy sources and more advantageous compared to other hydrate production methods. The long-term efficiency is uncertain since no such trial has been conducted. The drawback of depressurization is the occurrence of hydrate reformation during production, which subsequently reduces the production rate. Thermal stimulation requires a high external energy to heat and inject the fluid into the NGH reservoir. The energy output/input ratio can be less than 1. Chemical injection may be effective, but the low permeability of the reservoirs is likely to limit its performance in the NGH reservoirs. Moreover, all of these dissociation-based methods can cause destabilization of sediments and subsequent seafloor subsidence. CH4–CO2 replacement has the advantages of stabilization of the deposits and CO2 sequestration, but it has a limited NGH dissociation rate. The combination of these methods may be wise to improve the overall efficiency and production rate and control the risk of the destabilization of the sediments. Considering the impact of NGH production on the physical and mechanical properties of gas hydrate reservoirs, the CH4–CO2 replacement-based combination method should be intensively assessed to minimize the risks of potential damage to the environment. In addition, extensive studies are needed to improve our understanding of the major components of the sediments, ocean water, and properties of solid NGHs. Overall, before commercial NGH production, more efforts are still required to characterize the energy consumption, gas production rate, and stabilization of the deposits for the combination of methods.
5. Carbon capture and sequestration
Carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) has been proposed as one of the key techniques for preventing excessive CO2 emissions into the atmosphere. The earliest worldwide efforts in CCS were marked by the first international conference held in March 1992 in Amsterdam.218 In this conference, scientists and engineers from all over the world gathered for the first time to discuss strategies for removing CO2 from the atmosphere. In the 21st century, more attention has been focused on CCS due to the acceleration of global warming. Scientists have formed a consensus that CCS techniques should be treated as a primary way to reduce or eliminate CO2 emissions and to act as an effective long-term solution to global warming.
The principle of CCS is to collect CO2 and/or other carbon-containing greenhouse gases, such as CH4, perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and store them in a stable and enclosed environment, instead of freely discharging them into the atmosphere. Beyond the concept of CCS, carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) has been recently developed. The idea of CCUS is to separate CO2 from the other flue gases and atmospheric gases and reuse it. CCUS is expected to provide economic benefits while achieving the goal of carbon emission reduction and climate change mitigation. In this section, two main components of the CCS technology, CO2 separation and CO2 sequestration, are discussed individually from the points of view of their characteristics, limitations, and practicality. Subsequently, a new CCS method called hydrate-based carbon capture and sequestration (HBCS) is analyzed systematically. The advantages and the current status of HBCS techniques are comprehensively demonstrated by comparing it to other techniques. At the end of this section, the current major CCS projects and related policies are summarized to illustrate the world's efforts in global warming mitigation.
5.1. Carbon dioxide capture
The most common sources of capturable CO2 include flue gas and the air. Accordingly, there are two CCS scenarios: (1) capturing CO2 from flue gas with a relatively high CO2 concentration, which is mainly produced by the burning of fossil fuels and other raw materials in power plants and factories, and (2) capturing CO2 from air with low CO2 concentrations, which comes from all emitting sources (Fig. 8). In the current technological setting, removing CO2 from the flue gas with high CO2 concentrations is easier and more energy-efficient than directly capturing CO2 from air with low CO2 concentrations. Because of dilution, capturing CO2 is more challenging once the flue gas is emitted into the atmosphere. Therefore, most of the current CCS efforts focus on capturing CO2 from flue gas at its source. Environmental data indicated that global energy-related CO2 emissions plateaued at around 33 Gt in 2019, of which power plants for electricity generation alone accounted for more than 40%.49 The data show that power plants and some other plants that use fossil fuels are the best candidates for CCS.
 Fig. 8  Sources of capturable CO2. 
Three major approaches to reducing CO2 emission caused by fossil fuel combustion are pre-combustion capture, post-combustion capture, and the oxy-fuel process (Fig. 9).219 The pre-combustion capture process captures the CO2 from fossil fuels or biomass fuel before combustion. A typical process includes ① gasification of the fuel to produce synthesis gas, ② CO2 separation from the synthesis gas to enrich the hydrogen, and ③ using the hydrogen-rich gas for power generation. The post-combustion capture process captures CO2 from the flue gas produced by burning fuel. It should be noted that CO2 separation from the post-combustion gaseous stream faces the problem of a relatively low CO2 concentration and impurities such as SO2, NO2, and O2. Oxy-fuel combustion involves burning the fuel in pure oxygen rather than air, which can reduce the production of gas impurities. The CO2 concentration of the flue gas stream after oxy-fuel combustion can reach approximately 75% without treatment and 99% after water condensation.220 The advantage of this option is the ease of recovering CO2 due to its high concentration in the flue gas.
 Fig. 9  Carbon capture methods during fossil fuel consumption. 
Several specific techniques have been evaluated for CO2 capture from the flue gas, including membrane separation, adsorption, absorption, and cryogenics (Fig. 10).221,222 We discuss the theory of each approach and their research progress, pros and cons, and deployment in the following paragraphs.
 Fig. 10  Technical approaches to CO2 capture and separation (prepared based on the information provided by Salvi and Jindal218 and Rubin et al.221). 
Membrane separation mostly depends on a specially designed membrane sieve. It works based on the differences in permeabilities of each gaseous component flowing through the membrane. Among the CO2 post-combustion capture techniques, membrane gas separation is often considered to be one of the most promising options. Studies of CO2 separation from different mixed gases have been performed using membrane separation, including CO2 separation from CH4, air, and a mixture of other gases.223,224 The advantages of using membranes to remove CO2 generally include their versatility, adaptability, environmental friendliness, small space requirement, and lightweight. The reported cost of the membrane separation method is 24–48 dollars per ton of CO2, depending on the specific working conditions. However, membranes also have their disadvantages.8 Organic membrane materials cannot simultaneously exhibit a high selectivity and a high permeability, and inorganic membrane materials do not perform well in terms of reproducibility, reliability, and cost-control.224 The separation selectivity of the current commercially available membranes is in the range of 30–50, which is only one-tenth of the desired value (300) for CO2.224 Such low separation selectivity makes it difficult to achieve the desired CO2 purity (80% CO2 in the permeate stream).225 In order to solve the contradiction between permeability and selectivity, a high feed-to-permeate pressure ratio is needed.225 The results of mathematical simulations have revealed that the operating pressure can significantly affect the permeability of gas molecules.224 Besides, the performance of the membrane separation system is greatly influenced by the flue gas composition. The sustainability and aging resistance of the membrane are also the problems in using the membrane separation process on a large-scale. Due to these challenges, membrane separation has not been used commercially for post-combustion CO2 separation processes.
Adsorbent-based systems usually use porous media with a high surface area that can adsorb the target gas molecules onto their surface via intermolecular forces, such as activated carbons, carbon fibers, zeolites, porous silicates, and metal–organic frameworks. This is a physical process and has received wide concerns in recent years.226 This process consists of two steps, gas adsorption on the surface of the porous material and gas desorption. Because the ability to hold molecules on the surfaces of porous media can be adjusted via physical or chemical means,221 the adsorbent beds can be easily regenerated by releasing the adsorbate via different methods, including pressure change, temperature change, and washing methods.221 The greatest advantage of this method is that it significantly reduces the cost of CO2 capture. In the best-case scenario, the economics of this process can reach as low as 14 dollars per ton of CO2, and the energy consumption is 1.85 GJ per ton of CO2.227
Adsorbents with a stronger affinity for CO2 are more capable of capturing CO2 from gas mixtures with lower CO2 concentrations. However, no adsorbents with a high affinity are economical enough for industrial applications at present. Besides, the operating conditions of the adsorption process are complicated due to the low-temperature requirements, the moisture and impurities in flue gas, and the pressure drop caused by the adsorbent. The lack of performance evaluation has caused the applicability of this method to remain ambiguous, especially when facing complicated situations such as high humidity, high temperature, and the presence of SOx and NOx. If the challenges are overcome, the adsorption capture process may be an effective option due to its low cost, high cyclic stability, and fast adsorption/desorption kinetics. As one possible CCS solution, the mineral carbonate adsorbent systems can capture and store CO2 simultaneously.228,229 However, it is difficult to reuse the separated CO2.
Absorption includes amine scrubbing and aqueous ammonia scrubbing. Both of these are able to recover CO2 from flue gases via chemical reactions between the absorbent and the CO2. Typical absorbents include monoethanolamine (MEA), di-glycol amine (DGA), di-ethanol amine (DEA), tri-ethanol amine (TEA), and methyl diethanolamine (MDEA). Among them, MEA is the best and its CO2 separation efficiency can reach about 90%.230,231 The absorption process is typically conducted at around room temperature (20 ± 15 °C), and solvent regeneration is operated at around 120 °C.232 The separated CO2 or the subsequent by-products can be used in industrial applications or be sequestrated directly. Absorption processes have the advantages of a high CO2 capacity, excellent solvent persistence during the absorption and regeneration processes, and a better tolerance for the oxygen in the flue gas.233 However, a lot of energy is required for solvent regeneration, thereby significantly increasing the costs. The absorption CO2 capture method should be oriented towards a completely closed carbon cycle process that involves the optimization of the solvent regeneration and the utilization of economically valuable CO2-based products, reducing the use of fresh materials and the cost.234
Cryogenic separation is based on cooling and condensation. CO2 can be easily removed from a gas mixture via liquefaction or solidification at extremely low temperatures and high pressures. In this method, flue gas containing CO2 passes through cooling media and cools down to the specific temperature range for liquefying or solidifying CO2 from a gaseous mixture, achieving CO2 separation. Typically, over 90% of the CO2 in flue gas can be recovered via this method.231 The captured CO2 has a high purity and can be easily utilized. However, it should be noted that both the cooling and pressurizing steps are energy-intensive and consume approximately 600–660 kW h per ton of CO2.235 Such high energy consumption intensity makes it an economically unfavorable method for industrial applications. In fact, the studies of this method have been focused on cost optimization to make this technique more affordable.236 The recent developments related to this technique have been reviewed by Song et al.237
Various carbon capture and separation techniques have been systematically developed in recent decades. Each technique has its own advantages and disadvantages. In order to overcome the shortcomings of each technique, a combination of two or more approaches has been considered as a potential solution.238 Membrane-based,239,240 absorption-based,241–243 adsorption-based,244–246 and cryogenic-based247,248 hybrid processes have all been evaluated. Comparing to each individual method, hybrid processes generally have the advantages of high CO2 recovery, low energy consumption, low installation investment, and low maintenance costs. For instance, the combination of membrane and cryogenic techniques has a high CO2 recovery efficiency, and its capture cost is comparable to that of the conventional MEA solvent technique (41–42 dollars per ton of CO2).249 Besides, the hybrid process of adsorption and membrane method has also been demonstrated to have a lower energy requirement.238 Hybrid processes may become a promising option for reducing CO2 emissions in the future. However, before practical applications can be implemented, a large amount of work is still required to optimize these processes.
5.2. Carbon dioxide sequestration
It is well known that CO2 sequestration is the last step in CCS. Its purpose is to store excess CO2 in specific containers, such as forests, oceans, and certain geological structures to prevent it from being emitted into the atmosphere. In order to achieve the climate warming mitigation target, about 3 Gt of CO2 needs to be permanently sequestered every year, which is around one-eleventh of the current global CO2 production.250 However, in contrast to the development of carbon capture techniques, carbon sequestration techniques have received little attention.
Storage site selection is the first step in CO2 sequestration. A detailed assessment of CO2 storage sites is essential for successful sequestration. An ideal CO2 storage site must be safe, reliable, environmentally friendly, economically feasible, and politically sanctioned.251 Geological structures, geohazard risks, the potential storage capacity, and environmental, economic, and political issues are also key factors that should be considered. Previous studies have investigated several options for CO2 sequestration, including saline aquifer storage, depleted and developing oil and gas reservoir storage, deep ocean storage, mineral carbonation, etc.252,253 This section provides a brief discussion of each sequestration strategy, including their advantages and limitations.

Saline aquifers. 
Saline aquifers are considered to be a feasible space for storing CO2.253–256 In this situation, supercritical CO2 is injected into the storage reservoir to displace the pore water and react with the groundwater and porous media.257 The process eventually precipitates new minerals and/or dissolves the previously existing minerals.258 Investigations have revealed that most saline aquifers are located in the sedimentary basins with large pore volumes and relatively high permeabilities, and thus they have a great potential for CO2 storage. There are four trapping mechanisms in saline aquifers, including structural trapping, residual trapping, solubility trapping, and mineral trapping, which can ensure the stable storage of CO2 and prevent the injected gas from leaking back out (Fig. 11).259 Most of the saline aquifers are currently not suitable for other commercial applications and can be used for CO2 storage.260 However, from an economic point of view, the cost of using saline aquifers for CO2 storage is still high due to the absence of necessary infrastructures, such as injection equipment and pipelines for CO2 transportation. Besides, from the point view of the geological structures, a low-permeability caprock is still needed to prevent the CO2 from migrating upward out of the reservoir.261 It should be noted that the formation and dissolution of minerals are two uncertain factors that may affect the porosity of reservoirs, thereby leading to the misjudgment of the reservoir capacity.262
 Fig. 11  The four main CO2 trapping mechanisms.263 


Depleted and developing oil and gas reservoirs. 
Injecting CO2 in depleted or developing oil and gas reservoirs is now considered to be one of the most effective storage options. Firstly, these reservoirs have been extensively studied from the economic and geological perspectives in the hydrocarbon exploration stage. The infrastructure that was originally used for oil and gas exploitation can be reused for CO2 injection with minor adjustments.252,264–268 Second, CO2 injection can be applied to enhance gas and oil production. CO2 is considered to be the most suitable fluid for enhanced oil recovery (EOR) because of its affordable price and its ability to reduce the oil viscosity and replace CH4 on the surfaces of porous media. Besides, the fact that oil and gas reservoirs can seal hydrocarbons demonstrates the stability and sealability of the caprock and the geological structure. Thus, CO2 can be stored without leakage. However, the impurities in CO2 streams can cause problems in reservoir sequestration. It has been reported that non-condensable impurities often lead to a reduction in the CO2 storage capacity and the corrosion of the injection equipment.269 Moreover, because the exploitation of most reservoirs is still in progress, the available depleted reservoir sites for CO2 storage are actually very limited worldwide.268


Deep ocean storage. 
An alternative strategy for sequestering CO2 is to inject the CO2 into the deep ocean and store the CO2 by dissolving it in the sea water. The basic operation of deep ocean storage is to discharge the liquid CO2 directly into the seafloor to form droplet plumes under specific temperature–pressure conditions.270,271 Only injection equipment is required for this process. Since oceans cover 70% of the Earth's surface, this method can provide large amounts of reserves and places to store CO2 to cope with the rapid growth of CO2 emissions in the future. However, some people have raised objections because the potential local acidification of the seawater near the CO2 injection site may lead to ecological disasters on the seafloor.272,273 In addition, the uncertainties associated with direct injection, including the injection depth, residence time, and migration of CO2, also prevent the development of deep ocean CO2 storage applications.251 Therefore, deep ocean storage requires further study and improvement to address the uncertainties, including (i) accurate evaluation of the storage capacity, (ii) suitable storage location determination, and (iii) evaluation and consideration of potential ocean acidification and other unknown risks of CO2 storage.


Mineral carbonation. 
The concept of CO2 mineral carbonation (mineralization) is another CO2 sequestration strategy.274,275 In the mineral carbonation process, CO2 is injected into calcium–magnesium-rich minerals to react with alkaline earth metal oxides or hydroxides to form stable carbonates. This method in theory allows CO2 capture and storage to be completed in one step.276 However, this method is still not perfect. First, risks such as unknown geological characteristics may lead to the leakage of a large amount of the stored CO2. Second, geochemical reactions that tend to reduce the porosity and permeability of the strata can lead to blockage of the injection channels, thereby reducing the injection efficiency and even causing unpredictable strata alterations, such as fracturing. Third, the reaction rate is usually slow, and the rock storage capacity is usually limited for CO2 mineral carbonation. In addition, mineral deposits may contain impurities, which can shorten the operation time and affect the carbonation efficiency. In short, in order to make mineral carbonation a promising method for large-scale CO2 sequestration in the future, the following issues need to be investigated:251 (1) the reaction rate of the mineral carbonation and CO2 dissolution; (2) the CO2 diffusion in the layers; (3) the strata alterations caused by the mineral precipitation; and (4) management of the mineral impurities.
Based on the above discussion, the current CO2 sequestration approaches can be divided into three main categories: continental sequestration (mineral carbonation), oceanic sequestration (deep ocean storage), and reservoir storage. The current CO2 sequestration applications are mainly based on onshore storage. Onshore storage is characterized by good infrastructures, mature operation standards, and proven examples. However, onshore storage is limited by the number of sites and the capacity of the sites in the current technological setting. To explore more possible CO2 sequestration approaches, scientists and engineers are turning to the ocean. Oceanic sequestration is advantageous in terms of large capacity, numerous potential storage sites, and less impact by human activities. In the past, the complexity of the oceanic systems, the immature marine engineering equipment, and the unpredictable problems of oceanic sequestration have made it challenging to safely store CO2 in oceans. If these problems, including the environmental impacts can be solved, ocean storage will be a competitive solution in the future.

5.3. Hydrate-based carbon capture and storage
Recently, a novel technique, hydrate-based carbon capture and storage, has been proposed for CCS, which may allow CO2 capture and sequestration to be achieved in a single step and may overcome the shortcomings of the other current methods. In clathrate hydrates, gas molecules are trapped in water cages to stabilize the hydrate crystal structures. Because different gases have different hydrate formation conditions, controlling the hydrate formation conditions can remove certain gas components from the gas mixture. This mechanism can be used to separate CO2 from flue gas. A schematic diagram of CO2 capture and sequestration via hydrate formation is shown in Fig. 12. This section aims to review the development of hydrate-based CCS techniques and discuss their role in future climate change mitigation.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the hydrate-based CO2 capture and sequestration technique.277 

5.3.1. Hydrate-based CO2 capture technique. 
The CO2 in flue gas can be trapped in hydrate cages to form solid CO2 hydrates.278 There are typically three steps to hydrate formation at a constant temperature.279 The first is gas dissolution. In this step, the mixed gas containing CO2 is dissolved into the solution until it reaches an equilibrium state. Then, the gas hydrate begins to nucleate due to the supersaturation of the gas dissolution. Subsequently, the hydrate crystals begin to form and grow. Given adequate water, most of the CO2 can be captured during the formation of solid CO2 hydrates.
Hydrate-based CO2 separation has the potential to become a future CCS technique due to the following advantages:231 (1) it is a quick industrial process and is insensitive to the impurities in the mixed gas. (2) Solution re-generation can be easily achieved by simply increasing the temperature through heat exchange with the environment or depressurization by controlling the pressure. (3) The process is energy-efficient. Based on evaluations, the energy consumption of hydrate-based CO2 capture can be as low as 0.57 kW h per kg CO2.280
The major drawback of this technique is the strict formation conditions, especially for a gaseous mixture with a low CO2 concentration. Therefore, this method may only be suitable for capturing CO2 from a gas mixture with a high CO2 concentration. Besides, hydrate formation may not completely remove CO2 from a gas mixture. If the residual gas cannot meet the industrial requirements, it is necessary to perform further CO2 separation. Using hydrate-based separation a second time is possible but would likely not be economical since a higher pressure and/or a lower temperature is needed for a gas with low-concentration CO2. In addition, the slow hydrate formation kinetics of this process are also a problem.
The addition of thermodynamic promoters is considered to be an effective way to alleviate the hydrate formation conditions. Thermodynamic promoters usually participate in the hydrate formation, thereby changing the structure of the hydrate formation.15 Several commonly-used promoters include tetrahydrofuran (THF), cyclopentane (CP), propane (C3H8), methyl-cyclopentane (MCP), tetra-n-butyl salts, (TBAB, TBPB, TBAC, and TBAF), and their mixtures. Detailed studies of their effectiveness have been recently summarized in the review conducted by Wang et al.281 Overall, the problem of high hydrate formation conditions has been basically solved.
Slow hydrate formation kinetics is another common challenge in hydrate formation. It is well known that the heat and mass transfer between liquids, gases, and solids are the rate-limiting steps of hydrate formation kinetics. Therefore, the key to improving hydrate kinetics is to enhance heat and mass transfer. Currently, there are several strategies for promoting heat and mass transfer: (1) mechanical methods such as stirring, bubbling, spraying, Venturi jet mixing, and temperature fluctuation; (2) chemical additives, including kinetic promoters, thermodynamic promoters, and nanofluids. It should be noted that some of these chemical additives are dual-action (kinetic and thermodynamic) promoters of hydrate formation. (3) Finally, highly dispersed systems of porous media and a packed bed crystallizer can promote heat and mass transfer. These systems have been reviewed by various researchers.281,282 Although all of these strategies can significantly promote hydrate formation alone, when used together, a higher efficiency can be practically obtained.
In order to reduce the cost of further separating CO2 from the residual gas obtained from hydrate formation, several combinations of the hydrate method and other traditional CO2 separation methods have recently been proposed. One combination attempted is the hybrid hydrate–membrane method. Feyzi et al.283 investigated the CO2 separation efficiency, energy, exergy, and economics of using this method to capture CO2 from fuel gas. The hydrate formation step was conducted in the system with and without promoters. The results revealed that, relative to the standalone hydrate-based CO2 separation process, the hybrid hydrate–membrane method can reduce the energy required for CO2 capture. Li et al.284 also confirmed that this hybrid hydrate–membrane process is a cost-effective alternative method of obtaining a high-purity target gas. The advantages and challenges of the hybrid hydrate–membrane process have recently been systematically reviewed by Warrier et al.285
Another attempted hybrid process is the cryogenic-hydrate CCS technique.247 In this process, cryogenic condensation is conducted first, and then the remaining CO2 is captured via hydrate formation. Surovtseva et al.286 used the cryogenic-hydrate method to remove CO2 from integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) syngas and confirmed that a high feed pressure can facilitate CO2 separation using cryogenic methods. Moreover, due to the combination of the two methods, the energy consumption was greatly reduced. The reason for this is that the liquid CO2 obtained from the cryogenic method has a large amount of cold energy, thereby ensuring that no additional energy is required for the hydrate separation unit.
Moreover, hydrate formation combined with chemical absorption and adsorption methods was also evaluated for use in CO2 capture from fuel gas. Thilagan et al.278 conducted a technological review of the use of the adsorption and hydrate method to capture CO2 from fuel gas. It should be noted that Li et al.287,288 recently developed a hybrid hydrate–chemical absorption method to capture CO2 from IGCC syngas. Their experiments demonstrated that CO2 can be completely removed from the syngas, and the cost was only about 31.19 USD per ton CO2.
Overall, compared to a single process, these hybrid processes had lower costs and energy requirements for CO2 capture. A schematic diagram of the combinations of the hydrate method and other traditional CO2 separation methods is shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Hybrid hydrate-based CO2 capture process. 
A pilot-scale plant is a key step before the full-scale industrial application of the hydrate-based CO2 capture technique. In recent years, some lab-scale plant designs have been proposed.289 Aaron and Tsouris290 presented a SIMTECHE process for CO2 separation using the hydration method, which is considered to be the first true hydrate-based CO2 separation process. Besides, Linga et al.291 proposed the concept of three-stage hydrate formation to remove CO2 from fuel gas. Their results confirmed that 98–99 mol% of CO2 stream can be obtained at the end of the stage. It should be noted that the author's group developed the first pilot-scale plant for CO2 separation based on the hydrate and chemical absorption methods.287 In this plant, a special gas–liquid-hydrate separator was designed to efficiently separate the residual gas and the CO2 hydrate formed. Besides, a Venturi jet unit was designed to enhance the heat and mass transfer of the system, which significantly promoted hydrate formation. The energy consumption evaluation of this pilot-scale plant indicates that the cost of CO2 recovery is around 30 USD per ton, about 30% lower than that of the cryogenic method. A schematic diagram and a picture of the device is presented in Fig. 14 and 15, respectively.
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the pilot-scale device for CO2 separation from IGCC syngas using a combination of the hydrate and chemical absorption methods (1 – first one-way air valve; 2 – flow distributor; 3 – gas flow-meter; 4 – second one-way air valve; 5 – Venturi jet unit; 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, and 22 – temperature sensors; 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, and 23 – pressure transducers; 24 – gas–liquid–solid three phase separator; 25 – first stop valve; 26 – first slurry pump; 27 – second stop valve; 28 – hydrate decomposition tank; 29 – regulating valve; 30 – third stop valve; 31 – second slurry pump; 32 – fourth stop valve; 33 – saturated solution tank; 34 – third one-way valve; 35 – proportion–integration–differentiation (PID); 36 – fourth one-way valve; 37 – chemical adsorption tower; 38 – fifth one-way valve; 39 – gas collecting tank; 40 – fifth stop valve; 41 – first noncorrosive pump; 42 – sixth stop valve; 43 – solution reservoir; 44 – second noncorrosive pump; 45 – heat exchanger; 46 – seventh stop valve; 47 – MEA regeneration tower; 48 – eighth stop valve; 49 – third noncorrosive pump; 50 – ninth stop valve; 51 – tenth stop valve; 52 – liquid flow-meter; 53, 54, and 55 – safety valves; 56 – observation window).287 
 Fig. 15  Picture of the continuous CO2 separation device that uses a combination of the hydrate and chemical absorption methods (1 – gas–liquid–solid three-phase separator; 2 – hydrate decomposition tank; 3 – saturated solution tank; 4 – chemical adsorption tower; 5 – MEA regeneration tower; 6 – Venturi jet unit).287 
In summary, recent studies have demonstrated that the hydrate-based CO2 capture technique has a promising future in CCS, especially for gaseous mixtures with high CO2 concentrations. Besides, the combination of the hydration process and other traditional methods may also be a promising option for future CCS. However, to apply the hydrate technique in industry, the strict hydrate formation conditions and the slow hydrate formation kinetics must be overcome. In addition, more experiments involving lab-scale and pilot-scale plants should be conducted to constrain the problems and energy costs of this technique. Some other research including full-process simulations, optimization, energy efficiency analysis, and economic estimates should also be carried out to support this technique. A comparison of the advantages, limitations, and cost considerations of the hydrate method and the above-mentioned CCS techniques is presented in Table 7.
Table 7 Advantages, limitations, and cost considerations of CO2 capture techniques




No.
Technique/method
Advantages
Limitations
Cost considerations
Ref.




1
Membrane separation process
Better adaptability, environmentally friendly, compact size, and light weight
Difficulty achieving desired CO2 recovery and purity, unknown sustainability and aging resistance, and high-pressure requirement
The production cost of the polymeric membrane is low but the cost of a two-stage membrane with better performance is high

223–225 and 292







2
Adsorbent based systems
Physical/chemical control of adsorption capability, easy regeneration of adsorbent and adsorbate
Weak affinity for CO2, poor performance in conditions involving humidity, impurities, and high temperatures
Industrial wastes and mineral carbonates can be used as adsorbents, lowering the CO2 capture and re-utilization cost

221, 228, 229, 276 and 293







3
Absorption process
Excellent adaptability to flue gases, tolerance to oxygen and solvent persistence, high CO2 separation efficiency
Low purity of captured CO2 and high energy intensity during absorbent regeneration
The cost is the lowest in industrial applications, the by-products can be reused, and a completely closed carbon cycle is required to reduce the use of fresh materials

233, 234 and 294







4
Cryogenic separation process
High purity of captured CO2 (up to 95%), CO2 can be reused, tolerance to humidity and impurities in the CO2 capture process
Extremely high requirements for low temperature and high pressure
High energy intensity, about 660 kW h per tonne of CO2 recovered

235, 236 and 294







5
Hydrate separation process
Simple and efficient process, excellent adaptability in humidity and impurities, CO2 can be easily recovered, high capacity and low energy penalty
Relatively high hydrate formation conditions are required; the hydrate formation rate is slow
The cost of the pressurization and cooling process is relatively high, but it is much lower than that of the cryogenic method

291 and 295–297







5.3.2. Hydrate-based CO2 sequestration technique. 
Storing CO2 under the seafloor in the form of hydrates is a novel but promising option. It uses clathrate hydrates to trap CO2 molecules and store solid CO2 hydrates in a specific storage site under proper conditions.298 Typically, CO2 hydrates are stable above certain pressure and temperature values. The high-pressure and low-temperature environments of the deep oceans and sub-permafrost zone provide suitable conditions for CO2 hydrate storage.
The high expectations of hydrate-based CO2 sequestration come from its advantages in forming hydrate caps and its potential self-sealing effect. To achieve sequestration, liquid CO2 is injected into the seafloor or sub-permafrost sediments below the CO2 hydrate stability zone. Due to the buoyancy force, liquid CO2 spontaneously rises into the hydrate stability zone, forming hydrates in the pores of the porous sediments and becoming an impermeable layer. This CO2 hydrate layer will block the subsequent upward flow of liquid CO2. Besides, the CO2 hydrates can strengthen the integrity and stability of the seafloor geo-structure. Therefore, the formation of CO2 hydrates can make these subsurface sites excellent for CO2 sequestration.299 Moreover, because solid CO2 hydrates are stable within their stability zone, there is no need to worry about CO2 dissolution and ocean acidification. It should be noted that the original existence of CH4 hydrates demonstrates that the geological structure and environment of the site are stable and that the location is suitable for long-term CO2 storage without leakage. In theory, CO2 hydrates are more stable than CH4 hydrates under the same conditions.
Currently, marine hydrate-based CO2 storage is still in the proving the concept stage. Most research is still focused on lab-scale experiments300–302 and theoretical and numerical modeling.303,304 There are still some challenges regarding this concept. (1) Hydrates are stable only within certain pressure and temperature ranges.299 Thus, hydrate-based CO2 storage is limited to specific environments, such as below thick permafrost or in the seafloor in deep water areas. These locations are usually far from the source of CO2 emissions, and thus the transportation of large amounts of CO2 can be challenging. (2) The infrastructure for CO2 sequestration is insufficient. Considering the possibility of sharing engineering equipment with other industrial applications, reducing deployment costs will be arduous. It should be noted that if natural gas hydrate exploitation techniques continue to develop, sharing the related equipment to reduce the costs may be possible. (3) Drilling through hydrate-bearing sediments and injecting liquid CO2 may change the local temperature and pressure of the site, dissociate the existing hydrates, and eventually destabilize the geo-structure.305 Because of the risks, a comprehensive safety assessment is essential before any deployment. (4) The mechanisms of hydrate cap formation require further investigation to avoid the unpredicted fractures in the hydrate cap and leakage of the stored CO2.
It should also be noted that in theory there is almost no technical barrier to injecting liquid CO2 into the deep ocean to form hydrates. The challenges are mainly related to the assessment and monitoring of the stability of CO2 hydrates in the deep sea. A comparison between the sequestration approaches described in Section 5.2 and the hydrate-based CO2 sequestration technique is presented in Table 8. It is believed that the hydrate-based technique is a promising solution for future CO2 sequestration.
Table 8 Advantages, limitations, and cost consideration of CO2 storage techniques




No.
Storage approach
Advantage
Limitation
Ref.




1
Saline aquifers
Large storage capacity, multiple trapping mechanisms, little impact on human activities
A caprock is needed to prevent CO2 leakage, lack of infrastructure

253, 257 and 260



2
Depleted and developing oil and gas reservoirs
Infrastructure and sufficient geological information are available. It can also improve oil and natural gas recovery
High requirements for impurity control in CO2, limited storage sites

264–266



3
Deep ocean storage
Huge storage potential, abundant storage sites, simple equipment
Potential local ocean acidification risk, insufficient risk assessment

272 and 273



4
Mineral carbonation
Simple process, simultaneous CO2 capture and storage
Uncertain leakage risk, possible CO2 injection blockage, unknown impurity reactions

274–276







5
Hydrate based storage
Large storage capacity, an effective way to simultaneously achieve natural gas hydrate exploitation and CO2 storage, spontaneous elimination of the interference of impurities, stable storage, prevention of local ocean acidification and the formation instabilities caused by natural gas hydrate exploitation
Strict environmental requirements for storage sites, immature technical solutions, and risk control methods

162, 302 and 305





In summary, the CO2 hydrates and their formation characteristics can result in many benefits to the CCS technique, which make the hydrate-based technique a promising solution for both CO2 capture and sequestration. A brief timetable of hydrate-based CCS developments is summarized in Table 9.
Table 9 Time table of hydrate-based major CCS technology developments




Time
Author
Event




2000
Kang and Lee306
Developed a new hydrate-based gas separation (HBGS) process, especially for recovering CO2 from flue gas using THF as a hydrate promoter






2002
Klara and Srivastava307
A novel concept of using hydrate to separate CO2 was proposed by the Department of Energy (DOE)


2005
Aaron and Tsouris290
Designed a SIMTECHE process for hydrate separation, including CO2 capture, CO2 hydrate formation, and hydrate slurry separation steps


2007
Luo et al.308
Attempted to apply the bubble method for gas hydrate-based CO2 separation


2007
Linga et al.291
Proposed an approach for capturing CO2 from treated flue gas based on gas hydrate crystallization combined with a membrane process


2007
Zhang et al.309
Investigated the role of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) during methane hydrate formation in a batch reactor


2009
Fan et al.310
Proposed the idea of efficient capture of CO2 from simulated flue gas via the formation of TBAB or TBAF semi-clathrate hydrates


2011
Suroutseua et al.247
Designed and operated a pilot plant for CO2 capture from IGCC flue gases via a combined cryogenic and hydrate method


2011
Li et al.311
Studied hydrate-based pre-combustion carbon dioxide capture in a system with TBAB solution in the presence of CP


2013
Babu et al.312
Developed a novel fixed bed reactor by combining adsorption-based and hydrate-based techniques to separate CO2 for pre-combustion capture


2013
Park et al.313
Examined the feasibility of the hydrate-based pre-combustion capture of carbon dioxide in the presence of a thermodynamic promoter and porous silica gels


2014
Sun et al.295
Developed a simulation apparatus to investigate the storage of CO2 in a partially water-saturated porous medium under gas hydrate formation conditions similar to those in a typically depleted gas reservoir in Northern Alberta


2015
Bhattacharjee et al.314
Discussed CO2 sequestration via hydrate formation in porous sediments in a fixed bed setup and stressed the importance of mass transfer limitations of field scale adaptations of CO2 sequestration in geological formations


2018
Liu et al.315
Explored the sequestration behavior of CO2 as a hydrate in depleted methane hydrate (MH)-bearing sediments


2019
Xu et al.287
Developed a novel continuous separation device and carbon dioxide separation via a combination of hydrate formation and chemical absorption


2020
Gauteplass316
Visualized CO2 trapping phenomena, measured CO2 leakage rates, and demonstrated that the integrity of the hydrate seal strongly depends on the fluid–rock interactions and the initial water distribution


2020
YU et al.317
Almost completely removed CO2 from IGCC synthesis gas using one hydrate formation stage; further proved a two-step mechanism of CO2 hydrate formation in the presence of a promoter. This mechanism was proposed in 2018 for the first time.318





5.4. Status of carbon capture and storage deployment
Carbon capture and sequestration are regarded as a key and promising part of international efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and prevent global warming. In order to achieve the goal of global warming mitigation, over 3000 CCS projects need to be implemented by 2050.319 This section will comprehensively review the existing major large-scale CO2 projects around the world and discuss the policies created to control CO2 emissions.
CCS techniques were proposed as early as the mid-19th century. Currently, many CCS projects have been implemented all over the world. Both developed and developing countries including the USA, China, Canada, the UK, Germany, Japan, Brazil, Spain, Norway, Sweden, Algeria, India, Australia, Saudi Arabia, UAE, South Korea, etc. have set clear CCS targets to reduce CO2 emissions.55
Power plants and industrial factories contribute a large portion of CO2 emissions. Each of these sites is individually a large CO2 emitter, making them perfect targets for the deployment of CCS technology. Fig. 16 shows the current CCS projects around the world in 2019.55 Reports indicate that the number of facilities increased from 51 in 2019 to 65 in 2020,320 but this is still a long way from the original CCS deployment goal of 100 in 2020.320 Among these facilities, 21 are in operation, 3 are under construction, 17 are in advanced development, and 24 are in the early stages. At present, these facilities have been able to capture and store nearly 40 million tons of CO2 per year. According to the report, 9 CCS technology test centers and 39 pilot-scale CCS facilities are helping to speed up the deployment of CCS technology around the world.55 Some of the representative CCS projects worldwide are listed in Table 10, as well as their locations, CO2 storage types, storage capacities, and time periods. Overall, the CCS facilities are mainly distributed in four regions, North America, Europe, the Middle East, and the Asia/Pacific area. It should be noted that, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the data for 2020 are less informative. Therefore, most of the following data are for 2019:
 Fig. 16  CCS projects and facilities worldwide (modified from Global CCS Institute's Report55). 
Table 10 Representative world CO2 capture and sequestration projects operating or under development




Project name
Location
Storage type
Storage capacity
Important information




Alberta Carbon Trunk Line
Alberta, Canada
Enhanced oil recovery
1.7–14.6 Mtpa
One of the largest CCS projects worldwide in operation. The CO2-EOR system is expected to enhance oil recovery fields. Supported by two privately funded companies


North Dakota CarbonSAFE
North Dakota, USA
Various options
3–17 Mtpa
Supported by the US government. Three facilities have been incorporated into the CO2 capture scenarios to provide the commercial-scale of CO2 for storage


CarbonSAFE Illinois-Macon County
Illinois, USA
Various options
2–15 Mtpa
Sponsored by the US Department of Energy; uses multiple injection sites and storage complexes for commercial CO2 storage


Integrated Mid-continent Stacked Carbon Storage Hub
Nebraska, USA
Various options
1.9–19.4 Mtpa
Conducted as part of the US DOE CarbonSAFE program; establish a commercial-scale CO2 storage hub consisting of storage sites and multiple sources; uses proven techniques for CCS and transportation from nearby ethanol sources


Wabash CarbonSAFE
Indiana & Illinois, USA
Various options
1.5–18 Mtpa
Led by UIUC; sponsored by the US government; and targeted to begin operation in 2021 for commercial-scale CO2 storage beneath an ammonia production plant


Northern Lights
Offshore, North Sea, Norway
Deep saline formations
0.8–5 Mtpa
Sponsored by three petroleum companies – Equinor, Shell, and Total, and expected to begin operation in 2024 as the first open-access CCS project in Europe or even the world


Net Zero Teesside
Offshore, North Sea, UK
Deep saline formations
0.8–6 Mtpa
A full-chain carbon capture, utilization and storage (‘CCUS’) project, including CO2 pipeline connections from industrial facilities, sponsored by the BP company


Net Zero Carbon Humber
Humber region, UK
Enhanced oil recovery
2–18.3 Mtpa
Plans to capture carbon dioxide at the commercial scale from the industrial plant via pipeline transportation, and to scale up to create the world's first carbon-negative power station in the 2020s


Porthos
Offshore, North Sea, The Netherlands
Depleted oil and gas reservoirs
2–5 Mtpa
Helps the Netherlands reach its carbon reduction targets with multiple suppliers and a shared backbone, which the European Commission has proposed a €102m award for


Abu Dhabi Cluster
Abu Dhabi, UAE
Enhanced oil recovery
2.7–5 Mtpa
The world's first commercial carbon capture facility in a steel production plant in 2016


Junggar Basin CCS Hub
Xinjiang, China
Enhanced oil recovery
0.2–3 Mtpa
Connected with coal-fired/natural gas power plants and chemical and petrochemical production industry transporting CO2via pipelines and roads


CarbonNet
Offshore, Bass Strait, Australia
Deep saline formations
2–5 Mtpa
Jointly funded by the Australian and Victorian governments, storing CO2 from multiple sources, including power plants, hydrogen production, and chemical production




(i) Thirteen operational large-scale CCS facilities are located in the Americas. Among them, 8 facilities started providing service in 2019. The US government is the main driving force of the CCS projects in the USA. The stimulus based on special policies has promoted the rapid establishment of these new facilities. Following this success, the US government has begun to discuss further CCS policy proposals, including CO2 transportation infrastructure, financing, and climate change adaptation via CCS techniques, but the actual investment has not been realized.321
(ii) Europe has been at the forefront of CCS technology development.322 A wide range of discussions of the role of CCS in climate change and energy policies were held in Europe during 2019. The European Commission's Long-Term Strategy has reached an agreement on the inclusion framework of CCS techniques for a climate-neutral Europe.323 Up to now, Norway owns two operational large-scale CCS facilities in Europe. The other large-scale CCS facilities are still in different stages of development, including those in Ireland, the Netherlands, and the UK. Most of the CCS projects in Europe focus on the decarbonization of industrial systems, but some of the planned projects will attempt to convert captured CO2 into fuels, such as CH4.324 In the EU, low-carbon technologies including CCS will be funded by the EU's Innovation Fund, which is one of the largest funded programs in the world. This fund provides opportunities for CCS technology development. Furthermore, the UK has upgraded the design of the CCS prototype to the commercial level. Six major facilities are under deployment, several of which involve industrial clusters. In November 2019, the European Commission presented its 4th Projects of Common Interest list, which included CCS projects such as CO2 transportation pipeline and CO2 storage network development. Since the start of the CCUS Action Plan 2018, several milestones have been achieved in the EU. Due to their solid foundation and policy support, Europe is expected to play a significant role in the development and deployment of CCS technology.
(iii) Two operational large-scale CCS facilities are located in the Middle East. One is located in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), which focuses on CO2 from iron and steel production.325 Another one is located in Saudi Arabia, which focuses on natural gas processing.55 According to reports from the UAE, there is a new large-scale CCS facility under development, which will be used to capture CO2 from natural gas processing.326
(iv) Australia has started the 19th large-scale CCS project in the world. When it is fully operational, this facility will become the largest geological CO2 storage facility with a capacity of over 3.4 Mt of CO2. Japan continues its steps to a full hydrogen society via CCS techniques. Five pilot projects are in operation, implementation, or under construction in Japan.55 In China, the government published an updated CCUS Roadmap, in which 12 CCS projects are operational and 13 are in preparation.327 In fact, major national energy companies in China have started many CCS programs due to the government's carbon emission-related policies. China can now store more than 1.7 Mt of CO2 per year through various means, and the amount is still growing rapidly.327 The efforts of these countries show that Asia/Pacific may become the new and strong growth center of CCS technology deployment.328
Although the IPCC, the IEA, and other national/international associations have all emphasized the important role of CCS, the policies worldwide are still insufficient to motivate CCS deployment. Looking ahead, it is necessary to construct the right policy framework to support CCS deployment and achieve the global climate change mitigation targets.329 From our point of view, multiple specific aspects are needed to achieve this goal. It is necessary to add economic benefits to emission control. Without incentives, it is difficult to stimulate enterprises and institutions to participate in reducing CO2 emissions. European countries such as Norway and Sweden have introduced policies such as carbon taxes and emission trading, thereby facilitating the development of CCS techniques.330 Second, more investment needs to be raised in the infrastructure area, including gas transportation, geological surveys of potential storage sites, and pilot equipment. Like other large infrastructure projects, the development and construction of CCS projects may require collaborations between governments and the private sector. In this regard, China has some advantages. Its large national energy companies follow the national policy and can quickly and efficiently concentrate resources on CCS projects. The third aspect is risk mitigation. Government should eliminate the infrastructure risks that enterprises cannot bear. For example, sharing existing infrastructure (such as transportation pipelines and storage networks) can reduce initial investment and cross-chain transportation risks. The United States has some practical experience that can be of benefit in similar attempts in the future. In addition, governments should also increase their R&D budgets to support the development of new techniques.
5.5. Summary
In this chapter, we reviewed the current CCS techniques, including CO2 capture and storage, and discussed relatively new hydrate-based techniques, i.e., hydrate-based CO2 separation technique and hydrate-based CO2 sequestration technique. We also reviewed the global CCS efforts by summarizing the major projects deployed before 2020 and provided relevant policy suggestions. Based on the analysis provided in this chapter, it can be concluded that:
(i) Achieving the global warming mitigation target is more urgent than ever. A good option for climate change mitigation is to capture and permanently sequester CO2 to avoid its excessive emission into the atmosphere. Various techniques for CO2 capture and sequestration have been developed, and each technique has different advantages and disadvantages. A lot of work is still required to optimize each technique and their combinations before they can be put to practical application. Besides although the number of CCS facilities deployed has significantly increased recently, we still have a long way from the original goal.
(ii) The current CO2 sequestration efforts are mainly focused on onshore storage. Onshore storage has good infrastructures, mature operation standards, and proven examples. However, onshore storage is limited by the number of sites and their storage capacities in the current technological setting. Oceanic sequestration is another option. It has a large capacity and more potential storage sites, and is less influenced by human activities. The complexity of the oceanic systems, the immature nature of marine engineering equipment, and the unpredictable problems of oceanic sequestration make it challenging to safely store CO2 in oceanic areas.
(iii) Hydrate-based CO2 capture techniques have a promising future in CCS, especially for gaseous mixtures with high CO2 concentrations. However, in order to apply hydrate technology in the industry, the problems posed by the strict hydrate formation conditions, the slow hydrate formation kinetics, and the high costs of the multi-stage hydrate formation caused by low CO2 concentrations must be overcome. Using thermodynamic promoters, enhancing the heat and mass transfer in the system and combining hydrate-based techniques with other traditional techniques (i.e., absorption, membrane and cryogenic techniques) can help to alleviate these problems. Currently, hydrate-based CO2 capture techniques are in a transition stage from the laboratory scale to the pilot scale.
(iv) The high-pressure and low-temperature environments of the deep ocean and sub-permafrost zone provide suitable conditions for CO2 storage in the form of solid hydrates. CO2 storage in the deep ocean in the form of CO2 hydrates can in theory prevent local ocean acidification because CO2 hydrates are stable under certain pressure and temperature conditions. The original existence of CH4 hydrates demonstrates that the geological structure and environment of the site are stable and the location is suitable for long-term CO2 storage without leakage. It should be noted that hydrate caps and the potential self-sealing effect are very important for hydrate-based CO2 storage in the deep ocean. Currently, hydrate-based CO2 storage is still in the proving the concept stage.
6. Natural gas capture, storage, and transportation
6.1. Methods of natural gas storage and transportation
Given the rapid energy transition towards natural gas, the need for novel natural gas capture, storage, and transportation methods is emerging. Natural gas storage is an important component of natural gas transportation. Transportation may require storage before and after loading. Transportation itself is also short-term storage. In practice, production, transportation, and consumption almost never occur at the same pace. Sufficient and convenient storage methods can provide flexibility and stability to the market. Despite the current increasing use of natural gas, the current storage methods are still limited. There is a need for innovative natural gas storage methods. Depending on the purpose, the storage can be short- or long-term. The storage needs to consider factors such as the site costs, deliverable rate, cycle capacity, etc.331 The best NG storage approach may vary at different locations. Current mainstream storage and transport solutions include pipeline natural gas (PNG), CNG, and LNG. Pipelines are usually used for the storage and transportation of NG on land. In contrast, LNG and CNG are commonly used to transfer natural gas across oceans by tank ships.
In terms of consumption, PNG, LNG, and CNG can serve the purpose of not only transportation but also short-to-medium-term NG storage. However, a pipeline can only store a relatively small amount of gas due to the low gas density of PNG. LNG and CNG have high gas densities but require low temperatures (approximately -16 °C for LNG) or high pressures (approximately 25 MPa for CNG), which are costly in terms of energy and expense for medium- and long-term storage. Besides, all three methods designed for natural gas production, storage, and transportation require large-scale infrastructure and lack flexibility. Natural gas is also widely stored underground in depleted reservoirs, salt caverns, mines, aquifers, and hard-rock caverns.331 These underground sites can provide various storage capacities and periods. The major limitations are perhaps their availability and flexibility.
In terms of production, novel gas storage methods are also needed to reduce waste, protect the environment, and increase profits. Natural gas sources are diverse. In the small and medium production sites where pipeline networks are not available, natural gas often cannot be effectively used or transported. It has to be vented or burned (also called flared) to reduce its greenhouse effect and other environmental concerns. However, flaring alone does not eliminate the greenhouse effect since it still produces CO2. Natural gas is also flared during drilling and completion when the amount of gas is not large enough to make the use of conventional storage and transportation methods profitable. Gas flaring has caused a huge waste of natural gas sources globally. Based on the data collected led by the World Bank for 85 counties, the global amount of flared natural gas was 140 × 109 m3 in 2017 (Fig. 17),332 of which the United States accounted for one-tenth. This amount is larger than the natural gas consumption in most countries (Fig. 17).333 Apart from wasting energy and reducing profits, vented and flared gases can also create greenhouse gases, air pollutants,334 and health issues,335,336 such as cancers, asthma, hypertension, and many other diseases. A better strategy is to capture and store the CH4 before flaring. However, the use of our current technology is generally not profitable for such small-scale CH4 capture and subsequent storage. Therefore, to reduce flare gases, monetize small to medium gas production, more effectively protect the environment, and better address public health concerns, innovative natural gas capture and storage methods are needed.
 Fig. 17  (a) Global amount of flared gas from 1996 to 2018. (b) Amount of flared gas in the US. (c) Natural gas consumption in 2017. 
The transportation of natural gas is also an important component of the natural gas chain. Table 11 qualitatively compares the common natural gas transportation methods. Expense is an important parameter for the comparison of the common natural gas storage and transportation methods. Storage and transportation costs are associated with the gas capacity. As shown in Table 11, a medium with a low gas capacity usually requires mild conditions and thus has low storage costs, but a low gas capacity also leads to a high volume which usually results in high logistical costs. LNG has the highest gas capacity, and thus it has competitive transportation costs, especially on a large scale. LNG is not suitable for small scale applications mainly because of the extra storage costs due to cooling and the problem of boil-off gas. CNG has a medium gas capacity. Because of its high pressure, thick and heavy containers are required for CNG transportation, which reduces the cost efficiency of long-distance transportation. Therefore, CNG is used by either end-users or within short-distance transportation. Besides, the capital cost is related to the infrastructure. PNG heavily depends on the pipeline, which may be thousands of miles long and require a large capital investment to construct. LNG has to depend on cooling equipment and operations, which require a huge investment and energy consumption. GTL (gas to liquids) refers to converting natural gas into a liquid. It is a good way to utilize excess natural gas. The conversion increases the energy density, which is equivalent to an increase in the gas capacity. After conversion, the hydrocarbon liquid can be stored and transported under mild conditions. This liquid also provides high-purity downstream liquid products. However, the product loses some of the advantages of natural gas. In addition, the conversion requires complex equipment and considerable energy consumption, resulting in huge capital costs.
Table 11 Comparison of NG storage and transportation methods




Method
Typical storage/transportation conditions
Gas capacity under typical conditions (mol gas/m3)
Pros
Cons




PNG
1 atm, 293 K
41.65
Low energy density, low OPEX on land
High CAPEX, large land occupancy, environmental impact


LNG
1 atm, 110 K
27485
High energy density, Medium OPEX across ocean on a large scale
High CAPEX


GTL
1 atm, 273 K
N/A
High energy density, provides alternative liquid hydrocarbons
Energy loss during conversion, different use from natural gas, no commercial applications for small-scale production


CNG
200 atm, 293 K
9914
Medium energy density, low CAPEX, convenient for end-users
Heavy container, high OPEX on a large scale


SNG
1 atm, 220–273.15 K
7472
Medium energy density, low CAPEX and OPEX
No commercial applications




The transportation of natural gas as solid hydrates is a new promising method. Such a method is referred to as the solidified natural gas (SNG) technique in the following text for convenience. The SNG process was firstly proposed by Gudmundsson and Parlaktuna in 1992337 and gradually developed afterward. Several reviews have focused on the research and development progress of the SNG technique.23,338
Comparing to other approaches, the various costs of the SNG technique are in the middle range, which results in advantages for medium- to long-term storage, short to medium transportation distances, and long-term storage in small- to medium-scale natural gas production. Because this technique has not been commercialized, the pros and cons can only be estimated based on the current research progress. SNG has a medium gas capacity (smaller than that of LNG but larger than that of CNG), but it does not necessarily require a high-pressure container, which helps balance shipping costs. Normally, the SNG technique requires much less energy than LNG for cooling, but long-distance transportation may still not be cost-competitive due to the gas capacity difference. Besides, the SNG technique has lower shipping costs than CNG, and it has lower capital investments than PNG and LNG.339,340 Moreover, the SNG production process is relatively simple, mild, and environmentally benign. In addition, SNG can be stored under milder conditions than LNG, making it advantageous for long-term storage. The safety of SNG storage is not a major concern. Even at high temperatures, SNG can present high stability during transportation due to its “self-preservation” characteristic.
6.2. Storage and transportation of natural gas as solid hydrates

6.2.1. Solidification step of the solidified natural gas (SNG) technique. 
Typical SNG-based natural gas transportation can be roughly divided into three steps: solidification, transportation, and regasification. After solidification, the SNG is transported and stored until regasification, at which time the container may or may not be changed. These steps can be realized individually and coupled with other processes to meet the needs of different industrial applications.

Fig. 18 shows a conceptual schematic of SNG-based natural gas transportation after offshore NGH extraction. In this scenario, natural gas is extracted from an offshore hydrate reserve and processed on a platform. Then, the processed gas and liquid water are converted into SNG under typical high-pressure and low-temperature conditions (i.e., the solidification step). The SNG process is very simple because the gas does not need to be dehydrated. In a certain gas field, CO2 and H2S may still need to be removed as they are also hydrate formers, but it is not important unless the concentrations of CO2 and H2S are extremely high. Then, the SNG is compressed into dense pellets and stored in containers. Subsequently, the SNG can be periodically transported to onshore terminals using cargo ships. After reaching the terminal, the NGHs can be stored as long as needed followed by regasification and distribution.
 Fig. 18  Hydrate-based NG transportation. 
The core step of SNG-based transportation is solidification. Controlling either the thermodynamic or the kinetic nature of the solidification has been a challenge. From the thermodynamic perspective, hydrates can only form when the pressure–temperature conditions reach the hydrate formation region, usually high pressure and low temperature conditions (above 2.87 MPa at 274.15 K). These relatively extreme conditions increase not only the expenses related to cooling, compression, and pressure-rated vessels, etc. but also the safety risks. Alleviating the need to meet these equilibrium conditions is beneficial in terms of expense and risk control, and thus is considered to be the primary problem that needs to be solved to industrialize hydrate techniques.
Hydrate formation involves at least two kinetic challenges. The first is nucleation. Hydrate nucleation has been shown to be a stochastic process, which means the hydrate formation can be difficult to initiate even when the thermodynamic requirements are met.341 The system can remain in the metastable region for a considerable duration.342 The second challenge is the apparent formation rate, which is a combination of the intrinsic hydrate formation rate and the heat and mass transfer rate. Because the formation of most hydrates occurs through interfacial reactions,343 the heat and mass transfer limitation is a common issue. Hydrates usually form as a dense layer and occupy the entire interface. The hydrate layer then isolates the gases and water and only allows diffusion through the layer. Therefore, the heat and mass transfer limitation becomes the rate-limiting step. The heat and mass transfer not only limits the hydrate formation kinetics but also usually limits the pseudo-steady state amount of hydrates. In the pseudo-steady state, all of the water or all of the gases, depending on the conditions, become entrained and isolated in the hydrate matrix. The rate becomes virtually negligible as the limitation increases.344
Many efforts have been made to address these thermodynamic and kinetic challenges. The strategies can be categorized into three areas: thermodynamics, kinetics, and heat and mass transfer enhancement. Different strategies can be used at the same time to achieve synergistic enhancement.
Thermodynamic strategies use additives to adjust the thermodynamics of hydrate formation. In current studies, this is the only way to lower hydrate formation conditions. At the molecular level, these additives usually occupy the hydrate cages along with the gas components to increase the structural stability of the hydrates. Therefore, the additives may change the hydrates’ compositions and structures, which subsequently changes the hydrate gas storage capacity. Hydrocarbon molecules normally form sI and sII hydrates, but they can also form sH and semi-clathrate-hydrate structures, depending on the promoter. Because of the cage sizes and the cage stacking, different hydrate structures have different CH4 storage capacities (Table 12). Normally the actual storage with proper promotion strategies can exceed more than 90% of the theoretical capacity.
Table 12 Summary of common thermodynamic hydrate promoters (sII, sH, semi-clathrate)




Hydrate structure
Theoretical gas storage capacity at STP/hydrate volume
Promoter
Promoter structure




sI
171.8
None




sII
115
THF345





Cyclopentane346





1,3-dioxolane347





Propane348





sH
125
Cyclopentyl bromide349





Semi-clathrate hydrate
35–40
TBAB350








Table 12 also summarizes some of the common thermodynamic promoters described in the literature. They share similar advantages in terms of reducing the hydrate formation conditions and have similar drawbacks in terms of reducing the gas storage capacities because they occupy a certain portion of the cages. Common promoters include THF, propane, cyclopentane, 1,3-dioxolane, tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB), tetrabutylammonium chloride (TBAC), etc.
THF is one of the most well-studied thermodynamic promoters. It has a high solubility in water and can form hydrates with CH4 under mild conditions. For example, the phase equilibrium of THF–CH4 hydrates formed from a 5.56 mol% aqueous solution is 278 K at 0.33 MPa,345 whereas that of pure CH4 hydrates is 217 K at 0.33 MPa.351 The hydrate structure of THF–CH4 is sII. Because the large cages are almost completely occupied by THF, the theoretical hydrate gas storage capacity of THF–CH4 mixed hydrates (115 V/V) is significantly lower than that of pure CH4 hydrates (171.8 V/V). Recent research has demonstrated that these drawbacks can be minimized by optimizing the hydrate formation conditions, e.g., the THF concentration, pressure, and temperature. For example, Kim et al. reported that CH4 can not only occupy small cages but also be trapped in large cages in sII hydrates at low THF concentrations. The optimal THF concentration is 0.2 mol%. At this concentration, CH4 can occupy the large cages of sII hydrates to the greatest extent.352
The promotion of THF is largely contributed by its high solubility in water. However, THF is volatile. In hydrate-based gas storage, this property may affect the THF recycling, as well as the quality of the recovered gas. As an alternative, 1,3-dioxolane has been proposed. This chemical is often used as a solvent substitute for THF since its solubility and toxicity are similar to those of THF, but it is less volatile. In terms of CH4 hydrate formation, Bhattacharjee et al. reported that, for a 5.0 mol% 1,3-dioxane aqueous solution at 283 K, methane-1,3-dioxane hydrates can form at 1.0 MPa, whereas pure methane hydrates form at 7.2 MPa.347
Cyclopentane (cC5) is another widely studied thermodynamic promoter. Lee et al.353 reported that the CH4 hydrate formation conditions in the presence of cC5 are only 0.62 MPa at 287.5 K. In particular, these hydrates are stable at ambient pressure when the temperature is approximately 280 K. However, previous studies of cC5 have mainly focused on hydrate-based CO2 capture. This may be because CH4 has a low solubility in water and a high solubility in cC5, thereby significantly affecting the cC5 recycling, as well as the quality of the gas recovered at the SNG transport terminal.
Semi-clathrate hydrate promoters belong to another group consisting of many quaternary ammonium compounds. The structure and properties of semi-clathrate hydrates are slightly different from those of conventional clathrate hydrates. Specifically, these promoters not only occupy hydrate cages but also participate in the formation of the cage's frame. Due to their high structural stability, they are usually stable even at room temperature and pressure. However, the natural gas storage capacity is relatively low (only 35–40 V/V) compared to those of other structures (sI or sII). Therefore, semi-hydrate promoters are probably more useful in gas separation than in natural gas storage. TBAB is one of the most studied semi-clathrate hydrate promoters. Arjmandi et al. investigated the phase equilibrium of TBAB hydrate formation in the presence of H2, CH4, N2, CO2, or natural gas.350 Their results showed that CH4-TBAB hydrates formed in 5.0 wt% TBAB solution are stable at 287 K and 4.7 MPa. However, a pressure of 11.0 MPa is required to stabilize pure CH4 hydrates at the same temperature.
To address the kinetic challenges, kinetic promoters were developed. Table 13 lists several common kinetic promoters. Most kinetic promoters can promote hydrate nucleation and increase the apparent hydrate formation rate. The nucleation of a solid phase, such as hydrates, is classically recognized to start from a nucleation site.354 By providing more homogeneous or heterogeneous nucleation sites, many kinetic promoters promote hydrate nucleation and thus contribute to the hydrate kinetics.355 Moreover, some kinetic promoters further reduce the heat and mass transfer limitation and/or increase the intrinsic hydrate formation rate to promote the hydrate kinetics. In most studies, only the combined apparent rate was studied since the actual mechanism is secondary.
Table 13 Representative kinetic hydrate promoters




Name
Structure
Name
Structure




THF (thermodynamic/kinetic promoter)356



Methionine (amino acids, green promoter)357,358





SDS (anionic surfactant)359



Hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide360 (cationic surfactant, quaternary ammonium salts)





(Zwitterionic surfactant)361









R = butyl or pentyl


X = spacer


R′ = long tail


Y− = anionic group, COO−, CH2SO3−




It should be noted that many thermodynamic promoters can also act as kinetic promoters. One reason for this is that thermodynamic promoters allow system conditions further away from equilibrium under given conditions to obtain a high driving force, which promotes nucleation and accelerates the intrinsic hydrate formation rate. Another reason is their ability to reduce the mass transfer barriers, such as THF. Veluswamy et al. studied CH4 hydrate formation with THF in a transparent vessel under unstirred conditions.356 Their results showed that, in the CH4–water system, hydrates only form at the gas–liquid interface, but in the CH4/THF/water system hydrates can rapidly grow in the bulk solution. In the pseudo-steady state of the CH4/THF/water system, hydrate formation converted almost 70% of the water in less than one hour. Finally, the hydrates occupied the entire bottom portion of the vessel and had an apparent porous structure. Undoubtedly, the kinetic differences in the systems with and without THF should be correlated with the crystal growth pattern and the porous structure, but the exact mechanism is not well understood. It is possible that the high solubility of THF and the increased solubility of CH4 due to the presence of THF contribute to this difference.
1,3-Dioxolane also has the dual function of improving the thermodynamics and kinetics of hydrate formation.347 Its promotion ability is as effective as that of THF. Under unstirred conditions, Raman monitoring revealed that hydrate formation in the presence of 1,3-dioxolane may occur in two steps. In the first step, 1,3-dioxolane formed hydrates but enclathrates only a small amount of methane. In the second step, a large amount of CH4 is trapped in the hydrate cages. However, these two steps are not differentiable in a stirred system.
Surfactants are a group of chemicals that generally have kinetic promotion effects. Numerous surfactants have been tested and proven to be effective.362 Surfactants are usually defined as amphiphilic molecules. Their molecular structures are diverse. They can be straight long chain, zwitterionic, branched, etc. Researchers are trying to develop better surfactants based on the structure–function relationship, but the promotion mechanism is still unclear. In water–gas binary systems, the kinetic promotion caused by a surfactant can be attributed to its general effect on crystal growth.363 Many studies have monitored hydrate formation at the interface of hydrocarbons and water. Without any surfactant, hydrates always form a film at the interface and grow only slightly after the mass transfer limitation takes effect. In contrast, with surfactants, hydrates usually do not form such a film. Besides, the promotion effect is also affected by the surfactant chemistry and the surfactant concentration, but it is still not well understood. In addition, several studies have suggested that surfactant micelles are important.364,365 However, several detailed analyses of the micelle formation have suggested otherwise.366,367 Moreover, there has been no conclusion as to whether or how interfacial tension or other interfacial properties can affect the promotion caused by surfactants.
Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) is plausibly the most studied kinetic promoter. Hayama et al. reported hydrate formation from SDS aqueous droplets and CH4.368 At 100 ppm SDS and 2.3 K subcooling, hydrates formed crystals on the interface but spontaneously detached from the interface after reaching a certain size. Eventually, the droplets disappeared and hydrate crystals covered the bottom support plate. At 6.3 K subcooling, the hydrates formed mesh-like dendrites. Besides, the observations suggested a much higher water conversion with SDS than without. Watanabe et al. quantitatively measured the hydrate kinetics in an unstirred CH2F2/SDS/water system.366 They found that the hydrates grew from the interface and extended to the hydrocarbon and water phases, and the kinetics increased with increasing SDS concentration before reaching the critical micelle concentration (CMC). In addition, the final water conversion increased with increasing SDS concentration even after the CMC was reached. These results suggest a complex mechanism behind SDS promotion.
One drawback of surfactant application is the formation of foam, which is a gas in a liquid emulsion. The effect of foam on hydrate formation and dissociation has not been studied in detail, and it may vary with the promoter. The foam may promote the hydrate formation kinetics, as it increases the interfacial surface area and generates more nucleation sites.369 Moreover, the foam can also reduce the gas release rate during dissociation, which is the key step in the re-gasification step of the SNG technique.370 This problem can be eased by adding foam inhibitors. Pandey et al. reported the success of using a silicone-based anti-foaming agent in an SDS-containing system.370 They found that the agent limited the foam formation but did not affect the kinetic promotion of the SDS. This was attributed to the high hydrophobicity and the low surface tension of the agent. These results also suggest that foam formation is not a major mechanism of SDS promotion.
It should be noted that many previous studies of hydrate kinetics were performed under static conditions, which is convenient for measurement and observation. Under flowing or dynamic conditions, more promotion strategies are available to control and enhance the kinetics, including improving the design of the reactor and using anti-agglomerates. These strategies can be easily applied.
Different conventional reactors have been tested for SNG formation, including batch reactors, continuously stirred flow reactors, and plug flow reactors. Among them, batch reactors are the most common since they have the simplest structure and likely the lowest cost. An unstirred batch reactor can apparently lower the energy costs, but a promoter would be necessary.356,371 Stirring can induce hydrocarbon–water contact, break hydrate shells, disperse hydrate solids, and accelerate the hydrate formation kinetics. Many parameters can be optimized for a batch reactor. Pivezhani et al. reported a batch reactor optimization for CO2 hydrate production.372 They optimized the impeller geometry, stirring speed, water volume, pressure, and temperature to balance the hydrate formation kinetics and energy consumption. Their results indicate that proper mixing of the phases is important to the hydrate formation kinetics. Besides, their calculation revealed that the energy cost was mostly related to the equilibration time, so using more energy for mixing in the initial stage of hydrate formation can be beneficial.
Continuous stirred flow reactors and semi-batch reactors are similar to a batch reactor, except that they have continuous or intermittent feed-in and product out. Hydrate kinetic promotion can be achieved by feeding water into the gas or the opposite. The water feed can be controlled as small droplets to increase the interfacial surface area and promote hydrate formation.373–375 The gas can be pumped into the water as small bubbles to achieve similar results.376 Finally, hydrates can be formed in a flow reactor to achieve continuous production. This may be the best method for large-scale production. However, possibly due to the cost, tests using a flow reactor for hydrate storage purposes are rare. Most studies have been conducted for other purposes, such as hydrate management in multi-phase hydrocarbon production lines.377,378
Under typical stirring or flow conditions, hydrate solids are under shear stress and tend to disperse in fluids. Chemicals that can also promote hydrate dispersion are usually called anti-agglomerates (AAs).379 AAs can promote hydrate formation kinetics by dispersing hydrate solids, reducing the entrained water in the hydrate solids, and increasing the water–gas contact.344 AAs are often, but not always, surfactants.380 Although AAs do not necessarily require a liquid hydrocarbon phase to disperse hydrates,381 they usually have a better performance when a liquid hydrocarbon phase is available and a hydrate slurry in a hydrocarbon can be formed. AAs are commercially available on the market. However, the potential need for a liquid hydrocarbon phase has limited their application in the SNG technique, as it may increase the complexity of the process and the operating expense.
Similar to AAs, certain nanomaterials can also promote the dispersion of hydrate solids and enhance hydrate formation kinetics.382 Nanoparticles can stay at the phase interface and promote the emulsion through shear, i.e., a Pickering emulsion.383 The existence of nanoparticles at the interface produces a physical resistance to coalescence. The properties of the emulsion, including the size distribution, stability, and continuous phase, can be altered by tuning the properties of the nanoparticles. Wang et al.384 and Zhang et al.385 used nanoparticles to form a water in air emulsion and a water in oil emulsion, respectively. In both cases, the water was dispersed as fine droplets and rapidly converted to hydrates. This technique is both theoretically and experimentally promising, but a large-pilot scale test has not been reported. More studies are necessary to demonstrate its feasibility in industrial applications.
Overall, solidification is the first step in SNG storage and transportation. Many efforts have been focused on intensifying the process through thermodynamic alleviation, kinetic promotion, and mechanical stimulation. Thermodynamic alleviation and kinetic promotion are usually achieved via chemical additives. Multiple additives can be used simultaneously to obtain synergistic effects. Despite the good lab test results, there are no available reports concerning additive separation, large-scale applications, long-term performance, economic analysis, etc. Furthermore, one challenge with thermodynamic promoters is that they occupy part of the hydrate cage, which will reduce the CH4 storage capacity. Finally, mechanical stimulation can be optimized to reduce the heat and mass transfer limitation during hydrate formation, which is complementary to the use of chemical promoters.


6.2.2. Transportation and regasification steps of the SNG technique. 
SNG is ready for transportation after the solidification step. Hydrate solids are usually compressed to remove any remaining gas and water, control the size, and form dense and compact pellets. This form is advantageous not only in terms of transportation efficiency but also in terms of “self-preservation”.
SNG is stored in tanks at high pressures and low temperatures during transportation. The cost balance between the pressure and the temperature is important. The pressure requirement determines the tank wall's thickness and the tank's weight, which affects the cost-efficiency. To reduce expenses, it is preferable to store hydrate solids at atmospheric pressure. At ambient pressure, in many cases, SNG is only thermodynamically stable at low temperatures. The actual equilibrium temperature depends on the NG's composition. Normally, the equilibrium temperature of natural gas hydrates is slightly higher than that of CH4 hydrates due to the presence of heavier hydrocarbons. The temperature is much higher than that of LNG, which is technically feasible but is still considerably expensive to maintain. For example, the phase equilibrium temperature of pure CH4 hydrates at 0.1 MPa is 194 K. Such a low storage temperature still results in both high CAPEX and high OPEX.
Fortunately, SNG can be stored at a much higher temperature due to its unique “self-preservation”. Here, “self-preservation” refers to the phenomenon that the hydrate dissociation rate reduces outside the hydrate formation region when the temperature is below the melting point of ice.386,387 This phenomenon was firstly reported by Yakushev and Istomin.386 As a result of their “self-preservation”, hydrates can be stored at a relatively high temperature, thereby significantly reducing the cost. However, hydrate solids still dissociate by at least a few percent in a few days. This dissociation can raise the tank pressure rating and transportation costs. Besides, it should be noted that, if economically and technically justified, hydrates can be stably stored above the freezing point or at approximately ambient temperature by adding thermodynamic promoters, but the gas capacity will decrease somewhat.
Due to the practical importance of the “self-preservation” property, numerous studies have focused on its control mechanism and intensification. The mechanism is not fully understood, but it is generally agreed that it is a combination of mass and heat transfer. One plausible cause of this effect is ice shielding. When the temperature is below the melting point of ice, the hydrate solids should be in equilibrium with the ice solids and gas phase. When the ambient temperature increases, the hydrate surfaces should dissociate and convert into ice solid. When the ice layer covers the entire hydrate particle, it acts as a physical barrier for mass and heat transfer. The ice layer is believed to effectively increase the internal pressure by reducing the gas convection to the environment, which increases the equilibrium temperature of the hydrate and delays the dissociation of the internal portion.
Shimada et al. directly observed ice formation on a hydrate surface during hydrate dissociation.387 Hydrate particles were formed in a high-pressure reactor, then transferred to a temperature-controlled cell, and dissociated by controlling the temperature. A confocal microscope was used to monitor the surface changes. The hydrate dissociation rate was characterized by measuring the amount of gas released. In the stepwise temperature-ramping dissociation from 170 to 220 K, ice layer formation was observed. In the dissociation tests at a constant temperature, the hydrate dissociation rates sharply decreased when the dissociation temperature was greater than 230 K. A comparison of the hydrate surfaces revealed that the ice existed as distinguishable particles at 200 K, as a solid sheet at 250 K, and as a mixed type in-between. These observations support the ice shielding hypothesis. Similar observations were also reported by Mimachi et al.388 who examined SNG pellets after 93 days of storage at 253 K using X-ray CT imaging. A 100 μm thick ice layer was observed on the pellet surface, while the interior was still predominantly hydrates.
Studies have suggested that the “self-preservation” phenomenon only occurs within a certain temperature range. Stern et al. reported that the anomalous preservation range of CH4 hydrates is only between 240 and 273 K.389 Further studies revealed that the “self-preservation” phenomenon is related to the morphology of the ice layer. Takeya and Ripmeester used PXRD to characterize the ice morphology and confirmed its importance to “self-preservation”.390 A plate-like ice layer, which was the preferred morphology during rapid depressurization, could better intensify the “self-preservation” phenomenon than an aggregated-grain layer. Kuhs et al.391 and Falenty et al.392 used neutron diffraction and cryo-SEM to study the “self-preservation” phenomenon. Their results confirmed the importance of the ice layer and the pressure–temperature dependence of the microstructure of the ice. The effectiveness of the ice layer is attributed to the change in the metastable ice crystal structure from Ic to Ih. Certain pressure–temperature conditions, e.g., 260 K and 1.0 atm, can boost ice annealing and reduce the porosity and permeability, which could be correlated with effective “self-preservation”.
The ice shielding theory has been used to explain important factors that affect the “self-preservation”, such as pressure and temperature,393 particle size,394 porosity,393 thermal history,388etc., of which the two most important parameters for SNG storage and transportation are the hydrate porosity and particle size. Falenty et al. reported that porous hydrate pellets dissociate much faster than dense pellets.393 The porous structure may enhance the heat transfer with the environment and increase the gas mass transfer to the environment, thereby accelerating the hydrate dissociation. Moreover, the porous structure also wastes volume during SNG storage. Mimachi et al. tested the effect of hydrate particle size on “self-preservation”.394 Compressed dense particles with different sizes were stored at 253 K for 14 days. Smaller particles were observed to experience more mass loss, while 30 mm particles only experienced 0.76 wt% loss. A straightforward explanation for this is that the smaller particles require more hydrate dissociation to form an ice layer covering the surface. Thus, a large particle size is preferable for SNG storage.
“Self-preservation” is a complex phenomenon. Despite the related research achievements, the ice shielding theory still cannot convincingly explain how the ice layer withstands the relatively high internal gas pressure between the hydrate and ice. The theory also cannot sufficiently explain the other factors related to “self-preservation”, such as the gas composition.395,396 Although the most studied CH4 and CO2 hydrates exhibit the well-known “self-preservation” phenomenon, the hydrates of some gases and gas mixtures, such as CH4/ethane (91/9 by mole),395 only exhibit slight or no “self-preservation”. The hydrate structure does not seem to be a determinant factor.396 Although CH4 is the dominant gas, such as in natural gas, it usually possesses “self-preservation”. It is worthwhile to test the effect of a specific gas before taking any advantage of the “self-preservation” phenomenon for SNG applications.
SNG has been tested in pilot-scale storage and transportation by Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding Co., Ltd. (MES). This company was one of the first companies to investigate SNG transportation.339 They reported on most of the pilot-scale studies and related patents. In 2011, they completed the first demonstration of SNG land transportation to deliver natural gas to remote areas without pipelines.339 The plant produced 5 tons of SNG per day, which was stored at -20 °C with the help of “self-preservation”, then transported by truck, and regasified at the end-users’ houses. They customized the tank so the regasification could be easily controlled by circulating room temperature water. A 100 ton-per-day onshore production–transportation plan was proposed at the time, but the plan seems to be temporarily suspended as there has been no publicly reported progress since 2011. Another pilot-scale hydrate production project was conducted by the Korean Institute of Industrial Technology in 2012, but transportation was not tested.23 To validate the designed SNG process, they produced 1 ton of hydrate pellets per day, stored them, and regasified the SNG at a rate of 5 m3 per day.
SNG cannot be directly used in many cases. Direct combustion is possible397 but may be inefficient. After transportation, hydrates need to be dissociated to release the gas. The regasification focuses on engineering design, which probably explains that only a few studies are publicly available. The control principle of regasification is opposite to that of solidification. Hydrate solids can be depressurized and/or heated to reach the hydrate dissociation region. The regasification is less challenging than the other steps. The thermodynamic and kinetic difficulties of solidification are advantageous during regasification. Solely relying on depressurization may not work well since hydrate dissociation is an endothermic process. Introducing heat into the storage environment and adjusting the pressure can initiate and maintain the hydrate dissociation better.
Hydrate dissociation can be affected by many factors, which are summarized in Table 14. The parameters of the container and pellet design can be optimized to make the dissociation process controllable. The process does not require much energy input. However, because of the container, the heat and mass transfer can still be the limiting factors of the process, which may need to be well controlled. Because of the relatively fast dissociation and non-existent metastability, the limiting step of hydrate dissociation is the heat transfer rather than the intrinsic dissociation. Thus, the process can be easily simulated.398 Similar to most transportation problems, a large pellet size and a low pellet porosity can reduce the heat transfer, thereby reducing the dissociation efficiency.
Table 14 Factors affecting NGH regasification




Factors
Comments




Container
Heating controllability
Heating may be intermittent or continuous. Heating may require the use of as much heat exchange with the environment as possible.


Pressure rating
The pressure limit determines the storage temperature and the amount of the maximum gas being released via hydrate dissociation.


Others
Wall material, volume, thermal properties, insulation, sealing, solid entry, liquid exit, etc.


Pellet
Size
Large particles have better self-preservation but the dissociation will be slower.


Gas composition
Compositions determine the hydrate phase boundary and the minimum dissociation conditions.


Promoter
Thermodynamic promoters change the dissociation conditions. Both thermodynamic and kinetic promoters may need to be recycled to reduce costs.




It should be noted that the released gas can be directly used by the end-users, as was illustrated in a pilot-scale test.339 It can also be further transported through pipelines, similar to LNG, at the terminal. However, unlike LNG, natural gas from hydrate dissociation has a much higher water content. Water is undesirable because it may form hydrates or corrosive solutions with H2S and CO2. In such a case, proper dehydration is necessary.


6.2.3. Cost analysis of the SNG technique. 
The cost of the SNG technique is one of the most important factors, if not the most important factor, determining the feasibility and the implementation of the technique. However, no analysis of long-term SNG storage is available currently. Most of the current cost analyses, if not all of them, only focus on SNG-based transportation. The CAPEX and OPEX are mostly estimated without considering any kinetic or thermodynamic promoters.
The evaluation of kinetic and/or thermodynamic promoters can be complicated. The promoters are developed to lower the costs of hydrate solidification and storage, but in the current stage most of the promoters have not been tested on a large scale. Moreover, the processes of the SNG technique have not been standardized, making it hard to evaluate the chemical formulation, long-term performance, disposal difficulty, and associated costs. More experimental data are necessary to better model the promoter performances and costs.
Cheap and widely available chemicals are always preferred in order to lower costs, but several additional factors need to be considered as well, including volatility and hydrate stability. The promoters are usually liquids and have good reusability after releasing natural gas. Thus, the purchase of promoters mainly occurs as an initial investment. Therefore, the amount of promoters used in the SNG process may not be a key factor in determining its economics. However, promoters still have a certain volatility, which depends on their vapor pressures. They may still require replenishment, which increases the OPEX. Heavier molecules generally have advantages regarding this factor. Besides, promoters also affect the thermodynamic properties of SNG, specifically its dissociation temperature and the “self-preservation”. These properties determine the solidification, storage and recovery conditions, which affect the costs. More importantly, promoters have a negative impact on the gas storage capacity. This is probably the key factor affecting the economy of the process because it will significantly affect the efficiency of the NG transportation, which is an economic control step for the SNG technique. To the best of our knowledge, the highest reported CH4 storage capacity in the presence of a thermodynamic promoter is approximately 80 V/V, which was obtained for THF solutions. The development of more efficient accelerators that can help achieve a high gas storage capacity is being pursued. In the future, iterative process design and cost analysis are needed to identify the feasibility of the use of promoters in the SNG technique.
The current economic analyses of the SNG technique based on different production and transportation conditions have produced mixed results. The SNG technique may have advantages in some small-scale natural gas transportation enterprises due to its relatively low CAPEX and OPEX.339,399,400 In large-scale production, the SNG technique will suffer from a high OPEX because the gas density is considerably lower than that of LNG. MES conducted decades of studies and concluded that the SNG technique is more economic than the LNG for short distance transportation, and it is also safer and more environmentally friendly. Fig. 19 shows their estimation of the total supply chain CAPEX for various transportation methods. Under the assumed conditions, the SNG technique is advantageous for transporting 1–1.5 million tons per year over distances of 1000–6000 km.
 Fig. 19  Comparison of the different natural gas transportation methods conducted by MES for an annual production of 1–1.5 × 109 kg (after Nogami et al.339). 
Other studies also have reached similar conclusions. Javanmardi et al.340 evaluated natural gas transportation from the Middle East to East Asia and Western Europe using the SNG technique. Assuming a processing capacity of 4160 m3 day−1 for 20 years, the total cost of the SNG technique was approximately 0.003 USD/MJ. If the natural gas was transported as LNG, the total endpoint cost would be 0.00427 USD/MJ (4.5 USD/MBtu). The saving is mainly the result of the lower capital cost, which is about 48% that of the LNG. In their calculations, the utilization of “self-preservation” could increase the storage temperature from 248 to 274 K, thereby considerably lowering the costs. Najibi et al. performed an analysis using a method similar to that of Javanmardi et al., but they extended the comparison to include PNG, LNG, CNG, and SNG techniques and specified the gas field.401 Their analysis was based on gas transportation from the South-Pars gas field in Iran to different destinations. Due to the large production scale, the capital investment of LNG can be averaged out, while the SNG technique becomes relatively expensive, i.e., almost 1.5 times that of the LNG.

6.3. Summary
Natural gas storage and transportation require innovation to embrace the rapid changes in the energy industry, i.e., the increase in the use of natural gas to mitigate climate change and reduce pollution. The SNG technique is one of the promising methods. Although there have been no commercial applications, many studies support its technical feasibility. The SNG technique for natural gas storage can be roughly divided into three stages, solidification from the natural gas source, transportation, and regasification for downstream customers. Multiple economic analyses have shown that SNG storage can be advantageous for small to medium production scales, small to medium distance transportation, and long-term storage.
Solidification is probably the most challenging step in the SNG technique. Gas hydrate formation faces difficulties in terms of the harsh thermodynamic conditions, uncertain nucleation time, and slow kinetic rates. The current proposed strategies mainly include thermodynamic promoters, kinetic promoters, and mechanical stimulation. Although promising in the lab, the use of promoters needs to be tested in large-scale hydrate production to further illustrate their performance and expenses. Hydrate solids can be stored and transported after being compressed. The compression removes the excess water and gas to form dense pellets, increasing the transportation efficiency and reducing the dissociation via the potential “self-preservation”. The “self-preservation” phenomenon is most likely caused by ice shielding on the hydrate surfaces during hydrate dissociation when the temperature is below the freezing point of water but above the equilibrium temperature of the hydrate. Properly intensifying the “self-preservation” phenomenon can help alleviate the storage conditions and greatly reduce transportation costs. After reaching the destination, the hydrate is dissociated to release the CH4. The regasification is relatively easy and convenient and is accomplished by raising the temperature. Due to the water content, the released gas may be suitable for end-users but not for secondary transportation through a pipeline before the gas is dehydrated.
7. Outlooks for the role of natural gas hydrates and their related techniques in climate change mitigation
Based on the all-encompassing analysis presented in this paper, it can be found that NGHs account for most of the CH4 and up to a third of the mobile organic carbon on the Earth. They act as a carbon storage reservoir in the carbon cycle on our planet,402 and thus their exploitation and utilization will undoubtedly significantly affect the future energy structure and climate change. Besides, hydrate-based techniques including CO2 separation, CO2 sequestration, and natural gas storage and transportation can also be used for carbon capture and storage (CCS) to reduce greenhouse gas emission and have excellent potential. Thus, NGHs and their related techniques should not be ignored when evaluating the future energy supply and climate warming mitigation. Unfortunately, at present, wide concern has only highlighted the interest in NGH exploitation, and few studies have investigated the new CCS challenges resulting from NGH utilization. In addition, although some studies of hydrate-based techniques have been conducted and reported in the literature, no further detailed discussion on their role in the mobile carbon cycle has been conducted to assess their utilization and commercialization prospects in restricting climate change.
In this section, first we discuss the current status and the goal of climate change mitigation in detail, thereby providing a holistic perspective on the efforts that we have taken to limit climate change and the path forward in the future. Then, we fully discuss the role and value of CCS in avoiding greenhouse gas emissions, thereby answering the question of whether CCS alone is enough to mitigate climate change. Besides, the new scenario of the fossil fuel supply and the effect of NGH utilization on future strategies for carbon emission reduction are discussed. Finally, we assess the commercialization prospect of using hydrate-based techniques to reduce carbon emissions and to highlight the key future research needs. A forward-looking strategy is established based mainly on hydrate-based techniques, providing new insights for limiting climate change in the future. It should be noted that the analysis presented in this section does not focus on economic assessment because the costs of the related techniques are expected to decrease as the technology is developed further and installations are more widely deployed. Overall, the bulk of this section is focused on evaluating the effectiveness and development potential of the relevant techniques.
7.1. The ambitious target of climate change mitigation
The target of limiting global warming below 2.0 °C in this century was determined in the 2015 COP21 Paris climate agreement.403 This ambitious goal depends on removing CO2 at average rates of 10 Gt per year before 2050 and 25 Gt per year from 2050 to 2100, i.e., a total of approximately 800–3000 Gt of CO2.404 In order to achieve this goal, several countries pledged to set their own carbon emission targets at the climate negotiations. For example, G8 (The Group of Eight Industrialized Nations) and the European Union aim to reduce CO2 emissions by at least 80% from the 1990 baseline by 2050.251 China, as the country with the world's largest CO2 emissions, also promised to reduce its carbon intensity.405 It has completed the first stage goal of reducing the carbon intensity by 18% from 2015 to 2020 in advance, which was set by “13th Five Year Plan (FYP) of Energy Development, China”.406,407 Recently, at the Climate Ambition Summit, China promised that, by 2030, it will cut emissions per unit of GDP by “at least” 65% compared to 2005 levels and will achieve carbon neutrality by 2060.408 Despite the achievements in carbon emission reduction made by these countries, it should be noted that the current CCS deployment is far from what is required to achieve the climate change mitigation goal (see Section 5). An investigation conducted by Spencer et al.409 showed that only approximately 3% of electricity generation plants in China, the European Union, the USA, and Japan have been equipped with CCS facilities. High investments and low economic benefits are two of the core factors that restrict CCS deployment.410 Actually, relative to environmental issues, many countries and governments have a lower tolerance for economic losses, especially in less developed countries.
An accepted view is that the window to achieve the goal of limiting global warming within 2.0 °C in this century is closing gradually. Simulations have shown that if the carbon emission reduction is further delayed, the 2.0 °C target may not be reachable at all in this century.411 In 2018, a report by the IPCC stated that the current mitigation delay puts us on track for global warming beyond 3 °C by the end of this century.412 Even if CCS facilities begin to be widely deployed starting now, the goal may not be achievable without “negative emissions”. Studies have pointed out that because carbon emission reductions were not immediately and comprehensively implemented, the necessary emission reductions needed to limit global warming to within 2.0 °C creates a need for “negative emissions”.413–415 It should be noted that the term “negative emission” refers to the removal of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere, and the results should ensure that any greenhouse gas emissions that result from this process are not greater than the amount of greenhouse gases removed.416 Luderer et al.417 pointed out that we had the opportunity to achieve the goal of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C by only improving energy efficiency without the need for “negative emissions”, but now it may be too late.
There is no doubt that achieving “negative emission” would require strict and difficult processes. However, the current goal is impossible to achieve without it. In contrast to the practical actions, a higher ambition of limiting global warming to within 1.5 °C in this century was presented in the 2018 IPCC special report.56 This goal would require that the average rate of negative carbon emissions in this century reach 3–30 Gt per year.418 Undoubtedly, such massive-scale negative emissions would require unprecedented technological development. Unfortunately, the strategy to achieve negative carbon emissions has not been made clear yet.419 Currently, it has been ascertained that several natural processes, including afforestation, soil carbon sequestration, and direct reductions in carbon emissions from fossil fuel usage, can achieve negative carbon emissions.420–422 Whether carbon capture and storage techniques can achieve “negative emissions” depends on the actual case. This is because the amount of carbon emissions from the energy sources used to support the operation of CCS facilities may exceed the amount of captured CO2. Using wind and solar energy to replace fossil fuels and to provide the power for CCS facilities may be a good choice.423 Overall, the risks and uncertainties related to these techniques should be evaluated when discussing the target of limiting global warming to within 1.5 °C because the realization of this goal greatly relies on achieving large-scale negative carbon emissions.
Clearly, based upon the current status, the target of limiting global warming to within 1.5 °C in this century will be overwhelmingly difficult, if not impossible, to achieve. The window of opportunity may open if immediate actions, unprecedented development of negative emission techniques, extensive international cooperation, and the determination of consumer stakeholders can all be accomplished perfectly. Regarding this goal, achieving the target of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C in this century will rely more on negative carbon emissions, and this dependence will increase as action is further delayed. Thus, it is urgent that CCS facilities be immediately deployed. Besides, the role of carbon capture and utilization (CCU) in climate change mitigation should be evaluated because captured CO2 that is used to enhance oil recovery, to create carbon-based fuels, and to produce carbonated drinks may eventually be released into the atmosphere.423 In order to achieve negative emissions, a good option is to permanently isolate this captured CO2 and to avoid its return to the atmosphere.
7.2. Is carbon capture and storage alone enough?
CCS is a very attractive option for reducing carbon emissions and mitigating climate change. The IPCC reported that CCS has the potential to reduce CO2 emission by 75–90%,412 and its energy penalty was evaluated to be approximately 25%.423–425 Simulations have shown that there is no feasible means of achieving the 2.0 °C global warming goal without using CCS.426 That is CCS is an essential process in mitigating climate change. More strikingly, the energy needed to run CCS facilities may come from renewable energy sources, which could further reduce the resulting CO2 emissions.427 While this sounds perfect, the question remains: is CCS alone enough to achieve the goals of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C or 1.5 °C in this century?
The analysis presented in Section 7.1 demonstrates that the goals of limiting global warming to within 1.5 °C or 2.0 °C require the support of negative carbon emissions. Thus, we have to ensure that CCS facilities capture more CO2 from the atmosphere than the amount being released from their energy consumption. It can be challenging to capture CO2 directly from the atmosphere because of the highly dilute nature of atmospheric CO2. Actually, the uncertainty of the techniques and energy caveats make it difficult for CCS techniques to achieve truly negative CO2 emissions during the process of capturing CO2 directly from the atmosphere.423 One may argue that wind, solar, and ocean wave energy can meet the energy requirements. However, it is unclear if wind, solar, and ocean waves can directly replace fossil fuels as a more efficient way to achieve negative CO2 emissions. Jacobson423 stated that, relative to capturing CO2 directly from the atmosphere, planting more trees, reducing non-energy CH4 emissions, and replacing some of the current fossil fuel consumption with zero-carbon-emission energy sources may be more cost-effective methods of achieving negative carbon emissions.
CO2 emission will certainly increase.428 It should be noted that there is an upper limit to the CCS capacity, which depends largely on the development of techniques and storage sites. Thus, an open question for the near future is whether the maximum possible increase in the CCS capacity will be sufficient to accommodate the increase in CO2 emissions from fossil fuel utilization. The current CCS capacity is far from our requirement to achieve the climate target.429 Besides, it should be noted that the current delay in CCS deployment also leads to a decrease in the affordability of technological development risks in the process of achieving the goal of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C in this century. Therefore, a method of hedging the risk of technological development is needed.
In the past few decades, our efforts have been focused on passively solving the problem of the excessive CO2 emissions caused by burning fossil fuels. It is well known that excessive CO2 emissions ultimately come from the conversion of the carbon sources in fossil fuels. Thus, can we reduce CO2 emissions by directly restricting the conversion of the carbon sources in fossil fuel into CO2? The answer is yes! Actually, the replacement of fossil-based energy with renewable energy sources, zero-carbon emission energy sources, and nuclear power can directly reduce the conversion of the carbon sources in fossil fuels, and it has been proven at various scales.430 More importantly, controlling the release rate of carbon sources from fossil fuels will help increase the affordability of technological development risks. The concept is very simple: if the growth of the CCS capacity, which depends on technological development, cannot counter the increase in CO2 emissions from fossil fuel utilization, it is necessary to control the release rate of carbon sources from fossil fuels in order to accommodate the technological development and deployment of facilities to limit global warming to within 2.0 °C or 1.5 °C in the future. Unfortunately, this point has been neglected in current studies of carbon emission reduction. Actually, it is very easy to control the conversion rate of the carbon sources in coal and crude oil, i.e., by restricting the speed of its utilization, which is what we are doing now. This is mainly due to the fact that the carbon sources in coal and crude oil will not be converted to greenhouse gases (CO2) before burning. However, for natural gas, this scenario will be very different to achieve, and it is discussed in detail in the next section. By considering these facts, a more realistic carbon emission control schematic, which can increase the affordability of technological development risks in the process of achieving the goal of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C in the future, was created (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  A realistic schematic of reducing CO2 emissions to the atmosphere based on CCS. 
Another aspect that should be noted is that most CCS studies have focused on CO2, and only a few studies have involved CH4. From Section 6, we have known that billions of cubic meters of natural gas is flared and vented annually around the globe, releasing millions of tons of greenhouse gases (CH4 and CO2) into the atmosphere and exacerbating global warming.431 Based on the concept of “negative emissions”, directly reducing non-energy CH4 emission could be a cost-effective way of achieving negative carbon emissions. Besides, developing CCS techniques focused on CH4 is necessary due to the change in the energy structure and NGH exploitation. Considering all of these factors, CCS techniques focused on capturing and storing non-energy CH4 emissions should be developed in the future to achieve the goal of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C in the future.
Overall, based on the current status of CCS deployment, it can be concluded that conventional carbon capture and storage techniques are essential but are not sufficient to achieve the goal of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C in this century. The complementary methods of planting more trees, improving energy efficiency, developing new CCS techniques focused on non-energy CH4 emissions, and restricting the conversion of the carbon sources in fossil fuels to CO2 by replacing fossil-based energy and controlling the speed of fossil fuel consumption must be used together to increase the possibility of achieving the climate warming mitigation goal.
7.3. New scenario for fossil fuel consumption and challenges
As discussed in Section 2, the percentage of the primary energy consumption accounted for by natural gas continues to increase and is irreversible. According to the world energy outlook presented by the International Energy Agency (IEA), this century will be the golden age for natural gas.432
This transition in the energy structure will significantly affect CCS. Gaseous CH4 is very difficult to store and transport on a large scale, and leakage accidents may occur during natural gas production and utilization.433 Besides, without suitable natural gas storage methods, the risks involved in gas infrastructure and fluctuations in the gas market may lead to more non-energy CH4 emissions, thereby resulting in the need for more CCS efforts to focus on CH4. To the best of our knowledge, it is much more difficult to capture CH4 than CO2 on a large scale, and no effective and feasible method is currently available. As discussed in Section 7.2, without effective storage methods, it will be very difficult to control the speed of CH4 utilization and to increase the affordability of technological development risks in the process of achieving the goal of limiting climate change. This is because, unlike coal and oil, once natural gas is extracted, regardless of whether it is used, it is a greenhouse gas. Actually, the ability of methane to absorb and reradiate energy is approximately 10 times greater than that of CO2.434 In order to avoid direct CH4 emissions and ensure that the rate of natural gas consumption is effectively controlled, a safe, easy method of storing and releasing natural gas on a large-scale for a long time is required. Hydrate-based natural gas storage is one possible solution. Furthermore, the potential environmental impact of CH4 seeps in both active and passive continental margins caused by gas hydrate degradation in the seafloor should also be given extensive attention, especially in the case of accelerated marine NGH exploration and gas production from hydrate-bearing sediments.
Overall, as the world energy supply shifts toward natural gas and potentially NGHs, the threat to climate change caused by CH4 should be considered. Besides, hydrate-based techniques that can achieve safe long-term natural gas storage are very important for the changing energy structure and future CCS development.
7.4. Key R&D needs for hydrate-based techniques in future climate change mitigation
In general, there are four steps through which a technique becomes commercially available:435 ① laboratory research; ② pilot-scale tests; ③ demonstration-scale tests; and ④ commercial applications. Based on the analysis presented in Section 5, hydrate-based CO2 separation techniques are transitioning from laboratory to pilot scale tests. Although they are still a long way from becoming mature commercial methods, their low equipment capital costs, low energy penalties, and simple operating processes result in a great development potential. They are likely to become some of the most promising CO2 capture techniques in the future.
The ocean is one of the options for permanent CO2 sequestration with the most potential because its huge storage capacity means that it can adapt to the ever-increasing future CO2 emission requirement. However, as discussed in Section 5, it is still in the concept phase because the core problem of potential ocean acidification caused by the dissolution of CO2 in seawater is still being investigated. Besides, the risk of CO2 escape from the ocean back into the atmosphere is also a concern. With regard to these two concerns, CO2 sequestration in the marine sediments in the deep ocean in the form of gas hydrates may be a reliable method.436 Theoretically, CO2 hydrates will not decompose and can be stably stored in deep sea areas where the hydrostatic pressure is above the phase equilibrium of CO2 hydrates, thereby avoiding gas leakage and ocean acidification. In addition, a low-permeability secondary cap can form to prevent CO2 diffusion when forming gas hydrates in marine sediments.437 More strikingly, sequestrating CO2 in the NGH-related areas can reduce the risk of hydrate exploitation-induced seafloor instability. Meanwhile, based on the guidance of the CH4–CO2 replacement theory, some of the CH4 will also be extracted from the hydrates during CO2 storage. That is, storing CO2 in the form of hydrates in the seabed not only may be necessary for CCS, but could also be essential for the safe utilization of the new energy source, i.e., NGHs. It is worth mentioning that the Geological Survey of Canada has successfully stored the CO2 in Alberta's gas reservoirs as gas hydrates, and the estimated storage density in the Alberta portion of the Western Canada Sedimentary Basin is as high as 37.5 Gt.438–441
Based on Praveen Linga analysis, natural gas storage via solid gas hydrates is in the transition phase from the pilot scale to the demonstration scale.23 Hydrated-based natural gas storage could be a good option for the safe, long-term (i.e., a few months to years), large-scale storage of natural gas. One may argue that LNG and CNG are two mature methods of storing natural gas. However, as discussed in Section 6, the continuous gas boil-off issues of LNG and the safety concerns of CNG make them unsuitable for large-scale, long-term natural gas storage.356 Thus, to embrace the increasing importance of natural gas in the new energy structure, large-scale natural gas storage in the form of solid hydrates may be indispensable, especially when the need to restrict carbon source conversions and limit climate change is considered.
Overall, hydrate-based techniques for CO2 separation, CO2 sequestration in the deep ocean, and large-scale long-term natural gas storage should be highlighted in the process of global warming mitigation. In the future, it may be possible to establish a complete chain, including the energy-carbon conversion control, carbon capture, and carbon storage, based on hydrate techniques in order to facilitate global warming mitigation. Fig. 21 shows a schematic of this chain. In this chain, long-term, large-scale storage of natural gas as solid hydrates is the main step in controlling the rate of conversion of the carbon source in CH4 into CO2 and in reducing non-energy CH4 emissions (Step 3). Moreover, hydrate-based CO2 separation is the main technique for capturing the CO2 released from fossil-fuel-fired plants and industrial processes with relatively high CO2 concentrations (Step 1). It should be noted that hydrate-based techniques are obviously not favorable for capturing CO2 directly from the atmosphere. More suitable techniques and strategies that can ensure the achievement of real “negative emissions” in the process of capturing CO2 directly from the atmosphere are needed. In this regard, planting more trees and improving the energy efficiency of vehicles may be good choices. Finally, the captured CO2 can be permanently stored in the deep ocean in the form of hydrates to ensure the stability of the seabed after the extraction of NGHs (Step 2).
 Fig. 21  Schematic of a carbon chain to limit global warming based on hydrate techniques. 
It should be noted that the hydrate-based techniques in this chain still have technical uncertainties and risks. Based on the analysis presented in Section 5, hydrate-based CO2 separation has encountered a bottleneck due to its low energy efficiency ratio, and thus, in the future, extensive efforts should be made to identify effective promoters to increase the hydrate formation kinetics and alleviate the hydrate formation conditions, thereby further improving the CO2 separation efficiency and reducing its cost. Besides, reactor configuration and hydrate formation process optimization are also two effective methods of improving the CO2 separation efficiency. In addition, in view of recent studies, in comparison to chemical absorption and membrane separation alone, the combinations of other processes with hydrate-based techniques have better energy efficiencies. This may be a shortcut to applying hydrate-based techniques commercially, and more detailed studies of this possibility should be carried out in the future.
CO2 sequestration in the deep ocean also has two main challenges: (1) the assessment and monitoring of the CO2 hydrate stability in the deep sea and (2) risk management of CO2 leakage. The good news is that most of the techniques of injecting CO2 into the deep ocean sediments are already available because they have been established in the petroleum industry. Besides, the high pressure in the deep sea and the promotion of currently available technology can ensure rapid hydrate formation in the deep sea.
Regarding the storage of natural gas as solid hydrates, as discussed in Section 6, achieving a high hydrate formation rate at moderate pressures and stable hydrate storage at nearly ambient temperatures are two ideal conditions for these applications. Thus, further development of this technique should focus on two major challenges: ① low gas uptake during hydrate formation in the presence of thermodynamic promoters. At present, thermodynamic promoters are considered to be the only effective method of significantly alleviating the hydrate formation conditions, thereby achieving a high hydrate formation rate at moderate pressures. However, this leads to a potential gas capacity reduction during hydrate formation. ② The energy requirements for gas compression and for maintaining the conditions required for natural gas storage are relatively high, especially those of the latter. In this regard, a full understanding of the “self-preservation” effect of hydrates may help solve this problem in the future. Besides, it should be noted that a suitable facility deployment site can greatly reduce the cost of this technique because, to the best of our knowledge, many countries and regions around the world have lower temperatures for most of the year, and such low ambient temperatures would provide ideal conditions for NGH storage, thereby greatly reducing the energy penalty of this technique.
8. Conclusions
It is undisputed that the rapid transition in the energy supply towards natural gas will affect future climate change mitigation efforts. NGH reserves account for most of the natural gas resources and up to one-third of the mobile organic carbon on the Earth, and they act as a carbon storage reservoir in the carbon cycle on our planet. Hydrate-based techniques, including CO2 separation, CO2 sequestration, and natural gas storage and transportation, can also be used for CCS in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and they have an excellent potential. Thus, NGH and hydrate related techniques should not be ignored when evaluating the future energy supply and climate warming mitigation. In this paper, the global energy and environment challenges, NGHs and their role in the energy supply, carbon cycle, and climate change were comprehensively discussed, and the state-of-the-art developments in hydrate-based techniques and NGH exploitation methods and their potential environmental impacts were reviewed, thereby providing a holistic perspective on the role of NGHs and their related techniques in the future energy supply and climate warming mitigation. The main conclusions of this review are as follows.
(I) Although more and more of our energy supply is expected to come from renewable and nuclear energy sources as time progresses, fossil fuels are expected to remain a major energy source in the coming decades. Considering the balance between energy security, climate change, and economic growth, the use of natural gas has become a realistic option. The global economy is gradually transitioning from oil-based to natural gas-based. The increasing demand for natural gas offers an opportunity for the exploration and exploitation of NGHs. Due to their large reserves and the wide distribution, NGHs represent a promising and sufficient supply of natural gas in the near future.
(II) NGHs are an important carbon sink in the carbon cycle. Historical global warming events have been associated with increased atmospheric CH4 levels. The release of CH4via hydrate dissociation is one possible major cause. Global warming and hydrate dissociation may form a positive feedback loop, in which the two events can strengthen each other. Further studies of NGHs in nature are needed to better characterize the causal relationship between NGH dissociation and historical climate change, thereby systematically evaluating the potential risk of increasing atmospheric CH4 levels caused by hydrate dissociation during natural gas hydrate exploitation. Besides, the impact of NGH production on the physical and mechanical properties of gas hydrate-bearing sediments should also be assessed to minimize the risks of potential damage to the environment.
(III) Field tests and laboratory studies of NGH production from both permafrost and offshore NGH reservoirs have significantly improved our understanding of the properties of NGHs and indicate that NGHs are a promising future natural gas source. The proposed hydrate production methods include thermal stimulation (heating), depressurization, inhibitor injection, CO2–CH4 replacement, fluidization, etc. Thus far, depressurization appears to be the most economic and effective method of extracting hydrates. It should be noted that CH4–CO2 replacement is a non-destructive exploitation method and has the benefits of stabilizing the deposits and CO2 sequestration. This process is close to carbon-neutral. Each natural gas extraction method has its own individual advantages and disadvantages. Combining these methods may be a favorable way to improve the overall efficiency and production rate. Therefore, advanced studies involving laboratory, modeling, and field-scale analysis of combined NGH production methods should be conducted, especially for the combination of CH4–CO2 replacement and other methods.
(IV) Achieving the target of limiting global warming to within 2.0 °C in this century must rely more on carbon “negative emissions”, and this dependence will increase as CCS deployment is further delayed. CCS is one of the key techniques for preventing excessive CO2 emissions into the atmosphere. Various traditional techniques used for CO2 capture, including the absorption, the adsorbent membrane, etc., have different advantages and disadvantages. The hydrate-based carbon capture technique is a novel CO2 capture method and has the advantages of low costs, a short process, and insensitivity to impurities in the mixed gas. Currently, this technique is in the transition phase from laboratory scale to pilot scale tests. Further efforts should focus on increasing the energy efficiency ratio by developing effective promoters, optimizing reactor configuration, and hydrate formation process, and combining this process with the chemical absorption or membrane separation techniques.
(V) The hydrate-based technique is also a promising solution for CO2 sequestration. In theory, CO2 storage in the deep ocean in the form of solid CO2 hydrates can prevent local ocean acidification. The original existence of CH4 hydrates proves that the geological structure and environment of the site are stable and the location is suitable for long-term CO2 storage without leakage. A hydrate cap and the potential self-sealing effect are very important for hydrate-based CO2 storage in the deep ocean. Strikingly, sequestrating CO2 in NGH areas by forming hydrates can reduce the risk of hydrate exploitation-induced seafloor instability. Therefore, storing CO2 in the form of hydrates in the seabed may not only be necessary for CCS but also be essential for the utilization of the new energy source, i.e., NGHs. Currently, hydrate-based CO2 storage is still in the proving the concept stage. Once the challenges of storage site selection, infrastructure sharing, safety assessment and monitoring, and the mechanisms of hydrate cap formation and the self-sealing effect are resolved, hydrate-based CO2 storage in the deep ocean will become a promising option in the future.
(VI) As the world energy supply shifts toward natural gas, the threat to climate change caused by CH4 should also be of concern. Therefore, long-term and safe storage of natural gas is a requirement for natural gas management. The SNG technique is promising for the safe, long-term (a few months to years), large-scale storage of natural gas. It can be roughly divided into three stages: solidification of the natural gas source, transportation, and regasification for downstream customers. Multiple economic analyses have shown that the SNG technique can be advantageous for small to medium production and small to medium distance transportation. At present, this technique is in the transition phase from pilot scale to demonstration scale tests. More attention should be paid to developing this method and reducing the negative effects of the thermodynamic promoters on the hydrate gas capacity in the future. Besides, a full understanding of the self-protection effect of hydrates and the identification of suitable facility deployment sites to make full use of the ambient cold energy could significantly reduce the costs of this technique.
(VII) There is an upper limit to CCS capacity, which depends largely on the development of the technology. The increase in the CCS capacity should be sufficient to accommodate the increase in the amount of CO2 released by fossil fuel utilization. Therefore, technological development risks should be considered when using CCS to achieve the target of climate change mitigation. For coal and crude oil, the step of restricting the conversion of their energy-carbon sources to CO2 can increase the affordability of technological development risks. For natural gas, to achieve this goal, long-term, safe storage methods will be indispensable.
Based on this review, it is worth hoping that a complete chain, including energy-carbon conversion control, carbon capture, and carbon storage, may be established based on hydrate techniques in order to facilitate the goal of reducing CO2 emissions and non-energy CH4 emissions. Besides, it can be concluded that although there are many hurdles to the development of natural gas hydrates as a future alternative fuel and to the effective use of hydrate-based CCS techniques, none of them seem to be insurmountable.
Author contributions
Yi-Song YU: supervision, validation, writing – review & editing; Xian-Wei ZHANG, Yohan LEE, and Jian-Wu LIU: writing; Xiao-Sen LI: writing and supervision.
Availability of data and materials
Virtually all data are provided within the paper and references, and if any data are not provided they can be obtained from the author.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22008237), the Key Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China (51736009), the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)(ZDBS-LY-SLH041), Guangdong Special Support Program-Local innovation and entrepreneurship team project (2019BT02L278), Special Project for Marine Economy Development of Guangdong Province (GDME-2018D002), Fundamental Research & Applied Fundamental Research Major Project of Guangdong Province (2019B030302004, 2020B0301030003), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province, China (2019A1515012086), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou, China (202102020720), Science and Technology Apparatus Development Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (YZ201619), Frontier Sciences Key Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (QYZDJ-SSW-JSC033), and the International Postdoctoral Exchange Fellowship Program (20190073).
References
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Adoption of the Paris Agreement, 21st Conference of the Parties, Paris, 2015.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol Reference Manual On Accounting Of Emissions And Assigned Amount, 2008.
European Commission, A European strategic long-term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate neutral economy, Brussels, 2018, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52018DC0773, (accessed February 2021).
European Commission, A policy framework for climate and energy in the period from 2020 to 2030, Brussels, 2014, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A52014DC0015, (accessed March 2021).
EIA, International Energy Outlook 2019, U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2019, https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/pdf/ieo2019.pdf, (accessed March 2021).

          G. J. Moridis, T. S. Collett, M. Pooladi-Darvish, S. Hancock, C. Santamarina, R. Boswell, T. Kneafsey, J. Rutqvist, M. Kowalsky and M. T. Reagan, Challenges, uncertainties and issues facing gas production from gas hydrate deposits, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.(LBNL), Berkeley, CA (United States),  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, B. J. Ryu, T. S. Yun, J. Lee and G.-C. Cho, KSCE J. Civil Eng., 2011, 15, 689–696 CrossRef .
R. Boswell and T. S. Collett, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1206–1215 RSC .
A. Eslamimanesh, A. H. Mohammadi, D. Richon, P. Naidoo and D. Ramjugernath, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2012, 46, 62–71 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. McConnell, Z. Zhang and R. Boswell, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2012, 34, 209–223 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, K. Xu, Y. Song, W. Liu, W. Lam, Y. Liu, K. Xue, Y. Zhu, X. Yu and Q. Li, Energies, 2012, 5, 399–419 CrossRef CAS .
H. Komatsu, M. Ota, R. L. Smith Jr and H. Inomata, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2013, 44, 517–537 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Anderson, R. Boswell, T. S. Collett, H. Farrell, S. Ohtsuki, M. White and M. Zyrianova, Review of the findings of the iġnik Sikumi CO2-CH4 gas hydrate exchange field trial, Proceedings of the 8th international conference on gas hydrates (ICGH8-2014), BeiJing China, 2014.
Y. Song, L. Yang, J. Zhao, W. Liu, M. Yang, Y. Li, Y. Liu and Q. Li, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 778–791 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dashti, L. Z. Yew and X. Lou, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2015, 23, 195–207 CrossRef CAS .
P. Babu, P. Linga, R. Kumar and P. Englezos, Energy, 2015, 85, 261–279 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demirbas, M. Rehan, B. O. Al-Sasi and A.-S. Nizami, Pet. Sci. Technol., 2016, 34, 1204–1210 CrossRef CAS .
X.-S. Li, C.-G. Xu, Y. Zhang, X.-K. Ruan, G. Li and Y. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 172, 286–322 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Chong, S. H. B. Yang, P. Babu, P. Linga and X.-S. Li, Appl. Energy, 2016, 162, 1633–1652 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, P. Zhang, H. Bao and S. Deng, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 53, 1273–1302 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Koh, H. Kang, J.-W. Lee, Y. Park, S.-J. Kim, J. Lee, J. Y. Lee and H. Lee, Appl. Energy, 2016, 162, 114–130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, C. Lu, M. Wu, Y. Peng, Y. Yao and W. Luo, Adv. Geo-Energy Res., 2018, 2, 53–62 CrossRef .
H. P. Veluswamy, A. Kumar, Y. Seo, J. D. Lee and P. Linga, Appl. Energy, 2018, 216, 262–285 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, X. Li, K. Yan, X. Ruan, Z. Chen and Z. Xia, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2019, 27, 1998–2013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Z. R. Chong, M. F. Qureshi and P. Linga, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 10529–10546 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Cordero, P. Roth and L. Da Silva, Environ. Sci. Policy, 2005, 8, 392–398 CrossRef .
N. Antonakakis, I. Chatziantoniou and G. Filis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 808–824 CrossRef .
M. M. Alam, M. W. Murad, A. H. M. Noman and I. Ozturk, Ecol. Indic., 2016, 70, 466–479 CrossRef .
BP, bp Statistical Review of World Energy 2020, 2020.
IRENA, Renewable capacity statistics 2020, International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi, 2020.
IAEA, Energy, Electricity And Nuclear Power Estimates For The Period Up To 2050, International Atomic Energy Agency(IAEA), Vienna, 2019, https://www.iaea.org/publications/14786/energy-electricity-and-nuclear-power-estimates-for-the-period-up-to-2050, (accessed March 2021).
World Nuclear Association, Nuclear Power, Energy and the Environment, World Nuclear Association, 2019.
OECD/IAEA, Uranium 2007: Resources, Production and Demand, The OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Atomic Energy Agency, Paris, 2008.
B. Fu, Y. K. Wang, P. Xu, K. Yan and M. Li, Sci. Total Environ, 2014, 472, 338–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Keith, J. F. Decarolis, D. C. Denkenberger, D. H. Lenschow, S. L. Malyshev, S. Pacala and P. J. Rasch, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 16115–16120 CrossRef CAS .
I. Miller, E. Gençer, H. S. Vogelbaum, P. R. Brown, S. Torkamani and F. M. O'Sullivan, Appl. Energy, 2019, 238, 760–774 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pedroli, B. Elbersen, P. Frederiksen, U. Grandin, R. Heikkilä, P. H. Krogh, Z. Izakovičová, A. Johansen, L. Meiresonne and J. Spijker, Biomass Bioenergy, 2013, 55, 73–86 CrossRef .
S. K. Sansaniwal, M. A. Rosen and S. K. Tyagi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 80, 23–43 CrossRef .
D. Moya, C. Aldás and P. Kaparaju, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 94, 889–901 CrossRef .
J. W. Lund and T. L. Boyd, Geothermics, 2016, 60, 66–93 CrossRef .
P. Albertus, J. S. Manser and S. Litzelman, Joule, 2020, 4, 21–32 CrossRef CAS .
OSS, 4th Generation Nuclear Power, Open Sources Systems, Sciences, Solutions, http://www.ossfoundation.us/projects/energy/nuclear, (accessed January 2021).
L. Huang, R. He, Q. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. K. Hammitt, X. Lu, J. Bi and Y. Liu, Energy Policy, 2018, 120, 294–301 CrossRef .
W. H. Orem and R. B. Finkelman, Treatise Geochem., 2003, 7, 191–222 Search PubMed .
IEA, Global Energy Review 2020, International Energy Agency(IEA), Paris, 2020.
IEA, Coal 2018, International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, 2018.
P. Moriarty and D. Honnery, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 244–252 CrossRef .
NASA, Carbon dioxide, National Aeronautics and Space Administration(NASA), 2020, https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/carbon-dioxide/, (accessed March 2021).
IEA, CO2emissions from fuel combustion – Highlights, International Energy Agency(IEA), Paris, 2019.
IPCC,  2014: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. O. R. Edenhofer, Y. Pichs-MadrugaSokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. V. Stechow, T. Zwickel and J. C. Minx, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,  2014 Search PubMed .
R. A. Kerr, Science, 2010, 328, 1624–1626 CrossRef CAS .
M. Levi, Clim. Change, 2013, 118, 609–623 CrossRef CAS .
IPCC, Technologies, Policies, and Measures for Mitigating Climate Change - IPCC Technical Paper I, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change(IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 1996.
P. Kelemen, S. M. Benson, H. Pilorgé, P. Psarras and J. Wilcox, Front. Clim., 2019, 1, 1–20 CrossRef .
Global CCS Institute, The Global Status of CCS 2020, Global CCS Institute, Australia, 2020, https://www.globalccsinstitute.com/resources/global-status-report/, (accessed March 2021).
IPCC, Global warming of 1.5 °C: an IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2018.

          J. E. Dendy Sloan and C. Koh, Clathrate Hydrates of Natural Gases, CRC Press, 3rd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. K. Sum, C. A. Koh and E. D. Sloan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 7457–7465 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uchida, T. Hirano, T. Ebinuma, H. Narita, K. Gohara, S. Mae and R. Matsumoto, AIChE J., 1999, 45, 2641–2645 CrossRef CAS .
T. Uchida, S. Takeya, Y. Kamata, I. Y. Ikeda, J. Nagao, T. Ebinuma, H. Narita, O. Zatsepina and B. A. Buffett, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12426–12431 CrossRef CAS .
J. Priestley, bey Rudolph Graffer, 1778, 3, 359–362 Search PubMed .
E. G. Hammerschmidt, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1934, 26, 851–855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Makogon, Gas Ind., 1965, 5, 14–15 Search PubMed .
S. Kamata, F. Nimmo, Y. Sekine, K. Kuramoto, N. Noguchi, J. Kimura and A. Tani, Nat. Geosci., 2019, 12, 407–410 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Ruppel and J. D. Kessler, Rev. Geophys., 2017, 55, 126–168 CrossRef .
P. Serov, S. Vadakkepuliyambatta, J. Mienert, H. Patton, A. Portnov, A. Silyakova, G. Panieri, M. L. Carroll, J. Carroll and K. Andreassen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6215–6220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Makogon, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2010, 2, 49–59 CrossRef CAS .
World Energy Council, World Energy Resources 2016, World Energy Council, 2016.
EIA, World Shale Resource Assessments, Energy Information Administration(EIA), 2015.

          P. Thakur, Advanced reservoir and production engineering for coal bed methane, Gulf Professional Publishing,  2016 Search PubMed .
A. V. Milkov, Earth-Sci. Rev., 2004, 66, 183–197 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Collett, A. H. Johnson, C. C. Knapp and R. Boswell, AAPG Mem., 2009, 89, 146–219 Search PubMed .
EIA, Dry Natural Gas Proved Reserves, Energy Information Administration(EIA), 2019.

          T. S. Collett, K. A. Lewis, M. V. Zyrianova, S. S. Haines, C. J. Schenk, T. J. Mercier, M. E. Brownfield, S. B. Gaswirth, K. R. Marra, H. M. Leathers-Miller, J. K. Pitman, M. E. Tennyson, C. A. Woodall and D. W. Houseknecht, Assessment of undiscovered gas hydrate resources in the North Slope of Alaska, 2018. No. 2019-3037, US Geol. Survey,  2019.
E. J. Brook and C. Buizert, Nature, 2018, 558, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
IPCC, Climate change 2013: the physical science basis: Working Group I contribution to the Fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 2013.
R. J. Cicerone and R. S. Oremland, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 1988, 2, 299–327 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Collett, M. W. Lee, M. V. Zyrianova, S. A. Mrozewski, G. Guerin, A. E. Cook and D. S. Goldberg, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2012, 34, 41–61 CrossRef .
A. Yudhowijoyo, R. Rafati, A. Sharifi Haddad, M. S. Raja and H. Hamidi, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2018, 54, 309–319 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Ruppel, Nat. Educ. Knowl., 2011, 2, 12 Search PubMed .
N. Sultan, A. Plaza-Faverola, S. Vadakkepuliyambatta, S. Buenz and J. Knies, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ferre, P. G. Jansson, M. Moser, P. Serov, A. Portnov, C. A. Graves, G. Panieri, F. Gründger, C. Berndt and M. F. Lehmann, Nat. Geosci., 2020, 13, 144–148 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chuvilin, V. Ekimova, D. Davletshina, N. Sokolova and B. Bukhanov, Geosciences, 2020, 10, 383 CrossRef CAS .

          A. H. Johnson, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kindom,  2011 Search PubMed .
C. Ruppel, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2014, 60, 429–436 CrossRef .
B. J. Phrampus and M. J. Hornbach, Nature, 2012, 490, 527–530 CrossRef CAS .
K. Thatcher, G. Westbrook, S. Sarkar and T. Minshull, J. Geophys. Res.: Solid Earth, 2013, 118, 22–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ketzer, D. Praeg, L. F. Rodrigues, A. Augustin, M. A. Pivel, M. Rahmati-Abkenar, D. J. Miller, A. R. Viana and J. A. Cupertino, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef .
R. E. Zeebe, A. Ridgwell and J. C. Zachos, Nat. Geosci., 2016, 9, 325–329 CrossRef CAS .
D. Archer and B. Buffett, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2005, 6, 1–13 Search PubMed .
D. F. McGinnis, J. Greinert, Y. Artemov, S. E. Beaubien and A. Wüest, J. Geophys. Res., 2006, 111, 1–15 CrossRef .
G. Rehder, P. W. Brewer, E. T. Peltzer and G. Friederich, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2002, 29, 21 CrossRef .
B. Wang, S. A. Socolofsky, J. A. Breier and J. S. Seewald, J. Geophys. Res. Oceans, 2016, 121, 2203–2230 CrossRef .
R. Wanninkhof, J. Geophys. Res., 1992, 97, 7373–7382 CrossRef .
W. S. Reeburgh, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 486–513 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bohrmann, J. Greinert, E. Suess and M. Torres, Geology, 1998, 26, 647–650 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Valentine, D. C. Blanton, W. S. Reeburgh and M. Kastner, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2001, 65, 2633–2640 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leonte, J. D. Kessler, M. Y. Kellermann, E. C. Arrington, D. L. Valentine and S. P. Sylva, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2017, 204, 375–387 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. de Angelis and M. I. Scranton, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 1993, 7, 509–523 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mau, J. Blees, E. Helmke, H. Niemann and E. Damm, Biogeosciences, 2013, 10, 6267–6278 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pack, M. B. Heintz, W. S. Reeburgh, S. E. Trumbore, D. L. Valentine, X. Xu and E. R. M. Druffel, Limn. Ocean. Meth., 2011, 9, 245–260 CrossRef CAS .
D. Archer, B. Buffett and V. Brovkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20596–20601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Kessler, D. L. Valentine, M. C. Redmond, M. Du, E. W. Chan, S. D. Mendes, E. W. Quiroz, C. J. Villanueva, S. S. Shusta, L. M. Werra, S. A. Yvon-Lewis and T. C. Weber, Science, 2011, 331, 312–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, E. A. G. Schuur, K. S. Inglett, M. Lavoie and J. P. Chanton, Global Change Biol., 2012, 18, 515–527 CrossRef .
S. P. Hesselbo, D. R. Grocke, H. C. Jenkyns, C. J. Bjerrum, P. Farrimond, H. S. Morgans Bell and O. R. Green, Nature, 2000, 406, 392–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. A. Teichert, N. Gussone, A. Eisenhauer and G. Bohrmann, Geology, 2005, 33, 213–216 CrossRef CAS .

          G. R. Dickens and B. M. Kennedy, Noble gases in methane hydrate from the Blake Ridge, Proc. ODP, Sci. Results, 164. College Station, TX, USA, 2000.
G. Winckler, W. Aeschbach-Hertig, J. Holocher, R. Kipfer, I. Levin, C. Poss, G. Rehder, E. Suess and P. Schlosser, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2002, 29, 63 Search PubMed .
M. Kennedy, D. Mrofka and C. von der Borch, Nature, 2008, 453, 642–645 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Kemp, A. L. Coe, A. S. Cohen and L. Schwark, Nature, 2005, 437, 396–399 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Beerling, Am. J. Sci., 2002, 302, 28–49 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jiang, M. J. Kennedy and N. Christie-Blick, Nature, 2003, 426, 822–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Harries and C. T. S. Little, Palaeogeogr., Palaeoclimatol., Palaeoecol., 1999, 154, 39–66 CrossRef .
G. J. Bowen, B. J. Maibauer, M. J. Kraus, U. Röhl, T. Westerhold, A. Steimke, P. D. Gingerich, S. L. Wing and W. C. Clyde, Nat. Geosci., 2014, 8, 44–47 CrossRef .
A. Tripati and H. Elderfield, Science, 2005, 308, 1894–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. McCarren, E. Thomas, T. Hasegawa, U. Röhl and J. C. Zachos, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2008, 9, 1–10 CrossRef .
G. R. Dickens, M. M. Castillo and J. C. G. Walker, Geology, 1997, 25, 259–262 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Kennett and B. L. Ingram, Nature, 1995, 377, 510–514 CrossRef CAS .
K. U. Hinrichs, L. R. Hmelo and S. P. Sylva, Science, 2003, 299, 1214–1217 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Kennett, K. G. Cannariato, I. L. Hendy and R. J. Behl, Science, 2000, 288, 128–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Himmler, D. Sahy, T. Martma, G. Bohrmann, A. Plaza-Faverola, S. Bunz, D. J. Condon, J. Knies and A. Lepland, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw1450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sowers, Science, 2006, 311, 838–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Flemings, X. Liu and W. J. Winters, Geology, 2003, 31, 1057–1060 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Hornbach, D. M. Saffer and W. S. Holbrook, Nature, 2004, 427, 142–144 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Brandt, G. A. Heath, E. A. Kort, F. O'Sullivan, G. Petron, S. M. Jordaan, P. Tans, J. Wilcox, A. M. Gopstein, D. Arent, S. Wofsy, N. J. Brown, R. Bradley, G. D. Stucky, D. Eardley and R. Harriss, Science, 2014, 343, 733–735 CrossRef CAS .
J.-f. Li, J.-l. Ye, X.-w. Qin, H.-j. Qiu, N.-y. Wu, H.-l. Lu, W.-w. Xie, J.-a. Lu, F. Peng, Z.-q. Xu, C. Lu, Z.-g. Kuang, J.-g. Wei, Q.-y. Liang, H.-f. Lu and B.-b. Kou, China Geol., 2018, 1, 5–16 CAS .
R. Boswell, D. Schoderbek, T. S. Collett, S. Ohtsuki, M. White and B. J. Anderson, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 140–153 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Shouwei, L. Qingping, C. Wei, Z. Jianliang, P. Weixin, H. Yufa, L. Xin, X. Liangbin, F. Qiang and L. Jiang, The World's First Successful Implementation of Solid Fluidization Well Testing and Production for Non-Diagenetic Natural Gas Hydrate Buried in Shallow Layer in Deep Water. Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, USA, 2018.

          R. Boswell, G. Moridis, M. Reagan and T. S. Collett, Gas Hydrate Accumulation Types and Their Application to Numerical Simulation. the 7th International Conference on Gas Hydrates (ICGH 2011), Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, 2011.

          S. Fakher, Y. Elgahawy and H. Abdelaal, A Comprehensive Review on Gas Hydrate Reservoirs: Formation and Dissociation Thermodynamics and Rock and Fluid Properties. International Petroleum Technology Conference, Beijing, China, 2019.
J. Lee, S. Park and W. Sung, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 2510–2515 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Sun and G.-J. Chen, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2006, 242, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .

          G. J. Moridis and M. T. Reagan, Strategies for Gas Production From Oceanic Class 3 Hydrate Accumulations. Offshore Technology Conference. Houston, Texas, U.S.A., 2007.
A. Sultaniya, J. A. Priest and C. R. I. Clayton, Can. Geotech. J., 2017, 55, 988–998 CrossRef .
M. Hyodo, Y. Li, J. Yoneda, Y. Nakata, N. Yoshimoto and A. Nishimura, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2014, 51, 52–62 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Sakamoto, T. Komai, Y. Kawabe, N. Tenma and T. Yamaguchi, Gas Hydrate Extraction From Marine Sediments By Heat Stimulation Method. The Fourteenth International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference, Toulon, France, 2004.
V. A. Kamath and S. P. Godbole, J. Petrol. Technol., 2013, 39, 1379–1388 CrossRef .
C. Cranganu, J. Petrol. Sci. Eng., 2009, 65, 76–80 CrossRef CAS .
D.-L. Li, D.-Q. Liang, S.-S. Fan, X.-S. Li, L.-G. Tang and N.-S. Huang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2008, 49, 2207–2213 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Minagawa, T. Ito, S. Kimura, H. Kaneko, S. Noda and H. Narita, Depressurization and Electrical Heating of Hydrate Sediment for Gas Production, Eleventh Ocean Mining and Gas Hydrates Symposium, Kona, Hawaii, USA, 2015.
X.-S. Li, Y. Wang, G. Li, Y. Zhang and Z.-Y. Chen, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 1650–1658 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Pang, W. Y. Xu, C. Y. Sun, C. L. Zhang and G. J. Chen, Fuel, 2009, 88, 497–503 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ahn, C. Park, J. Lee, J. M. Kang and H. T. Nguyen, J. Can. Pet. Technol., 2012, 51, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, D. Liang, D. Li and L. Ma, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
M. Islam, J. Pet. Sci. Eng., 1994, 11, 267–281 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Sysoev, Numerical simulation of gas hydrate decomposition under microwave heating. 2011 21st International Crimean Conference “Microwave & Telecommunication Technology”. IEEE, 2011.
J. M. Schicks, E. Spangenberg, R. Giese, M. Luzi-Helbing, M. Priegnitz and B. Beeskow-Strauch, Energies, 2013, 6, 3002–3016 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yuan, C.-Y. Sun, X. Yang, P.-C. Ma, Z.-W. Ma, Q.-P. Li and G.-J. Chen, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 3108–3115 CrossRef CAS .

          J. H. Sira, S. L. Patil and V. A. Kamath, Study of Hydrate Dissociation by Methanol and Glycol Injection. SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, New Orleans, Louisiana, Society of Petroleum Engineers, 1990.
G. Li, X.-S. Li, L.-G. Tang and Y. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 3388–3393 CrossRef CAS .

          D. L. V. Katz, Handbook of natural gas engineering, McGraw-Hill,  1959 Search PubMed .

          I. U. r. F. Makogon, Hydrates of natural gas, PennWell Books Tulsa, Oklahoma,  1981 Search PubMed .
S. Hirohama, Y. Shimoyama, A. Wakabayashi, S. Tatsuta and N. Nishida, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 1996, 29, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohgaki, K. Takano, H. Sangawa, T. Matsubara and S. Nakano, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 1996, 29, 478–483 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ota, K. Morohashi, Y. Abe, M. Watanabe, R. L. Smith Jr and H. Inomata, Energy Convers. Manage., 2005, 46, 1680–1691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, Y. Seo, Y. T. Seo, I. L. Moudrakovski and J. A. Ripmeester, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5048–5051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Baldwin, J. Stevens, J. J. Howard, A. Graue, B. Kvamme, E. Aspenes, G. Ersland, J. Husebø and D. R. Zornes, Magn. Reson. Imaging, 2009, 27, 720–726 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, D. Liang, S. Liang, L. Yi and F. Lin, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 1099–1106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, A. Okwananke, B. Tohidi, E. Chuvilin, K. Maerle, V. Istomin, B. Bukhanov and A. Cheremisin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 136, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lim, H. Ro, Y. Seo, Y.-j. Seo, J. Y. Lee, S.-J. Kim, J. Lee and H. Lee, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2017, 106, 16–21 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Schicks, B. Strauch, K. U. Heeschen, E. Spangenberg and M. Luzi-Helbing, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 2018, 123, 3608–3620 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Xu, J. Cai, Y.-S. Yu, Z.-Y. Chen and X.-S. Li, Fuel, 2018, 216, 255–265 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bai, X. Zhang, G. Chen and W. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7033–7041 RSC .
G. Ersland, J. Husebø, A. Graue, B. A. Baldwin, J. Howard and J. Stevens, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 158, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
A. Falenty, J. Qin, A. N. Salamatin, L. Yang and W. F. Kuhs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 27159–27172 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Falenty, M. M. Murshed, A. N. Salamatin and W. F. Kuhs, Gas Replacement in Clathrate Hydrates during CO2 Injection - Kinetics and Micro-Structural Mechanism. Tenth ISOPE Ocean Mining and Gas Hydrates Symposium. Szczecin, Poland: International Society of Offshore and Polar Engineers, 2013.
B. Peters, N. E. R. Zimmermann, G. T. Beckham, J. W. Tester and B. L. Trout, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17342–17350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Buch, J. P. Devlin, I. A. Monreal, B. Jagoda-Cwiklik, N. Uras-Aytemiz and L. J. P. C. C. P. Cwiklik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10245–10265 RSC .
A. Demurov, R. Radhakrishnan and B. L. Trout, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 116, 702–709 CrossRef .
A. N. Salamatin, A. Falenty and W. F. Kuhs, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17603–17616 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Moudrakovski, K. A. Udachin, S. Alavi, C. I. Ratcliffe and J. A. Ripmeester, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 074705 CrossRef .
S. Liang, D. Liang, N. Wu, L. Yi and G. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16298–16304 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, W. Choi, Y.-J. Seo, J. Y. Lee, J. Lee and Y. Seo, Appl. Energy, 2018, 228, 229–239 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, Y.-j. Seo, T. Ahn, J. Lee, J. Y. Lee, S.-J. Kim and Y. Seo, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 50–58 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, W. Choi, K. Shin and Y. Seo, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 150, 356–364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, Y. Kim and Y. Seo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 8899–8906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Lee, H. Lee and Y. Seo, Appl. Energy, 2015, 150, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Lee, H. Lee and Y. Seo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 13184–13190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, J. Zhao, Q. Li, W. Chen, J. Zhou, N. Wei, P. Guo and W. Sun, Nat. Gas Ind., 2018, 5, 118–131 CrossRef .
S. Ma, J.-n. Zheng, J. Zhao, M. Yang and Y. Song, Fuel, 2021, 284, 119020 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Feng, Y. Wang and X.-S. Li, Appl. Energy, 2018, 211, 1171–1178 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Z. Fan, J. Zhao, X. Lv, W. Pang and Q. Li, Appl. Energy, 2018, 229, 858–871 CrossRef .
Y. Feng, L. Chen, A. Suzuki, T. Kogawa, J. Okajima, A. Komiya and S. Maruyama, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 184, 194–204 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Tupsakhare and M. J. Castaldi, Appl. Energy, 2019, 236, 825–836 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gambelli and F. Rossi, Energy, 2019, 172, 423–434 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deusner, N. Bigalke, E. Kossel and M. Haeckel, Energies, 2012, 5, 2112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, C. Deusner, E. Kossel, W. Choi, Y. Seo and M. Haeckel, Appl. Energy, 2020, 277, 115569 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Yamamoto, Y. Terao, T. Fujii, T. Ikawa, M. Seki, M. Matsuzawa and T. Kanno, Operational overview of the first offshore production test of methane hydrates in the Eastern Nankai Trough. Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, USA, 2014.
K. Yamamoto, X. X. Wang, M. Tamaki and K. Suzuki, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 25987–26013 RSC .
J.-l. Ye, X.-w. Qin, W.-w. Xie, H.-l. Lu, B.-j. Ma, H.-j. Qiu, J.-q. Liang, J.-a. Lu, Z.-g. Kuang, C. Lu, Q.-y. Liang, S.-p. Wei, Y.-j. Yu, C.-s. Liu, B. Li, K.-x. Shen, H.-x. Shi, Q.-p. Lu, J. Li, B.-b. Kou, G. Song, B. Li, H.-e. Zhang, H.-f. Lu, C. Ma, Y.-f. Dong and H. Bian, China Geol., 2020, 3, 197–209 CAS .

          S. H. Hancock, T. S. Collett, S. R. Dallimore, T. Satoh, T. Inoue, E. Huenges, J. Hennings and B. Weatherill, Overview of thermalstimulation production-test results for the JAPEX/JNOC/GSC et al. Mallik 5L-38 gas hydrate production research well., Geological Survey of Canada, Bulletin No. 585; Natural Resources Canada: Ottawa, ONT, Canada, 2005.
K. Yamamoto and S. Dallimore, Fire Ice, Methane Hydrate Newslett., 2008, 8, 1–5 Search PubMed .
Y. Makogon and R. Omelchenko, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2013, 11, 1–6 CrossRef .
T. S. Collett and G. D. Ginsburg, Int. J. Offshore Polar Eng., 1998, 8, 8 Search PubMed .

          S. Hancock, T. Collett, S. Dallimore, T. Satoh, T. Inoue, E. Huenges, J. Henninges and B. Weatherill, Scientific Results From the Mallik 2002 Gas Hydrate Production Research Well Program, Geological Survey of Canada, Mackenzie Delta, Northwest Territories, Canada,  2005, p. CD–ROM Search PubMed .
S. R. Dallimore, T. S. Collett, A. E. Taylor, T. Uchida, M. Weber, A. Chandra, T. H. Mroz, E. M. Caddel and T. Inoue, Bull. - Geol. Surv. Can., 2005, 1–162 Search PubMed .
A. Gupta, T. J. Kneafsey, G. J. Moridis, Y. Seol, M. B. Kowalsky and E. D. Sloan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16384–16392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Grace, T. Collett, F. Colwell, P. Englezos, E. Jones, R. Mansell, J. P. Meekison, R. Ommer, M. Pooladi-Darvish and M. Riedel, Report of the Expert Panel on Gas Hydrates, Council of Canadian Academies,  2008 Search PubMed .
R. B. Hunter, T. S. Collett, R. Boswell, B. J. Anderson, S. A. Digert, G. Pospisil, R. Baker and M. Weeks, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2011, 28, 295–310 CrossRef .
T. S. Collett, M. W. Lee, W. F. Agena, J. J. Miller, K. A. Lewis, M. V. Zyrianova, R. Boswell and T. L. Inks, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2011, 28, 279–294 CrossRef .
R. Boswell, D. Schoderbek, T. S. Collett, S. Ohtsuki, M. White and B. J. Anderson, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 140–153 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Jeon and D.-H. Lee, Environ. Eng. Sci., 2015, 32, 71–85 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Schoderbek, K. L. Martin, J. Howard, S. Silpngarmlert and K. Hester, North Slope Hydrate Fieldtrial: CO2/CH4 Exchange. OTC Arctic Technology Conference, Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, USA, 2012.

          T. Fujii, T. Saeki, T. Kobayashi, T. Inamori, M. Hayashi, O. Takano, T. Takayama, T. Kawasaki, S. Nagakubo, M. Nakamizu and K. Yokoi, Resource Assessment of Methane Hydrate in the Eastern Nankai Trough, Japan. Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, USA, 2008.
K. Yamamoto, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2015, 66, 296–309 CrossRef .
Y. Konno, T. Fujii, A. Sato, K. Akamine, M. Naiki, Y. Masuda, K. Yamamoto and J. Nagao, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 2607–2616 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fu and J. Lu, Mar. Geol. Lett., 2010, 26, 6–10 Search PubMed .
W. Li, X. Yu, X. Zeng, J. Wang and X. Shan, Mar. Geol. Front., 2013, 29, 17–26 Search PubMed .
B. S. Kiran, K. Sowjanya, P. S. Prasad and J.-H. Yoon, Oil Gas Sci. Technol., 2019, 74, 12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, B. Li, W. Guo, X. Lü, Y. Zhang, K. Li, P. Wang, G. Jin, R. Jia and L. Qu, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2014, 21, 456–466 CrossRef .
A. Biastoch, T. Treude, L. H. Rüpke, U. Riebesell, C. Roth, E. B. Burwicz, W. Park, M. Latif, C. W. Böning, G. Madec and K. Wallmann, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2011, 38, 1–5 CrossRef .
T. S. Yun, J. C. Santamarina and C. Ruppel, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 2007, 112, 1–13 Search PubMed .
W.
F. Waite, J. C. Santamarina, D. D. Cortes, B. Dugan, D. N. Espinoza, J. Germaine, J. Jang, J. W. Jung, T. J. Kneafsey, H. Shin, K. Soga, W. J. Winters and T. S. Yun, Rev. Geophys., 2009, 47, 1–38 CrossRef .
K. A. Kvenvolden, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1994, 715, 232–246 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Kvenvolden, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 3420–3426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Riedel and T. S. Collett, IODP Prelim. Rep., 2005, 311, 1–104 Search PubMed .
T. S. Collett and R. Boswell, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2012, 34, 1–3 CrossRef .
B. L. Salvi and S. Jindal, SN Appl. Sci., 2019, 1, 1–20 Search PubMed .

          O. Davidson and B. Metz, Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage, International Panel on Climate Change(IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Kanniche, R. Gros-Bonnivard, P. Jaud, J. Valle-Marcos, J.-M. Amann and C. Bouallou, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2010, 30, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Rubin, H. Mantripragada, A. Marks, P. Versteeg and J. Kitchin, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2012, 38, 630–671 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Rao and E. S. Rubin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 4467–4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Adewole, A. L. Ahmad, S. Ismail and C. P. Leo, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 17, 46–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Sunarso, S. M. Liu and R. Wang, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 12, 84–107 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brunetti, F. Scura, G. Barbieri and E. Drioli, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 359, 115–125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, X. Luo, H. Zhang, N. Sun, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 11–36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinha and M. J. Realff, AIChE J., 2019, 65, e16607 CrossRef .
S. J. Self, B. V. Reddy and M. A. Rosen, Int. J. Renew. Energy Environ. Eng., 2012, 3, 16 CrossRef .
D. J. Roddy and P. L. Younger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 400–407 RSC .
A. Veawab, A. Aroonwilas and P. Tontiwachwuthikul, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 223, U568–U569 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Leung, G. Caramanna and M. M. Maroto-Valer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 426–443 CrossRef CAS .
F. O. Ochedi, J. Yu, H. Yu, Y. Liu and A. Hussain, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 19, 77–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Figueroa, T. Fout, S. Plasynski, H. McIlvried and R. D. Srivastava, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2008, 2, 9–20 CrossRef CAS .
P. Luis, Desalination, 2016, 380, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gottlicher and R. Pruschek, Energy Convers. Manage., 1997, 38, S173–S178 CrossRef .
M. J. Tuinier, M. V. Annaland, G. J. Kramer and J. A. M. Kuipers, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 114–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, Q. Liu, S. Deng, H. Li and Y. Kitamura, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 265–278 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, Q. Liu, N. Ji, S. Deng, J. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Song and H. Li, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 215–231 CrossRef CAS .
R. Anantharaman, D. Berstad and S. Roussanaly, Energy Procedia, 2014, 61, 1244–1247 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Kundu, A. Chakma and X. Feng, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2014, 28, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scholz, B. Frank, F. Stockrneier, S. Falss and M. Wessling, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 16929–16938 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Li, D. Rocha, S. J. Zhou, H. Meyer and D. Yong, Hybrid Membrane/Absorption Process for Post-Combustion CO2 Capture. North American Membrane Society Meeting, 2012.
DOE/NETL, Carbon dioxide capture from existing coal-fired power plants, U.S. Department of Energy(DOE)/National Energy Technology Laboratory(NETL), 2006, https://www.globalccsinstitute.com/archive/hub/publications/159713/carbon-dioxide-capture-existing-coal-fired-power-plants.pdf, (accessed January 2021).
E. R. van Selow, P. D. Cobden, A. D. Wright, R. W. van den Brink and D. Jansen, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 1090–1095 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Li Yuen Fong, C. J. Anderson, G. Xiao, P. A. Webley and A. F. A. Hoadley, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 111, 193–203 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Soria, S. Tosti, A. Mendes and L. M. Madeira, Fuel, 2015, 159, 854–863 CrossRef CAS .
D. Suroutseua, R. Amin and A. Barifcani, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2011, 89, 1752–1757 CrossRef .

          D. Hasse, S. Kulkarni, E. Sanders, E. Corson and J. P. Tranier, in CO2 capture by sub-ambient membrane operation. in Ghgt-11, ed. T. Dixon and K. Yamaji, Elsevier Science Bv, Amsterdam,  2013, vol. 37, pp. 993–1003 Search PubMed .
C. F. Song, Q. L. Liu, N. Ji, S. Deng, J. Zhao and Y. Kitamura, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2017, 114, 887–895 CrossRef CAS .
M. Co, G. Co, U. States, C. Capture and I. Co, Gsa Today, 2009, 36–37 Search PubMed .
M. D. Aminu, S. A. Nabavi, C. A. Rochelle and V. Manovic, Appl. Energy, 2017, 208, 1389–1419 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Voormeij and G. J. Simandl, Geosci. Can., 2004, 31, 11–22 Search PubMed .

          M. Javaheri and K. Jessen, Residual trapping in simultaneous injection of CO2 and brine in saline aquifers, SPE Western North American Region Meeting. Society of Petroleum Engineers, 2011.
A. Burnol, I. Thinon, L. Ruffine and J. M. Herri, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2015, 35, 96–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. Frerichs, J. Rakoczy, C. Ostertag-Henning and M. Krüger, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 1306–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, Z. Pang, L. Lin, Z. Jia, F. Zhang, Z. Duan and Z. Zong, Appl. Geochem., 2013, 30, 4–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mito, Z. Xue and T. Sato, Appl. Geochem., 2013, 30, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cantucci, G. Montegrossi, O. Vaselli, F. Tassi, F. Quattrocchi and E. H. Perkins, Chem. Geol., 2009, 265, 181–197 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shukla, P. Ranjith, A. Haque and X. Choi, Fuel, 2010, 89, 2651–2664 CrossRef CAS .
J. Trémosa, C. Castillo, C. Q. Vong, C. Kervévan, A. Lassin and P. Audigane, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2014, 20, 2–26 CrossRef .
P. J. Armitage, R. H. Worden, D. R. Faulkner, A. C. Aplin, A. R. Butcher and A. A. Espie, J. Geol. Soc., 2013, 170, 119–132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wdowin, R. Tarkowski and M. Manecki, Gospod. Surowcami Miner., 2013, 29, 137–153 Search PubMed .
X. L. Zhao, X. W. Liao, W. F. Wang, C. Z. Chen, Z. H. Rui and H. Wang, J. Energy Inst., 2014, 87, 297–305 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Voormeij and G. Simandl, British Columbia Geological Survey, Geological Fieldwork,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. Bachu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2000, 41, 953–970 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wildgust, C. Gilboy and P. Tontiwachwuthikul, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 16, S1–S4 CrossRef .
F. J. Ryerson, J. Lake, S. Whittaker and J. W. Johnson, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 16, S25–S34 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Hawkes and C. Gardner, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 16, S50–S61 CrossRef .
IEA, Effects of impurities on geological storage of CO2, International Energy Agency(IEA), Cheltenham, UK, 2011.
P. W. Boyd, H. Claustre, M. Levy, D. A. Siegel and T. Weber, Nature, 2019, 568, 327–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Adams and K. Caldeira, Elements of Physical Oceanography: A derivative of the Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences,  2009, p. 315 Search PubMed .
M. Hofmann and H. J. Schellnhuber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1883–1896 RSC .
M. Z. Jacobson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 148–173 RSC .
W. Seifritz, Nature, 1990, 345, 486 CrossRef .
A. Sanna, M. Uibu, G. Caramanna, R. Kuusik and M. M. Maroto-Valer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8049–8080 RSC .
E. R. Bobicki, Q. X. Liu, Z. H. Xu and H. B. Zeng, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2012, 38, 302–320 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, F. Y. Zhang and W. Lipinski, Appl. Energy, 2020, 269, 26 Search PubMed .
J. Thilagan, B. Gayathri and M. Sugumar, Int. J. Environ. Waste Manage., 2018, 22, 147–181 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Bishnoi and V. Natarajan, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1996, 117, 168–177 CrossRef .
J. He, Y. Liu, Z. Ma, S. Deng, R. Zhao and L. Zhao, Energy Procedia, 2017, 105, 4090–4097 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, F. Zhang and W. Lipiński, Appl. Energy, 2020, 269, 114928 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, J. Wang and B. Bao, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 175–193 CrossRef CAS .
V. Feyzi and V. Mohebbi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 13132–13142 CrossRef CAS .
X.-S. Li, Z.-M. Xia, Z.-Y. Chen and H.-J. Wu, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 1302–1309 CrossRef CAS .
P. Warrier, M. Naveed Khan, M. A. Carreon, C. J. Peters and C. A. Koh, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2018, 10, 034701 CrossRef .

          D. Surovtseva, CO2 separation by cryogenic and hydrate, Curtin University,  2010 Search PubMed .
C.-G. Xu, Y.-S. Yu, W.-J. Xie, Z.-M. Xia, Z.-Y. Chen and X.-S. Li, Appl. Energy, 2019, 255, 113791 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Li, C. Xu, Y. Yu, Z. Chen, N. Huang and G. Li, US Pat., 10183865,  2019 Search PubMed .
L. Li, S. Fan, Q. Chen, G. Yang, J. Zhao, N. Wei and Y. Wen, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2018, 79, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aaron and C. Tsouris, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2005, 40, 321–348 CrossRef CAS .
P. Linga, R. Kumar and P. Englezos, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 149, 625–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Mat and G. G. Lipscomb, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2017, 62, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, N. Zhao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Fuel, 2013, 108, 112–130 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. C. Leung, G. Caramanna and M. M. Maroto-Valer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 426–443 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun and P. Englezos, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2014, 25, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Xu, R. Yan, J. Fu, S.-H. Zhang, K.-F. Yan, Z.-Y. Chen, Z.-M. Xia and X.-S. Li, Appl. Energy, 2019, 239, 57–69 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Molokitina, A. N. Nesterov, L. S. Podenko and A. M. Reshetnikov, Fuel, 2019, 235, 1400–1411 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Xu, M. Fan, R. Gupta, R. B. Slimane, A. E. Bland and I. Wright, J. Environ. Sci., 2008, 20, 14–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Rochelle, A. P. Camps, D. Long, A. Milodowski, K. Bateman, D. Gunn, P. Jackson, M. A. Lovell and J. Rees, Geol. Soc. London Spec. Publ., 2009, 319, 171–183 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghavipour, M. Ghavipour, M. Chitsazan, S. H. Najibi and S. S. Ghidary, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2013, 91, 264–273 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ruffine, J. P. Donval, J. L. Charlou, A. Cremière and B. H. Zehnder, Mar. Pet. Geol., 2010, 27, 1157–1165 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rehder, I. Leifer, P. G. Brewer, G. Friederich and E. T. Peltzer, Mar. Chem., 2009, 114, 19–30 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jemai, B. Kvamme and M. T. Vafaei, WSEAS Trans. Heat Mass Transfer, 2014, 9, 150–168 Search PubMed .
M. R. Talaghat, F. Esmaeilzadeh and J. Fathikaljahi, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2009, 279, 28–40 CrossRef CAS .
T. Khabibullin, G. Falcone and C. Teodoriu, SPE-131332-PA, 2011, 26, 287–294 CAS .
S.-P. Kang and H. Lee, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 4397–4400 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Klara and R. D. Srivastava, Environ. Prog., 2002, 21, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Luo, J. H. Zhu, S. S. Fan and G. J. Chen, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2007, 62, 1000–1009 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zhang, S. Lee and J. W. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 6353–6359 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Fan, S. F. Li, J. Q. Wang, X. M. Lang and Y. H. Wang, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4202–4208 CrossRef CAS .
X.-S. Li, C.-G. Xu, Z.-Y. Chen and H.-J. Wu, Energy, 2011, 36, 1394–1403 CrossRef CAS .
P. Babu, R. Kumar and P. Linga, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 17, 206–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, S. Lee, Y. Lee, Y. Lee and Y. Seo, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2013, 14, 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bhattacharjee, A. Kumar, T. Sakpal and R. Kumar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1205–1214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, P. Wang, M. Yang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhao and Y. Song, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2018, 49, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gauteplass, S. Almenningen, G. Ersland, T. Barth, J. Yang and A. Chapoy, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122646 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Yu, Q.-Z. Zhang, X.-S. Li, C. Chen and S.-D. Zhou, Appl. Energy, 2020, 265, 114808 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Yu, C.-G. Xu and X.-S. Li, Energy, 2018, 143, 546–553 CrossRef CAS .
OECD/IEA, Report, Technology Roadmap: Carbon capture and storage, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development(OECD)/International Energy Agency(IEA), Paris, 2009.
IEA, CCUS in Clean Energy Transitions, International Energy Agency(IEA), Paris, 2020.
W. J. Schmelz, G. Hochman and K. G. Miller, Interface Focus, 2020, 10, 20190065 CrossRef PubMed .
F. d’Amore and F. Bezzo, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8, 1–15 CrossRef .

          J. Wachsmuth, M. Schaeffer and B. Hare, The EU long-term strategy to reduce GHG emissions in light of the Paris Agreement and the IPCC Special Report on 1, 5 °C, Working Paper Sustainability and Innovation, 2018.
D. Hidalgo and J. M. Martín-Marroquín, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 132, 110057 CrossRef CAS .

          A.-M. O. Mohamed, M. El-Gamal and S. Hameedi, International Symposium on Energy Geotechnics,  2018, pp. 387–393 Search PubMed .
I. Ustadi, T. Mezher and M. R. Abu-Zahra, Energy Procedia, 2017, 114, 6366–6376 CrossRef .
CTSA-CCUS, China CCUS Roadmap (edition 2019), National Energy Group Beijing, China, 2019.
M. Baek, Q. Chai and S. Kim, Clim. Change Econ., 2020, 11, 2050010 CrossRef .
S. Silva, I. Soares and C. Pinho, Appl. Econ. Lett., 2018, 25, 425–428 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, D. L. McCollum, O. Fricko, M. Gidden, D. Huppmann, V. Krey and K. Riahi, Environ. Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 054017 CrossRef CAS .
EIA, The Basics of Underground Natural Gas Storage, U.S. Energy Information Administration(EIA) https://www.eia.gov/naturalgas/storage/basics/#:~:text=These%20underground%20facilities%20are%20deplete-d,form%20in%20above%E2%80%93ground%20tanks, (accessed December 2020).
The World Bank, Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership (GGFR), the Word Bank https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/gasflaringreduction#1, (accessed December 2020).
EIA, Internal Natural Gas Consumption, U.S. Energy Information Administration(EIA), https://www.eia.gov/international/data/world, (accessed December 2020).
K. Huang and J. Fu, Sci. Data, 2016, 3, 160104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Nwankwo and D. O. Ogagarue, J. Geol. Min. Res., 2011, 3, 131–136 Search PubMed .
O. Maduka and C. Tobin-west, BMJ Global Health, 2017, 2, e000413 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. S. Gudmundsson and M. Parlaktuna, Storage of natural gas hydrate at refrigerated conditions. AICHE Spring National Meeting. 5, New Orleans, USA, 1992.
I. Chatti, A. Delahaye, L. Fournaison and J.-P. Petitet, Energy Convers. Manage., 2005, 46, 1333–1343 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Nogami, S. Watanabe and S. Nakai, World's First Demonstration Project of Natural Gas Hydrate (NGH) Land Transportation. International Petroleum Technology Conference, Bangkok, Thailand, 2011.
J. Javanmardi, K. Nasrifar, S. H. Najibi and M. Moshfeghian, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2005, 25, 1708–1723 CrossRef .
E. F. May, R. Wu, M. A. Kellend, Z. M. Aman, K. A. Kozielski, P. G. Hatley and N. Maeda, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 107, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, X. Peng, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao and Y. Kong, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2017, 107, 141–152 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tanaka, E. Sakemoto and R. Ohmura, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2529–2536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, A. Melchuna, J.-H. Sa and A. K. Sum, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2020, 79, 103340 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Lee, T. Kawamura, Y. Yamamoto and J.-H. Yoon, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2012, 57, 3543–3548 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-N. Lv, X.-S. Li, Z.-Y. Chen and J.-C. Feng, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2013, 58, 3249–3253 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bhattacharjee, M. N. Goh, S. E. Arumuganainar, Y. Zhang and P. Linga, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4946–4961 RSC .
R. Kumar, P. Linga, I. Moudrakovski, J. A. Ripmeester and P. Englezos, AIChE J., 2008, 54, 2132–2144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, M. Kida and J. Nagao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23469–23475 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arjmandi, A. Chapoy and B. Tohidi, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2007, 52, 2153–2158 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Makogon and E. D. Sloan, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 1994, 39, 351–353 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Kim, J. Park, J.-W. Lee, J. A. Ripmeester and H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15360–15361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, Y. K. Jin and Y. Seo, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 338, 572–578 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kashchiev and A. Firoozabadi, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 243, 476–489 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-s. Yu, C.-g. Xu and X.-s. Li, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 59, 64–69 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Veluswamy, A. J. H. Wong, P. Babu, R. Kumar, S. Kulprathipanja, P. Rangsunvigit and P. Linga, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 290, 161–173 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jeenmuang, C. Viriyakul, K. Inkong, H. P. Veluswamy, S. Kulprathipanja, P. Rangsunvigit and P. Linga, Fuel, 2021, 299, 120828 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, Y. Chen, Q. Li, L. Li, H. Huang, S. Wang and W. Wang, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1195–1199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Lee and J. W. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 6353–6359 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pahlavanzadeh, S. Rezaei, M. Khanlarkhani, M. Manteghian and A. H. Mohammadi, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2016, 34, 803–810 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kelland, T. M. Svartaas, J. Øvsthus, T. Tomita and J.-i. Chosa, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2006, 61, 4048–4059 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, G. Bhattacharjee, B. D. Kulkarni and R. Kumar, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 12217–12232 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Canselier, J. Disper. Sci. Technol., 1993, 14, 625–644 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Kalogerakis, A. K. M. Jamaluddin, P. D. Dholabhai and P. R. Bishinoi, Effect of Surfactants on Hydrate Formation Kinetics, SPE International Symposium on Oilfield Chemistry, New Orleans, LA, USA, 1993.
Y. Zhong and R. E. Rogers, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2000, 55, 4175–4187 CrossRef CAS .
K. Watanabe, S. Imai and Y. H. Mori, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 4846–4857 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ando, Y. Kuwabara and Y. H. Mori, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 73, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hayama, M. Mitarai, H. Mori and R. Ohmura, Procedia Eng., 2016, 148, 339–345 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, W. Pu, J. Zhao, Y. Guo, P. Lian, Y. Liu, L. Wang and Y. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 32, 20473–20479 CrossRef .
G. Pandey, G. Bhattacharjee, H. P. Veluswamy, R. Kumar, J. S. Sangwai and P. Linga, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6899–6911 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Veluswamy, S. Kumar, R. Kumar, P. Rangsunvigit and P. Linga, Fuel, 2016, 182, 907–919 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pivezhani, H. Roosta, A. Dashti and S. H. Mazloumi, Energy, 2016, 113, 215–226 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gnanendran and R. Amin, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 3849–3863 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsuda, H. Tsuda and Y. H. Mori, AIChE J., 2006, 52, 2979–2987 CrossRef .
F. Rossi, M. Filipponi and B. Castelani, Appl. Energy, 2012, 99, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Luo, J.-H. Zhu, S.-S. Fan and G.-J. Chen, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2007, 62, 1000–1009 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, E. O. Straume, G. A. Grasso, R. E. M. Morales and A. K. Sum, Fuel, 2020, 262, 116558 CrossRef CAS .
G. Song, Y. Li, W. Wang, K. Jiang, X. Ye and P. Zhao, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2017, 158, 480–489 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kelland, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 825–847 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Tian and C. Walker, Non-emulsifying, new anti-agglomerant developments, In Offshore Technology Conference,
Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, USA, 2012.
S. Dong and A. Firoozabadi, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2018, 117, 214–222 CrossRef CAS .
S.-d. Zhou, Y.-s. Yu, M.-m. Zhao, S.-l. Wang and G.-Z. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 4694–4698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chevalier and M. A. Bolzinger, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 439, 23–34 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. L. Bray, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11608–11609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Gong, X. Yang, B. Slupe, J. Jin, N. Wu and A. K. Sum, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 13496–13508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Yakushev and V. A. Istomin, Phys. Chem. Ice, 1992, 136–140 Search PubMed .

          W. Shimada, S. Takeya, Y. Kamata, T. Uchida, J. Nagao, T. Ebinuma and H. Narita, Mechanism of self-preservation during dissociation of methane clathrate hydrate, Fifth international conference on gas hydrates (ICGH 5), Trondheim, Norway, 2005.
H. Mimachi, M. Takahashi, S. Takeya, Y. Gotoh, A. Yoneyama, K. Hyodo, T. Takeda and T. Murayama, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 4827–4834 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Stern, S. Circone, S. H. Kirby and W. B. Durham, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1756–1762 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takeya and J. A. Ripmeester, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 70–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Kuhs, G. Genov, D. K. Staykova and T. Hansen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 4917–4920 RSC .
A. Falenty and W. F. Kuhs, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15975–15988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Falenty, W. F. Kuhs, M. Glockzin and G. Rehder, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 6275–6283 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mimachi, S. Takeya, A. Yoneyama, K. Hyodo, T. Takeda, Y. Gotoh and T. Murayama, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2014, 118, 208–213 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Stern, S. Circone, S. H. Kirby and W. B. Durham, Can. J. Phys., 2003, 81, 271–283 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takeya and J. A. Ripmeester, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 54, 1276–1279 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Misyura, Appl. Energy, 2020, 270, 115042 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Misyura and I. G. Donskoy, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 148, 65–77 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rehder, E. Eckl, M. Elfgen, A. Falenty, R. Hamann, N. Kahler, W. F. Kuhs, H. Osterkamp and C. Windweier, Energies, 2012, 5, 2499–2523 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shim, Y. Lee, K. song, J. Na, S. Park, Y. Lee, C.-J. Lee and C. Han, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2016, 112, 64–77 CrossRef .
H. Najibi, R. rezaei, J. Javanmardi, K. Nasrifar and M. Moshfeghian, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2009, 29, 2009–2015 CrossRef .
L. Liu, B. Ryu, Z. Sun, N. Wu, H. Cao, W. Geng, X. Zhang, Y. Jia, C. Xu and L. Guo, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2019, 65, 82–107 CrossRef CAS .
European Commission, COP21 Paris Agreement, European Commission, https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris, (accessed March 2021).

          D. van Vuuren, E. Kriegler, K. Riahi, M. Tavoni, B. Koelbl and M. van Sluisveld, The use of carbon capture and storage in mitigation scenarios—An integrated assessment modelling perspective, Our Common Future Under Climate Change, International Scientific Conference, Paris, 2015.
D. Guan, J. Meng, D. M. Reiner, N. Zhang, Y. Shan, Z. Mi, S. Shao, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang and S. J. Davis, Nat. Geosci., 2018, 11, 551–555 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yelery, China Rep., 2016, 52, 228–234 CrossRef .
NDRC, 13th FYP of Energy Development, 2016, National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) http://www.ndrc.gov.cn/zcfb/zcfbtz/201701/t20170117_835278.html, (accessed March 2021).
China, Diplomacy, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3113775/xi-jinpings-pledge-cut-chinas-carbon-emissions-raises, (accessed March 2021).

          T. Spencer, R. Pierfederici, H. Waisman, M. Colombier, C. Bertram, E. Kriegler, G. Luderer, F. Humpenoeder, A. Popp and O. Edenhofer, Beyond the numbers: understanding the transformation induced by INDCs,  2015 Search PubMed .
J. Lilliestam, J. M. Bielicki and A. G. Patt, Energy Policy, 2012, 47, 447–455 CrossRef .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo and L. A. Hackett, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
IPCC, Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change(IPCC), 2018, https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/, (accessed March 2021).
J. C. Minx, W. F. Lamb, M. W. Callaghan, L. Bornmann and S. Fuss, Environ. Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 035007 CrossRef .
J. Hansen, M. Sato, P. Kharecha, K. Von Schuckmann, D. J. Beerling, J. Cao, S. Marcott, V. Masson-Delmotte, M. J. Prather, E. J. Rohling, J. Shakun, P. Smith, A. Lacis, G. Russell and R. Ruedy, Earth Syst. Dyn., 2016, 8, 577–616 CrossRef .
T. Gasser, C. Guivarch, K. Tachiiri, C. Jones and P. Ciais, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. E. Tanzer and A. Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1210–1218 RSC .
G. Luderer, R. C. Pietzcker, C. Bertram, E. Kriegler, M. Meinshausen and O. Edenhofer, Environ. Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 034033 CrossRef .
J. Rogelj, A. Popp, K. V. Calvin, G. Luderer, J. Emmerling, D. Gernaat, S. Fujimori, J. Strefler, T. Hasegawa and G. Marangoni, Nat. Clim. Change, 2018, 8, 325 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Arcanjo, A Climate institute publication,  2019 Search PubMed .
EASAC, EASAC policy report 35, European Academics Science Advisory Council(EASAC), 2018.
J. G. Canadell and M. R. Raupach, Science, 2008, 320, 1456–1457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Smith, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustainability, 2012, 4, 539–544 CrossRef .
M. Z. Jacobson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3567–3574 RSC .
S. Sgouridis, M. Carbajales-Dale, D. Csala, M. Chiesa and U. Bardi, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 456–465 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tollefson, Nature, 2018, 562, 172–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Riahi, E. Kriegler, N. Johnson, C. Bertram, M. Den Elzen, J. Eom, M. Schaeffer, J. Edmonds, M. Isaac and V. Krey, Technol. Forecase. Soc., 2015, 90, 8–23 CrossRef .
S. Hong, C. J. Bradshaw and B. W. Brook, Appl. Energy, 2015, 143, 451–459 CrossRef .
B. L. Salvi and S. Jindal, SN Appl. Sci., 2019, 1, 885 CrossRef CAS .
I. OECD, Energy and Air Pollution: World Energy Outlook Special Report 2016, 2016.

          V. Kumar and N. Goyal, Comprehensive Study of Different Renewable Energy Resources such as Hydro Energy, Solar Energy and Wind Energy,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. A. Khan, M. Z. Khan, K. Zaman and L. Naz, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 29, 336–344 CrossRef .

          F. Birol, J. Corben, M. Argiri, M. Baroni, A. Corbeau, L. Cozzi and A. Yangisawa, IEA World Energy Outlook,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. A. Alvarez, S. W. Pacala, J. J. Winebrake, W. L. Chameides and S. P. Hamburg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 6435–6440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Al-Ghussain, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2019, 38, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Cousins, L. Wardhaugh and A. Cottrell, Absorption-based Post-combustion Capture of Carbon Dioxide, Elsevier,  2016, pp. 649–684 Search PubMed .
S. Ahmad, Y. Li, X. Li, W. Xia, Z. Chen and P. Wang, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 528–547 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tohidi, J. Yang, M. Salehabadi, R. Anderson and A. Chapoy, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1509–1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Cote and J. Wright, Preliminary assessment of the geological potential for sequestration of CO2 as gas hydrate in the Alberta portion of the Western Canada Sedimentary Basin, Natural Resources Canada,  2013 Search PubMed .

          K. G. Osadetz and M. P.-D. J. A. Majorowicz, Athabasca carbon dioxide storage as gas hydrate: A call for improved current and recent temperature and permafrost data and histories, 2018.

          M. Cote and F. Wright. Geological potential for sequestration of CO2 as gas hydrate in the Alberta portion of the Western Canada Sedimentary Basin. Canadian Unconventional Resources and International Petroleum Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 2010.

          J. C. Shaw, Technical Evaluation & Feasibility Study on Subterranean Disposal of CO2 as Hydrate, Geological Survey of Canada Open File 1830, 2004.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yi-Song Yu
	Dr Yi-song Yu received his PhD in engineering thermophysics (2018) from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. From 2018 to 2019, he worked at the Center of Gas Hydrate Research in Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Currently he performs postdoctoral research at Colorado School of Mines, USA, on flow assurance. His research areas include the thermodynamics and kinetics of gas hydrates, hydrate-based CO2 capture, utilization and storage, hydrate-based energy storage and transportation, and natural gas hydrate exploitation.

Xianwei Zhang
	Xianwei Zhang received his PhD in 2017 in chemical engineering at Colorado School of Mines under the supervision of Prof. Amadeu Sum. His research was in the field of hydrate-related flow assurance. During his post-doctoral research, he expanded his research interest to more hydrate-related science and engineering challenges.

Jian-Wu Liu
	Jian-Wu Liu is currently an assistant research scientist under the guidance of Prof. Xiao-Sen LI at Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion (GIEC), Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his PhD in Fluid Mechanics at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. De-Tang LU in the field of fluid flow within porous media. His research interests include fluid flow and fluid–solid coupling effect in unconventional reservoirs and other porous media.

Yohan Lee
	Dr Yohan Lee is a postdoctoral fellow in Colorado School of Mines, USA from 2019. He received his PhD in environmental engineering from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea, in 2017. He has also worked in GEOMAR – Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Germany, with Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship. His research interests are flow assurance, natural gas hydrate exploitation, and carbon capture, utilization and storage.

Xiao-Sen Li
	Xiao-Sen Li, PhD, Professor, graduated from the Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University with a Doctoral Degree in 2000. From April 2000 to July 2005, he worked at the University of Alberta and University of British Columbia. From August 2005 to now, he works at the Center of Gas Hydrate Research in Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), as a chief scientist and a professor. He is a director of the Key Laboratory of Gas Hydrate, CAS. His research interests are in thermodynamics and kinetics of gas hydrates, production and utilization of natural gas hydrates and hydrate-based application technology. He has published more than 260 academic papers, obtained 65 patents of invention and won the second prize of the National Technological Invention Award.

Broader context
The transition of the global economy from oil-based to natural gas-based affects future carbon capture and storage (CCS) and offers an opportunity for natural gas hydrate (NGH) use. NGHs with one-third of the mobile organic carbon on Earth can act as a carbon storage reservoir. Hydrate-based technology for carbon (CO2 and CH4) capture and storage can also support climate change mitigation. This paper provides a perspective on the relationship between the upcoming energy supply scenario, NGH utilization, hydrate-based technologies, and climate change mitigation; summarizes the state-of-the-art developments related to these aspects; and highlights key research challenges. Importantly, this perspective balances the risks related to the development of technologies, the CCS capacity, and climate change mitigation targets.


Challenges, uncertainties and issues facing gas production from gas hydrate deposits6	2010	Status of the efforts toward commercial gas production of hydrates
Review on the gas hydrate development and production as a new energy resource7	2011	Knowledge of gas hydrate and the scope of gas hydrate research
Current perspectives on gas hydrate resources8	2011	History and current status of gas hydrate resource assessment
Application of gas hydrate formation in separation processes: A review of experimental studies9	2012	Introduction to hydrate-based techniques related to separation processes
Review of progress in evaluating gas hydrate drilling hazards10	2012	History of gas hydrate shallow hazard assessment
A review on research on replacement of CH4 in natural gas hydrates by use of CO211	2012	Research advances in replacement of CH4 with CO2 in Natural Gas Hydrates (NGHs) and discussion of its advantages and disadvantages
Review of CO2–CH4 clathrate hydrate replacement reaction laboratory studies – properties and kinetics12	2013	Research progress in replacement reactions and analytical methods with a special focus on laboratory studies
Review of the findings of the Iġnik Sikumi CO2–CH4 gas hydrate exchange field trial13	2014	Findings of the Iġnik Sikumi CO2–CH4 gas hydrate exchange field trial
The status of natural gas hydrate research in China: a review14	2014	Gas hydrate research in China
Recent advances in gas hydrate-based CO2 capture15	2015	Chemical additives and the mechanical methods used to improve the CO2 separation efficiency and energy consumption through hydrate-based carbon capture techniques
A review of the hydrate-based gas separation (HBGS) process for carbon dioxide pre-combustion capture16	2015	Summary of the data for the hydrate-based gas separation (HBGS) process related to the capture of CO2 from fuel gas mixtures
Evaluation of natural gas hydrates as a future methane source17	2016	Evaluation of the potential of methane gas from NGHs as a future unconventional energy source
Investigation into gas production from natural gas hydrate: a review18	2016	Current hydrate research scope and main achievements
Review of natural gas hydrates as an energy resource: prospects and challenges19	2016	Resource potential of natural gas hydrates, current research progress in laboratory settings, and several recent field trials
Review of fundamental properties of CO2 hydrates and CO2 capture and separation using hydration method20	2016	Research on CO2 hydrates and hydrates of gas mixtures of CO2/N2/H2/CH4, including the fundamental thermo-physical properties, molecular structures and hydrate formation equilibrium conditions
Energy-efficient natural gas hydrate production using gas exchange21	2016	State-of-the-art gas exchange concept for NGH production and several recent international NGH field production tests
Review of exploration and production technology of natural gas hydrate22	2018	Natural gas exploitation techniques
A review of solidified natural gas (SNG) technology for gas storage via clathrate hydrates23	2018	Methods of improving the kinetics of hydrate formation and increasing the gas storage capacity
Research progress in hydrate-based technologies and processes in China: A review24	2019	Current status of hydrate-based technology research in China
Carbon dioxide sequestration via hydrates: a potential pathway towards decarbonization25	2020	A brief overview of biological and non-biological CO2 sequestration methods



Hydro	37.66	1310	50–95	130–160


Wind	5.146	622 (594 onshore, 28 offshore)	48–600	28400
Solar	2.607	586 (580 photovoltaic, 6 concentrated)	118–2592	3.9 × 106
Bio	1.88	124 (87 solid biofuel, 3 liquid biofuel, 19 biogas)	27–1500	3000
Ocean	0.0036	0.531	1.8–33	700
Geothermal	0.318	13.909	1.1–22	1300
Nuclear	24.92	39732	1000 EJ (uranium with current reactors)33	N/A
Coal	157.9 (36.45 electricity)	1631.9 (in 2017)	N/A	N/A
Oil	193.03	107.7 (in 2017)	N/A	N/A
Natural gas	141.5 (22.5 electricity)	460.3 (in 2017)	N/A	N/A

 	Fig. 1  Consumption of energy sources and projections.	 

Cage	512	51262	512	51264	512	51268	435663
Cage ratio	1	3	2	1	3	1	2
Cage size (nm)57	0.395	0.433	0.391	0.473	0.391	0.571	0.406

Conventional gas reservoir	Gas migration through porous media until reaching a sealed impermeable trap	6599 (2015)	
68

Tight sand gas	Gas trapped in low-permeability sandstone and carbonates	6954 (2015)	
69

Shale gas	Gas trapped in pores and fractures in low-permeability shale rock
Coalbed methane	Gas absorbed by the coal particles in the coal mines	275–11296 (1992)	
70

Gas hydrates	Gas solidified with water	∼105 (unproved, 2004)	
71

Others	Gas from various sources, including biomass, land fill waste, crude oil cracking, etc.	N/A	


Total
	
	
198.8 (2019, all resources)
	
29


 	Fig. 2  Carbon cycle components related to NGHs.	 


Onshore permafrost	20 Gt C84	Thermogenic	Intermediate: hydrates are deeply buried but are affected by substantial climate warming and permafrost thawing at high latitudes
Subsea permafrost in the Arctic	Unknown	Thermogenic	Intermediate: hydrates are deeply buried but will continue to dissociate as warming from inundation propagates to deeper depths in the Arctic Ocean shelves
Subglacial in Antarctica	80–400 Gt C85	Microbial and thermogenic	Low: global warming will be less obvious in Antarctica over the next few centuries
Upper continental slope	63 Gt C80	Microbial	High: due to the warming of intermediate ocean waters and the very small magnitude of offsetting stabilization effect associated with rising sea level
Deep marine	1717 Gt C	Microbial	Low: due to the long-term stability of deep ocean temperatures and the fact that the hydrates are generally far inside the stability zone

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of NGH reservoirs affected by depressurization.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of the NGH reservoir affected by thermal stimulation.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of NGH reservoirs affected by inhibitor injection.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the potential geo-mechanical repercussions of hydrate dissociation-based production methods.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the P–T conditions of NGH reservoirs affected by the CH4–CO2 replacement.	 

Japan	Daini-Atsumi Knoll	2013	Depressurization	6 d, 11.9 × 104	2 × 104	
188

Daini-Atsumi Knoll	2017	Depressurization	12 d, 3.5 × 104	2.9 × 103	
189

Daini-Atsumi Knoll	2017	Depressurization	24 d, 20 × 104	8.3 × 103 m3	
189

China	Shenhu	2017	Depressurization	60 d, 30.9 × 105	5.2 × 103 m3 (1.6 × 104 m3 in the initial 8 days)	
126

Shenhu	2020	Depressurization	30 d, 8.614 × 105	2.9 × 104 m3	
190

Canada	Mallik	2002	Heating	125 h, 468	3.7 m3	
191

Mallik	2007	Depressurization	12.5 h, 830	66 m3	
192

Mallik	2008	Depressurization	6 d, 1.3 × 104	2.2 × 103 m3	
192

USA	Prudhoe Bay	2012	CO2 replacement	31.5 d, 2.83 × 104	90 m3	
13 and 127


 	Fig. 8  Sources of capturable CO2.	 

 	Fig. 9  Carbon capture methods during fossil fuel consumption.	 

 	Fig. 10  Technical approaches to CO2 capture and separation (prepared based on the information provided by Salvi and Jindal218 and Rubin et al.221).	 

 	Fig. 11  The four main CO2 trapping mechanisms.263	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the hydrate-based CO2 capture and sequestration technique.277	 

 	Fig. 13  Hybrid hydrate-based CO2 capture process.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of the pilot-scale device for CO2 separation from IGCC syngas using a combination of the hydrate and chemical absorption methods (1 – first one-way air valve; 2 – flow distributor; 3 – gas flow-meter; 4 – second one-way air valve; 5 – Venturi jet unit; 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, and 22 – temperature sensors; 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, and 23 – pressure transducers; 24 – gas–liquid–solid three phase separator; 25 – first stop valve; 26 – first slurry pump; 27 – second stop valve; 28 – hydrate decomposition tank; 29 – regulating valve; 30 – third stop valve; 31 – second slurry pump; 32 – fourth stop valve; 33 – saturated solution tank; 34 – third one-way valve; 35 – proportion–integration–differentiation (PID); 36 – fourth one-way valve; 37 – chemical adsorption tower; 38 – fifth one-way valve; 39 – gas collecting tank; 40 – fifth stop valve; 41 – first noncorrosive pump; 42 – sixth stop valve; 43 – solution reservoir; 44 – second noncorrosive pump; 45 – heat exchanger; 46 – seventh stop valve; 47 – MEA regeneration tower; 48 – eighth stop valve; 49 – third noncorrosive pump; 50 – ninth stop valve; 51 – tenth stop valve; 52 – liquid flow-meter; 53, 54, and 55 – safety valves; 56 – observation window).287	 

 	Fig. 15  Picture of the continuous CO2 separation device that uses a combination of the hydrate and chemical absorption methods (1 – gas–liquid–solid three-phase separator; 2 – hydrate decomposition tank; 3 – saturated solution tank; 4 – chemical adsorption tower; 5 – MEA regeneration tower; 6 – Venturi jet unit).287	 

1	Membrane separation process	Better adaptability, environmentally friendly, compact size, and light weight	Difficulty achieving desired CO2 recovery and purity, unknown sustainability and aging resistance, and high-pressure requirement	The production cost of the polymeric membrane is low but the cost of a two-stage membrane with better performance is high	
223–225 and 292



2	Adsorbent based systems	Physical/chemical control of adsorption capability, easy regeneration of adsorbent and adsorbate	Weak affinity for CO2, poor performance in conditions involving humidity, impurities, and high temperatures	Industrial wastes and mineral carbonates can be used as adsorbents, lowering the CO2 capture and re-utilization cost	
221, 228, 229, 276 and 293



3	Absorption process	Excellent adaptability to flue gases, tolerance to oxygen and solvent persistence, high CO2 separation efficiency	Low purity of captured CO2 and high energy intensity during absorbent regeneration	The cost is the lowest in industrial applications, the by-products can be reused, and a completely closed carbon cycle is required to reduce the use of fresh materials	
233, 234 and 294



4	Cryogenic separation process	High purity of captured CO2 (up to 95%), CO2 can be reused, tolerance to humidity and impurities in the CO2 capture process	Extremely high requirements for low temperature and high pressure	High energy intensity, about 660 kW h per tonne of CO2 recovered	
235, 236 and 294



5	Hydrate separation process	Simple and efficient process, excellent adaptability in humidity and impurities, CO2 can be easily recovered, high capacity and low energy penalty	Relatively high hydrate formation conditions are required; the hydrate formation rate is slow	The cost of the pressurization and cooling process is relatively high, but it is much lower than that of the cryogenic method	
291 and 295–297


1	Saline aquifers	Large storage capacity, multiple trapping mechanisms, little impact on human activities	A caprock is needed to prevent CO2 leakage, lack of infrastructure	
253, 257 and 260

2	Depleted and developing oil and gas reservoirs	Infrastructure and sufficient geological information are available. It can also improve oil and natural gas recovery	High requirements for impurity control in CO2, limited storage sites	
264–266

3	Deep ocean storage	Huge storage potential, abundant storage sites, simple equipment	Potential local ocean acidification risk, insufficient risk assessment	
272 and 273

4	Mineral carbonation	Simple process, simultaneous CO2 capture and storage	Uncertain leakage risk, possible CO2 injection blockage, unknown impurity reactions	
274–276



5	Hydrate based storage	Large storage capacity, an effective way to simultaneously achieve natural gas hydrate exploitation and CO2 storage, spontaneous elimination of the interference of impurities, stable storage, prevention of local ocean acidification and the formation instabilities caused by natural gas hydrate exploitation	Strict environmental requirements for storage sites, immature technical solutions, and risk control methods	
162, 302 and 305


2000	Kang and Lee306	Developed a new hydrate-based gas separation (HBGS) process, especially for recovering CO2 from flue gas using THF as a hydrate promoter


2002	Klara and Srivastava307	A novel concept of using hydrate to separate CO2 was proposed by the Department of Energy (DOE)
2005	Aaron and Tsouris290	Designed a SIMTECHE process for hydrate separation, including CO2 capture, CO2 hydrate formation, and hydrate slurry separation steps
2007	Luo et al.308	Attempted to apply the bubble method for gas hydrate-based CO2 separation
2007	Linga et al.291	Proposed an approach for capturing CO2 from treated flue gas based on gas hydrate crystallization combined with a membrane process
2007	Zhang et al.309	Investigated the role of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) during methane hydrate formation in a batch reactor
2009	Fan et al.310	Proposed the idea of efficient capture of CO2 from simulated flue gas via the formation of TBAB or TBAF semi-clathrate hydrates
2011	Suroutseua et al.247	Designed and operated a pilot plant for CO2 capture from IGCC flue gases via a combined cryogenic and hydrate method
2011	Li et al.311	Studied hydrate-based pre-combustion carbon dioxide capture in a system with TBAB solution in the presence of CP
2013	Babu et al.312	Developed a novel fixed bed reactor by combining adsorption-based and hydrate-based techniques to separate CO2 for pre-combustion capture
2013	Park et al.313	Examined the feasibility of the hydrate-based pre-combustion capture of carbon dioxide in the presence of a thermodynamic promoter and porous silica gels
2014	Sun et al.295	Developed a simulation apparatus to investigate the storage of CO2 in a partially water-saturated porous medium under gas hydrate formation conditions similar to those in a typically depleted gas reservoir in Northern Alberta
2015	Bhattacharjee et al.314	Discussed CO2 sequestration via hydrate formation in porous sediments in a fixed bed setup and stressed the importance of mass transfer limitations of field scale adaptations of CO2 sequestration in geological formations
2018	Liu et al.315	Explored the sequestration behavior of CO2 as a hydrate in depleted methane hydrate (MH)-bearing sediments
2019	Xu et al.287	Developed a novel continuous separation device and carbon dioxide separation via a combination of hydrate formation and chemical absorption
2020	Gauteplass316	Visualized CO2 trapping phenomena, measured CO2 leakage rates, and demonstrated that the integrity of the hydrate seal strongly depends on the fluid–rock interactions and the initial water distribution
2020	YU et al.317	Almost completely removed CO2 from IGCC synthesis gas using one hydrate formation stage; further proved a two-step mechanism of CO2 hydrate formation in the presence of a promoter. This mechanism was proposed in 2018 for the first time.318

 	Fig. 16  CCS projects and facilities worldwide (modified from Global CCS Institute's Report55).	 

Alberta Carbon Trunk Line	Alberta, Canada	Enhanced oil recovery	1.7–14.6 Mtpa	One of the largest CCS projects worldwide in operation. The CO2-EOR system is expected to enhance oil recovery fields. Supported by two privately funded companies
North Dakota CarbonSAFE	North Dakota, USA	Various options	3–17 Mtpa	Supported by the US government. Three facilities have been incorporated into the CO2 capture scenarios to provide the commercial-scale of CO2 for storage
CarbonSAFE Illinois-Macon County	Illinois, USA	Various options	2–15 Mtpa	Sponsored by the US Department of Energy; uses multiple injection sites and storage complexes for commercial CO2 storage
Integrated Mid-continent Stacked Carbon Storage Hub	Nebraska, USA	Various options	1.9–19.4 Mtpa	Conducted as part of the US DOE CarbonSAFE program; establish a commercial-scale CO2 storage hub consisting of storage sites and multiple sources; uses proven techniques for CCS and transportation from nearby ethanol sources
Wabash CarbonSAFE	Indiana & Illinois, USA	Various options	1.5–18 Mtpa	Led by UIUC; sponsored by the US government; and targeted to begin operation in 2021 for commercial-scale CO2 storage beneath an ammonia production plant
Northern Lights	Offshore, North Sea, Norway	Deep saline formations	0.8–5 Mtpa	Sponsored by three petroleum companies – Equinor, Shell, and Total, and expected to begin operation in 2024 as the first open-access CCS project in Europe or even the world
Net Zero Teesside	Offshore, North Sea, UK	Deep saline formations	0.8–6 Mtpa	A full-chain carbon capture, utilization and storage (‘CCUS’) project, including CO2 pipeline connections from industrial facilities, sponsored by the BP company
Net Zero Carbon Humber	Humber region, UK	Enhanced oil recovery	2–18.3 Mtpa	Plans to capture carbon dioxide at the commercial scale from the industrial plant via pipeline transportation, and to scale up to create the world's first carbon-negative power station in the 2020s
Porthos	Offshore, North Sea, The Netherlands	Depleted oil and gas reservoirs	2–5 Mtpa	Helps the Netherlands reach its carbon reduction targets with multiple suppliers and a shared backbone, which the European Commission has proposed a €102m award for
Abu Dhabi Cluster	Abu Dhabi, UAE	Enhanced oil recovery	2.7–5 Mtpa	The world's first commercial carbon capture facility in a steel production plant in 2016
Junggar Basin CCS Hub	Xinjiang, China	Enhanced oil recovery	0.2–3 Mtpa	Connected with coal-fired/natural gas power plants and chemical and petrochemical production industry transporting CO2via pipelines and roads
CarbonNet	Offshore, Bass Strait, Australia	Deep saline formations	2–5 Mtpa	Jointly funded by the Australian and Victorian governments, storing CO2 from multiple sources, including power plants, hydrogen production, and chemical production

 	Fig. 17  (a) Global amount of flared gas from 1996 to 2018. (b) Amount of flared gas in the US. (c) Natural gas consumption in 2017.	 

PNG	1 atm, 293 K	41.65	Low energy density, low OPEX on land	High CAPEX, large land occupancy, environmental impact
LNG	1 atm, 110 K	27485	High energy density, Medium OPEX across ocean on a large scale	High CAPEX
GTL	1 atm, 273 K	N/A	High energy density, provides alternative liquid hydrocarbons	Energy loss during conversion, different use from natural gas, no commercial applications for small-scale production
CNG	200 atm, 293 K	9914	Medium energy density, low CAPEX, convenient for end-users	Heavy container, high OPEX on a large scale
SNG	1 atm, 220–273.15 K	7472	Medium energy density, low CAPEX and OPEX	No commercial applications

 	Fig. 18  Hydrate-based NG transportation.	 

sI	171.8	None	

sII	115	THF345	


Cyclopentane346	


1,3-dioxolane347	


Propane348	


sH	125	Cyclopentyl bromide349	


Semi-clathrate hydrate	35–40	TBAB350	



THF (thermodynamic/kinetic promoter)356	

	Methionine (amino acids, green promoter)357,358	


SDS (anionic surfactant)359	

	Hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide360 (cationic surfactant, quaternary ammonium salts)	


(Zwitterionic surfactant)361	

	
	

R = butyl or pentyl
X = spacer
R′ = long tail
Y− = anionic group, COO−, CH2SO3−

Container	Heating controllability	Heating may be intermittent or continuous. Heating may require the use of as much heat exchange with the environment as possible.
Pressure rating	The pressure limit determines the storage temperature and the amount of the maximum gas being released via hydrate dissociation.
Others	Wall material, volume, thermal properties, insulation, sealing, solid entry, liquid exit, etc.
Pellet	Size	Large particles have better self-preservation but the dissociation will be slower.
Gas composition	Compositions determine the hydrate phase boundary and the minimum dissociation conditions.
Promoter	Thermodynamic promoters change the dissociation conditions. Both thermodynamic and kinetic promoters may need to be recycled to reduce costs.

 	Fig. 19  Comparison of the different natural gas transportation methods conducted by MES for an annual production of 1–1.5 × 109 kg (after Nogami et al.339).	 

 	Fig. 20  A realistic schematic of reducing CO2 emissions to the atmosphere based on CCS.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic of a carbon chain to limit global warming based on hydrate techniques.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
