Fluorescent graphene-like carbon nitrides: synthesis, properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC02330D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC02330D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8146-8160Fluorescent graphene-like carbon nitrides: synthesis, properties and applications

        
          
            Ai-Jun 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hua 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Huang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhao-Sheng 
            Qian
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jiu-Ju 
            Feng
          
          
        
      *
      College of Chemistry and Life Science, College of Geography and Environmental Science, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China. E-mail: jjfeng@zjnu.cn
Received 
      6th June 2016
    , Accepted 1st August 2016First published on 1st August 2016AbstractFluorescent graphene-like carbon nitrides (FL GCNs) are emerging as a new kind of graphene-like two-dimensional (2D) layered nanomaterials in bioimaging, sensing, drug delivery, cancer therapy, photocatalysis, solar energy and optoelectronic devices, owing to their excellent optoelectronic properties, high specific surface areas, good biocompatibility and low toxicity. In this review, we firstly introduced the synthetic methods for FL GCNs such as the “top-down” and “bottom-up” strategies, followed by systematically addressing the unique properties of FL GCNs. Then, the current applications of FL GCNs were discussed in detail, and finally an outlook on their possible and potential developments was roughly described.
Ai-Jun Wang
Ai-Jun Wang is a professor in the College of Geography and Environmental Science, Zhejiang Normal University. He received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2007. His research interests include fluorescence spectroscopy, electrochemical sensors, functional nanomaterials and biomaterials.
Hua Li
Hua Li received her BSc in Applied Chemistry from Henan Agricultural University in 2014. She is currently a Master's candidate in the College of Geography and Environmental Science, Zhejiang Normal University and her research interests are in the fabrication of fluorescent functional nanomaterials for bioanalytical applications.
Hong Huang
Hong Huang received his BSc in chemistry from Fuyang Teachers College in 2011. Afterwards, he moved to Zhejiang Normal University as a Master's student under the supervision of Professor Jiu-Ju Feng. Now he is a doctoral candidate at East China Normal University. His research interests are focused on the fabrication of fluorescent functional nanomaterials for (bio)analytical applications.
Zhao-Sheng Qian
Zhao-Sheng Qian is an associate professor in the College of Chemistry and Life Science, Zhejiang Normal University. He received his BSc in chemistry from Shandong Normal University and his PhD from Nanjing University. He is interested in molecular probes and nanomaterial-based luminescent probes and their applications in chemosensors and biosensors.
Jiu-Ju Feng
Jiu-Ju Feng is a professor in the College of Chemistry and Life Science, Zhejiang Normal University. She received her PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2006. She did her post-doctoral research in Technische Universität, Berlin. Her research interests include (bio)sensors, functional (bio)nanomaterials, and Raman and fluorescence spectroscopy.
1. Introduction
Recently, carbon nitride materials have received tremendous attention because of their distinct characteristics such as their abrasive resistance, high rigidity, chemical inertness, stabilized electron field emission, wide-band optical transparence, and favorable biocompatibility.1 Among various kinds of carbon nitrides, two dimensional (2D) layered graphene-like carbon nitrides (GCNs, Fig. 1) have triazine or tris-s-triazine units with the smallest band gap (2.7 eV), which are the most stable in practical applications.2,3 This is ascribed to the π-conjugated graphitic planes that originate from the sp2 hybridization between carbon (C) and nitrogen (N). In particular, FL GCNs at the nanoscale level are composed of single or several graphene layers with weak van der Waals forces between the adjoining covalently bonded C–N layers,4,5 and have attracted significant interest because of their graphene-like structures, superior optical features, and high specific surface areas.2,6
 Fig. 1  The graphene-like structure of carbon nitride with tris-s-triazine units. 
Unlike inorganic semiconductors, fluorescent (FL) GCNs mainly contain C, hydrogen, and N that are the most abundant elements on earth.7 Meanwhile, they are environmentally friendly, which greatly promotes their practical applications especially in biological fields.8 Therefore, many efforts are focused on the large-scaled preparation of FL GCNs via the bulk condensation of cheap nitrogen-rich precursors (e.g., cyanamide, melamine, ammonium thiocyanate, dicyandiamide, urea, and thiourea).9
Up to now, many researchers have prepared a large number of FL GCNs, which mostly emit bright blue luminescence with high optical stability, good water solubility, strong resistance against photobleaching, nontoxicity, and biocompatibility.10 As a promising alternative to carbon materials, the as-synthesized FL GCNs have been explored in bioimaging,11 sensing,12 drug delivery,13 catalysis,14,15 and pollutant degradation.2,16
Impressively, FL GCNs have been functionalized with many metals and inorganic/organic elements (e.g., protonation,17 fluorine,18 bromine,19 boron (B),20 sulfur (S), and phosphorus (P) doping16) by binding or even intercalation, thereby endowing them with superior physiochemical properties and finally extending their potential applications.10,21
To date, several reviews about FL GCNs have been reported, while most of them are concentrated on the (photo)catalytic applications.2,6,22,23 In this review, we mainly summarized the recent studies correlated with their synthesis and chemical doping strategies, discussed their photochemical features, cytotoxicity, biocompatibility and electrochemical luminescence properties, followed by roughly highlighting their (bio)medical applications, as shown in Fig. 2. Finally, we have given a short discussion on the current challenges and an outlook on their future development.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the unique properties and various applications based on FL GCNs. 
2. Synthetic methods
Recently, great efforts have been made to develop synthetic methods for FL GCNs (including doping or not), which can be mainly classified into two categories: top-down and bottom-up syntheses. The top-down route refers to the synthesis of GCNs from large-sized materials, involving the cleavage of different carbonaceous materials by acidic chemical exfoliation, ultrasonication, chemical tailoring, and electrochemical oxidation. In contrast, the bottom-up strategy means the self-assembly of some smaller units (e.g., atoms, molecules, and nanoparticles) to form relatively larger and more complex systems via the interactions between the building units such as hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, and/or electrostatic adsorption,24 as listed in Table 1.
Table 1 A brief summary of the properties of FL GCNs prepared by various synthesis methods




Methods
Details
Starting materials
Fluorescence color
Yield (%)
Ref.




Top-down
Sonication
Melamine bulk GCNs
Blue
14.5

12



Acidic chemical oxidation
Bulk P-doped GCNs
Blue
90.2

16



Sonication
Dicyandiamide lumps GCNs melamine
Blue
12.53

26



Acidic chemical oxidation
Dicyanamide bulk GCNs
Blue
3.0

27



Chemical tailoring
Bulk polymeric carbon nitride
Blue
46

28



Hydrothermal cutting
Bulk GCNs
Blue
16.9

35



Electrochemical oxidation
Melamine
Blue
—

38







Bottom-up
Microwave-assisted method
Guanidine hydrochloride and EDTA
Green
35

7



Hydrothermal or solvothermal method
Citric acid and thiourea
Blue
14.5

10



Microwave-assisted method
Citric acid and thiourea
Blue
31.67

21



Hydrothermal or solvothermal method
1,2-Ethylenediamine and CCl4
Blue
—

41



Microwave-assisted solvothermal method
Citric acid monohydrate and urea
Blue
27.1

45



Low temperature solid-phase method
Urea and sodium citrate
Green to dark blue
42

46



Low temperature solid-phase method
EDTA and melamine
Blue
34

48





2.1. Top-down routes
Top-down methods have advantages of low cost, simple operation, and low temperature, which are important in the large-scaled production and extensive applications of GCNs,25 although they suffer from some limitations including multiple steps, being laborious and time-consuming. Usually, the synthesis procedure involves the use of bulk graphitic carbon nitrides (bulk GCNs) as the initial precursors.26–28

2.1.1. Acidic chemical oxidation. 
Herein, carbon materials with aromatic sp2 structures are usually used as the precursors in the synthesis process of FL GCNs.29 However, these starting materials lack an efficient band gap to emit fluorescence. In order to make them fluorescent, their electrochemistry and size should be finely adjusted by some strong oxidizing acid (HNO3 or H2SO4).29
For example, Chen et al. synthesized highly water-soluble flake-like fluorescent carbon nitride nanoparticles with bright blue fluorescence from bulk GCNs by chemical oxidation with the help of dicyanamide at 550 °C.27 More importantly, P- and O-co-doped GCNs were synthesized by chemical oxidation and hydrothermal etching of bulk P-doped GCNs originated from the pyrolysis of melamine and phytic acid.16 The as-obtained architectures showed strong blue fluorescence with a high quantum yield (QY) of 90.2%, which was much higher than carbon nitride nanoflakes (QY = 3.0%).27
Acidic chemical exfoliation is essential in the large-scaled synthesis of GCNs from a variety of carbon materials.25 However, the excess amount of oxidant (such as HNO3) is difficult to be removed from the reaction media, except usually neutralizing by centrifugation and washing thoroughly with water.


2.1.2. Ultrasonication. 
Ultrasonication is widely used for preparation of various nanomaterials (e.g., GCNs).30–32 Recently, Zhang and his co-workers developed a dicyandiamide-assisted strong acid and ultrasonic method to construct FL GCNs with the thickness of ca. 5 nm, using bulk GCNs as the starting materials.26 The resulting GCNs contained a few layers of graphene-like carbon nanosheets. In another example, ultrathin FL GCNs with a thickness of 1.0 nm were directly synthesized by ultrasonication-assisted liquid exfoliation of bulk GCNs that were prepared by the direct pyrolysis of melamine in the semiclosed system.12 It was demonstrated that the as-prepared FL GCNs only contained about three C–N layers.


2.1.3. Chemical tailoring. 
Molecular tailoring means that a molecule with a unique effect on a certain chemical bond can serve as the precise molecular scissors to complete the expected molecular cutting and assembling.33 In 2015, Zhang's group prepared several kinds of carbon nitride nanostructures by chemical tailoring with phase polymeric bulk GCNs in acidic media, including rods, leaves, and quantum dots.28 As illustrated in Fig. 3, tris-s-triazine-based compounds would hydrolyze into smaller molecules such as cyanuric acid and the guanylammelinium dication with the assistance of free protons. Therefore, it is feasible to synthesize nanostructured GCNs from phase polymeric bulk GCNs by the top-down cleavage of tris-s-triazine units via hydrolysis.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the chemically tailored FL GCNs in acid media (reprinted with permission from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society). 


2.1.4. Hydrothermal cutting. 
Hydrothermal cutting is a simple and green approach,34 while there are scarce examples about the preparation of FL GCNs by this technique.35 Zhang et al. fabricated GCNs by a hydrothermal method with blue emission and a high QY (16.9%)35 in comparison with GCNs (5.5%) and water-soluble graphene quantum dots (3.8%).36


2.1.5. Electrochemical oxidation. 
Electrochemical oxidation can be described as follows: the organic units capture electrons and are oxidized by applying a potential on the anode in the electrolyte, or after the oxidation of the metal ion from low to high valence states.37 For example, Lu and his co-workers synthesized ultrathin GCNs containing about 6 C–N layers by a one-step electrochemical method with melamine as the precursor in alkaline media,38 showing their well-dispersed stability in water and a thickness of approximately 2.0 nm (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Typical (a) TEM image, (b) XRD pattern, and (c) AFM image of FL GCNs (reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 

2.2. Bottom-up routes
The “bottom-up” route is efficient to synthesize FL GCNs on a large scale via pyrolysis or carbonization of some small organic precursors generally containing –COOH, –OH, –CO, and –NH2 groups at high temperature.24

2.2.1. Hydrothermal or solvothermal method. 
A hydrothermal method refers to a chemical reaction occurring in a sealed container at high temperature and pressure, using water as the solvent.39 As it is well-known, solvothermal strategies are an expansion of hydrothermal methods, in which both water and some organic solvents can be used as solvents.40 The two approaches are green, without using any strong acid or surface modification agent.
For example, FL GCNs were prepared at 200 °C for 2 h by a hydrothermal method, using citric acid and thiourea as the starting materials.10 The as-obtained product exhibited bright blue luminescence with the QY of 14.5%. Meanwhile, photoluminescent GCNs were synthesized by polymerizing 1,2-ethylenediamine and CCl4 at 150 °C for 120 min under solvothermal conditions,41 showing strong fluorescence, good water solubility and uniform size distribution.


2.2.2. Microwave-assisted method. 
In contrast to hydrothermal/solvothermal methods, microwave synthesis has a similar reaction mechanism, albeit with a dramatically shortened reaction time and extraordinarily high reaction efficiency.42 Importantly, doping of fluorescent carbon nanomaterials is achieved by microwave methods rather than others.43
Unlike our previous work,10 bright green fluorescent GCNs doped with oxygen (O) and S were facilely prepared by a simple microwave approach,21 in which thiourea was employed as the precursor because it is cheap, abundant, easily accessible, and rich in N. The as-prepared GCNs showed excitation wavelength- and pH-dependent photoluminescence, along with a fluorescence QY of 31.67%.
Guanidine hydrochloride, as another kind of N-rich material, was also selected as the precursor to fabricate FL GCNs. As shown in Fig. 5, Tang et al. prepared water soluble and uniform GCNs with high luminescence by the one-pot microwave treatment of guanidine hydrochloride and EDTA.7 Here, EDTA was chosen as the capping and stabilizing agent to control the size of the product effectively, owing to its rich carboxyl and amino motifs.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration for the microwave-assisted preparation of FL GCNs and the corresponding CL mechanism (reprinted with permission from ref. 7 with permission from American Chemical Society). 


2.2.3. Microwave-assisted solvothermal method. 
By combining microwave and solvothermal methods, a microwave-assisted solvothermal method is achieved which has advantages of short reaction time, simple processing, low temperature and pressure, relatively high yield, and easy post-processing when compared with other synthetic approaches.44
For instance, Cao et al. developed a microwave-assisted solvothermal method to synthesize FL GCNs in oleic acid at a moderate reaction temperature (180 °C) for a short period of reaction time (5 min), using citric acid and urea as the precursors.45 The as-obtained nanomaterials have a high fluorescence QY (up to 27.1%) without further passivating treatment.


2.2.4. Low temperature solid-phase method. 
Low temperature solid-phase methods are one of the main tools to construct new types of solid materials, which has the advantages of simple operation, high selectivity and efficiency.46 Specifically, the reaction process starts with the close contact of the two solid reactants, namely a “solid–solid” chemical reaction, where the old chemical bonds disappear while new ones emerge.
Zhou et al. developed a solid-phase reaction method for synthesis of FL GCNs with tunable emission at an extremely low temperature by mixing urea and sodium citrate and heating in an autoclave at 180 °C for 1 h (Fig. 6),46 where urea was chosen as the precursor because of its low price, abundance, and rich N. The as-obtained FL GCNs had a QY of 42%.
 Fig. 6  The formation mechanism for the synthesis of FL GCNs with tunable emission by a low-temperature solid-phase method (reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Notably, the emission of FL GCNs can be simply tuned from green to dark blue by adjusting the molar ratios of the two reactants. Very recently, Xu et al. slightly modified the above method to prepare mono-dispersed FL GCNs with blue luminescence and an average diameter of 3.5 nm.47
Similarly, Fan et al. synthesized FL GCNs by a melamine-assisted low temperature solid-phase method (Fig. 7), which exhibited exceptional luminescence properties with a QY of 34%.48 Herein, EDTA containing many amino and carboxyl groups was selected as the capping and stabilizing agent to prevent the aggregation of GCNs and offer more active sites in the GCNs. Also, various fluorescent GCNs were prepared by varying the molar ratios of melamine to EDTA or changing the temperature from 200 to 400 °C. These observations are in good accordance with the work of Zhou.46
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration for (a) the preparation of GCNs by a thermal condensation process, (b) CL of the GCNs–K3[Fe(CN)6] system, and (c) the mechanism of FL and CL of GCNs (reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 

3. Properties
3.1. Structures and compositions
The structure and composition of FL GCNs are mainly characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and X-ray diffraction (XRD).2 The resulting FL GCNs usually have a small particle size of a few nanometers (as shown in Fig. 8) and are mainly composed of C and N elements, which have stacked 2D structures normally considered as N-substituted graphite in a regular way, but with different properties.2,6 Currently, there are a variety of FL GCNs with different morphologies (e.g., nanosheets,13 nanoflakes,27 and quantum dots7), compositions, structures and surface properties, which may have significant effects on their physicochemical features.5
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the strategy for preparation of single-layered FL GCNs. The corresponding (b) TEM image and size-distribution diagram, (c) AFM and (d) height images (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Wiley Online Library). 
3.2. Optical properties
Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption and photoluminescence are the two main optical properties of FL GCNs, which are essential for their potential and practical applications.25 Normally, the optical features are mainly characterized by UV-vis and fluorescence spectroscopy in aqueous media.10

3.2.1. Absorbance. 
FL GCNs typically show a strong UV-vis absorption peak in the optical region of 260–320 nm, along with a tail stretching to visible range.49 The UV-vis absorption peak of FL GCNs is centered at ∼250 nm, which is probably due to the π–π* electron transfer of carbon nitrides possessing s-triazine rings, further confirming the existence of s-triazine rings in FL GCNs.50 Also, unlike common carbon quantum dots, a new shoulder peak appears in the region of 270–390 nm for FL GCNs, which is ascribed to the n–π* transition of CO bonds.51


3.2.2. Photoluminescence. 
The photoluminescence behavior of FL GCNs is one of the most attractive features.25 FL GCNs exhibit various fluorescence colors from blue, green, to near infrared, as listed in Table 1. The fluorescence spectra are generally broad and strongly dependent on the excitation wavelengths.52 As shown in Fig. 9, the photoluminescence spectra of O and S dual-doped GCNs exhibit red shifts upon changing the excitation wavelength from 400 to 530 nm, along with a fast decrease of the fluorescence intensities.
 Fig. 9  (a) Emission spectra of FL GCNs obtained by adjusting the excitation wavelength from 400 to 530 nm with a 10 nm increment. (b) The corresponding normalized fluorescence spectra. 
Meanwhile, FL GCNs have a preferable two-photon absorbance behavior, which can absorb two near-infrared photons at the same time, with the emission of strong photoluminescence in the visible region.53 During the two-photon absorption process, the medium molecules absorb two photons simultaneously, and the electrons jump from the ground to the excited states under the strong light excitation (Fig. 10). For example, Xie's group prepared single-layered GCNs with two-photon absorption behavior.53 Compared with one-photon graphitic carbon nitride material, the two-photon ones are beneficial for their further application in bioanalysis.54
 Fig. 10  Scheme of one- and two-photon excited fluorescence of GCNs (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Wiley Online Library). 

3.3. Chemical doping
FL GCNs doped with heteroatoms (e.g., O, S, P, and B) have tunable characteristics16 such as electronic features and local and surface chemical properties, which are beneficial for extending their applications in bioimaging and biosensing.55 Specifically, blank GCNs are often self-quenched and in turn severely restrict their further applications in bioanalysis.56,57 In contrast, doped GCNs usually have a higher QY than bare counterparts because of their layered structures and better properties.24 For example, Rong and his co-workers synthesized P and O co-doped FL GCNs (P,O-GCNs) from the bulk P-GCNs.16 The as-prepared P,O-GCNs showed bright blue luminescence with a QY of 90.2%, which was almost the highest when compared with those in the literature.28,46,48 Besides, the P,O-GCNs displayed high resistance to high ionic strength and photobleaching. Therefore, research studies on doping FL GCNs with heteroatoms are of great importance.
3.4. Cytotoxicity and biocompatibility
As it is known, the backbone of biological molecules is mainly composed of carbon and therefore carbonaceous FL GCNs are more biocompatible than other nanomaterials.24 As expected, this is in good agreement with the results obtained from the cytotoxicity and biocompatibility investigations of FL GCNs.58 Xie and his co-workers found the nontoxicity and excellent biocompatibility of ultrathin GCNs by incubating them with HeLa cells.11 Zhang et al. showed that the single-layered GCNs could be used as a promising two-photon probe for cellular imaging of HepG2 cells, without any effect on their viability, proliferation, and metabolic ability.53 All evidence indicates the great potential of FL GCNs in biomedical applications.
3.5. Electrochemiluminescence (ECL)
Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) is a method which generally combines an electrochemical reaction and chemiluminescence activity, showing fascinating features such as low cost, facile strategy, good controllability, low background emission, and high selectivity.59,60 There are some substances produced on the electrode surface by electrochemical methods. And the electrons in the substances jump from the ground state to the excited state, followed by returning to the ground state again with luminescence.61
FL GCNs show ECL behaviors, similar to those of semiconductor and carbon quantum dots,42 although there is scarce work associated with the ECL. For example, Cheng et al. firstly studied the ECL behaviors of the as-prepared GCNs with K2S2O8 as the co-reaction agent.62 Another group studied the ECL of GCNs with different oxidative agents (e.g., O2, H2O2, and S2O82−) as co-reactants, exhibiting strong ECL with blue bright emission (Fig. 11).27
 Fig. 11  The developed ECL reaction mechanism for GCN–coreactant systems (CB = conduction band, VB = valence band; reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4. Applications
As it is known, FL GCNs have overcome some disadvantages of traditional semiconductor quantum dots, thanks to their superior optical properties, small-size effect, good biocompatibility, low cytotoxicity and easy functionalization.63 Therefore, they have wide applications in bioimaging, optical/chemical sensing, drug delivery, environmental monitoring, and (photo)catalysis.58
4.1. Bioimaging
Fluorescence bioimaging of living cells plays an important role in bioimaging.64 As a fluorescent probe, the most essential requirements include bright luminescence, high QY, low toxicity, good biocompatibility, and resistance to photobleaching for sensitive biosensing and bioimaging.65 To date, fluorescent carbon nanomaterials have been used for imaging a variety of cells (e.g., HeLa cells, U87 cells, HepG2 cells, HEK293T cells, RAW 264.7 cells), owing to their nontoxicity.66 In particular, the newly emerged FL GCNs have been demonstrated to be promising bioimaging nanomaterials because of their good photoluminescence, high QY, low toxicity, and good biocompatibility.13
Researchers have demonstrated FL GCNs as pH-responsive drug nanocarriers for cancer cell imaging and therapy.13 Furthermore, HeLa cells cultivated with FL GCNs at 37 °C for 4 h showed an obvious blue color under the excitation wavelength of 405 nm, demonstrating their potential utilization as the bioimaging probe.11
GCNs with bright blue fluorescence obtained by a “green” liquid exfoliation method, showed good stability, nontoxicity, high biocompatibility, enhanced photoabsorption, and photoresponse, along with a QY of up to 19.6%.11 Experimental results confirmed the existence of GCNs mainly in the HeLa cell membrane, indicating that the cells still had good activity and retained normal morphology, which was promising as an excellent biomarker for labeling HeLa cells.
Heteroatoms such as O and S co-doped GCNs were synthesized by the thermal treatment of citric acid and thiourea under green hydrothermal conditions for HeLa cell imaging,10 which exhibited bright blue fluorescence, and good stability and biocompatibility. As described in Fig. 12, bright green-emitting GCNs doped with O and S for cell imaging were obtained by replacing the hydrothermal method with a microwave-assisted method.21 The synthetic method was essential for the fluorescence behavior of the heteroatom-doped GCNs. Another kind of P and O doped GCN with strong blue luminescence and high QY (up to 90.2%) was obtained by an acid-oxidation and hydrothermal-etching approach. They showed good stability and biocompatibility and were further applied for MCF-7 breast cancer cell imaging.67
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the preparation of green FL GCNs by a microwave synthesis method and their in vitro bioimaging. 
The above-mentioned GCNs have tunable properties, including local and surface chemical features, and electronic characteristics, as well as extensive applications in bioimaging and biosensors.68,69 Besides, laser confocal scanning microscope figures showed their luminescence viewed only in the areas of the cell membrane and cytoplasm, while negligible fluorescence was observed in the nucleus. The as-prepared fluorescent probes were easy to stick into the cell membrane and cytoplasm, rather than nuclei.70
Fluorescence microscopy imaging is critical to study living creatures.64 The most commonly used one is single-photon microscopy cell imaging.71 Over the past few decades, two-photon fluorescence microscopy has attracted great research attention for living tissue imaging, due to its low photodamage, large penetration depth, and long observation time.72 In order to explore its application, two-photon fluorescence probes have sparked great research interest because of their large two-photon absorption cross-section in the near infrared region, good water solubility, high photostability and sensitivity to the substrate of the receptor.72,73 The mechanism of two-photon fluorescence probes includes intramolecular charge transfer, fluorescence resonance energy transfer, photoinduced electron transfer and group conversion.74
On account of the above superiorities, two-photon fluorescence probes undoubtedly bring a new route for typical organelle labeling of living cells.74 Zhang et al. prepared a safe, promising, and luminescent single-layered GCNs for two-photon fluorescence imaging of HepG2 cellular nuclei (Fig. 13).53 The as-prepared fluorescent probe exhibited steady and bright two-photon fluorescence with a two-photon absorption cross-section up to 28000 GM at 750 nm, which would be further used in many biomedical applications.
 Fig. 13  One-photon fluorescence images of HepG2 cells co-stained with 1,1-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate (DiI) (a1 and b1), fluorescein diacetate (FDA) (a2 and b2), GCNs (a3), and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (b3). Two-photon fluorescence images of HepG2 cells with GCNs (a4) and DAPI (b4). Merged images of a1–a3 (a5), a1, a2 and a4 (a6), b1–b3 (b5), b1, b2 and b4 (b6) (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Wiley Online Library). 
Fluorescent carbon nanomaterials with tunable emission are regarded as the next generation green fluorescent probes,75 which are promising candidates for luminescent semiconductor quantum dots containing toxic heavy metals.76 For example, Zhou and his co-workers synthesized bright FL GCNs with tunable fluorescence emission by changing the molar ratios of the two starting materials.46 For cell imaging, there were bright blue, green, and red emission regions observed obviously in the HEK 293T cell membrane and cytoplasm using confocal microscopy at the excitation wavelength of 405, 488, and 543 nm, respectively (Fig. 14b). Besides, only very weak auto-fluorescence was observed in the contrast group incubated with blank FL GCNs (Fig. 14a), demonstrating FL GCNs as a superior probe for bioimaging.
 Fig. 14  Confocal fluorescence images of HEK 293T cells before (a) and after incubation with (b) FL GCNs for 24 h (reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4.2. Sensors

4.2.1. Fluorescent sensors. 
Fluorescent devices are currently of great importance in biology, chemistry, and environmental science.77 It is essential to design and construct a sensitive and selective fluorescent sensor for the assay of metal ions, enzyme activity, anions, (bio)macromolecules, and thiols,78 whose recognition mechanism mainly includes photoinduced electron transfer (PET), intramolecular charge transfer (ICT), fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), and excited-state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT).79 Based on the photoluminescence of GCNs, a variety of sensors have been fabricated recently with the “signal-off,” “signal-on,” and “on–off–on” models.80
Various transition metal ions (e.g., Cu2+, Fe3+, and Cr3+) are critical for the life of organisms.81 However, their excessive intake would cause physiological abnormalities or diseases, such as kidney problems, Alzheimer's disease, Wilson's disease, Parkinson's disease and Menkes disease.82 For example, Hg2+ is one of the heavy metal ions widely used in agriculture and industry.83 Its high toxicity would induce serious pollution in the environment and its bioaccumulation, which can cause severe problems to human health even with trace amounts.84 Thus, it is of great importance to exploit practical and effective strategies for sensitive and selective detection of these analytes from the perspective of environmental protection and human health.85
Nowadays, many efforts are being focused on the design of new routes to sensitively detect heavy metal ions.80 Firstly, we introduce some studies based on the process of “signal-off” caused by the addition of metal ions. Sun's group synthesized ultrathin GCNs to construct a fluorescent sensor for the fast detection of Cu2+ in real water samples,12 taking advantage of the chelation between Cu2+ and N of GCNs to cause fluorescence quenching (Fig. 15).86,87 Similarly, Guo et al. prepared GCNs by exfoliation and applied them as a fluorescent probe for the trace determination of Cu2+ in spiked water samples (Fig. 16).88
 Fig. 15  The sensing principle of the FL GCN-based fluorescent sensor for Cu2+ (reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 16  (a) Synthesis process for FL GCNs with the use of protonation and sonication of bulk GCNs. (b) An analytical pathway for Cu2+ based on the photoinduced electron transfer between Cu2+ and FL GCNs (PET = photoinduced electron transfer, reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Springer Link). 
Zhang et al. fabricated FL GCNs facilely by the hydrothermal treatment of bulk GCNs for the simple, rapid, selective, and sensitive detection of Cu2+ and Fe3+ in real-water samples,35 using sodium hexametaphosphate to mask Fe3+ and allowing the exclusive and selective detection of Cu2+. The detection mechanism was based on fluorescence quenching, probably thanks to the higher binding affinity of Cu2+ and Fe3+ to O and N functional groups of GCNs in contrast to other transition-metal ions, along with their faster chelating kinetics.89
Zhou et al. synthesized GCNs for the rapid, selective and sensitive detection of Fe3+ with a relatively low detection limit of 1 μM.28 It was found that the fluorescence intensity of GCNs could be significantly quenched (95%) in the presence of 700 μM Fe3+, probably due to the PET of the probe with Fe3+. And the improved sensing performance was presumably ascribed to the strong binding of Fe3+ to the hydroxyl and N functional groups of the GCNs.
FL GCNs doped with O and S were prepared in our laboratory for the detection of Hg2+ in a linear range of 0.001–0.5 mM and a detection limit of 0.37 nM.10 These values were comparable or even better than those in the literature.90 Besides, FL GCNs were synthesized by different precursors for the assay of Hg2+ in tap water samples without any pretreatment, showing a low detection limit of 0.14 μM.45 The high selectivity and sensitivity make them superior fluorescent probes in biomedical and environmental analysis.
Meanwhile, there are a lot of fluorescent sensors fabricated based on the process of “on–off–on”, involving fluorescence quenching after the addition of metal ions (Cu2+, Hg2+, Cr6+, etc.) and the fluorescence signal's recovery again after the introduction of some enzymes and their substrates, small peptides, amino acids, DNA, and so on.78
As illustrated in Fig. 17, P and O co-doped GCNs (P,O-GCNs) were prepared as a label-free, fast, selective and sensitive fluorescent probe for the signal “on–off” detection of Cu2+ in aqueous media with a detection limit of 2 nM.16 In their work, Cu2+ could exclusively quench the luminescence because of static fluorescence quenching and the PET of the as-obtained probe with Cu2+. Furthermore, the luminescence of the P,O-GCNs–Cu2+ system was sensitively restored in the presence of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) by using acetylthiocholine (ATCh) as the substrate. Meanwhile, ATCh was efficiently hydrolyzed to thiocholine (TCh) by AChE. The TCh bound with Cu2+ to form a Cu(I)–TCh complex,91 owing to the stronger binding energy of Cu2+ and TCh in contrast to those of Cu2+ and P,O-GCNs. Then, the luminescence of P,O-GCNs was recovered again in an “off–on” way for the effective detection of AChE activity.
 Fig. 17  (a) The synthesis of fluorescent P,O-GCNs. (b) Schematic illustration of the sensitive and selective fluorescence detection of Cu2+ and AChE activity based on the P,O-GCNs (reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Xu et al. developed a switch-on fluorescent chemical sensor for the fast and sensitive detection of glutathione (GSH) in various food samples (e.g., tomatoes, cucumbers, cherry tomatoes, and purple grapes) based on the GCNs–Hg2+ system.47 As seen in Fig. 18, the initial fluorescence of GCNs is quenched by the addition of Hg2+ with the fluorescent signals switched to the “off” state. Upon the addition of GSH, Hg2+ was strongly captured by GSH and was free from the surface of GCNQDs with the fluorescent sensor converted to the “on” state. The increased fluorescence intensity was attributed to the competitive interactions between GSH and Hg2+, which is consistent with the fact that Hg2+ has a unique affinity for GSH as reported in previous work.92,93
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the principle of the GCNs–Hg2+ system based chemosensor for GSH (reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society). 

L-Cysteine (L-cys), a common amino acid in biological bodies, is a S-containing alpha amino acid,94 which has a strong affinity for Ag+, Hg+, and Cu+ to form insoluble mercaptide.95 Based on the advantages of GCNs, GCNs were used as a fluorescence “on–off–on” probe for highly sensitive and selective practical determination of Hg2+ and L-cys in running water and well water samples.26 Specifically, Hg2+ would quench the fluorescence of GCNs, because the empty orbital of Hg2+ would combine with π electrons of N to form a covalent bond (turn-off). Besides, the addition of L-cys would recover the fluorescence intensity of the GCNs–Hg2+ system, due to the strong interactions between the thiol group of L-cys and Hg2+ (turn-on).
Until now, numerous investigations have been carried out to detect metal ions, while only a few reports are available concerning the assay of anions.96 The iodide anion (I−) is crucial in biological and environmental fields.96 The plasma membrane glycoprotein Na+/I− symporter of the thyroid can promote the transportation of I−, which is the first step in thyroid hormone biogenesis.97 Thus, it is essential for the sensitive and selective detection of I−. Barman and Sadhukhan developed a versatile fluorescent sensor based on GCNs, which could efficiently sense Hg2+ and I− in aqueous media through the “on–off–on” luminescence model.96 The fluorescence of GCNs was quenched by Hg2+ with the signals switching to the “off” state for the formation of non-fluorescent chelating compound GCNs–(Hg2+)x. Besides, the “off” state was changed to the “on” state upon the addition of I− because of the formation of HgI2.
Biological macromolecules such as DNA have the ability to guide biological development and functional operation in life.98 Ju et al. developed a general PET based sensing approach for rapid and sensitive detection of DNA and Hg2+ with systematic investigations of the interactions between GCNs and DNA (Fig. 19).99 The GCNs–DNA system can be explored for broad bioanalysis of DNA and other analytes (e.g., proteins, RNA, metal ions, and small molecules) on the basis of their different bonding ability to DNA and the functional groups on GCNs.
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of interactions of DNA with GCNs, the fluorescence quenching mechanism of GCNs, and the sensing strategy for the fluorescence detection of (a) DNA, (b) Hg2+ and (c) ratiometric fluorescence detection of DNA (reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
Generally, chromium mainly exists in the forms of trivalent chromium (Cr3+) and hexavalent chromium (Cr6+).100 The former plays a significant role in insulin activity, which is essential for the metabolism of sugar and cholesterol.101 Alternatively, the latter is highly carcinogenic and causes a lot of clinical damage to the human respiratory, immune, gastrointestinal, reproductive, hematological and developmental systems.102 Thus, many studies have been carried out to selectively determine Cr6+ in biological and environmental samples.80 Rong and his co-workers developed a facile fluorescence method with GCNs for the efficient detection of Cr6+ and ascorbic acid (AA) with detection limits of 0.15 μM for Cr6+ and 0.13 μM for AA (Fig. 20), respectively.103 The luminescence of GCNs would be completely quenched by Cr6+ due to the fluorescence inner filter effects. However, the fluorescence of the GCNs–Cr6+ system was sensitively restored by reducing Cr6+ with AA based on an “on–off–on” strategy. Additionally, the as-developed approach was explored for sensing Cr6+ in lake water and AA in biological liquid samples.
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of fluorescence “on–off” assay for Cr(VI) and “on–off–on” assay for AA (AA = ascorbic acid, DAA = dehydroascorbic acid) (reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Science Direct). 
Biological thiols, including L-cys, glutathione (GSH), coenzyme A (COA-SH), and homocysteine (Hcy), are critical to human body physiology.104,105 Usually, an abnormal level of thiols will lead to many diseases such as psoriasis, leucocyte loss, cancer, liver damage, and AIDS.106 Therefore, their determination in real samples has attracted significant attention.107 Tang et al. designed an “on–off–on” strategy to detect GSH, L-cys, and Hcy with a low detection limit of 6.4, 9.6, and 8.1 nM, respectively, by taking advantage of the chemisorption of GCNs with Ag+.108 The original fluorescence of GCNs was quenched by Ag+ and restored again by the addition of biothiols via the liberation of Ag+ from GCNs (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the persistent luminescent Ag+–GCNs system for the imaging detection of biothiols (reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
Biomacromolecules are the main active ingredients of organisms, which include proteins, nucleic acids, and polysaccharides.109 For the detection of biomacromolecules, Ju et al. developed a rapid and sensitive method for the detection of DNA and Hg2+ based on an “on–off–on” sensing strategy.99 Meanwhile, Hu et al. developed a low-cost and efficient approach for simultaneous determination of diverse DNA marked with multi-color dyes in aqueous media on the basis of the chemisorption of GCNs with dye marked single-stranded DNA (ssDNA).110 This combination was weakened upon the hybridization of the dye marked ssDNA with the targeted DNA, which induced the departure of the ssDNA from the surfaces of GCNs (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of a GCN based multicolour fluorescent nanoprobe for multiplex detection of DNA (reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Springer Link). 
Apart from biomacromolecules, some small molecules are also important in biological systems. Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is an essential component and its concentration level offers an important biological indicator for a lot of diseases (e.g., myocardial infarction, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and cancer).111 H2O2 detection generally relies on the help of a third party, different from ion detection.112 Besides, H2O2 can act as a substance for the detection of glucose112 and uric acid38 which have deep influence on life activity. Sun's group synthesized FL GCNs via polymerization of 1,2-ethylenediamine and CCl4 or the heat treatment of dimethylformamide under acidic conditions.112 The product possessed an inherent peroxidase-like activity and promoted the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine with the solution color turning from colorless to blue. Based on these features, they developed a colorimetric approach to determine H2O2 and glucose. Zhang's group used a similar colorimetric method for the efficient and indirect determination of H2O2 and uric acid on the basis of the peroxidase-like activity of FL GCNs toward the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine with H2O2.38 As shown in Fig. 23, the absorption peak emerged at 652 nm was in proportion to the H2O2 concentration in the range of 10–100 μM with a low detection limit of 5.6 μM and obvious color variation (S/N = 3). And the linear determination range for uric acid was 10–100 μM with a detection limit of 8.9 μM (S/N = 3).
 Fig. 23  The UV-vis spectra of (a) 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)–GCNs–H2O2 and (c) 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine TMB–GCNs–uricase–uric acid systems with analytes of different concentrations. Response curves of (b) H2O2 and (d) uric acid, respectively. Inset: Images of production of colored products for different concentrations of H2O2 and uric acid (pH 4.0. The concentrations of GCNs and TMB were 0.07 mg mL−1 and 0.5 mM, respectively. The incubation temperature is 37 °C) (reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Moreover, FL GCNs are also employed to detect catecholamine neurotransmitters such as dopamine (DA), which plays an important role in the hormonal, renal, and cardiovascular systems.113 Abnormal variation of DA would cause diverse pathological diseases including Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.114 Clearly, it is indispensable to develop a facile, sensitive, and selective method for the assay of DA. Fan et al. built a new chemiluminescence (CL) system to determine DA with a detection limit of 4.7 nM (S/N = 3).48
CL means the formation of electromagnetic radiation via a chemical reaction that can excite some electrons from the ground to excited states and further return to the ground state again, accompanied by the emission of light.115 CL has attracted great interest because of its high sensitivity, versatility, simple use, broad linear range, and no background interference, and has wide applications in chemical analysis.116 FL GCNs are usually used as a CL emitter, which would effectively eliminate the disturbance from other CL analytes and exclusively determine DA, as well as having high CL efficiency. As revealed in Fig. 7, restraining of DA by the CL was likely due to the competition of DA with GCNs for K3[Fe(CN)6].48 It demonstrated the potential optical applications of FL GCNs in the CL field. Lv's group prepared GCNs with strong CL emission after the addition of NaClO to the CL system for the direct detection of free chlorine in water with a low detection limit of 0.01 μM in a wide range of 0.02 to 10 μM.117 Notably, the CL was produced through the radiative recombination between the oxidant-injected holes and electrons in GCNs. Besides, the 1O2 that existed on the surface of GCNs delivered energy to GCNs and thereby increased the CL emission (Fig. 5).
It is known that 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) is a dangerous nitroaromatic compound and is a stronger explosive than its analogue 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT).118 Usually, TNP is widely applied in fireworks, the dye industry, pharmaceuticals, rocket fuels, and chemical laboratories,119 and is regarded as an environmentally harmful substance and results in lasting severe effects on human health.120 Therefore, increasing research attention has been focused on developing methods for detection of TNP in recent years.121 In Rong's work, a facile and effective fluorescence sensing method was developed for the detection of TNP in water samples with a detection limit of 8.2 nM by quenching the fluorescence of GCNs with TNP,122 due to the strong inner filter effects and molecular interactions between TNP and GCNs (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the sensitive and selective fluorescence detection of TNP based on the GCNs (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
Riboflavin (RF) is a water-soluble vitamin (namely vitamin B2) that can be easily absorbed by eukaryotic cells.123 It plays the key role in a series of life activities including the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins, and its deficiency would cause many human illnesses such as slowed growth, fatigue, and digestive problems.124 Thus, it is urgent to develop an accurate detection method for RF. Recently, a fluorescence ratiometric sensing method of RF was developed for quantitative detection of RF in complicated systems (e.g., drink and milk) on the basis of FRET, in which GCNs and RF acted as an energy donor and an acceptor, respectively.125


4.2.2. Electrogenerated chemiluminescence sensors. 
ECL sensors based on FL GCNs exhibit enhanced analytical performances.25 Cheng et al. studied the ECL behaviors of the as-prepared GCNs by using K2S2O8 as the co-reaction reagent.62 The as-fabricated GCNs easily reacted with K2S2O8 in 0.10 M K2SO4 and induced the electrons in the excited states to jump back to the ground states, accompanied by the emission of strong fluorescence. This observation coincided well with the photoluminescence behavior of the GCNs, showing that the excited states occurred in both the photoexcitation and electroexcitation procedures.62 Besides, the ECL was effectively quenched by Cu2+ and was thereby applied to construct an ECL sensor with high selectivity for the trace analysis of Cu2+.

4.3. Drug delivery and cancer therapy
In recent decades, biocompatible and biodegradable nanoparticles have attracted much attention for their broad applications in drug delivery, because they can effectively load drugs, improve their solubility, stability, and bioavailability, enhance the effectiveness of the loaded drugs, and reduce the associated side effects.126 At present, it is still challenging to increase the drug concentrations loaded onto the supports and transported into tumors, along with extending the drug residence time simultaneously.127
FL GCNs were extended as both photosensitizers for photodynamic tumor therapy and pH-responsive nanocarriers for drug delivery.13 As described in Fig. 25, GCNs loaded with the anticancer drug doxorubicin (DOX) showed a pH-responsive release feature, which further promoted the transmission of DOX to cancer cells to kill the cells efficiently for chemotherapy as a photosensitizer, with the assistance of newly-generated reactive O species. The luminescent GCNs visualized the delivery process because of their high fluorescence QY and enlarged surface area, which would greatly improve the drug-loading ability.
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of GCNs as potential photosensitizers and pH-responsive drug nanocarriers for cancer therapy (ROS = reactive oxygen species, DOX = delivery of doxorubicin, reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4.4. Photocatalysts
The unique chemical properties of FL GCNs make them a promising metal-free photocatalyst. However, pure FL GCNs usually have relatively low photocatalytic efficiency.128 Various methods have been developed for enhancement, including doping elements and fabrication of nanocomposites. For example, Li et al. developed a simple and facile hydrothermal method for the incorporation of O into GCNs. The O-doped GCNs showed excellent photoreactivity for the degradation of methylene blue and H2 evolution by visible light irradiation.128 This study offers a mild strategy to adjust the electronic structure and physicochemical properties of GCNs, which is helpful for the fabrication of high-powered and metal-free photocatalysts.
Another kind of GCN nanocomposite has good photocatalytic activity. As reported by Yong et al., sandwich-like and metal-free graphene–GCN nanocomposites were prepared by a mild one-pot impregnation–thermal reduction approach. The as-obtained photocatalyst exhibited visible-light photoactivity for the reduction of CO2 to CH4 under ambient conditions, showing a 2.3-fold improvement as compared to the blank GCNs.129
4.5. Solar energy related applications
Based on their appealing electronic band structure, photocatalytic activity, and high physicochemical stability, FL GCNs have drawn great interdisciplinary attention and become a new research hotspot as photocatalysts for solar energy utilization and conversion, as well as for environmental remediation.23 Up to now, successful examples include CO2 reduction,129,130 water splitting,15,19 and environmental remediation.131,132 For example, Lan et al. prepared a bromine doped FL GCN photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution.19 Bromine modification improved the conductive, optical, and photocatalytic properties of the as-prepared sample. Yong and his co-workers deposited Pt nanoparticles on GCNs via chemical reduction with the assistance of ethylene glycol.130 The photoactivity of CO2 reduction to CH4 was greatly enhanced after fabricating the heterostructures of Pt and GCNs. These studies emphasize the transition from solar to chemical energy by photocatalysis for both energy and environment related issues.
4.6. Optoelectronic devices
Growing interest is emerging in the construction of multi-functional optoelectronic devices with nanostructured metals, semiconductors, transparent conductive oxides, and semiconductor heterojunctions.133,134 Recently, Zhou et al. fabricated a unique photoconductor based on FL GCNs in an all-solid-state device with high sensitivity and stability, which showed a unique electronic structure and improved surface features.28 This method opens a new avenue for the design and construction of GCN-based photoelectrical sensing devices.
5. Conclusions and future outlook
In summary, we have introduced recent research work associated with FL GCNs. The studies described here demonstrate the great promise of FL GCNs towards a variety of applications such as bioimaging, fluorescent probes, chemical sensing, drug carriers, environmental monitoring, and photocatalysis. Nevertheless, there still remain several challenges to overcome before the better practical application of FL GCNs. Firstly, most of the current reported FL GCNs show green or blue emission (Table 1). However, cells and biological tissues mainly contain carbohydrate and emit blue light, which may interfere with the fluorescence signals from FL GCNs.135 Long excitation and emission wavelengths are particularly needed for deep tissue bioimaging. Thus, it is necessary to research the red shift of the maximum emission light of FL GCNs from blue to green, yellow, red, and even the near-infrared region. Moreover, most of the FL GCNs used for cell imaging can penetrate into the cell but only the cytoplasm. It is significant to develop FL GCNs with better cell penetrating ability that can penetrate into the cell nucleus. Besides, most current obtained FL GCNs are of low quantum yield. Therefore, it is also challenging to develop methods for the enhancement of the QY. Advanced synthetic approaches, suitable raw materials, doping heteroatoms, surface passivation, etc. can probably contribute to the improvement of the QY.25 In addition, an enhanced QY is highly required for response modes such as luminescence turn-on, FRET, and ratiometric responses for the resulting FL GCNs-based sensors. Most FL GCNs-based detection of metal ions is based on the turn-off model of fluorescence, which is easily interfered by the detection environment. Although their study is at the early stage, “carbon nitrides”, as a much larger family (including C3N4, C3N2, C3N, C5N, and C10N3), can provide more opportunities in the formation of FL GCNs with novel and exciting properties, together with more great applications beyond what is mentioned in this article.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21475118, 21275130 and 21405142).
Notes and references
F. Z. Cui and D. J. Li, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2000, 131, 481–487 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
D. Mitoraj and H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9975–9978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Groenewolt and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1789–1792 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Shi and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14766–14772 CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Su, N. Yang, L. Zhang and Y. Lv, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4528–4535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, C. Ge, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8921–8924 RSC .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 5595–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu, J. Chen, A.-J. Wang, N. Bao, J.-J. Feng, W. Wang and L. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 73–78 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Xie, H. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 18–21 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 5595–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-S. Lin, Z.-X. Cong, J. Li, K.-M. Ke, S.-S. Guo, H.-H. Yang and G.-N. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1031–1037 RSC .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, A. H. Qusti, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11604–11609 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Cui, W. Zhang, C. Fu and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 426–432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rong, X. Song, T. Zhao, Q. Yao, Y. Wang and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10916–10924 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Di, M. Antonietti, H. Li, X. Chen and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5119–5121 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-A. Lan, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 116–125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Yao, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 446–450 RSC .
H. Li, F.-Q. Shao, H. Huang, J.-J. Feng and A.-J. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 226, 506–511 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 1620–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, G. Wu, G. Yang, J. Peng, J. Zhao and J.-J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4015–4039 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. Hu, Q. Huang, C. Wei, W. Zhang, L. Kang, Z. Huang and A. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2093–2100 RSC .
L. Chen, D. Huang, S. Ren, T. Dong, Y. Chi and G. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 225–230 RSC .
Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, Y. Li, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. He, Y. Liu, H. Huang, S. Lian, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 605–609 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu and K. S. Suslick, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3209–3214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Miao, R.-L. Fu, J.-M. Zhu, K. Xu, J.-J. Zhu and H.-Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3013–3015 RSC .
P. Gao, Y. Xie, Y. Chen, L. Ye and Q. Guo, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 285, 555–560 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, Z. Chen, M. Fang and H. Lu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Li, M. Zeng, J. Xu, X. Wang and W. Hu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4157–4162 RSC .
R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15221–15223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pimentel, N. Oturan, M. Dezotti and M. A. Oturan, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 83, 140–149 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Deng, Y. Hou, H. Wang, H. Li and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12251–12253 RSC .
Y. Guo, Z. Wang, H. Shao and X. Jiang, Carbon, 2013, 52, 583–589 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Matsubara, L. Xiong, T. Hayakawa and M. Nogami, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9095–9104 CAS .
S. Liu, J. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Luo, J. Zhai and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11726–11729 RSC .
H. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Wang, F. Yang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5118–5120 RSC .
K. S. Prasad, R. Pallela, D.-M. Kim and Y.-B. Shim, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2013, 30, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 437–444 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, J. Ma, Y. Lin, B. Yao, F. Li, W. Weng and X. Lin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 151, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Yang and C.-y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8605–8607 RSC .
Y. Xu, X. Niu, H. Zhang, L. Xu, S. Zhao, H. Chen and X. Chen, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2015, 63, 1747–1755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, Y. Feng, Y. Su, L. Zhang and Y. Lv, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 55158–55164 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Yin, A. Jain and H. S. Zhou, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14270–14275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. N. Khabashesku, J. L. Zimmerman and J. L. Margrave, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, Y. Y. Lin, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. A. Chen, I. S. Chen, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 505–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S.-Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Xie, Y. Tian, J. Wang and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4438–4443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. C. So, C. Y. Dong, B. R. Masters and K. M. Berland, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2000, 2, 399–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Teng, C. Ma, C. Ge, M. Yan, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, P. C. Morais and H. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4631–4639 RSC .
W. Shi, X. Li and H. Ma, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 6538–6541 CrossRef .
P. Wu and X.-P. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5489–5521 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2308–2326 RSC .
W. Miao, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2506–2553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. M. Fang, R. Y. Wang, L. X. You, N. Y. Fu, G. N. Chen and J. J. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3855–3857 RSC .
R. Pyati and M. M. Richter, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2007, 103, 12–78 RSC .
C. Cheng, Y. Huang, X. Tian, B. Zheng, Y. Li, H. Yuan, D. Xiao, S. Xie and M. M. Choi, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4754–4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, Q. Han, Y. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Li and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1841–1846 CAS .
Z. Guo, S. Park, J. Yoon and I. Shin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 43, 16–29 RSC .
W.-J. Niu, Y. Li, R.-H. Zhu, D. Shan, Y.-R. Fan and X.-J. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 218, 229–236 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Bhunia, A. Saha, A. R. Maity, S. C. Ray and N. R. Jana, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1473 Search PubMed .
M. Rong, Z. Cai, L. Xie, C. Lin, X. Song, F. Luo, Y. Wang and X. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 9387–9395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Teng, C. Ma, C. Ge, M. Yan, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, P. C. Morais and H. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4631–4639 RSC .
R. Zhang and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, F. Li, S. Li, W. Weng, H. Guo, T. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, T. Huang, X. Hong, S. You, Y. Lin, K. Zeng and S. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1967–1971 RSC .
P. Zrazhevskiy, M. Sena and X. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4326–4354 RSC .
G. S. He, L.-S. Tan, Q. Zheng and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1245–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, C. S. Lim, Y. S. Tian, J. H. Han and B. R. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1216–1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Pu, K. Li, X. Zhang and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4186–4189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhu, Q. Qu, X. Shao, B. Kong and Y. Tian, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 7297–7301 CrossRef .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, X. Qian and L. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2272–2273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du and S. Guo, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2532–2543 RSC .
C. R. Lohani and K.-H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 143, 649–654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Chen and M. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 63, 61–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Kuo, B. Zhou, D. Cosco and J. Gitschier, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 6836–6841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Emerit, M. Edeas and F. Bricaire, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2004, 58, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, H. Li, W. Kong, J. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Tong, X. Zhang and Z. Kang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 2529–2534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Jin and R. Yang, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 9021–9028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wen, T. Zeng, L. Liu, K. Zhao, Y. Zhao, X. Liu and H. C. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18312–18317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zong, K. Ai, G. Zhang, H. Li and L. Lu, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3126–3132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chan, Y. Jin, C. Wu and D. T. Chiu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2820–2822 RSC .
X. Guo, Y. Wang, F. Wu, Y. Ni and S. Kokot, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 183, 773–780 CrossRef .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Guo, L. Cai, M. Yu and L. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5798–5800 RSC .
J. J. Feng, H. Huang, W. J. Chen, J. R. Chen, H. J. Lin and A. J. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33, 2664–2668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lei, Z. Wang, Z. Nie, H. Deng, H. Hu, Y. Huang and S. Yao, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 1974–1980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, J. Yuan and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5569–5573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Park, M. I. Kim, M. A. Woo and H. G. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 45, 65–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zong, X. Yang, A. Trinchi, S. Hardin, I. Cole, Y. Zhu, C. Li, T. Muster and G. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 51, 330–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Suryawanshi, M. Biswal, D. Mhamane, R. Gokhale, S. Patil, D. Guin and S. Ogale, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11664–11670 RSC .
S. Barman and M. Sadhukhan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21832 RSC .
O. Dohan and N. Carrasco, Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 2003, 213, 59–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Jass, K. Mukawa, H. S. Goh, S. B. Love and D. Capellaro, J. Clin. Pathol., 1989, 42, 254–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, W. Wang, J. Lei, N. Xu, F. Gao and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 12182–12188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rattanarat, W. Dungchai, D. M. Cate, W. Siangproh, J. Volckens, O. Chailapakul and C. S. Henry, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 800, 50–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Katz and H. Salem, J. Appl. Toxicol., 1993, 13, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, L. Qi, G. Shen, W. Liu and Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 5862–5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rong, L. Lin, X. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Zhong, J. Yan, Y. Feng, X. Zeng and X. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 210–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han and E. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2585–2589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, F. Pu, Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3487–3489 RSC .
D. M. Townsend, K. D. Tew and H. Tapiero, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2003, 57, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Zhou, X. Peng and J. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2120–2135 RSC .
Y. Tang, H. Song, Y. Su and Y. Lv, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 11876–11884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Russo Krauss, A. Merlino, A. Vergara and F. Sica, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 11643–11691 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hu, T. Zhong, Y. Huang, Z. Chen and S. Zhao, Microchim. Acta, 2014, 182, 949–955 CrossRef .
J. Ju and W. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 1903–1910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Luo and X. Sun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 411–413 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Li, L. Tang, J. Lu and J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 889–892 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, W. Zhang, P. Sherrell, J. M. Razal, X. F. Huang, A. I. Minett and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 44–48 CAS .
T. Li, E. Wang and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5520–5522 RSC .
Z. Lin, H. Chen and J.-M. Lin, Analyst, 2013, 138, 5182–5193 RSC .
Y. Tang, Y. Su, N. Yang, L. Zhang and Y. Lv, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4528–4535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, H. Li, S. Peng and L. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 8415–8421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, M. Rong, S. Lu, X. Song, Y. Zhong, J. Yan, Y. Wang and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1872–1878 RSC .
Y. Wang and Y. Ni, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 7463–7470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, A. J. Zhang, M. Dong and Y. W. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4505–4507 RSC .
M. Rong, L. Lin, X. Song, T. Zhao, Y. Zhong, J. Yan, Y. Wang and X. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 1288–1296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. I. Cataldi, D. Nardiello, L. Scrano and A. Scopa, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2002, 50, 6643–6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Priego-Capote and M. D. Luque de Castro, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26, 2376–2383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, H. Y. Zou, M. X. Gao and C. Z. Huang, Talanta, 2016, 148, 279–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, M. V. Yigit, D. Mazumdar and Y. Lu, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2010, 62, 592–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, K. Yang and H. Dai, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, B. Shen, Z. Hong, B. Lin, B. Gao and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 12017–12019 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 530–543 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Qian, J. Xiang and C. M. Lieber, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. D. Kumar, J.-H. Yun and J. Kim, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2014, 2014, 1–14 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y. Li, L. Cheng, Z. Cao and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 2, 46–48 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Ai-Jun Wang
	Ai-Jun Wang is a professor in the College of Geography and Environmental Science, Zhejiang Normal University. He received his PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2007. His research interests include fluorescence spectroscopy, electrochemical sensors, functional nanomaterials and biomaterials.

Hua Li
	Hua Li received her BSc in Applied Chemistry from Henan Agricultural University in 2014. She is currently a Master's candidate in the College of Geography and Environmental Science, Zhejiang Normal University and her research interests are in the fabrication of fluorescent functional nanomaterials for bioanalytical applications.

Hong Huang
	Hong Huang received his BSc in chemistry from Fuyang Teachers College in 2011. Afterwards, he moved to Zhejiang Normal University as a Master's student under the supervision of Professor Jiu-Ju Feng. Now he is a doctoral candidate at East China Normal University. His research interests are focused on the fabrication of fluorescent functional nanomaterials for (bio)analytical applications.

Zhao-Sheng Qian
	Zhao-Sheng Qian is an associate professor in the College of Chemistry and Life Science, Zhejiang Normal University. He received his BSc in chemistry from Shandong Normal University and his PhD from Nanjing University. He is interested in molecular probes and nanomaterial-based luminescent probes and their applications in chemosensors and biosensors.

Jiu-Ju Feng
	Jiu-Ju Feng is a professor in the College of Chemistry and Life Science, Zhejiang Normal University. She received her PhD degree from Nanjing University in 2006. She did her post-doctoral research in Technische Universität, Berlin. Her research interests include (bio)sensors, functional (bio)nanomaterials, and Raman and fluorescence spectroscopy.

 	Fig. 1  The graphene-like structure of carbon nitride with tris-s-triazine units.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the unique properties and various applications based on FL GCNs.	 

Top-down	Sonication	Melamine bulk GCNs	Blue	14.5	
12

Acidic chemical oxidation	Bulk P-doped GCNs	Blue	90.2	
16

Sonication	Dicyandiamide lumps GCNs melamine	Blue	12.53	
26

Acidic chemical oxidation	Dicyanamide bulk GCNs	Blue	3.0	
27

Chemical tailoring	Bulk polymeric carbon nitride	Blue	46	
28

Hydrothermal cutting	Bulk GCNs	Blue	16.9	
35

Electrochemical oxidation	Melamine	Blue	—	
38



Bottom-up	Microwave-assisted method	Guanidine hydrochloride and EDTA	Green	35	
7

Hydrothermal or solvothermal method	Citric acid and thiourea	Blue	14.5	
10

Microwave-assisted method	Citric acid and thiourea	Blue	31.67	
21

Hydrothermal or solvothermal method	1,2-Ethylenediamine and CCl4	Blue	—	
41

Microwave-assisted solvothermal method	Citric acid monohydrate and urea	Blue	27.1	
45

Low temperature solid-phase method	Urea and sodium citrate	Green to dark blue	42	
46

Low temperature solid-phase method	EDTA and melamine	Blue	34	
48


 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the chemically tailored FL GCNs in acid media (reprinted with permission from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  Typical (a) TEM image, (b) XRD pattern, and (c) AFM image of FL GCNs (reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration for the microwave-assisted preparation of FL GCNs and the corresponding CL mechanism (reprinted with permission from ref. 7 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 6  The formation mechanism for the synthesis of FL GCNs with tunable emission by a low-temperature solid-phase method (reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration for (a) the preparation of GCNs by a thermal condensation process, (b) CL of the GCNs–K3[Fe(CN)6] system, and (c) the mechanism of FL and CL of GCNs (reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the strategy for preparation of single-layered FL GCNs. The corresponding (b) TEM image and size-distribution diagram, (c) AFM and (d) height images (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Wiley Online Library).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Emission spectra of FL GCNs obtained by adjusting the excitation wavelength from 400 to 530 nm with a 10 nm increment. (b) The corresponding normalized fluorescence spectra.	 

 	Fig. 10  Scheme of one- and two-photon excited fluorescence of GCNs (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Wiley Online Library).	 

 	Fig. 11  The developed ECL reaction mechanism for GCN–coreactant systems (CB = conduction band, VB = valence band; reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the preparation of green FL GCNs by a microwave synthesis method and their in vitro bioimaging.	 

 	Fig. 13  One-photon fluorescence images of HepG2 cells co-stained with 1,1-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate (DiI) (a1 and b1), fluorescein diacetate (FDA) (a2 and b2), GCNs (a3), and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (b3). Two-photon fluorescence images of HepG2 cells with GCNs (a4) and DAPI (b4). Merged images of a1–a3 (a5), a1, a2 and a4 (a6), b1–b3 (b5), b1, b2 and b4 (b6) (reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Wiley Online Library).	 

 	Fig. 14  Confocal fluorescence images of HEK 293T cells before (a) and after incubation with (b) FL GCNs for 24 h (reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 15  The sensing principle of the FL GCN-based fluorescent sensor for Cu2+ (reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Synthesis process for FL GCNs with the use of protonation and sonication of bulk GCNs. (b) An analytical pathway for Cu2+ based on the photoinduced electron transfer between Cu2+ and FL GCNs (PET = photoinduced electron transfer, reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Springer Link).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The synthesis of fluorescent P,O-GCNs. (b) Schematic illustration of the sensitive and selective fluorescence detection of Cu2+ and AChE activity based on the P,O-GCNs (reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the principle of the GCNs–Hg2+ system based chemosensor for GSH (reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of interactions of DNA with GCNs, the fluorescence quenching mechanism of GCNs, and the sensing strategy for the fluorescence detection of (a) DNA, (b) Hg2+ and (c) ratiometric fluorescence detection of DNA (reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of fluorescence “on–off” assay for Cr(VI) and “on–off–on” assay for AA (AA = ascorbic acid, DAA = dehydroascorbic acid) (reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Science Direct).	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the persistent luminescent Ag+–GCNs system for the imaging detection of biothiols (reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of a GCN based multicolour fluorescent nanoprobe for multiplex detection of DNA (reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Springer Link).	 

 	Fig. 23  The UV-vis spectra of (a) 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)–GCNs–H2O2 and (c) 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine TMB–GCNs–uricase–uric acid systems with analytes of different concentrations. Response curves of (b) H2O2 and (d) uric acid, respectively. Inset: Images of production of colored products for different concentrations of H2O2 and uric acid (pH 4.0. The concentrations of GCNs and TMB were 0.07 mg mL−1 and 0.5 mM, respectively. The incubation temperature is 37 °C) (reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of the sensitive and selective fluorescence detection of TNP based on the GCNs (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of GCNs as potential photosensitizers and pH-responsive drug nanocarriers for cancer therapy (ROS = reactive oxygen species, DOX = delivery of doxorubicin, reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
