Facile single-component precursor for Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 with enhanced phase and composition controllability   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE43101K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE43101K
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 998-1005Facile single-component precursor for Cu2ZnSnS4 with enhanced phase and composition controllability†

        
          
            Huanping 
            Zhou‡
, 
      
        
          
            Hsin-Sheng 
            Duan‡
, 
      
        
          
            Wenbing 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chia-Jung 
            Hsu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wan-Ching 
            Hsu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chun-Chao 
            Chen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. E-mail: yangy@ucla.edu
Received 
      15th September 2013
    , Accepted 25th November 2013First published on 26th November 2013AbstractA simple and effective method has been demonstrated using soluble single-component precursors to achieve high quality Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin films with enhanced phase and composition controllability. The soluble single-component precursors were composed of Cu2−xS colloidal nanocrystals (NC) and the homogeneously distributed Zn–Sn species on the surface. Zn species is presented as the surface ligand for the first time, in the form of Zn–Sn complex, providing both the colloidal stabilization and the essential components for CZTS. CZTS film composition is governed by the prescribed stoichiometry between Cu2−xS nanoparticles and the Zn–Sn complex in solution. This novel reaction process enables a favorable CZTS phase progression, with less than 175 °C formation temperature, and a minimized secondary phase growth mode, due to its local composition uniformity in both liquid and film state. Compared with the approaches based on molecular precursor or quarternary CZTS nanocrystals, the single-component precursor allows fine tuning of the kesterite materials for future advanced optoelectronics.

Broader content
Solar energy is the most abundant, renewable, and non-polluting energy resource available to human beings, and yet it remains one of the most poorly utilized, due to the current high production costs. To develop a material which is cost-effective, earth abundant, and possesses decent optical and electronic property is essentially important for secure and sustainable energy sources capable of powering the modern world. Cu2ZnSnS4 is one of the most practical absorber materials producing solar energy in a cost-effective way. A challenge in any synthetic route for fabrication of high performance CZTS is exquisite controllability over composition and pure phase. The present work addresses these issues by designing and synthesizing Cu2-xS capped with Zn–Sn complex ligand with both composition and phase control. The materials were evaluated in phase formation and film property, showing improved characteristics in terms of homogeneity and a favorable reaction pathway. Using the present precursor, photovoltaic devices were successfully demonstrated, and advanced optoelectronics are expected by precisely tuning the kesterite material properties.

Introduction
Kesterite-phase Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) has recently been highlighted as emerging absorber material in next generation thin film solar cells, owing to its decent optical property and earth abundant nature.1,2 The successful demonstration of CZTS processing3–11 largely benefits from controlling the formation of the kesterite phase, a target that poses unique material challenges. Unlike its analogous Cu(In,Ga)S2 (CIGS) or CdTe,12–14 single-phase kesterite CZTS exists only within a narrow stoichiometry range.15,16 The presence of volatile elemental constituents and binary phases17–19 (such as zinc metal and tin chalcogenide) further complexes the phase purity issue within the deposited films, particularly under high temperatures and vacuum conditions. Thus, the exquisite controllability over composition20–24 and phase becomes the key prerequisite in any synthetic routes for the fabrication of high performance CZTS films.
Similar with other members of the metal chalcogenide family, high quality CZTS films have been deposited via a cost-effective solution processing.3,5 Solution processing, by taking advantage of its high precursor diffusivity and uniform precursor distribution in liquids, is capable of producing pure kesterite phase at low temperature.4,5,19 An ideal solution precursor for high quality kesterite phase requires identical compositions in both liquid and film, absence of impurities, precise control on composition stoichiometry, free of phase segregation and small geometry reorganization during film formation. Despite the remarkable progresses, current solution processing precursors, varying from solution mixture of multiple molecules or binary/ternary nanoparticles, quarternary particles to preformed single-component quaternary nanoparticles, still hardly meet all the criteria.7–9 Solution mixture of multiple molecular or binary/ternary nanoparticles enables large stoichiometry tunability, however, the local element distribution in spin-coated films is uncertain owing to phase segregation, which may lead to an intensive kinetic ion diffusion barrier during phase formation. A single-component precursor, such as quaternary kesterite-phase CZTS nanocrystals with only one composition, enables identical local compositions in both liquid and film state, but on the cost of surface long chain hydrocarbon ligands contaminating film purity. Thus, developing a clean uniform solution precursor that exhibits controllability over composition and phase progression during film formation is highly preferable.
We report, for the first time, a facile single-component nanoparticle precursor, Cu2−xS nanoparticles (NPs) capped with Zn–Sn complex (Zn–Sn complex abbreviates the mixture of Zn(hyc)2(N2H4)2 (hyc: hydrazinocarboxylic), [Sn2S7]6− and [SnS4]4−), for high-quality kesterite-phase CZTS film (Scheme 1). In this approach, Zn–Sn complex is directly capped onto the ultra-small Cu2−xS nanoparticles surface to form homogeneous nanoparticles. Compared with quaternary kesterite-phase CZTS nanocrystals, Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn nanoparticle (Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn) precursor exhibits similar composition controllability, resulting from their single-component nature, but with the absence of surface hydrocarbon ligands. Upon annealing, local element re-distribution produces the resulting kesterite-phase CZTS with increased film homogeneity and less impurities. Surface Zn–Sn ligands surrounding Cu2−xS nanoparticles provide both colloidal stabilization and essential components for CZTS. The stoichiometry of CZTS is simply adjusted by the concentration of Cu2−xS nanoparticles and Zn–Sn ligands. Film formation is investigated in detail with X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy. We find that, with current single-component nanoparticle precursors, very few steps are required to produce kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 phase. Using the present precursor, photovoltaic devices have been successfully demonstrated, and advanced optoelectronics are expected by precisely tuning the kesterite material properties.
 Scheme 1  A schematic illustration of the synthetic route to CZTS film. Initially, Cu2−xS nanoparticles were capped with Zn–Sn complexes to form the single-component precursor, Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn nanoparticles. Then Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn nanoparticles were deposited into the precursor film, followed by thermal annealing to form the kesterite CZTS film. 
Experimental
Chemicals
All chemicals are purchased from Aldrich, and used without any further purification.
Synthesis of Cu2−xS nanoparticles
The synthesis of Cu2−xS nanoparticles followed the literature method.25 In a typical synthesis, 1.25 mmol of ammonium diethyldithiocarbamate is mixed with 10 mL of dodecanethiol and 17 mL of oleic acid in a three-neck flask. Then, the solution is heated up to 110 °C under Argon (Ar) flow and maintained at 110 °C for 30 minutes, followed by a quick injection of a suspension composed of 1 mmol of copper(II) acetylacetonate and 3 mL of oleic acid. After that, the solution is quickly heated up to 180 °C and kept at the temperature for 10 minutes. The solution containing Cu2−xS nanoparticles is cooled down naturally to room temperature before being taken out of the flask for centrifuging at 5000 rpm for 8 minutes. The supernatant is discarded and the precipitation is first fully dissolved in 4 mL of toluene and then precipitated out by adding 30 mL of isopropanol followed by centrifuging at 5000 rpm for 8 minutes. The as-obtained precipitation is fully dissolved in toluene with mass concentration of 20 mg mL−1 Cu2−xS nanoparticles for further construction of CZTS precursor.
Preparation of Zn–Sn ligand solution
The Zn–Sn hydrazine solution was prepared according to the previous work of our group.26 In brief, Zinc nanopowder (2 mmol) was mixed and stirred with H2NNHCOOH saturated hydrazine solution (1 mL), which was first prepared by adding hydrazine to a vial containing solid-state carbon dioxide. The tin precursor solution was prepared in a separate vessel, through mixing SnS2 (1 mmol) and excess sulfur (2 mmol) in N2H4 (1 mL) with stirring. The Zn–Sn hydrazine solution was made by mixing the above two solutions with adjusted molar ratio of Zn–Sn = 1.2. Note: hydrazine is highly toxic, and appropriate protective equipment should be used to prevent direct contact with the liquid or vapor. The reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrazine is highly exothermic. The hydrazine-based solutions were prepared in a nitrogen-filled glovebox where the oxygen and moisture levels were both below 1 ppm. The Zn–Sn dried precursor was prepared by evaporating Zn–Sn hydrazine solution overnight, and was re-dissolved in appropriate amounts of benign solvents, such as formamide (FA), ethanolamine (EA) with continuous stirring at 100 °C for 1–2 h. The as-prepared Zn–Sn species in EA or FA are adjusted with desired concentration for the construction of CZTS precursor solution in the next step.
Preparation of CZTS precursor
The final CZTS precursor solution was prepared by mixing the following constituents, 0.3 mL 0.2 M Zn–Sn solution of FA, 0.5 mL 20 mg mL−1 Cu2−xS colloidal solution of toluene and 0.2 mL extra FA in the glovebox. The as-formed two-phase mixture was stirred vigorously for several hours, after which toluene phase turned colorless while the FA phase turned black, indicating ligand exchange of nanocrystals. The colorless upper toluene phase was discarded and the bottom FA phase was washed three times with toluene. Then, the bottom black layer was collected by adding an adequate amount of acetonitrile, followed by centrifuging at 5000 rpm for 6 min, and lastly was re-dispersed in FA solvent. The as-obtained CZTS precursor solution was stored in the glovebox for further characterization and device fabrication. For FTIR characterization, the precursor solution is dried under vacuum in order to measure its solid state behaviour. The off-stoichiometric CZTS precursor solution was prepared by mixing excessive Zn–Sn solution with Cu2−xS nanocrystals, e.g., 0.4 mL 0.2 M Zn–Sn solution and 0.5 mL 20 mg mL−1 Cu2−xS colloidal solution, and the rest of the preparation procedures remain the same.
Fabrication and characterization of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) solar cells
CZTSSe absorber was deposited onto the molybdenum-coated glass substrate by spin-coating the precursor solution multiple times, with intermediate annealing steps of 300 °C followed by a final selenization in a graphite box at 560 °C for 20 minutes. The cadmium sulfide (CdS) layer was then deposited onto CZTSSe layer by chemical bath deposition. Finally, Ag nanowires (NW)/ITO-nanoparticles films were spin coated onto the devices as a transparent top electrode. The area of each cell was 2 mm by 2.5 mm, defined by mechanical scribing of a 1 cm by 1 cm substrate. The current versus voltage (J–V) performance was measured under an AM 1.5 G filter at 100 mW cm−2, using a Newport Oriel 92192 solar simulator.
Materials characterization
Both the films and powder samples were annealed at the desired temperature on a hot plate with the temperature verified by an IR thermometer. XRD patterns were collected on a PANalytical X'Pert Pro X-ray powder diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54060 Å). The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were taken on Nova 230 with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. Raman shift spectroscopy was carried out using a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope using an excitation laser with a wavelength of 514 nm. TEM images were taken on an FEI CM120 microscope operating at 120 kV, and FEI Titan 80–300 kV S/TEM operating at 300 KV. FTIR spectra were obtained on a PerkinElmer Paragon 1000 FT-IR Spectrometer at a resolution of 4 cm−1 with a PerkinElmer IR microscope.
Results and discussion
The single-component precursor, Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn, was synthesized by a two-step ligand-exchange reaction, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In brief, Cu2−xS nanoparticles were firstly synthesized, followed by a surface ligand exchange from oleic acid to Zn–Sn ligands. Cu2−xS nanoparticles were firstly synthesized following a literature method,25,27 where copper acetylacetonate and ammonium diethyldithiocarbamate reacted in a mixed solvent of dodecanethiol and oleic acid. Fig. 1a and inset show the Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM) images of the as-obtained Cu2−xS nanoparticles. The average size of the nanoparticles was measured as 5.2 ± 0.4 nm, based on TEM statistic results. Characteristic interplanar distance of 0.2 nm from the (110) planes of single-crystal hexagonal Cu2−xS was also observed in the HRTEM image (inset of Fig. 1a). X-ray diffraction (XRD) further confirmed the hexagonal chalcocite Cu2−xS (JCPDS 012-0176, Fig. S1, ESI†) phase of the as-prepared Cu2−xS nanoparticles, which was in agreement with the TEM results.
 Fig. 1  (a) TEM images of the as-prepared oleic acid capped Cu2−xS nanoparticles; (b) photograph of Cu2−xS nanoparticles before and after ligand exchange of Zn–Sn ligand; (c) TEM images of Zn–Sn ligand capped Cu2−xS nanoparticles. 
The Zn–Sn ligand solution was separately prepared by evaporating Zn–Sn hydrazine solution (including Zn(hyc)2(N2H4)2 (hyc: hydrazinocarboxylic), [Sn2S7]6−, and [SnS4]4−)26 into a dried precursor, followed by re-dissolution into formamide (FA).28 Upon the mixing with Cu2−xS nanoparticles solution, Zn and Sn constituents substituted the original surface oleic acid ligands. Fig. 1b shows the sequential images before and after ligand exchange. Original Cu2−xS nanoparticles in the toluene phase were then transferred into the Zn–Sn containing FA phase, leaving a transparent toluene layer on the top. Stable Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn precursors were finally harvested by centrifuging and re-dispersing the bottom layer. TEM image shows similar morphology of Cu2−xS before (Fig. 1a) and after (Fig. 1c) surface ligand exchange. Notably, only capped nanoparticles were stabilized in FA, preserving the surface modification uniformity at single particle scale. Also, inadequate amounts of Zn–Sn complex ligands versus Cu species would lead to the precipitation of Cu2−xS nanoparticles in formamide. Thus, successfully preparing the CZTS precursor solution in formamide without precipitate indicates the presence of single-component nanoparticles, rather than simply the mixture of Cu2−xS nanoparticles and Zn–Sn complex ligands, in the CZTS precursor solution. In addition, to prove the homogenous distribution of Zn–Sn complex on Cu2−xS nanoparticles, a scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)-energy dispersive spectrum (EDS) measurement was conducted (Fig. 2). Due to the weak signal from a single nanoparticle (size of ∼5 nm), a scanning range of ∼45 nm (the inset of Fig. 2a) that covered several nanoparticles, was selected as our measurement scope. The plots of metal composition at varied scanning positions were drawn for Cu, Zn and Sn, respectively (Fig. 2b). The signals of Cu, Zn and Sn follow similar distribution profiles, indicating that the Zn–Sn complexes ligands likely capped on the surface of Cu2−xS nanoparticles evenly.
 Fig. 2  (a) A STEM image of Cu2−xS nanoparticles capped with Zn–Sn complexes; (b) an EDS line scan of the several Cu2−xS nanoparticles capped with Zn–Sn complexes shown in the inset of (a), showing the distribution of Cu (top), Zn and Sn (bottom), respectively. 
The successful fabrication of single-component Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn nanoparticle precursors was further confirmed by FTIR and Raman spectra. As shown in Fig. 3a, solid-state FTIR studies indicated the removal of the original hydrocarbon ligands: the characteristic C–H vibrations peak at 2800–3000 cm−1 disappeared after the ligand exchange. In Raman spectra (Fig. 3b), after ligand exchange, the peak around 300 cm−1 and 352 cm−1, indicative of the bridge vibration of S3Sn–S–SnS3 and [SnS4]4− stretching mode, disappeared, while two new peaks at 334 cm−1 and 475 cm−1 likely from Cu2ZnSnS4 and Cu2S were observed, respectively.19,29,30 Importantly, the appearance of Cu2ZnSnS4 vibration at 334 cm−1 indicates the surface binding between Cu2−xS nanoparticles and Zn and Sn species at room temperature, and the effective surface distribution of Zn and Sn around Cu2−xS nanoparticles.
 Fig. 3  (a) FTIR spectra of the Cu2−xS nanoparticles, before (red line) and after (black line) ligand exchange with Zn–Sn complex; (b) Raman spectra of Zn–Sn precursors in FA and Cu2−xS nanoparticles with Zn–Sn complexes in FA. 
Next we investigated the phase formation and intermediate products within the as-deposited film via temperature-dependent XRD and Raman spectrum. At each temperature, the film was incubated for 10 minutes, and then characterized by XRD and Raman, as shown in Fig. 4. At 100 °C, strong signals from Cu2−xS and amorphous hydrazinium frameworks were recorded in XRD. Due to the spectrum overlap, diffraction patterns from the crystalline phases of CZTS or its sub-phases were hard to be identified. The same sample exhibits one Raman peak at 470 cm−1, in good agreement with the reported vibrational mode of Cu2−xS phase.31 Besides, there is a broad peak appearing at 330 cm−1 with a shoulder at 298 cm−1, suggesting the formation of Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu2SnS3.32
 Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns and (b) Raman spectra of Cu2−xS nanocrystal and Zn–Sn ligand precursor annealed at various temperatures. Stage 1 (RT – 175 °C): formation of Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu2SnS3 based on reaction between Cu2−xS and Zn–Sn species; stage 2 (175–540 °C): formation of pure kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 from Cu2SnS3 and ZnS. 
When the temperature reached 175 °C (stage 1), we observed clear signs indicative of dramatic phase changes from Cu2−xS to Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu2SnS3. XRD diffraction from Cu2−xS disappeared, together with the appearance of a mixture of diffraction patterns from hexagonal phase of ZnS (JCPDS 00-005-0492) and a cubic phase, from either Cu2SnS3 (JCPDS 01-089-2879) or Cu2ZnSnS4 (JCPDS 00-026-0575), appeared in XRD spectrum. The appearance of these bimetallic or trimetallic chalcogenides, clearly indicated the reaction between Cu2−xS nanoparticles and Zn–Sn ligands at mild conditions, even though it is challenging to differentiate the close phases of Cu2SnS3 and Cu2ZnSnS4. Same phase change was also evidenced in Raman spectrum, where a strong peak at 330 cm−1 from the dominant phase of Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu2SnS3 appeared instead of the Cu2S peak. Notably, we did not observe the wurtzite ZnS in Raman spectrum owing to the lack of proper laser source to excite the corresponding vibrations. The new formed phases appeared around Cu2−xS nanoparticles, suggesting the single-component precursor as the nucleation center for the phase formation in the film.
Further temperature increment kept triggering phase changes until the complete formation of kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 (stage 2). From 200 °C to 540 °C, the characteristic diffraction patterns from wurtzite ZnS, gradually decreased till final diminish; whereas diffraction intensity from crystallined kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 on the contrary, was increasing, until all its characteristic peaks appeared, evidencing a pure kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 in the film. In Raman, the improvement crystallined kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 promoted the peak intensity at around 330 cm−1 during the whole stage 2.
The complementary study based on XRD and Raman spectroscopy suggested a two-stage film formation upon annealing. Starting from the single-component precursor, Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn nanocrystals, Cu2−xS firstly reacts with surface Zn–Sn species to form CZTS or Cu2SnS3 at 175 °C (stage 1), which then gradually grows larger until final conversion to the dominant pure kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 stable up to at least 540 °C (stage 2). This two-stage growth is unique compared to other deposition processes starting from pure elements or binary chalcogenides, because the Cu2−xS nanoparticles provide not only key constituents but also nucleation centers for film growth. A homogeneous elemental distribution down to the nanoscale, as indicated in Fig. 2, enables a uniform film (Table S1†) from the single component precursor. Local ion diffusion within short distances of each precursor may provide a desired phase composition; in contrast, long-distance ion diffusion is often required in other deposition processes. Similar growth processes have also been reported in hydrazine based approach which starts with Cu2Sn(Se,S)3 and Zn(Se,S)N2H4, where much larger nanoparticle mixtures are used.19
For the first time, Cu2−xS nanocrystals are capped with Zn–Sn complexes to form the single-component nanoparticle precursor, Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn, towards high-quality uniform kesterite CZTS films. This strategy enables quantitative, facile, and clean CZTS film controllability on both composition and phase formation. For the composition controllability, the element stoichiometry in the as-deposited film is identical to the stoichiometry of Cu2−xS nanoparticles and Zn–Sn complex in solution. Prescribed composition of the film can be directly synthesized by controlling solution concentration and the amount. Preparing the single-component nanoparticle precursor is achieved by direct mixing of multiple constituents at room temperature, without the need to consider incorporation discrimination of multiple elements into nanoparticle or as-deposited film. Phase segregation in molecular solution-deposited or multiple nanoparticle solution is absent with current single-component precursor, ensuring the uniform element distribution, both locally near nucleation centers and globally through the film. For the stoichiometry product fabricated with single-component precursor, no extra XRD patterns, coming from possible secondary phases, such as ZnS in slightly off-stoichiometric composition are observed, as shown in Fig. 5a. Substituting hydrocarbon molecules with Zn–Sn complexes further ensures only the desired constituents are present in the film, and diminishes the carbon contamination that is observed in traditional nanoparticle precursors as shown in Fig. 5b.
 Fig. 5  (a) The XRD pattern of the Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn precursor solution based film, with adjusted ratio between Cu2−xS nanoparticles and Zn–Sn species; (b) the Raman spectra of Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn precursor solution and CZTS nanocrystals. The CZTS nanocrystals were obtained by the procedure detailed in the ESI.† 
The as-prepared single component CZTS precursors are further used to fabricate the solar cell devices. Fig. 6a shows a cross section SEM image of a CZTSSe film after selenization and Fig. 6b represents typical J–V characteristics of a solar cell made from the present CZTS precursor. It is worth noting that there is an absence of carbon-rich layer in the selenized films, which is different from that based on CZTS nanoparticles capped with long chain carbon ligands. This indicates the successful ligand exchange process, leading to negligible hydrocarbon residues in the final film. In a first optimization, the device exhibits an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.151 V, short circuit current (JSC) of 25.3 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) of 30.8%, and power conversion efficiency of 1.2%. Continued optimization of absorber fabrication and interface engineering is underway.
 Fig. 6  (a) Cross section SEM image of a CZTSSe film after selenization, and (b) J–V characteristics of a photovoltaic device prepared from the single-component CZTS precursor. 
Cu2−xS as the nucleation center might overcome the activation energy barrier of film growth to the thermodynamically stable phase, where the stability of secondary impurity phase is largely decreased. Zn–Sn species are homogeneously distributed on Cu species, producing comparatively shorter local diffusion lengths for all the constituents to reach the thermodynamic equilibrium positions than that in a phase-segregated film. Different from the single-component precursor present here, an alternative approach using Sn2Se64− capped Cu2Se and ZnS nanocrystals,33 still needs complex accurate balancing on both composition and ion diffusion among all the constituents. During film formation, significantly longer ion diffusion through Sn species separated Cu and Zn nanoparticles is also observed. Hence, pre-formed small nanocrystals serve as perfect models for investigating the mediation of nucleation and growth within a solid-state film from soluble precursors. A more controllable nucleation and growth mode from liquid state to solid state will in turn benefit the development of solid state chemistry.
Using Zn–Sn species as the capping ligands of the colloidal nanocrystals enriches the inorganic ligand family, from single halogen anion or single metal-based metal chalcogenide complex (MCC) to multi-metal-based MCC ligands.33–36 We have noticed that the presence of multi-metal-based MCC ligands, with their high affinity to replace typical organic ligands on nanoparticle surface, solves both carbon contamination and surface surfactant barrier for ion diffusion. In particular, some inorganic species may perform as the indispensable components to improve performance of designed optoelectronic devices, while Zn–Sn species as an inorganic ligand, is a promising candidate with the capability for tuning optical and electrical properties for optoelectronics development.
Conclusion
In summary, we report a facile, quantitative and clean fabrication of kesterite CZTS film from a single-component precursor, crystalline Cu2−xS capped with multi-metal MCC ligands, Zn–Sn complex, and demonstrate its optoelectronic performance. This facile approach possesses unique controllability over CZTS composition and phase formation progression. For the first time, Zn, together with Sn chacolgenide in the form of Zn–Sn complex, is used as surface capping ligand for Cu2−xS to provide both colloidal stability and essential components for CZTS. Kesterite CZTS film composition is thus governed by the prescribed stoichiometry between Cu2−xS nanoparticles and the Zn–Sn complex in solution. The characteristic that Zn–Sn species homogeneously distributed on Cu2−xS nanoparticles, enables a favorable CZTS phase formation pathway, with less than 175 °C formation temperature, and a minimized secondary phase growth mode. Substitution of traditional hydrocarbon capping ligands by Zn–Sn complex significantly decreases the carbon contamination in films, and photovoltaics devices have been successfully demonstrated. Current strategy, owing to its relatively simple processes, clean composition against organic sacrificial groups during annealing, and low-temperature fabrication, could be further expanded to other I2-II-IV-VI4, I-V-VI2 based electronic and optoelectronic materials. Facile processing of high-quality clean kesterite films will thus contribute to the ongoing development of optoelectronic devices into industry production of next-generation optoelectronics. The combination of pre-formed small nanocrystals and capped essential components serve as perfect models for investigating the mediation of nucleation and growth within a solid-state film from soluble precursors, which will in turn benefit the development of solid state chemistry.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (grant number: ECCS-1202231, and Program Director: Dr George N. Maracas).
References
D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, K. Wang and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1421–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Repins, M. J. Romero, J. V. Li, S.-H. Wei, D. Kuciauskas, C.-S. Jiang, C. Beall, C. DeHart, J. Mann, W.-C. Hsu, G. Teeter, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2012, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E156–E159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, H. Zhou, B. Lei, C. Chung, S. Li, W. W. Hou and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6323–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Vora, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippo, B. To, J. Mann, W.-C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, M. S. Denny, J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. S. Ionkin, L. K. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, H. D. Rosenfeld, K. R. Choudhury and W. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15644–15647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11672–11673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, W.-C. Hsu, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, W. Yang, T. Song, C.-J. Hsu and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2822–2838 CAS .
H.-S. Duan, W. Yang, B. Bob, C.-J. Hsu, B. Lei and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1466–1471 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, W.-C. Hsu, S. Luo, S. Ye, H.-S. Duan, C.-J. Hsu, W. Yang and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15998–16001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Chavez, D. K. Ward, B. M. Wong, F. P. Doty, J. L. Cruz-Campa, G. N. Nielson, V. P. Gupta, D. Zubia, J. McClure and X. W. Zhou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 245316 CrossRef .
X. W. Zhou, D. K. Ward, B. M. Wong, F. P. Doty, J. A. Zimmerman, G. N. Nielson, J. L. Cruz-Campa, V. P. Gupta, J. E. Granata, J. J. Chavez and D. Zubia, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 245302 CrossRef .
X. W. Zhou, D. K. Ward, B. M. Wong and F. P. Doty, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 245503 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nagoya, R. Asahi, R. Wahl and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 113202 CrossRef .
S. Schorr, A. Weber, V. Honkimäki and H.-W. Schock, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2461–2464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Redinger, D. M. Berg, P. J. Dale and S. Siebentritt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3320–3323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Weber, R. Mainz and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 013516 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-C. Hsu, B. Bob, W. Yang, C.-H. Chung and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8564–8571 CAS .
H. Katagiri, K. Jimbo, M. Tahara, H. Araki and K. Oishi, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2009, 1165, 125–136 CrossRef .
F.-J. Fan, L. Wu, M. Gong, G. Liu, Y.-X. W. Wang, S.-H. Yu, S. Chen, L.-W. Wang and X.-G. Gong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1454–1463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, S. Singh, S. Levcenko, T. Unold, F. Laffir and K. M. Ryan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2013, 52, 9120–9124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, A. Walsh, J.-H. Yang, X. Gong, L. Sun, P.-X. Yang, J.-H. Chu and S.-H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 1–5 Search PubMed .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W.-C. Yang, C. J. Hages, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 132–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 25, 2–6 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, H. Duan, K. C. Cha, C. Hsu, W. Hsu, H. Zhou, B. Bob and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6915–6920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, H. Zheng, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16851–16857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, C.-J. Hsu, W.-C. Hsu, H.-S. Duan, C.-H. Chung, W. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Campbell, D. P. DiCiommo, H. P. A. Mercier, A. M. Pirani, G. J. Schrobilgen and M. Willuhn, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 6265–6272 CrossRef CAS .
B. Krebs and W. Schiwy, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1973, 398, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoo and J. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fontané, L. Calvo-Barrio, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo, A. Pérez-Rodriguez, J. R. Morante, D. M. Berg, P. J. Dale and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 181905 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jiang, J. Lee and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5010–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, L. L. Kosbar, C. E. Murray, M. Copel and A. Afzali, Nature, 2004, 428, 299–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nag, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Lee, W. Liu, B. Spokoyny and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10612–10620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43101k‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader content
Solar energy is the most abundant, renewable, and non-polluting energy resource available to human beings, and yet it remains one of the most poorly utilized, due to the current high production costs. To develop a material which is cost-effective, earth abundant, and possesses decent optical and electronic property is essentially important for secure and sustainable energy sources capable of powering the modern world. Cu2ZnSnS4 is one of the most practical absorber materials producing solar energy in a cost-effective way. A challenge in any synthetic route for fabrication of high performance CZTS is exquisite controllability over composition and pure phase. The present work addresses these issues by designing and synthesizing Cu2-xS capped with Zn–Sn complex ligand with both composition and phase control. The materials were evaluated in phase formation and film property, showing improved characteristics in terms of homogeneity and a favorable reaction pathway. Using the present precursor, photovoltaic devices were successfully demonstrated, and advanced optoelectronics are expected by precisely tuning the kesterite material properties.


 	Scheme 1  A schematic illustration of the synthetic route to CZTS film. Initially, Cu2−xS nanoparticles were capped with Zn–Sn complexes to form the single-component precursor, Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn nanoparticles. Then Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn nanoparticles were deposited into the precursor film, followed by thermal annealing to form the kesterite CZTS film.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) TEM images of the as-prepared oleic acid capped Cu2−xS nanoparticles; (b) photograph of Cu2−xS nanoparticles before and after ligand exchange of Zn–Sn ligand; (c) TEM images of Zn–Sn ligand capped Cu2−xS nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A STEM image of Cu2−xS nanoparticles capped with Zn–Sn complexes; (b) an EDS line scan of the several Cu2−xS nanoparticles capped with Zn–Sn complexes shown in the inset of (a), showing the distribution of Cu (top), Zn and Sn (bottom), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) FTIR spectra of the Cu2−xS nanoparticles, before (red line) and after (black line) ligand exchange with Zn–Sn complex; (b) Raman spectra of Zn–Sn precursors in FA and Cu2−xS nanoparticles with Zn–Sn complexes in FA.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns and (b) Raman spectra of Cu2−xS nanocrystal and Zn–Sn ligand precursor annealed at various temperatures. Stage 1 (RT – 175 °C): formation of Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu2SnS3 based on reaction between Cu2−xS and Zn–Sn species; stage 2 (175–540 °C): formation of pure kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 from Cu2SnS3 and ZnS.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The XRD pattern of the Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn precursor solution based film, with adjusted ratio between Cu2−xS nanoparticles and Zn–Sn species; (b) the Raman spectra of Cu2−xS/Zn–Sn precursor solution and CZTS nanocrystals. The CZTS nanocrystals were obtained by the procedure detailed in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cross section SEM image of a CZTSSe film after selenization, and (b) J–V characteristics of a photovoltaic device prepared from the single-component CZTS precursor.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43101k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
