Progress and prospects of the morphology of non-fullerene acceptor based high-efficiency organic solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE01220G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01220G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4341-4357Progress and prospects of the morphology of non-fullerene acceptor based high-efficiency organic solar cells

        
          
            Lei 
            Zhu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ming 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Wenkai 
            Zhong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shifeng 
            Leng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guanqing 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yecheng 
            Zou
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xuan 
            Su
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Ding
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Peiyang 
            Gu
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Liu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yongming 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aFrontiers Science Center for Transformative Molecules, In-situ Center for Physical Science, and Center of Hydrogen Science, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China. E-mail: fengliu82@sjtu.edu.cn; ymzhang@sjtu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Fluorinated Functional Membrane Materials and Dongyue Future Hydrogen Energy Materials Company, Zibo, Shandong 256401, P. R. China
cJiangsu Key Laboratory of Advanced Catalytic Materials and Technology, School of Petrochemical Engineering, Changzhou University, Changzhou, Jiangsu 213164, P. R. China. E-mail: gupeiyang0714@163.com
Received 
      23rd April 2021
    , Accepted 17th June 2021First published on 17th June 2021AbstractWith the development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of organic solar cells (OSCs) has been continuously improved and has exceeded 18%. A critical step to realize high-efficiency devices is to control the complex non-equilibrium morphology of the photoactive layer, to match the domain sizes with excitons, carriers, and other photoelectron physical kinetics, and to suppress the loss channels. Multiple factors affect the blended film morphology, which is in close relation to the physical and chemical properties of the donor/acceptor materials and the film-forming conditions that provide leverage for morphology optimization. This article reviews the important morphological characteristics and recent research progress of NFA-based OSCs, including indacenodithiophene (IDT)- and Y6-based π-conjugated molecular systems and n-type π-conjugated polymers, and discusses the effects of material miscibility, crystallinity, chemical structure, blending strategy, and processing conditions on the film morphology. The recently emerged high performance Y6-based NFAs are paid special attention, and the structure–property relationship has been constructed from the perspective of the crystal structure and phase separation. We wish that this short review can provide useful information and guidance for the morphology optimization of NFA-based OSCs, and wish that the discussion could help to resolve the morphological issues for new materials to achieve higher efficiency devices.
Lei Zhu
Dr Lei Zhu is a Research Fellow in Prof. Feng Liu's group at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He received his BS and PhD in materials science and engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2011 and 2017, respectively. Then he moved to South China University of Technology as a Postdoctoral Fellow (2018–2020). He joined Prof. Liu's group in 2020. His current research interests include high efficiency organic solar cells, and morphology and photophysical properties of organic semiconductors.
Ming Zhang
Ming Zhang received his BS in materials science and engineering from East China University of Science and Technology in 2013. Now he is a PhD candidate at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research focuses on the characterization of nano and mesoscopic structures in organic semiconductor materials and devices using synchrotron-based X-ray scattering techniques.

Broader context
Non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) based organic photovoltaics (OPVs) exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of greater than 18%. The phase separated morphology of the light-absorbing layers is the key factor in determining the device performance since it dictates the exciton splitting and carrier transport properties. Such morphology is in a complex non-equilibrium state which is dictated by thermodynamic and kinetic factors. In-depth exploration of the physical chemistry of blended thin film morphology of the active layer can help in the understanding of the morphology manipulation of the OPV nanostructure, and thus in constructing a solid structure–property relationship, which is the scope of the current review.

1. Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) have received widespread attention due to their low cost, lightweight, solution processing, flexibility, and abundant material resources.1–3 Currently, the most efficient OSCs employ the non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) based active layers with bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) configuration, where p-type donor materials and NFAs are blended to form interpenetrating networks with a refined phase separation for realizing effective exciton splitting and carrier transport.4–6 In comparison with fullerene derivatives that have been used as acceptors in the early stage of OSC research, NFAs have unique merits in light harvesting, extinction coefficient, exciton diffusion length, electron mobility, etc.7–11 In BHJ blends, NFAs can match better with donor polymers in energy levels, and an extremely low driving force is obtained for efficient exciton splitting, yielding a low energy loss that fundamentally changes the power output in OSCs. The efficiency of Y6-based OSCs has exceeded 18% and maintains a strong upward trend,12 envisaging a prosperous future for the OSC technology.
Morphology is the bridge that connects material properties with device performances and is thus of primary importance in device optimization. Due to the abundance of OSC materials, the morphology optimization is straightforwardly two-fold: (1) examining the intrinsic physical and chemical properties of materials to guide the morphology optimization; (2) exploring the film-forming kinetics to adjust the non-equilibrium morphology details. Beyond the materials and processing conditions, key parameters such as material interaction and crystallization are the main focuses to be considered.
In this review, we briefly comment on the important morphological research progress based on the prevalently used NFA systems, trying to provide a general overview for understanding the facts and details of how morphology affects the performance of OSCs, and, to the best of our effort, to point out the future direction in OSC research.
2. General consideration of morphological aspects and connection with device performances
The working mechanism of OSCs includes four consecutive steps: light absorption and exciton generation, exciton diffusion to the donor/acceptor (D/A) interface, exciton dissociation into free carriers, and carrier transport and collection.13 The last three steps are closely related to the morphology of the active layer. In general, an interpenetrating network nanostructure with a domain size of 20 to 30 nanometers is ideal, which matches with the exciton diffusion length, so simple diffusion yields high exciton to carrier generation at the D/A interface.14–16 The OSC performance depends on three parameters, open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC), and fill factor (FF), which jointly determine the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of photovoltaic devices. VOC is mainly determined by the energy level difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the acceptor, and adjusted by the voltage loss caused by the recombination of radiative and nonradiative decaying channels, where a suitable interfacial morphology helps to diminish these factors.17–19JSC is the summation of the photo-to-electron conversion process,20 where the length scale of phase separation and mixing phase character dictates. A key evaluation would be optimizing a suitable sized phase separation with distinctive p-/n-transporting channels so that trap-assisted loss is mitigated. Meanwhile, in the mixing phase where the Langevin kinetics comes into play, efficient carrier diffusion outwards and onboarding the transport highway needs to be enhanced.21 The FF is a most straightforward evaluation of the device and material quality where the above-mentioned last three steps are integrated.22,23 A high and balanced mobility is beneficial, which though yields a higher recombination rate, the recombination probability will be reduced. This is related to trap-assisted recombination, which is transverse to the trap density in the BHJ morphology framework. Appropriate domain size is the first morphology character to be examined, where highly populated carriers could find the freeway to their respective electrodes. The transporting domain properties, mostly the structure order and connectivity of domains, are also the key, which help to reduce the trap-state of low and deep levels. It should be of specific concern that carriers extracted from the mixing zone to the transport channel should be optimized in a specific manner to counteract the Langevin recombination. The conjugated polymer with crystallization peculiarity provides a secured mechanism to induce holes to diffuse out, leaving the n-type diffusion nature to be considered. Within this perspective, the FF and JSC share common morphology characters that can be optimized in the same direction. In general, thin-film crystallinity, crystal orientation, phase connection, and vertical segregation should be in focus, yielding high carrier transport and collection to offer a good electric feature in devices. These morphological factors together with suitable energy level alignments are the inevitable aspects that should be taken into consideration for the high-efficiency device preparation.
3. The key morphology advances of indacenodithiophene (IDT)-based NFA OSCs
ITIC is a key invention in IDT-based NFAs. Since then, the efficiency of OSCs has been improved rapidly and substantially.10 It is an acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) type small molecule with a strong intramolecular push–pull electronic structure, which makes it realize a strong and broad spectral absorption, and thus device photocurrent is highly enhanced. These A–D–A type molecules usually have a backbone with a fused-ring core, which connects with end-capping groups on both ends and alkyl chains on sides.24 Such a chemical design tactic enables high tunability in that both molecular electronic structures and the thin film morphology can be optimized.
For BHJ thin films, the miscibility of materials strongly affects the thin film morphology, which is related to the thermodynamic Flory–Huggins interaction parameter (χ).25 For low-band gap polymer:fullerene BHJ blending, χ is usually large,26,27 and excessive phase separation is commonly seen, which is unfavorable for exciton dissociation. The χ between donor and NFAs can be small, resulting in high miscibility that leads to weak phase separation and thus serious carrier recombination. Tang and coworkers designed and synthesized a group of NFAs, TPIC-X, with different halogen end groups (the chemical structure of TPIC-X is shown in Fig. 1a).28 The interaction parameter between TPIC-X and PM7 was estimated by contact angle measurements. NFAs with more halogens introduced showed less miscibility with PM7, leading to the increased domain size, as demonstrated by atomic force microscopy (AFM, shown in Fig. 1b–d) and resonant soft X-ray scattering (RSoXS, shown in Fig. 1e), and thus better device performances were obtained. Appropriate phase separation improves charge transport and reduces bimolecular recombination, which elevates JSC and FF. So and coworkers fine-tuned the aggregation and miscibility of polymers with NFAs by adjusting the thiophene content in the polymer backbone (the structure of polymers is shown in Fig. 1f), and ultimately refined the domain size and purity to enhance charge generation and transport in blended thin films.29 Bearing in mind that χ comes into play in the thermodynamic world, for the non-equilibrium OSC blended thin film, it is logically not sound to make a direct correlation, especially when the phase structure and composition are not well understood. A possible mechanism can be that suitable miscibility reduces large-scaled phase separation, and the liquid–liquid phase separation at a suitable level purifies the donor and acceptor domain and thus material crystallization takes place to lock the morphology and condenses the film (Fig. 1g). There are numerous examples of adjusting the film morphology through material miscibility control,25,30 and some extreme cases show that crystallization could break the spinodal decomposition dictated phase separation in micro phase separated polymers,31,32 which should be noted and examined in OSC blends. And in many NFA-based OSC blends, the crystallization should be paid special attention due to its higher energy landscape.33,34 In specific NFA-based OSC blends, it remains challenging to balance the miscibility and crystallinity to fabricate better-percolated domains.
 Fig. 1  (a) The chemical structure of TPIC-X. AFM height image (b–d) and RSoXS profiles (e) of PM7:TPIC-X blend films. (b–e) Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) The chemical structure of PffBT4T-2OD, PffBT4T90-co-3T10, PffBT4T70-co-3T30, PffBT4T50-co-3T50, and PffBT3T-2OD. (g) Morphology evolution during drying for PffBT4T90-co-3T10 in blends with IDTBR. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Chemical modification is versatile for IDT-based NFAs. With fine-tuned molecular structures and film processing protocols, the molecular stacking characters and crystallinity of NFAs can be manipulated to induce more favorable phase separation. Li and coworkers developed m-ITIC with meta-alkyl-phenyl side-chain substitution by isomerization engineering of the ITIC alkyl-phenyl side chain (the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 2a).35 Such a subtle change improves the crystallinity of m-ITIC, as evidenced by grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) results shown in Fig. 2b. When blended with J61, m-ITIC shows a stronger π–π stacking in the out-of-plane direction (GIWAXS 1D line cuts are shown in Fig. 2c), and an appropriate domain size is achieved. Zhan and coworkers replaced the phenyl side chain of ITIC with the thienyl side chain to afford ITIC-Th (the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 2a).36,37 GIWAXS characterization indicates that ITIC-Th adopts a tighter π–π packing and has a better crystallinity (Fig. 2d). At the same time, when mixed with ITIC, the crystal habit changes, and the backbone ordering of the ITIC/ITIC-Th mixture gets enhanced, which extends the charge transport pathway and improves the electron mobility to realize efficient device performance. Wang and coworkers reported that the transition of COi8DFIC (the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 2e) from a mixed edge-on and flat-on lamellar to H- and J-type face-on π–π stacking can be induced by changing the film processing conditions (the absorption spectra of COi8DFIC films under different processing conditions are shown in Fig. 2f).38 This transformation of the molecular order not only broadens the absorption range of the active layer, but also makes the orientation of the donor and acceptor be in coherence, shortening the contact distance of the conjugate plane between the donor and acceptor, and thus exciton dissociation was improved (shown in Fig. 2g). It can be seen from these results that the crystallization of NFA is of particular importance in manipulating the morphology of BHJ thin films, aiming to obtain a suitable phase separation size, reduced aggregation, and improved crystallinity with favorable orientation. Notably, in many cases, the use of an additive during the film processing for NFA-based BHJ blends should be with caution since an inappropriate amount would lead to excessive NFA crystallization that surpasses the suitable length-scaled phase separation due to the high tendency of the vitrified thin-film crystallization process.39,40
 Fig. 2  (a) The chemical structure of ITIC, m-ITIC, and ITIC-Th. (b) 2D GIWAXS patterns of m-ITIC and ITIC. (c) In-plane and out-of-plane line cut profiles of the 2D GIWAXS data based on J61:m-ITIC and J61:ITIC blend films. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) 2D GIWAXS patterns of ITIC-Th and ITIC. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) The chemical structure of COi8DFIC. (f) The absorption spectra of COi8DFIC films cast at room temperature, at room temperature with solvent–vapor annealing, and on a 100 °C hot substrate. (g) Schematic of morphology within PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC films: flat-on and edge-on lamellar crystalline, and H- and J-type face-on π–π stacking of COi8DFIC. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
The ternary blend strategy is considered to be a simple and effective way to improve the device performance,41–45 which not only extends the spectral absorption of the BHJ thin film but also improves the blend morphology, which is beneficial for charge transfer and exciton dissociation. The energy level alignments and morphology features in ternary components are rich, and four mechanisms in terms of charge generation are proposed: charge transfer, energy transfer, parallel-like, and alloy model (shown in Fig. 3a–d).46 Albeit the complexity in terminology, the morphology character behind a ternary blend can be simple, especially in NFA blends. We assume that the main body of the three components in blends can form their pure phases, and most probably by forming crystalline domains. The amorphous part of each component can possibly form a complicated mixture depending on the different interaction behaviors of specific material pairs. However, such an effect can be trivial since the crystallization energy landscape can be much large than the liquid–liquid phase separation. And we can simply accredit them to be a simple mixing domain, which binds other components together. The focus from device aspects yields different mechanisms such as parallel-like model and alloy model. It should also be noted that there are rare cases where the two components especially acceptors can have eutectic characteristics and show high material miscibility in that one component and its crystalline structure could host the other.47,48 Such a case is more like a physical synthesis of new materials and should not be simply analyzed by the mechanistic model mentioned above. There is also a detailed categorization of morphologies of ternary blends based on the role of the third component: embedded (or dissolved) in the donor or acceptor phase, residing between the donor and acceptor phase, and co-crystallized with the donor or acceptor moiety.49 However, in practice, the morphology of ternary blends in a real case is more complex, and therefore, multiple morphological models are required to achieve a comprehensive understanding. As shown in Fig. 3e and f, Liu and coworkers introduced a wide bandgap acceptor IDT-T into the PBDB-T:ITIC system and found that IDT-T functions as an energy-level mediator, a fluorescence resonance energy-transfer donor, an electron acceptor, and a crystallization modulator in the blend.42 The structural similarity between the two NFAs makes them exhibit good miscibility. The addition of IDT-T can also induce ITIC crystallization, resulting in more effective exciton generation, reduced bimolecular charge recombination, and enhanced charge transport. The multi-functional synergy of IDT-T in the ternary system significantly improves the performance of ternary OSC devices. Zhu and coworkers employed a NFA NITI (the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 3e) as a third component in BTR:PC71BM blends, promoting the spectral absorption of the blended system and making the morphology of the blend film to form a hierarchical structure (shown in Fig. 3g).41 BTR and NITI are highly miscible to form a small phase separated structure that is conducive to charge separation. PC71BM forms a large-scaled phase separation around the mixing phase, which facilitates the rapid transport of electrons. Consequently, the optimal balance of carrier generation and transportation is achieved, and a high efficiency is obtained.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the working mechanisms in ternary organic solar cells. Charge transfer (a), energy transfer (b), parallel-like (c), and alloy model (d). (e) The chemical structure of IDT-T and NITI. (f) Schematic of the related electron and energy-transfer processes between PBDB-T, ITIC, and IDT-T. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (g) Schematic of the hierarchical morphology in the ternary film and the dominant charge generation and transport processes. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
In general, the main purpose of introducing the third component to adjust the morphology of blended films is to improve carrier mobility, reduce recombination, and facilitate charge separation. In many cases, it is found that the morphology of the active layer is not a simple interpenetrating network structure, but a more complex multi-length scaled morphology.41,50–54 There is a large-scaled phase separation that summarizes the single or multiple pure phase transport channels to ensure carrier transport, and there can be complimentary small-sized phase separation to elevate charge separation and carrier diffusion, which best utilizes the BHJ framework to balance the carrier generation and transport. In this scenario, the differences in material's electronic structure, as well as the crystallinity nature, should be considered comprehensively, to afford an aggressive morphology framework that best harvests light power and to extract carriers in an optimal functioning mechanism.
4. Morphology aspects of Y6-based OSCs
Many of the recent record-breaking efficiencies are reported based on the active layers using the Y6 family (Y-series) as the acceptors.11 This A–DA′D–A type acceptor offers good absorption property in the near-infrared region and suitable frontier energy levels that can match well with the mid-bandgap donors. On the basis of Y6, several NFAs with excellent performance have been designed through strategies such as alkyl chain optimization, halogen or selenium atom substitution, and core acceptor unit structure optimization, and the efficiency of the single-junction OSCs has exceeded 18%,12 with high device JSC, superior carrier diffusion length, and low energy loss (∼0.5 eV), indicative of the great potential of such unique acceptor material (summarized in Fig. 4 and Table 1).55–66 These functions are strongly tied with the morphology feature in the blended thin films. While the Y6-based BHJ blends do not suffer from large-scaled phase separation, the unique crystalline structure constructs a multi-length scaled morphology to coordinate the nature of the photo-excitons and free carriers, showing an efficient operating mechanism.
 Fig. 4  Chemical structures of Y-series acceptors (differences from Y6 are marked in different colors). 
Table 1 The photovoltaic parameters of the OSCs based on Y-series acceptors




Acceptor
Donor
The third component

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




BTP-4Cl
PM6
—
0.867
25.4
75.0
16.5

55



N3
PM6
PC71BM
0.850
25.71
76.6
16.74

56



AQx-2
PM6
—
0.86
25.38
76.25
16.64

57



Y11
PM6
—
0.833
26.74
74.33
16.54

58



BTIC-2Br-m
PM6
—
0.88
25.03
73.13
16.11

59



BTP-eC9
PM6
—
0.839
26.2
81.1
17.8

60



CH1007
PM6
PC71BM
0.822
27.48
75.61
17.08

61



BTP-ClBr
PM6
—
0.906
23.48
79.0
16.82

62



Y6Se
D18
—
0.839
27.98
75.3
17.7

63



Y6-1O
PM6
PC71BM
0.90
24.9
78.5
17.6

64




m-BTP-C6Ph
PTQ10
—
0.883
25.3
79.3
17.7

65



L8-BO
PM6
—
0.87
25.72
81.5
18.32

66





The packing motif of the banana-shaped Y6 molecules should be checked first and foremost.67 In single crystals, one Y6 molecule overlays on top of two Y6 molecules through the 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (IC) end groups to form a twisted 1D transport channel, extending along the cube face diagonal, as seen from the top and side view in Fig. 5a. The other set of Y6 molecules form another 1D channel that takes the opposite cube face diagonal in the crystal unit cell, establishing a cross-plane transport pathway, which is very different from the previously reported ITIC analogs.37,68 The π–π stacking is confirmed to be the major driving force to form such a unique crystalline structure. In chloroform (CF) processed BHJ thin film processed with chloroform (CF) solvent, the Y6 molecules stand tilted on the surface normal, making two cube face diagonal polymer-like backbone (110) semi-vertical on the substrate, as shown in Fig. 5b. Such a spatial arrangement could facilitate carrier transport that is favorable for device carrier extraction, and thus, high SCLC electron mobility and current density are obtained. Photo-induced force microscopy (PiFM) was used to investigate the PM6:Y6 BHJ thin film morphology (Fig. 5c), where Y6 could form a crystallite fibrillar network tens of nanometers in width (Fig. 5d), which is close to the crystalline coherence length (CCL) of Y6 lamellae (110) packing according to the GIWAXS results.69 The quite large (020) CCL around 40 nm is associated with the fibril length. The real value can be much large since slight dislocations or twisting in molecular packing quickly ceases the coherence in crystalline structure by the mathematic nature of CCL calculation. Such structure in blends with a PM6 nanofibril interconnected network accounts for the excellent performance of the Y6 BHJ system. Independent research on Y6's crystalline behavior is reported, which successfully answers the key issues in the OSC community.61,70,71
 Fig. 5  (a) Top and side view of the molecular packing sketch map of Y6 according to single crystal data. (b) 3D molecular packing sketch map of Y6. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Tapping mode AFM phase image (left) and PiFM image (right) at a wavenumber of 1532 cm-1 of the PM6:Y6 blend film. (d) Line profiles to obtain the FWHM of cross-section through tapping AFM-IR signal for PM6:Y6 blends. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Layer-by-layer (LbL) processing has recently emerged as a promising method to adjust the vertical distribution of the photovoltaic materials, to achieve a device architecture with a p–i–n configuration.72 The morphology is easy to control in principle, where the donor and acceptor components could be optimized separately, and the combination process offers another round of structure refining.73,74 The LbL approach is effectively implemented for the Y6 system, as shown by Sun and coworkers,75 achieving better-performing devices than those with BHJ configuration. The advantages of LbL are well harnessed in the opto-electronic process for Y6-based OSCs. The bottom polymer layer is fabricated without the presence of acceptor molecules that commonly disturb the polymer crystallization, and thus a better-developed polymer crystallite fibril structure with intertwined characteristic is obtained (Fig. 6a). Intuitively, the secondary Y6 layer fabrication would disturb the bottom layer morphology. However, the appropriate selection of solvents that can swell or partially dissolve amorphous polymers would introduce Y6 into the fibril mesh and form the electron-transport channels in-between the two layers, where the Y6 crystallization is in a confined environment spaced by polymer fibrils that in face-on orientation could form a distinctive vertical n-type transport channel. This secondary crystallization process also pushes the mixing zone to be well-aligned in-between the donor and the acceptor transporting zone, with reduced sizes to guarantee an efficient carrier diffusion, and mitigating recombination. The use of a solvent additive for the preparation of the Y6 secondary layer leads to controlled vitrification of the polymer layers, where refined chain ordering from surface-induced nucleation and growth could further improve the crystalline fibril morphology, which is another advantage of the LbL strategy (shown in Fig. 6b). Overall, such a method of shifting the paradigm of material optimization into morphology optimization in constructing BHJ thin-films reduces serious issues that are hard to surpass previously. Batch-to-batch variation of polymers is not sensitive since the fibril formation assumes the crystallization feature without complicated heterogeneous interactions. The pre-formed fibril network layer and the sequentially deposited NFA form a robust morphology and lead to a superior device performance. Chen and coworkers reported OSC efficiency of over 18% using the LbL method.76 The addition of BTP-S2, which has low miscibility with PM6 (estimated by Flory–Huggins interaction parameters), helps avoid the excessive mixing of the donor and the acceptor during LbL fabrication, thereby forming good vertical phase distribution with the donor buried at the anode, the acceptor enriched at the cathode, and the middle inter-diffusion layer ensuring an efficient electronic process, as the time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) results have shown (Fig. 6c). Through GIWAXS analysis, the LbL strategy is confirmed to take the advantage of higher crystallinity, compact molecular packing, and appropriate phase separation, compared with the BHJ processing, thus leading to higher JSC and FF. Ying and coworkers reported thin-film photovoltaic devices based on a wide-band-gap donor (P2F-EHp) and a highly crystalline NFA (M4-4F). The devices were fabricated by using an orthogonal solvent through the LbL method and they achieved a higher PCE than BHJ devices. And through GIWAXS with different incident angles the promotion effect of this processing method on M4-4F crystallization was confirmed (Fig. 6d).77
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process and morphology of the LbL blend film. (b) GIWAXS in-plane (left), out-of-plane (middle) line-cut, and RSoXS scattering profiles of LbL and BHJ blend films. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (c) TOF-SIMS ion yield of F− and CN− as a function of sputtering time for BHJ-0%, LbL-0%, BHJ-25%, and LbL-25% blend films (0% represents the PM6:BO-4Cl binary system and 25% represents adding 25% BTP-S2 into PM6:BO-4Cl). Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) 2D GIWAXS images of BHJ and PHJ blend films (P2F-EHp:M4-4F) with different incidence angle. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2021, Elsevier Inc. 
Fine-tuning of the molecular structures via modification of the fused ring core, ending groups, and alkyl side chain is demonstrated as a useful method to seek further optimization. The major consideration is to balance the trade-off between light absorption and VOC, and fine-tune the crystalline properties to better suit the prevailing donor materials.57,60,62 Owing to the chemical similarity, these fine-tuned molecules could match well with Y6, in terms of energy levels and miscibility. The ternary or quaternary strategy could make use of the advantage of each component, with the original morphology framework maintained. Taking such advantages, we recently reported that developing eutectic mixing for Y6-based molecules can realize JSC amplification. NFA mixtures with similar chemical structures but different electronic structures were employed. During the film drying process, the NFA mixture with similar structure would form an intimate mixture in the presence of solvent, and then crystallizes separately to purify. The primary crystallization driving force is π–π stacking, which leads to the formation of tiny crystalline slabs. The consumption of materials retards the 3D expansion of crystallization, and in a mixture of similar materials, the early stage crystallized slabs would then find their tolerable analogs to pack and condense by considering the similarity in surface energy and crystal growth front, leading to eutectic lamellar fibrils, and a more obvious fibril mesh network morphology can be seen in PM6:Y6:Y6-BO blends (Fig. 7a and b). Thus, a well-defined crystallization with improved crystallinity and crystalline quality is obtained, as visualized by GIWAXS (Fig. 7c and d).69 Such a morphology yields a much lower density of states (DoS) of defects and significantly reduced non-geminate recombination loss in devices (Fig. 7e and f). A similar strategy was used by Zhang and coworkers; by using two compatible Y6 derivatives with rather small interfacial energy as the acceptors, an optimal PCE of 17.59% was achieved.78 All these studies reveal the importance of utilizing specific material interactions to control the crystalline habit in the blended films to form a well-suited morphology in guiding superior performances, which is of high demand for the development of OSC fabrication toward 20% PCE in the next stage.
 Fig. 7  AFM phase image of PM6:Y6 (a) and PM6:Y6:Y6-BO (b). GIWAXS in-plane (c) and out-of-plane (d) line cut profiles of acceptor blends (Y6, Y6:Y6-BO, Y6:Y7, and Y6:Y7-BO). Derived charge lifetime (e) and recombination rate coefficient (f) as a function of charge density based on different BHJ films fitted from TPV and TPC results. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The utilization of fullerene derivatives, such as PC61BM and PC71BM, acting as the first generation of mainstream acceptor materials, achieved tremendous success.6,79,80 Due to the n-type and amorphous nature, fullerene derivatives can be used as a morphology regulator to construct multi-length scaled phase separation, where NFA crystallization ensures efficient exciton dissociation and carrier transport, while fullerene derivatives promote a better electronic structure that aids charge transfer and electron transport.41 In the Y6-based BHJ system, the unbalanced electron and hole transportation often impedes the further improvement of device performance. To address such a problem, the introduction of PCBM is a feasible strategy for achieving a balanced transport (Fig. 8a).81 The high-lying charge-transfer (CT) state compared to the Y6 singlet energy state effectively suppresses the non-geminate recombination and could even make use of the CTs. To understand PCBM's working mechanism, Zhang and coworkers used Raman scanning to map the morphology of the BHJ thin films.82Fig. 8b depicts the Raman spectroscopy of the neat PM6, Y6, and PC71BM films, showing different spectral characteristics as a function of Raman shift, and thus, each component in the blending can be highlighted. As shown in Fig. 8c, the Raman mapping images indicate that the added PC71BM shows a high tendency to mix with Y6 and would not aggregate even when the content is greatly increased. Liu and coworkers used a similar strategy by integrating PC71BM for optimizing both energy level alignments and film morphology of Y6-based photovoltaic films.12 A quaternary blending concept was proposed using PM6/PM7 as the dual donors and Y6 and PC71BM as the dual acceptors. With the increase of PC71BM content, the quaternary blends show scattering features gradually evolving from a hump to a well-defined peak without position shift, suggesting the scattering distribution of PC71BM in the mixed matrix (Fig. 8d and e). Such a mixing induces close interactions with the other amorphous components, producing a unique electronic structure with improved electron transport channels, where excited electrons in the donors can transfer onto the LUMO of the mixed domain that is rapidly extracted. Although the HOMO of PC71BM is much deeper than that of Y6, a homogeneous mixing provides good contact with the donor materials, making exciton harvesting by PC71BM and Y6 efficient (Fig. 8f). Such a modification together with a well-defined multi-length scaled morphology induced by PM6/PM7-Y6 yields a simultaneous improvement of VOC, JSC, and FF, resulting in a record PCE of 18.07%. The designing principle behind is to find a strategy to optimize morphology and electronic structure in one-shot. It is realized that the simple ternary blend strategy cannot provide enough operating parameters that can dissect the morphology and electronic structure optimization. A combination of four materials addresses this issue and affords record high efficiencies, which is a useful approach in fully exploring the potential of photovoltaic materials.
 Fig. 8  (a) The hole and electron mobility of PM6:Y6:PC61BM blends with different PC61BM contents. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Raman spectra of PBDB-T-2Cl, PC71BM and Y6. (c) Raman mapping image of PBDB-T-2Cl:Y6:PC71BM blend films with different PC71BM contents, and the red, blue and green color regions correspond to PBDB-T-2Cl, Y6 and PC71BM in the blend films, respectively. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2020, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. (d) RSoXS profiles of PM6:PM7:Y6:PC71BM blends with different PC71BM contents. (e) The arrangement sketch of molecules in PM6:PM7:Y6:PC71BM blended films. (f) Energy level alignment and double cascading transport pathways for the PM6:PM7:Y6:PC71BM system. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. 
5. Morphology of all-polymer solar cells (APSCs)
The synergistic developments in materials, morphology, and device engineering have boosted the improvement of single-junction APSCs with a PCE over 16%.83 The photoactive layer of the APSCs shows not only long-term light and thermal stability but also unique advantages in film formation, flexibility, and robust mechanical properties, in comparison to small-molecule-based OSCs. It is compatible with large-scale manufacturing and is very suitable for large-area device printing. APSCs have become a hot research topic in recent years and will play an essential and irreplaceable role in future commercial applications.84–86
For a polymer blend system, due to the rapid increase of repeating units, the mixing entropy is significantly reduced. Therefore, the mixing free energy of the polymer blend system is mainly determined by the enthalpy of mixing, i.e., the intermolecular interaction energy. For most polymer blends, the χ values are small but positive, and χn (n is the degree of polymerization) is an effective value to evaluate polymer interaction. Thus, in blends, polymer preferred to self-aggregation and form large-sized phase separation. Additionally, the phase separation thermodynamics and material crystallization is strongly integrated due to the strong π–π stacking of the backbone. Consequently, it is challenging to fully understand such complex film morphology that governs the APSC performance. N2200 is one of the well-studied n-type polymers with strong crystallinity and high electron-transport property,87 which is widely used as an acceptor in OSCs. In polymer–polymer blends, the crystallization of N2200 is strongly associated with phase separation and the size is usually large. Therefore, precise manipulation of crystallization behavior and material interaction is a crucial way to refine the morphology of APSC films, including chemical modification of polymers and film processing protocols, etc.
From the structural point of view, randomizing the main chain by incorporating a third subunit is an effective method to adjust the crystallization of polymers as well as the film morphology. A typical example is the random copolymerization of naphthalenediimide (NDI)-based n-type polymers to regulate their crystallinity.88,89 Jenekhe and coworkers developed a series of terpolymers with various NDI/perylene diimide (PDI) fractions to reduce the crystallinity of PNDIS-HD (the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 9a).90 The results showed that with the increase of PDI content, the mean size of crystalline domains and the crystallinity decreased gradually (Fig. 9b). With the increase of the PDI unit, the domain size of the blend films gradually decreases, from ∼200 nm for PNDIS-HD-based blending to ∼20 nm for terpolymer-based blending with 30% PDI (30PDI), as demonstrated by transmission electron microscope (TEM) images (Fig. 9c), propelling the increase of device JSC from 5.39 mA cm−2 to 18.55 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 9  Random copolymerization to adjust the morphology of blend films. (a) Chemical structure of the random copolymer based on PNDIS-HD with different PDI contents. (b) Dependence of PCE and the mean crystalline domain size on random copolymer composition. (c) TEM images of PNDIS-HD:PBDTTT-CT and xPDI:PBDTTT-CT blend films. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Crystallinity and domain size are mutually determinative. The high crystallization tendency of polymers in blending would trigger large-scaled phase separation while reducing the crystallinity may result in small-sized phase separation or even a mixing state that strongly affects transport and recombination. Due to the fast film drying process, polymer crystallization is kinetically trapped, generating a morphology with a non-equilibrium state. Even if the interaction parameter is large, the quick film formation would condense the film at an early stage of phase separation, and thus the phase purity is low. The material crystallization can occur in a much faster time scale, which is integrated with the phase separation process and consumes materials to form pure domains that in fact accelerate the phase separation process to form a mixed morphology. Compared with the amorphous region, the crystalline region can promote charge transport. Therefore, a detailed balance between crystallization and interaction is the key in APSC fabrication. There are many reports that address this issue; for example, multicomponent copolymerization yields quite interesting results.91–94 Side-chain engineering is another approach, as seen by the demonstration from Kim and coworkers that a systematic change of the side-chain (alkyl side-chain length, branching point of alkyl side-chains, side-chain types such as alkyl chain, alkylthio chain, alkylsilyl chain, etc.) could alter material crystallization and orientation effectively (summarized in Fig. 10).95–98
 Fig. 10  (a) The chemical structure of PNDIT-R with different alkyl side-chains. (b) GIWAXS in-plane and out-of-plane (inset) line cut profiles of the films based on PNDIT-R. (c) 2D GIWAXS patterns of PTB7-Th:PNDIT-R blend films. The PNDIT-R with different side-chains showed different stacking and crystallinity, whether in pure or blend films. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The chemical structure of P(NDIR-T2) with different alkyl side-chains. GIWAXS out-of-plane line cut profiles (e) and 2D patterns (f) of PTB7-Th:P(NDIR-T2) blend films. It is observed that P(NDIR-T2) with different alkyl side-chains exhibits distinct differences in the extent of face-on orientation. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) The chemical structure of P(NDIm-T) with different branching point of alkyl side-chains. GIWAXS in-plane (h) and out-of-plane (i) line cut profiles and the pole figures of the (200) peak area (j) of the films based on P(NDIm-T). The branching point of side-chains can affect the polymer assembly and packing structures. With the branching point moved away, more ordered crystal formation with face-on orientation is observed. (h–j) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (k) The chemical structures of polymer donors (PDs) with different side chains (P-EH, P-SEH, and P-Si). (l) AFM height images of PDs:N2200 blend films. The alkyl side-chains can affect the pre-aggregation of PDs in solution, thus affecting the film morphology. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
The molecular weight was found to be another critical factor affecting the morphology of APSCs. Marks and coworkers showed that molecular weight will dramatically affect the intrachain and interchain interactions and ultimately the degree of phase separation.99 Increasing molecular weight for both donor and acceptor shrinks blend film domain size and enhances donor–acceptor interfacial areas (Fig. 11a), affording increased JSC. However, the greater disorder and mixing region proliferation accompanying molecular weight increase lead to stronger recombination and smaller FF. The coarse-grained simulation results further support the above conclusion (Fig. 11b), which is consistent with the device performance. Min and coworkers studied the effect of molecular weight of the acceptor polymer on the device performance of weakly crystalline polymer systems (PM6:PYT, the chemical structure of PYT is shown in Fig. 11c) and showed that with the increase of the molecular weight of the PYT, the mixing free energy of the polymer blends will decrease and the phase separation will be larger in size (Fig. 11d).100 The device based on a moderate molecular weight PYT achieved the best performance with an efficiency of 13.44%. By further optimizing the alkyl side-chain of PYT, Huang and coworkers synthesized PJ1, which was blended with PBDB-T to obtain an excellent PCE of 14.4%.101
 Fig. 11  The effect of molecular weight on film morphology. (a) TEM images of all-polymer blend morphologies for different Mn PTPD3T and N2200 polymers. (b) Polymer–polymer blend film morphology from coarse-grained MD simulations. The n-type polymer is represented by red beads and p-type polymer by gray beads. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) The chemical structure of PYT. (d) Schematic diagram of the film morphology based on PM6 with PYT of different molecular weight. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. 
The processing condition manipulates APSC morphology from another perspective. Two important factors of processing solvents should be considered: (i) evaporation kinetics and (ii) the interaction with polymers. The quick evaporation of low boiling solvent freezes the thin film morphology in an earlier stage; the solubility parameter affects the chain interaction in the dissolution state. The morphology of blend films can be controlled by adjusting these two parameters. Kim and coworkers showed that the highly volatile chloroform solvent kinetically froze APSC morphology with small domain sizes of 30 nm, whereas chlorobenzene (CB) and ortho-dichlorobenzene (o-DCB) processing led to larger domain sizes (Fig. 12a and b).102 In contrast, a poor solvent (para-xylene, p-XY) leads to serious polymer aggregation and thus severe phase separation. These morphology features are closely related to device performance (Fig. 12c). Huang and coworkers used 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MTHF) to process thin films based on PTzBI-Si:N2200.103,104 The function of 2-MTHF is two fold. It promotes the weak aggregation of donor and acceptor polymers in solution and vaporizes quickly to arrest an early stage of phase separation, achieving a device efficiency of 10.1%. Cyclo-pentyl methyl ether (CPME) is another interesting processing solvent that could control polymer aggregation and crystallization (Fig. 12d),105 leading to better crystallinity and optimal domain size. In addition to processing solvents, other device processing conditions, such as solvent additives, solvent–vapor annealing and the third component compatibilizer, were found to be effective for tuning the BHJ blend morphology in APSCs.106,107 Huang and coworkers recently reported that adding a third polymer PCE10 in blends can mitigate the liquid phase separation between SC3 and N2200 due to the heterogeneous entanglement of polymers (Fig. 12e), which also changed the polymer crystallization kinetics from solution to thin film as revealed by in situ GIWAXS, resulting in well-mixed polymer blends with a delicate fibrillar network and improved OSC performance (Fig. 12f).108
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of PDFQx3T and N2200. (b) AFM phase (top) and TEM (bottom) images of PDFQx3T:N2200 blends prepared from CF, CB, DCB, and XY processing solvents. (c) Correlation between domain size and JSC of the devices processed by CF, CB, DCB, and XY. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of PTzBI-Si:N2200 in 2-MTHF, THF and CPME solvent. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) TEM images of SC3:N2200 (2:1, left) and SC3:PCE10:N2200 (1:1:1, right) blends. (f) In situ GIWAXS OOP sector profiles of SC3:N2200 (2:1) and SC3:PCE10:N2200 (1:1:1) blends at each frame during drying; the color scale bar inside the plot represents the time point. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) The blend film morphology (left: AFM height image, middle: scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM) image, right: TEM image) of PTzBI-Si:N2200 blends processed by slot die printing with 2-MTHF solvent. (h) Schematic representation of the morphology-forming process. The polymers aggregate in 2-MTHF solution and a fibril network structure is formed after solvent removal. (g and h) Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The real success of APSC morphology optimization is to find the right balance between material crystallization and phase separation. In this focus, material choice, processing solvents, and post-treatments should be used in combination. The advantage of conjugated polymers is the fact that the backbone is an efficient conducting channel for excitons and carriers, and polymer chains could order by localized chain segment packing to form an efficient carrier conducting domain. The chain crystallization peculiarity leads to an assortment of interconnected crystalline domains, where transport can be maximized. Meanwhile, carefully manipulating material interaction and processing conditions to form an intimately mixed D/A region, where the contributing chain segments get involved in the crystalline domain, could result in an ideal hierarchical type morphology that best utilizes the transport phase and mixing domain for efficient carrier diffusion and transportation. Within this picture, we initiated APSC printing fabrication using highly miscible and 2-MTHF-soluble PTzBI-Si:N2200 blends.51 Moderate chain aggregation for both species is seen, which increases viscosity and facilitates printing fabrication. The weak chain aggregation can be translated to moderate material crystallization to define the fibril network phase-separated morphology. Subsequently, solvent vapor annealing at elevated temperature is used to vitrify the film to further induce material crystallization and release the non-equilibrium film formation induced defects and stress in the BHJ thin film. Tremendous fibrils in network can be seen in a large area, with tiny ones less visible lying around (Fig. 12g). Such a hierarchical fibril network could form a good connection via chain segments with the mixing region, leading to a smart multi-length scaled morphology (Fig. 12h). High exciton splitting and carrier transport in a balanced manner are seen and an FF above 75% and an efficiency of 11.76% are recorded, suggesting the importance of panoramic morphology optimization in elevating the device performances.
6. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, this article discusses the morphology aspects and research progress of NFA-based organic solar cells. It aims to build up the success of NFA OSCs from the morphology perspective. The emergence of NFAs is the most important advance for OSCs in recent years, and new materials bearing higher efficiency arise at the historic moment. The right match of electronic structure, excitonic nature, and morphology feature is the inevitable avenue on which further breakthrough would reside. Morphologically, appropriate miscibility, manageable crystallinity, and controllable processability are the foundation for the formation of suitable phase separation with adjustable domain size and phase purity. Although the progress and morphology investigation of OSCs have been successful, there are a few key issues that should be further explored:
(1) The choice of materials and morphology match. The new NFA materials with optimized electronic structure are coming out continuously, the right match for specific materials and morphology is unknown. Theoretical investigation and big data regression might be a possible way out.
(2) The physics of morphology formation. It is well known that OSC thin film is of non-equilibrium nature. We do not have a clue about how to define the key controlling parameter and effectively predict the morphology. Effort should be paid to construct a theoretical framework, to disentangle miscibility, crystallinity, and over-saturated solution instability correlation.
(3) The bridge from single crystals to thin films. Numerous single crystals for NFAs are reported, from which we could extract detailed molecular packing and interaction. The bridge from single crystals to thin films is not clearly shown, though discarded efforts are seen. The general principle that guides the translation of single-crystal packing to thin-film order needs to be strengthened.
(4) The general discourse on order and disorder of polymer chains. The unique flat and rigid nature of conjugated polymers makes them distinct from conventional polymers, which induces a large variety of different phenomena. The accurate assessment of the order and disorder of conjugated polymers in associating with specific chain contact is in urgent need, which helps to understand in detail the photoelectron conversion.
Author contributions
F. L., Yongming Zhang, and P. G. conceived and directed this project. L. Z. and M. Z. wrote the original draft. F. L., W. Z., S. L., G. Z., Yecheng Zou, X. S., and H. D. helped to revise the manuscript. All authors participated in the manuscript preparation and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (No. 51973110, 21734009, 51803143 and 21905102), Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS201902), the Center of Hydrogen Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Electrical Insulation and Thermal Aging, Shanghai Electrochemical Energy Devices Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. L. Z. acknowledges the funding supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2020M681278).
References
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 770 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Xu, C. Cui and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701791 CrossRef .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, L. Zhu, G. Zhou, T. Hao, C. Qiu, Z. Zhao, Q. Hu, B. W. Larson, H. Zhu, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, W. Feng, Y. Zhang, T. P. Russell and F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Brédas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 RSC .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Mikhnenko, H. Azimi, M. Scharber, M. Morana, P. W. M. Blom and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6960–6965 RSC .
O. V. Mikhnenko, P. W. M. Blom and T.-Q. Nguyen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1867–1888 RSC .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 391–410 RSC .
M. D. Perez, C. Borek, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9281–9286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, J. Wang, A. Melianas, Y. Wu, R. Kroon, W. Li, W. Ma, M. R. Andersson, Z. Ma, W. Cai, W. Tress and O. Inganäs, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12574–12581 RSC .
N. A. Ran, J. A. Love, M. C. Heiber, X. Jiao, M. P. Hughes, A. Karki, M. Wang, V. V. Brus, H. Wang, D. Neher, H. Ade, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701073 CrossRef .
C. M. Proctor, M. Kuik and T.-Q. Nguyen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1941–1960 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gupta, S. Mukhopadhyay and K. S. Narayan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1309–1313 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Jao, H.-C. Liao and W.-F. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5784–5801 RSC .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Naveed and W. Ma, Joule, 2018, 2, 621–641 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, H. Hu, M. Ghasemi, T. Wang, B. A. Collins, J.-H. Kim, K. Jiang, J. H. Carpenter, H. Li, Z. Li, T. McAfee, J. Zhao, X. Chen, J. L. Y. Lai, T. Ma, J.-L. Bredas, H. Yan and H. Ade, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 253–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, L.-M. Wang, S. Liu, X. Zhan, T. Zhu, Z. Cao, H. Lai, J. Zhao, Y. Cai, W. Xie and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45979–45990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, G. Li, D. Li, T. Liu, Z. Luo, G. Zhang, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Luo, T. Yang, F. Liu, H. Yan and B. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000250 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yi, Z. Peng, B. Xu, D. Seyitliyev, C. H. Y. Ho, E. O. Danilov, T. Kim, J. R. Reynolds, A. Amassian, K. Gundogdu, H. Ade and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902430 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yi, Q. Ai, W. Zhou, L. Huang, L. Zhang, Z. Xing, X. Li, J. Zeng and Y. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 10211–10224 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Quiram, R. A. Register and G. R. Marchand, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 4551–4558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nojima, K. Kato, S. Yamamoto and T. Ashida, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 2237–2242 CrossRef CAS .
M. Muthukumar, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2000, 3, 199–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lim, F. Liu, S. Ferdous, M. Muthukumar and A. L. Briseno, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 14–24 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bin, S. Chen, L. Gao, L. Xue, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15011–15018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, Q. He, L. Huo, Y. Wu, T. C. Parker, W. Ma, Y. Sun, C. Wang, D. Zhu, A. J. Heeger, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4955–4961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mai, Y. Xiao, G. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Zhu, N. Zhao, X. Zhan and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802888 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, M. Chen, J. Cai, E. L. K. Spooner, H. Zhang, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu, Z. Xiao, D. G. Lidzey, L. Ding and T. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 819–833 CrossRef CAS .
C. McDowell, M. Abdelsamie, M. F. Toney and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707114 CrossRef .
K. S. Wienhold, V. Körstgens, S. Grott, X. Jiang, M. Schwartzkopf, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42313–42321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Xu, J. Song, Y. Jin, Q. Yue, Y. Qian, F. Liu, F. Zhang and X. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 952–959 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, B. He, Q. Hu, L. Maserati, Y. Zhao, B. Yang, M. A. Kolaczkowski, C. L. Anderson, N. J. Borys, L. M. Klivansky, T. L. Chen, A. M. Schwartzberg, T. P. Russell, Y. Cao, X. Peng and Y. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2154–2166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, R. Ming, W. Gao, Q. An, X. Ma, Z. Hu, C. Yang and F. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 58–65 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, G. Zhang, G. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Li, T. Ma, H. Hu, W. Ma, H. Ade and H. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701370 CrossRef .
T. Liu, X. Xue, L. Huo, X. Sun, Q. An, F. Zhang, T. P. Russell, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2914–2920 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, Z. Wang and Y. Sun, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700158 CrossRef .
T. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Yi, L. Huo, X. Xue, X. Sun, H. Fu, W. Xiong, D. Meng, Z. Wang, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10008–10015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Y. Tan, K. Gao, J. Zhang, L.-L. Chen, S.-P. Wu, X.-F. Jiang, X.-B. Peng, Q. Hu, F. Liu, H.-B. Wu, Y. Cao and X.-H. Zhu, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1600003 CrossRef .
N. Gasparini, A. Salleo, I. McCulloch and D. Baran, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 229–242 CrossRef .
R. Zhou, Z. Jiang, C. Yang, J. Yu, J. Feng, M. A. Adil, D. Deng, W. Zou, J. Zhang, K. Lu, W. Ma, F. Gao and Z. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5393 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhu, W. Zhong, C. Qiu, B. Lyu, Z. Zhou, M. Zhang, J. Song, J. Xu, J. Wang, J. Ali, W. Feng, Z. Shi, X. Gu, L. Ying, Y. Zhang and F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gao, S. B. Jo, X. Shi, L. Nian, M. Zhang, Y. Kan, F. Lin, B. Kan, B. Xu, Q. Rong, L. Shui, F. Liu, X. Peng, G. Zhou, Y. Cao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807842 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Mukherjee, J. H. Carpenter, O. Awartani, X. Jiao, J. Hou and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602000 CrossRef .
L. Ye, Y. Xiong, S. Li, M. Ghasemi, N. Balar, J. Turner, A. Gadisa, J. Hou, B. T. O'Connor and H. Ade, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702016 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Hong, K. Xian, B. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Peng, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2515 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang, Q. Wei, J. Y. L. Lai, Z. Peng, H. K. Kim, J. Yuan, L. Ye, H. Ade, Y. Zou and H. Yan, Joule, 2019, 3, 3020–3033 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, W. Liu, G. Zhou, M. Zhang, D. Qian, J. Zhang, S. Chen, S. Xu, C. Yang, F. Gao, H. Zhu, F. Liu and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Yuan, W. Deng, M. Luo, Y. Xie, Q. Liang, Y. Zou, Z. He, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. Liu, J. Zhou, D. Mo, L. Han, H. Lai, H. Chen, N. Zheng, Y. Zhu, Z. Xie and F. He, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, K. Jiang, W. Kaminsky, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15246–15251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, R. Ma, Z. Chen, Y. Xiao, G. Zhang, T. Liu, R. Sun, Q. Zhan, Y. Zou, C. Zhong, Y. Chen, H. Sun, G. Chai, K. Chen, X. Guo, J. Min, X. Lu, C. Yang and H. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002649 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Cai, Y. Zhang, X. Lu and Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18741–18745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, F. Bai, Z. Peng, L. Zhu, J. Zhang, X. Zou, Y. Qin, H. K. Kim, J. Yuan, L.-K. Ma, J. Zhang, H. Yu, P. C. Y. Chow, F. Huang, Y. Zou, H. Ade, F. Liu and H. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003141 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chai, Y. Chang, J. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Yu, X. Zou, X. Li, Y. Chen, S. Luo, B. Liu, F. Bai, Z. Luo, H. Yu, J. Liang, T. Liu, K. S. Wong, H. Zhou, Q. Peng and H. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3469–3479 RSC .
C. Li, J. Zhou, J. Song, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Zhu, D. Wei, G. Han, J. Min, Y. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Yi, H. Yan, F. Gao, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 605–613 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, M. Zhang, G. Zhou, T. Hao, J. Xu, J. Wang, C. Qiu, N. Prine, J. Ali, W. Feng, X. Gu, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, H. Zhu, L. Ying, Y. Zhang and F. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904234 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Swick, T. Gebraad, L. Jones, B. Fu, T. J. Aldrich, K. L. Kohlstedt, G. C. Schatz, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2608–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, L. Zhu, T. Hao, G. Zhou, C. Qiu, Z. Zhao, N. Hartmann, B. Xiao, Y. Zou, W. Feng, H. Zhu, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, T. P. Russell and F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, A. P. Spencer, S. Mukherjee, J. M. Alzola, V. K. Sangwan, S. H. Amsterdam, S. M. Swick, L. O. Jones, M. C. Heiber, A. A. Herzing, G. Li, C. L. Stern, D. M. DeLongchamp, K. L. Kohlstedt, M. C. Hersam, G. C. Schatz, M. R. Wasielewski, L. X. Chen, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 14532–14547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, X.-K. Chen, J. Xiao, P. C. Y. Chow, M. Ren, G. Kupgan, X. Jiao, C. C. S. Chan, X. Du, R. Xia, Z. Chen, J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zou, H. Yan, K. S. Wong, V. Coropceanu, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, J.-L. Bredas, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Du, J. Zhao, H. Lin, C. Zheng and S. Tao, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000592 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600414 CrossRef .
M. Suzuki, Y. Yamaguchi, K. Uchinaga, K. Takahira, C. Quinton, S. Yamamoto, N. Nagami, M. Furukawa, K.-I. Nakayama and H. Yamada, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6614–6621 RSC .
K. Weng, L. Ye, L. Zhu, J. Xu, J. Zhou, X. Feng, G. Lu, S. Tan, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhan, S. Li, X. Xia, Y. Li, X. Lu, L. Zuo, M. Shi and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, W. Zhong, L. Ying, B. Fan, M. Li, Z. Gan, Z. Zeng, D. Chen, N. Li, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105957 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Sun, J. Gao, X. Ma, J. H. Son, S. Y. Jeong, Z. Hu, L. Niu, H. Y. Woo, J. Zhang and F. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100007 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. P. Russell and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 174–179 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, H. Yao, Y. Cui, L. Hong, C. He and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902302 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gao, J. Wang, Q. An, X. Ma, Z. Hu, C. Xu, X. Zhang and F. Zhang, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, T. Yang, R. Ma, L. Zhan, Z. Luo, G. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Gao, Y. Xiao, J. Yu, X. Zou, H. Sun, M. Zhang, T. A. Dela Peña, Z. Xing, H. Liu, X. Li, G. Li, J. Huang, C. Duan, K. S. Wong, X. Lu, X. Guo, F. Gao, H. Chen, F. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Li, Y. Cao, B. Tang and H. Yan, Joule, 2021, 5, 914–930 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, F. S. Melkonyan, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4129–4142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, S. Lee, G. U. Kim, W. Lee and B. J. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8028–8086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, W. Lee, J. Oh, T. Kim, C. Lee and B. J. Kim, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2424–2434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, S. Schneider, C. Walter, A. H. Chowdhury, B. Bahrami, H. C. Wu, Q. Qiao, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 392–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Zhang, C. Duan, M. Li, Z. Hu, J. Wang, F. Liu, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, R. A. J. Janssen, G. C. Bazan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8934–8943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, T. Earmme, B. A. Courtright, F. N. Eberle and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4424–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma, N. B. Kolhe, V. Gupta, V. Bharti, A. Sharma, R. Datt, S. Chand and S. K. Asha, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 8113–8125 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Xu, W. Zhang, X. Meng, W. Ma, A. Yartsev, O. Inganas, M. R. Andersson, R. A. Janssen and E. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10935–10944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jo, J. W. Jung, H. Ahn, M. J. Ko, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Son, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601365 CrossRef .
J. Du, K. Hu, L. Meng, I. Angunawela, J. Zhang, S. Qin, A. Liebman-Pelaez, C. Zhu, Z. Zhang, H. Ade and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, H. Kang, W. Lee, T. Kim, K. H. Kim, H. Y. Woo, C. Wang and B. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2466–2471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, C. Lee, H. Yu, D.-J. Kim, C. Wang, H. Y. Woo, J. H. Oh and B. J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1543–1553 CrossRef CAS .
H. You, D. Kim, H.-H. Cho, C. Lee, S. Chong, N. Y. Ahn, M. Seo, J. Kim, F. S. Kim and B. J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803613 CrossRef .
J. S. Park, N. Choi, C. Lee, S. Lee, J.-W. Ha, D.-H. Hwang and B. J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3585–3596 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhou, A. S. Dudnik, T. I. Li, E. F. Manley, T. J. Aldrich, P. Guo, H. C. Liao, Z. Chen, L. X. Chen, R. P. Chang, A. Facchetti, M. Olvera de la Cruz and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1240–1251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Q. Wu, R. Sun, J. Guo, Y. Wu, M. Shi, W. Yang, H. Li and J. Min, Joule, 2020, 4, 1070–1086 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jia, J. Zhang, W. Zhong, Y. Liang, K. Zhang, S. Dong, L. Ying, F. Liu, X. Wang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104718 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, Y. Li, W. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Choi, T. Kim, C. Wang, E. D. Gomez, H. Y. Woo and B. J. Kim, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 5051–5058 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, L. Ying, P. Zhu, F. Pan, F. Liu, J. Chen, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703906 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fan, L. Ying, Z. Wang, B. He, X.-F. Jiang, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1243–1251 RSC .
Z. Li, L. Ying, P. Zhu, W. Zhong, N. Li, F. Liu, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 157–163 RSC .
H. I. Kim, M. Kim, C. W. Park, H. U. Kim, H.-K. Lee and T. Park, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6793–6798 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xie, K. Zhang, Z. Hu, H. Fang, B. Lin, Q. Yin, B. He, S. Dong, L. Ying, W. Ma, F. Huang, H. Yan and Y. Cao, Sol. RRL, 2019, 4, 1900385 CrossRef .
W. Zhong, Q. Hu, L. Ying, Y. Jiang, K. Li, Z. Zeng, F. Liu, C. Wang, T. P. Russell, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000148 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Lei Zhu
	Dr Lei Zhu is a Research Fellow in Prof. Feng Liu's group at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He received his BS and PhD in materials science and engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2011 and 2017, respectively. Then he moved to South China University of Technology as a Postdoctoral Fellow (2018–2020). He joined Prof. Liu's group in 2020. His current research interests include high efficiency organic solar cells, and morphology and photophysical properties of organic semiconductors.

Ming Zhang
	Ming Zhang received his BS in materials science and engineering from East China University of Science and Technology in 2013. Now he is a PhD candidate at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research focuses on the characterization of nano and mesoscopic structures in organic semiconductor materials and devices using synchrotron-based X-ray scattering techniques.

Broader context
Non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) based organic photovoltaics (OPVs) exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of greater than 18%. The phase separated morphology of the light-absorbing layers is the key factor in determining the device performance since it dictates the exciton splitting and carrier transport properties. Such morphology is in a complex non-equilibrium state which is dictated by thermodynamic and kinetic factors. In-depth exploration of the physical chemistry of blended thin film morphology of the active layer can help in the understanding of the morphology manipulation of the OPV nanostructure, and thus in constructing a solid structure–property relationship, which is the scope of the current review.


 	Fig. 1  (a) The chemical structure of TPIC-X. AFM height image (b–d) and RSoXS profiles (e) of PM7:TPIC-X blend films. (b–e) Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) The chemical structure of PffBT4T-2OD, PffBT4T90-co-3T10, PffBT4T70-co-3T30, PffBT4T50-co-3T50, and PffBT3T-2OD. (g) Morphology evolution during drying for PffBT4T90-co-3T10 in blends with IDTBR. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The chemical structure of ITIC, m-ITIC, and ITIC-Th. (b) 2D GIWAXS patterns of m-ITIC and ITIC. (c) In-plane and out-of-plane line cut profiles of the 2D GIWAXS data based on J61:m-ITIC and J61:ITIC blend films. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) 2D GIWAXS patterns of ITIC-Th and ITIC. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) The chemical structure of COi8DFIC. (f) The absorption spectra of COi8DFIC films cast at room temperature, at room temperature with solvent–vapor annealing, and on a 100 °C hot substrate. (g) Schematic of morphology within PTB7-Th:COi8DFIC films: flat-on and edge-on lamellar crystalline, and H- and J-type face-on π–π stacking of COi8DFIC. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the working mechanisms in ternary organic solar cells. Charge transfer (a), energy transfer (b), parallel-like (c), and alloy model (d). (e) The chemical structure of IDT-T and NITI. (f) Schematic of the related electron and energy-transfer processes between PBDB-T, ITIC, and IDT-T. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. (g) Schematic of the hierarchical morphology in the ternary film and the dominant charge generation and transport processes. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  Chemical structures of Y-series acceptors (differences from Y6 are marked in different colors).	 

BTP-4Cl	PM6	—	0.867	25.4	75.0	16.5	
55

N3	PM6	PC71BM	0.850	25.71	76.6	16.74	
56

AQx-2	PM6	—	0.86	25.38	76.25	16.64	
57

Y11	PM6	—	0.833	26.74	74.33	16.54	
58

BTIC-2Br-m	PM6	—	0.88	25.03	73.13	16.11	
59

BTP-eC9	PM6	—	0.839	26.2	81.1	17.8	
60

CH1007	PM6	PC71BM	0.822	27.48	75.61	17.08	
61

BTP-ClBr	PM6	—	0.906	23.48	79.0	16.82	
62

Y6Se	D18	—	0.839	27.98	75.3	17.7	
63

Y6-1O	PM6	PC71BM	0.90	24.9	78.5	17.6	
64


m-BTP-C6Ph	PTQ10	—	0.883	25.3	79.3	17.7	
65

L8-BO	PM6	—	0.87	25.72	81.5	18.32	
66


 	Fig. 5  (a) Top and side view of the molecular packing sketch map of Y6 according to single crystal data. (b) 3D molecular packing sketch map of Y6. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Tapping mode AFM phase image (left) and PiFM image (right) at a wavenumber of 1532 cm-1 of the PM6:Y6 blend film. (d) Line profiles to obtain the FWHM of cross-section through tapping AFM-IR signal for PM6:Y6 blends. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process and morphology of the LbL blend film. (b) GIWAXS in-plane (left), out-of-plane (middle) line-cut, and RSoXS scattering profiles of LbL and BHJ blend films. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (c) TOF-SIMS ion yield of F− and CN− as a function of sputtering time for BHJ-0%, LbL-0%, BHJ-25%, and LbL-25% blend films (0% represents the PM6:BO-4Cl binary system and 25% represents adding 25% BTP-S2 into PM6:BO-4Cl). Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) 2D GIWAXS images of BHJ and PHJ blend films (P2F-EHp:M4-4F) with different incidence angle. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2021, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 7  AFM phase image of PM6:Y6 (a) and PM6:Y6:Y6-BO (b). GIWAXS in-plane (c) and out-of-plane (d) line cut profiles of acceptor blends (Y6, Y6:Y6-BO, Y6:Y7, and Y6:Y7-BO). Derived charge lifetime (e) and recombination rate coefficient (f) as a function of charge density based on different BHJ films fitted from TPV and TPC results. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2021, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The hole and electron mobility of PM6:Y6:PC61BM blends with different PC61BM contents. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Raman spectra of PBDB-T-2Cl, PC71BM and Y6. (c) Raman mapping image of PBDB-T-2Cl:Y6:PC71BM blend films with different PC71BM contents, and the red, blue and green color regions correspond to PBDB-T-2Cl, Y6 and PC71BM in the blend films, respectively. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2020, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. (d) RSoXS profiles of PM6:PM7:Y6:PC71BM blends with different PC71BM contents. (e) The arrangement sketch of molecules in PM6:PM7:Y6:PC71BM blended films. (f) Energy level alignment and double cascading transport pathways for the PM6:PM7:Y6:PC71BM system. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  Random copolymerization to adjust the morphology of blend films. (a) Chemical structure of the random copolymer based on PNDIS-HD with different PDI contents. (b) Dependence of PCE and the mean crystalline domain size on random copolymer composition. (c) TEM images of PNDIS-HD:PBDTTT-CT and xPDI:PBDTTT-CT blend films. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The chemical structure of PNDIT-R with different alkyl side-chains. (b) GIWAXS in-plane and out-of-plane (inset) line cut profiles of the films based on PNDIT-R. (c) 2D GIWAXS patterns of PTB7-Th:PNDIT-R blend films. The PNDIT-R with different side-chains showed different stacking and crystallinity, whether in pure or blend films. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The chemical structure of P(NDIR-T2) with different alkyl side-chains. GIWAXS out-of-plane line cut profiles (e) and 2D patterns (f) of PTB7-Th:P(NDIR-T2) blend films. It is observed that P(NDIR-T2) with different alkyl side-chains exhibits distinct differences in the extent of face-on orientation. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) The chemical structure of P(NDIm-T) with different branching point of alkyl side-chains. GIWAXS in-plane (h) and out-of-plane (i) line cut profiles and the pole figures of the (200) peak area (j) of the films based on P(NDIm-T). The branching point of side-chains can affect the polymer assembly and packing structures. With the branching point moved away, more ordered crystal formation with face-on orientation is observed. (h–j) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (k) The chemical structures of polymer donors (PDs) with different side chains (P-EH, P-SEH, and P-Si). (l) AFM height images of PDs:N2200 blend films. The alkyl side-chains can affect the pre-aggregation of PDs in solution, thus affecting the film morphology. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  The effect of molecular weight on film morphology. (a) TEM images of all-polymer blend morphologies for different Mn PTPD3T and N2200 polymers. (b) Polymer–polymer blend film morphology from coarse-grained MD simulations. The n-type polymer is represented by red beads and p-type polymer by gray beads. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) The chemical structure of PYT. (d) Schematic diagram of the film morphology based on PM6 with PYT of different molecular weight. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of PDFQx3T and N2200. (b) AFM phase (top) and TEM (bottom) images of PDFQx3T:N2200 blends prepared from CF, CB, DCB, and XY processing solvents. (c) Correlation between domain size and JSC of the devices processed by CF, CB, DCB, and XY. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of PTzBI-Si:N2200 in 2-MTHF, THF and CPME solvent. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) TEM images of SC3:N2200 (2:1, left) and SC3:PCE10:N2200 (1:1:1, right) blends. (f) In situ GIWAXS OOP sector profiles of SC3:N2200 (2:1) and SC3:PCE10:N2200 (1:1:1) blends at each frame during drying; the color scale bar inside the plot represents the time point. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (g) The blend film morphology (left: AFM height image, middle: scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM) image, right: TEM image) of PTzBI-Si:N2200 blends processed by slot die printing with 2-MTHF solvent. (h) Schematic representation of the morphology-forming process. The polymers aggregate in 2-MTHF solution and a fibril network structure is formed after solvent removal. (g and h) Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
