A colloidoscope of colloid-based porous materials and their uses  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00533G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00533G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 281-322A colloidoscope of colloid-based porous materials and their uses

        
          
            Katherine R. 
            Phillips
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Grant T. 
            England
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Steffi 
            Sunny
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Elijah 
            Shirman
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Tanya 
            Shirman
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Nicolas 
            Vogel
          
          
        
      de and 

        
          
            Joanna 
            Aizenberg
          
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
bJohn A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA. E-mail: jaiz@seas.harvard.edu
cWyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
dInstitute of Particle Technology, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany
eCluster of Excellence Engineering of Advanced Materials, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany
Received 
      7th July 2015
    First published on 23rd September 2015AbstractNature evolved a variety of hierarchical structures that produce sophisticated functions. Inspired by these natural materials, colloidal self-assembly provides a convenient way to produce structures from simple building blocks with a variety of complex functions beyond those found in nature. In particular, colloid-based porous materials (CBPM) can be made from a wide variety of materials. The internal structure of CBPM also has several key attributes, namely porosity on a sub-micrometer length scale, interconnectivity of these pores, and a controllable degree of order. The combination of structure and composition allow CBPM to attain properties important for modern applications such as photonic inks, colorimetric sensors, self-cleaning surfaces, water purification systems, or batteries. This review summarizes recent developments in the field of CBPM, including principles for their design, fabrication, and applications, with a particular focus on structural features and materials' properties that enable these applications. We begin with a short introduction to the wide variety of patterns that can be generated by colloidal self-assembly and templating processes. We then discuss different applications of such structures, focusing on optics, wetting, sensing, catalysis, and electrodes. Different fields of applications require different properties, yet the modularity of the assembly process of CBPM provides a high degree of tunability and tailorability in composition and structure. We examine the significance of properties such as structure, composition, and degree of order on the materials' functions and use, as well as trends in and future directions for the development of CBPM.
Clockwise from top left: Katherine R. Phillips, Grant T. England, Dr Elijah Shirman, Steffi Sunny and Dr Tanya Shirman
Katherine Phillips graduated from Brown University in 2010 with an ScB in chemistry and mathematics. She subsequently joined the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Harvard, where she is a PhD candidate in the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg. Her research interests broadly include using chemistry to make nanomaterials for optical, catalytic, and electrochemical uses, and she is currently working to develop sol–gel processes for the fabrication of inverse opals with optical and catalytic functions.Grant T. England obtained his BE in electrical engineering and mathematics in 2009 from Vanderbilt University. He is currently pursuing a PhD in Applied Physics in the John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard working with Prof. Joanna Aizenberg. His research is focused on bio-inspired photonics and structurally colored materials.Steffi Sunny completed her undergraduate degree in Nanotechnology Engineering at the University of Waterloo in 2012. She is currently pursuing a PhD in Bioengineering in the John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard in the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg. Steffi's research in the Aizenberg group involves work on omniphobic surfaces and their applications.Dr Elijah Shirman received a BSc and MSc in Physical Chemistry from the Hebrew University and a PhD from the Weizmann Institute of Science, in Israel, working on laser-induced processes and self-assembled photoactive molecular structures. As a postdoc at Tufts University, he worked on silk-based photonic crystals and hybrid bioelectronic devices. He then moved to the Aizenberg group, where he focuses on the development of sensors and adaptive photonic materials using a combination of colloidal self-assembly, nanofabrication, surface chemistry, and microfluidic methods.Dr Tanya Shirman received her PhD in chemistry from the Weizmann Institute of Science. In 2012, she joined the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2014, she was appointed Technology Development Fellow at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University. She is working on a variety of projects focusing on the development of dynamic optical and functional materials based on structural color and inorganic nanoparticles for production of industrially valuable pigments and catalysts.
Prof. Nicolas Vogel
Prof. Nicolas Vogel studied chemistry at the Johannes Gutenberg-University in Mainz, Germany and Seoul National University in Seoul, Republic of Korea. In 2011, he received his PhD at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz. He then joined the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg at Harvard University as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2014, he was appointed associate professor in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg. He likes to apply colloidal assembly to create functional materials and coatings, for example for structural color or tailored wetting properties.
Prof. Joanna Aizenberg
Prof. Joanna Aizenberg received a BS and MS in Chemistry from the Moscow State University, and a PhD in Structural Biology from the Weizmann Institute of Science. She then did postdoctoral research at Harvard University on micro/nanofabrication and near-field optics. After nearly a decade at Bell Labs, she joined the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Harvard University in 2007. She is a pioneer of the rapidly developing field of biomimetic materials synthesis, using basic principles of biological design to develop advanced new materials.
1. Introduction
Functional properties in nature often arise from hierarchical structuration in a variety of forms. In particular, unique and interesting properties occur due to structure between the molecular and bulk scales even with common materials. For example, some feathers have bright blue colors,1–5 chameleons can change color,6 and Lotus leaves are hydrophobic,7–10 as shown in Fig. 1A; additionally, many seeds,11 shells,12 and butterfly wings13–16 have bright iridescent colors, and shells can have high fracture toughness.17,18 Generally, the structure of a material on the nano to microscale strongly affects its optical, wetting, mechanical, and chemical properties; thus, controlling features on this length scale can lead to a myriad of materials possibilities.
 Fig. 1  Colloidal particles, from biology to applications. (A) Biological examples of structures on the colloidal length scale: (i and ii) disordered particles provide the crown feathers of the Lepidothrix coronata butterfly with a vivid blue color (scale bars = 200 mm (left), 1 μm (right)),4 reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010; (iii and iv) the skin of a Furcifer pardalis panther chameleon changes color in response to excitement as a result of the changing periodicity of the underlying structure (scale bar = 200 nm),6 reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015; and (v and vi) a lotus leaf has self-cleaning properties due to the microstructure of the surface (scale bar = 20 μm),7 reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2008. (B) Properties and degrees of freedom of colloidal assemblies. (C) Application areas that particularly benefit from using colloid-based materials are optics,22 wetting,23 sensing,24 catalysis,25 and electrodes.26 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons (copyright 2014), the American Chemical Society (copyright 2004, 2013, and 2014), and Nature Publishing Group (copyright 2013). 
Synthetically, monodisperse colloids can be made and subsequently used to create structures similar to those found in nature, where simple building blocks are used to achieve a variety of functions despite a limited materials space. Self-assembly of colloids creates nanoscale features simply, inexpensively, and quickly over large areas from the bottom up by taking advantage of molecular interactions that lead to the assembly of nanoscale building blocks.19 Block copolymers can also be used, to achieve features below 100 nm,20,21 whereas colloids are in the range between 100 nm and 1000 nm (1 μm). Colloids can be used to make colloid-based porous materials (CBPM), which provide the ability to control important aspects of the structure including porosity and order (Fig. 1B). Control over the CBPM structure on the colloidal length scale is particularly useful because many important properties occur at this scale, such as the wavelength of visible light, providing CBPM the ability to control many physical phenomena. By expanding the range of materials beyond what nature uses, synthetic CBPM can achieve a variety of structures with specific compositions, leading to properties beyond those found in natural mesoscale materials, for example for catalytic and electrochemical uses. Indeed, CBPM fabrication methods allow for a highly tailorable composition and structure.
In this review, the underlying theme is the influence of CBPM structure on their macroscopic properties. We start our discussion with a short introduction to colloidal self-assembly and templating processes and survey the variety of structures and patterns that can be generated. We then introduce and critically review different application fields of such structures and discuss the desired key properties for different applications and how colloidal self-assembly processes can be applied to meet these requirements. We focus on the areas of optics, wetting, sensing, catalysis, and electrodes, as summarized in Fig. 1C, to illustrate the scope of colloidal assemblies, using specific but not exhaustive examples. While biology uses mainly organic building blocks, different technological applications require more specialized materials. A variety of materials can be incorporated into CBPM structures including metals, metal oxides, and polymers. All applications benefit from the tunability, tailorability, and hierarchy of CBPM, originating from the variety of fabrication and assembly methods. Much of the review focuses primarily on inverse opals, ordered structures templated from colloidal crystals, but we include comparisons with disordered and direct (untemplated) structures as well. We intend to highlight the versatility of colloid-based materials by providing a “colloidoscope” – an overview ranging from the multitude of available structures and their specific properties to a discussion of their advantages and potentials in a wide range of technological applications.
2. Fabrication of colloidal assemblies
A rich variety of structures can be generated by self-assembly using even the simplest colloidal particles as building blocks. We focus on spherical colloidal particles, typically prepared in the size range from 100 nm to several μm, made from common materials without any inherent special properties (mostly polystyrene, poly(methylmethacrylate), and silica),27 rather than assemblies of functional nanoparticles. Such colloids can be synthesized with high precision and uniformity using emulsion polymerization,28,29 dispersion polymerization,30,31 and Stöber processes.32,33 The composition can later be tailored as desired, as discussed below and described in Fig. 2. With the focus on the assembly of simple, spherical particles, this review does not cover the synthesis and self-assembly of more complex colloidal building blocks, such as Janus particles,34,35 patchy particles,36–39 core–shell particles,40–42 particles with more complex internal structures,43–45 anisotropic particles,46 or non-spherical nanocrystals.47–50
 Fig. 2  Overview of various methods to control CBPM composition. The material itself can be controlled, functional additives such as nanoparticles can be used, and the surface can be modified, either with a conformal thin film or with a molecular surface layer. 
Complex properties and highly functional materials can emerge solely by controlling the structure of the material or by providing a template to generate patterns in another material. The classical structures created by spherical assemblies are direct opals, consisting of three-dimensional assemblies of colloidal particles in the ordered arrangement of a face centered cubic crystal (Fig. 3A), and their inverse analogues created by backfilling the interstitial sites with a second material and subsequent removal of the colloids which serve as templates to generate an interconnected, porous matrix (Fig. 3C).
 Fig. 3  Colloidal assembly structures with different order and porosity. (A) Direct colloidal crystal, or opal.80 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (B) Disordered assembly of colloids.4 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010. (C) Inverse colloidal crystal, or inverse opal, prepared by filling the interstitial sites of the colloidal assembly and removing the colloidal template.59 Reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2010. (D) Mesoporous–macroporous material from colloidal templating, where the inverse opal matrix is further structured with mesopores.81 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010. 
Within this chapter, we will briefly introduce the important structural aspects of colloidal assemblies and highlight the modularity and versatility of these structures. We organize the chapter according to the length scale of structures, starting from the composition of the material, via order and porosity of CBPM to a short overview of types of assemblies and superstructures that can be created across several dimensions and length scales.
2.1 Control over structural features in colloidal assemblies

Composition. 
There is a high degree of control over the composition of CBPM even using simple building blocks. Some of the key benefits of CBPM are the modularity of the matrix material, the additives, and the surface chemistry, as shown in Fig. 2.
(A) Bulk material. 
The material choice for the colloidal particles is limited by the synthetic possibilities to prepare monodispersed spheres. There are numerous approaches to create metallic,41,51 polymeric,52,53 semiconducting,48 and oxidic49,50 nanoparticles, but the vast majority of colloidal assembly structures are prepared from simple polymer or silica particles.27,54–56 Inverse structures have much more pronounced material variety since the matrix material can be chosen freely, provided it can fill the interstitial sites of the template crystal. By controlling the matrix material separately from the assembly process, one can combine properties of the structure (interconnected pores, high order, high surface area) with inherent material properties.57,58 The variety of materials that can be used forms the basis for applications of colloidal structures in sensing, catalysis, and electrode materials, and specific examples will be discussed in these sections. These inverse structures are generally made by backfilling a pre-formed colloidal template with a precursor for the matrix material; however, when the matrix and colloids are co-assembled simultaneously, the resulting structure has better long-range order and fewer cracks.59
(B) Nanoparticle additives. 
The addition of functional nanoparticles within the architecture provided by the colloids can be used to add further functional properties. For example, carbon black60 or gold nanoparticles61 can be used for their absorbing properties, or catalytically active nanoparticles62–64 can be embedded into the matrix material.
(C) Surface modification. 
Additional functional properties can be introduced to the inverse opal matrix by various surface modification techniques. The interconnected porosity enables the entire surface to be modified uniformly, for example using atomic layer deposition (ALD)65–72 or electrodeposition26,73–76 techniques. The matrix material can also be conveniently chosen to allow for simple and reliable introduction of a rich variety of surface functionalities at a molecular level, for example via silane chemistry.77,78


Porosity and order. 
As colloids start to assemble, they form porous structures that can have a degree of order from single crystalline to amorphous. Using the colloids as a template and inverting the structure allows one to form macropores (defined as those with pore diameter ≥∼30 nm79) with interesting fluid and gas transport properties.
(A) Order. 
The self-assembly of colloidal particles in three dimensions creates close-packed structures with long-range order if the particles are sufficiently similar in size and if the assembly process is well-controlled.54–56 The colloids assemble in a face-centered cubic crystal structure with periodicities in the hundred-nanometer range, as defined by the individual colloidal particle size. Colloidal crystals, for example in Fig. 3A, are also known as opals.
(B) Disorder. 
While the assembly of colloids into ordered structures require monodisperse particles and careful control over assembly conditions,54–56 disordered assembly structures can be prepared more easily. Polydisperse particles, which are unable to crystallize in an ordered matrix, can be used to prepare amorphous assemblies without long-range order (Fig. 3B).4,82 Simplistic and scalable approaches such as spray coating83,84 or layer-by-layer assembly85,86 of particles that are not suitable for crystallization due to high attractive forces or insufficient crystallization time can still be used to prepare disordered assembly structures in an experimentally straightforward way. Indeed, as we discuss in detail in several of the following sections, order is not necessary for every application of CBPM, and controlled disorder may even create desired properties.
(C) Ordered porosity. 
The inversion of a colloidal crystal, by backfilling the interstitial sites with a matrix material followed by removal of the templating colloids, produces materials with interconnected pores with uniform, defined neck sizes and long-range order inherited from the colloid templates (Fig. 3C).57,58 These inverse opals are the subject of extensive research and will be discussed in depth in the following chapters. Direct opals are also porous and interconnected, although the pores are not spherical and the degree of porosity much lower.
(D) Multiple porosities. 
To create porous materials with increasing complexity, additional interfaces and pores over multiple length scales can be fabricated by co-crystallizing particle populations with different sizes,87,88 or by introducing porogens to produce mesopores within the matrix material (Fig. 3D).81


Assembly structures and patterning. 
As showcased in Fig. 4, colloidal assemblies and structures prepared from colloidal templates can be classified according to their dimensionality into: (A) colloidal monolayers, providing two-dimensional surface patterns; (B) colloidal crystals with periodic internal structures in three dimensions; (C) hierarchical assemblies, creating structural features at multiple length scales on solid substrates; and (D) superparticles, dispersible structures several microns wide and made from colloidal building blocks.
 Fig. 4  Overview of types of patterned structures that can be created from colloidal self-assembly processes. (A) Colloidal monolayers create periodic surface structures at the nanoscale that can be used as templates or masks to produce (i) a honeycomb structure by backfilling with a second material95 (reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013), (ii) an array of nanocones from anisotropic etching processes using the colloids as a mask96 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009), or (iii) complex nanostructures by a combination of angular evaporation and etching involving the monolayer as template97 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011). (B) 3D porous materials from inverted colloidal crystals (i) with gold nanoparticles embedded inside98 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012), (ii) with anisotropic pore shape99 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014), and (iii) with two distinct periodicities88 (reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013). (C) Hierarchical assemblies produce materials with periodicities at multiple length scales and can be prepared by (i) photolithography of a self-assembled structure100 (reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015), (ii) assembly in a topographically structured substrate101 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2001), or (iii) inkjet printing of colloidal dispersions102 (reproduced with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2006). (D) Assembly in confinement can also produce superparticles, micron-scale structures of self-assembled colloidal particles, for example via confinement in (i) surface channels on a substrate, producing bricklike structures103 (modified with permission from OSA publishing, copyright 2014), (ii) a silicone microtube, forming a helical superstructure of colloidal particles104 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2005), or (iii) emulsion droplets, producing spherical superparticles105 (reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015). 
There have been a number of very recent review articles covering all facets of colloidal assembly, which we will refer to throughout the discussion. Nature creates these structures from 100–1000 nm proteinaceous or lipid particles assembling into ordered structures.89,90 In synthetic systems, the interplay of colloid interaction forces is the key factor in the control of any colloidal self-assembly process. Within this review, we focus on material and design aspects rather than colloidal physics, which has been exhaustively discussed elsewhere.91–94
(A) Two-dimensional assembly structures. 
The assembly of two-dimensional (2D) arrays of colloidal particles creates surface patterns with nanoscale dimensions and high order, with a resolution determined solely by the size of the colloids (Fig. 4A). Such monolayers can be deposited directly onto solid substrates via evaporation-driven convective assembly processes,106–108 spincoating,109 electric field-assisted deposition,55,110 or mechanical rubbing of dry powders.111,112 They can also be pre-assembled at a liquid interface and subsequently transferred to a solid substrate.113–116 The choice of assembly technique depends on the requirements with respect to the area to be coated, which have recently been discussed in detail.52,117
Colloidal monolayers can be especially valuable as templates or masks for etching or evaporation processes to create functional surface nanostructures or coatings. There have been intense research activities in the last decade on the generation of arrays of nanostructures using colloidal monolayers, as discussed in several recent review articles;117–120 here, we only introduce general strategies and highlight a few examples in Fig. 4A.
(i) Inversion of the monolayer structure. 
Backfilling colloidal monolayers produces bowl-shaped, closed-cell nanostructures with high mechanical stability (Fig. 4A(i)).95 Very similar structures with microscale dimensions can also be created using water droplets as the structuring material in a breath figure process.121
(ii) Dry etching using colloidal monolayer masks. 
The presence of colloids can shield parts of the surface from an etching process, leading to selective removal of exposed surface areas. Classically, this process produces ordered arrays of nanopillar122 and nanocone96 architectures (Fig. 4A(ii)).
(iii) Colloidal lithography. 
A colloidal monolayer can be used as a mask through which a second material can be deposited on the surface, typically by directed evaporation. In the simplest case, this process yields arrays of triangular nanoparticles from the geometry of the interstitial sites.123 The process offers ample degrees of freedom: consecutive evaporation steps with changes in tilt angle and orientation of the substrate can create a range of complex nanostructures.124 Adding directed dry etching steps to selectively remove material from defined parts of the surface further increases the accessible structures and geometries.117,120Fig. 4A(iii) shows the fabrication of arrays of crescent shaped nanoparticles by a combination of evaporation of gold under a tilted angle followed by an etching step normal to the surface.97,125 Similarly, the colloids themselves can be used to deposit the metal using colloids that contain metal nanoparticles or molecular metal complexes as precursor materials.126,127
(iv) Capillary-assisted deposition of structures. 
If a colloid-decorated substrate is wetted by a dispersion of nanoparticles, capillary forces confine the liquid to the necks in between particles and between the particles and the substrate during the drying process, leading to the formation of ring structures from nanoparticles deposited selectively at the contact points.128
(B) Three-dimensional colloidal assemblies. 
Three-dimensional (3D) colloidal crystals are predominantly prepared by convective assembly processes in which the colloidal particles are deposited from a dispersion via a receding meniscus.107,108,129 Research over two decades has created a wealth of different assembly techniques under this umbrella, which are discussed in great detail in a number of recent reviews.54–56,92,130 Briefly, methods to assemble colloidal particles into ordered three-dimensional crystals include sedimentation,131,132 Langmuir–Blodgett techniques,133 spin-coating,134 and shear alignment.135,136 Using evaporative deposition, nanoparticles can also be easily incorporated into the structure (Fig. 4B(i)).61,98
(i) Control of crystal symmetry. 
The substrate onto which colloidal particles assemble can be pre-structured with a defined hole pattern into which the first layer of the colloidal particles deposits in a process called colloidal epitaxy.137 The surface pattern thus acts as a lattice-directing layer that defines the symmetry and lattice orientation of the colloidal particles,138 predominantly into face-centered cubic structures.55 Each subsequent layer consequently deposits into the voids present in the former layer, enabling the substrate pattern to control the macroscopic crystal orientation of the assembly structure, provided that the template structure exactly matches the size of the colloidal spheres. The process allows the formation of colloidal crystals with controllable crystal structures138 and enables rapid fabrication of assemblies with minimal defect densities.139
(ii) Control of pore shape. 
Inverse opals with anisotropic pore structures can be prepared from simple spherical colloidal particles by exploiting volume shrinkage of the sol–gel matrix material: with increasing temperature, increased condensation induces volume loss in the matrix, which in turn leads to a selective shrinkage of the inverse opal film. Since this film is bound to the substrate within the substrate plane, the volume loss occurs entirely perpendicular to the substrate, leading to “squishing” of the pores into increasingly anisotropic geometries (Fig. 4B(ii)).99
(iii) Binary and more complex assemblies. 
The simultaneous assembly of colloids with multiple sizes can result in the formation of binary and multinary crystal structures provided that the diameter of the small particles is chosen in a way that they can be accommodated in the interstitial sites of the crystal formed by the large particles.87 A size mismatch, however, will result in disordered crystal structures.4,82 Additionally, the porous materials of an inverse opal can be backfilled by smaller colloidal particles (Fig. 4B(iii)), producing more complex materials with higher porosity and choice of materials.88,140
(iv) Crack formation and homogeneity. 
The formation of cracks is generally unwanted and results from various origins. One major source of cracking is volume loss and stress during drying of a colloidal crystal.129 In this case, cracking can be reduced by addition of filler materials to the assembly solution,59 assembly on elastic substrates,141 or use of low surface energy-substrates.141 Cracks can also form due to chemical effects, for example crystallization of the matrix material, or polycondensation of sol–gel precursors.99
(C) Hierarchical patterns. 
We define hierarchical superstructures broadly as colloidal assembly structures with periodicities at multiple length scales. Confining the assembled structure to a desired region of a substrate or device can be important,142–144 and this hierarchy can lead to more complex properties, for example by introducing light–matter interactions occurring at different length scales100 or by creating pixelated structures.145,146 Hierarchical structures can be produced from 2D and 3D assemblies by a multitude of approaches, which have been discussed in great detail recently.54,55 Very generally, common strategies to create hierarchical structures from colloidal assemblies involve patterning from the top down, or assembling into patterns from the bottom up.
(i) Top-down patterning. 
A desired superstructure is imposed on a pre-assembled colloidal crystal using classical top-down fabrication methods such as photolithography100,145,147 (Fig. 4C(i)), microcontact printing,146 or imprinting.148 Alternatively, colloidal dispersions can be printed onto desired parts of the substrate using inkjet printing (Fig. 4C(iii)).102,144
(ii) Bottom–up assembly. 
With convective assembly, the colloidal crystal will grow directly around any surface features present on a pre-patterned substrate.149–152 The assembly conditions themselves are precisely adjusted to create superstructures, for example stripe patterns can form in a convective assembly process.153,154 Alternatively, a preferred site for the colloidal assembly can be created via assembly on a substrate that is patterned either physically (topographically)55,101,149 (Fig. 4C(ii)) or chemically (wetting contrast, differences in adhesion).55,155
(D) Superparticles. 
We define superparticles as dispersible particles on the 10–1000 μm scale that are comprised of colloids in their internal structure. Whereas the classical hierarchical structures introduced above create multiple periodicities on a substrate, for a superparticle, the hierarchical element exists as a powder or in a dispersed state. The assembly of such structures generally requires an element of confinement, in which the colloids organize within the hierarchical superstructure. This confining element can be realized in various fashions.
(i) Release from substrate. 
A colloidal crystal is assembled on a substrate, patterned into a desired shape, and released to form dispersed elements (Fig. 4D(i)).103
(ii) Removal from confined assembly. 
Colloidal particles are assembled in a desired confinement and released via selective removal of the confining architecture. The process is exemplarily shown for a helical colloidal crystal assembled in the confinement of a silicon tube (Fig. 4D(ii)).104
(iii) Confinement in emulsion droplets. 
A colloidal dispersion is confined to an emulsion droplet and left to evaporate, leading to the assembly of micron-sized spherical colloidal crystals (Fig. 4D(iii)).105,156–158


Scalability. 
One of the great advantages of colloidal self-assembly is the potential to marry an inexpensive and parallel fabrication process with the high resolution features necessary for the plethora of applications discussed below. For any real world application, these fabrication processes need to be scalable to macroscopic dimensions without compromising the properties. While many assembly processes easily achieve very high order and beautiful features over small areas (as observed in electron micrographs), methodologies capable of producing structures over macroscopic areas with similar fidelity are extremely important. Here we highlight potential possibilities for self-assembly-based fabrication techniques to be scaled up.
High quality colloidal monolayers can be assembled over extended areas at an air/water interface followed by transfer to the target substrate. Using a Langmuir trough, this process easily yields wafer-scale colloidal assemblies in high quality (Fig. 5A and B).115
 Fig. 5  Colloidal self-assembly can yield surface patterns or structured materials with nanoscale dimensions in a parallel fabrication process over large areas. (A and B) Wafer scale colloidal monolayer deposition using a Langmuir trough.115 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011. (C and D) Wafer scale processing of opals via spin-coating.109,159 Reproduced with permission from AIP publishing LLC (copyright 2006) and the American Chemical Society (copyright 2004). (E and F) Melt extrusion of core–shell particles can fabricate elastomeric, mechanically stable opals over large areas.135,136,160 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons (copyright 2008), Elsevier (copyright 2003), and the American Chemical Society (copyright 2013). (G and H) Droplet-based microfluidics can be used to prepare spherical superparticles in a continuous-flow method105 (reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015), and (H) the throughput can be increased by parallelization while maintaining monodispersity161 (reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011). 
There are several scalable methods for making three-dimensional colloidal structures. Three-dimensional colloidal assemblies over large areas can be produced, for example via spin-coating processes. Though the presence of shear forces can be detrimental to the order, with a proper choice of colloidal particles, polymerizable matrix material, and a precisely controlled coating protocol, the fabrication of wafer-scale opals and inverse opals can be achieved (Fig. 5C and D).109,159 Melt extrusion of core–shell colloidal particles is another process that yields colloidal crystals over macroscopic dimensions in an industrial extrusion process. The particles used in this process consist of a hard core and a shell with a low glass transition temperature and are applied in the process as a powder without any solvent. At elevated temperatures, the shell softens, leading to melting of the powder. This colloid melt can then be extruded and sheared into a thin film. The shear forces induce ordering of the particles and upon cooling, a large area colloidal crystal results (Fig. 5E).135,136 The shell can further be crosslinked, producing elastomeric colloidal crystals with strain-responsive structural color (Fig. 5F).160 Finally, superparticles can be prepared in a microfluidic setup, allowing a continuous flow production of self-assembled materials with high fidelity (Fig. 5G and H).105,161
The composition, order, and assembly of colloidal particles creates a rich variety of structures. Improving the control over cracking, large-scale synthesis, and hierarchical elements will lead to advances in achievable structures, which will then influence how they will be used. We next turn to how one can take advantage of these various structures in several application areas.

3. Optical applications
In nature, colloidal particles have been used to change the visual appearance of various organisms in several ways, including by providing additional scattering,12 allowing for angle-independent structural color,4 or providing bright, ordered structural color.6 Colloids are useful in natural and biomimetic structural color applications because they have sizes on the same length scale as the wavelength of visible light, such that one can tune the optical properties of materials created from colloids by varying the size of the colloidal buildings blocks or the dielectric constant of the material. Multi-step, hierarchical fabrication methods further enable additional optical properties occurring at larger dimensions such as grating effects and angular reflection properties. Structurally colored materials are increasingly sought for a wide range of applications, including high reflectivity mirrors, anti-reflective coatings, and optical fibers, as well as color elements for paint, cosmetics, decoration, or display technologies, and colloids are often used to template the photonic materials that enable these technologies due to their ease of fabrication and versatility. In particular, colloids can be assembled into structures with periodicity in all three spatial dimensions on the same order as the wavelength of visible light, forming 3D photonic crystals. By changing the material composition of these 3D photonic crystals—whether by using absorbing additives, responsive materials, or flexible materials—a variety of optical effects can be created. Fig. 6 schematically illustrates examples of different material parameters that can be tuned to modify the photonic properties of CBPM, with the resulting reflection spectra shown as insets. It should be noted that, although direct opals are shown in the schematics, the optical effects apply in the same way to inverse (templated) structures.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the influence of materials properties on the photonic peak of an opal. (A) A direct opal. (B and C) Direct opals formed from different types of colloids: (B) core–shell colloids, which can change size (and color) in response to a stimulus, and (C) colloids made of a material with a lower refractive index than in (A), resulting in a blue shifted spectrum. (D and E) Direct opals with (D) selective and (E) broadband absorbers. Insets show schematics of the reflected Bragg peak of the structure (black line, A–E), the reflected Bragg peak of the reference structure shown in part A (gray line, B–E), and the absorption spectra of the absorbers added to the material (blue line, D and E). 
In addition to tailoring the properties of the individual colloids to tune the optical properties of CBPM, the assembly of colloidal particles can also be varied in several ways to alter the angle-dependence of the structural color (Fig. 7). Patterning the CBPM can enable more complicated security printing or display applications by allowing for more complex optical materials to be created, such as diffraction gratings (Fig. 7B). Changing the degree of order of the structure can drastically reduce the angle dependence of a structurally colored material, allowing for a much more angle-independent structural color (Fig. 7C). Assembling the opal structures further into dispersible particles either by top-down (i.e. grinding) or bottom-up (i.e. microfluidics) methods is an alternate method of changing the angle-dependent properties (Fig. 7D and E).
 Fig. 7  Schematic of various methods for changing the angular dispersion of structural color in CBPM. (A) A direct opal. (B–E) Direct opals in various geometries: (B) patterned, (C) disordered, and (D and E) assembled in confinement—both (D) spherical and (E) rectangular. Insets show schematics of the reflected spectra for various detection angles, assuming normal incidence illumination. 
There are several parameters that can be used to tune the optical properties of colloidal crystals and derivatives thereof. The location of the Bragg peak in a photonic structure can be tuned in several ways as can be seen in the well-known Bragg–Snell equation (assuming a close-packed 111 lattice): (1)where λ is the location of the Bragg peak of the structure, D is the diameter of the colloids used in the HCP structure, ϕ1,2 and n1,2 are the volume filling fractions and refractive indices of the constituent materials (colloids and air for direct opals or voids and matrix for indirect opals), and θ is the incidence angle measured from the surface normal. Note that while the parameters in eqn (1) can be used to modify the photonic stopband, the location of the photonic peak of the structure is not the only parameter that affects the appearance of the material. The bandwidth of the peak, the presence of additional orders, and the amount of scattering in the structure can also strongly influence the macroscopic appearance of the material. It should also be noted that this equation ignores the effects of color saturation that can be modified by changing the number of layers in the structure or adding in absorptive elements. Additionally, this equation assumes a close-packed, ordered lattice; changing either of these properties also affects the optical properties of the material.
Overall, several parameters of the CBPM can be varied combinatorially to tune the optical appearance of hierarchical porous colloidal materials. The position of the Bragg peak can be controlled by the periodicity of the structure, the refractive index of the constituent materials, the presence or absence of absorption in the material, and the number of periods of the structure. Other properties of the material can affect the angular dispersion of the structural color, such as the degree of order of the structure or the inclusion of hierarchical geometries in the structure (Fig. 7). Below, we discuss in detail how these multifaceted approaches can lead to a diversity of advanced optical behaviors across a broad range of applications.
3.1 Factors affecting optical applications

Composition and additives. 
Structural colors are not susceptible to photobleaching, so there is a large drive in the field to generate rich and varied colors for use as photonic pigments for paints and cosmetics. Historically, many different types of thin films of opals, inverse opals, and other colloid-derived materials have been used for their photonic properties.82,162 Since scattering can greatly reduce the saturation of a photonic color, adding absorbing elements to the matrix can enhance the color of the structure. Fig. 8A shows examples of different structural colors that can be created from powderized inverse opal films.
 Fig. 8  Structural color created from colloidal photonic crystals. (A) Silica inverse opal powders with various pore sizes (red, 360 nm; green, 336 nm; blue 288 nm; other colors are 1:1 mixes of these) with mixed RGB reference images.22 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (B) Images of a stretched colloidal crystal elastomer and absorbance spectra showing the position of the Bragg peak for different strain values.172 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (C) Disordered opal structure generated by spray coating, showing: left, color change by adding different amounts of carbon black to mixtures of two different colloid sizes; right, different colors for different sizes of colloids.180 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013. 
More recently, core–shell colloids (typically silica core with polymeric shell) have been used to generate films of opal or inverse opal photonic crystals on different substrates163,164 using organic shell components that can be annealed to enhance adhesion to the substrate or increase the mechanical durability of the film. Currently, the production of imperfect structures leads to non-negligible scattering that desaturates any structural color produced. Through the incorporation of broad spectrum absorbers22,60,165 or plasmonic absorbers,61,103,105,166 this scattering can be reduced, although in the case of the broad spectrum absorbers the photonic peak intensity is also reduced. For example, Stellar's jays have blue feathers due to melanin coupled with disordered colloidal particles.5 These additives purify the color and enable pigment and coating applications to access a broader color space than would otherwise be possible.
By using responsive materials as the matrix, reversibly tunable colors can be achieved. The color shift of such materials is caused by a change in either the periodicity of the structure or the refractive index of its constituent materials. For security materials, optical switches, or dynamic display applications, it is important to be able to reversibly switch the structural color of CBPM either in an on/off configuration or by a measurable shift in the photonic stopband location. These responsive CBPM can also be used as sensors, as discussed in more detail below. There are several mechanisms that can be used to enable this switching, including the incorporation of magnetic particles to switch between ordered and disordered structures,167–170 the use of elastomeric materials to allow change in the periodicity of the structure upon application of strain,171–174 the inclusion of light-responsive moieties to change the average refractive index in the material,24,175 and the implementation of redox-sensitive materials176 and thermo-responsive materials24,174,177,178 to change the lattice parameter typically by swelling and deswelling. An example of an elastomeric stretch-tunable structural color can be seen in Fig. 8B, where the periodicity changes upon stretching due to the Poisson ratio of the elastomeric material, causing a reversible blue-shift in the photonic peak of the opal structure. Photonic crystals like these can also be used as the gain media for colloidal crystal lasers as discussed in detail in a recent review.179


Disorder. 
While typically order is necessary for photonic structures, disordered colloidal structures—which still exhibit structural coloration—have also been studied.4,82,180–182 For many color applications, the iridescent structural color of photonic crystal materials is undesirable. Nature has solved this problem by incorporating disorder into its photonic structures in order to increase their angular visibility, for example in the feather shown in Fig. 1A(i and ii)1.3,5 Similarly, disorder introduced into CBPM can lead to angle-independent structural colors.180–185 An example of such angle independence can be seen in Fig. 8C. It should be noted that there is a blue tinge to the colors that can be produced using this method. This additional blue coloration is caused by the wavelength-dependent scattering from the photonic materials and may be undesirable for the creation of longer wavelength colors. In order to create high-saturation structural colors, this scattering must be reduced either by incorporating selective absorbers as mentioned above or by creating defect-free materials.181


Monolayers. 
In addition to 3D photonic crystals, 2D colloidal monolayers can also be tuned to create many different optical materials and properties. For example, the monolayer can be used for shadow deposition to generate different shapes of deposited materials,97,120,124,186 used as an etch mask to generate high aspect ratio structures with high order,166,187,188 inverted/textured to create antireflective coatings for reducing the amount of reflected light from a substrate surface,95 or deformed to generate structurally colored patterns on a substrate.112 Interesting coupling effects can be observed between the photonic modes of an opal and the plasmonic modes of thin metals deposited on top of the crystal.189–193
Colloids can also be used for antireflective coating applications.85 In particular, colloidal monolayers have been used to create porous, graded-index materials with low reflectivity by, for example, plasma etching of colloidal monolayers,194 inverting the monolayer,95 or using the monolayer as an etching mask to generate pillars.166,187,195 To reduce the reflection from the top surface of solar cells, many methods are used to generate porous materials with the proper optical thickness and effective index for optimal transmission. A recent perspective discusses many of these methods.196 Specifically, colloidal materials can generate high porosity, creating the ability to reach the  effective refractive index required for perfect transmission at the desired wavelength.197
There are several ways to generate the graded effective refractive index profile that causes the antireflective effect of these coatings. Very small colloids (<30 nm), such as organically modified silica (ORMOSIL) particles, can be used to generate uniform antireflective coatings, but typically require the addition of stabilizing elements to make robust films.198–200 Larger colloids can be used, with or without other materials, to generate hierarchically structured materials with very high transmission values.188,201,202Fig. 9 shows an example of such a structure created by using a monolayer of colloids as an etch mask to make a grating structure on which a disordered array of gold nanoparticles is created. This array of nanoparticles is then etched to create a hierarchical structure with better antireflective properties than the original structure. The transmittance was found to increase after the surface treatment (Fig. 9C).
 Fig. 9  Antireflective coating based on hierarchical colloidal lithography. (A) Schematic representation of the fabrication of compound submicrometer structures (c-SMSs) and ordered submicrometer gratings (o-SMGs) for use as antireflective coatings. A layer of colloids is first etched to create o-SMG, which is coated with gold and thermally treated to generate nanoparticles on the surface, which is then etched again to generate a c-SMS. (B) Tilted-angle and side-view (inset) SEM images of hierarchical nanostructure antireflective coatings using Au film thicknesses of 3, 5, and 7 nm. (C) Transmittance spectra for the structures shown in A along with the transmittance spectrum for the bare structure (without the additional gold etching step, black line, o-SMGs). Insets show the diffuse transmittance spectra and haze ratio values for two different wavelengths for all samples.188 Reproduced with permission from OSA publishing, copyright 2013. 
Colloidal monolayers can even generate structural color if surface diffraction modes are used as the source of the structural color.112 This type of material has a much more angle-dependent structural color as compared to fully three-dimensional photonic crystals due to the nature of the surface diffraction.


Superparticles. 
Another way to create angle-independent structural color is via modification of the local geometry. By using spherical or hemispherical assemblies of colloids, all viewing directions are normal to some portion of the superparticles. Such assemblies are typically created via evaporation of a solvent from a droplet containing colloids. These droplets can be created via microfluidics105,203 or ink-jet printing.204,205 For more information, a recent review covers many of the aspects of these types of photonic crystals.158Fig. 10 shows inkjet-printed photonic hemispheres (Fig. 10A–C) and arrays of buckled-sphere photonic superparticles embedded in a flexible material (Fig. 10D), both of which show angle-independent color. It should be noted that the structural color of these photonic superparticles is only independent of viewing angle in a diffusely lit environment due to the near-normal incidence peaks being brighter than the blue-shifted, higher incidence angle peaks. When viewing the structures in transmission or at an oblique angle to a strong lighting source, different photonic or scattering colors can be seen.105 The creation of disordered superparticles can also strongly reduce angular-dependence of the reflection color, similar to thin films of disordered colloids.180,185 Also, when larger colloids are used, diffractive colors become dominant over the Bragg reflectance peak, leading to a much larger variation in color with viewing angle.105,206
 Fig. 10  Colloidal crystal superparticles with little angle-dependence of color. (A–C) Ink-jet printed hemispherical colloidal superparticles. (A) SEM image of a dome (scale bar: 5 μm). (B) Normalized fluorescent intensity of domes (red) and dots (black) for different detection angles. (C) Top and side view images of a pattern of domes showing a wide angular visibility of the color.205 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (D) 2.8 cm × 1.5 cm flexible buckled-sphere colloidal superparticle films showing lack of angle dependence of the structural color upon compression and stretching. Colloid sizes: 170 nm (blue), 200 nm (green), 250 nm (red).203 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
Another geometry of dispersible photonic particles is created using fragments of inverse opal films, which can be grown directly into sacrificial channels103 or ground from larger inverse opal samples22,165 to create structural color “pigments” which can be dispersed in paint bases. Structures created in this way have a different visual appearance compared to dense layers of spherical photonic superparticles due to the obvious angle-dependence of the structural color. Since the particles are typically larger, individual domains can be seen by eye, creating a sparkle effect when changing the viewing and illumination conditions.103


Hierarchy/patterning. 
For display applications, the patterning of photonic materials of different stopbands into pixelated arrays is of great interest. Such patterning has historically been achieved via top-down processes such as photolithography100,147,207 or microimprinting,148 leading to static “pixels” of photonic crystals such as those shown in Fig. 11A. Such pixelation can be used to create near arbitrary patterns (images) from structural color materials, provided the desired colors can be generated. An example of an RGB pixelated array can be seen in Fig. 11B and C. If magnetic materials are used, architectures closer to an actual display are created170 in which the color of each pixel can be reversibly changed in an on/off state. The pixels, in this case, consist of magnetic Janus superparticles with colloids comprising half of the sphere to generate a photonic peak that is visible only when the superparticles are in the correct orientation. Since the particles are magnetic, the orientation of each “pixel” can be reversibly switched allowing for images to be created.
 Fig. 11  Lithographic patterning of colloidal photonic crystals. (A) Left, schematic illustration of patterning method used to make multi-colored colloidal crystals. Right, optical images of films with two and three colors under different viewing angles.144 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (B and C) Hierarchical “pixelated” inverse opal arrays made from SU-8: (B) optical microscopic image of the hierarchical inverse opal, and (C) SEM of the structure.207 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. 

3.2 Perspective
CBPM provide a platform for the development of photonic crystal materials due to their relative ease of fabrication, controlled order, and the wide variety of materials from which they can be made. For macroscopic (i.e. wafer-scale or larger) 3D photonic crystals, competing methods such as electron beam lithography and two-photon lithography methods are limited to small sizes, and they require long processing times to create the desired photonic structures due to their serial nature. 1D Bragg stacks and 2D nanowire forest photonic crystals have applications that compete with opal and inverse opal photonic crystals, but they typically lack the benefits of self-assembled systems such as low cost and facile fabrication. Still, crystal lattice defects lead to scattering that greatly weakens the signal-to-noise ratio of the optical response in self-assembled CBPM; it remains a great challenge to increase the order of such materials or to allow for controlled disorder to generate high-chromaticity angle-dependent or angle-independent structural colors.
Additionally, the ability of hierarchical CBPM to be made via top-down lithographic methods or assembly in confinement allows a greater variety of optical properties to be achieved. Research is still needed into creating CBPM with better long-range order and using colloids with higher refractive index materials in order to achieve a full photonic bandgap.208 Longer-range order and higher refractive indices will generate stronger photonic peaks with less scattering noise, reducing the need to integrate absorption into the material. Increases in the sophistication of CBPM with regard to the dynamic coloration via shifting the photonic stopband or moving the photonic crystal out of view could lead to electronic ink displays with full color displays in the future and advanced security features in anti-counterfeit applications.
4. Wetting applications
The leaves of many plants, water strider legs, duck feathers, butterfly wings, and the coat of the Stenocara beetle in the Namib desert are examples of natures' sophisticated solutions to keeping surfaces clean and dry.209 Studying these organisms' wetting properties has led to countless approaches to create multifunctional materials with tunable wettability for applications ranging from self-cleaning repellent surfaces to antifogging coatings. Colloids offer a unique platform to understand and control the wetting of liquids on surfaces for various applications because they can systematically modify multiple parameters of the surface with simple methods.
A recent review by Yan et al. provides a thorough discussion of specific theoretical models used to describe wetting behavior.209 There are generally three parameters fundamental to achieving a desired surface wetting state: surface roughness, re-entrant geometry of the roughness features, and surface energy. Colloidal particles assembled on a substrate allow for the direct control of all three of these parameters. The size of the colloids, material used (i.e., polymers, metals, or metal oxides), surface functionality of the colloids, spacing between particles, filling fraction, and order of the assembly can be used to adjust the three parameters and therefore the surface wetting state of liquids. Due to colloids' large surface area to volume ratio, they can easily be used to generate surface roughness on a variety of different substrates. Depending on the material composition, the surface chemistry, and the final architecture of the colloidal particles, liquids either assume a fully wetted state or a non-wetting state, allowing for ease of use in applications that require either of these wetting behaviors.
Here, we discuss the ordered and disordered colloidal assemblies that are used to study wetting phenomena. In addition to using colloidal assemblies for creating a particular surface wetting property, inverse colloidal assemblies have also been used to study liquid transport as a function of local pore size and chemistry. These studies are particularly useful for membrane and sensing applications, and are related to the diffusion through the pores that is necessary for catalytic and electrode applications. CBPM have also been used in other transport applications such as for cell culture,210,211 for drug delivery,212,213 and as membranes and filters,214 applications we do not cover in this review.
4.1 Factors affecting wetting applications

Surface roughness. 
One of the obvious benefits of using colloidal particles for wetting applications is the inherent increase in surface roughness provided by both ordered and disordered assemblies. Models such as the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter states are commonly used to predict the wetting state of a liquid on a surface. Both models recognize that the presence of surface roughness alters the contact angle of a liquid droplet when compared to a smooth surface with the same surface energy. Liquids infiltrate the structure in the Wenzel model,218 as shown in Fig. 12A, and complete wetting in this state is beneficial in some instances such as when designing an antifogging coating. For example, water condensate spreads on a hydrophilic anti-fogging coating on glass containing roughness features instead of forming droplets as it does on an untreated flat glass substrate, decreasing light scattering and maintaining transparency (Fig. 12A).86 However, such behavior is not suited for applications where repellency is desired, since it would result in liquid pinning, high contact angle hysteresis, and failure of the coating.
 Fig. 12  Overview of different wetting states of liquids on surfaces and resulting macroscopic properties. (A) Wenzel state for antifogging coatings. The uncoated region of the glass slide shows droplet formation while the coated region appears transparent.86 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2006. (B) Cassie–Baxter state for superhydrophobic self-cleaning surfaces.215 Reproduced with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015. (C) Re-entrant geometry for superoleophobic surfaces, such as for oil transport. The red droplets are dyed rapeseed oil on a duck feather modified to be superoleophobic.216 Reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Science, copyright 2008. (D) Liquid-infused surfaces capable of preventing bacterial attachment and thus preventing bacterial biofilms. The fluorescent control image indicates bacterial biofilm formation on a flat polytetrafluoroethylene substrate after incubation in bacterial culture, while the lack of fluorescence on the lubricant-infused roughened polytetrafluoroethylene surface indicates that the surface contains no bacteria after incubation.217 Reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Science, copyright 2012. 
On the other hand, the Cassie–Baxter model, shown in Fig. 12B, describes the state where liquid repellency is attainable. The model suggests that liquid droplets can be supported by the composite air/solid interface of a rough surface to form apparent contact angles greater than 90° without wetting the air pockets within the rough surface.219 An ideal Cassie–Baxter state results in minimal pinning and is suited for applications such as self-cleaning surfaces where liquid droplets are shed from the surface at low tilt angles, collecting solid particles within the droplets (Fig. 12B). By introducing roughness, the hydrophobicity (for Cassie–Baxter) or hydrophilicity (for Wenzel) of the surface chemistry can be enhanced.
In direct colloidal assemblies, the selected size of the particles and the spacing between them can be tuned, enabling precise control over the wetting state (Fig. 13A(i and ii)). Techniques such as reactive ion etching220 or oxygen plasma treatment23 can provide control over these parameters. The resulting topographies of the substrate surface, such as pillars and cones, support a specific wetting state.122,221 By introducing the appropriate surface chemistry, a superhydrophilic or superhydrophobic state can be achieved. For example, surfaces after plasma etching are generally rendered superhydrophilic, where water wets the surface structures in a Wenzel state at an angle close to 0°. Conversely, functionalization with a hydrophobic fluoroalkylsilane renders the surface superhydrophobic, where water wets the surface in a metastable Cassie–Baxter state at an angle greater than 150° (Fig. 13A(ii)).23
 Fig. 13  Various types of roughness formed from CBPM. (A) Longer plasma treatment times etch away at close-packed polystyrene particles, increasing the interparticle spacing. This surface modification leads to increased surface roughness and therefore increased superhydrophobicity, as shown (i) before, and (ii) after plasma treatment.23 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2004. (B) Inverse colloidal monolayers infused with lubricant repel both low and high surface tension liquids such as octane and water. (i) SEM of structure; (ii) sliding angle of water and octane.95 Reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013. (C) Layer-by-layer assembly of silica nanoparticles creates superhydrophobic surfaces after modification with a fluorinated silane. (i) SEM of the structure; (ii) photograph demonstrating the resulting high contact angle.85 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2007. 
The concave structures produced by inverse opal assemblies provide ideal rough substrates to satisfy the Wenzel or Cassie–Baxter state of wetting.222–224 Inverse opals have been used to template soft materials to create superhydrophobicity;225 however, the concave structures shown in Fig. 12A and B have not been used to create superoleophobic surfaces, which instead require a feature known as re-entrant geometry, shown in Fig. 12C and discussed below.
Surfaces that rely on the Cassie–Baxter wetting state for repellency often face some disadvantages, such as reduced stability at high pressures and the formation of pinning points for the liquid in the presence of defects. Another type of repellent surface circumvents these issues by using low surface energy lubricant oil infiltrated into a roughened surface (Fig. 12D).95 Through capillary forces and matching chemistry between the oil and solid surface, the liquid forms a thermodynamically stable wetted state. A second immiscible liquid slides off the surface with ease. These liquid-infused surfaces repel both low and high surface tension liquids without the need for re-entrant geometries. They also do not fail under pressure, can be made optically transparent, and to a certain extent self heal after mechanical damage.226–228 These omniphobic coatings not only repel complex liquids such as blood and crude oil, but they can also prevent bacterial biofilm formation, for example in catheters where patients are at risk for hospital-acquired infections.217
Inverse opals can be infiltrated with a lubricant to create these liquid-infused surfaces. For example, Vogel et al. templated silica using colloidal monolayers on a glass surface (Fig. 13B). Following fluorosilanization with a fluoroalkyl trichlorosilane, a fluorinated lubricant was infiltrated into the structure and was stably trapped within the inverse assembly such that a second immiscible liquid slid off the surface at tilt angles below 2°.95 In this case, the surface roughness combined with the low surface energy functionalization is responsible for stably trapping the lubricant in a Wenzel state while the lubricant imparts repellency. The molecular-scale, dynamic nature of the liquid layer prevents organisms such as bacteria from forming contact points with the underlying solid structure, resulting in poor biofilm formation on these types of surfaces,217 with the promise to create anti-bacterial surfaces. In addition, the regular, closed cell porosity of the inverse colloidal monolayer provides strong mechanical durability of the coating.95
Similar to ordered assemblies, disordered systems contain innate surface roughness that enhances the hydrophilic or hydrophobic nature of the surface. Layer-by-layer assembly and spray deposition are commonly used techniques to cover a substrate with disordered colloids for superhydrophilic/phobic coatings (Fig. 13C).229–231 Metal oxide colloids, especially silica, are typically used in layer-by-layer assemblies because they contain surface charges that can be employed for electrostatic binding to a substrate and can be readily functionalized after assembly. When the sizes of these metal oxide particles are below the wavelength of visible light, they form transparent coatings.85,86 The particles can also be sintered to improve the mechanical robustness of the coating.232 However, the sintering process may limit substrates to those that can withstand high temperature treatments. While the dry coatings without further modification are generally not omniphobic, disordered rough surfaces can be functionalized and infiltrated with a lubricant to form a liquid infused repellent coating capable of repelling both high- and low-surface-tension liquids on a variety of curved and other types of surfaces.233


Re-entrant geometry. 
In general, low-surface-tension liquids with contact angles much lower than 90° assume the Wenzel state as opposed to the Cassie–Baxter state. Therefore, it is very difficult to create surfaces that can repel low-surface tension liquids. Tuteja et al.234 and Krupenkin et al.235 discovered a way to create a highly non-wetting surface for low-surface-tension liquids using an additional parameter called re-entrant geometry.234,235 Introducing geometry that contains an overhang, or re-entrant curvature, to the roughness features enables these low-surface-tension liquids to remain suspended rather than infiltrating the structures. If the overhang makes an angle smaller than 90° to the flat substrate, low-surface-tension liquids with a larger wetting angle than the overhang angle will de-wet from the structures,77,216 as shown schematically in Fig. 12C. The overhang changes the angle the liquid makes with the roughness features, creating a convex meniscus shape. This convex meniscus changes the advancing force of the liquid upward against gravity, allowing a metastable Cassie–Baxter state to form. These surfaces are referred to as superoleophobic, and they are well suited for oil transport pipelines where oil repellency from the surface of the pipeline reduces the required pressure for transport and thus the energy costs associated with transport.
Re-entrant curvature is not easily fabricated and typically involves multiple process steps or hierarchical architectures to provide overhanging elements in the structure. Colloids can be used to build such elements, provided they are attached to a suitable support, such as in pillars created via plasma etching (Fig. 14A).236 More robust superomniphobicity can be created from hierarchical assemblies: Deng et al. used candle soot to create a coating composed of 30–40 nm carbon particles, which were subsequently coated with a thin silica shell. Upon calcination, the carbon combusts, leaving behind a transparent superomniphobic mechanically robust coating (Fig. 14B).237 A simple spray coating of metal oxide colloids combined with a perfluoroacrylic polymer emulsion or fluorosilane has recently been used to easily create superoleophobic coatings as well (Fig. 14C).84,215,238 These methods are promising candidates for omniphobic coatings for applications where transparency is not a design criterion, such as for drag reduction in pipelines.
 Fig. 14  Examples of re-entrant geometries created using ordered and disordered colloidal assemblies. (A) (i) Side view, and (ii) top view of re-entrant geometry created with plasma etching and colloidal lithography, where the mushroom caps are composed of polystyrene (PS) and the stems are composed of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA).236 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (B) A superamphiphobic coating created using hollow silica particles. (i) Schematic of re-entrant curvature supporting a low surface tension solvent droplet, and (ii) SEM image of the coating, with an inset of a hexadecane droplet on the surface (CA = 156°).237 Reproduced with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Sciences, copyright 2012. (C) An omniphobic coating: (i) SEM of ZnO particles sprayed with perfluoroacrylic polymer emulsion, and (ii) the resulting high oil contact angle.238 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. 
Discussions of re-entrant curvature are usually made in the context of repelling low-surface-tension liquids. However, re-entrant curvature is also present within inverse opals and can guide the wettability and direction of wetting within the nanoporous structures. Interconnected pores in an inverse opal assembly meet at an angle referred to as the neck angle θN (Fig. 15A(ii)). A liquid droplet forms an angle θC with a flat substrate (Fig. 15A(i)), and this angle is determined by the surface energies of the liquid, solid surface, and liquid/solid interface. The same liquid will only wet an inverse opal structure composed of the same material if θC < θN, enabling one to define the wetting characteristics by adjusting the surface chemistry of the inverse opal pores.77,78 Sintering an inverse opal assembly attached to a solid substrate results in anisotropy of the opals to varying degrees depending on the temperature used.239 The pore anisotropy results in the ability to control the neck angle of the pores resulting in a difference between the in-plane and out-of-plane neck angles. Liquids can only infiltrate and wet the structure if the contact angle of the liquid is below the neck angle of the pore, so the anisotropy in pore shape results in certain liquids only infiltrating within the plane (Fig. 15B).239 This unique tunability of the neck angle of colloidal structures adds an extra parameter that can be used when designing coatings where directional liquid wetting may be desired.240,241
 Fig. 15  Controlling bulk wettability in inverse opals. (A) Wetting conditions for inverse opals. (i) Liquids form a contact angle θC on a flat substrate. (ii) Two adjacent pores are separated by re-entrant geometry characterized by an angle, θN. Liquids will infiltrate an inverse opal assembly of a given material composed of pores connected at some angle θN if θC < θN.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (B) Inverse opals attached to a solid support are isotropic upon assembly, but after high temperature treatments they form anisotropic pores, causing liquids to wet only from the side.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (C) Chemical patterning of an inverse opal structure leads to varying degrees of bulk wettability depending on the liquid used, the neck angle of the pore, and the chemistry of the pores.78 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. 


Surface energy. 
In addition to roughness, colloidal particles allow for easy control of surface functionality either by employing particles that possess a particular surface chemistry or by modifying the particles or templated structure after assembly. As mentioned above, roughness enhances the inherent surface chemistry of the surface (whether the surface is hydrophobic or hydrophilic). The ease with which surface chemistry can be tuned lends itself to producing intricate wettability patterns on a single substrate. Because the contact angle (CA, or θC) influences filling of inverse opal pores along with the structure (neck angle), surface chemistry can be used to adjust the contact angle and thus the wetting properties. Indeed, inverse opal assemblies have been patterned with varying chemical functional groups so that immersion of the substrate in a particular liquid will result in liquid infiltration only in select regions.78Fig. 15C shows an example of an inverse opal assembly that was functionalized with multiple distinct surface functionalities. Selective liquid infiltration will occur in this structure depending on the criteria discussed above and described in Fig. 15A. Clearly, both pore geometry and surface chemistry are important for bulk liquid wetting. These types of surfaces are useful for encryption or sensing applications, as discussed in more detail in the following section.
Chemical patterning techniques can also be used in liquid infused surfaces. After chemical patterning, infusion with a lubricant leads to lubricant spreading in all the regions in a metastable state. However, the addition of a second immiscible liquid displaces the lubricant in regions where it has no chemical affinity to the underlying solid structure leading to a clear spatial confinement of the test liquid.95
The surface energy can also be controlled based on the material itself. Assembly conditions such as temperature242 and pH243 can determine the final wetting state of the surface. For example, particles with a hydrophobic core of polystyrene (PS) and a hydrophilic shell of poly(n-butyl acrylate–acrylic acid) (PBA–PAA) assembled at temperatures close to 20 °C have been shown to form a superhydrophilic surface, while an assembly temperature of 90 °C produces a superhydrophobic film.242 This has been attributed to phase separation of the polymer segments at varying assembly temperatures.244 Wetting states can also be modulated using stimuli-responsive materials such as polypyrrole245 and azobenzene244 incorporated into the colloidal assemblies. This type of selective wettability is useful for applications such as window treatments where environmental triggers such as heat or UV from sunlight can modulate whether surfaces repel liquids or are wetted by them.

4.2 Perspective
Colloids are capable of creating a diverse array of coatings despite their simplicity. These coatings can be made transparent using subwavelength colloids, while the use of larger colloidal particles can result in “colored” wetting behaviors. Creating the underlying geometry or surface roughness to support non-wetting states for various liquids can be achieved using conventional fabrication methods such as photolithography, electrochemical deposition, electrospinning, etc.;209 however, these methods often require expensive equipment, time consuming processes, limited substrate choice, and a feature size limit. CBPM have the potential to overcome these drawbacks: they do not generally require expensive instruments, they allow diverse materials and topographies to be coated, and they are inherently very small in dimension.
A one-size-fits-all coating method is not possible due to the abundance of wetting applications that exist with competing demands. Therefore, choosing a method that satisfies the design criteria for a specific application is critical. For example, an anti-fogging coating must be transparent, but a self-cleaning surface may not need to be. For most of the applications that require repellency, mechanical robustness is one of the most important criteria. Improvements have been made recently in this regard. The honeycomb inverse opal assemblies on glass are particularly robust, but these structures don't easily coat variable geometries or large surface areas without the presence of defects.95 Disordered colloidal assemblies can be sintered to improve mechanical strength.232 However, a colloid-based coating that can survive the wear and tear of daily use or hostile cleaning procedures remains elusive and could be the subject of future research.
Ordered colloidal assemblies are extremely useful for the precise control of structures on a wide variety of substrates. In addition to being low cost and easy to fabricate, the resulting assemblies are straightforward to model, and therefore it is possible to understand, predict, and systematically tailor the wetting behavior on these surfaces. Researchers have made significant strides to overcome the challenges of creating these coatings on multiple substrates and shapes, making progress to extend their use to applications such as anti-fogging, anti-icing, self-cleaning, or anti-microbial surfaces that was previously not possible. From an industrial standpoint, the techniques employed to create disordered coatings for selective wetting are far more scalable than ordered colloidal coatings. Coatings spanning large areas on windows and long pipelines are possible. These coatings can be transparent, can cover different materials, and can uniformly coat varying geometries. They can also be multifunctional and combine both wetting and sensing applications.
5. Sensing applications
The demand for reliable, simple, and inexpensive sensors stems from the need to monitor and record a broad range of conditions and analytes, including light intensity, temperature, pressure, pH, and humidity, as well as the presence of various chemicals and microorganisms in water, in food, and in vivo. As described in the Optics section above, CBPM with lattice dimensions on the length-scale of visible light can form a photonic crystal with structural color. This structural color allows them to be used as colorimetric sensors. In addition to photonic properties, CBPM can also have unique phononic properties that are useful for sensing applications.246 Colorimetric sensors are the most common type of CBPM sensors, and thus they are the focus of this part of the review.
A distinct optical response of a CBPM sensor can originate from dynamic variation of its different components, as shown in Fig. 16, namely from changes in the lattice constant, each constituent's refractive index, or additional components' spectral characteristics. A number of existing reviews cover various aspects of CBPM sensors, such as materials,247 fabrication,248–250 degree of order,251 and specific applications.57,252 Here, we discuss how CBPM provide control over the composition, surface chemistry, and structural hierarchy, which are all beneficial for sensing applications.
 Fig. 16  Overview of sensing parameters. (A) Possible physical, chemical, and biological stimuli. (B) Response mechanisms include: (i) change in the periodicity, where an increase in the lattice constant results in a red shift in the CBPM stopband; (ii) change in the refractive index contrast between the pores and the filler, where a decrease in refractive index contrast, accompanied by positive change in the average refractive index, results in a decrease in the intensity of the reflectance and a red shift in the peak; and (iii) change in the absorption intensity of an additive incorporated into the CBPM, where higher absorption intensity can result in an increase in the saturation of the observed color. 
Photonic effects can influence the photoinduced performance of entrapped functional components such as plasmonic nanoparticles. Indeed, efficient surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrates253 have been made from colloidal templating for enhancement of plasmonic photoexcitation within the partial photonic bandgap. In this section, we focus on sensing applications that rely on structural and chemical changes in CBPM. The design of substrates for localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) applications such as SERS has been discussed extensively elsewhere254–256 and is beyond the focus of the current review.
Colloid-templated sensors can take many forms. They can be confined in a thin film or formed as discrete superparticles, both of which can be spatially, chemically, and structurally patterned (as shown in Fig. 17). Because of these different forms, CBPM sensors can be made as standalone indicators or integrated within a complex device, such as an electrochemical cell,257,258 microfluidic device,259 or miniaturized spectrometer.143 Their sensing mechanism can be tailored through chemical functionalization to achieve a response to various environmental stimuli. In addition, CBPM sensors can be structurally patterned in order to obtain an explicit visual readout260 (Fig. 17A and B) or be molecularly imprinted to target specific molecules.261–266 The high surface area inherent to CBPM can lead to higher analyte–surface interactions with advantageous signal-to-noise ratios. Furthermore, the presence of macropores and stimuli-responsiveness allows the use of CBPM superparticles for multiple functions, for example to combine optical reporting with self-monitored drug release.267
 Fig. 17  CBPM colorimetric sensors with varying degrees of hierarchy designed to respond to various types of stimuli. (A) Spatially and chemically patterned silica inverse opal film for identification of liquids.77 The sample is shown wetted with ethanol (left), and methanol (right). Scale bar 5 mm. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (B) Spatially patterned CBPM with direct opal structure for sensing of vapors, formed by inkjet printing of solid silica colloids (the trunk) and mesoporous silica colloids (the leaves).260 The sample is shown (left) before, and (right) after exposure to ethanol vapors. Scale bar 5 mm. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (C) Temperature responsive spherical superparticles with inverse opal structure made of poly(n-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel.267 Scale bar 200 μm. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
5.1 Factors influencing sensing applications

Composition. 
Materials used for the fabrication of colorimetric CBPM sensors define their appearance, response mechanism, and ultimately possible applications. Changing the average refractive index, refractive index contrast, and spectral properties of adducts in a photonic crystal results in a color shift, as shown in Fig. 16 and discussed in the Optics section. The color shift induced by infiltration of liquids into the pores can be used for the identification of liquids.268,269 Infiltration of the pores with a material capable of changing its refractive index in a stimuli-responsive manner can be used as a strategy to design CBPM sensors. For example, hexaphenylsilole (HPS) can be reversibly transformed from crystalline to an amorphous solid upon exposure to vapors of volatile organic compounds (VOCs).270 This transformation is accompanied by an increase in the refractive index from 1.243 to 1.373 in the case of diethyl ether vapors. Infiltration of a silica inverse opal with HPS molecules thus enables a colorimetric response to the presence of VOCs, as shown in Fig. 18. The sensitivity of this system to the presence of VOCs is on the level of ∼1000 ppm. Similarly, a titania inverse opal infiltrated with polyaniline, which has a refractive index sensitive to its protonation state,271 creates a colorimetric indicator that responds to the presence of acidic or basic vapors (HCl and NH3).
 Fig. 18  Silica inverse opals infiltrated with hexaphenylsilole (HPS) change color upon exposure to vapors of diethyl ether due to a change in refractive index stemming from a crystalline to amorphous transition of HPS within the matrix.270 (A) Optical images of a sample upon exposure to air and diethyl ether vapor. (B) SEM image of a silica inverse opal film before infiltration with HPS. (C) Optical reflectance spectra obtained during exposure of the HPS-infiltrated inverse opal film to the vapors of diethyl ether for different amounts of time. Reused with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
As discussed in the Optics section, a broadband or selective absorber incorporated into the structure of CBPM can greatly influence its visual properties by decreasing the amount of incoherently scattered light or suppressing certain unwanted diffraction peaks.22,103 Moreover, the contrast-enhancing material can have stimuli-responsive absorption properties, which can be used for modulations of the appearance of a CBPM sensor. In the example shown in Fig. 19, an amorphous array of silica colloids incorporating silver ions and a small amount of titania nanoparticles can show different degrees of color saturation based on the oxidation state of silver.272 Photo-induced electron transfer between titania nanoparticles and silver ions was used to modulate the color saturation. The direction of the electron transfer is wavelength dependent, allowing the formation (under UV) or oxidation/decomposition (under visible light) of silver nanoparticles.
 Fig. 19  Photoinduced saturation changes in silica amorphous colloidal arrays.272 (A) Schematic representation of the photoinduced formation (under UV) or oxidation/decomposition (under visible light) of silver nanoparticles in the presence of titania nanoparticles leading to visual changes in the saturation of the structural color. (B) Changes in the intensity of absorption at 500 nm of the Ag/TiO2 composite film exposed to alternating UV (313 nm) and visible (>420 nm) light. (C) Samples after exposure to light: (left) the changes in the reflection spectra and the corresponding optical images of the colloidal amorphous array exposed to UV light of varying intensity; (right) the same samples after exposure to visible light for 12 hours. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
The colorimetric response of CBPM sensors based on soft stimuli-responsive materials can originate from changes in both the periodicity and the refractive indices of its constituents, as shown in Fig. 16B. Examples of soft materials used for CBPM sensors include hydrogels,178,261–265,273–280 electroactive polymers,176,281,282 elastomers,24,174,283 natural polymers,189,284–286 poly(ionic liquids),287–289 and metal–organic frameworks.290,291 Stimuli-induced shifts in the periodicity of these types of CBPM sensors can be induced by swelling or deformation that in turn results in the shift in the photonic stopband (Fig. 16B(i)) and can be detected visually or using a spectrometer.
Stimuli responsive hydrogels are among the most frequently used materials for the formation of photonic crystal-based sensors. Upon application of various stimuli, the hydrogel network can undergo a phase transition resulting in a volume change.292 Hydrogel CBPM are often formed by infiltration of a direct opal colloidal array with a predesigned mixture of monomers followed by a polymerization step (e.g. light exposure) and subsequent dissolution/etching of the colloidal template.292 In fact, the dissolution is not a necessary requirement for forming structural color sensors. Colloidal crystals embedded in hydrogels have been extensively developed during the last two decades with diverse chemistry and functions.293–306 These systems were well covered in a number of recent reviews;307,308 in the current discussion we focus on systems that benefit from colloid-templated interconnected pores. Among the advantages of porous structures over the embedded colloids are facile diffusion and shorter response times to various stimuli.274,309,310
Specific functional groups can be incorporated into the gel by premixing the corresponding co-monomers before polymerization or by modification of the CBPM after its formation.311,312 Hydrogel CBPM sensors based on such monomers as acrylamides and carboxylic acids are capable of detecting changes in pH, ion concentration, and heat.178,274,313 Moreover, incorporation of specific target molecules and enzymes allows label-free detection of glucose,310 enzymatic activity,279 and antibodies276 with remarkable sensitivity. For example, the level of detection that was achieved using a CBPM assay for acetylcholinesterase is of 5 mU mL−1 (U = “enzyme units”).279 This level is comparable to other existing highly sensitive methods such as those based on gold nanoparticles,314 but the CBPM indicator is more reliable, particularly in complex solutions.279 An example of a pH-responsive inverse opal hydrogel sensor with high selectivity and sensitivity to mercury ions is shown in Fig. 20.278
 Fig. 20  Hydrogel inverse opal for pH and mercury ion sensing.278 (A) SEM image of the structure. An optical image of the sample is shown in the inset. (B) Schematic diagram of the pH and Hg2+ sensing mechanism. (C) The diffraction wavelength shift as a function of the ion concentration for various ions in aqueous solution. (D) Comparison of the diffraction wavelength shifts for various ions at 1 mM concentration, showing selectivity for Hg2+. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
An additional method to introduce binding specificity to hydrogel materials is molecular imprinting.261–266 To generate an imprinted CBPM sensor matrix, the template molecule is pre-complexed to the monomer before the polymerization step. In the next step, the template molecule is removed, exposing a highly selective recognition site. Using this method, highly sensitive and selective label-free colorimetric assays were demonstrated for applications such as amino-acid chiral recognition,266 as well as detection of vanillin,315 various antibiotics,262 and toxins263 at sub-micromolar concentrations.
Incorporation of multiple elements in a single CBPM sensor can result in multi-responsiveness, multiple reporting mechanisms, and multi-functionality. For example, incorporation of glucose oxidase and a conductive polymer into an inverse opal hydrogel resulted in a glucose sensitive system with both optical and electric readouts.258 Similarly, systems responsive to both temperature and acids/bases can be obtained, for example by copolymerizing N-isopropylacrylamide and methacrylic acid.313 Moreover, these systems can be further modified with light responsive (e.g. azobenzene) or magnetic field responsive (e.g. iron oxide nanoparticles) functions.178
CBPM sensors can also be made of natural materials such as proteins and polysaccharides, for example silk fibroin,284,285 chitosan,286 and cellulose.316 The colorimetric changes in these systems were shown to result from changes in the refractive index contrast, average refractive index contrast, and swelling. Thus, silk inverse opals have been made that are sensitive to infiltration with water,285 various concentrations of glucose in aqueous solutions, and to humidity.284 Chitosan inverse opals286 were made that are sensitive to various organic solvents, pH values, and ionic strengths. For example, the reflectance peak of the chitosan inverse opal shifts almost linearly with increasing concentration of various alcohols in water, in the entire range from pure water to pure alcohol, with an overall shift of ∼100 nm. Due to their biocompatibility and eco-friendly character, CBPM sensors made of natural materials can be beneficial for biomedical applications and fabrication of disposable sensors.


Porosity. 
High surface area and interconnectivity of the pores are important properties of CBPM for sensing applications. The high surface area allows enhanced interaction of the matrix with analytes resulting in an enhanced signal. The interconnectivity of macropores allows facile diffusion within the structure, even of large analytes,317 and shortens the response time. For example, the equilibration time of inverse opal hydrogel based sensors can be considerably shortened (seconds vs. minutes) compared to their nonporous analogs based on direct colloidal structures embedded into hydrogels.318
Infiltration of liquids into the pores of CBPM changes the refractive index contrast and the average refractive index and thus results in a change in the appearance of the photonic structure.77,78,269 This property can be used for measurements of the refractive index of the liquids and their identification, for example for WO3 inverse opals.269 However, since the refractive index of common liquids is in a narrow range between ∼1.33–1.50, the change in color and the intensity of the reflection spectrum is not always large enough to be easily observable by the naked eye. As discussed in the Wetting section, the geometry of the pores of the structure and the intrinsic contact angle of the liquids with the surface material together control liquid infiltration into silica inverse opal pores. Therefore, modification of the surface of the pores with functional molecules can result in selective infiltration of various liquids, as shown in Fig. 15C. The high uniformity of the pores originates from co-assembling the colloids and matrix material, and it results in a narrow threshold for infiltration. In addition, the surface chemistry can be patterned to achieve a combinatorial wetting sensor319 with an easy-to-read colorimetric response (as shown on Fig. 17A). Stimuli-responsive functional groups, such as Disperse Red 1 acrylate, can reveal the history of the sensor's exposure to light. Such a system has high potential for use as forgery-resistant and age-reporting labeling.320 Another way to record the history of exposure of the sensor to a stimulus is to cause a deformation in the CBPM structure. For example, exposure of silica inverse opals to high temperatures can lead to anisotropic structures, resulting in a predictable color change and complex wetting properties.99,239
Incorporation of mesopores into CBPM can result in a system that responds colorimetrically to infiltration with gases due to changes in the average refractive index of the photonic crystal. For example, Fig. 17B shows spatially patterned CBPM sensors made with mesoporous silicon dioxide colloids fabricated through inkjet printing for visual detection of vapors of organic solvents.260 The tree trunk and the leaves are made of solid and mesoporous silica colloids, respectively. The size of the colloids was chosen so that they appear similar in the absence of vapors but develop different colors upon exposure to organic vapors such as ethanol.260 Furthermore, mesopores produced through molecular imprinting of CBPM made of stimuli-responsive hydrogels, as discussed earlier, can result in a label-free colorimetric sensor to various analytes with high specificity.261–266


Degree of order. 
In addition to directly generating color from their structure, photonic CBPM sensors can substantially enhance the fluorescence signal of organic molecules incorporated inside the pores when the absorption spectrum of the chromophore is aligned with the stopband of the structure. Consequently, the signal-to-noise ratio is increased in the presence of fluorescently labeled analytes321 or those capable of quenching a fluorescence signal.322,323 For example, quenching of the fluorescence signal in the presence of vapors of nitroaromatics can be detected with enhanced sensitivity.322,323
As discussed in the Optics and fabrication sections, the design of colored CBPM classically assumes crystalline arrangements of colloids with long-range order, analogous to the naturally iridescent opal gemstone. Amorphous arrays generally exhibit lower saturation; however, when a broadband absorber, such as melanin,5 silver nanoparticles,180 or iron oxide,183 is incorporated into these systems, bright angle-independent colors can be achieved.180,182 Consequently, stimuli-responsive structurally-colored amorphous arrays have become a popular topic in recent years. One recent example of a light-responsive amorphous array is shown in Fig. 19.272 Additional examples include colorimetric indicators that respond to temperature,183 electric field,183 and osmotic pressure.185 Due to their angle-independent color, disordered CBPM colorimetric sensors simplify the readout step and thus are advantageous when the sensors are being used as stand-alone indicators.


Hierarchy and patterning. 
CBPM sensors can be designed at many length scales and can adopt different architectural features. The ability to control the organization of CBPM architectures at many hierarchical levels is important for obtaining systems with dimensions appropriate for specific applications (i.e. films or superparticles), with explicit reporting signals (for example in Fig. 17A and B),260 and with multi-analyte sensing capability.324 Multi-analyte cross-reactive arrays combining CBPM elements, for example based on molecularly imprinted hydrogels, can be used for colorimetric detection of trace amounts of toxins and pollutants in complex mixtures even with high background signal from the other components.263,324 An array sensitive to brominated flame-retardants, commonly used as additives in consumer products, is shown in Fig. 21.324 Monitoring of brominated flame-retardants at low levels normally requires relatively complex chromatographic analyses. The use of molecularly-imprinted spatially patterned inverse opal arrays combines low-cost fabrication of the sensors, simple and fast analysis of the results, and the ability to detect picomolar amounts, comparable to chromatographic methods. As discussed earlier, the hierarchical network of interconnected macropores in the CBPM allows facile diffusion of the analytes resulting in enhanced signal and quick response.
 Fig. 21  Spatially patterned molecularly-imprinted inverse opal array for the detection of poly-brominated diphenylethers.324 (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the array. (B) Molecular structures of the analytes used (BPA, BIP, DBDE, TBDE, and TBBPA). (C) Optical response of the BIP-imprinted sensor to DBDE. (D) Optical response of TBBPA-imprinted sensor to TBDE. (E) 2D principal component analysis plot for the identification of TBDE and three different mixtures by the molecularly-imprinted sensor array, where mixture 1 is TBDE and BPA, mixture 2 is TBDE, BPA, and TBBPA, and mixture 3 is TBDE, BPA, TBBPA and BIP. (D) 3D principal component analysis plots for the identification of each analyte (TBDE: 1 × 10−12 M, BPA: 1 × 10−10 M, TBBPA: 1 × 10−10 M, BIP: 1 × 10−10 M and DBDE: 1 × 10−10 M) by the MIPPs sensor array. PC1, PC2, and PC3 represent the principal components calculated. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
In addition to multiple analyte sensing, hierarchy can be achieved using superparticles, which have been used as dispersible indicators for various stimuli. For example, spherical inverse opal superparticles based on poly(ionic liquids) were used for recognition of various ions and solvents,288,289 and protein-modified silica superparticles were used as coding carriers in multiplex immunoassays.325 Additionally, the high surface area of the pores can be used for adsorption and triggered release of drugs in addition to sensing.267 As shown in Fig. 17C, temperature responsive spherical inverse opal superparticles change their color due to a change in the periodicity of their lattice when exposed to different temperatures. Preloaded with fluorescently labeled dextran molecules, these superparticles can be used for self-monitored temperature-triggered drug release based on a temperature-induced shrinkage. The formation of the superparticles and the kinetic profile of the release of the fluorescently-labeled dextran is shown in Fig. 22. CBPM superparticles can also be used as a dispersible cell culture substrate capable of reporting on the interaction of cells with biomaterials in a single culture environment.326 Because their color originates from their structure, the signal from CBPM microcarriers is stable.
 Fig. 22  Temperature-responsive hydrogel inverse opal superparticle sensors with controlled drug release.267 (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and controlled drug release of the particles. (B) Release profiles of fluorescently-labelled dextran from the particles under different temperature cycles. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 

5.2 Perspective
Colloidal templating is the most facile and developed up-to-date approach for obtaining photonic crystal arrays capable of providing a colorimetric response while using simple, colorless, inexpensive, inert, and non-toxic stimuli-responsive materials. The state of the art CBPM sensor can compete with considerably more sophisticated analytical instruments in providing specific responses to various physical, chemical, or biological stimuli. A key advantage of CBPM sensors is their modularity of design, allowing combinations of various architectures, structural materials, surface chemistries, and degrees of order. CBPM sensors can have very small physical dimensions, be remotely monitored, and in principle do not require any additional optical, chemical, or electronic modules, which improves their reliability and security. Compared to their 1D and 2D analogs, such as Bragg stacks, gratings, and crystal fibers, CBPM sensors have greater sensitivity due to their higher surface area available for interaction with analytes and shorter response time due to facile diffusion through the pores. Finally, the response of CBPM-based sensors can be designed to be reversible or irreversible, capable of monitoring and/or recording the history of their environment.
CBPM sensors have technological potential as easy-to-use and inexpensive sensing devices, which has motivated intense research in the last few decades. On a fundamental level, a better understanding of the processes governing the self-assembly of colloidal particles on substrates and in droplets is still necessary, particularly as the field moves to larger scale production. On a more applied level, a great variety of sensing approaches utilizing CBPM sensors are being explored, fostering their novel applications with additional stimuli responses, as well as improved sensitivity, specificity, reproducibility, and longevity.
6. Catalytic applications
Heterogeneous catalysis is of paramount importance in many areas of the chemical and energy industries including coal, oil and gas refining; polymer production; environmental pollutant degradation; and manufacturing of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals.327 Having a solid-phase catalyst improves catalyst recovery and product separation. The great majority of practical heterogeneous catalysts consist of metal oxides serving as solid catalyst or catalyst support, and their design for optimum performance for a given process requires a consideration of a combination of chemical, structural, and mechanical properties. CBPM can be made with high surface area, interconnected porosity, and control over material composition, all of which are important for developing catalysts having high activity and selectivity, thermal stability, and superior mass transport (Fig. 23).58,79
 Fig. 23  Schematic summarizing the advantageous properties provided by CBPM for the design of an efficient heterogeneous catalyst. 
CBPM possess many advantageous characteristics and degrees of freedom that enable them to be designed for a wide range of catalytic applications (Fig. 23). They exhibit architectural tunability easily achievable via hierarchical templating and characterized by a porous network where many factors can be controlled, including wall thickness, pore size, pore interconnectivity, and shape. The incorporation of hierarchical porosity using colloidal-crystal templating in combination with soft templates (e.g. surfactants) offers minimal diffusive limitations to mass transport by macropores (pore diameter ≥∼30 nm), and high surface area for active site dispersion over micro and/or mesopores (pore diameter ≤1.5 nm and 1.5–30 nm, respectively).79 Additionally, templated structures are used almost exclusively in order to increase the macroporosity and decrease the amount of material used. CBPM assembly methods allow good control over the composition and incorporation of functional materials (e.g. metal nanoparticles), important for achieving improved catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability of the resulting catalyst.
During the last decade, much effort has been put into developing CBPM for various catalytic processes including oxidation and reduction of industrial and automotive harmful byproducts, chemical fuels catalysis, biomass upgrading, photocatalysis, and water splitting.58,64,79 For example, CBPM have been used in such environmentally important catalytic processes as removal of CO, uncombusted hydrocarbons (e.g. soot), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emitted from transportation and industrial activities.58,79,328 Various supported noble metals and single or mixed metal oxides have been used for this purpose. Interconnected porosity on multiple length scales and low tortuosity are both especially important for liquid phase catalysis involving large bulky molecules in processes such as chemical fuel catalysis (including crude oil cracking, isomerization, and reforming), photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds, and biomass upgrading.64,79,329 The importance of structural order (periodicity) varies for the different types of catalytic reactions. For example, ordered CBPM, widely referred to in the literature as three-dimensionally ordered macroporous materials (3DOM) or inverse opals, are of particular interest in photocatalysis due to their photonic properties as well as their superior mass transfer through interconnected pore channels.67,330
This section will focus on the application of CBPM to distinct catalytic reactions, with emphasis on the advantages of CBPM structural parameters for catalyst systems, namely the ability to control the composition, porosity, and periodicity of the structure. Table 1 lists specific examples of colloid-based porous catalysts that have been fabricated and studied, focusing on the past four years. While the material composition is an inherent characteristic of any type of catalyst, the additional advantages achieved with CBPM such as mass transport and periodicity can play a significant role in specific catalytic reactions and will be discussed in separate sections below. We summarize how the challenges and limitations of specific catalytic reactions can be addressed using CBPM, discussing both highly ordered 3D architectures and low periodicity/irregular systems generated from colloidal templating.
Table 1 Recent reports describing diverse CBPM-based catalysts used in various types of catalytic reactions




Catalytic transformations
Active catalyst and support in colloid-based catalytic systems




Environmental catalysis


CO and toluene oxidation
CeO2;331 Au/Mn2O3;332 Pr6O11;333 Tb4O7;333 Au/Co3O4;334 Au/Mn2O3/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3;328 Co3O4/Eu0.6Sr0.4FeO3;335 Au/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3336






Soot combustion
Pt/MO (M = Mn, Co, Fe, Ni, Cu);337 Pt@CeO2/CeO2;338 Au@Pt/Ce0.8Zr0.2O2;339 Au/LaFeO3;340,341 Au/CeO2;342 Au–Pt/Ce0.8Zr0.2O2;343 Pt/MnCeO;344 Al2O3/CeO2;345 Au/LaFeO3340,341






NOx reduction
Ce0.75Zr0.2M0.05O2−δ (M = Fe, Cu, Mn, Co);346 CeO2/TiO2347






Methane oxidation
Pt/Ce0.6Zr0.3Y0.1O2;348 Pd/LaMnO3;349 Ag/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3350






Chemical fuel synthesis


Isomerization
Pt/SiO2, Al2O3, TiO2, Nb2O5, Ta2O5, ZrO2351






Cracking (oil)
Al2O3/SiO2342






Fischer–Tropsch
Co@Cu/SiO2–La2O2;352 Fe2O3353






Biodiesel production
Mg–Al hydrotalcites;354 Al2O3-hydrotalcites/SiO2355










Selective organic transformations


Selective oxidation
Pd/SiO2;356 Al/SiO2;357 VO/SiO2358






Suzuki cross-coupling
Pd/SnO2359






Photocatalysis


CO2 reduction
CeO2/TiO2;360 Au/TiO2;361






Oxidation of organics
TiO2;362–366 TiO2/SiO2;367 Fe3+/TiO2;368 Ti3+/TiO2;369 N/TiO2;370 C/TiO2;371 K5[Co(H2O)PW11O39]/TiO2;372 CuO/TiO2;373 ZrO2/TiO2;374 SnO2/TiO2;375 Au/TiO2;98,376 Ag/TiO2;377,378 Ag/Bi2O3–TiO2;379 ZnO;378,380 BiFeO3;381 Bi2WO6;382 W10O34/Mg2Al;383 BiVO4;384 Au, Pt, Pd/AgBr/BiVO4;385 InVO4;386 CrxOyTiO2/SiO2387






Water splitting
α-Fe2O3;388 TiO2;70 Au/TiO2;389 TaON;390 WO3/BiVO4;391 WO3;392,393 graphene/Fe2O3;394 Cu2O3;395 quantum dot/TiO2;396,397 Mo/BiVO425




6.1 Factors influencing CBPM catalysts

Surface area and composition. 
The composition and active surface area of a catalyst are crucial to its performance, particularly for the removal of industrial and automotive byproducts (e.g. CO, soot, NOx, VOCs). Controlling composition provides thermal stability and chemical reactivity (e.g. selectivity, large oxygen storage capacity), while high surface area ensures catalytic efficiency. Colloidal templating creates porous materials with facile control in composition and morphology with wide suitability for many metal precursors, allowing their use in a variety of catalytic reactions.
The intrinsic catalytic activity of metal oxides can be enhanced by incorporation of noble metal nanoparticles (e.g. Au, Pt, Pd).398 Because the composition and additives can be controlled independently in CBPM structures, a variety of materials have been investigated (see Table 1). For example, Wei et al. fabricated hierarchical macro/meso porous catalysts for soot combustion from platinum nanoparticles (NPs) supported on various transition metal oxides (with M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu).337 The resulting materials possessed a well-defined macroporous structure with mesopores of ∼6 nm and Pt NPs (2.9–3.5 nm) highly dispersed on the inner walls of the macropores. The strong metal–support interactions and unique porous architecture in these systems improved the contact efficiency between catalyst and soot leading to higher catalytic activity for diesel soot combustion.
The incorporation of metal NPs into inverse opal scaffolds can also be used to enhance photocatalytic properties. The plasmonic properties of metal NPs can couple with the semiconductor properties of the support. Under visible-light illumination, plasmon-excited hot electrons in noble metal NPs can transfer to the conduction band of an adjacent semiconductor, leading to charge transfer/separation and subsequent chemical reactions.63,399 For example, TiO2 inverse opals incorporating Au98,361,376,400 and Ag377,378 NPs have shown improved photocatalytic dye degradation and CO2 reduction.361 This effect can be strongly enhanced by engineering periodicity at the right wavelength through colloidal templating, and it will be discussed in more detail below.
TiO2 photocatalysts also benefit from other aspects of control over the composition. Titania suffers from a high rate of charge carrier recombination and a relatively wide band gap (3.2 eV), limiting the light absorption to UV irradiation, which accounts for less than 5% of the total energy of the solar spectrum. To overcome these drawbacks and improve photocatalytic activity, multiple components are often incorporated to tune the band structures and electron–hole separation and transportation.330,401 Many studies have attempted to introduce metal-ions368,369 or nonmetals370 as dopants; and dyes,402 quantum dots,396 or carbon371 as sensitizers or for surface modification.372 Coupling TiO2 with other transition metal oxides can enhance the photocatalytic performance via improving the charge separation of photogenerated charges and extending the photoresponse region, thus facilitating the degradation of organic dyes and CO2 reduction (Table 1).360,373–375 For example, Li et al. demonstrated excellent activity for the photocatalytic degradation of crystal violet using a composite Ag/Bi2O3–TiO2 macroporous inverse opal with mesoporous walls by employing different radiation sources such as UV, simulated solar light, and microwave-assisted irradiation.379 Compared to TiO2, the light absorption edge of ordered macro/meso porous Ag/Bi2O3–TiO2 structures was red-shifted by about 100 nm into the visible region. The catalytic activity of this ordered composite structure was significantly higher than that of TiO2 nanopowder (P25), Bi2O3, and disordered Ag/Bi2O3–TiO2 and was retained after three cycles. In addition to TiO2-based inverse opal photocatalysts, novel visible-light-responsive materials have been reported including both single semiconductor materials378–382,384,386 and heterostructured systems (Table 1).333,383
In the past few years, several authors developed rare earth oxide-based catalysts for CO, toluene, and soot oxidation.333 Among the rare earth metal oxides, ceria (CeO2) is one of the most extensively investigated as an environmental catalyst due to its high oxygen storage capacity, good sulfur-resistance, and excellent redox properties.403 However, a major drawback of pure CeO2 is low thermal stability causing sintering and loss of its redox and oxygen storage properties. Various ceria-based mixed metal oxides including Al–Ce,345 Ce–Ti,347 and Ce–Zr346 have been used as active catalysts for the oxidation of CO, methane, soot, and NOx. Among these binary compounds, Ce1−xZrxO2 (x = 0.1–0.9) is considered to be one of the key components in auto-exhaust treatment catalysts due to its high oxygen storage/release capacity and good thermal stability. Recent studies have produced a variety of colloid-based porous Ce–Zr binary oxides and composite structures incorporating metal NPs.339,343,344 For example, Arandiyam et al. fabricated 3D ordered macro/mesoporous Pt/Ce0.6Zr0.3Y0.1O2 (CZY) catalysts for methane combustion using PMMA as hard template and pluronic (P123) as surfactant (Fig. 24A and B).348 The excellent catalytic activity of Pt/CZY was ascribed to an increase in surface area due to its unique macro/mesoporous structure as well as its high concentration of adsorbed oxygen, good low-temperature reducibility, and strong catalyst-support interaction due to composition.
 Fig. 24  Fabrication of colloid-based hierarchically porous catalysts incorporating metal NP for oxidation of methane. (A) Representative SEM image of 3D ordered macro/mesoporous Ce0.6Zr0.3Y0.1O2 (CZY) embedded with PtNP (1.1 wt%). (B) Methane conversion versus temperature over the macroporous CZY, x wt% Pt/CZY, and Bulk CZY catalysts.348 Reused with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
In addition, the colloid-based templating approach has been used to prepare high-surface area perovskite-type oxides (ABO3) with porous architectures.340,341 It was reported that doping with rare earth metals (e.g. La, Eu) and/or loading a certain amount of transition metal oxides onto colloid-based ABO3 supports can enhance the catalytic performance for toluene oxidation.328,333,335 In addition, the loading of noble metal NPs on ABO3 generates catalysts with higher catalytic oxidation activity.328,331,349,350 For example, Au NPs supported on colloid-based porous La0.6Sr0.4MnO3 (LSMO) outperformed undoped LSMO structures in the oxidation of CO and toluene.336 Similarly, Pd NP supported LaMnO3349 and Ag NP supported LaSrMnO3350 demonstrated improved catalytic activity toward methane oxidation.


Mass transport/porosity. 
Poor mass transfer of bulky molecules and pore blockage represent significant challenges for liquid phase heterogeneous catalysts, particularly for crude oil cracking, selective organic transformations, and biomass upgrading. For example, catalytic cracking of crude oil is vital for the large-scale generation of commodity compounds. The design of hydrothermally stable materials with an interconnected macro-meso-micropore system remains a great challenge.342
Implementation of catalytic materials exhibiting hierarchical and interconnected macro-mesoporous networks such as CBPM can enhance both internal mass and heat transfer and active site dispersion and accessibility, particularly for such low temperature, liquid phase chemistry as selective transformations of organic molecules. Higher catalytic activity of CBPM systems over their purely mesoporous counterparts has been demonstrated in selective oxidation,356–358 Suzuki coupling,359 and epoxidation reactions.404 For example, Parlett et al. investigated the effect of support architecture on Pd-catalyzed aerobic selective oxidation of sterically challenging allylic alcohols over hierarchically ordered macro/mesoporous silica systems fabricated using pluronic (P123) and polystyrene (PS) colloids as respective meso- and macropore directing agents (Fig. 25).356 The hierarchically porous Pd NP/macro-meso-SiO2 structures outperformed mesoporous analogues by dramatically improving in-pore diffusion and access to active sites containing well-stabilized palladium oxide NP.
 Fig. 25  Hierarchically ordered colloid-based macro/mesoporous (MM) silica (SBA-15) structures loaded with Pd NP (Pd/MM-SBA-15) demonstrate enhanced catalytic activity in the aerobic selective oxidation of bulky allylic alcohols to their aldehydes. (A) SEM and TEM images of MM-SBA-15 and corresponding 0.78 wt% Pd/MM-SBA-15. (B) Impact of interconnected macroporosity on the oxidation of farnesol and phytol over Pd/MM-SBA-15 versus Pd/SBA-15.356 Reused with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
Mass transport within CBPM is particularly useful for biomass conversion. Biomass conversion into fuel and chemicals is becoming increasingly popular as a way to diversify energy sources. It is estimated that biomass could provide about 25% of global energy requirements.329,405,406 Agricultural crops, waste from food processing, litter from animal feedlots and many other sources of biomass can be converted into fuel gas, bio-alcohol, or biodiesel, or into a syngas from which chemicals and fuels can be synthesized. Biodiesel in particular has emerged as one of the best potential renewable energy sources to replace current petroleum-based transportation fuel.329 Although recent studies have proven the environmental and economical benefits of biodiesel production via heterogeneous catalysis, it remains challenging to develop suitable heterogeneous catalyst architectures that will facilitate the diffusion of viscous bio-oil feedstock during catalytic conversion. Most materials described to date exhibit micro and/or mesoporosity, which are not optimal for accommodating bulky triglyceride derivatives. In this respect, colloid-templated hierarchical macro/mesoporous materials are good candidates. For example, hydrotalcites (HTs) have been used in the fabrication of colloid-based macroporous structures for the transesterification of triglycerides with methanol.354 HTs are a class of naturally occurring, solid base catalyst materials possessing layered double hydroxide structures, with the general formula [[M(II)1−xM(III)x(OH)2]x+(An−x/n)mH2O]x+, where 0.17 < x < 0.33. These materials are considered good candidates for biodiesel formation under mild conditions due to their high activity and robustness in the presence of water and fatty acids.407 It was demonstrated that HTs with a macroporous–mesoporous architecture have superior mass-transport characteristics leading to exceptional performance.355


Order and periodicity. 
Depending on the specific catalytic reaction, the degree of structural perfection and long-range order can have varying importance. While structural order and photonic aspects were found to play a significant role in the enhancement of photocatalytic efficiency, the requirements for structural perfection are much less strict for other catalytic systems. Nevertheless, the regularity of the structures can improve catalytic properties and contribute to better quantitative modeling of catalytic behavior.
Compared to disordered porous structures, inverse opal-based photocatalyst systems provide not only high surface area, but also exhibit many optical properties desirable for photocatalytic enhancement, such as a photonic stopband, light scattering, and slow photon effects. Harvesting and conversion of solar energy into chemical energy using photocatalysts is one of the most promising strategies toward the development of renewable energy technologies, environmental protection, and remediation.330,408 Two key requirements of efficient photocatalysts are: (i) effective harvesting of solar energy, and (ii) facile separation and transportation of charge carriers. Inverse opal structures have been extensively investigated for photocatalytic applications in recent years and a number of reviews have been published;64,330,346,401 most studies have focused on semiconductor photocatalysts for water splitting, degradation or oxidation of organic contaminants, and CO2 conversion (Table 1).
Among semiconductor metal-oxide photocatalysts, titania (TiO2) has been the most investigated photocatalytic material due to its high reactivity, low cost, chemical stability and non-toxicity.408 The enhanced photocatalytic activity in TiO2 inverse opals has been demonstrated for efficient photodegradation of various organic compounds362,364–366 and stems from enhanced absorption due to the “slow photon” effect, where certain wavelengths of light near the photonic peak spend more time in the structure. In addition, the synergy of the slow photon effect and the hierarchically porous structure of the inverse opal itself results in even higher photocatalytic activity due to enhanced surface area.363,409 Recently, enhanced photocatalytic activity for degradation of organic compounds has been demonstrated in highly ordered meso/macroporous silica inverse opals impregnated with TiO2 nanoparticles.367
Ordered macroporous structures for photo-induced solar fuel production, such as hydrogen from water splitting, have received much attention in recent years (Table 1). Typically, the semiconductor is incorporated into a photoelectrochemical cell or used as a powder suspended in solution. Many studies demonstrated that the inverse opal morphology has a profound effect on photoelectrocatalytic performance. Various semiconductor photo-anode materials with inverse opal structures have been used (Table 1). For example, Zhou et al. demonstrated enhancement in the photocurrent density and photoelectrochemical water splitting efficiency for 3D ordered macroporous Mo:BiVO4 inverse opal structures as compared to the porous but disordered counterpart (Fig. 26).25 This enhancement was attributed to the synergistic effects of compositional and structural optimization, leading to an improvement in charge transport properties.
 Fig. 26  Inverse opals for electrochemical water splitting. (A) Ideal schematic representation of the expected advantages of integrative Mo:BiVO4 macro-mesoporous photoelectrodes. (B) SEM image (top view) of Mo:BiVO4 inverse opal. (C) Photocurrent density stability of various films at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The films for measurement are before illumination, and after illumination for 5 h, respectively. (D) Enhancement factors of solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies (ηSTH).25 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 

6.2 Perspective
Regardless of the specific catalytic application, CBPM architecture is an important but somewhat unexplored parameter in the field of heterogeneous catalysis. In general, much better catalytic performance was demonstrated for ordered CBPM, inverse opals, than for their disordered macroporous, mesoporous and bulk counterparts in various catalytic reactions, especially in the liquid phase. The use of the unique properties of CBPM in different areas of catalysis is somewhat uneven. Hundreds of reports have been published on their photocatalytic applications in the past few years, while only a few reports exist on their utilization as catalytic supports in biomass upgrading. Given their superior structural properties for mass transport, it is surprising that the use of CBPM as catalyst supports is not more widespread in liquid phase catalytic processes involving bulky molecules. For example, in biomass transformation, the design of pore networks with interconnecting macro and mesoporous channels has clear beneficial effects on reaction rates by improving in-pore diffusional properties and therefore should be further pursued. Moreover, the surface functionalization of CBPM using enzymes to improve selectivity is a largely unexplored area.410–412
Practical applications of CBPM and their more widespread use will require more systematic studies and optimization of fabrication processes to address challenges in large-scale fabrication. The conventional synthesis of CBPM involves the infiltration of a matrix material, typically a sol–gel solution of a metal-oxide precursor, into a sacrificial colloidal crystal template, followed by its removal to produce an inverse inorganic porous material. This conventional infiltration method does produce highly ordered structures at small scales, but also generates a number of defects such as cracks, domain boundaries and over-layer coatings at larger length scales. While for some catalytic applications long-range order is less important for efficient performance, the fabrication of crack-free, ordered domains over significantly large areas is crucial for photocatalytic applications. Vapor phase deposition (such as atomic layer deposition) avoids the problems of liquid infiltration, but is time consuming and expensive. Some efforts have been made to control the cracking and domain orientation of colloidal crystal films through control of the evaporative deposition conditions, co-assembly methods,59 and pre-sintering of the particles. However, the fabrication of crack-free inverse opals of arbitrary composition remains a challenge, and further studies should be done to expand the materials space of highly ordered structures.
Regardless of the importance of structural perfection, low quality, disordered CBPM can complicate their quantitative comparison with non-structured or mesoporous/microporous analogues. In addition, fabrication of dispersible CBPM (e.g. spherical photonic micro-particles) can be beneficial for many catalytic applications and is largely unexplored.363,401,413
The control over metal NP size, distribution, and stability using a simple synthetic approach represents an additional challenge. Non-uniform distribution of functional particles can result in the formation of hot spots and compromise the uniform distribution of temperature and concentration profiles in the reactor channel. Loosely bound metal NPs will reduce catalyst durability. Different strategies of metal NP immobilization have been developed including impregnation, adsorption based on electrostatic interaction, in situ synthesis, or co-assembly with metal oxide precursors. The post-modification methods, such as impregnation or adsorption of preformed metal NPs, generates structures with uniform, high accessibility metal NPs. However, they are not very stable and are prone to sintering, especially in high-temperature catalytic reactions. In addition, the presence of capping ligands used for metal NP stabilization is undesirable for catalytic applications, and they often must be removed by annealing treatments, which generally results in loss of diameter control due to particle agglomeration. Oxidative removal (ozone treatment) can lead to changes in the surface chemistry of the metal. In addition, to achieve high loading, pre-immobilization treatment is required (e.g. oxidative or thermal activation or surface functionalization to introduce a chemical linker group). Co-assembly and in situ methods produce much more stable metal NP systems, but suffer from non-uniform size and low accessibility.
Nevertheless, these results highlight the significance of colloid-based ordered macro-mesoporous architectures as promising catalytic systems. In particular, the compositional and morphological control of CBPM provides the ability to create more purpose-designed catalysts with highly efficient performance.
7. Electrode applications
Electrochemical processes are fundamental to a vast range of applications, particularly for energy storage and conversion. Because electrochemistry occurs at the interface of an electrode and an electrolyte, the electrode geometry has a large influence on rates and capacities. Using CBPM, the geometry and composition can be controlled across multiple length scales, providing an excellent handle over electrode geometry for various electrode applications such as capacitors, batteries, fuel cells, and solar cells.
Capacitors and batteries both store electrical energy. Capacitors or supercapacitors rapidly store and release energy by separating charge across a dielectric or electrolyte. Higher energy storage is possible with higher capacitance values, but the capacitance is dependent on the two electrodes having large surface area and short separation distances between them. Batteries also store energy, by moving electrons from the negative electrode to the positive electrode; however, in batteries, the energy is stored in chemical bonds rather than in the electric field. Thus, a chemical change is incorporated, such as Li+ intercalating into transition metal compounds in Li-ion batteries. During discharge, this chemical energy is released, reforming the initial compounds and producing a current.
While capacitors and batteries store electric energy, fuel cells and solar cells instead generate electric current by converting other forms of energy. In a fuel cell, a chemical fuel is consumed to produce the current, much like during discharge of a primary (non-rechargeable) battery. In solar cells, absorbed light is converted into electric current; in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), light absorption is enhanced by adding a photosensitizer such as a dye molecule to the semiconductor surface. Photoelectrochemical cells, a type of catalyst system, take this one step further by converting the incident light energy into chemical bonds for storage.
All of these applications are summarized in Table 2. Because they are based on electrochemical processes, they necessitate the need for control over the electrode structure on the 10 nm and 100 nm scale,414 making CBPM ideal candidates.
Table 2 Comparison of various electrodes that can be made with CBPM




Electrode type
Surface area?a
Porosity?a
Order?a
Energy input
Energy output
Critical factor
Ref.





a For each type, the importance of various attributes of CBPM are noted as either very important (✓✓), important (✓), or not important (✗). Additionally, the energy input and output for each type is listed as well as their function.





Capacitor
✓✓
✓
✗
Electrical
Electrical
Surface area

58, 73, 415, 417, 418







Battery
✓
✓✓
✗
Chemical (discharge)
Electrical (discharge)
Diffusion

26, 62, 68, 74, 420–431, 464–466







Fuel cell
✓✓
✓✓
✗
Chemical
Electrical
Diffusion

58, 433, 434







Solar cell
✓✓
✓
✓
Light
Electrical
Charge separation

58, 65–67, 71, 72, 201, 393, 432, 435–439, 441–447, 449–457, 462





There are three key advantages of CBPM for making electrodes for applications: high surface area, interconnected porosity, and visible light control. These factors apply to all CBPM and are shown schematically in Fig. 27 for inverse opals in particular. For example, with a high surface area (Fig. 27A) with controlled composition, high charging rates can be maintained in capacitors, and short charge transport distances are possible.458 The macroporosity (Fig. 27B) is useful for ion diffusion through the structure, especially in batteries.458 Additionally, because active battery materials can undergo large volume changes, macropores allow the material to expand without breaking the structure. Finally, the length scale is commensurate with the wavelength of visible light, allowing these colloidal materials to be used for increasing photon absorption in solar cells. Enhanced absorption can stem from the photonic nature of an ordered structure (Fig. 27C) or from increased scattering in a disordered structure. Additionally, these features can all be combined in hierarchical structures using colloids. These advantages will be discussed in more detail below.
 Fig. 27  Schematic of double-layer inverse opal illustrating the key advantages of CBPM in electrode applications: (A) high surface area, (B) porosity, and (C) periodicity. 
While Fig. 27 shows inverse, ordered structures, disordered and direct structures have also been investigated. Colloid-based electrodes are generally templated (i.e. inverse structures) because inverse structures have larger pores, better pore interconnectivity, and improved mechanical stability. Using block copolymers to make mesoporous materials,429,430 the surface area can be further increased. Charge transport generally occurs across 1–10 nm, so the structure on the 100 nm scale less important; however, ordered structures ensure that the pores are fully interconnected for ion diffusion. Additionally, ordered structures provide a good model system to study different properties (e.g. diffusion),459,460 and can provide additional photon management for solar cells.448,461 The pore size can be another handle on controlling the properties, especially for diffusion. Due to the nature of electrodes, primarily three-dimensional structures are grown on supports rather than making free-standing superparticles.
One final advantage that underpins the desirable macroporous structure is the high degree of compositional tunability of colloid-based structures. Electrochemical cells rely on different material compositions for their conductivity, insulating nature, or electroactivity (for catalysis or intercalation). Indeed, the electrode composition determines its use as an electrode, with a vast materials space possible spanning transition metal oxide intercalation compounds,428,430 metals,65 other conductors,441,462 polymers,420,436 and semiconductors.76,442,452 Hierarchical structures can be also made, for example with a conducting matrix and either conformal growth of an active layer71,74,419,425,426 or embedded additives such as functional catalysts433 or electroactive62 nanoparticles.
7.1 Factors influencing electrode applications

Composition and surface area. 
One of the primary reasons hierarchical CBPM are used as electrodes is their high surface area, with a higher active area for a given volume of material. High surface area allows for easy access to active materials in batteries421,423,426,428–431 and fuel cells,433 improving energy density. It also leads to higher dye loading, and thus increased light absorption and higher rates, in dye-sensitized solar cells.65,440 The surface area was further taken advantage of by Ergang et al. in their fabrication of an electrode consisting of a conducting matrix with a conformal electrolyte layer.426 Because the cathode consisted of a gel, it could then be infiltrated into the structure, forming an interpenetrating cell with high surface area and extremely short diffusion distance between the anode and cathode. Mesoporous structures have been used as well, either in a hierarchical meso–macroporous architecture,463 or a mesoporous–macroporous bilayer,67,452 to achieve even higher surface area.
High surface area structures generally have long charge transport distances, leading to increased recombination. CBPM can also achieve short electron transport distances even in high surface area structures,341 particularly with inverse structures, by controlling the hierarchical composition. Generally, high surface area structures have large separation between where charge is collected and where it is generated, as well as many grain boundaries, making recombination more likely to occur. For example, high surface area in solar cells can improve the rate, but it can also lead to increased recombination.438 The simple fabrication methods of CBPM allow one to make mixed structures, for example a conducting matrix with embedded active particles,62,464 as shown in Fig. 28. Because the nanoparticles are fully embedded in the matrix, they do not dislodge from the structure, and the efficiency is stable even after hundreds of cycles (Fig. 28B).62 Alternatively, active electrode materials can easily be grown on conducting supports to produce a layered structure,26,415,416,425,465 as shown in Fig. 29. With hierarchical structures, the charge can quickly travel from the active site to the conducting matrix, where it can be collected before recombination. Small transport distances have been found to decrease charge recombination in solar cells,450,451 enhancing current output.
 Fig. 28  Nanoparticle additives lead to close contact between the electroactive material and the conductor. (A) Schematic illustrating the fabrication of a carbon inverse opal with embedded electroactive SnO2 nanoparticles for Li-ion batteries, and (B) their specific capacity and coulombic efficiency, which remain stable after hundreds of cycles.62 Reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013. 
 Fig. 29  Swelling of an electroactive coating material does not lead to disruption of the macroporous structure of an inverse opal. (A) A nickel inverse opal with a conformal silicon layer shown schematically; (B and C) SEM images showing that (B) upon lithiation, the LixSi fills the pores but the structure remains intact, and (C) after delithiation, the structure remains.425 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 


Macroporosity. 
While the composition of CBPM can provide control over electron transfer processes, the porosity can allow for the simultaneous control of ion diffusion.341,458 Much like for catalysis, the macroporous structure of CBPM provides for easier diffusion to the active surface; in electrodes, fast ion diffusion means faster charging and reaction rates.430 Ordered, inverse structures have been particularly well investigated as a means of controlling ion transport, for example in Li-ion batteries,26,428,466 Li-air batteries,431 dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC),450 and fuel cells.433 These colloid-templated structures have also been used as separators in batteries420 and fuel cells434 due to their ability to control ion diffusion. Capacitors also benefit from the control over diffusion, because high surface area increases the capacitance, but it can also cause very high charging times. Inverse opal capacitors can be made with a controllable balance between accessible high surface area and charging time.73,417 In addition to specific applications, inverse opal structures have been used as a model system for studying diffusion in nano-to-micro pores,459,460 which will undoubtedly be important when designing future CBPM-based electrodes. When considering this control over diffusion, the amount of cracks is also important since they can introduce other diffusion pathways.
Beyond diffusion, the macroporosity has an added benefit for battery electrode stability because the structure can undergo large volume changes without degradation. In lithium-based batteries in particular, large volume changes are associated with the lithiation and delithiation of the electrode materials.68,74,427 Swelling and shrinking can lead to loss of structural integrity and battery failure. Several groups have investigated using inverse opals to avoid this degradation, especially for MnO2465 and MnSiO4464 positive electrodes and silicon negative electrodes74,425,427 in Li-ion batteries, as well as for sulfur in Li–S batteries.68 These studies describe hierarchical structures, where a conducting matrix is covered with an active material. This active material can then swell into the pores without deforming the contact to the rest of the battery. For example, in Fig. 29, a nickel matrix is coated with an electroactive silicon layer. During lithiation, the silicon swells and fills the pores; when Li+ is released during discharge, silicon shrinks back and the structure reappears. Inverse structures are used due to their macroporosity, but the effects of parameters such as pore size and degree of order have not been investigated and would yield important insights into the ideal structure.


Order and periodicity. 
The 100 nm length scale of colloidal materials provides a handle for controlling visible light absorption in solar cells and for photoelectrochemistry.75,365,448,461,463 For example, several groups have investigated using photonic enhancement from ordered inverse opal structures in both semiconductor and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC).65,436,442,443,452,456,457 In a photonic crystal such as an inverse or direct opal, light near the photonic bandgap has increased absorption due to a longer lifetime in the structure.467 This additional absorption can improve the efficiency. For example, it accounted for a >50% increase in the efficiency of a DSSC,447 and can be seen clearly in Fig. 30 for a photoanode made from WO3, where the efficiency varies as a function of wavelength depending on the periodicity of the structure.393 There is a clear efficiency enhancement for the structure made with 200 nm colloids, which has a photonic bandgap overlapping with the electronic absorption of WO3. In addition to ordered structures for increased absorption of certain wavelengths, disordered structures can be used to increase scattering of all wavelengths,71 which also improves absorption by increasing the path length in the structure.
 Fig. 30  Photonic crystal effects enhance efficiency in photoanodes. (A–C) SEM images of WO3 inverse opals made from different sizes of colloids. (D) Optical image of the inverse opals shown in (A–C). (E) Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the inverse opals, compared to disordered and unpatterned structures. WO3-200, WO3-260, and WO3-360 correspond to WO3 inverse opals made from 200 nm, 260 nm, and 360 nm colloids, respectively.393 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. 


Patterning and hierarchical structures. 
Using colloidal patterning techniques, more complicated electrode structures can be made. For example, interdigitated microbatteries are possible where the anode and cathode alternate on the scale of tens of microns (Fig. 31).26 Using patterning, Pikul et al. achieved Li-ion batteries with extraordinary energy and power densities. CBPM have also been used as separators in batteries420 and fuel cells,434 where they were grown within the confines of the other layers of the cells.
 Fig. 31  Patterning of interdigitated inverse opal electrodes. (A) Schematic, and (B) SEM image of interdigitated microbattery electrode structure with alternating materials (scale bar 50 μm; inset scale bars 1 μm). (C) Larger scale SEM image showing a top-down view of the structure (scale bar 500 μm).26 Reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013. 
The vast majority of studies of CBPM electrodes have focused on controlling the 10–100 nm scale since electrochemical phenomena such as charge transfer and diffusion generally occur on this scale. However, in actual cells, the proximity of the anode and cathode are important. Patterning CBPM electrodes are a promising and relatively unexplored area; for example, superparticles could be used to make even more complex patterns with easy transport between the two electrodes.

7.2 Perspective
CBPM not only have both high surface area and porosity, but their unique structure combining the two allows for both fast ion diffusion and fast electron transport.26,62,427 High charging and discharging rates stem from the high surface area and short distance between the active area and the conducting support. With limited tortuosity, ion diffusion is facile and controllable, with the added benefit of being able to undergo volume changes without loss of structural integrity. For solar cells, scattering and photonic effects also improve the efficiency. Furthermore, the tailorability of colloid-based materials allows complicated structures to be made fairly easily, whether with electrodeposition or additives. Multiple parameters can be controlled simultaneously, across the material composition as well as the structure. These factors are especially important in electrodes, where the composition and hierarchical composite structure are integral to the function. For these reasons, CBPM have been investigated for many electrochemical energy storage and conversion applications, with much success; however, good comparisons are challenging because adequate controls are often not included, for example to compare the benefits of a specific structure or hierarchical composition to a similar, flat substrate, or to a similar structure missing one aspect of the composition. One area that hasn't been fully developed is to pattern CBPM for electrode applications, which opens up a variety of interesting possibilities for hierarchical electrochemical cells, for example microbattery architectures.468
Compared to hierarchical colloid-based materials, most other methods are either more expensive or offer less control. Much of this text has described the advantages of porous, high surface area structures in general; for example, nanostructured DSSC electrodes not based on colloids can have very high surface area. However, many of these high surface area architectures generally suffer from high recombination rates. Comparing to other porous structures not based on colloids, the benefits are less clear. For battery electrodes, there are many other porous materials in use for electrodes, such as porous carbon and nanoporous gold, which can easily achieve hierarchical compositions using electrodeposition. However, the “pore” size of these structures is fixed and functionalization with nanoparticles requires a second step. Nanoporous gold is also more expensive.
In order for CBPM to compete with existing porous materials, improvements in the fabrication methods must be considered. Most of these electrode applications would require inexpensive fabrication methods to be cost-effectively scaled up to the necessary scale. Certain fabrication methods, such as electrodeposition, are easy to scale up, whereas others, such as ALD, are not. Disordered structures are faster and easier to make, but most basic research to date has centered on ordered structures. These ordered structures are ideal for model studies, for example to investigate the effect of the size scale of porosity on different aspects of performance; understanding the underlying chemistry and physics will allow us to target a specific size for scaled-up versions. However, a better understanding of phenomena such as ion diffusion in disordered structures will also be critical.
Because composition is so important for electrode function, expanding the materials space will allow for new applications. New electrode materials for Li-ion batteries are constantly emerging, for example ZnCo2O4.469 New battery types are also being investigated such as Li–air and Zn–air,470 and new compositions are necessary to be used in these applications. Assembly strategies for making crack-free structures of arbitrary composition with hierarchical architecture will require a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of crack-free structure formation. Crack-free structures can be made by co-assembling a silica matrix with the colloidal crystal,59 but this method remains to be adequately expanded to other materials. Future electrodes will have a porous structure and hierarchical composition with good reproducibility and durability; the benefits of CBPM for introducing these characteristics are a huge advantage if various compositions can be made reliably.
8. Conclusions
Biology uses structuration on the nano to the macroscale to achieve functions beyond the inherent properties of its limited materials scope. Using colloids, similar structural features can be made synthetically, with a variety of assembly methods producing structures beyond those found in nature. These structures give rise to a variety of functionalities not present in the individual colloidal particles, rendering such self-assembled materials attractive for a diverse range of applications, in particular optics, wetting, sensing, catalysis, and electrodes.
CBPM can be made for many applications with controlled composition, porosity, periodicity, order, and hierarchy. Different application fields vary in their desired properties, but the modularity of the assembly process provides a high degree of tunability and tailorability in the composition and structure, opening the door for many potential commercial products. In terms of composition, functional particles can easily be added at various locations in the CBPM structure due to the modularity of the fabrication methods. These particles can act as optical absorbers, catalysts, or electroactive materials. Additionally, the surface can be modified with various functionalities, which is particularly useful for wetting and sensing applications. The degree of order and periodicity determine most optical effects, which can subsequently be used as sensors that rely on a colorimetric readout. Moreover, the order is intimately connected to the porosity, as the degree of order can affect the tortuosity and interconnection of the porous network. The interconnection is especially important for diffusion in heterogeneous catalysis and electrodes. The porosity also influences fluid transport, whether within the structure or on the surface for repellency. CBPM allow for precise control over these aspects, but comparative studies highlighting advantages over other types of porous structures are still rare.
Using hierarchical and patterned structures, complex features can be created for advanced applications. For example, multiple sensing responses can occur on a single chip,260 or complete microbatteries can be assembled.26 Complex optical effects can be achieved by combining features on different length scales, for example if stopband effects were combined with grating diffraction, all in a patterned structure. With many patterning techniques, the hierarchy can be tailored to the specific application.
Colloids can be used in a variety of areas, but scaling up the fabrication process is a major roadblock to commercialization, particularly of ordered structures. At a lab-scale, colloidal assemblies are unchallenged in their ability to provide precise model systems to develop design guidelines for the optimization of a desired macroscopic property. Future work should focus on scaling up methods of producing high quality structures of various types, including both superparticles and crack-free templated structures of arbitrary composition, on an industrial scale beyond typical “large scale” assembly methods. Superparticles are already showing promise to solve the scale-up problem, and they are particularly useful for their ability to be transported as a powder and dispersed in a variety of media.
Finally, many biological colloidal structures achieve multifunctionality, optimizing for multiple properties simultaneously, for example optical effects, wetting characteristics, and mechanical stability.12 To date, there are limited synthetic multifunctional structures, but we expect that this research area will provide a variety of novel materials in the future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSF Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Harvard University under Award No. DMR 14-20570 and by AFOSR under Award No. FA9550-09-1-0669-DOD35CA. The authors wish to thank Alison Grinthal for fruitful discussions. KRP acknowledges the support of a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship from the Department of Defense; TS acknowledges support from the Weizmann Institute of Science – National Postdoctoral Award Program for Advancing Women in Science. NV acknowledges funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the Cluster of Excellence Engineering of Advanced Materials.
References
R. O. Prum, R. Torres, S. Williamson and J. Dyck, Proc. R. Soc. B, 1999, 266, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, K.-Q. Gao, J. Vinther, M. D. Shawkey, J. A. Clarke, L. D'Alba, Q. Meng, D. E. G. Briggs and R. O. Prum, Science, 2010, 327, 1369–1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Dufresne, H. Noh, V. Saranathan, S. G. J. Mochrie, H. Cao and R. O. Prum, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1792 RSC .
J. D. Forster, H. Noh, S. F. Liew, V. Saranathan, C. F. Schreck, L. Yang, J. G. Park, R. O. Prum, S. G. Mochrie, C. S. O'Hern, H. Cao and E. R. Dufresne, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2939–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Shawkey and G. E. Hill, J. Exp. Biol., 2006, 209, 1245–1250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Teyssier, S. V. Saenko, D. van der Marel and M. C. Milinkovitch, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Xu, X. Gao, Y. Zheng and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2232 RSC .
J. Zhang, X. Sheng and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1371–1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3240–3255 RSC .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vignolini, P. J. Rudall, A. V. Rowland, A. Reed, E. Moyroud, R. B. Faden, J. J. Baumberg, B. J. Glover and U. Steiner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15712–15715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, S. Kolle, J. C. Weaver, C. Ortiz, J. Aizenberg and M. Kolle, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kolle, P. M. Salgard-Cunha, M. R. J. Scherer, F. Huang, P. Vukusic, S. Mahajan, J. J. Baumberg and U. Steiner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vukusic, J. R. Sambles, C. R. Lawrence and R. J. Wootton, Proc. R. Soc. B, 1999, 266, 1403–1411 CrossRef .
K. Chung, S. Yu, C. J. Heo, J. W. Shim, S. M. Yang, M. G. Han, H. S. Lee, Y. Jin, S. Y. Lee, N. Park and J. H. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2375–2379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. England, M. Kolle, P. Kim, M. Khan, P. Munoz, E. Mazur and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 15630–15634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Barthelat, H. Tang, P. Zavattieri, C. Li and H. Espinosa, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2007, 55, 306–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. H. Xu and R. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2301–2304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.
J. Robb, S. Y. Ku and C. J. Hawker, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5686–5700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stefik, S. Guldin, S. Vignolini, U. Wiesner and U. Steiner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5076–5091 RSC .
D. P. Josephson, M. Miller and A. Stein, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2014, 640, 655–662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Shiu, C.-W. Kuo, P. Chen and C.-Y. Mou, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 561–564 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Schafer, D. A. Smolin, G. P. Hellmann and M. Gallei, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 11275–11283 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Guan, C. Wang, L. Wen, Y. Lei and Y. Xie, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7088–7098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Pikul, H. Gang Zhang, J. Cho, P. V. Braun and W. P. King, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1732 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Xia, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 693–713 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Harkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1947, 69, 1428–1444 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Goodwin, J. Hearn, C. C. Ho and R. H. Ottewill, Colloid Polym. Sci., 1974, 252, 464–471 CAS .
S. Jiang, E. D. Sudol, V. L. Dimonie and M. S. El-Aasser, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 108, 4096–4107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Tseng, Y. Y. Lu, M. S. El-Aasser and J. W. Vanderhoff, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1986, 24, 2995–3007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Hartlen, A. P. Athanasopoulos and V. Kitaev, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1714–1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Stöber, A. Fink and E. Bohn, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62–69 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, S. C. Bae and S. Granick, Nature, 2011, 469, 381–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wurm and A. F. Kilbinger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8412–8421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bao, W. Peukert and R. Klupp Taylor, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2644–2649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bao, T. Bihr, A. S. Smith and R. N. Klupp Taylor, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3954–3966 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. R. Breed, V. N. Manoharan, L. Feng, A. D. Hollingsworth, M. Weck and D. J. Pine, Nature, 2012, 491, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Yi, D. J. Pine and S. Sacanna, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2013, 25, 193101 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Contreras-Cáceres, J. Pacifico, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, A. Fernández-Barbero and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3070–3076 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Guerrero-Martinez, J. Perez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1182–1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, C. Fernandez-Lopez, J. Perez-Juste, L. M. Liz-Marzan, K. Landfester and C. K. Weiss, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8985–8993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Groschel, F. H. Schacher, H. Schmalz, O. V. Borisov, E. B. Zhulina, A. Walther and A. H. Muller, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 710 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Groschel, A. Walther, T. I. Lobling, F. H. Schacher, H. Schmalz and A. H. Muller, Nature, 2013, 503, 247–251 Search PubMed .
D. Klinger, C. X. Wang, L. A. Connal, D. J. Audus, S. G. Jang, S. Kraemer, K. L. Killops, G. H. Fredrickson, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7018–7022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sanchez-Iglesias, M. Grzelczak, J. Perez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9985–9989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dong, J. Chen, P. M. Vora, J. M. Kikkawa and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2010, 466, 474–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
U. Jeong, X. Teng, Y. Wang, H. Yang and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 33–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Liz-Marzan, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, C. K. Weiss and K. Landfester, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4044–4061 RSC .
K. Landfester, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4488–4507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, D. P. Josephson and A. Stein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 360–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, M. Retsch, C. A. Fustin, A. Del Campo and U. Jonas, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6265–6311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Velev and S. Gupta, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1897–1905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stein, F. Li and N. R. Denny, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 649–666 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763–2803 RSC .
B. Hatton, L. Mishchenko, S. Davis, K. H. Sandhage and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 10354–10359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. I. Aguirre, E. Reguera and A. Stein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3257–3262 CAS .
Y. Vasquez, M. Kolle, L. Mishchenko, B. D. Hatton and J. Aizenberg, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, J. Chen, Z. Lu, H. Yu, Q. Yan and H. H. Hng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2317 Search PubMed .
S. T. Kochuveedu, Y. H. Jang and D. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8467–8493 RSC .
T.-D. Nguyen, C.-T. Dinh and T.-O. Do, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 624–635 RSC .
W. L. Hoffeditz, M. J. Katz, P. Deria, A. B. Martinson, M. J. Pellin, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8646–8650 CAS .
J. W. Lee, J. Lee, C. Kim, C. Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee and J. H. Moon, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5164–5168 RSC .
Z. Liang, G. Zheng, W. Li, Z. W. Seh, H. Yao, K. Yan, D. Kong and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5249–5256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Peng, B. Kalanyan, P. G. Hoertz, A. Miller, H. Kim do, K. Hanson, L. Alibabaei, J. Liu, T. J. Meyer, G. N. Parsons and J. T. Glass, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1481–1488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, H. Zhang, D. Kong, B. Liu, Y. Yang and C. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22953–22957 RSC .
N. Tetreault, E. Arsenault, L. P. Heiniger, N. Soheilnia, J. Brillet, T. Moehl, S. Zakeeruddin, G. A. Ozin and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4579–4584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. O. Williams, E. J. DeMarco, M. J. Katz, J. A. Libera, S. C. Riha, D. W. Kim, J. R. Avila, A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12290–12294 CAS .
W. S. Chae, D. V. Gough, S. K. Ham, D. B. Robinson and P. V. Braun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3973–3979 CAS .
H. Liu, H. M. Cho, Y. S. Meng and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9842–9849 CAS .
X. Shi, K. Zhang, K. Shin, J. H. Moon, T. W. Lee and J. H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11717–11722 RSC .
J.-P. Zhang and L.-P. Yu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 5646–5651 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Burgess, N. Koay, K. P. Raymond, M. Kolle, M. Loncar and J. Aizenberg, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1427–1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. B. Burgess, L. Mishchenko, B. D. Hatton, M. Kolle, M. Loncar and J. Aizenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12430–12432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3876–3893 RSC .
S. Wong, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15589–15598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dhainaut, J.-P. Dacquin, A. F. Lee and K. Wilson, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 296–303 RSC .
J. F. Galisteo-Lopez, M. Ibisate, R. Sapienza, L. S. Froufe-Perez, A. Blanco and C. Lopez, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 30–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Steele, I. Bayer and E. Loth, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 501–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Campos, A. J. Guenthner, A. J. Meuler, A. Tuteja, R. E. Cohen, G. H. McKinley, T. S. Haddad and J. M. Mabry, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9834–9841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bravo, L. Zhai, Z. Wu, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7293–7298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Cebeci, Z. Wu, L. Zhai, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2856–2862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Q. Li, W. Knoll and U. Jonas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15606–15607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Retsch and U. Jonas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5381–5389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Hemsley and N. I. Gabarayeva, Plant Syst. Evol., 2006, 263, 25–49 CrossRef .
A. R. Hemsley and P. C. Griffiths, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2000, 358, 547–564 CrossRef CAS .

          H. J. Butt, K. Graf and M. Kappl, Physics and Chemistry of Interfaces, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
D. J. Norris, E. G. Arlinghaus, L. Meng, R. Heiny and L. E. Scriven, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1393–1399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, U. Jonas, X. S. Zhao and M. Kappl, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2008, 3, 255–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Academic Press, New York, 3 edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
N. Vogel, R. A. Belisle, B. Hatton, T. S. Wong and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2167 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Ren, X. Li, X. Zhang, D. Zhu, T. Wang, T. Tian and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, J. Fischer, R. Mohammadi, M. Retsch, H. J. Butt, K. Landfester, C. K. Weiss and M. Kreiter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 446–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Phillips, N. Vogel, Y. Hu, M. Kolle, C. C. Perry and J. Aizenberg, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1622–1628 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schaffner, G. England, M. Kolle, J. Aizenberg and N. Vogel, Small, 2015, 11, 4334–4340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, Y. Lu, B. Gates and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8718–8729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J. Moon, H. Shin, D. Wang and M. Park, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 298, 713–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Koay, I. B. Burgess, T. M. Kay, B. A. Nerger, M. Miles-Rossouw, T. Shirman, T. L. Vu, G. England, K. R. Phillips, S. Utech, N. Vogel, M. Kolle and J. Aizenberg, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 27750–27768 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, X. Badel, J. Linnros and J. B. Wiley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3268–3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, S. Utech, G. T. England, T. Shirman, K. R. Phillips, N. Koay, I. B. Burgess, M. Kolle, D. A. Weitz and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 10845–10850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Born, A. Munoz, C. Cavelius and T. Kraus, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8300–8308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Dimitrov and K. Nagayama, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1303–1311 CrossRef CAS .
L. Malaquin, T. Kraus, H. Schmid, E. Delamarche and H. Wolf, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11513–11521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, T. Prasad, M. J. McFarland and V. L. Colvin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 011908 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 3408–3413 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, T. Lee, Y. Xia, T. J. Shin, J. Myoung and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4633–4638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Park, K. Koh and U. Jeong, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Retsch, Z. Zhou, S. Rivera, M. Kappl, X. S. Zhao, U. Jonas and Q. Li, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2009, 210, 230–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sirotkin, J. D. Apweiler and F. Y. Ogrin, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10677–10683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, L. de Viguerie, U. Jonas, C. Weiss and K. Landfester, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, S. Goerres, C. K. Weiss and K. Landfester, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye and L. Qi, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 608–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kraus, D. Brodoceanu, N. Pazos-Perez and A. Fery, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Cai and G. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhang and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4249–4269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-S. Wan, L.-W. Zhu, Y. Ou and Z.-K. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4024 RSC .
W.-L. Min, B. Jiang and P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3914–3918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, A. V. Whitney, J. Zhao, E. M. Hicks and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1920–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nemiroski, M. Gonidec, J. M. Fox, P. Jean-Remy, E. Turnage and G. M. Whitesides, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11061–11070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Retsch, M. Tamm, N. Bocchio, N. Horn, R. Forch, U. Jonas and M. Kreiter, Small, 2009, 5, 2105–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manzke, N. Vogel, C. K. Weiss, U. Ziener, A. Plettl, K. Landfester and P. Ziemann, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2523–2528 RSC .
A. Manzke, A. Plettl, U. Wiedwald, L. Han, P. Ziemann, E. Schreiber, U. Ziener, N. Vogel, C. K. Weiss, K. Landfester, K. Fauth, J. Biskupek and U. Kaiser, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1048–1054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, W. S. Liao, X. Chen, T. Yang, S. E. Wark, D. H. Son, J. D. Batteas and P. S. Cremer, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 173–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Routh, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046603 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Diao and X. Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1354–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Vos, M. Megens, C. M. vanKats and P. Bösecke, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 6004–6008 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Davis, W. B. Russel and W. J. Glantschnig, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 411–424 RSC .
M. Bardosova, M. E. Pemble, I. M. Povey and R. H. Tredgold, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3104–3124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, M. Ocaña and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2244–2249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. J. Pursiainen, J. J. Baumberg, H. Winkler, B. Viel, P. Spahn and T. Ruhl, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1484–1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ruhl, P. Spahn and G. P. Hellmann, Polymer, 2003, 44, 7625–7634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. van Blaaderen, R. Ruel and P. Wiltzius, Nature, 1997, 385, 321–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Hoogenboom, A. K. Van Langen-Suurling, J. Romijn and A. Van Blaaderen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 138301 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Jensen, D. Pennachio, D. Recht, D. A. Weitz and F. Spaepen, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 320–328 RSC .
C. Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2971–2975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Huang, G. Liu, L. Wang, S. Chen, X. Li, D. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e21 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. Kim, J.-M. Lim, W. C. Jeong, D.-G. Choi and S.-M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3211–3217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, H. S. Park, J. H. Choi, J. W. Shim and S. M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 946–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Lee, T. S. Shim, H. Hwang, S.-M. Yang and S.-H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2684–2690 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lee, S.-H. Kim, H. Hwang, J. Y. Sim and S.-M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ding, S. K. Smoukov and J. J. Baumberg, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1857–1863 RSC .
H. S. Lee, T. S. Shim, H. Hwang, S. M. Yang and S. H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 26842690 Search PubMed .
T. Ding, Q. Zhao, S. K. Smoukov and J. J. Baumberg, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Allard, E. H. Sargent, P. C. Lewis and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1360–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Ozin and S. M. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schweikart, A. Fortini, A. Wittemann, M. Schmidt and A. Fery, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 5860 RSC .
A. van Blaaderen, R. Ruel and P. Wiltzius, Nature, 1997, 385, 321–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Watanabe, K. Inukai, S. Mizuta and M. T. Miyahara, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7287–7295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mino, S. Watanabe and M. T. Miyahara, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5290–5295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Fustin, G. Glasser, H. W. Spiess and U. Jonas, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1025–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, G. R. Yi, D. J. Pine and S. M. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10897–10904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Velev, A. M. Lenhoff and E. W. Kaler, Science, 2000, 287, 2240–2243 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Shang, Y. Cheng and Z. Gu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3632–3642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang and M. J. McFarland, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13778–13786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Schaefer, B. Viel, G. P. Hellmann, M. Rehahn and M. Gallei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10623 CAS .
A. R. Abate and D. A. Weitz, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 1911 RSC .
G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev, B. V. Lotsch and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2528–2554 RSC .
L. Zhou, G. Liu, Y. Wu, Q. Fan and J. Shao, Fibers Polym., 2014, 15, 1112–1122 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. S. Lee, C. H. Lim, S.-M. M. Yang and S.-H. H. Kim, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 2369–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Josephson, E. J. Popczun and A. Stein, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13585–13592 CAS .
J. J. Kim, Y. Lee, H. G. Kim, K. J. Choi, H. S. Kweon, S. Park and K. H. Jeong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 18674–18678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, Q.-W. Chen, J. Tang, X.-Y. Hu and X.-H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11048 RSC .
H. Hu, J. Tang, H. Zhong, Z. Xi, C. Chen and Q. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1484 Search PubMed .
H. Hu, H. Zhong, C. Chen and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3695 RSC .
Z. Yu, C. F. Wang, L. Ling, L. Chen and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2375–2378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Finlayson and J. J. Baumberg, Polym. Int., 2013, 62, 1403–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ito, C. Katsura, H. Sugimoto, E. Nakanishi and K. Inomata, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13951–13957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cho, S. Y. Lee, L. Ellerthorpe, G. Feng, G. Lin, G. Wu, J. Yin and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201502774 .
C. G. Schafer, C. Lederle, K. Zentel, B. Stuhn and M. Gallei, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1852–1860 Search PubMed .
F. Gallego-Gómez, A. Blanco, D. Golmayo and C. López, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4109–4119 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Scheid, C. Lederle, S. Vowinkel, C. G. Schafer, B. Stuhn and M. Gallei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2583–2590 RSC .
F. Gallego-Gomez, A. Blanco and C. Lopez, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6204–6209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Hu, R. Deng, R. Liang, W. Li, S. Liu and J. Zhu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8825–8834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Furumi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6003 RSC .
Y. Takeoka, S. Yoshioka, A. Takano, S. Arai, K. Nueangnoraj, H. Nishihara, M. Teshima, Y. Ohtsuka and T. Seki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7261–7265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Magkiriadou, J.-G. Park, Y.-S. Kim and V. N. Manoharan, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 1343 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoshioka and Y. Takeoka, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 2209–2215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gotoh, H. Suzuki, N. Kumano, T. Seki, K. Katagiri and Y. Takeoka, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 2171 RSC .
C. H. Lim, H. Kang and S. H. Kim, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8350–8356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. G. Park, S.-H. H. Kim, S. Magkiriadou, T. M. Choi, Y.-S. S. Kim and V. N. Manoharan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2899–2903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Belardini, A. Benedetti, M. Centini, G. Leahu, F. Mura, S. Sennato, C. Sibilia, V. Robbiano, M. C. Giordano, C. Martella, D. Comoretto and F. B. de Mongeot, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 208–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Brodoceanu, R. Elnathan, B. Prieto-Simon, B. Delalat, T. Guinan, E. Kroner, N. H. Voelcker and T. Kraus, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1160–1169 CAS .
J. W. Leem, M. S. Kim and J. S. Yu, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2013, 30, 1665 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, A. N. Mitropoulos, J. D. Spitzberg, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 8897–8903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Robbiano, M. Giordano, C. Martella, F. D. Stasio, D. Chiappe, F. B. de Mongeot and D. Comoretto, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 389–396 CrossRef PubMed .
H. R. Míguez, S. G. Romanov, A. V. Korovin, M. Reza Bahrami, U. Peschel, S. G. Romanov, L. C. Andreani and C. Seassal, Proc. SPIE, 2012, 8425, 842514 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Belardini, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 208–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Romanov, N. Vogel, K. Bley, K. Landfester, C. K. Weiss, S. Orlov, A. V. Korovin, G. P. Chuiko, A. Regensburger, A. Romanova, A. Kriesch and U. Peschel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 195145 CrossRef .
C. Stelling, C. Bernhardt and M. Retsch, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 1682–1688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zhu, H. Dong, F. Jia, Z. Wang, Z. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Li, W. Xu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4731–4734 CAS .
S. Guldin and U. Steiner, SPIE Proc. Micro- and Nanotechnology Sensors, Systems, and Applications VI, 2014, 9083, 908320 Search PubMed .

          H. Macleod, Thin film optical filters, Institute of Physics Publishing, 3 edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
H. Budunoglu, A. Yildirim and M. Bayindir, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9671 RSC .
U. Tuvshindorj, A. Yildirim, F. E. Ozturk and M. Bayindir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9680–9688 CAS .
X.-X. Zhang, B.-B. Xia, H.-P. Ye, Y.-L. Zhang, B. Xiao, L.-H. Yan, H.-B. Lv and B. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13132 RSC .
W.-B. Hung and T.-M. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 133, 39–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, W. Ji, H. Du, X. Li, J. Gong, J. Ma and J. Xu, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2014, 72, 511–517 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yeo, F. Tu, S. H. Kim, G. R. Yi, P. J. Yoo and D. Lee, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 1582–1588 RSC .
E. Sowade, J. Hammerschmidt, T. Blaudeck and R. R. Baumann, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2012, 14, 98–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuang, J. Wang, B. Bao, F. Li, L. Wang, L. Jiang and Y. Song, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 34–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rastogi, S. Melle, O. G. Calderón, A. A. García, M. Marquez and O. D. Velev, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4263–4268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, S.-H. H. Kim, H. Hwang, J. Y. Sim and S.-M. M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2391–2397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ding, Y. Long, K. Zhong, K. Song, G. Yang and C.-H. Tung, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4100 RSC .
Y. Y. Yan, N. Gao and W. Barthlott, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 169, 80–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Choi, Y. Zhang and Y. Xia, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 19001–19006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Joao, J. M. Vasconcelos, J. C. Silva and J. P. Borges, Tissue Eng., Part B, 2014, 20, 437–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sharma, G. I. Waterhouse, S. W. Loader, S. Garg and D. Svirskis, Int. J. Pharm., 2013, 443, 163–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Cheng, H. Wang, B. Ye, L. Shang, Y. Zhao and Z. Gu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10590–10594 RSC .
K. Rhee do, B. Jung, Y. H. Kim, S. J. Yeo, S. J. Choi, A. Rauf, S. Han, G. R. Yi, D. Lee and P. J. Yoo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9950–9954 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, S. Sathasivam, J. Song, C. R. Crick, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, Science, 2015, 347, 1132–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tuteja, W. Choi, J. M. Mabry, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 18200–18205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Epstein, T. S. Wong, R. A. Belisle, E. M. Boggs and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13182–13187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546 RSC .
A. Plettl, F. Enderle, M. Saitner, A. Manzke, C. Pfahler, S. Wiedemann and P. Ziemann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3279–3284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Ren, X. Li, X. Zhang, D. Zhu, T. Wang, T. Tian and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7375–7382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-G. Park, S. Y. Lee, S. G. Jang and S.-M. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5295–5299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Wang and X. Ge, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10804–10808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Gu, H. Uetsuka, K. Takahashi, R. Nakajima, H. Onishi, A. Fujishima and O. Sato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 894–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, N. Lu, H. Xu, D. Qi, Y. Wang, S. Shi and L. Chi, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1438–1443 RSC .
A. Lafuma and D. Quéré, EPL, 2011, 96, 56001 CrossRef .
J. D. Smith, R. Dhiman, S. Anand, E. Reza-Garduno, R. E. Cohen, G. H. McKinley and K. K. Varanasi, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 1772–1780 RSC .
T. S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Tsai and Y. L. Lee, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12687–12692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ogihara, J. Xie, J. Okagaki and T. Saji, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4605–4608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2305–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gemici, H. Shimomura, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2168–2177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sunny, N. Vogel, C. Howell, T. L. Vu and J. Aizenberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6658–6667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tuteja, W. Choi, M. Ma, J. M. Mabry, S. A. Mazzella, G. C. Rutledge, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Science, 2007, 318, 1618–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ahuja, J. A. Taylor, V. Lifton, A. A. Sidorenko, T. R. Salamon, E. J. Lobaton, P. Kolodner and T. N. Krupenkin, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ellinas, A. Tserepi and E. Gogolides, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3960–3969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Steele, I. Bayer and E. Loth, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 501–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Phillips, N. Vogel, I. B. Burgess, C. C. Perry and J. Aizenberg, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 7615–7620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Extrand and S. I. Moon, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9470–9473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Extrand and S. I. Moon, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Wen, J. Hu, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Wen, X. Feng, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 188–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ge, G. Wang, Y. He, X. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 575–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3554–3556 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, C. Y. Koh, J. P. Singer, S. J. Jeon, M. Maldovan, O. Stein and E. L. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 532–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. I. Aguirre, E. Reguera and A. Stein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2565–2578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, B. M. Phillips, K. Askar, B. Choi, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6031–6047 RSC .
Q. Li, M. Retsch, J. Wang, W. Knoll and U. Jonas, Top. Curr. Chem., 2009, 287, 135–180 CrossRef CAS .
G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev, B. V. Lotsch and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2528 RSC .
Y. Takeoka, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6059–6074 RSC .
A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763–2803 RSC .
M. J. Banholzer, J. E. Millstone, L. Qin and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 885–897 RSC .
B. Sharma, M. Fernanda Cardinal, S. L. Kleinman, N. G. Greeneltch, R. R. Frontiera, M. G. Blaber, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Sonntag, J. M. Klingsporn, A. B. Zrimsek, B. Sharma, L. K. Ruvuna and R. P. Duyne, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1230–1247 RSC .
M. Grzelczak and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4652–4663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Arsenault, D. P. Puzzo, I. Manners and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 468–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, Y. Zhao, X. Liu, Y. Wang, B. Ye, Z. Xie and Z. Gu, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4911 RSC .
W. Shen, M. Li, C. Ye, L. Jiang and Y. Song, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 3089–3095 RSC .
L. Bai, Z. Xie, W. Wang, C. Yuan, Y. Zhao, Z. Mu, Q. Zhong and Z. Gu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11094–11100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Griffete, H. Frederich, A. Maitre, S. Ravaine, M. M. Chehimi and C. Mangeney, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1005–1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, T. Wang, J. Liu, C. Guo, Y. Peng, J. Bai, M. Liu, J. Dong, N. Gao, B. A. Ning and Z. Gao, Analyst, 2012, 137, 4469–4474 RSC .
D. Xu, W. Zhu, C. Wang, T. Tian, J. Cui, J. Li, H. Wang and G. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 16620–16625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, Z. Li, Y. Liu, J. Gao, Z. Pan and Y. Liu, Chemistry, 2012, 18, 303–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Pan, Y. Yuan, Z. Sun, J. Ma, G. Huang, F. Xing and J. Gao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17250–17256 RSC .
X. Hu, Q. An, G. Li, S. Tao and J. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8145–8148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, B. Zhang, Y. Cheng, H. Wang, B. Ye and L. Shang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10590–10594 RSC .
H. L. Li, L. X. Chang, J. X. Wang, L. M. Yang and Y. L. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5098–5103 RSC .
S. Amrehn, X. Wu, C. Schumacher and T. Wagner, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2015, 212, 1266–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Qiu, M. Gao, P. Li, L. Gao, L. Heng, B. Z. Tang and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8865–8872 RSC .
C. Liu, G. Gao, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Wang and Y. Song, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 380–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hirashima, T. Seki, K. Katagiri, Y. Akuzawa, T. Torimoto and Y. Takeoka, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 344–348 RSC .
N. Griffete, H. Frederich, A. Maître, M. M. Chehimi, S. Ravaine and C. Mangeney, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13052 RSC .
J. Shin, S. G. Han and W. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 168, 20–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, J. Ma, J. Yan, M. Zhou and J. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2018–2025 RSC .
E. Choi, Y. Choi, Y. H. P. Nejad, K. Shin and J. Park, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 180, 107–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, Y. Chen, X. Feng, Y. Yan, X. Hu, B. Zhao, F. Zhang, D. Zhang, Z. Xu and Y. Lai, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8229–8231 RSC .
M.-L. Zhang, F. Jin, M.-L. Zheng and X.-M. Duan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20567 RSC .
T. Tian, X. Li, J. Cui, J. Li, Y. Lan, C. Wang, M. Zhang, H. Wang and G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15456–15465 CAS .
B. Ye, H. Ding, Y. Cheng, H. Gu, Y. Zhao, Z. Xie and Z. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3270–3274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Puzzo, A. C. Arsenault, I. Manners and G. A. Ozin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 943–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueno, J. Sakamoto, Y. Takeoka and M. Watanabe, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4778 RSC .
A. C. Arsenault, T. J. Clark, G. von Freymann, L. Cademartiri, R. Sapienza, J. Bertolotti, E. Vekris, S. Wong, V. Kitaev, I. Manners, R. Z. Wang, S. John, D. Wiersma and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 179–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Diao, X. Y. Liu, G. W. Toh, L. Shi and J. Zi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5373–5380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, A. N. Mitropoulos, J. D. Spitzberg, H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 817–822 Search PubMed .
G. Huang, Y. Yin, Z. Pan, M. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang and J. Gao, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 4396–4402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, C. A. Tao, Q. An, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Li, D. Shen and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 967–969 RSC .
X. Hu, J. Huang, W. Zhang, M. Li, C. Tao and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4074–4078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, W. Zhu, N. Gao, J. Li, H. Yang, Y. Jiang, P. Seidel, B. J. Ravoo and G. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3844–3848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, O. K. Farha, L. E. Kreno, P. M. Schoenecker, K. S. Walton, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4449–4452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Wu, F. Li, W. Zhu, J. Cui, C. A. Tao, C. Lin, P. M. Hannam and G. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12518–12522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Hendrickson and L. Andrew Lyon, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 29–35 RSC .
S. A. Asher, S. F. Peteu, C. E. Reese, X. Lin and D. Finegold, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373, 632–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Alexeev, S. Das, D. N. Finegold and S. A. Asher, Clin. Chem., 2004, 50, 2353–2360 CAS .
A. C. Sharma, T. Jana, R. Kesavamoorthy, L. Shi, M. A. Virji, D. N. Finegold and S. A. Asher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2971–2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Walker and S. A. Asher, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 1596–1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kamenjicki Maurer, I. K. Lednev and S. A. Asher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1401–1406 CrossRef PubMed .
K. W. Kimble, J. P. Walker, D. N. Finegold and S. A. Asher, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385, 678–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Walker, K. W. Kimble and S. A. Asher, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 389, 2115–2124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Muscatello and S. A. Asher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 1186, 18 Search PubMed .
Z. Jian-Tao, S. Natasha and A. A. Sanford, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 6416–6420 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhongyu, Z. Jian-Tao, X. Fei, H. Zhenmin, P. David and A. A. Sanford, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4840–4847 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Fenzl, S. Wilhelm, T. Hirsch and O. S. Wolfbeis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 173–178 CAS .
Q. Cui, M. M. Ward Muscatello and S. A. Asher, Analyst, 2009, 134, 875–880 RSC .
E. T. Tian, J. X. Wang, Y. M. Zheng, Y. L. Song, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1116–1122 RSC .
K. I. MacConaghy, C. I. Geary, J. L. Kaar and M. P. Stoykovich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6896–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, N. L. Smith, J. T. Zhang and S. A. Asher, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5013–5025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, X. Li and M. J. Serpe, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44074–44087 RSC .
Y. J. Lee and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Nakayama, Y. Takeoka, M. Watanabe and K. Kataoka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4197–4200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, X. Li, Y. Lan, T. Tian, J. Cui, T. Zhu, D. Shen and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6120–6128 RSC .
D. Xu, W. Zhu, Q. An, W. Li, X. Li, H. Yang, J. Yin and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3494–3496 RSC .
J. Y. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Feng, F. Yin and J. P. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3865–3871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, W. Chen, Y. Tian, S. He, W. Zheng, J. Sun, Z. Wang and X. Jiang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2012, 1, 90–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Peng, S. Wang, Z. Zhang, H. Xiong, J. Li, L. Chen and Y. Li, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2012, 60, 1921–1928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Zhu, M. Xue, F. Xue, Q. Wang, Z. Meng, W. Lu, W. Chen, F. Qi and Z. Yan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 222–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Couturier, M. Sutterlin, A. Laschewsky, C. Hettrich and E. Wischerhoff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6641–6644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shin, P. V. Braun and W. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 150, 183–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Raymond, I. B. Burgess, M. H. Kinney, M. Loncar and J. Aizenberg, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 3666–3669 RSC .
T. A. Singleton, I. B. Burgess, B. A. Nerger, A. Goulet-Hanssens, N. Koay, C. J. Barrett and J. Aizenberg, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 1325–1328 RSC .
J. Hou, H. Zhang, Q. Yang, M. Li, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5791–5795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fang, J. Geng, B. Liu, D. Gao, F. Li, Z. Wang, G. Guan and Z. Zhang, Chemistry, 2009, 15, 11507–11514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wang, Z. Pan, L. Cui, L. Xu, R. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1730–1735 RSC .
D. Xu, W. Zhu, C. Wang, T. Tian, J. Li, Y. Lan, G. Zhang, D. Zhang and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14133–14136 RSC .
Y. Zhao, X. Zhao, C. Sun, J. Li, R. Zhu and Z. Gu, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 1598–1605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Shang, F. Zheng, J. Lu, J. Qian, Y. Zhao and Z. Gu, Small, 2014, 10, 88–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3465–3520 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, J. Deng, S. Xie, H. Yang and H. Dai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 900–910 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Lee, Appl. Petrochem. Res., 2014, 4, 11–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, J. Feng, M. Fan, Y. Pi, L. Hu, X. Han, M. Liu, J. Sun and J. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 14610–14630 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Dai, J. Deng, L. Zhang, Z. Zhao, X. Li, Y. Wang, S. Xie, H. Yang and G. Guo, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 8665–8676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, H. Dai, J. Deng, H. Yang, W. Han, H. Arandiyan and G. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 279, 392–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Deng, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and H. Dai, Catal. Today, 2015, 245, 28–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, H. Dai, J. Deng, Y. Liu, H. Yang, Y. Jiang, W. Tan, A. Ao and G. Guo, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11207–11219 RSC .
K. Ji, H. Dai, J. Deng, X. Li, Y. Wang, B. Gao, G. Bai and C. T. Au, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 447–448, 41–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Dai, J. Deng, X. Li, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, S. Xie, H. Yang and G. Guo, J. Catal., 2013, 305, 146–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, T. Li, J. Liu, A. Duan and G. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 146, 57–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, C. Xu, G. Jiang and A. Duan, Small, 2013, 9, 3957–3963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, S. Liu, C. Xu, A. Duan and G. Jiang, J. Catal., 2014, 317, 62–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Chen, C. Xu, A. Duan, G. Jiang and H. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2326–2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, J. Jiao, J. Liu, A. Duan and G. Jiang, Catal. Today, 2015, 245, 37–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Shi, X. Gao, H. Liu, B. Wang and C. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 29694 RSC .
Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, B. Jin, X. Yu, J. Jiao, K. Li and J. Liu, Catal. Today, 2015, 251, 103–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Li, Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, B. Jin, A. Duan and G. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 9653–9664 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jin, Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Yu, Y. Li and J. Li, Catal. Today, 2015, 1–11,  DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2015.01.021 .
S. Cai, D. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Huang, H. Li, R. Gao, L. Shi and J. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 93–101 CAS .
Y. Xin, P. Jiang, M. Yu, H. Gu, Q. Li and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6419 CAS .
H. Arandiyan, H. Dai, K. Ji, H. Sun and J. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1781–1793 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guo, K. Lian, F. Gu, D. Han and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13575–13577 RSC .
H. Arandiyan, H. Dai, J. Deng, Y. Wang, H. Sun, S. Xie, B. Bai, Y. Liu, K. Ji and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14913–14928 CAS .
K. An, S. Alayoglu, N. Musselwhite, K. Na and G. A. Somorjai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6830–6833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, T. Niu, D. Pan, F. Liu and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 483, 10–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, R. Hirota, T. Kubota, Y. Yoneyama and N. Tsubaki, Catal. Commun., 2011, 13, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Woodford, J.-P. Dacquin, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6145 CAS .
J. J. Creasey, C. M. A. Parlett, J. C. Manayil, M. A. Isaacs, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2398–2405 RSC .
C. M. A. Parlett, P. Keshwalla, S. G. Wainwright, D. W. Bruce, N. S. Hondow, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2122–2129 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kamegawa, S. Tanaka, H. Seto, D. Zhou and H. Yamashita, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13323–13328 RSC .
T. Sen, J. Whittle and M. Howard, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4232–4234 RSC .
G. Collins, M. Blömker, M. Osiak, J. D. Holmes, M. Bredol and C. O'Dwyer, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4312–4320 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiao, Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Li, A. Duan and G. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 17345–17354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiao, Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, W. Zhong, J. Liu, J. Li, A. Duan and G. Jiang, Catal. Today, 2015, 1–8,  DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2015.01.030 .
X. Zheng, S. Meng, J. Chen, J. Wang, J. Xian, Y. Shao, X. Fu and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21263–21273 CAS .
H. Lee, T. Shim, H. Hwang, S.-M. Yang and S.-H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2684–2690 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, J. Teng, Z. Xiong, Y. Li, Q. Li, X. Lu and X. S. Zhao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5157–5164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, J. Jin, J. Liu, Z. Deng, Y. Li, O. Deparis and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15491 CAS .
M. Wu, J. Liu, J. Jin, C. Wang, S. Huang, Z. Deng, Y. Li and B.-L. Su, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150–151, 411–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamegawa, Y. Ishiguro, H. Seto and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2323–2330 CAS .
W.-Q. Fan, H.-Y. Bai, G.-H. Zhang, Y.-S. Yan, C.-B. Liu and W.-D. Shi, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 116–122 RSC .
D. Qi, L. Lu, Z. Xi, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 160–161, 621–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Yan, S. Zhao, B. Lin, C. Xue, G. Yang, S. Ding, B. Yang, C. Ma, G. Yang and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15611 CAS .
S. Lee, Y. Lee, D. H. Kim and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12526–12532 CAS .
L. Lu, L. Li, T. Hu, W. Zhang, X. Huang, J. Zhang and X. Liu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 394, 283–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, L. Yang, T. Tao, F. Ma, M. Xu and Z. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 288, 2–7 Search PubMed .
M. Li, X. Li, G. Jiang and G. He, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 5749–5757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Chen, A.-J. Wang, C. Dai, J. B. Benziger and X.-C. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 249, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, Z. Xiong, X. Lu and J. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 545–553 CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Yang, J. Xu, Z. Fu, M. Wu and F. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 3515–3522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Jin, Y. Li, H.-W. Huang, C. Wang, M. Wu, L.-H. Chen and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5051 CAS .
L. Li, X. Huang, T. Hu, J. Wang, W. Zhang and J. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 5293–5302 RSC .
S. Meng, D. Li, X. Zheng, J. Wang, J. Chen, J. Fang, Y. Shao and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2744 CAS .
T. Tan, W. Xie, G. Zhu, J. Shan, P. Xu, L. Li and J. Wang, J. Porous Mater., 2015, 22, 659–663 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, W. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19244 RSC .
E. S. Da Silva, V. Prevot, C. Forano, P. Wong-Wah-Chung, H. D. Burrows and M. Sarakha, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 2014, 21, 11218–11227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Dai, J. Deng, L. Zhang and C. T. Au, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2317–2325 RSC .
K. Ji, H. Dai, J. Deng, H. Zang, H. Arandiyan, S. Xie and H. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 274–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and K. Q. Zhang, Sensors, 2013, 13, 4192–4213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, F. Teng, S. Tapas, D. Qi, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 9–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, K. Zhang, K. Shin, J. H. Moon, T.-W. Lee and J. H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11717–11722 RSC .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Tsang, N. E. Pridmore, L. J. Gillie, Y. H. Chou, R. Brydson and R. E. Douthwaite, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3406–3409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, J. K. Kim, K. Zhang, X. Shi, S. J. Kim, J. H. Moon and J. H. Park, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5592–5597 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, J. H. Moon, T.-W. Leec and J. H. Park, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11939–11941 RSC .
X. Chen, J. Ye, S. Ouyang, T. Kako, Z. Li and Z. Zou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4310–4318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Yoon, J. S. Lee, K. Kim, C. H. Bak, S. I. Kim, J. B. Kim and J. H. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22634–22639 CAS .
S. Yoon, M. Kim, I.-S. Kim, J.-H. Lim and B. Yoo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11621 CAS .
C.-Y. Cho, S. Lee, J. Lee, D. C. Lee and J. H. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17568–17573 CAS .
C. Cheng, S. K. Karuturi, L. Liu, J. Liu, H. Li, L. T. Su, A. I. Tok and H. J. Fan, Small, 2012, 8, 37–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 2139–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Primo, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 886–910 RSC .
C. T. Dinh, H. Yen, F. Kleitz and T. O. Do, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6618–6623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, L. Xie, M. Wang and X. Ge, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2991–2998 CAS .
L. Yuan, Z. Yu, C. Li, J. Li, Y. Shen, H. Zhang, C. Wang and A. Xie, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, H332–H336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Mi, X. Tan and C. Lv, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4445–4455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamegawa, N. Suzuki, M. Che and H. Yamashita, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2873–2879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Briens, J. Piskorz and F. Berruti, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2008, 6 CAS .
P. Gallezot, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1538–1558 RSC .
S. Nishimura, A. Takagaki and K. Ebitani, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2026 RSC .
H. Xu, S. Ouyang, L. Liu, P. Reunchan, N. Umezawa and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12642 CAS .
W. Liu, A. Wang, J. Tang, S.-l. Chen, G. Yuan, K. Zhao, C. Li and X. Liu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 204, 143–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Gornowich and G. J. Blanchard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12165–12171 CAS .
Y. Jiang, C. Cui, Y. Huang, X. Zhang and J. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5490–5493 RSC .
D. Mersch, C. Y. Lee, J. Z. Zhang, K. Brinkert, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Arutanti, A. B. Nandiyanto, T. Ogi, T. O. Kim and K. Okuyama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3009–3017 CAS .
A. Stein, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 262–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Dong, S. Zhu, C. Liu and Z. Wen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 49, 448–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, Y. Kim, Y. Ko, S. Cheong, S. W. Ryu and J. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17213–17223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Y. Foo, T. K. Hoo, M. Ng and J. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 3598–3603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Isshiki, M. Nakamura, S. Tabata, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2011, 22, 1254–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Kim, J. Suk, D. W. Kim, Y. Kang, S. H. Im, Y. Yang and O. O. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6396–6401 CAS .
J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. H. Choi, H. K. Yu, J. H. Kim, J. S. Lee and S. Y. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4438–4448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Petkovich, S. G. Rudisill, B. E. Wilson, A. Mukherjee and A. Stein, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 1100–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Hu, Z. Liu, K. W. Nam, O. J. Borkiewicz, J. Cheng, X. Hua, M. T. Dunstan, X. Yu, K. M. Wiaderek, L. S. Du, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas, X. Q. Yang and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1130–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ming, Y. Wu, J. B. Park, J. K. Lee, F. Zhao and Y. K. Sun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10390–10396 RSC .
M. P. B. Glazer, J. Cho, J. Almer, J. Okasinski, P. V. Braun and D. C. Dunand, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500466 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2778–2783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Ergang, J. C. Lytle, K. T. Lee, S. M. Oh, W. H. Smyrl and A. Stein, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1750–1753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Esmanski and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1999–2010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Doherty, R. A. Caruso, B. M. Smarsly and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2895–2903 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Kang, S. O. Kim, Y. J. Chae, J. K. Lee and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1192–1198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Osiak, H. Geaney, E. Armstrong and C. O'Dwyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9433 CAS .
J.-J. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, F.-Z. Meng and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2213 CAS .
C. Y. Cho, H. N. Kim and J. H. Moon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10835–10840 RSC .
J. P. Bosco, K. Sasaki, M. Sadakane, W. Ueda and J. G. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 966–973 CrossRef CAS .
H. Munakata, D. Yamamoto and K. Kanamura, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 596–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kong, Q. Dai, C. Miao, L. Xu and H. Song, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 450, 196–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, G.-Y. Dong, B. Lin, J. Qu, N.-Y. Yuan and J.-N. Ding, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 52–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, Y. H. Jang, Y. J. Jang, J. Kim, W. Lee, J. H. Moon and D. H. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2590–2596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Roelofs, T. P. Brennan and S. F. Bent, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 348–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Ha, J. S. Kim, C.-Y. Cho, J. W. Lee, H.-G. Han, T.-H. Kwon and J. H. Moon, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40980–40984 RSC .
L. Kong, Q. Dai, C. Miao, L. Xu and H. Song, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 450, 196–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tian and M. A. Snyder, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 9828–9837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Varghese, Y. Xuan, B. Niu, L. Fan, P. Bermel and M. Qi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 692–698 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Park, W. S. Chi, D. K. Roh, S. H. Ahn and J. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 26–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yantara, T. T. T. Pham, P. P. Boix and N. Mathews, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21694–21701 RSC .
Y. Park, J. W. Lee, S.-J. Ha and J. H. Moon, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3105–3109 RSC .
Y. F. Wang, K. N. Li, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5940–5948 RSC .
C. Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9372–9377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Battaglia, C. M. Hsu, K. Soderstrom, J. Escarre, F. J. Haug, M. Charriere, M. Boccard, M. Despeisse, D. T. Alexander, M. Cantoni, Y. Cui and C. Ballif, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2790–2797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Subban, I. C. Smith and F. J. Disalvo, Small, 2012, 8, 2824–2832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Shin, J. H. Kang, W. M. Jin, J. H. Park, Y. S. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 856–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Arsenault, N. Soheilnia and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2984–2988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guldin, S. Huttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Muller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tetreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kwak, W. Lee, N.-G. Park, J. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1093–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Jiang, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Kuo and S. Y. Lu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095705 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Lee, N. M. Abrams, P. G. Hoertz, G. D. Barber, L. I. Halaoui and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14415–14421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, W. Li, B. Ma and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5926–5940 RSC .
R. Raccis, A. Nikoubashman, M. Retsch, U. Jonas, K. Koynov, H. J. Butt, C. N. Likos and G. Fytas, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4607–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cherdhirankorn, M. Retsch, U. Jonas, H. J. Butt and K. Koynov, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10141–10146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. F. K. M. Karg, M. Retsch, C. Stelling, P. M. Reichstein, T. Honold, M. Thelakkat and A. Fery, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 185–205 CrossRef PubMed .
V. O. Williams, E. J. DeMarco, M. J. Katz, J. A. Libera, S. C. Riha, D. W. Kim, J. R. Avila, A. B. Martinson, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12290–12294 CAS .
L. N. Quan, Y. H. Jang, K. A. Stoerzinger, K. J. May, Y. J. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu, Y. Shao-Horn and D. H. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9023–9030 RSC .
G. He and A. Manthiram, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5277–5283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Petkovich, B. E. Wilson, S. G. Rudisill and A. Stein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18215–18227 CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915–1919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis, P. Knauth and T. Djenizian, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3368–3397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, H. B. Wu, B. Dong, S. Ding and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2 CAS .
J.-S. Lee, S. Tai Kim, R. Cao, N.-S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Clockwise from top left: Katherine R. Phillips, Grant T. England, Dr Elijah Shirman, Steffi Sunny and Dr Tanya Shirman
	Katherine Phillips graduated from Brown University in 2010 with an ScB in chemistry and mathematics. She subsequently joined the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Harvard, where she is a PhD candidate in the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg. Her research interests broadly include using chemistry to make nanomaterials for optical, catalytic, and electrochemical uses, and she is currently working to develop sol–gel processes for the fabrication of inverse opals with optical and catalytic functions.
	Grant T. England obtained his BE in electrical engineering and mathematics in 2009 from Vanderbilt University. He is currently pursuing a PhD in Applied Physics in the John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard working with Prof. Joanna Aizenberg. His research is focused on bio-inspired photonics and structurally colored materials.
	Steffi Sunny completed her undergraduate degree in Nanotechnology Engineering at the University of Waterloo in 2012. She is currently pursuing a PhD in Bioengineering in the John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard in the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg. Steffi's research in the Aizenberg group involves work on omniphobic surfaces and their applications.
	Dr Elijah Shirman received a BSc and MSc in Physical Chemistry from the Hebrew University and a PhD from the Weizmann Institute of Science, in Israel, working on laser-induced processes and self-assembled photoactive molecular structures. As a postdoc at Tufts University, he worked on silk-based photonic crystals and hybrid bioelectronic devices. He then moved to the Aizenberg group, where he focuses on the development of sensors and adaptive photonic materials using a combination of colloidal self-assembly, nanofabrication, surface chemistry, and microfluidic methods.
	Dr Tanya Shirman received her PhD in chemistry from the Weizmann Institute of Science. In 2012, she joined the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2014, she was appointed Technology Development Fellow at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University. She is working on a variety of projects focusing on the development of dynamic optical and functional materials based on structural color and inorganic nanoparticles for production of industrially valuable pigments and catalysts.

Prof. Nicolas Vogel
	Prof. Nicolas Vogel studied chemistry at the Johannes Gutenberg-University in Mainz, Germany and Seoul National University in Seoul, Republic of Korea. In 2011, he received his PhD at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz. He then joined the group of Prof. Joanna Aizenberg at Harvard University as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2014, he was appointed associate professor in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg. He likes to apply colloidal assembly to create functional materials and coatings, for example for structural color or tailored wetting properties.

Prof. Joanna Aizenberg
	Prof. Joanna Aizenberg received a BS and MS in Chemistry from the Moscow State University, and a PhD in Structural Biology from the Weizmann Institute of Science. She then did postdoctoral research at Harvard University on micro/nanofabrication and near-field optics. After nearly a decade at Bell Labs, she joined the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Harvard University in 2007. She is a pioneer of the rapidly developing field of biomimetic materials synthesis, using basic principles of biological design to develop advanced new materials.

 	Fig. 1  Colloidal particles, from biology to applications. (A) Biological examples of structures on the colloidal length scale: (i and ii) disordered particles provide the crown feathers of the Lepidothrix coronata butterfly with a vivid blue color (scale bars = 200 mm (left), 1 μm (right)),4 reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010; (iii and iv) the skin of a Furcifer pardalis panther chameleon changes color in response to excitement as a result of the changing periodicity of the underlying structure (scale bar = 200 nm),6 reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015; and (v and vi) a lotus leaf has self-cleaning properties due to the microstructure of the surface (scale bar = 20 μm),7 reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2008. (B) Properties and degrees of freedom of colloidal assemblies. (C) Application areas that particularly benefit from using colloid-based materials are optics,22 wetting,23 sensing,24 catalysis,25 and electrodes.26 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons (copyright 2014), the American Chemical Society (copyright 2004, 2013, and 2014), and Nature Publishing Group (copyright 2013).	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of various methods to control CBPM composition. The material itself can be controlled, functional additives such as nanoparticles can be used, and the surface can be modified, either with a conformal thin film or with a molecular surface layer.	 

 	Fig. 3  Colloidal assembly structures with different order and porosity. (A) Direct colloidal crystal, or opal.80 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (B) Disordered assembly of colloids.4 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010. (C) Inverse colloidal crystal, or inverse opal, prepared by filling the interstitial sites of the colloidal assembly and removing the colloidal template.59 Reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2010. (D) Mesoporous–macroporous material from colloidal templating, where the inverse opal matrix is further structured with mesopores.81 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 4  Overview of types of patterned structures that can be created from colloidal self-assembly processes. (A) Colloidal monolayers create periodic surface structures at the nanoscale that can be used as templates or masks to produce (i) a honeycomb structure by backfilling with a second material95 (reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013), (ii) an array of nanocones from anisotropic etching processes using the colloids as a mask96 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009), or (iii) complex nanostructures by a combination of angular evaporation and etching involving the monolayer as template97 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011). (B) 3D porous materials from inverted colloidal crystals (i) with gold nanoparticles embedded inside98 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012), (ii) with anisotropic pore shape99 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014), and (iii) with two distinct periodicities88 (reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013). (C) Hierarchical assemblies produce materials with periodicities at multiple length scales and can be prepared by (i) photolithography of a self-assembled structure100 (reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015), (ii) assembly in a topographically structured substrate101 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2001), or (iii) inkjet printing of colloidal dispersions102 (reproduced with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2006). (D) Assembly in confinement can also produce superparticles, micron-scale structures of self-assembled colloidal particles, for example via confinement in (i) surface channels on a substrate, producing bricklike structures103 (modified with permission from OSA publishing, copyright 2014), (ii) a silicone microtube, forming a helical superstructure of colloidal particles104 (reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2005), or (iii) emulsion droplets, producing spherical superparticles105 (reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015).	 

 	Fig. 5  Colloidal self-assembly can yield surface patterns or structured materials with nanoscale dimensions in a parallel fabrication process over large areas. (A and B) Wafer scale colloidal monolayer deposition using a Langmuir trough.115 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011. (C and D) Wafer scale processing of opals via spin-coating.109,159 Reproduced with permission from AIP publishing LLC (copyright 2006) and the American Chemical Society (copyright 2004). (E and F) Melt extrusion of core–shell particles can fabricate elastomeric, mechanically stable opals over large areas.135,136,160 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons (copyright 2008), Elsevier (copyright 2003), and the American Chemical Society (copyright 2013). (G and H) Droplet-based microfluidics can be used to prepare spherical superparticles in a continuous-flow method105 (reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015), and (H) the throughput can be increased by parallelization while maintaining monodispersity161 (reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the influence of materials properties on the photonic peak of an opal. (A) A direct opal. (B and C) Direct opals formed from different types of colloids: (B) core–shell colloids, which can change size (and color) in response to a stimulus, and (C) colloids made of a material with a lower refractive index than in (A), resulting in a blue shifted spectrum. (D and E) Direct opals with (D) selective and (E) broadband absorbers. Insets show schematics of the reflected Bragg peak of the structure (black line, A–E), the reflected Bragg peak of the reference structure shown in part A (gray line, B–E), and the absorption spectra of the absorbers added to the material (blue line, D and E).	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of various methods for changing the angular dispersion of structural color in CBPM. (A) A direct opal. (B–E) Direct opals in various geometries: (B) patterned, (C) disordered, and (D and E) assembled in confinement—both (D) spherical and (E) rectangular. Insets show schematics of the reflected spectra for various detection angles, assuming normal incidence illumination.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 8  Structural color created from colloidal photonic crystals. (A) Silica inverse opal powders with various pore sizes (red, 360 nm; green, 336 nm; blue 288 nm; other colors are 1:1 mixes of these) with mixed RGB reference images.22 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (B) Images of a stretched colloidal crystal elastomer and absorbance spectra showing the position of the Bragg peak for different strain values.172 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (C) Disordered opal structure generated by spray coating, showing: left, color change by adding different amounts of carbon black to mixtures of two different colloid sizes; right, different colors for different sizes of colloids.180 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 9  Antireflective coating based on hierarchical colloidal lithography. (A) Schematic representation of the fabrication of compound submicrometer structures (c-SMSs) and ordered submicrometer gratings (o-SMGs) for use as antireflective coatings. A layer of colloids is first etched to create o-SMG, which is coated with gold and thermally treated to generate nanoparticles on the surface, which is then etched again to generate a c-SMS. (B) Tilted-angle and side-view (inset) SEM images of hierarchical nanostructure antireflective coatings using Au film thicknesses of 3, 5, and 7 nm. (C) Transmittance spectra for the structures shown in A along with the transmittance spectrum for the bare structure (without the additional gold etching step, black line, o-SMGs). Insets show the diffuse transmittance spectra and haze ratio values for two different wavelengths for all samples.188 Reproduced with permission from OSA publishing, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 10  Colloidal crystal superparticles with little angle-dependence of color. (A–C) Ink-jet printed hemispherical colloidal superparticles. (A) SEM image of a dome (scale bar: 5 μm). (B) Normalized fluorescent intensity of domes (red) and dots (black) for different detection angles. (C) Top and side view images of a pattern of domes showing a wide angular visibility of the color.205 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (D) 2.8 cm × 1.5 cm flexible buckled-sphere colloidal superparticle films showing lack of angle dependence of the structural color upon compression and stretching. Colloid sizes: 170 nm (blue), 200 nm (green), 250 nm (red).203 Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 11  Lithographic patterning of colloidal photonic crystals. (A) Left, schematic illustration of patterning method used to make multi-colored colloidal crystals. Right, optical images of films with two and three colors under different viewing angles.144 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. (B and C) Hierarchical “pixelated” inverse opal arrays made from SU-8: (B) optical microscopic image of the hierarchical inverse opal, and (C) SEM of the structure.207 Reproduced with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 12  Overview of different wetting states of liquids on surfaces and resulting macroscopic properties. (A) Wenzel state for antifogging coatings. The uncoated region of the glass slide shows droplet formation while the coated region appears transparent.86 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2006. (B) Cassie–Baxter state for superhydrophobic self-cleaning surfaces.215 Reproduced with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015. (C) Re-entrant geometry for superoleophobic surfaces, such as for oil transport. The red droplets are dyed rapeseed oil on a duck feather modified to be superoleophobic.216 Reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Science, copyright 2008. (D) Liquid-infused surfaces capable of preventing bacterial attachment and thus preventing bacterial biofilms. The fluorescent control image indicates bacterial biofilm formation on a flat polytetrafluoroethylene substrate after incubation in bacterial culture, while the lack of fluorescence on the lubricant-infused roughened polytetrafluoroethylene surface indicates that the surface contains no bacteria after incubation.217 Reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Science, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 13  Various types of roughness formed from CBPM. (A) Longer plasma treatment times etch away at close-packed polystyrene particles, increasing the interparticle spacing. This surface modification leads to increased surface roughness and therefore increased superhydrophobicity, as shown (i) before, and (ii) after plasma treatment.23 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2004. (B) Inverse colloidal monolayers infused with lubricant repel both low and high surface tension liquids such as octane and water. (i) SEM of structure; (ii) sliding angle of water and octane.95 Reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013. (C) Layer-by-layer assembly of silica nanoparticles creates superhydrophobic surfaces after modification with a fluorinated silane. (i) SEM of the structure; (ii) photograph demonstrating the resulting high contact angle.85 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2007.	 

 	Fig. 14  Examples of re-entrant geometries created using ordered and disordered colloidal assemblies. (A) (i) Side view, and (ii) top view of re-entrant geometry created with plasma etching and colloidal lithography, where the mushroom caps are composed of polystyrene (PS) and the stems are composed of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA).236 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (B) A superamphiphobic coating created using hollow silica particles. (i) Schematic of re-entrant curvature supporting a low surface tension solvent droplet, and (ii) SEM image of the coating, with an inset of a hexadecane droplet on the surface (CA = 156°).237 Reproduced with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Sciences, copyright 2012. (C) An omniphobic coating: (i) SEM of ZnO particles sprayed with perfluoroacrylic polymer emulsion, and (ii) the resulting high oil contact angle.238 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 15  Controlling bulk wettability in inverse opals. (A) Wetting conditions for inverse opals. (i) Liquids form a contact angle θC on a flat substrate. (ii) Two adjacent pores are separated by re-entrant geometry characterized by an angle, θN. Liquids will infiltrate an inverse opal assembly of a given material composed of pores connected at some angle θN if θC < θN.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (B) Inverse opals attached to a solid support are isotropic upon assembly, but after high temperature treatments they form anisotropic pores, causing liquids to wet only from the side.239 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (C) Chemical patterning of an inverse opal structure leads to varying degrees of bulk wettability depending on the liquid used, the neck angle of the pore, and the chemistry of the pores.78 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 16  Overview of sensing parameters. (A) Possible physical, chemical, and biological stimuli. (B) Response mechanisms include: (i) change in the periodicity, where an increase in the lattice constant results in a red shift in the CBPM stopband; (ii) change in the refractive index contrast between the pores and the filler, where a decrease in refractive index contrast, accompanied by positive change in the average refractive index, results in a decrease in the intensity of the reflectance and a red shift in the peak; and (iii) change in the absorption intensity of an additive incorporated into the CBPM, where higher absorption intensity can result in an increase in the saturation of the observed color.	 

 	Fig. 17  CBPM colorimetric sensors with varying degrees of hierarchy designed to respond to various types of stimuli. (A) Spatially and chemically patterned silica inverse opal film for identification of liquids.77 The sample is shown wetted with ethanol (left), and methanol (right). Scale bar 5 mm. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (B) Spatially patterned CBPM with direct opal structure for sensing of vapors, formed by inkjet printing of solid silica colloids (the trunk) and mesoporous silica colloids (the leaves).260 The sample is shown (left) before, and (right) after exposure to ethanol vapors. Scale bar 5 mm. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (C) Temperature responsive spherical superparticles with inverse opal structure made of poly(n-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel.267 Scale bar 200 μm. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 18  Silica inverse opals infiltrated with hexaphenylsilole (HPS) change color upon exposure to vapors of diethyl ether due to a change in refractive index stemming from a crystalline to amorphous transition of HPS within the matrix.270 (A) Optical images of a sample upon exposure to air and diethyl ether vapor. (B) SEM image of a silica inverse opal film before infiltration with HPS. (C) Optical reflectance spectra obtained during exposure of the HPS-infiltrated inverse opal film to the vapors of diethyl ether for different amounts of time. Reused with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 19  Photoinduced saturation changes in silica amorphous colloidal arrays.272 (A) Schematic representation of the photoinduced formation (under UV) or oxidation/decomposition (under visible light) of silver nanoparticles in the presence of titania nanoparticles leading to visual changes in the saturation of the structural color. (B) Changes in the intensity of absorption at 500 nm of the Ag/TiO2 composite film exposed to alternating UV (313 nm) and visible (>420 nm) light. (C) Samples after exposure to light: (left) the changes in the reflection spectra and the corresponding optical images of the colloidal amorphous array exposed to UV light of varying intensity; (right) the same samples after exposure to visible light for 12 hours. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 20  Hydrogel inverse opal for pH and mercury ion sensing.278 (A) SEM image of the structure. An optical image of the sample is shown in the inset. (B) Schematic diagram of the pH and Hg2+ sensing mechanism. (C) The diffraction wavelength shift as a function of the ion concentration for various ions in aqueous solution. (D) Comparison of the diffraction wavelength shifts for various ions at 1 mM concentration, showing selectivity for Hg2+. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 21  Spatially patterned molecularly-imprinted inverse opal array for the detection of poly-brominated diphenylethers.324 (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the array. (B) Molecular structures of the analytes used (BPA, BIP, DBDE, TBDE, and TBBPA). (C) Optical response of the BIP-imprinted sensor to DBDE. (D) Optical response of TBBPA-imprinted sensor to TBDE. (E) 2D principal component analysis plot for the identification of TBDE and three different mixtures by the molecularly-imprinted sensor array, where mixture 1 is TBDE and BPA, mixture 2 is TBDE, BPA, and TBBPA, and mixture 3 is TBDE, BPA, TBBPA and BIP. (D) 3D principal component analysis plots for the identification of each analyte (TBDE: 1 × 10−12 M, BPA: 1 × 10−10 M, TBBPA: 1 × 10−10 M, BIP: 1 × 10−10 M and DBDE: 1 × 10−10 M) by the MIPPs sensor array. PC1, PC2, and PC3 represent the principal components calculated. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 22  Temperature-responsive hydrogel inverse opal superparticle sensors with controlled drug release.267 (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and controlled drug release of the particles. (B) Release profiles of fluorescently-labelled dextran from the particles under different temperature cycles. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic summarizing the advantageous properties provided by CBPM for the design of an efficient heterogeneous catalyst.	 

Environmental catalysis
CO and toluene oxidation	CeO2;331 Au/Mn2O3;332 Pr6O11;333 Tb4O7;333 Au/Co3O4;334 Au/Mn2O3/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3;328 Co3O4/Eu0.6Sr0.4FeO3;335 Au/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3336


Soot combustion	Pt/MO (M = Mn, Co, Fe, Ni, Cu);337 Pt@CeO2/CeO2;338 Au@Pt/Ce0.8Zr0.2O2;339 Au/LaFeO3;340,341 Au/CeO2;342 Au–Pt/Ce0.8Zr0.2O2;343 Pt/MnCeO;344 Al2O3/CeO2;345 Au/LaFeO3340,341


NOx reduction	Ce0.75Zr0.2M0.05O2−δ (M = Fe, Cu, Mn, Co);346 CeO2/TiO2347


Methane oxidation	Pt/Ce0.6Zr0.3Y0.1O2;348 Pd/LaMnO3;349 Ag/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3350


Chemical fuel synthesis
Isomerization	Pt/SiO2, Al2O3, TiO2, Nb2O5, Ta2O5, ZrO2351


Cracking (oil)	Al2O3/SiO2342


Fischer–Tropsch	Co@Cu/SiO2–La2O2;352 Fe2O3353


Biodiesel production	Mg–Al hydrotalcites;354 Al2O3-hydrotalcites/SiO2355




Selective organic transformations
Selective oxidation	Pd/SiO2;356 Al/SiO2;357 VO/SiO2358


Suzuki cross-coupling	Pd/SnO2359


Photocatalysis
CO2 reduction	CeO2/TiO2;360 Au/TiO2;361


Oxidation of organics	TiO2;362–366 TiO2/SiO2;367 Fe3+/TiO2;368 Ti3+/TiO2;369 N/TiO2;370 C/TiO2;371 K5[Co(H2O)PW11O39]/TiO2;372 CuO/TiO2;373 ZrO2/TiO2;374 SnO2/TiO2;375 Au/TiO2;98,376 Ag/TiO2;377,378 Ag/Bi2O3–TiO2;379 ZnO;378,380 BiFeO3;381 Bi2WO6;382 W10O34/Mg2Al;383 BiVO4;384 Au, Pt, Pd/AgBr/BiVO4;385 InVO4;386 CrxOyTiO2/SiO2387


Water splitting	α-Fe2O3;388 TiO2;70 Au/TiO2;389 TaON;390 WO3/BiVO4;391 WO3;392,393 graphene/Fe2O3;394 Cu2O3;395 quantum dot/TiO2;396,397 Mo/BiVO425

 	Fig. 24  Fabrication of colloid-based hierarchically porous catalysts incorporating metal NP for oxidation of methane. (A) Representative SEM image of 3D ordered macro/mesoporous Ce0.6Zr0.3Y0.1O2 (CZY) embedded with PtNP (1.1 wt%). (B) Methane conversion versus temperature over the macroporous CZY, x wt% Pt/CZY, and Bulk CZY catalysts.348 Reused with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 25  Hierarchically ordered colloid-based macro/mesoporous (MM) silica (SBA-15) structures loaded with Pd NP (Pd/MM-SBA-15) demonstrate enhanced catalytic activity in the aerobic selective oxidation of bulky allylic alcohols to their aldehydes. (A) SEM and TEM images of MM-SBA-15 and corresponding 0.78 wt% Pd/MM-SBA-15. (B) Impact of interconnected macroporosity on the oxidation of farnesol and phytol over Pd/MM-SBA-15 versus Pd/SBA-15.356 Reused with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 26  Inverse opals for electrochemical water splitting. (A) Ideal schematic representation of the expected advantages of integrative Mo:BiVO4 macro-mesoporous photoelectrodes. (B) SEM image (top view) of Mo:BiVO4 inverse opal. (C) Photocurrent density stability of various films at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The films for measurement are before illumination, and after illumination for 5 h, respectively. (D) Enhancement factors of solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies (ηSTH).25 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 


Capacitor	✓✓	✓	✗	Electrical	Electrical	Surface area	
58, 73, 415, 417, 418



Battery	✓	✓✓	✗	Chemical (discharge)	Electrical (discharge)	Diffusion	
26, 62, 68, 74, 420–431, 464–466



Fuel cell	✓✓	✓✓	✗	Chemical	Electrical	Diffusion	
58, 433, 434



Solar cell	✓✓	✓	✓	Light	Electrical	Charge separation	
58, 65–67, 71, 72, 201, 393, 432, 435–439, 441–447, 449–457, 462


 	Fig. 27  Schematic of double-layer inverse opal illustrating the key advantages of CBPM in electrode applications: (A) high surface area, (B) porosity, and (C) periodicity.	 

 	Fig. 28  Nanoparticle additives lead to close contact between the electroactive material and the conductor. (A) Schematic illustrating the fabrication of a carbon inverse opal with embedded electroactive SnO2 nanoparticles for Li-ion batteries, and (B) their specific capacity and coulombic efficiency, which remain stable after hundreds of cycles.62 Reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 29  Swelling of an electroactive coating material does not lead to disruption of the macroporous structure of an inverse opal. (A) A nickel inverse opal with a conformal silicon layer shown schematically; (B and C) SEM images showing that (B) upon lithiation, the LixSi fills the pores but the structure remains intact, and (C) after delithiation, the structure remains.425 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 30  Photonic crystal effects enhance efficiency in photoanodes. (A–C) SEM images of WO3 inverse opals made from different sizes of colloids. (D) Optical image of the inverse opals shown in (A–C). (E) Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the inverse opals, compared to disordered and unpatterned structures. WO3-200, WO3-260, and WO3-360 correspond to WO3 inverse opals made from 200 nm, 260 nm, and 360 nm colloids, respectively.393 Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 31  Patterning of interdigitated inverse opal electrodes. (A) Schematic, and (B) SEM image of interdigitated microbattery electrode structure with alternating materials (scale bar 50 μm; inset scale bars 1 μm). (C) Larger scale SEM image showing a top-down view of the structure (scale bar 500 μm).26 Reproduced with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2013.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
