Carbon nitrides and metal nanoparticles: from controlled synthesis to design principles for improved photocatalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00479J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00479J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7783-7817Carbon nitrides and metal nanoparticles: from controlled synthesis to design principles for improved photocatalysis

        
          
            Ivo F. 
            Teixeira
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eduardo C. M. 
            Barbosa
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shik Chi Edman 
            Tsang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Pedro H. C. 
            Camargo
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartamento de Química Fundamental, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. E-mail: camargo@iq.usp.br
bWolfson Catalysis Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Received 
      17th July 2018
    First published on 20th September 2018AbstractThe use of sunlight to drive chemical reactions via photocatalysis is of paramount importance towards a sustainable future. Among several photocatalysts, earth-abundant polymeric carbon nitride (PCN, often wrongly named g-C3N4) has emerged as an attractive candidate due to its ability to absorb light efficiently in the visible and near-infrared ranges, chemical stability, non-toxicity, straightforward synthesis, and versatility as a platform for constructing hybrid materials. Especially, hybrids with metal nanoparticles offer the unique possibility of combining the catalytic, electronic, and optical properties of metal nanoparticles with PCN. Here, we provide a comprehensive overview of PCN materials and their hybrids, emphasizing heterostructures with metal nanoparticles. We focus on recent advances encompassing synthetic strategies, design principles, photocatalytic applications, and charge-transfer mechanisms. We also discuss how the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect of some noble metals NPs (e.g. Au, Ag, and Cu), bimetallic compositions, and even non-noble metals NPs (e.g., Bi) synergistically contribute with PCN in light-driven transformations. Finally, we provide a perspective on the field, in which the understanding of the enhancement mechanisms combined with truly controlled synthesis can act as a powerful tool to the establishment of the design principles needed to take the field of photocatalysis with PCN to a new level, where the desired properties and performances can be planned in advance, and the target material synthesized accordingly.
Ivo F. Teixeira
Ivo Teixeira received his BS in 2012 and his MSc in 2013 from the Federal University of Minas Gerais. He obtained his PhD from the University of Oxford in 2017, under the supervision of Prof. Edman Tsang. After that, he joined Prof. Pedro Camargo's group at Universidade de São Paulo as a postdoctoral researcher. His research interests include heterogeneous catalysis and photocatalysis applied for chemical synthesis, environmental remediation, and energy applications.
Eduardo Barbosa
Eduardo Barbosa obtained his BSc in Chemistry from Universidade Estadual de Londrina (2015). He is expected to earn his PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry (2019) from Universidade de São Paulo under Prof. Pedro Camargo's supervision. He is performing a part of his PhD at the University of Oxford (2018–2019) as a visiting researcher advised by Professor S. C. Edman Tsang. His scientific interests include the synthesis of shape-controlled hybrid materials, and their applications in catalysis and photocatalysis.
Shik Chi Edman Tsang
Edman Tsang is a professor of Chemistry and Head of Wolfson Catalysis Centre at the University of Oxford, UK. His research interests are on nanomaterials and catalysis concerning energy and environment which include developments of catalytic, photocatalytic and electrocatalytic technologies for fine chemicals, cleaner combustion, green chemistry, energy storages, and processes and production. His particular expertise is in the design and architecture of nanocatalysts, which can lead to understanding of catalytic surfaces and interfaces. He has won several international awards/recognitions, serves as an Associate Editor in Science Advances (Science sister journal); as a Editorial member of ChemCatChem, Catalysis, Structure & Reactivity (CAT) from Maney; and is a Member of the EPSRC College School.
Pedro H. C. Camargo
Pedro H. C. Camargo obtained his BS and MSc degrees in Chemistry from Federal University of Paraná (Brazil) in 2003 and 2005, respectively. He obtained his PhD from Washington University in Saint Louis in 2009, working in the group of Prof. Younan Xia. He became an Assistant Professor at University of Sao Paulo in 2011 and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2015 and to Full Professor in 2018. He serves as an Editor of the Journal of Materials Science and as an Associate Editor of the Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society. His research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials with controllable physicochemical features for plasmonic nanocatalysis.
1. Introduction
The adverse environmental problems caused by the intensive consumption of fossil fuels have led to an increasing interest in the use of alternative energy sources to serve and deliver power to human activities.1–3 Solar energy has an enormous potential as a clean, abundant, and economical resource.4 Therefore, the efficient harvesting and conversion of solar energy has been a worldwide priority target in the past decade.
In this context, the use of sunlight to drive and control chemical reactions (solar to chemical energy conversion) via photocatalysis represents a very promising approach.5 In photocatalysis, the most studied examples are endothermic reactions, such as H2O splitting and CO2 reduction, where the energy of solar photons can be stored in chemical bonds by using semiconductors as photocatalysts.6,7 Even though a lot of progress has been achieved in the development of semiconductor photocatalysts, most systems require solar energy input in the UV region for band gap excitation.8–10 Thus, most photocatalysts present low solar-energy utilization, as solar light is composed of ultraviolet, visible and infrared components (accounting for 5, 43, and 52%, respectively).11 These features illustrate that it is still very challenging to design new photocatalysts that are abundant, stable, facile to fabricate, and show high performances under visible-light or near-infrared excitation.10
The search for suitable semiconductor photocatalysts to optimise existing or design novel chemical processes is one of the persistent goals of sustainable chemistry. An optimal material would combine the ability to absorb light efficiently, especially in the visible and near-infrared range, and be stable in working chemical and thermal conditions. Moreover, it should be non-toxic, preferentially composed by abundant elements, and easily processable. Mostly explored semiconductors are so far constructed from transition metal ions with d0 or d10 electronic configuration, along with counter-anions such as chalcogens.12,13 However, it remains challenging to engineer and tune the electronic properties of metal chalcogenides. As a result, these structures have rarely been targets of systematic optimisation.14,15 Traditional inorganic semiconductors are limited in the nature of their active sites and thus the scope of applications that they can accomplish.16,17 On the other hand, while organic polymeric catalysts have the advantage of flexibility for optimization, they suffer from serious swelling and stability problems.17 Consequently, it is extremely desirable to have an active and stable photocatalyst that could allow large variations in the structure without having to change its overall composition.
Polymeric carbon nitride (PCN) (often wrongly named g-C3N4 in the literature) is a highly active photocatalyst which, at least in principle, meets above-mentioned requirements (Fig. 1). The history of carbon nitride can be traced back to the embryonic form, “melon”, made by Berzelius and named by Liebig in 1834, being regarded as one of the oldest synthetic polymers.14,16,18 The framework topology of linear polymer melon is presumably consisting of interconnected tri-s-triazines via secondary nitrogens 4,19 while poly(heptazine imide)s 5 comprises rings of six heptazine units that are linked by NH bridges to form a 2D extended network.20–22 The “perfect” graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) material is comprised solely of C and N bonds in the form of p-conjugated planar 2D sheets of poly(tri-s-triazines) interconnected via tertiary amines18,23 with no active basicity, due to the lack of electron localized in the π state.24 However, “perfect” g-C3N4 has not been synthesised to this day.21 The closest from g-C3N4 synthesised up to date were the poly(heptazine imide)s 5 and the triazine-based graphitic carbon nitride (TGCN) 6, the last consists of nitrogen-linked triazine units of sp2-hybridized carbon and nitrogen atoms forming a 2D layered material.25,26 Due to the poor understanding of the actual structures of carbon nitride materials, several reports do not allow a precise identification of which mentioned structure is the one obtained. Because of this, we decided to use in this review the more generic term “polymeric carbon nitride (PCN)” to refer to all the carbon nitride based materials (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of extended carbon nitride materials by polyaddition and polycondensation of the nitrogen-rich precursors. 
In general, most of the synthesis routes lead to predominantly to the linear polymer melon with medium to poor crystallinity and a high degree of disorder, but still showing high photocatalytic activity.14–16 Bulk PCN is typically prepared by the direct thermal condensation of low-cost nitrogen containing precursors (cyanamide, dicyandiamide).27–30 This results in carbon nitrides with several shortcomings, including low specific surface area, insufficient visible light utilization, and, particularly, rapid recombination of photogenerated charge carriers.30–34 High separation/transfer efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs is the most desirable property in PCN-based photocatalysts. Several strategies can be employed to achieve this objective, such as (i) doping the PCN structure with sulphur,35,36 boron,37 oxygen38 and phosphorous;35,39,40 (ii) modifying its synthesis method (e.g. changing and combining different nitrogen containing precursors,18,41,42 introducing mesoporous using hard templates,43,44 microwave-assisted synthesis,45 synthesis in molten salt,46 and synthesis in ionic liquid47); (iii) performing a post treatment (e.g. exfoliation48–51 and thermal treatment18,41,42); (iv) controlling the defects in its structure;52,53 (v) and/or combining it with other structures (e.g. semiconductors,30,54–58 metal nanoparticles (NPs)30,59–61 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)29,62–64).
Among the recent strategies in the development of PCN photocatalytic systems, PCN-based heterostructures are one the most promising due to its feasibility and effectiveness for the spatial separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.30 The PCN-based heterostructures are capable to suppress the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers while endowing the photocatalysts with unique features that arise from the synergism between PCN and the other components. Therefore, we believe that the rational design of PCN-based heterostructures could provide promising routes for creating highly efficient visible-light driven photocatalysts for chemical synthesis, environmental remediation, and energy applications.
Herein, we aim at providing a general overview on heterostructures comprised of PCN and metal nanoparticles (NPs). The synthesis, applications in photocatalytic reactions, and the mechanisms behind the synergistic effects involving PCN and metal NPs will be covered. This review will also focus on how the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect of some noble metals NPs (e.g. Au, Ag, and Cu), bimetallic compositions (AuPd, AuAg, AuPt, etc.), and even non-noble metals NPs (e.g., Bi) can enhance the catalytic properties of PCN in several light-driven transformations.
2. Synthesis of PCN
PCN is commonly synthesized by thermal treatment that leads to a combination of polyaddition and polycondensation reactions of the nitrogen-rich precursors such as urea, thiourea, melamine, cyanamide, and dicyandiamide.65–71 This approach is described in Fig. 1. The precursors condensate into dicyandiamide 1 and melamine (triamino-s-triazine) 2, which forms tri-s-triazine units, also known as melem 3, by polycondensation of melamines. Then, the PCN are formed through the further condensation of the tri-s-triazine units or by the further condensation of melanine with smaller nitrogen-rich precursor molecules in the case of TGCN 6.25,34,72
Interestingly, it has been established that the choice of precursors significantly influences the electronic band structures and textual properties of obtained pristine bulk PCN.30 For example, when thiourea is used to prepare PCN, it exhibits a slightly smaller bandgap when compared with the PCN prepared from urea.73,74 On the other hand, the PCN prepared from urea generally presents much higher specific surface area than that prepared from thiourea and melamine.18,73
Another aspect is that the PCN properties strongly depends on the nitrogen-rich precursors and temperature employed during the thermal polymerization, which represents an attractive method due to its simplicity and low cost. The nitrogen-rich small molecules polymerize into PCN in temperatures ranging between 450 and 650 °C.30,73,75 Bellow 450 °C, the polymerization is incomplete. Over 650 °C, the PCN start to decompose.66 Different precursors calcined at different temperatures can lead to a range of band-gaps and specific surface areas. For instance, urea can produce PCN with band gaps varying from 2.68 to 2.78 eV and surface areas from 31 to 288 m2 g−1, while thiourea can lead to carbon nitrides with band gaps from 2.58 to 2.76 eV and surface areas significantly smaller, corresponding to 11–52 m2 g−1.18 Furthermore, even the atmosphere composition used during the pyrolysis process can great influence the nature of the product obtained, producing nitrogen vacancies and consequently altering the PCN band gap.76 It is important to highlight that these examples involve only the modification in the nature of precursors and calcination temperature. Many other approaches can also be employed to tune carbon nitride properties, such as doping the PCN structure,35–40 introduce mesoporous using hard templates,13,43,44 using other synthesis methods apart from thermal condensation,45–47 adding a post-treatment (e.g. exfoliation48–51 and thermal treatment18,41,42), controlling the defects in its structure,52 and combining it with other structures, such as semiconductors,30,54–58 metal NPs,30,59–61 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).29,62–64
2.1. Challenges in characterizing PCNs
PCN photocatalysts are commonly characterized especially by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). However, the carbon nitride-based materials still have a poorly understood structure. By using the abovementioned techniques, is still not possible to state which of the PCN-based structures is the predominant in the generally reported materials. We would like to make the readers aware that some of the reproduced schematic representations reprinted in this review may not be the representation that better match with the characterization presented in the respective reports.
XRD is an important technique due the two characteristic diffraction peaks at ca. 13.0 and ca. 27.4° that appear for the PCN-based materials.18 The first related to in-plane repeats between heptazine (C6N7) units (spacing of 6.91 Å) and the last related to the π–π stacking motif of the same heptazines on top of each other (spacing of 3.20 Å). Despite the characteristic π–π stacking between the heptazine units, the PCN-based materials cannot be classified as graphitic, since its structure is not extended in a 2D network.21,77 The XPS measurements are especially useful to investigate the chemical environment of carbon and nitrogen elements in PCN, evidencing sp2-bonded carbon in N–CN (ca. 288.1 eV) and the sp2-bonded nitrogen in C–NC (ca. 398.7 eV). Furthermore, XPS allows to characterize elemental doped PCN and estimate the degree of defects in the PCN structure by the nitrogen in tertiary nitrogen groups (ca. 400.3 eV) and the presence of amino groups (C–N–H, ca. 401.4 eV). Most XPS results reported in the literature present significant amino peaks, evidencing structures more similar to melon (polymeric) than to graphitic structures like TGCN. Because of the high thermal stability of PCNs, the decomposition temperature obtained by TGA can be a simple way to confirm the proper polymerization of the nitrogen-rich precursors.18 Despite less developed, spectroscopy techniques also are employed to characterize PCN. IR spectra normally show signals in the ∼3000 cm−1, which is related to primary and secondary amine groups, the last probably forming bridges between the heptazine units. This, once again, confirms a more polymeric and less graphitic-like structure.78 Raman also is employed to characterize PCN structures. In general, Raman spectra for PCN presents two relevant peaks, one observed at ∼1345 cm−1 (D band) and ∼1570 cm−1 (G band). The G band corresponds to the symmetric E2g vibrational mode in graphite-like structures and is attributed to graphite-like sp2 microdomains in the products, while the D band corresponds to disordered sp2 microdomains introduced by the linking with N atoms.59 Although useful, the spectroscopic investigation of PCN by Raman still much less developed than other materials, such as carbon nanostructures. While Raman enables to estimate the number of layers in few layered graphene and to predict the diameter of single-walled carbon nanotubes, there are no studies that allow us to infer structural data for PCN-based materials from Raman spectroscopy.
3. Properties
3.1. Morphological features
As a polymer, g-C3N4 has a flexible structure and is suited to form different morphologies with the assistance of different templates during the synthesis as well as post-treatments. However, differently from most polymeric materials, PCN can endure high temperatures (up to 650 °C),79 even in oxidizing atmosphere.73 PCN have been obtained in several morphologies, such as porous PCN (3D nanostructures),43,44,80 hollow spheres,81 nanorods82/nanowires83/nanotubes84 (1D nanostructures), and nanosheets (2D nanostructures).51,85,86
Mesoporous polymeric carbon nitrides (mp-PCN) can be easily obtained by a hard template method. It has been successfully synthesized using various nitrogen-rich precursors in the presence of silica NPs43,44 or ordered mesoporous silica (e.g. SBA-15)80,87 as a hard template. The removal of those silica structures by a treatment with HF then generates a 3D structure of PCN with a large surface area, which can reach up to 373 m2 g−1.18 The mp-PCN synthesis, functionalization, and applications was recently reviewed by Lakhi and colleagues.88
The preparation of hollow PCN spheres is challenging due to its layered structure, which is more susceptible to collapse. However, Sun et al.81 were successful in coating monodisperse silica NPs with thin mesoporous silica shells and then used it as a hard template to prepare hollow PCN nanospheres. This strategy is similar to the one used to prepare mesoporous PCN. The silica was then removed by a post-treatment with HF at the end of the synthesis. PCN in the form of hollow spheres are very attractive because they are able to harvest more incident light through successive reflections within the hollow structure, producing more photoinduced charge carriers serving as light-harvesting antennas.18
1D nanostructured PCN such as nanorods, nanowires, nanobelts, and nanotubes are also attractive morphologies because their length, diameter, and aspect ratio can be tuned. This, in turn, can lead to unique and tunable chemical, optical and electronic properties.18 1D nanostructured PCN displaying porous structures, large surface areas, and charge-carrier mobility can be prepared using different templating (e.g. SBA-15)80,82 or non-templating (e.g. reflux in solvent)84,89,90 methods.
Bulk PCN display a low specific surface area, corresponding to <10 m2 g−1, due to the stacking of PCN layers. Thus, several studies have been focused on exfoliation methods to obtain nanosheets from bulk PCN. The most common strategies include ultrasonication-assisted liquid exfoliation,49,51,85,91–96 acid exfoliation,97,98 liquid ammonia-assisted lithiation,92 and thermal oxidation.49,99 2D PCN nanosheets exhibit interesting features, such as large specific surface areas, prolonged lifetime of charge carriers, enhanced electron transport property, reduced recombination rate of charge carriers, and improved charge transfer and separation efficiencies.34,100,101 Due to the combination of these very attractive features, it represents the most studied PCN morphology.
3.2. Surface basic and acid sites
Among the several features of PCN, the presence of acid and basic sites in its surface is one of the most interesting but poorly understood properties. PCN has Lewis basic sites (Fig. 2a), which can be the nitrogen present in the six-membered ring (A) or nitrogen present as primary (C) and/or secondary (B) amine groups on the terminating edges due to defects in the PCN structure.66 The surface basicity of PCN can be confirmed by temperature-programmed desorption of CO2 (CO2-TPD).66 This powerful technique also allows to differentiate and estimate the amount of the three basic site types. These basic sites can be applied to catalyze several reactions, such as C–C coupling,43 α-C–H activation,37 NO decomposition,102 and Knoevenagel condensations.24,103–105
 Fig. 2  Acid and basic sites on PCN surface. (a) Lewis basic sites present on the PCN surface: N in six-membered ring (A), secondary amine (B), and primary amine (C).66 (b) Proposed mechanism for the formation of Brønsted acid sites on the PCN surface.106 
The formation of Brønsted acid sites on the PCN surface under oxidation conditions was first proposed by Shiraishi et al.106 in 2014 by the approach shown in Fig. 2b. Ever since, many recent studies have confirmed the presence of highly labile hydrogen adsorption sites at the PCN edges under photooxidation conditions (O2 atmosphere and light) in the presence of alcohol, which can be the substrate or the solvent in the reaction.107,108 These Brønsted acid sites were recently confirmed experimentally by post-mortem temperature programmed desorption and in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis (XPS), which indicates Hads weakly adsorbed on the catalyst surface.107 This same study also confirmed the presence of Hads on PCN by semi-empirical MOPAC2016 calculations and estimated the relative adsorption energies of H pairs (two H atoms) on a model crystalline PCN structure consisting of two H-bonded strips with 6 melem units, which evidenced that the Brønsted acid sites are more likely to be present at the edges of the PCN and bonded to N atoms in the same ring adjacent to the bridging N atoms between melem units, as shown in Fig. 2b.107 The Brønsted acid sites can be applied to catalyse a series of reactions, especially those which depend on a dehydration, which include the conversion of nitroaromatics into azo- and azoxyaromatics107 and the photoacetalization of ketones and aldehydes.108 Moreover, Lewis acid sites can be introduced into PCN by elemental doping with boron37,109–111 or phosphorous.35,39,40,112 Despite that fact that Lewis acid sites are less active than the Brønsted ones, they presented helpful synergistic effects in a range of photoreactions, such as H2 evolution,40,109 photodegradation,40,111 photooxidations,110 C–H activations37 and CO2 cycloaddition.112
4. PCN based heterojunctions: non-noble metals, metal oxides, metal sulphides, and metal–organic frameworks
Elemental doping is widely used to engineer the band gap of PCN through the addition of other elements instead of C and N in the PCN structure. This makes it possible to modulate the light absorption and redox band potentials for targeted photocatalytic applications according to Fig. 3.34 As previously mentioned, the most commonly used elements are S,35,36,113 B,37,111 O,38 I35,114,115 and P.35,39,40 However, metal cations also can be included into PCN framework, such as Zn2+, Fe2+,116 Ni2+, Cu2+, Co3+,117 Cu1+,118 Mn3+, K+,119 Na+ and Li+.120–123 The recent review by Zhang et al. provides a detailed discussion of several strategies that can be employed to obtain PCN structures and how they affect photocatalytic activities.124 Another interesting review by Jiang and collaborators overviews the recent advances in doping of PCN for photocatalytic applications.125 Another efficient way to improve the PCN electronic properties is by combining it with other semiconductors and nanostructures to form PCN based heterojunctions.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the band structure of typical PCN samples, including PCN,79 S-PCN,113 B-PCN,111 O-PCN,38 I-PCN,35 P-PCN,39 ex-PCN,86 mp-PCN.87 The band structure for TiO2 is also shown for comparison. Adapted from ref. 18 with permission from the John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015. 
Similarly to other typical inorganic semiconductor photocatalysts (e.g., TiO2), PCN also suffers several intrinsic drawbacks such as low electrical conductivity, high recombination rates of electron–hole pairs, and limited absorption above 460 nm.126 Highly efficient PCN-based nanostructures must attend some important criteria. These include low recombination rates, enhanced solar light absorption, and high photochemical stability. In this context, the development of PCN-based nanohybrids is attractive for several reasons: (i) in enabling more efficient charge transfer and separation through the Schottky junction (metal/semiconductor heterostructures) or the p–n junction (semiconductor/semiconductor heterostructures); (ii) the presence of cocatalysts lowers the redox overpotential at the active sites; (iii) the visible light utilization can be improved; and (iv) the system stability by protecting the active sites and functional groups on the surface of the semiconductor through proper surface passivation is ameliorated.34
It is well established that charge recombination processes are disadvantageous to the photocatalytic efficiency. When the recombination process takes place, excited electrons return to the valence band, dissipating the energy as heat without reacting with the adsorbed species on the surface of PCN. Thus, many strategies have been investigated to suppress recombination in PCN and consequently improve the photocatalytic performances.34 Among them, the construction of PCN-based heterojunction nanohybrids is particularly appealing has received a lot of attention in the field of photocatalysis. This strategy will be discussed in the subsequent sections.
4.1. PCN and noble-metal free materials
Noble-metal free materials (e.g. PCN, graphene, carbon nanotubes, etc.) have various advantages, such as being low cost and environmentally friendly. Hence, they have attracted tremendous attention to their potential in tackling environmental and energy problems. Thus, it becomes attractive to construct hybridized materials via coupling two noble-metal free materials. For example, graphene, a two-dimensional macromolecular sheet of carbon atoms, has received much attention due to its outstanding mechanical, thermal, easily-obtained, and electrical properties.127,128 Thus, it represents an intuitive noble-metal free candidate to construct heterojunction nanohybrids with PCN.129
Sun et al. prepared graphene/PCN heterojunctions which presented enhanced conductivities and electrocatalytic performance towards the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).130 Xiang et al. obtained graphene/PCN nanohybrids by a combined impregnation-chemical reduction strategy, and successfully tested it towards the photocatalytic H2-production in the presence of Pt as a cocatalyst under visible light.129,131 Li and collaborators synthesised cross-linked PCN/rGO (reduced graphene oxide) nanohybrids with tunable band structure, which demonstrated significantly enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity.132 In another example, Ong et al. have assembled rGO and PCN for successful CO2 hydrogenation into methane.133 Other successful attempts have been made to explore novel materials coupling carbon nanostructures with PCN, such as MWNTs (multi-walled carbon nanotubes)/PCN,134,135 C60/PCN,136,137 carbon nanodots/PCN138–143 and polymers/PCN.144–149
Another carbon structure that has gained huge attention recently is carbon nanodots. They present excellent optical and electronic features, acting as both light absorbers and electron reservoirs.138 Different methods have been used to synthesize carbon nanodots on PCN, such as hydrothermal150 and pyrolysis.138 Due to the unique nature of carbon nanodots as spectral converters, they allow for the up conversion of infrared light to visible light. The emitted light can then be used by the PCN for various photo-driven transformations. Carbon nanodots can also be employed as a cocatalyst in some reactions. For example, H2O2 is a typical intermediate of photocatalytic water splitting and its adsorption on the surface of the PCN results in the poisoning of the active sites. When carbon nanodots are added on PCN surface, the photocatalyst maintains a high activity during the entire process.140
It is important to mention noble-metal free heterojunctions between carbon nitrides displaying different electronic structures. For instance, Wang et al. obtained two types of host–guest CN/CNS heterojunctions with a facile band alignment by the surface-assisted polymerization: CNS–CN (CN serving as the host) and CN–CNS (CNS serving as the host).151 This heterojunction is called isotype heterojunctions. These two types of CN/CNS heterojunctions have demonstrated significant enhancement in the photocatalytic activity and stability for H2 evolution. Inspired by Wang's work, Dong et al. synthesised layered PCN/PCN metal-free isotype heterojunction by treating the molecular composite precursors of urea and thiourea under the same thermal conditions. This CN-T/CN-U heterojunction was constructed on the basis that the PCN prepared from urea and thiourea have different band structures. Upon visible light irradiation, the photogenerated electrons transfer from PCN (thiourea) to PCN (urea). This is driven by the conduction band offset of 0.10 eV. Also, the photogenerated holes transfer from PCN (urea) to PCN (thiourea) driven by the valence band offset of 0.40 eV.41 These two charge transfer processes are beneficial for overcoming the high dissociation barrier of the Frenkel exciton and for the stabilization of electrons and holes. The redistribution of electrons on the one side of the heterojunction (CN-U) and holes on the opposite side (CN-T) reduces the electron–hole pair recombination, extending the lifetime of charge carriers and resulting in noticeably higher photocatalytic activity. These two examples demonstrated that the rational design and construction of isotype heterojunctions could open new strategies to the development of more efficient visible-light photocatalysts.129
4.2. PCN and metal oxides or sulphides
During the past few years, many groups have reported different types of heterojunction photocatalysts comprised of PCN and metal oxides or sulphides showing improved efficiencies relative to their individual components.30,34,129,152,153 Among abundant, non-noble metal oxides, TiO2 (e.g. 3.2 eV), represents one of the most widely used photocatalyst and it has been employed as a promising candidate for constructing PCN based heterojunctions. Several studies on the formation of TiO2/PCN hybrid nanohybrids have been reported to enhance photocatalytic activities.154–165 Zhou et al. reported the synthesis of TiO2 nanotube array/PCN heterojunction photocatalysts by a facile electrochemical approach.54 Additionally, heterojunctions between PCN and TiO2 with different morphologies (0D nanoparticles, 1D nanowires, 2D nanosheets, and 3D mesoporous crystals)166 and exposed facets ({001} and {101}) have been reported.156,167–171 Besides the incorporation of anatase TiO2 with PCN, other TiO2 crystal phases such as brookite and rutile have been coupled with PCN for photocatalytic applications.172–174
In addition to the TiO2/PCN photocatalysts, ZnO/PCN has also been reported (ZnO presents a band gap of around 3.2 eV).175–178 Several examples on the synergism between ZnO and PCN have been observed, such as the increase in photocurrent of ZnO/PCN hybrid nanomaterials by 5 folds under visible light irradiation (λ > 450 nm)55 and the use of N-doped ZnO/PCN core–shell nanoplates for visible-light photodegradation of Rhodamine B (RhB).179
Differently from TiO2 and ZnO, WO3 has a relatively lower band gap of ca. 2.6–2.8 eV, which lies in the visible light region. Therefore, WO3/PCN heterostructures exhibits the Type II heterojunction charge transfer process, which drastically suppress the recombination of charge carriers.180–182 It is noteworthy that other oxides have also been employed to generate PCN based hybrids, such as Cu2O/PCN (which promoted a red-shifted in the absorption edge from 460 to 600 nm),183 Fe2O3/PCN (makes the material magnetically recoverable and improves photoredox activity),184 and the Co3O4/PCN water oxidation catalysts displaying high stabilities.185 Hybrid photocatalysts containing composite oxides have also been receiving attention. For instance, Ge et al. prepared Bi2WO6/PCN heterostructured photocatalysts, which presented a strong light absorption in the visible region.186 The synergistic effect between PCN and Bi2WO6 promoted the charge transfer and separation due to the joined electric fields, whereby the excited electrons from PCN were injected into the conduction band of the Bi2WO6. Simultaneously, the holes on the valence band of Bi2WO6 were transferred to that of PCN, retarding charge recombination.34
In addition to metal oxides, cadmium sulphide (CdS) is a fascinating semiconductor with a relatively low band gap of 2.4 eV, which makes it able to absorb solar light up to 520 nm or even longer wavelengths.187 The well-matched energy levels of PCN and CdS allows for the formation of heterostructures through the Type II band alignment, which enables charge migration transfer upon light irradiation.34,188,189 To date, CdS/PCN materials, that are composed of two visible light responsive semiconductors, have been fabricated via an in situ precipitation–deposition method developed by Fu et al. The resulting CdS/PCN heterostructure exhibited outstanding visible light photocatalytic in 4-aminobenzoic acid removal.190 Other studies have reported higher stability and inhibition of photocorrosion of CdS when it is combined with PCN.191,192 Two-dimensional (2D) MoS2 nanosheets have become a promising cocatalyst to produce hybrid photocatalysts with PCN. MoS2 nanosheets are robust, highly active (especially for the H2 evolution reaction), can be obtained in the layered morphology, and it is relatively inexpensive.193–195 Interestingly, under the same loading of cocatalysts (MoS2 or Pt), it has been shown that MoS2/PCN outperformed the Pt/PCN for H2 production under similar experimental conditions.57
Mechanistic investigations extensively examined the interface region between PCN and MoS2. These studies concluded that valence band maximum and conduction band minimum of PCN were greater by ca. 0.15 and 0.83 eV, respectively, relative to MoS2. This led to the formation of a Type II heterojunction system.196 As the charge redistribution occurs preferentially at the heterointerfaces, a polarized field is created at the interface region, which inhibited the recombination of charge carriers and prolonged the lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers.34,196 Apart from CdS and MoS2, other sulphides have been employed for improved charge separation in hybrids with PCN. These include WS2/PCN,57,197 SnS2/PCN,198 NiS2/PCN,199 CoS/PCN,200 ZnS/PCN,201–203 and Ag2S/PCN.204
4.3. PCN and metal–organic frameworks (MOF)
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are area composed by metal ions coordinated to organic ligands to form one-, two-, or three-dimensional structures. Similar to what has been described for metal oxide and sulfide semiconductors, MOFs can photogenerate holes and electrons upon visible-light irradiation, which can lead to the transfer of holes and electrons to target reactant molecules to initiate light-driven photoredox processes.34,205 In terms of band structures, the MOF's valence band correspond to the outer orbitals of organic linkers, whereas the empty outer orbitals of the metal contribute to the conduction band. In this context, the incorporation of MOFs on PCN is interesting due to the variety of MOF structures and species as well as their tunable cavities, porosities, and high surface areas. Several successful examples of MOF/PCN hybrid systems have been reported, including MIL-125(Ti)/PCN,63 ZIF-8/PCN,206 and UiO-66/PCN.62 These hybrids have shown improved photocatalytic activities, high porosity and surface area, thermal stability, and accelerated mass transfer processes relative to PCN.64,207
5. PCN based heterojunctions with metal NPs
5.1. Principles
Among all classes of nanomaterials, metals deserve a special place. They represent almost two-thirds of all elements in the periodic table, displaying remarkable chemical, electronic, optical and magnetic properties that have enable novel and/or improved applications in areas such as catalysis, electronics, plasmonics, information storage, and biomedicine.5,208–215
Some metals, such as silver (Ag) and gold (Au), present outstanding optical properties in the visible and/or near infrared ranges. The unique optical properties of Ag and Au in the visible and near-infrared range occur as a result of their localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) excitation. These properties give rise to applications in areas such as surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), plasmonic photocatalysis, and plasmon-enhanced fluorescence.216 The LSPR refers to the oscillation of free charges on a metallic nanoparticle relative to the static nuclei in response to an oscillating electric field from an incoming electromagnetic wave.217 In this case, upon electromagnetic irradiation, the oscillating electric field component of light imposes a force onto the conduction electrons of the nanoparticle, which results in the formation of an induced dipole moment. In order to counterbalance this excitation, charge redistribution acts to provide a restoring force on the free electrons, thus granting these NPs an associated resonant frequency at a specific wavelength. The LSPR frequency is dependent on size, shape, composition, and structure of the nanoparticle as well as and the dielectric constant of the environment.208,217
It has been recently established that the LSPR excitation in plasmonic nanoparticles can be put to work towards the enhancement in the rates of several chemical transformations.5,218 This field, named plasmonic catalysis or plasmonic photocatalysis, has emerged as a new frontier in the field of nanocatalysis and allows for the utilization of visible light as an abundant and green energy input to drive and, at least in principle, control chemical reactions.215,218,219 Importantly, plasmonic photocatalysis allows one to overcome some of the intrinsic limitations of conventional semiconductor photocatalysts, such as short-range light response, low light absorption, and high photo-generated carrier recombination rates.215,218,219
Two main enhancement mechanisms have been proposed for the observed activities in plasmonic photocatalysis: localized heating and charge transfer of LSPR-generated charge carriers at the metal–molecule interface via direct and indirect mechanisms.220 Upon light LSPR excitation (Fig. 4a),217 the LSPR oscillation decays via non-radiative and radiative pathways.209,218,221 While radiative damping involve scattering and is not beneficial for plasmonic photocatalysis, non-radiative damping (Landau damping) leads to the generation of hot electrons and holes (Fig. 4b). In other words, this creates the probability of finding the excited electrons between the fermi level of the nanoparticle (EF) and EF + hν.220 Further decay via electron–electron and electron–phonon coupling lead to a Fermi–Dirac distribution of charge carriers (Fig. 4c), which also decays via thermal dissipation to the surroundings (Fig. 4d).218,220,222–225
 Fig. 4  Photoexcitation and subsequent relaxation processes following the illumination of a metal nanoparticle with a laser pulse, and characteristic timescales; (a) first, the excitation of a localized surface plasmon redirects the flow of light (Poynting vector) towards and into the nanoparticle; (b–d) schematic representations of the population of the electronic states (grey) following plasmon excitation: hot electrons are represented by the red areas above the Fermi energy EF and hot hole distributions are represented by the blue area below EF; (b) in the first 1–100 fs following Landau damping, the athermal distribution of electron–hole pairs decays either through re-emission of photons or through carrier multiplication caused by electron–electron interactions. During this very short time interval, the hot carrier distribution is highly non-thermal; (c) the hot carriers will redistribute their energy by electron–electron scattering processes on a timescale ranging from 100 fs to 1 ps; (d) finally, heat is transferred to the surroundings of the metallic structure on a longer timescale ranging from 100 ps to 10 ns, via thermal conduction. Reduced from ref. 225 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. 
Regarding the enhancement mechanism via charge transfer of LSPR excited hot carriers, two potential microscopic pathways, indirect and direct, can take place. In the indirect pathway, charge carriers are excited from occupied states to higher-energy unoccupied states in the metal particle. This leads to an excited electron distribution. Charge carriers of appropriate energy from this distribution can then scatter through the adsorbate states (orbitals) forming transiently charged adsorbates. The activation of these species then lead to increased reaction rates. The role of LSPR in this process is to increase the rates of charge excitation. On the other hand, the direct transfer pathway involves an LSPR-induced electron excitation from occupied to unoccupied orbitals of the metal–molecule or metal–adsorbate complex that is not mediated by the formation of an excited electron distribution within the metal. Instead, there is the excitation of an electron directly into an unoccupied adsorbate orbital of matching energy.226,227
When metal NPs are deposited on a semiconductor surface, a contact potential difference is generated at their interface due to their different work functions. This potential difference is called the Schottky barrier, and the band bending when a contact is formed after reaching equilibrium is dependent on the relative energies of the work functions of the metal and semiconducting component as illustrated in Fig. 5. This phenomenon can induce the directional migration of photogenerated electrons from the semiconductor to the metal, greatly enhancing the charge separation efficiency.30 Therefore, this system behaves as an effective electron trapping site to suppress the electron–hole recombination. In Fig. 5, this phenomenon is shown only for n-type semiconductors. However, for a p-type semiconductor, as the EF(bulk) is closer to the valence band, which is lower than EF(surf) under disequilibrium, the electrons will transfer from the surface to the bulk, causing downward band bending.228
 Fig. 5  Band structures for a hybrid composed of a metal and a semiconductor nanoparticle (the not in contact, in contact, and in contact under equilibrium scenarios are shown in the top, middle and bottom panels, respectively). (a and b) Represent the band-bending effect on a metallic nanoparticle (light blue) attached to an n-type semiconductor (dark blue) in two scenarios: when the semiconductor work function (ϕs) is higher than the metal work function (ϕm) (a), and when the semiconductor work function (ϕs) is lower than the metal work function (ϕm) (b). Reduced from ref. 228 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 

Fig. 6 displays the common mechanisms by which the LSPR excitation in hybrids between plasmonic NPs and semiconductors can lead to improvements in photocatalytic activities.220 When plasmonic NPs are coupled with semiconductors, in addition as acting as electron traps, localized heating (Fig. 6a) and near-field enhancements (Fig. 6b) as a result of the LSPR excitation might lead to an enhancement in the generation of charge carries at the semiconductor. Moreover, charge-transfer processes of SPR-excited hot electrons and holes between the metal and semiconductor can also take place (Fig. 6c). These processes also occur simultaneously in the hybrids. In this case, the elucidation of the mechanistic contribution of each effect over the detected activities represents an important challenge in the field.208,220,229,230
 Fig. 6  (a–c) LSPR-related mechanisms on hybrid materials composed of plasmonic NPs and semiconducting materials; (a) local temperature increase causes the enhancement of exciton formation on the semiconductor; (b) optical near-field enhancement promotes the transfer of photons to the semiconductor, thus increasing the exciton formation; (c) hot-electrons and holes are transferred to the semiconductor, so reactions on their surface can also be enabled by LSPR. Reduced from ref. 220 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
It is well known that plasmonic NPs can act as both light absorbers and electron traps, enabling the lowering recombination rates when combined with semiconducting materials.231 In the context of PCN, it is clear that the LSPR excitation of noble (Au and Ag)4 and even non-noble (e.g. Bi) metals can expand the optical spectral response of PCN to visible light, while the excellent catalytic activity enabled by the metal NPs can provide catalytic sites for target transformations.34,232–236 Moreover, the metal NPs possess a range of tunable properties (e.g. optical and catalytic properties as a function of shape, size, and composition), which can be exploited synergistically with a PCN for improved photocatalysis. In the following sections, we will start by discussing the synthesis and design in the construction of hybrid materials composed of metal nanoparticles and PCN.
5.2. Hybrids between noble metal NPs and PCN
Au and Ag represent the most investigated noble metal NPs displaying LSPR effect in the visible or near-infrared range. Au-loaded on bulk60,237,238 and exfoliated239 PCN have been reported for various photocatalytic applications.240 Different methods to decorate the PCN surface with the metal NPs are commonly used, such as photoreduction,238,239,241 impregnation,240 and deposition–precipitation.60 Di et al. compared Au/PCN synthesized by photoreduction, impregnation, and deposition–precipitation. They reported a higher photocatalytic activity for the composite prepared by the deposition–precipitation, due to the formation of tight Au–semiconductor heterojunctions effectively promoting the transfer of charge from light-excited PCN.60 The stronger the interfacial contact between Au and PCN, the easier the electron migration process will be. Moreover, the LSPR effect in Au helped in visible light absorption in the hybrid, also contributing to the superior photocatalytic activities. Samanta et al. compared pure PCN with 1 wt% Au/PCN. The plasmonic photocatalyst presented a photocurrent density that was 3000 folds higher than pure PCN. The dramatically enhanced photocurrent density of Au/PCN was ascribed to the strong visible light absorption and boosted charge carrier separation due to the LSPR effect from Au NPs.61 Furthermore, it can be observed that the Au Fermi level can shift towards more negative potentials when the electrons were transferred from the sp2-hybridized π-conjugated PCN network to Au. Essentially, Au played a dual-function role as an electron collector and also as a plasmonic cocatalyst.34
Ag, which presents a characteristic LSPR peak centered at ca. 400–450 nm, has also been employed to form heterojunctions with PCN.59,242–247 It is important to note that in both Au and Ag, the LSPR frequency can be tuned by maneuvering their size and shape.5 Yang et al. reported that Ag/PCN nanohybrids prepared by photodeposition were active under visible light due to the LSPR excitation in Ag NPs as well as the fast transportation and separation of charge carriers.248 It was demonstrated that the LSPR effect of Ag promoted an enhancement of local electromagnetic fields, which improved the generation of electron and holes within PCN. In addition to the LSPR effect, the photogenerated electrons on PCN can be scavenged promptly by Ag NPs, forming a Schottky barrier to inhibit the charge recombination process.34 Further details about Ag modified PCN hybrid synthesis and their applications can be found in a recent review written by Patnaik et al.249
In addition to the plasmonic metals, an interesting example that illustrated the importance of the strength of interaction between the noble metal and PCN to ensure the smooth transfer of photoinduced electrons was reported in the Pt/PCN material by Shiraishi and co-workers. They investigated the influence of two different synthesis methods over photocatalytic activities: (i) reduction of Pt precursor by H2 at a high temperature, and (ii) photoreduction. Both approaches yielded nearly similar Pt particle sizes (ca. 3.5–4 nm). Surprisingly, the catalyst prepared by the high-temperature method exhibited 10 times higher photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution when compared with samples prepared by photoreduction method.250 Several other studies also reported increased photocatalytic activity in Pt/PCN heterojunctions, especially for photodegradation251 and CO2 photoreduction.252,253
Pd/PCN heterojunctions have also been widely investigated. A range of publications have addressed synthesis routes to decorate PCN with Pd NPs.254–259 Among them, it is worth to highlight the results reported by Bai and co-workers on the effect of Pd facet selectivity as a cocatalyst in photocatalysis. They produced uniformly dispersed Pd NPs with different preferential exposed facets, {100} and {111}, on 2D PCN. They showed that reduction of CO2 can better occur on Pd-{111} facets while H2O prefers to generate H2 on Pd-{100}. The authors justified the higher activity of the Pd-{111} facets towards CO2 reduction as a result of the higher adsorption energy of CO2 in these surface facets (0.230 eV) when compared to Pd-{001} (0.064 eV), as indicated by first-principles theoretical calculations.258
5.3. Hybrids between non-noble metals NPs and PCN
Apart from the noble metals, Bi, Ni and Cu have also been used to form hybrids composited with PCN. The semimetal Bi exhibits intriguing properties, being able to act as an electron reservoir and possessing plasmonic properties (which are in essence similar to the noble metals).260 Dong et al. deposited Bi nanospheres on thin PCN layers and observed a wide additional absorption peak at ca. 500 nm, thus improving visible light absorption and the generation of charge carriers. They also observed a higher surface photovoltage (SPV) response for Bi/PCN due to the electric field generated from Bi accompanied by the transfer of electrons from PCN to Bi acting as an electron channel.260 These local electromagnetic fields emerge from the LSPR effect in Bi, which was confirmed by using a finite integration technique simulation.260 Another non-noble metal displaying plasmonic properties which was reported in PCN based hybrids is Cu. To the best of our knowledge, only Zhang et al. have investigated Cu NPs to improve photocatalytic reactions in this context. They observed a red-shift on light absorption due to LSPR effect of Cu NPs and an increment in the H2 evolution rate under visible light irradiation.261 Wang et al. have tested Cu/PCN NPs composite as peroxidase-like to help in glucose detection in blood samples, which allow lower detection limits.262 Studies on Cu/PCN heterojunctions have remained scarce mainly due to the instability of the Cu NPs towards oxidation in air. Hence, most of the reports tested Cu oxides or hydroxides with PCN.183,263,264
Ni has also been studied as a cocatalyst with PCN. Bi et al. reported increment on the SPV due to efficient charge separation at the heterojunction interface of Ni/PCN.265 Kong and collaborators developed a robust and visible light active Ni/PCN catalyst for H2 production. Their mechanistic studies concluded that the hybrid composite presented high visible light activity due to Ni NPs effectively preventing the recombination of the photogenerated electrons and holes of PCN.266 In a recent publication, Wen and co-workers reported that the H2-evolution activity for the system Ni/PCN can be further improved by the addition of NiS. They reported a significant synergistic effect between the multifunctional metallic Ni interface layers and amorphous NiS improving the charge separation and transportation. This effect could enhance both H2-production and TEOA-oxidation kinetics, thus resulting in the significantly boosted photocatalytic H2 evolution over the ternary composite photocatalysts.267 It is worth to highlight the recent Al decorated PCN reported by Choi and colleagues. The incorporation of this inexpensive and abundant metal significantly changed optical and photocatalytic properties and led to increments for H2-evolution and organic pollutant degradation under light excitation.268
5.4. Hybrids between bimetallic NPs and PCN
Compared to monometallic NPs, bimetallic NPs have attracted massive interest in catalysis, in which the synergy between the two metals (electronic effects) have led to improved performances.30,269 In addition to catalytic activity, selectivity and stability have also been dramatically affected in the bimetallic systems.270 Han et al. reported PCN nanohybrids modified with PtCo bimetallic alloy NPs. They were formed on PCN by an in situ strategy based on chemical reduction. This material was investigated towards the photocatalytic H2 evolution. They showed that the bimetallic NPs increased the surface defect density and changed the Fermi level in comparison to monometallic Pt NPs. This lead to the better separation of photogenerated charge carriers and consequently to a more active catalyst for generate H2 under visible light irradiation.271 The same group also reported AuPd/PCN bimetallic photocatalysts with enhancement of visible light absorption and more efficient separation of electron–hole pairs as compared to PCN and their monometallic counterparts.272
The effect of the exposed facet (shape effect) is also important in bimetallic systems. PtCu concave nanocubes displaying high-index {730} surface facets loaded on PCN nanosheets exhibited higher photocatalytic activity and selectivity in CO2 reduction for methane (CH4) production as compared to PtCu nanocubes (enclosed by {100} facets) loaded on PCN. This enhancement was assigned to the presence of more low-coordinated, active metal active sites in the concave nanocubes with high index surface facets, favouring adsorption and activation of CO2.273
5.5. Metal NPs in PCN-based Z-scheme photocatalysts
An important class of application of metal NPs is to work as a conductor in Z-scheme photocatalytic systems. Metal NPs (such as Au, Ag, Pt, Cu, and Bi), as well as carbon materials (such as GO, CNTs, rGO and carbon), can be applied as solid-state electron mediators for PCN-based Z-scheme systems. They can promote a fast separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs at the interface of the two semiconductors.274–277 The metal NPs can also serve as a charge transmission bridge. When a conductor is added between two semiconductors, it forms an Ohmic contact with low contact resistance as depicted in Fig. 7.278,279 The photoinduced electrons in the conduction band semiconductor 2 can directly recombine with the holes in the valence band of semiconductor 1 through the Ohmic contact. Consequently, the holes and electrons with more efficient redox ability can be mostly reserved for efficient photocatalytic reactions.280,281 Z-scheme systems have attracted considerable attention because it not only boosts the spatial separation efficiency of photoinduced electron–hole pairs but also minimizes undesirable backward reaction of the photocatalytic process due to two different redox sites.282,283 Moreover, maximum overpotentials can be obtained with this unique Z-scheme system, which benefits from the effective utilization of a high conduction band from semiconductor S2 and a low valence band from semiconductor S1 (Fig. 7).284,285 Many recent advances have been done using PCN in Z-scheme heterojunctions. This topic was recently reviewed by Jiang et al., which covered the preparation and catalytic application of PCN-based Z-scheme systems.280
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of two semiconductors (S1 and S2), coupled in a Z-scheme in the presence of a metal NPs as an electron mediator. Adapted from ref. 269 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. 
6. Photocatalytic applications of metal NPs and PCN hybrids
Metal NPs can have a wide range of catalytic applications. In fact, they can be coupled with PCN to accomplish one or more of the following tasks: (i) improve charge separation through heterojunctions with PCN; (ii) improve the visible light utilization; and (iii) act as a cocatalysts lowering the redox overpotential at the active sites and helping in the activation of the reactant molecules.34 This section will focus on how each metal introduce and presented in the last section help to address one or more of those tasks when coupled with PCN in different catalytic reactions together with a detailed discussion of their enhancement mechanisms. Due the great number of proposed mechanisms for different metal NPs/PCN systems, herein the photocatalytic mechanisms will be discussed following the catalytic applications in the same section. Moreover, the application sections are organized by metals, in order to facilitate to the reader interested in a specific metal, owing to the larger number of references. For a more chronological order for earlier stages of this topic we recommend the excellent review published in 2016 by Chai and colleges.34
6.1. Photocatalytic water splitting
Hydrogen is considered as an ultimate clean fuel because of its high-energy density (140 MJ kg−1), environmental benignancy, and recycling.1,129,286 The generation of H2 from water by employing a photocatalyst and solar light as the energy input has been considered a promising approach.287,288 A range of semiconductor photocatalysts have been reported to catalyse the evolution of H2 from water. However, the practical applications of this strategy are limited by the prompt recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs within photocatalysts.
According to the requirement of thermodynamics, the conduction band potential should be more negative than the reduction potential of H2O (0 V vs. NHE) for H2 generation. Meanwhile, the valence band potential should be more positive than the oxidation potential of H2O (1.23 V vs. NHE) for O2 generation. PCN possess appropriate conduction and valence band positions to catalyse the water splitting reaction.30,289 Moreover, its visible-light-driven properties and high specific surface area makes PCN a promising photocatalyst to promote the H2-evolution from water.289,290 The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has concluded that photocatalysts for water splitting must have solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency equal or higher than 5% to meet the economically viable price of US$ 2–4 kg−1 of H2. Up to now, one of the photocatalysts that are closer to this efficiency is a PCN-based catalyst comprised of carbon nanodots on PCN.140 Despite all the PCN great properties, it produces 0.1–4 μmol h−1 of H2 with a quantum efficiency (QE) of less than 1% under visible light when it is used to catalyse the water-splitting reaction.34,236,291,292 Hence, it is highly important modify PCN to allow higher rates of H2 production and quantum efficiencies. For instance, Table 1 summarizes the recent advances in the photocatalytic water splitting photocatalysed by metal NPs/PCN-based nanohybrids.
Table 1 Photocatalytic H2 evolution on metal NPs/PCN heterostructures




Catalysts
Fraction of cocatalysts
Total mass of catalysts (g)
Reactant solution
Light source (wavelength-nm)
Activity (μmol h−1)
QE (%)
Ref.




PCN
—
0.1
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA and methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
0.1–4
<0.1%

13



CDots/PCN
0.016 wt%
0.080
150 mL of water
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
8.4
6.29% (420 nm)

140



Pt/PCN
1.13 wt%
0.080
100 mL of water
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
0.531
N/A

236



Au/PCN
1.0 wt%
0.1
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
500WHBO lamp (>420 nm)
8.6
N/A

60



Au(18 nm)/PCN
2.0 wt%
0.02
40 mL of 2.5 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
540
1.2% (380 nm)

308



CdS/Au/PCN
2.0 wt%
0.1
50 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
19.0
N/A

312



PtSingle-Atom/PCN
0.16 wt%
0.05
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
318
N/A

293



PtCo/PCN
1.0 wt%
0.05
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
48
N/A

271



PdAu/PCN
0.5 wt%
0.05
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
16.3
N/A

272



PdAg/PCN
1.0 wt%
0.01
22.5 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
Solar irradiation (840 W m−2)
1250
8.7%

309



PtOAu/PCN
1.0 wt%
0.05
80 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution
350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
16.9
N/A

311



Rh/PCN
0.25 wt%
0.1
36 mL of 11 vol% methanol aqueous solution
Xe arc lamp (320 mW cm−2)
14.9
N/A

234



Ni/PCN
10 wt%
0.05
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
500 W Xe lamp
15.66
0.4% (365 nm)

317



Ni/PCN
10 wt%
0.05
100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
500 W Xe lamp
8.41
N/A

265



Ni(Single site)/PCN
0.1 wt%
0.05
50 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
Xe lamp (125 mW cm−2); (>420 nm)
5.5
2.6% (420 nm)

298



NiS/Ni/PCN
0.5 wt%
0.05
100 mL of 15 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (160 mW cm−2); (>420 nm)
515
N/A

267



Ag/PCN
∼8%
0.01
40 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution
Solar simulator
2.8
N/A

301



AgQC/PCN
7.46 wt%
0.01
40 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution
Solar simulator
2.43
N/A

301



Ag/CQDs/PCN
3 wt%
0.005
70 mL of 14 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
626.93
4.81% (400 nm)

302



Fluorescein/Ag/PCN
2.95 wt%
0.005
70 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp
2014.20
N/A

303



CdZnS/Au/PCN
—
0.1
100 mL of 0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3 aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
6150
N/A

313



Cd0.8Zn0.2S/Au/PCN
2.0 wt%
0.05
70 mL of 0.1 M glucose aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
123
N/A

314



PCN/Pd/Cu2O
—
0.015
20 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2); (>400 nm)
32.5
0.9% (420 nm)

315



PCN/Ag/MoS2
2.0 wt%
0.10
20 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (172 mW cm−2); (>420 nm)
10.4
N/A

316





Platinum is one of the most efficient cocatalysts for H2 generation and has been widely used for enhancing the performance of PCN-based hybrids.13,235,236,250–253,293–297 The intriguing mechanism of how the noble metals, especially Pt, act during the water-splitting reaction has been widely investigated. Fina et al. found that the oxygen content of the cocatalyst does not seem to affect the photocatalysts activity. Their investigation concluded that the main factor affecting the H2 evolution rate of the materials was the surface coverage, represented as the Pt:N ratio, with a lower coverage being more beneficial. Following the coverage, the crystallite size of the metal NPs also played an important role in the catalytic activity. Pt/PCN materials in which Pt NPs were characterised by a higher crystallinity resulted in a higher H2 evolution.235 Li and co-workers investigated single-atom Pt as a cocatalyst for PCN in H2 production. They showed that isolated single Pt atoms induces an intrinsic change of the surface trap states leading to a longer lifetime of photogenerated electrons and thereby improved photocatalytic performance (Fig. 8). Single-atom Pt cocatalyst led to tremendous enhancements on photocatalytic H2 generation, being 8.6 times higher than that of Pt NPs the per Pt atom basis, and nearly 50 times of that for bare PCN.293
 Fig. 8  Representative ultrafast transient absorption (TA) kinetics probed at 750 nm (pump at 400 nm) for (a) PCN; (b) PtSingle-Atom/PCN and (c) Pt NPs/PCN. (d) Schematic model of PtSingle-Atom/g-C3N4 and photocatalytic comparison with Pt NPs/PCN; (e) schematic illustration of the mechanisms which led to a longer lifetime of photogenerated electrons. Adapted from ref. 293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. 
Although Pt is essentially the most efficient cocatalyst for water splitting, it is prohibitively expensive, which strongly limits its practical applications. In the past few years, the Pt-free approach has been successfully demonstrated for H2 evolution by combining PCN with more inexpensive metals, such as Ni, Cu, Zn, Co, and Fe. Chen et al. introduced single Ni active sites onto the surface of PCN by using a molecular-level design strategy.298 The resulting catalyst family (with less than 0.1 wt% of Ni) was shown to generate H2 with a rate close to that attained with a 3 wt% Pt on PCN. In another contribution, Bi et al. synthesized a series of Ni-doped PCN materials and demonstrated a surface band bending change of PCN when contacted with Ni. The results indicated that Ni-coating deepened the surface band bending of PCN, thereby resulting in higher separation efficiency of photoinduced electron–hole pairs and improved H2 generation activity.265 Indra and collaborators proved that Ni2+ in mesoporous PCN can be reduced to Ni0 NPs during the photocatalytic reaction in the presence of sacrificial agent (e.g., TEOA), and act as a cocatalyst to reduce protons to H2.299 Zhang et al. deposited cobalt on PCN by using a homogeneously engineered strategy via chemical interaction. This modification promoted the surface kinetics of oxygen evolution reaction increasing its activity by two when compared with pure PCN.300 In another study, Zhang et al. added the noble metal rhodium (Rh) as the cocatalyst on PCN and investigated the influence of Rh NP size on the photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution. The authors demonstrated that the light-absorption properties of the PCN were not influenced by the presence of Rh and its activity is not significantly affected by the NPs size. However, the number of Rh NPs on the surface of PCN and the metallic nature of Rh0 greatly influenced the photocatalytic H2 production activity of PCN.234
Another metal which has shown promising results when coupled with PCN is Ag. Sridharan and co-workers compared the activity Ag NPs and Ag quantum clusters (AgQC) on PCN towards the H2 evolution reaction. The authors reported an enhanced absorbance for the AgQC/PCN originating from quantum confinement effect. Despite the fact that this improvement confers an activity 1.7 times higher than PCN for H2 production, the AgQC/PCN still was slightly less active than AgNP/PCN, because of surface hydroxyl radical formation on the AgQC/PCN surface.301 Qin and Zeng reported improved activity using Ag NPs combined with carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and PCN. The authors demonstrated a synergistic effect due to the combination of LSPR effect from Ag NPs with upconverted PL superiority of CQDs allowing a broader spectrum application (Fig. 9a), which lead to photocatalytic activities for H2 evolution 6.7 times higher than pure PCN and 2.8 higher than CQDs/PCN.302 The same research group also reported the improvement in photocatalytic H2 generation of Ag/PCN nanohybrids, under visible-light illumination, through dye-sensitization with fluorescein.303 The addition of the photosensitizer fluorescein lead to an activity for H2 production 4.8 times higher than that of 3 wt% Ag/PCN in the absence of dye molecules, which was approximately 4.8 times higher than that of 3 wt% Ag/PCN in the absence of dye molecules. The LUMO orbital of fluorescein is more negative than the conduction band of PCN, while its HOMO is more positive than the redox potential of the sacrificial reagent, TEOA.34,303 Upon the irradiation of visible light, both fluorescein and PCN were excited, and the electrons from fluorescein can easily migrate to the conduction band of PCN. Subsequently, the electrons rapidly migrated to the Ag, accumulating onto Ag NPs to create a Schottky barrier, which could hinder the recombination of electron–hole pairs. The strong local electromagnetic field induced by the LSPR effect of Ag could also improve the captured electron energy and transfer rate, allowing them to react with H+ increasing the H2 production (Fig. 9b). Simultaneously, the photogenerated holes of fluorescein and PCN could be packed by electrons from TEOA for reuse.34,303
 Fig. 9  (a) Scheme showing the charge generation, transfer process, and photocatalytic H2 evolution mechanism over the Ag/CQDs/PCN hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 302 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017; (b) schematic representation of the charge migration and separation improvement promoted by fluorescein on Ag/PCN hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
The promotion mechanism in Ag-modified PCN photocatalysts was investigated for the first time by Bu and collaborators through an electrochemical method.243 The decoration of the PCN surface with Ag NPs improved the conductivity and reduced the energy barrier of the interface reactions. As displayed in Fig. 10, both Fermi levels of PCN and Ag are shifted positively when Ag is in contact with the PCN surface because the conduction band potential of PCN is less positive than the Fermi level of Ag. Therefore, the Fermi level of PCN, which is situated below the conduction band, is shifted to the positive direction. The conduction band of PCN is simultaneously moved in the same direction. Consequently, the conduction band generates an upward band bending near to the interface between Ag and PCN for the transfer of photoexcited electrons from PCN to Ag NPs. This phenomenon leads to the formation of an interfacial electric field. When the electron exchange is held in equilibrium, the flat band potential (Efb) is positively shifted. This enhances the separation efficiency and prolongs the lifetime of electron–hole pairs, accredited to the heterojunction electric field formed on the interface of Ag and PCN.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the electron energy level when Ag NPs are in contact with PCN. Adapted from ref. 243 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014. 
In fact, when the LSPR absorption of the noble metal partly coincides with the optical absorption of the photocatalyst, the LSPR induces plasmon resonance energy transfer (PRET) from the plasmonic metal to the adjacent semiconductor will excite charge carriers at the interface of noble metal/semiconductor.304,305 Thus, the PRET effect facilitates the generation of charge carriers and, for this reason, it suppresses the charge recombination by reducing the migration distance for the surface catalysis.5 It is noted that the LSPR-induced electric field and the PRET effect will become greater when the distance between the semiconductor and the noble metal is optimised.306 For the Ag/TiO2 system, this optimal distance corresponds to around 5 nm as reported by Linic et al.5 If the semiconductor is located too near the noble metals, the nonradiative energy transfer, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), will primarily occur thus quenching the photoexcited semiconductor.307 As a result, the distance between a semi-conductor and a noble metal is essential to balance the PRET and FRET effects. Chen and collaborators, using an approach similar to that reported by Linic's group, investigated the distance-dependent plasmonic influence in the system PCN and Ag NPs. They used a nanogap-engineering approach by loading the Ag@SiO2 plasmonic core–shell NPs onto the PCN nanosheets.244 In view of the distance-dependent plasmonic influence, the nanogaps between PCN and Ag NPs were tuned from 8 to 21 nm by modulating the SiO2 shell thickness (Fig. 11a–f) in order to balance both PRET and FRET effects. The electromagnetic field intensity induced by Ag NPs could be viewed from the finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulation, as shown in Fig. 11g–l. By this the nanogap engineering approach, the optimum activity for the H2 production reported by the authors was for the system with a nanogap of 12 nm. This optimum distance balanced the positive PRET and the negative FRET effects on plasmonic photocatalysis (Fig. 11m).244 This interesting finding will be particularly helpful to designing more effective metal NPs/PCN systems for photocatalytic applications.34
 Fig. 11  (a–d) TEM images of Ag@SiO2 core–shell NPs in which the SiO2 shell thickness corresponding to 8 (a), 12 (b), 17 (c), and 21 nm (d). (e) TEM image of Ag NPs without the silica coating. (f) TEM image for Ag/PCN without SiO2 capping; (g–l) FDTD simulation for the field enhancements for Ag NPs (g), Ag@SiO2-8 nm (h), Ag@SiO2-12 nm (i), Ag@SiO2-17 nm (j), Ag@SiO2-21 nm (k), and a hollow SiO2 sphere with 12 nm shell thickness (l). (m) Representation of the mechanism for H2 production over Ag@SiO2/PCN in which the PRET and FRET effects gradually become weakened with the widening of the nanogap, as well as the H2 evolution rate for each system. Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. 
Regarding Au NPs, their combination with PCN presented higher activity for H2 evolution than Pt/PCN, as reported by Di et al.60 They proposed that the Au NPs on the surface of PCN trapped and stored the photogenerated electrons from the substrate. This shifted the Fermi level to more negative values, promoting the transfer, with low resistance, of electrons from the conduction band of PCN to Au. In a recent study, Guo and collaborators investigated the influence of the shape and size of the Au NPs in Au/PCN hybrids for H2 evolution.308 Their optimized 18 nm-sized Au nanospheres/PCN photocatalyst exhibits a rate of 540 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light (λ > 420 nm) for H2 evolution, exceeding those produced over larger-sized Au nanospheres/PCN, Au nanorods/PCN and photodeposited Au nanoparticles/PCN photocatalysts. The excellent activity for H2 evolution was attributed by the authors to the electron sink and plasmonic effects of the Au nanocrystals in different spectral regions.308
Despite the good activity presented by the Au NPs, in general, the Au/PCN photocatalytic system can have its activity further improved by combining it with other metals to generate bimetallic compositions as shown in Fig. 12.60 Other bimetallic cocatalysts, such as PtCo,271 PdAg,309 AuPd272,310 and AuPtO,311 also have exhibited higher H2 photocatalytic activity than their monometallic counterparts.
 Fig. 12  H2 evolution over various bimetallic cocatalysts loaded on PCN under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010. 
Metal NPs can have an important role in Z-scheme systems as explained in Section 5.6 and some of those properties can be exploited to enhance the photocatalytic activity for the water-splitting reaction. For example, when sulphur-doped PCN/CdS is decorated with Au NPs, it becomes almost 2 times more active for H2 evolution and 20 times more active than only sulphur-doped PCN under visible light irradiation.277 The Au NPs in this Z-scheme system act as an intermediate agent between sulphur-doped PCN and CdS, promoting the efficient transfer of excited electrons.277 Ding et al. reported excellent results using a similar system comprised of an Au-core and CdS-shell (Au@CdS) NPs supported over PCN. The author evaluated this Z-scheme photocatalyst for H2 evolution under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) using methanol as a sacrificial reagent and observed that its activity was about 125.8 times higher than PCN (and was even higher than that of Pt/PCN).312 Au NPs were also successfully used in other Z-scheme systems to improve its activity in water splitting reaction, such as PCN/Au/CdZnS313 and CdxZn1−xS/Au/PCN.314
Another interesting result for improved water splitting was reported by Yin and co-workers using core–shell nanocubes composed of a Pd-core and Cu2O-shell (Pd@Cu2O), as shown in Fig. 13. The embedded Pd nanocubes not only promoted the electron–hole separation by trapping the charge carriers from the semiconductors, but also act as a Z-scheme “bridge” in keeping the strong redox ability of the electrons/holes for surface reactions (as depicted in Fig. 13h). The authors observed a H2 evolution activity dramatically higher than that of its counterpart PCN/Cu2O structure without Pd.315
 Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of the synthesis of the Pd@Cu2O/PCN hybrids. (b–g) TEM and HRTEM images of Pd/PCN (b–d) and Pd@Cu2O/PCN hybrids (e–g). (h) Representation of the photocatalytic mechanism of H2 evolution on the Pd@Cu2O/PCN hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 315 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Other Z-scheme system that deserves attention is the PCN/Ag/MoS2 ternary plasmonic photocatalyst. This material displayed a flower-like architecture of about 0.4–0.6 μm in diameter (Fig. 14). It was successfully synthesized by Lu and collaborators.316 The authors reported that PCN/Ag/MoS2 was 8.78 and 2.08 times more active in the production of H2 out of water than Ag/MoS2 and PCN/MoS2, respectively. The excellent photocatalytic activities were attributed to the synergistic effects of Ag, PCN, and MoS2 nanostructures in the PCN/Ag/MoS2 composites, which result in a Z-scheme-mechanism-assisted fast separation and slow recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs and consequently higher photocatalytic activity.316 A comparison of the photocatalytic activity towards the water-splitting reaction of all the systems discussed in this section is shown in Table 1.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of hybrids composed of Ag/MoS2 nanoflowers on PCN; (b) separation and transfer of photogenerated charges in the Ag/MoS2/PCN nanohybrids; (c) SEM image of MoS2/PCN; (d–f) TEM images and SAED pattern for MoS2; (g–i) TEM images and SAED pattern of Ag/MoS2. Reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
6.2. Photocatalytic reduction of CO2
Over the past century, our society has become heavily dependent on fossil fuel sources such as coal, gas, and oil to produce our daily energy needs and chemicals.318 The CO2 produced by these non-renewable carbon sources has been significantly altering the climate on Earth319 and our heavy reliance make them more expensive and less abundant.318 A larger demand on fossil resources for the next few decades is expected since the global economy will continue to grow steadily.320 Recently, a great effort towards reducing the regional and global CO2 emissions has been pursued. However, a breakthrough technology which allows converting CO2 into energy-bearing products is required. Inspired by the natural photosynthesis, the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into energy-bearing products has been regarded as an alternative option to address the diminishing of fossil resources and mitigate the greenhouse gas effect to attain solar energy conversion.321,322 In this artificial photosynthesis approach, a photocatalyst directly captures CO2 and solar energy and converts them into hydrocarbon fuels.
The photocatalytic CO2 reduction process is a multielectron transfer process. The possible reaction processes and corresponding redox potentials (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE) are shown below: CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH (Eredox = −0.20 V)(1) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O (Eredox = −0.12 V)(2) CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O (Eredox = −0.07 V)(3) CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O (Eredox = +0.03 V)(4) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O (Eredox = +0.17 V)(5)In this case, the CO2 reduction reactions are complex with many pathways and products. Moreover, the CO2 molecule is extremely difficult to be activated and further reduced at room temperature due to its thermodynamic stability. These factors make photocatalytic CO2 reduction very challenging.30
Despite the very low efficiency, pure PCN (without any cocatalyst) can catalyse the reduction of CO2 into other chemicals (e.g. CO,323 CH3CHO324 and CH4324), and the nature of the major CO2 reduction product in the presence of water vapor can be modulated by the band structure of bulk PCN and PCN nanosheets, as reported by Niu et al.324 Other studies about the influence of electronic structure of PCN-based systems on the product selectivity in CO2 reduction were also performed and proposed that not only band position is responsible by this effect, but also the electron sink effect as well as the promoted charge transfer between composite components.30,252,325–329
Similar to photocatalytic water splitting, noble metals can be used as efficient cocatalysts for enhancing the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance of PCN (as summarized in Table 2). Yu et al. reported a great enhancement on the photocatalytic activity of PCN for reduction of CO2 into hydrocarbon when Pt was added as cocatalyst in a range from 0.25 to 2 wt%. More interestingly, they also reported an important influence on the product selectivity by the Pt loading (Fig. 15a).253 Another research group reported the reduction of CO2 to CH4 using PCN loaded with 0.5–10 wt% of Pt. As shown in Fig. 15b, better yields for CH4 were obtained over the Pt/PCN with an optimal 2 wt% content of Pt. Moreover, this catalyst presented reaction rate 5.1 times greater than pure PCN. The noticeably improved photoactivity of Pt/PCN was assigned to the increased light absorption and effective interfacial electron transfer from PCN to Pt due to its lower Fermi level that prohibited the recombination of electron–hole pairs (Fig. 15c).
Table 2 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction on metal NPs/PCN heterostructures




Catalysts
Fraction of cocatalysts
Total mass of catalysts (g)
Light source (wavelength-nm)
Activity (unit)
QE (%)
Ref.




PCN
—
0.20
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
CH3OH: 6.28 μmol g−1 h−1
0.18% (420 nm)

328



C2H5OH: 4.51 μmol g−1 h−1


PCN nanosheets
—
N/A
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
CH4: 7.47 μmol g−1 h−1
N/A

340



Pt/PCN
2 wt%
N/A
15 W LED-lamp
CH4: 13.02 μmol g−1
N/A

252



Pt/PCN
0.75 wt%
0.10
Solar simulator
CH4: ∼0.1 μmol
N/A

253



CH3OH: ∼0.12 μmol


HCHO: ∼0.05 μmol


Pd-(111)/PCN
11.6 wt%
0.01
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
CH4: 0.18 μmol g−1 h−1
N/A

258



CO: 14.90 μmol g−1 h−1


C2H5OH: 1.72 μmol g−1 h−1


Pd-(001)/PCN
11.9 wt%
0.01
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
CH4: n.d.
N/A

258



CO: 5.6 μmol g−1 h−1


C2H5OH: 7.4 μmol g−1 h−1


Ag3PO4/Ag/PCN
Ag3PO4/PCN molar ratio: 30%
0.15
500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
CO2 reduction rate: 57.5 μmol g−1 h−1
N/A

338



Ag/PCN/TiO2
55 wt%
0.05
300 W Xe lamp
CH4: 28 μmol g−1
N/A

339



CO: 19 μmol g−1


Pt/PCN/NaNbO3
0.5 wt%
0.05
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
CH4: 6.40 μmol g−1 h−1
N/A

331



Pt/PCN/KNbO3
0.5 wt%
0.10
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
CH4: 0.25 μmol h−1
N/A

332



Pd/PCN/LDH
0.5 wt%
0.20
500 W Hg (Xe) lamp
CH4: 3.7 μmol
0.093% (420 nm)

336



CO: 0.1 μmol


C2H6: 0.06 μmol


Au/PCN/BiOBr
1.0 wt%
0.10
300 W Xe lamp
CH4: 0.39 μmol g−1 h−1
N/A

337



CO: 0.05 μmol g−1 h−1


α-Fe2O3/PCN
—
0.025
300 W Xe lamp (0.21 W cm−2)
CO: 10.3 μmol g−1 h−1
0.96% (420 nm)

284





 Fig. 15  (a) Hydrocarbon yield produced by PCN decorated with Pt displaying different metal loadings (0–2.0 wt%) under the simulated solar light irradiation for 4 h of reaction. Reproduced from ref. 253 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014; (b) total yield pf CH4 over PCN loaded with Pt (0.25–2 wt%) after 10 h of reaction. Reproduced from ref. 252 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014; (c) schematic representation of the reduction of CO2 with H2O to CH4 catalysed by Pt/PCN heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 252 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014; (d) reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCOOH, CH3OH, and CH4 on the Pt/PCN catalyst and (e) Pd/PCN catalyst. Under standard conditions (pH 0, p(H2) = 1 bar, U = 0 V vs. SHE), the total energies of H+(aq) + e− and (1/2)H2(g) are equal. The reference energy (the total free energy of the catalyst, isolated CO2, and four H2) is set to zero. Color code: Pd, pine green; C, gray; O, red; H, white. Reprinted from ref. 330 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
In order to better understand the role of noble metals in the photocatalytic CO2 reduction process, Gao and collaborators investigated the photocatalytic CO2 reduction over PCN modified with single-atom of Pd or Pt by using DFT calculation. Comparing the rate-determining barriers of different possible reaction pathways, they found that the HCOOH was the favourable product of CO2 reduction on the Pd/PCN catalyst, while CH4 was favored over Pt/PCN (Fig. 15d and e). This work provided a theoretical support for the empirically observed product selectivity of photocatalytic CO2 reduction.330
Tu and collaborators have studied the impact of tuneable nitrogen vacancies on photocatalytic activities of Pt/PCN towards the CO2 reduction into CO.296 They observed a synergistic effect between nitrogen vacancies and Pt NPs, in which the density of nitrogen vacancies in an optimum range has a positive effect on the photocatalytic activities. This was due to the gradual enhancement of light harvesting, efficient charge separation and transportation, and the uniform binding of Pt on PCN as active reaction sites (Fig. 16). However, further increase in nitrogen vacancies decreased the photocatalytic activity, because the deeper midgap states induced by overdoped nitrogen vacancies could become recombination sites of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.296 Pt NPs cocatalyst on PCN were also used in combination with other heterostructures and tested to reduce CO2 into CH4, such as NaNbO3 nanowires331 and KNbO3.332 Enhancements in the photocatalytic activity were observed in these systems.
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of PCN nanosheets with nitrogen vacancies (VN) for photoreduction of CO2 to CO and H2 evolution. Paths 1, 2, and 4 refer to the electron excitation from the valence band to midgap states, the electron trapping from the conduction band to midgap states, and the electron transfer to reaction sites, respectively. Path 3 refers to deeper midgap states that act as recombination sites for trapping photogenerated electrons and holes. Reprinted from ref. 296 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
The nature of the exposed facet in noble metals (shape effect) can also significantly influence the product selectivity in CO2 reduction, as demonstrated by Bai et al.258 The authors investigated the facet-dependent selectivity of CO2 reduction over Pd cocatalysts in the Pd/PCN system employing Pd NPs with {100} and {111} surface facets (cubes and tetrahedrons, respectively). The photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity was significantly higher for PCN loaded with Pd tetrahedrons. Analysing the facet-dependent CO2 reduction process by first-principles calculations, it was found that the adsorption energy of CO2 on the Pd-{100} (Ea = 0.064 eV) was lower than that for Pd-{111} (Ea = 0.230 eV). Moreover, the activation barrier EB was reduced from 7.15 to 3.98 eV and from 6.79 to 4.15 eV for Pd-{111} and Pd-{100} facets, respectively, when two electrons were brought to the surfaces to initiate the activation of CO2 (Fig. 17). This observation helped to explain why the Pd-{111} facets were more reactive for the reduction of CO2. The Pd/PCN system works essentially similar to the Pt loaded system. When it is irradiated by light, the photoexcitation of electrons took place in PCN. Due to larger work functions of Pd-{100} (5.05 eV) and Pd-{111} (5.23 eV) as compared with the PCN (4.31 eV) (Fig. 17e and f), the photoexcited electrons were rapidly shuttled to the Pd cocatalysts to retard the recombination of charge carriers, resulting in increased CO2 reduction to CH4, CO and C2H5OH.34,258 Similar results were reported by Cao et al. They found that during this reduction reaction, tetrahedral Pd NPs with exposed {111} facets are more active than cubic Pd NPs with exposed {100} facets. Their mechanistic investigation revealed that the structure-sensitive photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity is mainly attributed to the more preferable electron sink effect, CO2 adsorption capability and CH3OH desorption capability of the Pd-{111} surface, as compared to Pd-{100}, due to their different surface atomic structures.333
 Fig. 17  (a and b) Top and side views of CO2 adsorption configurations for Pd-{100} (a) and Pd-{111} (b) and their respective adsorption energy (Ea) according to the geometry optimization simulations; (c) optimized configurations for the adsorption of CO2 on the Pd-{100} and (d) Pd-{111} facets and their respective potential energy along the bond length O–C of the CO2 molecule adsorbed under neutral conditions or charged with two electrons, from which the activation energy EB of CO2 is subtracted; (e) model systems and (f) calculated potentials with work functions for PCN, Pd-{100}, and Pd-{111}; (g) energy level diagrams for PCN and Pd before and after forming the interfaces for electron transfer based on first-principles calculations. Reprinted from ref. 258 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
Park and co-workers have investigated Pd/PCN on the direct synthesis of HCOOH under neutral conditions from CO2. The PCN support was able to adsorb CO2 and provide an activated form of carbonate or formate species to the Pd NPs. As a result, the activity of Pd/PCN catalyst was remarkably higher when compared to an inert support such as CNT. Similar results were obtained by Mondelli et al., however, using in situ spectroscopy techniques, they demonstrated that the PCN edges has an essential role on the CO2 activation due to the formations of carbamate species with the amino groups of the support.334 Moreover, the Pd/PCN catalyst exhibits remarkable stability during the catalytic reaction under neutral conditions, which is an essential property for the practical applications.335 Pd NPs were also tested as a cocatalyst on PCN combined with layered double hydroxides (LDH). The authors reported that the close interaction of LDH nanosheets with PCN and Pd NPs leads to a more efficient interlayer CO32− reduction as compared with the system without LDH.336
Au NPs have been tested towards the CO2 reduction in a PCN-based system only in Z-schemes, where the Au NPs and PCN are coupled with BiOBr.337 Bai et al. studied the influence of the Au NPs size in Au/PCN/BiOBr system for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. The results revealed that larger Au NPs (100–150 nm) mainly displayed Z-scheme bridge role and presented higher photocatalytic activity than PCN/BiOBr under 380 nm monochromatic light irradiation. Smaller Au NPs (10–20 nm) mainly displayed LSPR effect and showed higher photocatalytic activity than PCN/BiOBr under 550 nm monochromatic light irradiation.337 Ag NPs were also tested in a Z-scheme for CO2 reductions. He et al. observed the photoreduction of Ag+ in Ag3PO4/PCN after 1 h of irradiation (500 W Xe lamp). The resulting Ag3PO4/Ag/PCN system presented an enhanced photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction due to efficient separation of electron–hole pairs by a Z-scheme mechanism. The optimal Ag3PO4/Ag/PCN photocatalyst showed a CO2 conversion rate of 57.5 μmol h−1 gcat−1, which was 6.1 higher than pure PCN, under simulated sunlight irradiation.338 Ag NPs were also tested in a system combining PCN and TiO2. Despite not claimed by authors, the reported system seems to work in a Z-scheme. They reported that Ag/PCN/TiO2 was 12.7 times more active for CO2 reduction than TiO2 and 7.9 relatives to PCN. According to the authors, the Ag NPs deposited on the PCN/TiO2 surface played an important role. They not only retarded the recombination of electron–hole pairs through extracting electrons from the conduction band of TiO2 but also utilized the LSPR effect to enhance the energy level of electrons accumulated on their surface.339 It is important to highlight the urchin-like α-Fe2O3/PCN hybrid in Z-scheme recently reported by Jiang and collaborators, which presented excellent activity (10.3 μmol g−1 h−1) to reduce CO2 into CO without cocatalyst and sacrifice reagent.284 A comparison of the photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction of all the systems presented in this section is shown in Table 2.
6.3. Photocatalytic degradation of pollutants
Environmental pollution is a serious problem faced by humanity, hindering our sustainable development. In this context, the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants and environmental remediation constitute an important and wide-impact concern of the scientific community.34 Photocatalysis has proven to be a promising strategy for environmental decontamination due to its high efficiency and low cost.341–343 PCN is a promising photocatalyst for pollutants degradation, due to its band position which exhibits moderately high oxidation ability. Its photogenerated electrons can reduce O2 to produce ˙O2−, while the photogenerated h+ in some PCN-based heterojunctions can oxidize OH− to produce the highly oxidant radical ˙OH. These active species (h+, ˙O2−, ˙OH) can be put towards the oxidation of certain pollutants to mineralization (CO2 and H2O). In general, the photocatalytic degradation reactions over PCN can be categorized into two types: liquid phase removal of organic pollutants and gas phase degradation of pollutants, as summarized in Table 3. The photocatalytic degradation of pollutants also represents a simple approach to evaluate the photocatalytic activity of PCN-based composites. Therefore, many studies which focus on the mechanistic investigation of the photoactivity of PCN-based composites employ the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants as a model transformation.
Table 3 Utilization of PCN-based photocatalysts in the degradation of pollutants




Catalysts
Fraction of cocatalysts
Total mass of catalysts (g)
Light source (wavelength-nm)
Photocatalytic experiment
Activity (%)
Ref.




PCN
—
0.04
500 W Xe lamp (36 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
100% degradation in 3.3 h

344



Ag/PCN
4.0 wt%
0.10
500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MO
98.2% degradation in 9 min

345



Degradation of MB
99.3% degradation in 45 min


Ag/PCN
8.0 wt%
0.10
800 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
92.0% degradation in 0.5 h

346



Ag/PCN
1.0 wt%
0.15
500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MO
100% degradation in 3 h

247



Ag/PCN
5.0 wt%
0.10
300 W tungsten halogen lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MO
92.0% degradation in 1 h

248



Ag/PCN
54 wt%
0.010
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of diclofenac (DCF)
100% degradation in 1.5 h

347



Ag@PCN
0.5 wt%
0.025
500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MO
100% degradation in 5 min

59



Ag@PCN
3.0 wt%
0.002
400 W Xe lamp (>500 nm)
Degradation of MB
∼100% degradation in 3.5 h

348



Degradation of RhB
89% degradation in 4.2 h


Ag/mp-PCN
3.0 wt%
0.10
300 W tungsten halogen lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
100% degradation in 25 min

243



Ag@AgBr/PCN
70 wt% Ag@AgBr/PCN
0.10
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of MO
95% degradation in 10 min

349



Degradation of RhB
92% degradation in 10 min


PCN@Ag–Bi2WO6
2.7 wt%
0.05
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
70% degradation in 1.5 h

350



PCN/Ag/MoS2
6.7 wt%
0.10
300 W Xe lamp (172 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
∼100% degradation in 1 h

316



PCN/Ag/Ag3VO4
1.5 wt%
0.05
250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
95% degradation in 1.75 h

351



PCN@Ag@Ag3PO4
30 wt%
0.006
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
94.8% degradation in 1 h

352



AgQC/PCN
7.46 wt%
0.05
100 W halogen lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of MB
∼90% degradation in 0.5 h

301



Degradation of MO
∼90% degradation in 1.8 h


PCN/Ag/Ag2CrO4
8 wt% (Ag2CrO4/PCN)
0.05
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MB
58% degradation in 2 h

353



PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4
N/A
0.04
LED white-light lamp
Degradation of RhB
95% degradation in 10 min

354



PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4
25 wt% (Ag2PO4/PCN)
N/A
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of MO
100% degradation in 5min

355



PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4-(111) facet
10 wt% (PCN/Ag2PO4)
0.04
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of MB
100% degradation in 0.2 h

356



Removal of NOx
49.3% removal


PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4
2.1 wt% (Ag2PO4/PCN)
0.005
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of sulfamethoxazole (SMX)
100% degradation in 1 h

357



PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4
30 wt% (Ag2PO4/PCN)
0.010
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of diclofenac (DCF)
80% degradation in 2 h

358



PCN/Ag/Ag2CO3
25 wt% (PCN/Ag2CO3)
0.10
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of RhB
100% degradation in 0.5 h

359



Ag/SrTa2O6/PCN
2.0 wt%
0.025
300 W Hg lamp (3.45 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)
Degradation of MO
100% degradation in 1.2 h

360



Cr6+ photoreduction
100% reduction in 1.7 h


Ag/AgO/PCN
10 wt%
0.10
12 lamps of 100 Oreva
Degradation of acid Violet-7
98% degradation in 10 min

361



Pt/PCN
2.0 wt%
0.10
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of PCP
∼100% degradation in 7 h

251



Pd/mp-PCN
1.5 wt%
0.10
Solar simulator
Degradation of BPA
93.9% degradation in 3 h

259



Pd/PCN
5 wt%
0.05
N/A
Degradation of 2-CDD
54% degradation in 4 h

362



Au/PCN
N/A
0.045
500 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of MO
92.6% degradation in 2.5 h

239



Au@3D-PCN
N/A
0.04
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MO
82.6% degradation in 2 h

363



Au/TiO2/PCN
2.0 wt%
0.20
150 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of PCP
46% degradation in 1 h

364



Degradation of BPA
37% degradation in 1 h


Au/PCN/Fe2O3
N/A
0.05
N/A
Degradation of RhB
100% degradation in 50 min

365



Au/CNT/PCN
5.5 wt%
0.05
Visible light source (50 mW cm−2)
Degradation of RhB
∼100% degradation in 50 min

366



Au/graphene/PCN
1.0 wt%
0.10
500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MB
96.7% degradation in 4 h

367



Au/GO/PCN
1.0 wt%
0.05
500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of RhB
99.4% degradation in 2 h

368



CdS/Au/PCN
N/A
0.05
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of RhB
90.1% degradation in 10 min

369



Au/Pt/PCN
2.0 wt% (Au)
0.10
500 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of TC-HCl
93% degradation in 2 h

370



0.5 wt% (Pt)


Au–Ag/PCN
3.0 wt% (Au)
0.10
450 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of RhB
90% degradation in 4 h

371



1 wt% (Ag)


Au–Pd/PCN
3.2 at% (Au)
0.50
Solar ligth (600–900 W m−2)372
Degradation of phenol
94.4% degradation in 5 h

372



6.0 at% (Pd)


Cu/PCN
33 wt%
0.04
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of MB
∼100% degradation 0.25 h

373



Cu2O/Cu/PCN
20 at%
0.05
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
Degradation of MO
99% degradation in 40 min

374



Degradation of phenol
∼100% degradation 4 h


Bi@BiOCl/PCN
N/A
0.02
300 W Xe lamp
Degradation of RhB
94.3% degradation in 2 h

276



Degradation of DCP
80% degradation in 2 h


Cr6+ photoreduction
82.3% reduction in 1.3 h


Bi/PCN@Bi2WO6
4.6 wt%
0.10
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Degradation of MO
70% degradation in 2 h

375



Degradation of RhB
100% degradation in 0.5 h


Degradation of DCP
70% degradation in 3 h


Bi/PCN
11.8 wt%
0.20
150 W tungsten halogen lamp (>420 nm)
Removal of NOx
60.8% removal in 1 h

376



Ag/PCN
10.0 wt%
0.20
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
Removal of NOx
54.3% removal

377



Ag/PCN/WS2
2.0 wt%
0.10
300 W Xe lamp
Removal of NOx
72.5% removal in 1 h

378






6.3.1 Liquid phase degradation of pollutants. 
The removal of pollutants in wastewater effluents, especially organic pollutants (e.g. dyes, antibiotics, bisphenol A, phenols), has been addressed by advanced oxidation processes commonly catalysed by a variety of photocatalysts, which include PCN-based materials. In these studies, the dyes methyl orange, methylene blue, and Rhodamine B (RhB) have been employed as model molecules (so that the reaction can be monitored by a spectrophotometer). In the context of water purification, H2O2 is one of the most widely used green oxidants, which typically requires a catalyst for activation into more reactive oxidizing intermediates.34,344 Cui et al. have demonstrated the metal-free activation of H2O2 by PCN under visible light irradiation, using the decomposition of RhB in aqueous solution as a proof-of-concept reaction. The authors reported that PCN was capable of activating H2O2 to generate reactive oxy-radicals, which in turn led to the mineralization of the dye.344 Interestingly, other studies have used O2 as oxidant. For example, Yang et al. exploited the LSPR effect of Ag NPs in Ag-deposited PCN plasmonic photocatalysts towards the methyl orange degradation. In general, when PCN is excited by visible-light, the generation of ˙O2− and h+ takes place. Here, its band structure does not promote the formation of ˙OH species. It was found that for Ag/PCN systems, ˙OH radicals also took part in the photocatalytic reactions, thus giving the direct evidence to contribute to its increased catalytic performance.248 The same research group later reported the fabrication of Z-scheme plasmonic photocatalyst Ag@AgBr/PCN to further enhance the photocatalytic activity. The high activity achieved in the degradation of methyl orange was attributed to the Z-scheme system, which retained the photoinduced electrons with strong reduction power in the conduction band of PCN and h+ with strong oxidation power in the valence band of AgBr.349
Recently, Ag NPs have been used to improve photocatalytic activities in PCN-based Z-scheme systems.274,316,350,379 For example, Xiao et al. reported enhanced photocatalytic performances for degradation of RhB by a C3N4@Ag–Bi2WO6 material.350 Ag NPs also have been used in a Z-scheme system for RhB316,351,352 and methyl orange (MO)301,353 photodegradation. Several studies have reported the spontaneous photodeposition of Ag NPs during the photocatalytic reaction for Ag compounds/PCN materials due to the Ag+ photoreduction to generate Ag NPs under light irradiation.353,354,380 PCN have been reported to construct Z-scheme systems via the formation of Ag NPs during the photocatalytic reaction with Ag3PO4,338,354–357,380 Ag2CrO4353 and Ag2CO3.359 Generally, the Ag-compounds/PCN system behaves according to a traditional heterojunction. However, the excited electrons have enough reduction ability to convert Ag+ into Ag0. Consequently, the two-phase system is gradually transformed into a three-phase Z-scheme system under light illumination. Notably, Ag NPs can strongly absorb the visible light by LSPR effect.381–383 It has been reported that Ag NPs can simultaneously exhibit the LSPR effect and serve as electron mediators in some Ag-compound/Ag/PCN systems improving its photocatalyst activity.274,316,349,384
Ag doped PCN was also successfully employed to photodegradation of diclofenac (DCF). DCF is an organochlorine anti-inflammatory commonly found in wastewater. It can have significant impact to organisms even in extremely low concentrations (>1 μg L−1), which makes its removal from wastewater critical.385 Li et al. showed that the degradation rate for Ag/PCN was 3.1 folds higher relative to pure PCN, with an excellent stability over the re-use cycles. The authors attributed the enhanced photoactivity to the close contact between Ag and PCN as well as the localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect of Ag NPs.347 Even more impressive results were obtained by Zhang et al. doping PCN with Ag3PO4. In this case, it was reported a 34.8 times higher photodegradation rate for the doped sample when compared with pure PCN.358 The authors did not investigate mechanistically the system in detail. However, the presence of Ag NPs was confirmed, which may have led to the formation of a Z-scheme heterojunction, consequently improving the charge separation efficiency of the photogeneration electron–hole pairs.358
PCN-based Z-scheme systems were also applied for NO oxidation379 and Cr(VI) photoreduction.360 Su et al. decorated SrTa2O6/PCN with Ag NPs as catalysts. An enhancement of the visible light absorption efficiency and a promotion of the photocatalytic activity by a factor of 2.8 for Cr(VI) photoreduction and 4.6 for methyl orange degradation were observed as compared with only SrTa2O6/PCN (Fig. 18a–d). Ag decoration on SrTa2O6/PCN not only extended the visible light absorption region due to LSPR effects but also act as an electron mediator for efficient migration of photogenerated electrons and simultaneously prevent the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs (Fig. 18e).360
 Fig. 18  Change in methyl orange concentration (a and c) and in Cr(VI) concentration (b and d) as a function of the irradiation time for SrTa2O6/PCN (a and b) and Ag/SrTa2O6/PCN photocatalysts. Reprinted from ref. 360 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015; (e) schematic representation of a possible mechanism for Cr(VI) photoreduction and methyl orange degradation over Ag/SrTa2O6/PCN photocatalytic system under visible light irradiation. Adapted from ref. 360 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. 
Ag NPs also display antibacterial activity. Bing and co-workers successfully improved visible-light-driven antibacterial activity and dispersal of biofilms by embedding Ag NPs on PCN.246 The Ag/PCN hybrids were much more effective to reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation under visible light. The composite was efficient as a bactericidal agent for both Gram-negative (G−) E. coli and Gram-positive (G+) Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) under visible-light illumination.246 Muñoz-Batista et al. tested Ag/PCN biocidal capability against E. coli and it system displayed significantly higher antibacterial capabilities compared to the single components of Ag NPs and PCN.245 Upon UV light illumination, the Ag/PCN system was demonstrated be more effective on charge separation, which left hole-related radicals at the PCN support and electrons on the Ag NPs. Meanwhile, under visible excitation, the LSPR effect of Ag played an essential role in the biocidal action. In this regard, a complex phenomenon involving adsorption, radical attack as well as deactivation process of the interaction between microorganism and photocatalyst took place simultaneously.245 It is noteworthy that the bactericidal action was greatly influenced by both electron and hole-related charge species, which could be confirmed by the EPR measurements of the charge radicals produced from the photoactivity.34
In addition to Ag, Au also has been widely used to improve the PCN photodegradation performance. Cheng et al. reported superior photocatalytic activities for the decomposition of methyl orange under visible-light after decorating PCN nanosheets prepared by ultrasonication-assisted liquid exfoliation of bulk PCN with Au NPs deposited via green photoreduction of HAuCl4.239 Chang et al. reported an Au/PCN nanorods with high activity for photodegradation of a range of pollutants, such as RhB, 4-chlorophenol (4-CP), tetracycline (TC) and reduce (Cr(VI)).386 Au NPs also have been used to decorate PCN combined with other heterostructures (e.g. TiO2,364 Fe2O3365 and CdS)369 for the photodegradation of pollutants. It is noteworthy the results obtained by Zada and co-workers using the ternary component (Au/TiO2/PCN), which presented an improvement of 5.11-folds for photodecomposition of 2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-DCP) when compared with pure PCN. They reported an exceptional visible-light for the fabricated Au–(TiO2/PCN) nanohybrids, which was attributed to the extended visible-light response due to the Au NPs LSPR and its catalytic function, and to the enhanced charge separation by transferring electrons from PCN and Au to TiO2. This promoted electron transfer for the TiO2 favored the formation of hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), which are very effective in the photocatalytic oxidation process of 2,4-DCP.364 Furthermore, Au NPs also have been widely used in combination with carbon nanostructures, such as CNT366 and GO.368 This carbon nanostructures, in general, work as an electron transporter and acceptor facilitating the charge transfer and avoiding the recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs.368 Recently, Leng et al. reported a dramatically enhance of 15 times on the photocatalytic degradation rate constant towards methyl orange (MO) for Au@3D-PCN compared with PCN. Their nanonetwork-structured PCN with well dispersed Au NPs yolks seems to improve the photocatalytic activity due to the positive synergistic effect between the SPR effect of the Au NPs and the high photoelectron-separated efficiency of the 3D nanonetwork structure.363
Despite its more restrict use in photodegradation applications, possibly due to its prohibitive price, the activity of Pt NPs has also been evaluated to degradation of pollutants. In order to minimize the influence of the Pt price in the application feasibility of Pt/PCN for photodegradation, Xu and collaborators wisely coupled the photodegradation of the macrolide antibiotics roxithromycin (Rox) with H2 production reaction. The authors found that macrolide antibiotics present in water act as a sacrificial agent to consume H2O2 (side product from H2 production), itself being degraded, leading to an enhancement of the H2 yield (Fig. 19).387 Pt NPs were also tested on PCN nanotubes towards the photodegradation of p-chlorophenol, p-nitrophenol, methylene blue and RhB, under visible-light irradiation. The authors reported a superior photocatalytic activity as compared to only PCN nanotubes and attributed it to the synergic effect of Pt NPs on the unique tubular nanostructure of PCN nanotubes.251
 Fig. 19  (a) Photocatalytic water splitting to H2 catalyzed by 40 mg of 2 wt% Pt/PCN in 100 mL of water with different amounts of Rox; (b) proposed reaction mechanism for the enhancement in the simultaneous water splitting and degradation of the Rox reaction by using Pt/PCN under the visible light irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 387 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Bisphenol A (BPA) is another common pollutant. It is widely used in the manufacturing of consumer goods. Owing to its wide application, a large amount of bisphenol A has been released into the environment, leading to ubiquitous presence of bisphenol A in natural water.388 Thus, an extensive research effort has been devoted to the remediation of this problem. Chang et al. investigated the degradation of BPA in water by Pd decorated mesoporous PCN (Pd/mp-PCN).259 The catalyst modified with Pd NPs presented a higher photoactivity compared with only mp-PCN. This higher activity was attributed to the enhanced light absorbance in the UV-VIS region, along with the ability of the Pd NPs to act as electron traps and facilitate the separation of charge carriers.259 Pd NPs were also successfully employed to improve the photodegradation of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs). PCDDs are one of the most important environmental pollutants due to its toxicity, bioaccumulation, and persistence.389 Ding et al. reported a photodegradation rate constant 3.7 times higher than that of pure PCN for 2-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (2-CDD) for their optimal photocatalyst (5%Pd/PCN).362 The authors claimed that the enhanced activity originated mainly from the formation of Schottky barrier between Pd NPs and PCN, which extend the spectrum responsive range and suppressed the charge recombination of PCN.362
There are some successful examples where PCN was decorated with bimetallic NPs in order to improve its photocatalytic activity towards photodegradation reactions. Xue et al. fabricated Au/Pt co-decorated PCN heterostructure by a facile calcination–photodeposition technique, which displayed enhanced photocatalytic activity for antibiotic tetracycline hydrochloride (TC-HCl) degradation. The degradation rates were up to 3.4 times higher than that of pure PCN under visible light irradiation. The authors attributed this enhancement in the photocatalytic activity to the LSPR effect of Au and electron-sink function of Pt NPs, which improved the optical absorption property and photogenerated charge carriers separation of PCN, synergistically facilitating the photocatalysis process.370 Gondal et al. used a different approach. Instead of using co-decorated bimetallic NPs, they used AuAg NPs alloys in order to take better advantage of the LSPR properties of these NPs. As a result, AuAg/PCN photocatalysts exhibited significantly higher activity for the decolorization of RhB in the visible light as compared to the monometallic Ag and Au NPs counterparts on PCN.371 Bimetallic AuPd NPs alloys on PCN was recently applied for photodegradation of carcinogenic phenolic compounds and displayed superior photocatalytic activity compared with the previously reported AuPd/rGO. Photoluminescence results demonstrated that the efficient charge separation and delayed recombination of photo-induced electron–hole pairs in the AuPd/PCN nanocomposite were responsible for its superior activity.372
Besides the noble metals, non-noble metals such as Bi and Cu can be very useful to improve photocatalytic properties of PCN. The most common strategy consists in making use their plasmonic properties to improve visible light absorption and reduce the recombination of electron–hole pairs. This strategy has been reported by Sierra et al. for the Bi spheres/Bi mixed oxides/PCN nanohybrids390 and Gao et al. for the system Cu–PCN synthesised by a supramolecular approach.373 Other interesting example using the low-cost metal Bi to improve progradation was reported by Wang et al.375 The authors deposited plasmonic Bi NPs on PCN@Bi2WO6 microspheres via a hydrothermal method. Bi NPs inserted in the interlayer between PCN and the surface of Bi2WO6 microspheres worked as an electron-conduction bridge enhancing the visible light absorption due to the LSPR effect, consequently facilitating the efficient electron-carrier separation. As a result, they observed an extraordinary enhanced photocatalytic activity for decomposition of 2,4-DCP relative to the PCN, Bi2WO6, and PCN(20%)@Bi2WO6 samples. These observations imply that the heterostructured combination of PCN, metallic Bi NPs, and Bi2WO6 microspheres provided synergistic photocatalytic activity via an efficient electron transfer process. The low-cost metals Bi and Cu were also used to fabricate Z-scheme systems, such as Bi@BiOCl/PCN and Cu2O/Cu/PCN,374 which were applied for photodegradation of pollutants.276


6.3.2 Gas phase degradation of pollutants. 
The use of metal NPs/PCN heterostructures in the topic of gas phase photodegradation is essentially limited to the oxidation of nitric oxide (NO). Nitrogen dioxide and nitric oxide, also known as NOx, are common air pollutants generated from the combustion of fossil fuels and vehicle exhaust. They are responsible for atmospheric pollutions (e.g. acid rain and urban smog). In view of these facts, there is a growing environmental concern and thereby an intense search for efficient catalysts capable to oxidize NO.34 Sano et al. were the first to report the application of PCN photocatalysts for the oxidation of NO. However, the authors observed low oxidation rates under visible light irradiation.391 Despite the efforts of Wang and co-workers a few years later trying to improve the surface area of the PCN hoping to obtain higher oxidation rates, no satisfactory improvements on the NO oxidation was observed. Thus, the combination of PCN with a cocatalyst seems to be an interesting strategy to improve the photocatalytic activity for NO oxidation reaction.392 Sun et al. resorted to this strategy by hybridizing PCN with Ag NPs. Their results showed that the deposition of Ag NPs not only enhanced the visible light absorption of the hybrid but also benefited the oxidation of NO to the final products (NO2 and NO3−). The authors attributed the visible enhancement in light absorption due to the LSPR of Ag NPs and the increase in the NO oxidation due to improved separation and transfer of photoinduced carriers over Ag/PCN composites, which was supported by the PL spectra.377 Ma and co-workers reported even more significant increment on the activity for NO oxidation in PCN/WS2 decorated with Ag NPs. Their optimized system was 3.70, 1.90 and 1.17 times more active for NO oxidation than that of PCN, WS2, and PCN/WS2, respectively.378
Another promising cocatalyst for NO oxidation due to its low-cost is Bi. Jiang et al. reported the deposition of Bi NPs on PCN. This system was employed as a photocatalyst in removing ppb-level NO in a continuous gas flow under visible light illumination. The Bi NPs significantly enhanced the performance of PCN, and this enhancement arises from the heterojunction and LSPR effects of Bi NPs. However, Jiang et al. also investigated the contribution of each, since they are highly dependent on the size of Bi NPs. By tuning the size of Bi NPs, the authors concluded that Bi NPs with 12 nm represents the optimum size to favor the synergy of these two effects (Fig. 20c and d).376 In another paper, Dong et al. constructed an Bi NPs/PCN displaying highly enhanced visible-light photoactivity and stability for NO purification as compared to that of pristine PCN.260 The enhanced photocatalytic performance was attributed to the co-contributions of the notably improved light-harvesting, owing to the LSPR effects of Bi nanospheres, and the increased separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs due to the electron trapping effect of Bi metal in the heterostructured system. The local electromagnetic field arising from the LSPR effects of Bi was simulated with a rigorous Maxwell's solver based on the finite integration techniques (Fig. 20a), where a significant enhancement of electromagnetic field under visible light could be observed. This electromagnetic field accelerates the photoexcited electrons and holes separation. Furthermore, the nearby Bi NPs can act as electron traps to facilitate the separation of photoinduced electron–hole pairs (Fig. 20b).260
 Fig. 20  (a) Simulation of the LSPR-induced local electromagnetic field in the Bi NPs when it is illuminated by a plane wave with a wavelength of 420 nm from the z-direction. A three-dimensional view and two-dimensional cross-sections perpendicular to the x, y, and z-axes are shown. The scale bar shows the relative increase in field enhancement T = |E/Einc|2. (b) Visible-light-induced charge separation and a proposed mechanism for NO oxidation photocatalysed by Bi/PCN. Reprinted from ref. 376 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015; (c) photocatalytic activity for NO oxidation catalyzed by PCN and Bi/PCN materials containing Bi NPs of different sizes (Bi loading of 11.8 ± 4 wt%); (d) schematic of the synergy of the size-dependent heterojunction and LSPR effect of Bi NPs on the photocatalytic activity. Reprinted from ref. 366 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 

6.4. Other photocatalytic applications
In addition to the transformations presented in the previous sections, metal NPs/PCN have also been employed for other transformations.393 For example, Verma and collaborators studied the photocatalytic C–H activation and oxidative esterification photocatalysed by Pd/PCN. The authors reported excellent yields (>90%) for the conversion of a broad scope of aromatic alcohols into esters.394 Although only preliminary investigations about the reaction mechanism been performed, it is possible to affirm that the reaction proceeds via a C–H activation, which depends on O2 to occur. The activated carbon is then attacked by the alcohol used as reaction solvent, in this case methanol, leading to the ester as final product.394
It is important to note that the applications of carbon nitrides are not limited to only photoreactions. Despite not being the focus of this review, carbon nitrides and metal NPs/PCN hybrids have been put to work in electrocatalysis,395 hydrogenations,396 oxidations,397,398 alkene epoxidation,399 formic acid decomposition400 and very recently to promote cross-coupling reactions.401 Pérez-Ramírez and collaborators reported Pd single-atoms anchored on exfoliated PCN (Fig. 21a and b) efficiently catalysing the Susuki coupling of broad scope of substrates. The authors showed that heterogeneous Pd single-atom catalyst based on exfoliated PCN surpasses the performance of state-of-the-art homogeneous catalysts and conventional heterogeneous catalysts based on nanoparticles or grafted molecular complexes, without evidencing metal leaching or aggregation after the reaction. They attributed the enhanced properties to the adaptive coordination environment within the macroheterocycles of exfoliated PCN (Fig. 21a), which facilitates each catalytic step.401
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of heterogeneous Pd single-atoms anchored on exfoliated PCN; (b) aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-STEM) of the Pd single-atom catalyst based on exfoliated PCN. Reprinted from ref. 401 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
Moreover, a number of emerging intrinsic properties of PCN allow its novel applications outside of conventional catalysis. Recently, Antonietti et al. compiled these unconventional applications in an excellent review, covering applications of PCN in a range of areas, such as sensing, bioimaging, photovoltaic cells, templating, and the construction of carbon nitride based devices.402
7. Conclusions and perspectives
We presented herein a comprehensive overview of metal NPs/PCN-based heterostructures, focusing on their design principles, photocatalytic applications, and charge-transfer mechanisms. The versatility of the PCN with respect to control over its electronic band structure, composition, crystallinity, vacancies sites, porosity, stability, and active sites at its surface make this material an exceptional candidate for the formation of hybrids with metal NPs. The metal NPs can possess a range of tunable properties (e.g. optical and catalytic properties as a function of shape, size, and composition) that, when combined with PCN, can be harnessed for improved photocatalysis. The recent and intense investigation in the synthesis and application of NPs/PCN-based hybrids confirm that these materials represent an important class of photocatalysts for transitioning towards a sustainable future.
Despite the great progress in the area, we believe that we are still at the early stages in terms of material design and photocatalytic efficiency, which remains low for widespread applications. In order to overcome these challenges, we believe that several issues need to be addressed as described in the following paragraphs.
Firstly, we must be aware and correct the description of the carbon nitride-based materials. Unfortunately, several papers refer to carbon nitride-based materials generically as “g-C3N4”, which implied a precise and ideal stoichiometry. This limits the understanding and abstraction of the real structure responsible for the photocatalysis. Recently, McMillan and collaborators proposed a new a hierarchical scheme for naming these materials based on their hydrogen content and morphology.77 We particularly recommend the adoption of these naming practices for future publications and studies in the field.
A fundamental understanding of the mechanism behind the charge transport in metal NPs/PCN-based photocatalysts is critical. It is essential to unravel the charge cascading process in detail to allow an optimum utilization of light through photogenerated charge carriers for driving charge-transfer reactions. It is required to understand the charge generation, separation, and transportation across the nanoscale. This is especially important for Z-scheme systems, which remain poorly understood. For instance, in situ characterization can be very valuable for probing the electron–hole transfer pathways, being quite promising for enabling the design of more efficient metal NPs/PCN-based photocatalysts having higher quantum efficiencies and thus economic viability. It is also noteworthy that most of the work functions used in semiconducting materials and heterojunctions correspond to the bulk material values. Nevertheless, these values are size dependent, and their precise understanding should involve photophysical measurements of band structures/interfaces.
The interface of metal NPs/PCN-based photocatalyst is a complex system, but very important for photocatalytic activity. Consequently, it is imperative to investigate interface effects in detail, especially regarding metal–support interactions, shape effects, nanoscale assembly, composition, density of defects, vacancies, and bandgap adjustment. Some powerful characterization techniques, such as atom probe tomography and ion scattering, can be more employed to improve our understanding of the interface of metal NPs/PCN systems.
Another challenge consists on the development and utilization of theoretical models and approaches to understand metal NPs/PCN-based systems, such as electronic structure modelling of surface–adsorbate interactions and its integration it with the effect of light excitation. Moreover, many of the theoretical models use for PCN structures actually does not match with the experimental ones. Commonly, these calculations are performed using graphitic carbon nitride as model to represent what should be melon.
Metal NPs/PCN systems exhibit high photocatalytic activities. However, their practical application is limited by the high price and low abundance of noble metals. This limitation can be circumvented by replacing the expensive metal for low-cost alternatives. This review presented some examples of low-cost metals (e.g. Cu, Bi, and Fe) being used as alternative photocatalysts to noble metals. Another strategy is to enhance the atom utilization efficiency of noble metals, for example by synthesizing highly active systems containing noble metals (which enable one to reduce its loading in the reaction) and single-atom noble metal-deposited PCN materials. So far, facile and efficient methods for preparing single-atom noble metal modified PCN systems are challenging and deserve further exploration. Furthermore, the characterization of these systems is specially challenging and basically limited to AC-STEM and EXAFS. It would be very helpful with further development of spectroscopy techniques to probe and support the coordination environment of single-atoms on PCN. The stability of these systems it is also extremely important to make them economically viable. Hence, it is critical to address chemical corrosion and/or degradation of the photocatalysts.
Finally, synergistic efforts in the areas of controlled synthesis, precise characterization (both ex and in situ), mechanistic investigation, and modelling will be needed in order to move beyond the state-of-the-art in the field of photocatalysis and enable the widespread utilization of metal NPs/PCN materials towards sustainable molecular transformations.
It is a consensus that a sustainable economy must have its process driven by sunlight. Hence, photocatalytic systems will have a protagonist role in our journey to a green future. In this context, photocatalytic systems based on earth-abundant elements, such as PCN, are particularly attractive. Furthermore, the synthesis of metal NPs and PCN have been recently successfully scaled-up to the kilogram scale,107,403,404 which make these hybrids photocatalysts, even more, promising for future practical applications.
We believe that the precise understanding of the charge transport mechanism combined with the high level of control over the materials syntheses, their combination, and characterization can take the topic of photocatalysis with PCN to a new level, potentially enabling us to move from an observation-driven to a design-driven approach (Fig. 22). In this case, specific properties and the performance of the photocatalytic systems can be planned in advance, and the target material synthesized accordingly. We are confident that the continuous efforts of the scientific community in synthesis, characterization, and mechanistic understanding, modelling, and assessment in photocatalysis is paving the way for cleaner energy generation as well as more efficient and sustainable processes.
 Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the critical points which must be understood in photocatalysis promoted by metal NPs/PCN to allow the transition from an observation-driven to a design-driven approach. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by FAPESP (grant numbers 15/26308-7 and 17/50118-9) and the Serrapilheira Institute (grant number Serra-1709-16900). This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior – Brazil (CAPES) – Finance Code 001. P. H. C. C. thanks the CNPq for the research fellowships. I. F. T, and E. C. M. B. thank FAPESP for the fellowships (grant numbers 17/05506-0, 15/11452-5, and 18/00393-6, respectively).
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bisquert, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 648–649 CrossRef .
A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek, J. Cairney, C. A. Eckert, W. J. Frederick, Jr., J. P. Hallett, D. J. Leak, C. L. Liotta, J. R. Mielenz, R. Murphy, R. Templer and T. Tschaplinski, Science, 2006, 311, 484–489 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Wang, H. G. Yang, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. M. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 831–843 RSC .
M. D. Hernández-Alonso, F. Fresno, S. Suárez and J. M. Coronado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1231–1257 RSC .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Peiris, J. McMurtrie and H.-Y. Zhu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 320–338 RSC .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Blechert and M. Antonietti, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1596–1606 CrossRef .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
D. S. Su, J. Zhang, B. Frank, A. Thomas, X. Wang, J. Paraknowitsch and R. Schlögl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 169–180 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef PubMed .
B. V. Lotsch, M. Döblinger, J. Sehnert, L. Seyfarth, J. Senker, O. Oeckler and W. Schnick, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4969–4980 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Döblinger, B. V. Lotsch, J. Wack, J. Thun, J. Senker and W. Schnick, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1541–1543 RSC .
F. K. Kessler, Y. Zheng, D. Schwarz, C. Merschjann, W. Schnick, X. Wang and M. J. Bojdys, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17030 CrossRef .
K. Schwinghammer, M. B. Mesch, V. Duppel, C. Ziegler, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1730–1733 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 RSC .
F. Su, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1005–1009 RSC .
G. Algara-Siller, N. Severin, S. Y. Chong, T. Björkman, R. G. Palgrave, A. Laybourn, M. Antonietti, Y. Z. Khimyak, A. V. Krasheninnikov and J. P. Rabe, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 7580–7585 CrossRef .
A. I. Cooper and M. J. Bojdys, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 467–520 CrossRef .
Y. Si, J. Zhong, J. Li, X. Liu, W. Hu, J. Song, F. Zhang, K. Liu, K. Huang and S. Wu, J. Adv. Oxid. Technol., 2016, 19, 158–164 CrossRef .
Q. Yu, X. Li and M. Zhang, Micro Nano Lett., 2014, 9, 1–5 CrossRef .
L. Shi, L. Liang, F. Wang, J. Ma and J. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3235–3243 RSC .
J. Fu, J. Yu, C. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1701503 CrossRef .
S. Ye, R. Wang, M.-Z. Wu and Y.-P. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 15–27 CrossRef .
G. Mamba and A. Mishra, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 347–377 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, B. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12868–12884 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Lv, J. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Zhang and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23485–23493 CrossRef .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Yao, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 446–450 RSC .
J. Li, B. Shen, Z. Hong, B. Lin, B. Gao and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 12017–12019 RSC .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, J. Ye and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6294–6295 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Fan, B. Wang, M. Wang, W. Ren, J. Wang, M. Li and J. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3862–3867 RSC .
F. Dong, Z. Zhao, T. Xiong, Z. Ni, W. Zhang, Y. Sun and W.-K. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11392–11401 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Dong, Z. Ni, P. Li and Z. Wu, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 4737–4744 RSC .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4467–4471 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Su, S. C. Mathew, G. Lipner, X. Fu, M. Antonietti, S. Blechert and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16299–16301 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-P. Yuan, L.-S. Yin, S.-W. Cao, L.-N. Gu, G.-S. Xu, P. Du, H. Chai, Y.-S. Liao and C. Xue, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4663–4668 RSC .
M. J. Bojdys, J. O. Müller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8177–8182 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xu, J. Xia, H. Xu, S. Yin, K. Wang, L. Huang, L. Wang and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 866–874 CrossRef .
J. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Shi and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14766–14772 RSC .
P. Niu, L. Zhang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4763–4770 CrossRef .
P. Xia, B. Zhu, J. Yu, S. Cao and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3230–3238 RSC .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Dong, K. Zhao and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6178–6180 RSC .
V. W.-h. Lau, I. Moudrakovski, T. Botari, S. Weinberger, M. B. Mesch, V. Duppel, J. Senker, V. Blum and B. V. Lotsch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12165 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Peng, H. Wang, H. Yu and Y. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10323–10325 RSC .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922–2929 RSC .
C. Pan, J. Xu, Y. Wang, D. Li and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1518–1524 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, A. B. Laursen, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3621–3625 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, L. Zhang, M. Wu, Y. Du, X. Fan, M. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Kong and J. Shi, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 145–155 CrossRef .
X. Bai, R. Zong, C. Li, D. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 82–91 CrossRef .
Y. Di, X. Wang, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 834–838 CrossRef .
S. Samanta, S. Martha and K. Parida, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1453–1462 Search PubMed .
R. Wang, L. Gu, J. Zhou, X. Liu, F. Teng, C. Li, Y. Shen and Y. Yuan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500037 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Wu, G. Zeng, X. Chen, L. Leng and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174, 445–454 CrossRef .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Yu, L. Li, S. Hao and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3822–3827 RSC .
Q. Su, J. Sun, J. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Cheng and S. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1556–1562 RSC .
J. Zhu, P. Xiao, H. Li and S. n. A. Carabineiro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16449–16465 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5300–5303 RSC .
H.-J. Li, B.-W. Sun, L. Sui, D.-J. Qian and M. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 3309–3315 RSC .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. Miao, G. Ding and Z. Jiao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 14002–14008 RSC .
Y. Yu, Q. Zhou and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3396–3399 RSC .
B. Jürgens, E. Irran, J. Senker, P. Kroll, H. Müller and W. Schnick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10288–10300 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhu, P. Xia, W. Ho and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 344, 188–195 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Q. Li, B. Liu, B. Cheng, W. Ho and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 44–52 Search PubMed .
C. Yang, B. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Yin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 6727–6731 CrossRef .
P. Niu, L. C. Yin, Y. Q. Yang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8046–8052 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Miller, A. B. Jorge, T. M. Suter, A. Sella, F. Corà and P. F. McMillan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 15613–15638 RSC .
S. E. Rodil, A. C. Ferrari, J. Robertson and W. I. Milne, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 5425–5430 CrossRef .
S. C. Yan, S. B. Lv, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 1488–1491 RSC .
X.-H. Li, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2170–2174 RSC .
J. Sun, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1139 CrossRef .
X.-H. Li, J. Zhang, X. Chen, A. Fischer, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4344–4348 CrossRef .
J. Liu, J. Huang, D. Dontosova and M. Antonietti, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22988–22993 RSC .
S. Wang, C. Li, T. Wang, P. Zhang, A. Li and J. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2885–2890 RSC .
H. Zhao, H. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152, 46–50 CrossRef .
X. Dong and F. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23642–23652 RSC .
Y. Zhang and M. Antonietti, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 1307–1311 Search PubMed .
K. S. Lakhi, D.-H. Park, K. Al-Bahily, W. Cha, B. Viswanathan, J.-H. Choy and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 72–101 RSC .
X. Bai, L. Wang, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9952–9961 CrossRef .
M. Tahir, C. Cao, N. Mahmood, F. K. Butt, A. Mahmood, F. Idrees, S. Hussain, M. Tanveer, Z. Ali and I. Aslam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 6, 1258–1265 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Y. Jimmy, Z. Shen, D. K. L. Chan and T. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10148–10150 RSC .
Y. Yin, J. Han, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhou, D. Muir, R. Sutarto, Z. Zhang, S. Liu and B. Song, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 32690–32697 RSC .
L. Ma, H. Fan, M. Li, H. Tian, J. Fang and G. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22404–22412 RSC .
H. Xu, J. Yan, X. She, L. Xu, J. Xia, Y. Xu, Y. Song, L. Huang and H. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1406–1415 RSC .
Q. Han, B. Wang, J. Gao, Z. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2745–2751 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ma, H. Fan, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Tian and G. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 190, 93–102 CrossRef .
F. Cheng, H. Wang and X. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7176–7179 RSC .
J. Tong, L. Zhang, F. Li, K. Wang, L. Han and S. Cao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88149–88153 RSC .
P. Qiu, H. Chen, C. Xu, N. Zhou, F. Jiang, X. Wang and Y. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24237–24244 RSC .
T. S. Miller, T. M. Suter, A. M. Telford, L. Picco, O. D. Payton, F. Russell-Pavier, P. L. Cullen, A. Sella, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. Nelson, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5891–5896 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jia, E. R. White, A. J. Clancy, N. Rubio Carrero, T. Suter, T. S. Miller, P. M. McMillan, V. Brázdová, F. Corà and C. A. Howard, Angew. Chem., 2018 DOI:10.1002/ange.201800875 .
J. Zhu, Y. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Zhao and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6965–6967 RSC .
P. Sharma and Y. Sasson, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 25589–25596 RSC .
J. Xu, K. Shen, B. Xue and Y.-X. Li, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 372, 105–113 CrossRef .
H. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Yang, M. Zhao and Y. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 405–417 RSC .
Y. Shiraishi, S. Kanazawa, Y. Sugano, D. Tsukamoto, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 774–780 CrossRef .
Y. Dai, C. Li, Y. Shen, T. Lim, J. Xu, Y. Li, H. Niemantsverdriet, F. Besenbacher, N. Lock and R. Su, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 60–67 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Khan, I. F. Teixeira, M. M. J. Li, Y. Koito and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2772–2775 RSC .
Z. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1735–1738 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3356–3359 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3894–3901 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-H. Lan, H.-T. Wang, L. Chen, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, Carbon, 2016, 100, 81–89 CrossRef .
J. Hong, X. Xia, Y. Wang and R. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15006–15012 RSC .
G. Zhang, M. Zhang, X. Ye, X. Qiu, S. Lin and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 805–809 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Han, C. Hu, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4612–4619 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Chen, A. Thomas, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1609–1612 CrossRef .
Z. Ding, X. Chen, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 274–281 Search PubMed .
S. Hu, X. Qu, P. Li, F. Wang, Q. Li, L. Song, Y. Zhao and X. Kang, Chem.
Eng. J., 2018, 334, 410–418 CrossRef .
S. Hu, F. Li, Z. Fan, F. Wang, Y. Zhao and Z. Lv, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1084–1092 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Hu and Y. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 62912–62919 RSC .
H. Gao, S. Yan, J. Wang and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 8178–8183 RSC .
J. Zhao, L. Ma, H. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and S. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 332, 625–630 CrossRef .
T. Xiong, W. Cen, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2462–2472 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2298–2321 RSC .
L. Jiang, X. Yuan, Y. Pan, J. Liang, G. Zeng, Z. Wu and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 388–406 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10119–10126 RSC .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Y. Sun and F. Dong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15–37 RSC .
Y. Sun, C. Li, Y. Xu, H. Bai, Z. Yao and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4740–4742 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, P. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Li and H. Zhao, Small, 2013, 9, 3336–3344 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef .
L. Ge and C. Han, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 117, 268–274 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, H. Xu, L. Wang, J. Yan, H. Li, Y. Song, L. Huang and G. Cai, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 7604–7613 RSC .
B. Chai, X. Liao, F. Song and H. Zhou, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 982–989 RSC .
X. Bai, L. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152, 262–270 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, P. Yao, D. Zhu and C. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13189–13192 RSC .
H. Zhang, L. Zhao, F. Geng, L.-H. Guo, B. Wan and Y. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 656–662 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fang, Y. Xia, K. Lv, Q. Li, J. Sun and M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 185, 225–232 CrossRef .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, F. Ma, Y. Jiao, E. Waclawik and A. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31140–31144 RSC .
X. Jian, X. Liu, H.-m. Yang, J.-g. Li, X.-l. Song, H.-y. Dai and Z.-h. Liang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 370, 514–521 CrossRef .
L. Ge, C. Han and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11843–11850 RSC .
Y. Sui, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Tian and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9150–9155 RSC .
H. Yan and Y. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4168–4170 RSC .
Z. Xing, Z. Chen, X. Zong and L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6762–6764 RSC .
S. Hu, L. Ma, H. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhao and G. Wu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31947–31953 RSC .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Yu, S. Hao, Y. Zhou and Y. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7171–7179 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xia, N. Deng, G. Cui, J. Xie, X. Shi, Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, W. Wang and B. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10899–10902 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, R. Q. Sun and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 10292–10296 CrossRef .
L. Ye, D. Wang and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5280–5289 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Samanta, S. Khilari, D. Pradhan and R. Srivastava, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2562–2577 CrossRef .
J. Yu, S. Wang, J. Low and W. Xiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16883–16890 RSC .
Z. Jiang, C. Zhu, W. Wan, K. Qian and J. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1806–1818 RSC .
Q. Sun, K. Lv, Z. Zhang, M. Li and B. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 420–427 CrossRef .
M. J. Muñoz-Batista, A. Kubacka and M. Fernandez-Garcia, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2006–2015 RSC .
C. Han, Y. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Wang, N. Wu, Q. Shi and Q. Li, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1199–1209 CrossRef .
K. Sridharan, E. Jang and T. J. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 718–728 CrossRef .
K. Yang, C. Meng, L. Lin, X. Peng, X. Chen, X. Wang, W. Dai and X. Fu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 829–839 RSC .
G. Li, X. Nie, J. Chen, Q. Jiang, T. An, P. K. Wong, H. Zhang, H. Zhao and H. Yamashita, Water Res., 2015, 86, 17–24 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, C. Li, B. Chen, X. Jiao and D. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34281–34291 RSC .
X. Chen, J. Wei, R. Hou, Y. Liang, Z. Xie, Y. Zhu, X. Zhang and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 188, 342–350 CrossRef .
R. Hao, G. Wang, H. Tang, L. Sun, C. Xu and D. Han, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 47–58 CrossRef .
K. Li, Z. Zeng, L. Yan, M. Huo, Y. Guo, S. Luo and X. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 269–280 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, D. He, Q. An and G. Cao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 292, 79–89 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yan, H. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, F. Zhang and S. F. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 191, 130–137 CrossRef .
H. Li, L. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Lei and J. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17406–17412 RSC .
K. Dai, L. Lu, C. Liang, Q. Liu and G. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156, 331–340 CrossRef .
D. Lu, G. Zhang and Z. Wan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 223–230 CrossRef .
X. Song, Y. Hu, M. Zheng and C. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 587–597 CrossRef .
H. Chen, Y. Xie, X. Sun, M. Lv, F. Wu, L. Zhang, L. Li and X. Xu, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 13030–13039 RSC .
L. Zhang, D. Jing, X. She, H. Liu, D. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Li, Z. Zheng and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2071–2078 RSC .
Y. Zang, L. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Zuo and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15774–15780 RSC .
D. Chen, K. Wang, T. Ren, H. Ding and Y. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 13105–13114 RSC .
J.-X. Sun, Y.-P. Yuan, L.-G. Qiu, X. Jiang, A.-J. Xie, Y.-H. Shen and J.-F. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 6756–6763 RSC .
J. Li, M. Zhou, Z. Ye, H. Wang, C. Ma, P. Huo and Y. Yan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91177–91189 RSC .
W. Liu, M. Wang, C. Xu and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 209, 386–393 CrossRef .
S. Kumar, A. Baruah, S. Tonda, B. Kumar, V. Shanker and B. Sreedhar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4830–4842 RSC .
K.-i. Katsumata, R. Motoyoshi, N. Matsushita and K. Okada, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 260, 475–482 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, H. Xu, Y. Li, H. Li, X. Cheng, J. Xia, Y. Xu and G. Cai, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 8606–8616 RSC .
J. Ding, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Zhao, S. Cheng, B. Zong and W.-L. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 511–518 CrossRef .
J. Chen, S. Shen, P. Guo, M. Wang, P. Wu, X. Wang and L. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152, 335–341 CrossRef .
S. Ye, L.-G. Qiu, Y.-P. Yuan, Y.-J. Zhu, J. Xia and J.-F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3008–3015 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Grzelczak, Y. Hou, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 443–446 RSC .
L. Ge, C. Han and J. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 108, 100–107 CrossRef .
J. Ran, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2708–2713 RSC .
X. Dai, M. Xie, S. Meng, X. Fu and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 382–390 CrossRef .
H. Yu, F. Chen, F. Chen and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 385–392 CrossRef .
J. Fu, B. Chang, Y. Tian, F. Xi and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3083–3090 RSC .
M. Lu, Z. Pei, S. Weng, W. Feng, Z. Fang, Z. Zheng, M. Huang and P. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21280–21288 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. D. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhao, Y. Dong, P. Jiang, H. Miao, G. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7375–7381 RSC .
H. Tian, M. Liu and W. Zheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 468–476 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Z. Guan, J. Huang, Q. Li and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7960–7966 RSC .
Y. Hou, Y. Zhu, Y. Xu and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156, 122–127 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, J. Huang, M. Zhang, Q. Yuan and B. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 298–305 CrossRef .
L. Yin, Y.-P. Yuan, S.-W. Cao, Z. Zhang and C. Xue, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6127–6132 RSC .
Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Hou, Z. Ding and X. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 11873–11879 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, S. Jiang, K. Zhou, B. Wang, B. Wang, Z. Gui, Y. Hu and R. K. K. Yuen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 2609–2613 RSC .
P. Suyana, K. R. Sneha, B. N. Nair, V. Karunakaran, A. P. Mohamed, K. G. K. Warrier and U. S. Hareesh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 17800–17809 RSC .
J. Wang, P. Guo, Q. Guo, P. G. Jönsson and Z. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 4485–4492 RSC .
D. Jiang, L. Chen, J. Xie and M. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 4878–4885 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5414–5445 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Chen, J. A. Zapien and C.-S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17299–17305 RSC .
J. Hong, C. Chen, F. E. Bedoya, G. H. Kelsall, D. O'Hare and C. Petit, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 5042–5051 RSC .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Cobley, S. E. Skrabalak, D. J. Campbell and Y. Xia, Plasmonics, 2009, 4, 171–179 CrossRef .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia and N. J. Halas, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 338–348 CrossRef .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 442–453 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef PubMed .
W. A. Murray and W. L. Barnes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3771–3782 CrossRef .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 567 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Christopher, H. Xin, A. Marimuthu and S. Linic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1044 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3898–3907 RSC .
C. E. Talley, J. B. Jackson, C. Oubre, N. K. Grady, C. W. Hollars, S. M. Lane, T. R. Huser, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1569–1574 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2013, 4, 116–128 CrossRef .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian, H. Xin, J. Yan and P. Christopher, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5405–5412 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Gadzuk, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 6341–6348 CrossRef .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wadell, T. J. Antosiewicz and C. Langhammer, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4784–4790 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Nature, 1995, 376, 238 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates Jr, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, R. A. Ando and P. H. C. Camargo, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 7013–7016 CrossRef .
U. Banin, Y. Ben-Shahar and K. Vinokurov, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 97–110 CrossRef .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309–6315 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Fan, C. Song, T. Chen, X. Yan, D. Xu, W. Gu, W. Shi and L. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 34633–34640 RSC .
S. Ma, S. Zhan, Y. Jia, Q. Shi and Q. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 186, 77–87 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, D. A. J. M. Ligthart, X.-Y. Quek, L. Gao and E. J. M. Hensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 11537–11546 CrossRef .
F. Fina, H. Menard and J. T. S. Irvine, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13929–13936 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Lu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8826–8828 RSC .
Y. Guo, L. Zhang, K. Zhou, Y. Shen, Q. Zhang and C. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19594–19597 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Yang, N. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Huang and Z. Kang, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4559–4565 RSC .
N. Cheng, J. Tian, Q. Liu, C. Ge, A. H. Qusti, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6815–6819 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Bhowmik, M. K. Kundu and S. Barman, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 38760–38773 RSC .
S. Tonda, S. Kumar and V. Shanker, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 75, 51–58 CrossRef .
O. Fontelles-Carceller, M. J. Muñoz-Batista, M. Fernández-García and A. Kubacka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2617–2627 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bu, Z. Chen and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 622–630 CrossRef .
J. Chen, C. L. Dong, Y. Du, D. Zhao and S. Shen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500280 CrossRef .
M. J. Munoz-Batista, O. Fontelles-Carceller, M. Ferrer, M. Fernández-García and A. Kubacka, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 86–95 CrossRef .
W. Bing, Z. Chen, H. Sun, P. Shi, N. Gao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1648–1658 CrossRef .
L. Ge, C. Han, J. Liu and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 409, 215–222 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Y. Guo, F. Liu, X. Yuan, Y. Guo, S. Zhang, W. Guo and M. Huo, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 828–837 CrossRef .
S. Patnaik, D. P. Sahoo and K. Parida, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 1297–1312 CrossRef .
Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kofuji, S. Kanazawa, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15255–15258 RSC .
K. Li, Z. Zeng, L. Yan, S. Luo, X. Luo, M. Huo and Y. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 428–437 CrossRef .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1249–1257 RSC .
J. Yu, K. Wang, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11492–11501 RSC .
Y. Wang, D. Cao, M. Liu and X. Zhao, Catal. Commun., 2017, 102, 85–88 CrossRef .
Z. Li, R. Lin, Z. Liu, D. Li, H. Wang and Q. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 606–615 CrossRef .
H. Qian, H. Huang and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 734–741 CrossRef .
S. Verma, R. B. Nasir Baig, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Catal. Today, 2017, 309, 248–252 CrossRef .
S. Bai, X. Wang, C. Hu, M. Xie, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6094–6097 RSC .
C. Chang, Y. Fu, M. Hu, C. Wang, G. Shan and L. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142, 553–560 CrossRef .
F. Dong, Z. Zhao, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, S. Yan and Z. Wu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 12432–12440 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, T. Wang and H. Zeng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 404–414 CrossRef .
N. Wang, Z. Han, H. Fan and S. Ai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91302–91307 RSC .
X. Zhou, Z. Luo, P. Tao, B. Jin, Z. Wu and Y. Huang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 143, 1462–1468 CrossRef .
Z. Li, C. Kong and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 120, 56–63 CrossRef .
L. Bi, D. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Lin, D. Wang and T. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 29899–29905 RSC .
L. Kong, Y. Dong, P. Jiang, G. Wang, H. Zhang and N. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9998–10007 RSC .
J. Wen, J. Xie, H. Zhang, A. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Chen and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14031–14042 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Choi, L. Lin, S. Gim, S. Lee, H. Kim, X. Wang and W. Choi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4241–4256 CrossRef .
R. Mu, Q. Fu, H. Xu, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, Z. Jiang, S. Zhang, D. Tan and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1978–1986 CrossRef PubMed .
B. T. Sneed, A. P. Young, D. Jalalpoor, M. C. Golden, S. Mao, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang and C.-K. Tsung, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7239–7250 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Han, Y. Lu, J. Zhang, L. Ge, Y. Li, C. Chen, Y. Xin, L. Wu and S. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23274–23282 RSC .
C. Han, L. Wu, L. Ge, Y. Li and Z. Zhao, Carbon, 2015, 92, 31–40 CrossRef .
Q. Lang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. Hu, W. Jiang, S. Zhong, P. Gong, B. Teng, L. Zhao and S. Bai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6686–6694 RSC .
F. Chen, Q. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, D. Wang, X. Li, Z. Guo, H. Wang, Y. Deng and C. Niu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 133–147 CrossRef .
F. Shi, L. Chen, M. Chen and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17144–17147 RSC .
W. Feng, J. Fang, G. Zhou, L. Zhang, S. Lu, S. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Ling and Z. Fang, Mol. Catal., 2017, 434, 69–79 CrossRef .
W. Li, C. Feng, S. Dai, J. Yue, F. Hua and H. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168, 465–471 CrossRef .
K.-E. Byun, H.-J. Chung, J. Lee, H. Yang, H. J. Song, J. Heo, D. H. Seo, S. Park, S. W. Hwang and I. Yoo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4001–4005 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Kochuveedu, Y. H. Jang and D. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8467–8493 RSC .
L. Jiang, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, J. Liang, Z. Wu and H. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 599–615 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Low, C. Jiang, B. Cheng, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700080 CrossRef .
Z. Jiang, W. Wan, H. Li, S. Yuan, H. Zhao and P. K. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706108 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, J. Yi, X. She, Q. Liu, L. Song, S. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Song, R. Vajtai and J. Lou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 379–385 CrossRef .
J. Yu, S. Wang, B. Cheng, Z. Lin and F. Huang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1782–1789 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Cheng, X. Ruan, H. Song, Z. Lou, Z. Ye and L. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 775–784 CrossRef .
A. Mettenbörger, Y. Gönüllü, T. Fischer, T. Heisig, A. Sasinska, C. Maccato, G. Carraro, C. Sada, D. Barreca and L. Mayrhofer, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 415–427 CrossRef .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, Y. Chen and S. Xu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 125–133 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, T. Peng, L. Yu, R. Li, Q. Li and Z. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 504–510 CrossRef .
R. Marschall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2421–2440 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Bi, L. Zhang, S. Tao, W. Chu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2427–2431 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Jorge, D. J. Martin, M. T. S. Dhanoa, A. S. Rahman, N. Makwana, J. Tang, A. Sella, F. Cora, S. Firth and J. A. Darr, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7178–7185 CrossRef .
D. J. Martin, K. Qiu, S. A. Shevlin, A. D. Handoko, X. Chen, Z. Guo and J. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9240–9245 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tu, Y. Xu, J. Wang, B. Zhang, T. Zhou, S. Yin, S. Wu, C. Li, Y. Huang and Y. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7260–7268 CrossRef .
X. An, W. Wang, J. Wang, H. Duan, J. Shi and X. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 11405–11411 RSC .
Y. Chen, B. Lin, W. Yu, Y. Yang, S. M. Bashir, H. Wang, K. Takanabe, H. Idriss and J.-M. Basset, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10290–10295 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, K. Kailasam, D. Hollmann, M. Schröder, A. Thomas, A. Brückner and M. Driess, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 104–107 RSC .
G. Zhang, C. Huang and X. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 1215–1221 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sridharan, E. Jang, J. H. Park, J. H. Kim, J. H. Lee and T. J. Park, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9126–9132 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qin and H. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 161–173 CrossRef .
J. Qin, J. Huo, P. Zhang, J. Zeng, T. Wang and H. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2249–2259 RSC .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 RSC .
X. Wang, R. Long, D. Liu, D. Yang, C. Wang and Y. Xiong, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 87–93 CrossRef .
D. B. Ingram, P. Christopher, J. L. Bauer and S. Linic, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1441–1447 CrossRef .
A. O. Govorov, J. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 125308 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, H. Jia, J. Yang, H. Yin, Z. Yang, J. Wang and B. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 22296–22307 RSC .
I. Majeed, U. Manzoor, F. K. Kanodarwala, M. A. Nadeem, E. Hussain, H. Ali, A. Badshah, J. A. Stride and M. A. Nadeem, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1183–1193 RSC .
C. Han, Y. Gao, S. Liu, L. Ge, N. Xiao, D. Dai, B. Xu and C. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 22765–22775 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, J. Yu and S. Cao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 461, 56–63 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ding, Y. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Zhu, Y. Li, W. Deng and C. Wang, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 104410 CrossRef .
X. Ma, Q. Jiang, W. Guo, M. Zheng, W. Xu, F. Ma and B. Hou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 28263–28269 RSC .
H. Zhao, X. Ding, B. Zhang, Y. Li and C. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 602–609 CrossRef .
W. Yin, L. Bai, Y. Zhu, S. Zhong, L. Zhao, Z. Li and S. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23133–23142 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lu, H. Wang, X. Zhao, K. K. Kondamareddy, J. Ding, C. Li and P. Fang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1436–1445 CrossRef .
L. Bi, D. Meng, Q. Bu, Y. Lin, D. Wang and T. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31534–31541 RSC .
A. Brandt, J. Graesvik, J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 550–583 RSC .
A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek, J. Cairney, C. A. Eckert, W. J. Frederick Jr, J. P. Hallett, D. J. Leak, C. L. Liotta, J. R. Mielenz, R. Murphy, R. Templer and T. Tschaplinski, Science, 2006, 311, 484–489 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-H. Wang, Y. Himeda, J. T. Muckerman, G. F. Manbeck and E. Fujita, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12936–12973 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 251–259 CrossRef .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
G. Dong and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1160–1166 RSC .
P. Niu, Y. Yang, J. C. Yu, G. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10837–10840 RSC .
S. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Li, Y. Wang, G. Jiang, Z. Zhao, D. Wang, A. Duan, J. Liu and Y. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 20–29 CrossRef .
W. Yu, D. Xu and T. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19936–19947 RSC .
K. Li, B. Peng, J. Jin, L. Zan and T. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 910–916 CrossRef .
J. Mao, T. Peng, X. Zhang, K. Li, L. Ye and L. Zan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1253–1260 RSC .
M. Li, L. Zhang, X. Fan, Y. Zhou, M. Wu and J. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5189–5196 RSC .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shi, G. Chen, C. Zhang and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3637–3643 CrossRef .
H. Shi, C. Zhang, C. Zhou and G. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 93615–93622 RSC .
S. Cao, Y. Li, B. Zhu, M. Jaroniec and J. Yu, J. Catal., 2017, 349, 208–217 CrossRef .
C. Mondelli, B. Puértolas, M. Ackermann, Z. Chen and J. Pérez-Ramírez, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2859–2869 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, J. H. Lee, E. H. Kim, K. Y. Kim, Y. H. Choi, D. H. Youn and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 14302–14305 RSC .
J. Hong, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Zhou and R. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2315–2321 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, T. Chen, P. Wang, L. Wang, L. Ye, X. Shi and W. Bai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 406–414 CrossRef .
Y. He, L. Zhang, B. Teng and M. Fan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 49, 649–656 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Gao, X. Wu, P.-H. Lee and K. Shih, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 402, 198–207 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Bi, J. Jin, M. F. Ehsan, M. Fu and T. He, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 33254–33261 RSC .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef .
M. Humayun, Y. Qu, F. Raziq, R. Yan, Z. Li, X. Zhang and L. Jing, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 13600–13610 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zheng, D. P. Durkin, J. E. Elenewski, Y. Sun, N. A. Banek, L. Hua, H. Chen, M. J. Wagner, W. Zhang and D. Shuai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 12938–12948 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, Z. Ding, P. Liu, M. Antonietti, X. Fu and X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1455–1462 RSC .
Y. Fu, T. Huang, L. Zhang, J. Zhu and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13723–13733 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Wang, K. Zhu, F. Ma and A. Meng, Mater. Lett., 2015, 145, 167–170 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, L. Zhou and H. Deng, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 423, 270–276 CrossRef .
M. E. Khan, T. H. Han, M. M. Khan, M. R. Karim and M. H. Cho, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 6, 2912–2922 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, Y. Guo, Y. Zhao, X. Yuan and Y. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 271, 150–159 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xiao, J. Wei, Y. Yang, R. Xiong, C. Pan and J. Shi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3017–3023 CrossRef .
J. Wu, X. Shen, X. Miao, Z. Ji, J. Wang, T. Wang and M. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 2845–2853 CrossRef .
X. Li, T. Wan, J. Qiu, H. Wei, F. Qin, Y. Wang, Y. Liao, Z. Huang and X. Tan, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 591–602 CrossRef .
J. Luo, X. Zhou, L. Ma and X. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 390, 357–367 CrossRef .
X. Yang, H. Tang, J. Xu, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1350–1358 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Katsumata, T. Sakai, T. Suzuki and S. Kaneco, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 8018–8025 CrossRef .
C. Tang, E. Liu, J. Fan, X. Hu, Y. Ma and J. Wan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91979–91987 RSC .
L. Zhou, W. Zhang, L. Chen and H. Deng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 487, 410–417 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, L. Zhou, J. Shi and H. Deng, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 45–60 CrossRef .
L. Shi, L. Liang, F. Wang, M. Liu and J. Sun, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 1718–1727 CrossRef .
Y. Su, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, J. Lang, X. Xin and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 213–222 CrossRef .
D. Vidyasagar, S. G. Ghugal, A. Kulkarni, P. Mishra, A. G. Shende, Jagannath, S. S. Umare and R. Sasikala, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 339–348 CrossRef .
J. Ding, G. Long, Y. Luo, R. Sun, M. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Zhou, X. Xu and W. Zhao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 355, 74–81 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Leng, W. Mai, X. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Lin, J. Huang, H. Lou, Y. Xie, R. Fu and D. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7159–7162 RSC .
A. Zada, Y. Qu, S. Ali, N. Sun, H. Lu, R. Yan, X. Zhang and L. Jing, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 342, 715–723 CrossRef PubMed .
R. C. Pawar, Y. Pyo, S. H. Ahn and C. S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 654–666 CrossRef .
R. C. Pawar, S. Kang, S. H. Ahn and C. S. Lee, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 24281–24292 RSC .
J. Xue, S. Ma, Y. Zhou and Q. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88249–88257 RSC .
J. Wu, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, Y. Xin and D. Ma, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 100, 282–288 CrossRef .
D. Peng, H. Wang, K. Yu, Y. Chang, X. Ma and S. Dong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 77760–77767 RSC .
J. Xue, S. Ma, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhang and M. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9630–9637 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Gondal, A. A. Adeseda, S. G. Rashid, A. Hameed, M. Aslam, I. M. I. Ismail, U. Baig, M. A. Dastageer, A. R. Al-Arfaj and A. U. Rehman, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 423, 114–125 CrossRef .
G. Darabdhara and M. R. Das, Chemosphere, 2018, 197, 817–829 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gao, J. Wang, X. Qian, Y. Dong, H. Xu, R. Song, C. Yan, H. Zhu, Q. Zhong and G. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 228, 60–64 CrossRef .
Y. Bao and K. Chen, Mol. Catal., 2017, 432, 187–195 CrossRef .
J. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Deng, J. Wang and B. Peng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 5, 1062–1072 CrossRef .
G. Jiang, X. Li, M. Lan, T. Shen, X. Lv, F. Dong and S. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 532–540 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, T. Xiong, Z. Ni, J. Liu, F. Dong, W. Zhang and W.-K. Ho, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 356–362 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, J. Li, E. Liu, J. Wan, X. Hu and J. Fan, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 467–478 CrossRef .
M. Ou, S. Wan, Q. Zhong, S. Zhang, Y. Song, L. Guo, W. Cai and Y. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 97–107 CrossRef .
X. Yang, Z. Chen, J. Xu, H. Tang, K. Chen and Y. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15285–15293 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Sun, B. Cai, S. Gan, D. Han, L. Niu and T. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170, 206–214 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, S. Lin, L. Liu, J. Hu and W. Cui, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 192–203 CrossRef .
H. Ji, L. Lyu, L. Zhang, X. An and C. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 230–240 CrossRef .
Y. Bao and K. Chen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2016, 8, 182–192 CrossRef .
A. C. Mehinto, E. M. Hill and C. R. Tyler, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 2176–2182 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chang, Z. Liu, X. Shen, B. Zhu, D. K. Macharia, Z. Chen and L. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 344, 1188–1197 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, S. Xu, N. Li, F. Wu, S. Chen, W. Lu and W. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9667–9672 CrossRef .
D. P. Subagio, M. Srinivasan, M. Lim and T.-T. Lim, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 414–422 CrossRef .
R. A. Hites, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 16–20 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sierra, E. Borges, P. Esparza, J. Méndez-Ramos, J. Martín-Gil and P. Martín-Ramos, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2016, 17, 659–668 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sano, S. Tsutsui, K. Koike, T. Hirakawa, Y. Teramoto, N. Negishi and K. Takeuchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6489–6496 RSC .
A. Nikokavoura and C. Trapalis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 430, 18–52 CrossRef .
Q. Jia, S. Zhang and Q. Gu, J. Energy Chem., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.jechem.2018.07.015 .
S. Verma, R. B. N. Baig, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Catal. Today, 2017, 309, 248–252 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, Q. Cai, A. Vasileff, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3336–3339 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Yao, H. Li, D. Su and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2362–2365 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Huang, Y. Zhao and R. Tang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 90887–90896 RSC .
F.-F. Wang, S. Shao, C.-L. Liu, C.-L. Xu, R.-Z. Yang and W.-S. Dong, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 264, 336–343 CrossRef .
S. Tian, Q. Fu, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, W.-C. Cheong, R. Yu, L. Gu and J. Dong, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2353–2360 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Deng, J. Xin, S. Ma, F. Cui, Z. Zhao and L. Jia, Energy Technol., 2018 DOI:10.1002/ente.201800402 .
Z. Chen, E. Vorobyeva, S. Mitchell, E. Fako, M. A. Ortuño, N. López, S. M. Collins, P. A. Midgley, S. Richard, G. Vilé and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 702–707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2308–2326 RSC .
H. Hiramatsu and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2509–2511 CrossRef .
H. Duan, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5778–5792 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Ivo F. Teixeira
	Ivo Teixeira received his BS in 2012 and his MSc in 2013 from the Federal University of Minas Gerais. He obtained his PhD from the University of Oxford in 2017, under the supervision of Prof. Edman Tsang. After that, he joined Prof. Pedro Camargo's group at Universidade de São Paulo as a postdoctoral researcher. His research interests include heterogeneous catalysis and photocatalysis applied for chemical synthesis, environmental remediation, and energy applications.

Eduardo Barbosa
	Eduardo Barbosa obtained his BSc in Chemistry from Universidade Estadual de Londrina (2015). He is expected to earn his PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry (2019) from Universidade de São Paulo under Prof. Pedro Camargo's supervision. He is performing a part of his PhD at the University of Oxford (2018–2019) as a visiting researcher advised by Professor S. C. Edman Tsang. His scientific interests include the synthesis of shape-controlled hybrid materials, and their applications in catalysis and photocatalysis.

Shik Chi Edman Tsang
	Edman Tsang is a professor of Chemistry and Head of Wolfson Catalysis Centre at the University of Oxford, UK. His research interests are on nanomaterials and catalysis concerning energy and environment which include developments of catalytic, photocatalytic and electrocatalytic technologies for fine chemicals, cleaner combustion, green chemistry, energy storages, and processes and production. His particular expertise is in the design and architecture of nanocatalysts, which can lead to understanding of catalytic surfaces and interfaces. He has won several international awards/recognitions, serves as an Associate Editor in Science Advances (Science sister journal); as a Editorial member of ChemCatChem, Catalysis, Structure & Reactivity (CAT) from Maney; and is a Member of the EPSRC College School.

Pedro H. C. Camargo
	Pedro H. C. Camargo obtained his BS and MSc degrees in Chemistry from Federal University of Paraná (Brazil) in 2003 and 2005, respectively. He obtained his PhD from Washington University in Saint Louis in 2009, working in the group of Prof. Younan Xia. He became an Assistant Professor at University of Sao Paulo in 2011 and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2015 and to Full Professor in 2018. He serves as an Editor of the Journal of Materials Science and as an Associate Editor of the Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society. His research interests include the synthesis of nanomaterials with controllable physicochemical features for plasmonic nanocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of extended carbon nitride materials by polyaddition and polycondensation of the nitrogen-rich precursors.	 

 	Fig. 2  Acid and basic sites on PCN surface. (a) Lewis basic sites present on the PCN surface: N in six-membered ring (A), secondary amine (B), and primary amine (C).66 (b) Proposed mechanism for the formation of Brønsted acid sites on the PCN surface.106	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the band structure of typical PCN samples, including PCN,79 S-PCN,113 B-PCN,111 O-PCN,38 I-PCN,35 P-PCN,39 ex-PCN,86 mp-PCN.87 The band structure for TiO2 is also shown for comparison. Adapted from ref. 18 with permission from the John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoexcitation and subsequent relaxation processes following the illumination of a metal nanoparticle with a laser pulse, and characteristic timescales; (a) first, the excitation of a localized surface plasmon redirects the flow of light (Poynting vector) towards and into the nanoparticle; (b–d) schematic representations of the population of the electronic states (grey) following plasmon excitation: hot electrons are represented by the red areas above the Fermi energy EF and hot hole distributions are represented by the blue area below EF; (b) in the first 1–100 fs following Landau damping, the athermal distribution of electron–hole pairs decays either through re-emission of photons or through carrier multiplication caused by electron–electron interactions. During this very short time interval, the hot carrier distribution is highly non-thermal; (c) the hot carriers will redistribute their energy by electron–electron scattering processes on a timescale ranging from 100 fs to 1 ps; (d) finally, heat is transferred to the surroundings of the metallic structure on a longer timescale ranging from 100 ps to 10 ns, via thermal conduction. Reduced from ref. 225 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 5  Band structures for a hybrid composed of a metal and a semiconductor nanoparticle (the not in contact, in contact, and in contact under equilibrium scenarios are shown in the top, middle and bottom panels, respectively). (a and b) Represent the band-bending effect on a metallic nanoparticle (light blue) attached to an n-type semiconductor (dark blue) in two scenarios: when the semiconductor work function (ϕs) is higher than the metal work function (ϕm) (a), and when the semiconductor work function (ϕs) is lower than the metal work function (ϕm) (b). Reduced from ref. 228 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) LSPR-related mechanisms on hybrid materials composed of plasmonic NPs and semiconducting materials; (a) local temperature increase causes the enhancement of exciton formation on the semiconductor; (b) optical near-field enhancement promotes the transfer of photons to the semiconductor, thus increasing the exciton formation; (c) hot-electrons and holes are transferred to the semiconductor, so reactions on their surface can also be enabled by LSPR. Reduced from ref. 220 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of two semiconductors (S1 and S2), coupled in a Z-scheme in the presence of a metal NPs as an electron mediator. Adapted from ref. 269 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015.	 

PCN	—	0.1	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA and methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	0.1–4	<0.1%	
13

CDots/PCN	0.016 wt%	0.080	150 mL of water	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	8.4	6.29% (420 nm)	
140

Pt/PCN	1.13 wt%	0.080	100 mL of water	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	0.531	N/A	
236

Au/PCN	1.0 wt%	0.1	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	500WHBO lamp (>420 nm)	8.6	N/A	
60

Au(18 nm)/PCN	2.0 wt%	0.02	40 mL of 2.5 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	540	1.2% (380 nm)	
308

CdS/Au/PCN	2.0 wt%	0.1	50 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	19.0	N/A	
312

PtSingle-Atom/PCN	0.16 wt%	0.05	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	318	N/A	
293

PtCo/PCN	1.0 wt%	0.05	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	48	N/A	
271

PdAu/PCN	0.5 wt%	0.05	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	16.3	N/A	
272

PdAg/PCN	1.0 wt%	0.01	22.5 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	Solar irradiation (840 W m−2)	1250	8.7%	
309

PtOAu/PCN	1.0 wt%	0.05	80 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution	350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	16.9	N/A	
311

Rh/PCN	0.25 wt%	0.1	36 mL of 11 vol% methanol aqueous solution	Xe arc lamp (320 mW cm−2)	14.9	N/A	
234

Ni/PCN	10 wt%	0.05	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	500 W Xe lamp	15.66	0.4% (365 nm)	
317

Ni/PCN	10 wt%	0.05	100 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	500 W Xe lamp	8.41	N/A	
265

Ni(Single site)/PCN	0.1 wt%	0.05	50 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	Xe lamp (125 mW cm−2); (>420 nm)	5.5	2.6% (420 nm)	
298

NiS/Ni/PCN	0.5 wt%	0.05	100 mL of 15 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (160 mW cm−2); (>420 nm)	515	N/A	
267

Ag/PCN	∼8%	0.01	40 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution	Solar simulator	2.8	N/A	
301

AgQC/PCN	7.46 wt%	0.01	40 mL of 25 vol% methanol aqueous solution	Solar simulator	2.43	N/A	
301

Ag/CQDs/PCN	3 wt%	0.005	70 mL of 14 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	626.93	4.81% (400 nm)	
302

Fluorescein/Ag/PCN	2.95 wt%	0.005	70 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp	2014.20	N/A	
303

CdZnS/Au/PCN	—	0.1	100 mL of 0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3 aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	6150	N/A	
313

Cd0.8Zn0.2S/Au/PCN	2.0 wt%	0.05	70 mL of 0.1 M glucose aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	123	N/A	
314

PCN/Pd/Cu2O	—	0.015	20 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (100 mW cm−2); (>400 nm)	32.5	0.9% (420 nm)	
315

PCN/Ag/MoS2	2.0 wt%	0.10	20 mL of 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (172 mW cm−2); (>420 nm)	10.4	N/A	
316


 	Fig. 8  Representative ultrafast transient absorption (TA) kinetics probed at 750 nm (pump at 400 nm) for (a) PCN; (b) PtSingle-Atom/PCN and (c) Pt NPs/PCN. (d) Schematic model of PtSingle-Atom/g-C3N4 and photocatalytic comparison with Pt NPs/PCN; (e) schematic illustration of the mechanisms which led to a longer lifetime of photogenerated electrons. Adapted from ref. 293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Scheme showing the charge generation, transfer process, and photocatalytic H2 evolution mechanism over the Ag/CQDs/PCN hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 302 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017; (b) schematic representation of the charge migration and separation improvement promoted by fluorescein on Ag/PCN hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the electron energy level when Ag NPs are in contact with PCN. Adapted from ref. 243 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–d) TEM images of Ag@SiO2 core–shell NPs in which the SiO2 shell thickness corresponding to 8 (a), 12 (b), 17 (c), and 21 nm (d). (e) TEM image of Ag NPs without the silica coating. (f) TEM image for Ag/PCN without SiO2 capping; (g–l) FDTD simulation for the field enhancements for Ag NPs (g), Ag@SiO2-8 nm (h), Ag@SiO2-12 nm (i), Ag@SiO2-17 nm (j), Ag@SiO2-21 nm (k), and a hollow SiO2 sphere with 12 nm shell thickness (l). (m) Representation of the mechanism for H2 production over Ag@SiO2/PCN in which the PRET and FRET effects gradually become weakened with the widening of the nanogap, as well as the H2 evolution rate for each system. Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  H2 evolution over various bimetallic cocatalysts loaded on PCN under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Scheme of the synthesis of the Pd@Cu2O/PCN hybrids. (b–g) TEM and HRTEM images of Pd/PCN (b–d) and Pd@Cu2O/PCN hybrids (e–g). (h) Representation of the photocatalytic mechanism of H2 evolution on the Pd@Cu2O/PCN hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 315 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of hybrids composed of Ag/MoS2 nanoflowers on PCN; (b) separation and transfer of photogenerated charges in the Ag/MoS2/PCN nanohybrids; (c) SEM image of MoS2/PCN; (d–f) TEM images and SAED pattern for MoS2; (g–i) TEM images and SAED pattern of Ag/MoS2. Reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH (Eredox = −0.20 V)	(1)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O (Eredox = −0.12 V)	(2)
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O (Eredox = −0.07 V)	(3)
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O (Eredox = +0.03 V)	(4)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O (Eredox = +0.17 V)	(5)

PCN	—	0.20	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	CH3OH: 6.28 μmol g−1 h−1	0.18% (420 nm)	
328

C2H5OH: 4.51 μmol g−1 h−1
PCN nanosheets	—	N/A	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	CH4: 7.47 μmol g−1 h−1	N/A	
340

Pt/PCN	2 wt%	N/A	15 W LED-lamp	CH4: 13.02 μmol g−1	N/A	
252

Pt/PCN	0.75 wt%	0.10	Solar simulator	CH4: ∼0.1 μmol	N/A	
253

CH3OH: ∼0.12 μmol
HCHO: ∼0.05 μmol
Pd-(111)/PCN	11.6 wt%	0.01	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	CH4: 0.18 μmol g−1 h−1	N/A	
258

CO: 14.90 μmol g−1 h−1
C2H5OH: 1.72 μmol g−1 h−1
Pd-(001)/PCN	11.9 wt%	0.01	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	CH4: n.d.	N/A	
258

CO: 5.6 μmol g−1 h−1
C2H5OH: 7.4 μmol g−1 h−1
Ag3PO4/Ag/PCN	Ag3PO4/PCN molar ratio: 30%	0.15	500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	CO2 reduction rate: 57.5 μmol g−1 h−1	N/A	
338

Ag/PCN/TiO2	55 wt%	0.05	300 W Xe lamp	CH4: 28 μmol g−1	N/A	
339

CO: 19 μmol g−1
Pt/PCN/NaNbO3	0.5 wt%	0.05	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	CH4: 6.40 μmol g−1 h−1	N/A	
331

Pt/PCN/KNbO3	0.5 wt%	0.10	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	CH4: 0.25 μmol h−1	N/A	
332

Pd/PCN/LDH	0.5 wt%	0.20	500 W Hg (Xe) lamp	CH4: 3.7 μmol	0.093% (420 nm)	
336

CO: 0.1 μmol
C2H6: 0.06 μmol
Au/PCN/BiOBr	1.0 wt%	0.10	300 W Xe lamp	CH4: 0.39 μmol g−1 h−1	N/A	
337

CO: 0.05 μmol g−1 h−1
α-Fe2O3/PCN	—	0.025	300 W Xe lamp (0.21 W cm−2)	CO: 10.3 μmol g−1 h−1	0.96% (420 nm)	
284


 	Fig. 15  (a) Hydrocarbon yield produced by PCN decorated with Pt displaying different metal loadings (0–2.0 wt%) under the simulated solar light irradiation for 4 h of reaction. Reproduced from ref. 253 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014; (b) total yield pf CH4 over PCN loaded with Pt (0.25–2 wt%) after 10 h of reaction. Reproduced from ref. 252 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014; (c) schematic representation of the reduction of CO2 with H2O to CH4 catalysed by Pt/PCN heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 252 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014; (d) reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCOOH, CH3OH, and CH4 on the Pt/PCN catalyst and (e) Pd/PCN catalyst. Under standard conditions (pH 0, p(H2) = 1 bar, U = 0 V vs. SHE), the total energies of H+(aq) + e− and (1/2)H2(g) are equal. The reference energy (the total free energy of the catalyst, isolated CO2, and four H2) is set to zero. Color code: Pd, pine green; C, gray; O, red; H, white. Reprinted from ref. 330 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of PCN nanosheets with nitrogen vacancies (VN) for photoreduction of CO2 to CO and H2 evolution. Paths 1, 2, and 4 refer to the electron excitation from the valence band to midgap states, the electron trapping from the conduction band to midgap states, and the electron transfer to reaction sites, respectively. Path 3 refers to deeper midgap states that act as recombination sites for trapping photogenerated electrons and holes. Reprinted from ref. 296 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a and b) Top and side views of CO2 adsorption configurations for Pd-{100} (a) and Pd-{111} (b) and their respective adsorption energy (Ea) according to the geometry optimization simulations; (c) optimized configurations for the adsorption of CO2 on the Pd-{100} and (d) Pd-{111} facets and their respective potential energy along the bond length O–C of the CO2 molecule adsorbed under neutral conditions or charged with two electrons, from which the activation energy EB of CO2 is subtracted; (e) model systems and (f) calculated potentials with work functions for PCN, Pd-{100}, and Pd-{111}; (g) energy level diagrams for PCN and Pd before and after forming the interfaces for electron transfer based on first-principles calculations. Reprinted from ref. 258 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

PCN	—	0.04	500 W Xe lamp (36 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	100% degradation in 3.3 h	
344

Ag/PCN	4.0 wt%	0.10	500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MO	98.2% degradation in 9 min	
345

Degradation of MB	99.3% degradation in 45 min
Ag/PCN	8.0 wt%	0.10	800 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	92.0% degradation in 0.5 h	
346

Ag/PCN	1.0 wt%	0.15	500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MO	100% degradation in 3 h	
247

Ag/PCN	5.0 wt%	0.10	300 W tungsten halogen lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MO	92.0% degradation in 1 h	
248

Ag/PCN	54 wt%	0.010	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of diclofenac (DCF)	100% degradation in 1.5 h	
347

Ag@PCN	0.5 wt%	0.025	500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MO	100% degradation in 5 min	
59

Ag@PCN	3.0 wt%	0.002	400 W Xe lamp (>500 nm)	Degradation of MB	∼100% degradation in 3.5 h	
348

Degradation of RhB	89% degradation in 4.2 h
Ag/mp-PCN	3.0 wt%	0.10	300 W tungsten halogen lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	100% degradation in 25 min	
243

Ag@AgBr/PCN	70 wt% Ag@AgBr/PCN	0.10	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of MO	95% degradation in 10 min	
349

Degradation of RhB	92% degradation in 10 min
PCN@Ag–Bi2WO6	2.7 wt%	0.05	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	70% degradation in 1.5 h	
350

PCN/Ag/MoS2	6.7 wt%	0.10	300 W Xe lamp (172 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	∼100% degradation in 1 h	
316

PCN/Ag/Ag3VO4	1.5 wt%	0.05	250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	95% degradation in 1.75 h	
351

PCN@Ag@Ag3PO4	30 wt%	0.006	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	94.8% degradation in 1 h	
352

AgQC/PCN	7.46 wt%	0.05	100 W halogen lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of MB	∼90% degradation in 0.5 h	
301

Degradation of MO	∼90% degradation in 1.8 h
PCN/Ag/Ag2CrO4	8 wt% (Ag2CrO4/PCN)	0.05	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MB	58% degradation in 2 h	
353

PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4	N/A	0.04	LED white-light lamp	Degradation of RhB	95% degradation in 10 min	
354

PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4	25 wt% (Ag2PO4/PCN)	N/A	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of MO	100% degradation in 5min	
355

PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4-(111) facet	10 wt% (PCN/Ag2PO4)	0.04	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of MB	100% degradation in 0.2 h	
356

Removal of NOx	49.3% removal
PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4	2.1 wt% (Ag2PO4/PCN)	0.005	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of sulfamethoxazole (SMX)	100% degradation in 1 h	
357

PCN/Ag/Ag2PO4	30 wt% (Ag2PO4/PCN)	0.010	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of diclofenac (DCF)	80% degradation in 2 h	
358

PCN/Ag/Ag2CO3	25 wt% (PCN/Ag2CO3)	0.10	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of RhB	100% degradation in 0.5 h	
359

Ag/SrTa2O6/PCN	2.0 wt%	0.025	300 W Hg lamp (3.45 mW cm−2) (>420 nm)	Degradation of MO	100% degradation in 1.2 h	
360

Cr6+ photoreduction	100% reduction in 1.7 h
Ag/AgO/PCN	10 wt%	0.10	12 lamps of 100 Oreva	Degradation of acid Violet-7	98% degradation in 10 min	
361

Pt/PCN	2.0 wt%	0.10	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of PCP	∼100% degradation in 7 h	
251

Pd/mp-PCN	1.5 wt%	0.10	Solar simulator	Degradation of BPA	93.9% degradation in 3 h	
259

Pd/PCN	5 wt%	0.05	N/A	Degradation of 2-CDD	54% degradation in 4 h	
362

Au/PCN	N/A	0.045	500 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of MO	92.6% degradation in 2.5 h	
239

Au@3D-PCN	N/A	0.04	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MO	82.6% degradation in 2 h	
363

Au/TiO2/PCN	2.0 wt%	0.20	150 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of PCP	46% degradation in 1 h	
364

Degradation of BPA	37% degradation in 1 h
Au/PCN/Fe2O3	N/A	0.05	N/A	Degradation of RhB	100% degradation in 50 min	
365

Au/CNT/PCN	5.5 wt%	0.05	Visible light source (50 mW cm−2)	Degradation of RhB	∼100% degradation in 50 min	
366

Au/graphene/PCN	1.0 wt%	0.10	500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MB	96.7% degradation in 4 h	
367

Au/GO/PCN	1.0 wt%	0.05	500 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of RhB	99.4% degradation in 2 h	
368

CdS/Au/PCN	N/A	0.05	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of RhB	90.1% degradation in 10 min	
369

Au/Pt/PCN	2.0 wt% (Au)	0.10	500 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of TC-HCl	93% degradation in 2 h	
370

0.5 wt% (Pt)
Au–Ag/PCN	3.0 wt% (Au)	0.10	450 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of RhB	90% degradation in 4 h	
371

1 wt% (Ag)
Au–Pd/PCN	3.2 at% (Au)	0.50	Solar ligth (600–900 W m−2)372	Degradation of phenol	94.4% degradation in 5 h	
372

6.0 at% (Pd)
Cu/PCN	33 wt%	0.04	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of MB	∼100% degradation 0.25 h	
373

Cu2O/Cu/PCN	20 at%	0.05	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	Degradation of MO	99% degradation in 40 min	
374

Degradation of phenol	∼100% degradation 4 h
Bi@BiOCl/PCN	N/A	0.02	300 W Xe lamp	Degradation of RhB	94.3% degradation in 2 h	
276

Degradation of DCP	80% degradation in 2 h
Cr6+ photoreduction	82.3% reduction in 1.3 h
Bi/PCN@Bi2WO6	4.6 wt%	0.10	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Degradation of MO	70% degradation in 2 h	
375

Degradation of RhB	100% degradation in 0.5 h
Degradation of DCP	70% degradation in 3 h
Bi/PCN	11.8 wt%	0.20	150 W tungsten halogen lamp (>420 nm)	Removal of NOx	60.8% removal in 1 h	
376

Ag/PCN	10.0 wt%	0.20	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	Removal of NOx	54.3% removal	
377

Ag/PCN/WS2	2.0 wt%	0.10	300 W Xe lamp	Removal of NOx	72.5% removal in 1 h	
378


 	Fig. 18  Change in methyl orange concentration (a and c) and in Cr(VI) concentration (b and d) as a function of the irradiation time for SrTa2O6/PCN (a and b) and Ag/SrTa2O6/PCN photocatalysts. Reprinted from ref. 360 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015; (e) schematic representation of a possible mechanism for Cr(VI) photoreduction and methyl orange degradation over Ag/SrTa2O6/PCN photocatalytic system under visible light irradiation. Adapted from ref. 360 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Photocatalytic water splitting to H2 catalyzed by 40 mg of 2 wt% Pt/PCN in 100 mL of water with different amounts of Rox; (b) proposed reaction mechanism for the enhancement in the simultaneous water splitting and degradation of the Rox reaction by using Pt/PCN under the visible light irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 387 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Simulation of the LSPR-induced local electromagnetic field in the Bi NPs when it is illuminated by a plane wave with a wavelength of 420 nm from the z-direction. A three-dimensional view and two-dimensional cross-sections perpendicular to the x, y, and z-axes are shown. The scale bar shows the relative increase in field enhancement T = |E/Einc|2. (b) Visible-light-induced charge separation and a proposed mechanism for NO oxidation photocatalysed by Bi/PCN. Reprinted from ref. 376 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015; (c) photocatalytic activity for NO oxidation catalyzed by PCN and Bi/PCN materials containing Bi NPs of different sizes (Bi loading of 11.8 ± 4 wt%); (d) schematic of the synergy of the size-dependent heterojunction and LSPR effect of Bi NPs on the photocatalytic activity. Reprinted from ref. 366 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of heterogeneous Pd single-atoms anchored on exfoliated PCN; (b) aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-STEM) of the Pd single-atom catalyst based on exfoliated PCN. Reprinted from ref. 401 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the critical points which must be understood in photocatalysis promoted by metal NPs/PCN to allow the transition from an observation-driven to a design-driven approach.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
