Liquid metal batteries for future energy storage  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00531F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00531F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4177-4202Liquid metal batteries for future energy storage

        
          
            Shilin 
            Zhang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Liu†
c, 
      
        
          
            Qining 
            Fan
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chaofeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Tengfei 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Kourosh 
            Kalantar-Zadeh
          
          
        
      *e and 

        
          
            Zaiping 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical Engineering & Advanced Materials, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 5005, Australia. E-mail: zaiping.guo@adelaide.edu.au
bInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, School of Mechanical, Materials, Mechatronics and Biomedical Engineering, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, 2522, Australia
cInstitut für Chemie and IRIS Adlershof, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Brook-Taylor-Strasse 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany
dInstitutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Key Laboratory of Structure and Functional Regulation of Hybrid Material (Ministry of Education) Anhui Graphene Engineering Laboratory Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China. E-mail: tengfeiz@ahu.edu.cn
eSchool of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales (UNSW), Kensington, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: k.kalantar-zadeh@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      19th February 2021
    , Accepted 8th June 2021First published on 8th June 2021AbstractThe search for alternatives to traditional Li-ion batteries is a continuous quest for the chemistry and materials science communities. One representative group is the family of rechargeable liquid metal batteries, which were initially exploited with a view to implementing intermittent energy sources due to their specific benefits including their ultrafast electrode charge-transfer kinetics and their ability to resist microstructural electrode degradation. Although conventional liquid metal batteries require high temperatures to liquify electrodes, and maintain the high conductivity of molten salt electrolytes, the degrees of electrochemical irreversibility induced by their corrosive active components emerged as a drawback. In addition, safety issues caused by the complexity of parasitic chemical reactivities at high temperatures further complicated their practical applications. To address these challenges, new paradigms for liquid metal batteries operated at room or intermediate temperatures are explored to circumvent the thermal management problems, corrosive reactions, and challenges related to hermetic sealing, by applying alternative electrodes, manipulating the underlying electrochemical behavior via electrolyte design concepts, and engineering the electrode–electrolyte interfaces, thereby enabling both conventional and completely new functionalities. This report briefly summarizes previous research on liquid metal batteries and, in particular, highlights our fresh understanding of the electrochemistry of liquid metal batteries that have arisen from researchers’ efforts, along with discovered hurdles that have been realized in reformulated cells. Finally, the feasibility of new liquid metal batteries is discussed along with their distinct chemistries and performance characteristics to answer the question of how liquid metals can be accessible for next-generation battery systems.
Shilin Zhang
Dr Shilin Zhang is now a research fellow in the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Superconducting & Electronic Materials in the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 2020, after he graduated from Beijing University of Chemical Technology with an MSc in 2016. His current research interests focus on the design, synthesis and characterization of materials in the field of electrochemical devices such as ion batteries and metal batteries.
Ye Liu
Ye Liu is currently a PhD candidate at the Institut für Chemie and IRIS Adlershof, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. His research focuses on the design and fabrication of novel materials in new-generation energy storage and conversion, such as Li/Na/K-ion batteries.
Qining Fan
Qining Fan received his BS degree in Chemical Engineering from China University of Petroleum in 2013 and his MS degree in Chemical Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering at the University of Wollongong under the supervision of Prof. Jiazhao Wang and Prof. Zaiping Guo. His research focuses on Li2S cathodes and their application in lithium sulphur batteries and lithium ion batteries.
Tengfei Zhou
Prof. Tengfei Zhou's research is focused on Li/Na/K ion batteries, metal–CO2 batteries, and interfacial and catalysis problems encountered in battery systems. Zhou started his professional research career as a Chutian Scholar at the Key Laboratory of Catalysis and Materials Science of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission. After that, he worked as a research fellow and an ARC DECRA Fellow in the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials at the University of Wollongong from 2018 to 2020. He is currently a professor in the Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology at Anhui University.
Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh
Prof. Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh is a professor of Chemical Engineering at UNSW and one of the Australian Research Council Laureate Fellows of 2018. Prof. Kalantar-Zadeh is involved in research in the fields of materials science and sensors, has co-authored ∼450 scientific papers and is also a member of the editorial boards of journals including ACS Sensors, ACS Applied Nano Materials, and ACS Nano. He has received many international awards including the 2017 IEEE Sensor Council Achievement, the 2018 ACS Advances in Measurement Science Lectureship award and the 2020 Robert Boyle Prize of RSC. He has also appeared in the Clarivate Analytics most highly cited list since 2018.
Zaiping Guo
Prof. Zaiping Guo is now working at the School of Chemical Engineering & Advanced Materials, University of Adelaide (Australia). She received her PhD degree from the University of Wollongong in 2003, and her BSc and MSc in 1993 and 1996 from Xinjiang University (China), respectively. Her current research interests mainly focus on energy storage systems such as lithium ion batteries, sodium ion batteries, potassium ion batteries, and metal batteries, as well as electrochemistry characterization and computer modelling.

Broader context
The need for higher energy-density rechargeable batteries invokes interest in metal electrodes. Most solid metal anodes, however, suffer from the risk of dendrite growth, which raises safety concerns and impedes further security-critical applications. Among the available battery chemistries to solve this problem, the liquid metal electrode chemistry, in some aspects, is one of the most promising chemistries. This is dominantly attributed to the unique liquid–liquid electrode–electrolyte interface, which could allow liquid metal batteries to operate without solid dendrite growth and to obtain relatively high round-trip efficiencies at high current densities. However, practical liquid metal batteries can only be successfully developed after current hurdles are properly addressed. In this review, we systematically summarize recent advances in the development of liquid metal batteries and, in particular, provide our understanding of the electrochemistry of liquid metal batteries, along with discovered problematic issues that have been realized from researchers’ efforts. This work will promote the fundamental understanding of LMBs for practical applications and serve as a comprehensive guide for further liquid metal electrode research.

1. Introduction
The increasing demand for a low-carbon footprint economy has triggered significant changes in global energy consumption, driving us towards an imminent transition from hydrocarbon fuels to renewable and sustainable energy technologies.1–4 Electrochemical energy storage systems, such as batteries, are critical for enabling sustainable yet intermittent energy harvesting from sources including solar, wind, and geothermal.5 To date, various battery technologies have been employed for rapid and efficient energy storage/release, especially the prevailing lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), which fulfilled their promise for portable electronic devices and are being established in other niche markets such as stationary units and electric vehicles. The global market is projected to hit A$200 billion by 2027,6 however, the cell-level energy density and pack-level costs of practical systems come short of the corresponding expectations with characteristics in the order of 350 W h kg−1, 750 W h L−1, and <A$170 kW h−1, respectively.7
The need for better rechargeable batteries to enable high energy densities (around 500 W h kg−1) with low cost has motivated researchers to replace the current metal ion batteries over the past few decades.3,7 The transition to metal-electrode-based battery chemistries, which have been known since the 1970s, can significantly enhance the figures of merit of batteries, and one of the possible alternatives such as Li metal anodes featuring a high specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and electropositive potential (−3.04 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode, SHE).8 Unfortunately, most solid metal anodes, such as Zn and Li metal anodes, suffer from the possibility/risk of dendrite growth, which induces safety incidents and impedes security-critical applications.9 Consequently, finding alternatives with high-energy densities, cost-effectiveness, and good safety features is still an important part of metal-based battery research. This realization led to interest in liquid-to-liquid-based electrochemistry to gradually substitute for solid-to-solid chemistries. There is significant competitiveness for liquid systems beyond solid-state systems in terms of (i) the capability to operate with relatively high voltage efficiencies at high rates due to the superior kinetics provided by the liquid–liquid interfaces; (ii) the ability of liquid electrodes to render themselves immune to microstructural electrode deformation and/or dendrite formation; (iii) the advantage of establishing flexible energy storage components; and (iv) the eventual potential of reduced cost because most of the active materials are earth-abundant and inexpensive.10–14
The inspiration for liquid metal batteries (LMBs) can be traced back to the electrowinning of Al in 1886 and have long been under investigation (Fig. 1a).10 Early explorations (e.g. Cu–Al Hoopes cell) focused on systems that required high temperatures (HTLMBs, >400 °C), but comparatively low equilibrium cell voltages (below 30 mV). Specifically, such HTLMBs generally consisted of a molten salt (e.g. halide) electrolyte, where high-melting-point liquid metals (LMs) as electrodes were self-segregated and featured mutual immiscibility. Metals with intermediate melting points were also incorporated in LMBs to decrease the operating temperature, notably molten Li in the Li–SO2 battery, yet they afforded limited reversibility. Another candidate system was K–Hg thermally regenerative cells with KOH–KBr–KI molten salt electrolytes because of their better K–Hg separating kinetics, but they only offered a power density of 48 mW cm−2.10 The efforts towards achieving better HTLMBs have been reinforced in the past 10 years, especially when Sadoway’ group assembled a highly reversible Mg–Sb cell with a potential of 0.5 V and a low cost of A$230 kW h−1,3 confirming the potential of HTLMBs for practical employment.
 Fig. 1  Promise and challenges of current LMBs. (a) Timeline of liquid metal batteries. (b) Representative classification of LMBs. Most reducing liquid alkali metals can couple with oxidizing positive electrodes in an electrochemical reaction, for which an appropriate choice of electrolyte is required. (c) Summary of the key challenges that are limiting the life span and practical application of current high temperature (HT) and room temperature (RT) LMBs. (d) A comparison of the theoretical capacity–voltage metrics of LMBs, including selected conventional room temperature batteries (RT batteries), HTLMBs, and RTLMBs. Most data in part (d) were collected from ref. 3, 6, 7, 10 and 12. 
In line with the continuous exploration of electrode materials and advances in our understanding of their behavior in the complex electrochemical environment in LMBs, several further studies using post-transition- or semimetals (e.g. Bi, Sb, and Smolten) as positive electrode materials and alkaline metals (e.g. Li, Na, and Ca) as negative electrode materials have implied that the rechargeable potential could surpass 1.0 V. These developments saw HTLMB research reached a peak point, and the electrochemical performance exceeding early explorations, such as Cu–Al and K–Hg (Fig. 1b).3,15 Nevertheless, operating such HTLMBs has been greatly restricted by the need for rigorous thermal management and their highly corrosive active cell components, leading to difficulty with their utilization in next-generation energy storage systems, especially for portable devices (Fig. 1c).16–18
The search for concurrently relieving the parasitic reactions and minimizing the energy consumption due to high temperature has motivated researchers to study fusible materials (e.g. Ga based alloys, Hg-based alloys, and liquid sodium–potassium alloys) that are in the liquid phase at or near room temperature (RTLMBs, 0–40 °C).19,20 Among them, gallium based LMs are highly promising because the alloy type mechanism offers abundant storage sites for Li+, yet the uncontrollable volume variation and phase transformations during electrochemical reactions restrict their further deployment. One example of an established technology is related to Ga anodes in LIBs, which cycle through a liquid–solid–liquid phase transition during charge and discharge.21,22 Hg, as the liquid metal with high density and a low melting point of 234 K in nature, was initially believed to be utilized as an electrode material in RTLMBs; however, its potential hazardous effects on human beings and the environment make it challenging for further investigation. Room temperature sodium–potassium liquid alloys (NaK) are distinct from gallium in that they are charge carrier reservoirs and can potentially replace state-of-the-art Li anodes. Importantly, when matching NaK with reasonable cathode candidates in RTLMBs, such as LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (solid phase), Ga-based alloys or Hg based materials (liquid phase), and O2 or CO2 (gas phase), ideal energy densities could possibly be achieved due to their promising capacities and high equilibrium voltages (Fig. 1d).23 Thus, the borders in terms of materials science for LMBs are no longer strictly set, and batteries containing at least one LM electrode can be characterized as LMBs (Fig. 1b). Nevertheless, the intrinsic strong reactivity involving liquid metals in electrolyte still has adverse effects on the realization of LMBs with satisfactory electrochemical reversibility,24–26 and cycling at high cell voltages along with adequate energy density in pack-level LMBs has not yet been achieved.
The challenges associated with LMBs led to disappointment, but new findings about the prospects of this emerging battery technology have broadened today's ambitions.27,28 Our aim in this report is to discuss the recent progress in LMBs, by addressing their fundamental issues in terms of electrochemical properties, ion transport, and interfaces, and, furthermore, dividing the aspects that have been spotlighted in research pursuits into three parts. The first part is focused on searching for suitable alternative electrodes, including alloys and other mixed materials, based on the sophisticated experience gained in recent decades. The second part is focused on changing the electrochemical environment in which the main redox reactions occur, which is mainly governed by the electrolyte. The last part is focused on revisiting the interfacial properties along with effective strategies in engineering those properties. The possibility of new LMB systems is also re-evaluated for replacing mature LIBs for either grid-scale or portable energy storage.
2. Recent progress in high temperature liquid metal battery (HTLMB) systems
2.1 Historical investigations
Previous HTLMBs comprised of three-liquid-layers were evolved from metal refining technology, in which involves liquid electrodes with limited morphological/structural change compared with solid metals during operation (Fig. 2a). Besides, most of the candidate electrode materials and molten halide electrolytes are earth-abundant and inexpensive, enabling realisation of low-cost LMBs (Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  (a) Typical plating morphologies of solid metal and liquid metal electrodes during charging/discharging. The liquid metals are desirable and have established the reputation as safe anodes due to their limited structural deformation. (b) Comparison of the melting points, potentials vs. SHE, commercial prices, and liquid densities at the melting points of representative electrode candidates. (c) A phase diagram of eutectic metal with two components. (d) Coulombic efficiency, energy efficiency, and discharge capacity density as functions of cycle number in a typical Li‖Sb–Pb cell cycled at 275 mA cm−2. Inset: Profiles of voltage and current density during charge–discharge (15th cycle). Reproduced with permission.20 (e) Both advantages and disadvantages of the current alloy strategies in HTLMBs. 
For example, the conventional HTLMB model was initially focused on Na and K as negative electrodes and Sb and Hg as positive electrodes, as a project for building thermally regenerative cells.10,17 In another example, it was demonstrated that when a NaCl–NaI molten salt electrolyte was incorporated at 700 °C into a Na–Sn cell, the cell could work for over a month in the voltage range from 0.33 to 0.43 V, and achieve current densities up to 0.7 A cm−2.3 K|KOH–KBr–KI|Hg thermally regenerative cells also successfully demonstrated reversibility at an output power density of 48 mW cm−2.10 Even though sodium-based batteries were previously regarded by some as more suitable for large-scale energy storage, which will be discussed in more detail, molten Li would be preferred.29 As many studies have confirmed, Li metal batteries have high energy and power densities because Li has the most electropositive nature of all the candidates (−3.04 V vs. SHE), and additionally, Li is the lightest element with an intermediate melting point at 180 °C. More importantly, in its “own” molten electrolyte, Li exhibits much lower solubility due to the proximity of its valence electron to its nucleus compared to its counterparts Na and K.8
The invention of Mg-based LMBs offered a more attractive perspective since only half as many ions would be needed to achieve the same capacity as Li and because Mg in its molten electrolyte has an extremely low solubility. Although its coulombic and energy efficiencies are 94% and 73%, respectively, the typical Mg|NaCl–KCl–MgCl2|Sb cell was found to operate above 700 °C, which is why it has been largely excluded by the market.18 Reversibly electroplated Al through Al-based molten electrolytes is the least well characterized type reported over the past 50 years, despite the fact that Al has the advantages of the highest oxidation state of all LM candidates and the lowest cost (e.g., the Ca–Al cell can potentially provide the lowest cost of A$19 kW h−1). Unfortunately, the rapid capacity decay and high melting point of Al, and especially the lack of a compatible molten electrolyte, mean that this kind of system is not quite practical in comparison with the afore-mentioned systems.10,30 Calcium, as the fifth most abundant element on the Earth's crust, is also promising owing to its nontoxic nature with a SHE potential of −2.87 V, and a high theoretical capacity of 2060 mA h cm−3.6 Nevertheless, further application of Ca-based LMBs faces two dominant issues: the high melting point (842 °C) and high solubility of Ca in molten salt electrolytes.19
For positive electrodes, as one of the most electronegative elements among all initially tested candidates, tellurium (Te) can be coupled with Li to offer an enhanced open-circuit voltage (OCV), up to 1.75 V at 480 °C, compared with Sn, Bi, and Sb. The large-scale implementation of the Li–Te chemistry, however, has been obstructed by the low electronic conductivity and high price of Te.3,31 Another promising candidate is sulfur (S), which is abundant, multivalent, nonmetallic, and already an active component in battery chemistries. Nevertheless, the development of high temperature Li–S batteries is challenging because of the well-known shuttle effect of soluble polysulfides between the cathode and Li during conversion.7 Only one successful model involving S has been achieved, which is the Na–S battery that will be discussed later in this paper. Altogether, post-transition metals, such as Bi, Sb, Pb, and Sn, are worthy of further investigations when considering their lithiation voltage, cost, and melting point (Fig. 2b).
2.2 The role of high temperature
As can be seen, the already discussed systems only operate at elevated temperatures higher than their respective melting points to permit the establishment of liquid–liquid electrode–electrolyte interfaces. Accordingly, the rapid mass transport of reactants and products and also low ohmic losses due to highly conductive molten electrolytes allow HTLMBs to run with relatively high voltage efficiencies at high rates. As a principal characteristic of HTLMBs, clearly, their fast charge-transfer kinetics is also dependent on the chosen elevated operating temperature.
A high operating temperature, however, is one of the main roadblocks hindering the widespread application of HTLMBs, by degrading insulating seals, requiring harsh thermal management, and generating an environment with severe chemical reactivity.10 Specifically, the high reactivity leads to the metallic solubility of the electrode species in the molten salt electrolyte, which further induces high self-discharge rates, rendering the cell performance irreversible. Significantly, all-liquid components limit battery movement but are potentially hazardous if there is liquid phase leakage, possibly leading to rapid heat generation and short-circuits in the cell.10 It should be emphasized that the high temperature also involves multiple cost-based challenges, since the external energy input along with the requirements of hermetic sealing readily increases the cost load, making HTLMBs uncompetitive in comparison to existing technologies in both grid-scale and portable markets.
Reducing the operating temperature of HTLMBs is detrimental to the kinetics of the reactions and the high performance occurring at elevated temperatures, but it offers the potential use of polymeric sealing materials with upgraded mechanical strength, and reduced heat loss, hence improving the ability to resist corrosion, and simplifying the packing process.23 To strike a balance, approaches that are likely to be effective, such as electrode engineering, through alloying together with molten electrolyte optimization via multiple components have been investigated, which are summarized in the following sections.
2.3 Approaches to address the challenges

2.3.1 Beyond conventional liquid metals. 
Alloying strategies were first considered as a way to overcome the high melting point of Ca to realize Ca-based LMBs. Various Ca based alloys such as Ca–Bi, Ca–Sb, Ca–Mg, and Ca–Ge have been investigated (Fig. 2c). A typical example applying Mg–Ca alloy was recently reported, where Ca also served as the active component due to its lower electronegativity.6 Here, a Ca–Mg (90:10, mol%) negative electrode coupled with bismuth in LiCl–CaCl2 electrolyte was able to provide a 99% coulombic efficiency along with good cycling to operate at temperatures below 550 °C,32 supporting the effectiveness of this strategy. It was shown that a Ca–Mg alloy in the high-Ca eutectic region (0.60 < xCa < 0.80) would decrease the whole voltage by less than 30 mV compared with pristine Ca. Further decreasing the Ca concentration in the Ca–Mg alloy resulted in an obvious voltage loss of 200 mV; however, the reduction of the Ca concentration in the molten salt could radically improve the electrochemical performance in terms of cyclability.9
Eutectic alloys not only have shown promise in decreasing the melting points in comparison to the individual metallic components in negative electrodes, but also hold the potential for dramatically reducing the melting points of positive electrodes. Bismuth is a promising material for constructing such alloys owing to its low melting point of around 271 °C. One typical Li|LiCl–LiF (30:70, mol%)|Bi system was found to operate at 550 °C with a good rate capability (1000 cycles at 300 mA cm−2 with only 0.004% fade per cycle).33 Nevertheless, the high Li concentration still caused polarization in Bi at high rates (1250 mA cm−2), resulting in a discharge voltage in Li‖Bi of only 0.525 V, which was below its theoretical value for discharge with the OCV ranging from 0.95 to 0.72 V (from liquid Bi to solid-phase Li3Bi).34 In this condition, the polarization is mainly caused by the formation of solid Li3Bi on the positive electrode side, which features a high melting point and also offers a density that is in between those of the electrolyte and the electrode. However, the reaction kinetics and charge transfer are gradually retarded by the increased thickness of this solid layer relative to the depth of discharge. Thus, a prospective strategy to decrease the polarization voltage is to look for alloys that can change the discharge product. Recently, an optimized electrode containing Bi–Ga alloy (70:30, mol%) was proposed, where a Ga-rich discharge product (Li–Bi–Ga melt) was formed and coexisted in the liquid phase with the solid Li3Bi in the same layer to build rapid transfer kinetics. Gallium was selected due to its lower melting point (29.8 °C) than and comparable density (5.79 g cm−3, 500 °C) to Li3Bi.35 Here, the operational temperature of the whole cell was decreased to 500 °C. Owing to the synergetic combination of these advantages, the as-designed Li|LiF–LiCl–LiBr|Bi–Ga system delivered a high discharge voltage of 0.54 V at 1200 mA cm−2, which was 1.75 times higher than that of its Li‖Bi counterpart. Notably, despite its excellent performance, bismuth is still a moderately priced metal and it is averagely abundant in nature, which can possibly increase the production cost when considering its large-scale application.36
Antimony has yet another advantage over Bi in that it is much cheaper. The theoretical electromotive force (Emf) measurement of the Li‖Sb cell was determined to be around 0.92 V,34 but the employment of the Sb electrode was hindered by the high melting point of Sb (631 °C). Several alloy approaches have been pursued to find a solution to this problem. Wang et al. developed a eutectic Pb–Sb alloy as a positive electrode material,20 where Pb was chosen because of its low cost feature (about 3.5 times lower than that of Sb) and much lower melting point (327 °C). The electrochemical measurements were performed at 450 °C in a LiF–LiCl–LiI (20:50:30, mol%) molten salt electrolyte. Even at a lower concentration of Sb in Pb (18 mol%), the Li‖Sb–Pb system had a voltage output of 0.9 V, about 0.3 V higher than that of the Li‖Pb cell. This value was very similar to the theoretical value for Li‖Sb, indicating that the antimony was the only electrochemically active element. The Li‖Sb–Pb cell containing the Sb–Pb 30:70 (mol%) alloy consistently achieved 93% of its theoretical capacity with a discharge voltage of 0.73 V (Fig. 2d). After around 450 cycles at the full depth of discharge, the coulombic efficiency was estimated to be 98%, with the fading rate maintained at 0.004% per cycle from the 100th cycle. Furthermore, no obvious corrosion on the current collectors or sheath could be found from the cross-sectional investigations after 1800 hours of operation. From a practical perspective, this system could reach a capacity of 62.0 Ah at 275 mA cm−2, and the nominal discharge voltage was measured to be 0.69 V at 500 °C with an estimated cost of A$100 kW h−1. This pioneering discovery not only raised the appeal of this technology for stationary applications but also served as an illustration of how the class of alloy materials for LMBs could be broadened, such as in Li‖Bi–Pb systems.37
Although much attention is given to Pb based alloys, for most battery applications, physical safety and environmental safety are equally important, and pose barriers for practical implementation of Pb-based hosts for Li-ion batteries. Most recently, more environmentally benign alloys were reported to optimize the operating temperature of Li‖Sb, such as Sb–Sn38 and Sb–Bi binary alloys,39 and even Sb–Bi–Sn ternary alloys.40 Nevertheless, for one certain active material, adding electrochemically inert components (e.g. Pb and Sn) to form binary alloys leads to decreased energy density, in spite of the various merits of this strategy including their low melting points and solubility in electrolyte. Changing inert components to active ones (e.g. Sb–Bi and Sb–Bi–Sn) can increase/retain the whole energy density, but the formation of multiple intermetallic solids (e.g., Li3Sb, Li22Sn5, and Li3Bi) in the final discharge product results in a distribution into separated layers due to the varied density, which is detrimental to Li+ transfer kinetics within interlayers at high rates. This would become more severe when increasing the concentration of other active components (e.g. employing ternary alloys).
The eutectic alloy approach involving suitable metals has positive influences on decreasing the melting points of electrodes and the solubility of electrodes in electrolyte, while raising certain concerns about the electrochemical performance (Fig. 2e). It remains to be seen whether a compromise can be reached by further decreasing the operating temperature while retaining the energy output.


2.3.2 Electrolyte modification and its alternatives. 
Molten halides are in widespread use as electrolytes in HTLMBs due to their superior ionic conductivity (up to 3 S cm−1), potential cost-effectiveness, and better safety in comparison to commonly used liquid electrolytes. Molten salt electrolytes can also provide ultrafast electrode charge-transfer kinetics due to liquid–liquid electrode–electrolyte interfaces compared to emerging solid-state electrolytes. For molten halides, the appropriate candidates should meet the well-established selection criteria, which are as follows: (i) they should have a low melting point; (ii) they should be strong ionic conductors and electron insulators; (iii) they should have appropriate density; and (iv) they should not show parasitic reactions with electrodes. Nevertheless, the generation of subvalent ions caused by severe metallic solubility in the molten electrolyte is inevitable at high temperature. Although such a parasitic reaction improves the whole ionic conductivity of the electrolyte, a severe self-discharge rate along with a dramatically decreased energy efficiency becomes an obstacle to sustaining the reversibility. Luckily, despite the fact that experimental studies regarding electrolyte modification have rarely been undertaken other than for the developments of alloy LMs, it is currently believed that the maximum metal solubility only occurs in molten halides containing the cation of their respective metal. Previous investigations also indicated that the solubilities of LMs in their own halide salts are mainly related to the atomic number and are generally enhanced with increasing atomic number (Li < Na < K < Rb < Cs and F < Cl < Br < I), as shown in Fig. 3a.41–45 Notably, it is expected that the solubility of liquid metals in molten salt electrolytes can be suppressed by alloying the liquid metal to decrease its activity. Also, multiple cations in a molten electrolyte reduce the metallic solubility and offer a decreased melting point of the electrolyte (Fig. 3b).46 A representative example involved the use of LiCl–CaCl2 electrolyte in Ca-based LMBs.32 Special care must be taken, however, to avoid potentially irreversible reactions between the LMs and the multiple of cations from the electrolyte. For instance, it was found that molten Li reacts with the K+ ions in LiCl–KCl molten electrolyte (Li + KCl = LiCl + K) to form liquid K, which can be rapidly evaporated if the system operating temperature exceeds the boiling point of K (760 °C). More importantly, the ionic conductivity can also be decreased by applying exotic halides as inactive components due to the lack of free-flowing ions, even at a decreased operating temperature.47 The further development of molten electrolytes with optimized ratios of active to inactive parts is critical. Recently, a new concept was proposed by Sadoway and co-workers aimed at tackling this problematic issue. Specifically, a porous electronically conductive membrane of TiN fitted with a Li–Pb negative electrode, a Pb positive electrode, and PbCl2–LiCl–KCl molten electrolyte was assembled, where the TiN membrane served as a chemically selective agent by oriented faradaic reaction instead of regulated ionic conduction (Fig. 3f).19 In this case, when the cell was operated at 410 °C, the reduction reaction of Pb2+ (from molten electrolyte) to Pb(l) occurred on the interface between the molten electrolyte and the TiN membrane, which could prevent Pb from entering the negative electrode, thus avoiding parasitic reactions. When cycled at a current density of 150 mA cm−2, the cell exhibited a coulombic efficiency of 92% with a round-trip energy efficiency of 71%.
 Fig. 3  (a) Solubility of selected metals in their molten salt electrolytes at their melting point. (b) Phase diagram of the liquidus line of the typical NaI–LiI–KI system simulated using FactSage software. The melting point is as low as 290 °C. Reproduced with permission.46 (c) A simulation of thermal convection in a HTLMB. The vertical cross section through the centre of the battery shows that the temperature is much higher in the electrolyte than in either electrode. Reproduced with permission.54 (d) Schematic illustration of the garnet type of LLZO (left) and the perovskite type of LLTO (right). (e) Illustration of effective strategies from the perspective of the whole HTLMB design. (f) Schematic of a Li–Pb‖PbCl2 cell fitted with a porous faradaically selective membrane. Reproduced with permission.19 (g) Possible electrolyte candidates for future HTLMBs. 
Instead of targeting liquid phases, an alternative approach is to use solid electrolytes for a less reactive interfacial contact between electrolyte environments and electrodes. Na based beta-alumina solid electrolyte (Na-BASE, Na-β′′-Al2O3) was such a candidate and initially developed by Ford in 1966.17,34 One of the successful approaches using BASE electrolyte was based on using a high temperature Na–S battery in an attempt to address the self-discharge caused by the sophisticated ‘shuttle effect’ of the polysulfides during cycling.48 To date, this technology has been well implemented (global installed capacity: >4000 MW h over 230 countries). It is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate of more than 12% from 2020 to 2025.48 Nevertheless, there is a serious issue when decreasing the operational temperature to the intermediate zone: that is, reduced Na wettability on the surface of the electrolyte. If impurities such as calcium oxide, lithium oxide and even moisture exist on the surface during electrolyte synthesis, only an inferior wettability of sodium is achieved.
For solving this problem, both the introduction of an intermediate melting point metal layer and addition of an oxygen getter (e.g. Ti or Al) into liquid Na have been proven to be successful at temperatures above 300 °C to minimize the formation of the byproduct sodium oxide, while there are still some debates as to how much can be improved at intermediate temperatures below 200 °C. Different from adding oxygen getters, another successful attempt to improve Na wettability was made by Liu et al. by introducing an alloying strategy at a lower temperature.49 At 100 °C, three representative anodes, NaK, NaRb, and NaCs, demonstrated comparable wettability to pure Na at 250 °C, owing to the stronger interactions between exotic cations and β′′-alumina atoms than those between sodium and β′′-alumina atoms. Yet both NaK and NaRb induced the BASE fracture at 200 °C due to the ion exchange reaction of Na+ with large ions K+ and Rb+. Particularly, the K ions in NaK were exchanged with the Na+ ions in the lattice of Na-BASE due to the lower free energy of K-BASE than that of Na-BASE (65 kJ mol−1 difference), possibly due to a smaller distortion in the Al tetrahedra. Even small K impurities in Na-BASE can cause polycrystalline Na-BASE to fracture. In contrast, no fracture or cracks were observed for the BASE sample coated with NaCs (20:80, mol%) alloy, even when it was heated to 350 °C. As a result, superior cycling performance was obtained compared to its Na counterpart from 95 °C to 175 °C. Even so, the massive concentration of expensive cesium in sodium renders itself non-cost-competitive. Apart from this, Bi has the ability to form a low-melting-point alloy with Na, because it has a similar ionic radius to Na, and a lower solubility limit and a higher oxide formation energy than those of Na, enhancing the anode wettability on the surfaces of solid electrolytes. The formation of isolated bismuth islands significantly improved the cell performance, with cells retaining 94% of their charge after the initial cycle, an improvement over cells without bismuth islands.50 Most recently, exchanging Na metal for K was found to be somewhat interesting because of the low melting point and abundance of K.51 A K-BASE (K+ totally substituted) electrolyte was applied in K-based HTLMBs, which was promising in terms of addressing both Na+ exchange in Na-BASE and the vast K solubility in the molten electrolyte, even though such research is in its infancy.52
In the case of ceramics, most BASE electrolytes face two main problems at an intermediate temperature: the diffusion of ions through the β′′-Al2O3 is a thermally activated process (the ambient temperature conductivity is about 0.3 S cm−1) and the mechanical and structural stability of BASE electrolytes in all-solid-state batteries are still limited. As far as we know, substitutions of elements in BASE with elements with suitable ionic radii (e.g. Ni2+, Co2+) or doping with metal oxides (e.g. zirconia) is proved to be effective in dealing with these two problems, and the successful removal of both its surface hydroxyl groups and carbon contaminants is helpful.48 Importantly, there is a critical ionic radius (∼0.97 Å) at which the cation can be chosen to replace Al3+ and stabilize the BASE, while cations with a larger ionic radius can replace Na+, degrading the overall structure.16 Other strategies, such as boosting the high ionic conductivity, introducing thinner structures, or applying stable organic electrolyte that can work at high temperature, are also desirable. For instance, a semi-flow battery having a sodium iodide (NaI)/tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME) electrolyte in Na–S was successfully operated below 200 °C, but with insufficient ionic conductivity to the BASE.53 Obviously, there would be a trade-off between the operation temperature and the acceptable ionic conductivity when alternative approaches are applied.48


2.3.3 Joule heating effect of electrolyte. 
Generally, external heaters are required to liquefy materials in visible HTLMB chemistries, but external heaters are not always necessary because the electrical resistance of the battery components converts electrical energy to heat in a process known as Joule or ohmic heating. This Joule heating essentially occurs in the electrolyte because its electrical conductivity is four orders of magnitude smaller than those of liquid metals. If the environmental heat loss is neglected and the battery operates at a high enough current density, such a battery can maintain its high temperature without additional heaters, and the primary heat source would be the HTLMB itself. Nevertheless, the thermal convection caused by the Joule heating could bring in intermetallic materials from the electrolyte,54 which is likely to contaminate the negative electrode (Fig. 3c). This idea seems to be an exciting topic, while a large number of open questions must be solved because they would hinder its further application.


2.3.4 Approaches for improving energy density at intermediate temperatures. 
Portable devices require both energy and power densities, and these requirements are also needed for grid-scale markets. Clearly, the energy density is determined by several factors including the electrode couple, the efficiency of M+ conduction in electrolyte, and the transference kinetics between the electrodes and electrolyte. As can be seen from Fig. 1d, the energy densities of previously discussed energy storage systems involving HTLMBs always lie below 200 W h kg−1. These values would be dramatically decreased when decreasing their more elevated operational temperatures to intermediate zones. To fulfil the high demand for energy-related applications, efforts have increasingly been shifted toward higher-energy-density HTLMBs (>200 W h kg−1) in recent years, especially those operating at high current densities but at low temperatures.
One of the interesting models is a high temperature Na–S cell, which has a high theoretical gravimetric energy density of 750 W h kg−1, although the practical value remains below 250 W h kg−1. This is to avoid the formation of insoluble shorter chain polysulfides (Na2Sx, x < 3) at 350 °C.55 In order to improve the energy density, implementing novel electrolytes (such as ionic liquids) in this system is a plausible method. The chemistry of the ionic liquids with polysulfides and the related economic feasibility, however, still correspond to significant technical and economic challenges. In addition, while tubular type cells are dominant models in the current market, a possible exchange for planar configurations should be considered for the stacking of the electrodes based on Na–S cells. The enhanced active surface area for a given cell volume or the introduction of thinner electrodes can lead to higher capability and energy density. Alternatively, the family of liquid metal–gas systems show conceptual possibilities in terms of high energy densities but low costs by employing ultralight-weight air cathodes. As a proof of concept, Licht et al. developed a prototype consisting of a C, Fe or VB2 negative electrode coupled with an air positive electrode in molten electrolyte with its intrinsic energy density ranging from 10000 to 27000 W h L−1 at 700 °C.56 Even so, this kind of cell still cannot provide long-term cycling stability due to the lack of effective catalysts. To this end, Baek et al. recently reported a highly reversible Li–CO2 cell at 150 °C, which was achieved by using a nitrate-based quinary molten salt as electrolyte and ruthenium nanoparticles (catalysts) on the carbon cathode.57 Interestingly, unlike lithium halides, nitrate and nitrite anions can simultaneously lower the melting temperature of molten salts and provide sufficient ionic conductivity in a specific working window (below ∼4.0 V). Also, both simulations and experimental results have so far demonstrated intriguing decomposition mechanisms for the discharge product Li2CO3 in nitrate-based molten salts. Therefore, a stable cycling performance of more than 300 cycles at 10 A g−1 with the highest peak power density of 33.4 mW cm−2 (where the input power required to maintain 150 °C was only ∼0.6 mW) was obtained. Notably, high charging voltages and poor electrochemical reversibility, when cycling at high depths of discharge (rather than capacity-limited operation, which is often used in metal–gas systems), should be further improved when considering its practical use. Another metal–gas example involving a Li negative electrode, a eutectic LiNO3−KNO3 electrolyte, oxygen, and a carbon cathode was proposed in 2016 by Giordani and co-workers.58 When it was operated at 150 °C, improved energy efficiency (∼95%) and rate capability were achieved. Altogether, identifying effective catalysts and use of modified cathodes with improved stability are useful directions to be explored, aiming to reach high energy densities with cost-effective merits.
Following electrode related studies came work on batteries that involved manipulating electrolytes for improving their energy density, for example, replacing them with suitable alternatives, directing research attention towards exploring components including polymer electrolytes, superionic conductors, and even new types of solid state electrolytes (oxides, sulfides, etc.).6 For instance, in 2018, Jin et al. demonstrated that the plating and stripping of Li ions could be made reversible at 240 °C by using a Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12 (Ta doped LLZO) solid-state electrolyte tube. They combined the emerging concept of new solid-state electrolytes with liquid metals to assemble two typical Li‖Sn–Pb and Li‖Bi–Pb systems, which showed volumetric energy densities as high as 570 (150 W h kg−1) and 940 W h L−1 (230 W h kg−1), respectively.59 Thanks to the high ionic conductivity (>60 mS cm−1 above 200 °C) along with the modified interfacial impedance provided by the liquid–solid interfaces, the Li‖Sn–Pb battery demonstrated a high current density (up to 500 mA cm−2) with an average coulombic efficiency of 99.98%, as well as a high energy efficiency, above 75% in one cylinder-type cell. Notably, even under conditions of violent vibrations and impact, the Ta doped LLZO tube still remained intact without any noticeable cracks or damage, indicating that the tube exhibited good mechanical properties. This design offered prospects for grid-scale energy storage with high energy density, high safety, and low maintenance costs. Further investigations should focus on avoiding the possible formation of large interfacial resistance between such solid electrolytes and liquid metals due to the existence of contaminants (e.g. Li2CO3) at room temperature,60,61 and care needs to be taken during synthesis (Fig. 3d).
Considering the future prospects of HTLMBs with high energy densities at low operating temperatures, two scenarios can be defined: one is truly rechargeable HTLMBs with their specific energy densities exceeding those of today's state of the art; and the other is primary batteries that can fulfil specific requirements and tasks, such as in military use or space exploration. Therefore, whether new HTLMB systems are possible or whether any fundamental issues limit their development is worth exploring (Fig. 3e and g).

3. Recent progress in RTLMB technology
Operating batteries at a more secure temperature while maintaining a high performance (e.g. round-trip energy efficiencies >70% with long lives >4000 cycles) makes sense from both safety and economic viewpoints. In early explorations, the development of RTLMBs operating at ambient temperature (0–40 °C) is thus an intriguing target, since at such temperature they can acquire similar configurations to prevalent LIBs.62 At ambient temperature, not only can suitable current chemistries and technologies be applied to RTLMBs, but common solutions to challenges in LIBs can also be considered for RTLMBs (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Possible problems in current RTLMBs and potential approaches for addressing the associated problems. As can be seen, the wetting behaviour, volume change, unstable SEI layer, and inferior energy density are concluded to be dominant problems in RTLMBs. Because of typical RTLMBs originate from the prevalent LIBs, the physio- and electrochemical features of RTLMBs can be directly engineered from the successful experience of Li ions. 
To date, there have been several known elements and alloys with melting points that are near or below room temperature, namely, mercury, gallium (and its alloys), rubidium, cesium, francium, and NaK based alloys. Among them, as a liquid metal with high density and a low melting point of 234 K in nature, Hg was initially employed as a positive electrode material to pair with K or Na negative electrode materials in HTLMB systems.10 The low vapor pressure and toxic properties of Hg, however, make it unsuitable for large-scale RTLMB implementation, although some recent advances extended its application to Li metal batteries.63,64 Besides, the radiation hazards of Rb, Cs, and Fr make them challenging for commercial energy storage applications (Fig. 2b). In this family, Ga is favorable for RTLMBs because of its safe nature and its moderate potential window with respect to Li.65 The discharge product Li2Ga in LIBs contributes to a theoretical capacity of 769 mA h g−1, while around 217 mA h g−1 is achieved with the formation of Na22Ga39 with the highest Na concentration.12,66 The assembly of Ga‖high energy density cathode or Li‖Ga systems is, thus, being considered at present. Additionally, another promising material is the NaK alloy (eutectic down to −12.6 °C), which can only be a liquid phase with 9.2 to 58.2 wt% Na, and contributes a specific capacity of 629 mA h g−1 and 579 mA h g−1 in Na and K metal batteries, respectively.62 Unlike Li, it is low-cost due to its much cheaper raw materials Na and K metals and effortless synthesis.67 Besides, the contact between liquid NaK and solid-state electrolyte can be enhanced electrically and physically due to the liquid–solid interface.68,69 As only a few liquid metals have been electrochemically tested as electrodes in RTLMBs, this section follows a different layout than for HTLMBs, and it emphasizes the challenging issues associated with exploring liquid materials that contain Ga or NaK alloys that have come to light from current progress in battery applications.
3.1 Remaining challenges

3.1.1 Wettability behavior towards other surfaces. 
3.1.1.1 Gallium based materials. 
The interfacial wettability between electrodes and electrolytes, as well as between the electrodes and substrates (e.g., the current collector), primarily determines the resistance and transfer kinetics of batteries, which has been a dominant research aspect of surface chemistry in practical storage systems. Firstly, for wettability between LMs and substrates, both the surface tension and viscosity should be reduced to a lower degree at higher temperatures, resulting in a good wetting behavior regardless of the dimensions of the liquid metals. At room temperature, the high surface tension of pristine Ga LM supports its natural tendency to form spherical droplets that minimize surface energy, providing the worst wettability towards other surfaces, not only to liquid electrolytes but also to solid substrates (Fig. 4).70 This is problematic during the fabrication of electrodes involving pristine Ga LM. Secondly, the high surface tension of Ga LM makes it a suitable component for constructing alloy-type self-healing anodes, where materials such as Si and Sn are mainly active components, which suffer from the enormous volume change caused by diffusion-induced stresses during the lithiation process.70,71 It is difficult to obtain homogeneous components from routine mixtures of these materials without any additives (e.g. organic molecules) during electrode preparation due to the inferior wettability of Ga LM. Thirdly, increasing the surface area-to-volume ratio of the electrode is vital for electrochemical performance (Fig. 4),72 while reducing the size of bulk Ga LM to nanoscale dimensions is difficult due to its high surface tension. In addition, not only do self-healing electrodes containing LMs need to retain good wetting behavior within themselves, but the electrodes and other components, such as conductive carbon and binder species, also need to maintain contacts strong enough to offer a linked conductive network and ionic tunnels. Therefore, care should be taken when selecting appropriate components during the electrode preparation. For instance, it is generally believed that gallium based LMs adhere in the form of thin films to some hydrophilic species, while they do not adhere to certain hydrophobic surfaces, and aqueous binders may be thus essential for preparing electrode slurries.
3.1.1.2 Sodium potassium alloys. 
NaK alloy seemingly presents a challenge similar to Ga LM with regard to its wettability. Unlike gallium-based materials with versatile roles, NaK is regarded as a metal electrode material, so the wettability behaviour between the electrode and the electrolyte is therefore more significant.73–75
The wetting behavior between NaK and electrolyte was first studied on solid-state Na-BASE electrolytes. Na-BASE is incompatible with the NaK alloy electrode at high temperatures, leading to a fractural structure.49 The poor wettability of Na-BASE was also observed at room temperature. Lu et al. confirmed the wetting behavior with a solid substrate, while the wettability behaviour between NaK and organic-based liquid electrolytes was initially studied by Goodenough's group in 2016.62 They observed that the NaK liquid was immiscible in most hydrocarbon electrolytes, and subsequently tried to solve this problem by introducing a matrix. Specifically, due to its high surface tension, NaK cannot penetrate into porous separators (e.g., Celgard and glass fiber) containing an organic liquid electrolyte, resulting in a relatively poor quality wetting. To increase the contact area and improve the wettability of pure NaK towards liquid electrolyte at room temperature, a carbon matrix was introduced and proved to be compatible in that it could immobilize liquid NaK into composite electrodes. The combination of NaK with a suitable matrix emerges as a new direction in ameliorating the wettability of NaK, which has rarely been investigated.


3.1.2 Inevitable volume changes during cycling in batteries. 
3.1.2.1 Gallium based materials. 
The first observation of volume change in Ga LM can be traced back to decades ago. However, one of the best examples is presented in the work of Deshpande and co-workers.76 They tried to apply pristine gallium as a self-healing anode at 40 °C to produce a stabilized electrode by taking advantage of its liquid feature with limited structural deformation. Nevertheless, a typical liquid–solid–liquid phase transition (Ga–LixGa–Ga) was identified, and around 160% volume expansion of the pristine gallium occurred during the formation of solid LixGa in the fully lithiated process. Such a volume change is a common issue in alloy type materials, which results in crack formation and breaks down the electronically conductive network within the inner electrode, all of which lead to irreversible cycling.77 This would be one of the main reasons why this Ga anode lasted for only 30 cycles, with unsatisfactory capacity output (around 400 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1).76 In fact, the self-healing behavior of Ga LM is ambiguous due to the lack of direct evidence. Additionally, in the exploration of Liang et al., by using in situ microscopy to observe the electrochemical process of Ga LM, a reverse phase transition, accompanied by the nucleation and growth of nanosized voids during delithiation, was identified.77 After reaching the fully delithiated state, the nanovoids gradually annihilated. The authors proposed that the Ga LM may function as an effective healing agent in durable composite electrodes. Notably, the electrolyte that was employed in their observation was solid Li2O. The explanation of nanovoids annihilation from which cannot be simply extended to organic-based electrolytes since the self-healing behavior is still influenced by the electrode–electrolyte interface, which is dependent on the employed electrolyte component.77 Besides, non-self-healing species (e.g., conductive components and binder) are required during electrode preparation, which may increase the self-healing challenge of Ga LM during electrochemical processes.72 Volume change leads to the breakdown of the solid electrolyte interphase layer, which is another factor that influences the self-healing behavior of Ga LM and will be discussed in detail in the following part.
Besides their direct application as anode materials, Ga based LMs can targetedly regulate the properties of solid Li metal in Li metal batteries. There are some problems associated with Li metal batteries, such as the uneven nucleation behavior of solid Li metal (huge overpotential), parasitic reactions due to electrolyte corrosion by the solid Li metal, and more importantly, dendrite growth. Introducing lithiophilic seeds has been shown to involve a negligible nucleation overpotential; especially the liquid metal would be a good candidate due to the homogeneous distribution of the Li nuclei sites caused by the amorphous state of the liquid metal.27 Nevertheless, the amorphous state of the LM can be destroyed because of the formation of crystal Li–Ga solid alloys during lithiation, which have poor electronic conductivity compared to the Ga metal. Moreover, the volume change caused by the formation of such an alloy results in the possibility of pulverization and breakdown of the whole anode, making this strategy ineffective at unremittingly boosting the homogeneous distribution of Li seeds. Avoiding irreparable structural damage and maintaining the liquid nature are essential for hybrid alloy electrodes containing liquid metals.
3.1.2.2 Sodium potassium alloys. 
All electrode materials undergo volume changes during operation, and this also applies to NaK based alloys, an issue that deserves more attention. When pure NaK without a substrate acts as the anode (anolyte) and is kept in the liquid state at all times (in the Na content range from 9.2 to 58.2 wt%) during cycling, the volume change would be enormous, owing to its hostless nature.8 This result is quite similar to the volume variation in solid alkali metal anodes, including Li, Na, and K metals. When using a stable host substrate to contain pre-stored NaK, the volume change is accordingly decreased.


3.1.3 Interface formation on the surface of liquid metal. 
3.1.3.1 Gallium based materials. 
The solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) plays a vital role in the performance of LIBs. Ideally, the SEI serves as a passivation layer and is Li+ ion conducting but electrically insulating, allowing Li+ ions to effectively transfer across the electrode while preventing the further electrolyte reduction at the anode surface. The SEI film growth on the electrode along with incessant electrolyte decomposition will be observed if the electrons are not blocked, resulting in the consumption of Li (and electrolyte) and a decrease of the battery capacity. If insufficient transfer kinetics of Li+ ions is provided by the SEI layer, the whole impedance of the cell increases.
In general, when LIBs are employed with a graphite anode (with limited volume change) and ethylene carbonate (essential constituent), an SEI layer with 30 nm thickness that includes organic/inorganic compounds is formed.8 Nevertheless, the stability of this SEI layer is also limited, and the layer slowly fractures and reforms, thus eventually leading to loss of the electrolyte. Based on early explorations of LIBs, when the SEI layer (a liquid–electrolyte interface due to the liquid feature of Ga) is formed on the Ga LM surface, the breakage and reformation of the SEI layer are accelerated. Firstly, the extreme volume change of the Ga LM during repeated cycling processes leads to its extensive fracturing and pulverization, which provokes interfacial fluctuations on the Ga surface, followed by damage to the initially formed SEI layer. The exposed surface of the Ga LM further consumes the electrolyte to form a new SEI.8,76 Secondly, the formation of solid LixGa (due to the typical phase transition of the Ga LM) would result in the separation of the previously formed SEI layer from the surface of liquid Ga. This phase change is believed to be related to the inhomogeneous coverage of the SEI film. Thirdly, though great efforts have been made towards self-healing Ga LM, we still have very little idea of just what the exact process of self-healing is at the inner electrode. When regarded as a self-healing electrode, however, the old SEI layer on the Ga LM cannot fully cover the newly generated surface of the self-healing Ga LM due to the structural deformation (Fig. 5a).78 During the reversible Li+ intercalation into and extraction from liquid Ga, we know very less at the molecular level about the SEI films on the liquid surface – even how a well-functioning SEI works.
 Fig. 5  Potentially representative failure modes of RTLMBs. (a) Illustration of the principal failure reasons of Ga based LIBs when coupled with a high voltage cathode. At the anode, the organic ligands are required to disperse the Ga LM to obtain a sheet-like electrode. Non-uniform Ga distribution is achieved even by applying various mechanical approaches. During cycling, some Ga LM partially self-healed due to their strong surface tensions, while some others could be isolated by the binder or the formed SEI layer. Some active Ga LM would undergo a huge volume change, leaving a fractured structure after cycling. Moreover, electrolyte consumption can be attributed to the continuous SEI formation. At the cathode, a cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI) is formed by the decomposition of electrolytes. The problem of decomposition of cathode materials under high voltages should be avoided. (b) At the anode, only a limited amount of NaK alloy can be adsorbed by carbon substrates. The risk of squeezing out of the NaK alloy during battery operation cycles due to the over-dose can induce the anode crossover to the cathode during assembly. The strong activity of NaK results in the decomposition of electrolyte, which further induces SEI formation and NaK consumption to limit the long-term operation of NaK based RTLMBs. 
In addition, not only can Ga based LMs be corroded by organic-based electrolytes to form an SEI layer, but the SEI layer can also be formed when in contact with aqueous electrolytes. For instance, a previous report indicated that [Ga(OH)4]− was formed near the Ga surface in alkaline solutions, which led to negative charge aggregation at the Ga LM interface.70 Daeneke et al. that in the presence of acid media, the gallium was corroded, which was evidenced by the formation of Ga3+ on its surface. This corrosion has a significant influence on the performance of aqueous batteries containing Ga LM.
3.1.3.2 Sodium potassium alloys. 
Owing to the highly negative electrochemical potentials of K+/K and Na+/Na, virtually any liquid electrolyte can be reduced at the surface of NaK; this process accelerated when carbon substrates were used as matrices due to the improvement of the contact area. Before the NaK anode can become a viable electrode, formidable challenges need to be overcome, and one of the greatest challenges is the lack of any full understanding of the SEI layer since only a few reports were focused on this topic. A perfect SEI layer on the NaK surface is expected to be stable and homogeneous in composition and morphology; have acceptable ionic conductivity and electron-blocking capability; and exhibit strong mechanical performance. Yet many of them cannot be achieved in laboratory experiments or partly contradict the experimental results. Accordingly, the following problems regarding the SEI layer for NaK anodes are worth noting: (i) owing to the highly negative electrochemical potentials of both Na+/Na and K+/K,79 the composition of the SEI is more complicated than that in a single metal; (ii) since two charge carriers exist in NaK alloy, the selective ionic channels of the SEI layer will determine which charge carriers will be allowed to pass through; (iii) solvent selection was critical for the formation of a stable SEI that minimizes the degradation of active material, but what kind of solvent is preferred to form a stable SEI must be determined; (iv) how much carbon contributed to the SEI morphology and composition in a composite electrode if carbon substrates are selected; and (v) it must also be determined whether adequate protection of the NaK alloy is required to avoid parasitic reactions between NaK and the electrolyte.
The compositions of SEI films strongly depend on the electrolyte composition, which principally decides the primary nature of SEI films. Clearly, both solvents and salts are worthy of exploration. By exploring carbonate electrolytes, we would be able to replace the current Li anode with a dendrite free NaK anode. Importantly, the development of NaK in ether electrolytes would improve the lifetime and energy density of new systems (NaK–S and NaK–air).27,80 Also, the solubility of salts in a specific electrolyte determines the whole conductivity of the electrolyte, and the available choice of salts for electrolyte application is rather limited but important. In line with the above discussion, the electrolyte is critical to determining the physicochemical properties of the SEI layer.


3.1.4 Inferior energy density. 
3.1.4.1 Gallium based materials. 
Indeed, compared with previous HTLMB systems, the as-known Ga based materials in RTLMBs could provide a higher battery voltage due to their low reduction potential, thus providing a higher capacity and energy density. The capacity retention and capacity output abilities, however, are not comparable with those of prevalent candidates for next generation LIBs in portable devices. For example, as an alloy-type anode material, silicon has a much higher theoretical capacity (4200 mA h g−1) than Ga LM, although they both have similar drawbacks when used as electrodes. In terms of the liquid nature of Ga, if the concept of “self-healing” is truly achieved, other active components with high theoretical capacity (e.g., Si and Sn) can be used as assisting components in Ga anodes to prepare “self-healing” electrodes, affording an improved energy density.
The direct deployment of pure Ga LM, however, has rarely been reported due to the problems mentioned above. As can be seen, conductive species, organic ligands (used to disperse Ga LM), and binders are required in the traditional preparation of electrodes containing Ga based LMs, inducing a low energy density, even failing to take the liquid advantage when acting as an electrode.
3.1.4.2 Sodium potassium alloys. 
It is easy to speculate that the electrochemical mechanism of NaK alloys is complicated and a reasonable expectation is that K+ ions would preferentially serve as the main charge carriers, since K is more electroactive than Na.81 Nevertheless, the charge carrier selection, to some extent, is controlled by the SEI layer, cathode host, electrolyte, and discharge products. For example, Goodenough and co-workers discovered that the NaK alloy could work as a pure Na ion battery if the cathodes only provided Na+ pathways in Na ion-containing electrolyte. For cathodes that preferentially permit K ions, with suitable crystal parameters, such as K2MnFe(CN)6, MnFe(CN)6, and Na2MnFe(CN)6, K ions were selected as the carriers, while the Na ion electrolyte was gradually changed to a K+-containing electrolyte when the Na+-containing one was initially selected during cycling (Fig. 5b).66 Obviously, this charge carrier selection mechanism sacrifices some of the whole energy density of the battery. Fortunately, organic material-based cathode materials, such as sodium rhodizonate and 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride, were found to be suitable to concurrently allow both K+ and Na+ intercalations. In this design, the charge carrier was determined by both the initially selected electrolyte composition and the SEI components formed on the electrode surface. In other words, the Na+-containing SEI film can selectively permit Na+ transportation and act as a barrier for K+, as is the case for electrolytes containing K+. Yet, the low working window of organic-based cathodes cannot still match the ever-increasing demand for energy storage.
Meanwhile, the afore-discussed investigations always employed carbon matrixes along with excess electrolyte dose, which further limited the practical energy density of the whole battery.62,79,82 Notably, to satisfy the requirements of practical batteries, the mass and volume of electrolyte must be kept at a relatively low amount (such as 10 μL mA h−1 for LIBs) to achieve high energy density.83 This value must be kept much lower in NaK LMBs containing a substrate to absorb NaK. All in all, specific RTLMB configurations with different energy densities would be chosen depending on the market's requirements.


3.1.5 The concept of dendrite free NaK anodes. 
The intriguing concept of dendrite-free features is what that draws researchers’ attention in the field of NaK anodes. The concept remains to be tested, however, because: (i) because of liquid NaK must be kept in a range from 9.2 to 58.2 wt% Na, when with the continuous formation of SEI layers, the active components in NaK are constantly consumed to a critical point, which precludes the formation of liquid NaK, leading to an irreversible phase transfer from liquid to solid NaK alloy; and (ii) routine cell patterns and assembly methods may be inadequate for liquid NaK. In a composite electrode involving NaK and a substrate, if the pressure surpasses the degree that the substrate containing the liquid anode can bear, a soft short circuit may be caused by the possible crossover of the liquid NaK (Fig. 5b). The mechanical stability of the substrate after long-term operation should also be certified; and (iii) it also remains an open question if the liquid can be the kept phase during the whole duration of cycling. The concept of dendrite free NaK anodes should be carefully re-examined in full cell configurations that are operated within practical parameters.
In short, we should note that most issues discussed here are relevant to both room temperature LMs and many metal-based batteries. Nevertheless, due to the unique simultaneous “liquid” and “metal” nature of liquid metals, these problems may be more easily solved for RTLMBs, than for HTLMBs and all other common metal (solid) batteries. This would be perhaps one of the reasons that developments involving room temperature liquid metals are being revived.

3.2 Current progress

3.2.1 Gallium based alloys. 
3.2.1.1 Advances in overcoming the wettability issue. 
As discussed above, gaining control over the wetting behavior, to a significant extent, is the prerequisite for building RTLMBs. Previous studies indicate that the wettability of pristine gallium can be entirely altered by the naturally formed gallium oxide ‘skin’ on the Ga surface, decreasing the surface tension significantly (non-reactive wetting method).84–86 Similar to other metals (e.g. Zn and Al), when liquid gallium is exposed to oxygen (even as low as a few ppm), a self-limiting thin oxide layer gradually grows on the surface with an estimated thickness between 0.5 and 3 nm. The van der Waals force that emerges from this skin allows liquid metal droplets to wet substrates in their vicinity. Also, this gallium oxide prevents further oxidation of gallium metal, and in particular, it leads to non-Newtonian rheological properties, allowing it to be molded into non-spherical shapes that are infinitely deformable, which is beneficial to electrode preparation.70 Even in other gallium-based alloys (e.g. galinstan, eutectic Ga–In) with a high content of added species (e.g. In or Sn), the composition of this oxidized layer is hardly changed. Besides, electrochemical oxidation can reduce the surface tension even further, but only if electrochemical oxidation mainly occurs under suitably applied potentials that allow ion insertion through the oxide layer.70 Another typical modification involves removing the surface oxide from the liquid metal to react with the substrate, which could be classified as the reactive wetting approach.12 In this approach, by modulating the surface energy in a typical metallic material suitable for the varied atomic environment, the wetting behavior could be modified.49 For instance, intermetallic solid CuGa2 was obtained by electrochemical amalgamation of Ga onto Cu foil (the anodic current collector in batteries), allowing the Ga LM to easily wet the Cu surface.87 Ding et al. also found that good wettability behavior can be observed when Ga LM is in direct contact with a stainless steel current collector covered with a 50 nm layer of Au. Based on their experimental data and computational results, more binding sites were found for liquid metal atoms on the Au surface, leading to a stronger interaction and anchoring effect.88
In order to prepare nano- or microdroplets of Ga based LMs, two main approaches have been proved to be effective, which rely on constructing a physical barrier between adjacent droplets (Fig. 4). One method employs a natural oxide layer on the LM surface to separate individual liquid beads and prevent them from joining.89,90 The other elaborate method depends on the introduction of exotic organic ligands, which can tightly adsorb onto the LM surface. Common ligands usually consist of both anchoring groups (such as thiol, carboxylic acid, phosphonic acid, and amine) that attach themselves to the LM surface and tail groups (F, Cl, and CN) that can self-assemble in an ordered manner, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate65 and 3-mercapto-N-nonylpropionamide.72,78 This surface-coating polymer technique can also enhance the mechanical properties of the LMs.91 Importantly, mechanical techniques including sonication, blending, and water bath treatment have to be involved during the droplet preparation because the direct mixing of liquid droplets into elastomers can cause the formation of irregularly shaped droplets with non-uniform distributions. Notably, prolonged processing time leads to the formation of oxide flakes.70 Apart from this, surface-initiated radical polymerization was recently proved to be effective in forcing the LMs into uniform nanodroplets encapsulated using polymeric ligands, demonstrating an alternative way to separate the LMs.91 The organic ligands presented so far own insufficient electronic conductivity, so conductive polymers with limited use will be more helpful in terms of battery-related applications.92
3.2.1.2 Alleviating volume changes and improving SEI stability. 
Although relatively high-volume changes are a critical aspect of Ga based anodes, this issue is only just starting to be realized. To address this issue, Wu et al. applied carbon species (e.g. reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs))72,93 as electrode skeletons into LM-containing anode materials (Fig. 4). The tubular and flexible CNTs not only behaved as conductive networks, but also as buffer layers to alleviate the effect of volume change during the expansion/contraction of the LM particles. The rGO would be used as a thickener and stabilizer to keep the suspensions of Ga materials in a homogeneous state during the synthesis process. By further manipulating the electrolyte components, such as by adding fluoroethylene carbonate and vinylene carbonate, the so-called self-healing liquid metal-based anode could exhibit enhanced electrochemical performance. For instance, the Ga–Sn LM in a half-cell delivered high capacities of 775, 690, and 613 mA h g−1 at the rates of 200, 500, and 1000 mA g−1, respectively.72 In Wu et al.'s opinion, the alleviated volume changes and modified SEI layer (with additives to provide stabilized and polymeric SEIs)94 are responsible for such good performance. Two issues are needed to be considered in the future, however: one is that the “self-healing” ability is restricted by the added carbon species, and the other is the decreased specific capacity of the Ga–Sn anode due to the existence of carbon species.
Recently, Lee and co-workers concurrently modified the gallium electrode and the aqueous electrolyte to improve the SEI stability on the Ga surface in a soft and elastic metal–air battery.95 A eutectic Ga–In alloy (Ga:In = 9:1, wt%) was chosen to replace pristine Ga LM not only due to the ability of indium to prevent the corrosion of Ga in KOH electrolyte, but also its ability to form a liquid electrode with gallium at room temperature. Additionally, an elastic gel electrolyte (poly(acrylic acid)–KOH) and a carbon fiber yarn coated Pt array as a cathode were selected to assemble the battery. This kind of design was verified to have high flexibility and elasticity, demonstrating an excellent discharge performance retention of 98.87% even when the battery was stretched by up to 100%. Although this battery is a primary cell owing to the large overpotential required for the oxygen evolution reaction during charging, the direct application of Ga based LMs paves a new way for exploring energy-related devices. Most recently, by changing the cathode electrode to a MnO2 cathode, a rechargeable battery with a dramatically decreased overpotential was developed by Liu et al.96 Also, Ca2+ additive was introduced into the eutectic Ga–In alloy (EGaIn) anode to further reduce the parasitic reactions with the aqueous electrolyte and stabilize the SEI film. The corrosion measurements showed that the EGaIn (75 wt% gallium) anode could well tolerate the KOH electrolyte (up to 6 M) corrosion. The assembled battery finally exhibited an exceptionally high areal specific capacity (3.8 mA h cm−2) and excellent rechargeability over 100 charging cycles with good mechanical flexibility to support 100% tensile strain, demonstrating its feasibility for application in wearable electronics. The results demonstrated that stretchable batteries involving raw Ga based LMs are rechargeable and exhibit electrochemical performance comparable with other battery technologies in not only Li-based organic–electrolyte systems, but also Zn-based alkaline systems.
3.2.1.3 Advances regarding metal batteries. 
There have been several attempts to apply Ga LM alloys in Li metal as composite anodes during the past few decades, and the GaInSnZn LM is quite attractive because it has the advantages of lithiophilic behavior, non-toxicity, and a low melting point (<30 °C). For example, Wei et al. found that this pristine GaInSnZn LM could be directly used as a less-reactive passivation layer on Li metal to relieve the corrosion and stabilize the Li metal.97 A stabilized Li-based alloy framework tightly attached by plenty of submicron-scale grains was finally formed on the surface of the Li metal, without any exfoliation or mechanical rupture even under bending and folding, through the spontaneous reaction between metallic Li and the LM at room temperature. Importantly, the less-reactive composite anode provided a stable SEI interface, even in a more corrosive carbonate-based electrolyte. The synthesis was conducted in the presence of air, however, so that an oxide layer formed on the LM surface to change the wettability between the LM and the Li surface. Considering the speedy reactions between active Li and other species (for example, water or CO2) from air, safety issues arise during large-scale application.
To resolve this problem, it is proposed to use lithiophilic free standing MXene frameworks (MF) coupled with the GaInSnZn LM to regulate Li nucleation.98 Fortunately, the poor wettability of the MF with respect to the liquid metal, induced by the rough surface of the MF with irregular wrinkles and the high surface tension of the LM, could be eliminated through the introduction of a small brush. Moreover, this indicated that amorphous liquid metal nucleation seeds were stable against the MXene and could induce isotropic nucleation and uniform growth of Li, establishing an even potential gradient through the anode. The as-coated anode demonstrated a stable average coulombic efficiency (98.22%, 0.5 mA cm−2 with 0.5 mA h cm−2) in half-cells and long stable cyclability in a full cell assembled with a LiFePO4 cathode. The better electrochemical performance was also analyzed and found to be due to the uniform Li deposition induced by the decreased side reaction and the stabilized SEI layer. As confirmed by this approach, MXene frameworks are suitable for the substrate to regulate the Li nucleation behavior owing to their inherent lithiophilic feature; however, the following concerns must be taken into consideration: (i) traditional free standing MXene films with densely compacted nanosheets offer a limited space for liquid metal absorption, and the external force leads to non-uniform coating; and (ii) whether this kind of MXene stack can effectively withstand the large volume stress from the liquid metal during the stripping and plating process is ambiguous.
Apart from its use as an anode coating, the GaInSnZn LM can be either coated on the Cu surface87 or on the polymer separator99 to regulate the Li nucleation behavior in the Li metal battery. No matter what substrates apply to Li associate with Ga LM, a major challenge is the possibility of an unevenly distributed product involving liquid metals during Li plating/stripping. For instance, Deng and co-authors proposed a self-organized composite anode, called Li/LixLMy, which was derived from an alloy of Li and galinstan LM (LixLMy).99 The LixLMy alloy served as a sheath and induced the deposition of Li metal underneath the LixLMy matrix. As such, the Li composite anode enabled unprecedentedly high stability. Importantly, in their preparation, the LM was blade-coated onto a commercially available polypropylene separator under ambient conditions, indicating that this technic can be easily extended to large scale. Nevertheless, from their discussion, it is clear that the nucleation between the Li metal and SnIn sites was more preferred compared with the Ga sites, which further induced the isolation of SnInLi clusters from the GaLi matrix during continuous cycling. The potential influence on performance caused by the severe volume change of galinstan should also be examined. It can be therefore deduced that the postmortem study is necessary to check if the LM detaches from the separator, in a conclusive failure for this strategy.99
Overall, with continuous efforts directed towards design strategies and fabrication technologies, various approaches have been developed in attempts to overcome the existing problems in gallium-based batteries. Some of them have been proven to be successful; for instance, adding exotic ligands and modifying the physicochemical properties of substrates both support an increased Ga LM wettability towards the substrate and afford a simplified sheet-like electrode preparation.12 The use of carbonaceous species or other matrixes alleviates the volume change of Ga-based LMs during the charge–discharge process in batteries. A stable SEI layer coating on the electrode surface can be obtained by the effective engineering of electrolytes and electrodes.8 In addition, because the liquid Ga LM has a high affinity for Zn, Al, Mg, and Ca, it shows promise in tackling the long-term challenges associated with these metal batteries.
Despite the bright prospects of Ga based alloy anodes, critical challenges remain before they can be applied in practical batteries. For the application of Ga based LMs in LIBs, there is no generalized way to tackle all associated problems, and multiple strategies should be accordingly involved. In terms of the inferior wetting behavior of Ga LM to other interfaces, both non-reactive and reactive wetting methods are the main choices, yet non-reactive approaches will be more preferred duo to their facile production and the amount of electrochemically active Ga based LMs. In order to alleviate the volume changes of Ga LM, although the applied matrix is porous, lightweight, and flexible, the Ga LM loses the advantages in terms of volumetric and gravimetric densities, and especially may lose its liquid nature, making the self-healing concept ambiguous. Notably, the implementation of the self-healing electrode containing Ga LM should carefully consider the influence of the non-self-healing binder and conductive additives on their real self-healing ability. It seems that only flexible batteries with aqueous electrolyte can directly use raw Ga LM as electrodes; however, the energy density and the reversibility are far from enabling their effectiveness and applicability. Although the required value of the energy density for commercial electric vehicles has been increased to 500 W h kg−1, it will likely be difficult to achieve such a value for flexible and stretchable batteries, even though having competitive energy densities are badly needed in such wearable electronics. Finding suitable electrodes is highly demanded for addressing these problems. Besides, the delamination of active materials during stretching and seamless device integration are also the most important technical hurdles facing these deformable batteries. For the application of Ga LM in Li metal batteries, there is still uncertainty about what the critical role of liquid metals is in this configuration and how to take advantage of LMs in the design. It remains to be seen whether the Ga LM can be regarded as a self-healing component during discharge/charge, in accordance with previous expectations.


3.2.2 Sodium potassium alloys. 
In contrast to Ga LM, most central questions about the wetting behavior of NaK alloy with a specific substrate and the formed SEI layer on the surface of NaK remain unanswered. Also, considering the differences in ionicity, size, and reactivity among Li+, Na+, and K+ ions, the wetting behaviors of Na and K on the surface of a substrate should be considered, and whether they are distinctly different from that of Li should be explored. It is also important to investigate which SEI components are most efficient in stabilizing Na or K plating, and what their physicochemical properties are. Additionally, it has to be critically studied whether the mature technologies enabling reversible Li plating can be extended to NaK. In this part, we aim to address some of these fundamental challenges for harnessing the wetting behavior of NaK and the behavior of the SEI.
3.2.2.1 Improving wettability. 
The search for a functional solid-state electrolyte is beneficial for the commercialization of NaK based RTLMBs because a raw NaK anode could be directly employed as an electrode in such configurations. Although Na-BASE is not applicable, to achieve this goal, a K-BASE (K-β′′-Al2O3) electrolyte was developed by Baclig et al. in 2018, which was robust with a minimal exchange of Na ions in contact with the NaK anode over 7200 h at room temperature, so that only around 1.5% substitution was identified even at an elevated temperature of 300 °C.52 Although there was a well-documented poor wetting of the substrate, in this work, by NaK at room temperature, the authors further discovered that the inferior wetting behavior did not have any detrimental effect on the kinetics of ionic transport. This was mainly associated with the slight pressurization within the NaK compartment that caused the NaK to contact K-BASE regardless of wetting at ambient pressure (similar to the effect of pressure-driven infiltration of liquid metal), which was further evidenced by the corresponding electrochemical impedance testing. Moreover, the poor wetting behavior could be further improved by the pre-treatment of K-BASE at 1000 °C before being used in cells, with the aim of removing detrimental species, such as carbonate and water molecules, adsorbed onto the K-BASE surface during synthesis. In addition, the assembled flow battery provided an OCV of 3.1–3.4 V, and power density tests showed promising maximum power densities of 65 mW cm−2 at 22 °C and >100 mW cm−2 at 57 °C, where both electrodes were separated by a 330 mm K-BASE. By coupling it with an aqueous bromine/bromide posolyte, an OCV of ∼4 V and an energy density of ∼170 W h L−1 could be acquired, which emerged as promising characteristics for grid-scale energy storage.
In terms of the preparation of sheet-like electrodes, Xue et al. proposed a non-reactive wetting approach, that is, the vacuum infiltration technique, to physically force NaK into various porous substrates (e.g., Cu, Al, and Ni foams) at room temperature. Nevertheless, these membranes were very thick, which not only decreased the whole energy density, but also increased the concerns about short-circuits during cell assembly due to the squeezing out of the NaK alloy from the metal foams.100 Accordingly, lighter and slimmer carbon materials with abundant pores are preferred, although previous studies indicated that an elevated temperature (around 420 °C) was needed to impregnate NaK into their carbon paper to enhance wettability.62 Therefore, effective techniques for immobilization of NaK into carbon substrates at room temperature are desperately needed when safety and economic issues are considered.
Inspired by the effectiveness of reactive wetting strategies, Zhang and co-workers discovered that NaK could easily wet carbon fiber cloth (CFC) at room temperature, by the introduction of a solid K2O layer.82 Due to the poor wetting behavior of NaK on the CFC surface, the fabrication involved two facile processes: firstly, the Na and K molten metals were separately pressed into the CFC; then, these two sheets were pressed and merged to induce the alloying reaction between Na and K at room temperature, where potassium oxide was generated by taking advantage of a trace amount of oxygen in the glovebox. As expected, the K2O layer with a thickness of 30 nm provided a stable NaK alloy–solid K2O layer–electrolyte interface, which was believed to possess a strong self-healing capability during the charge and discharge processes. The K2O layer could realize self-healing with the help of a strong surface tension of the Na–K alloy, and could recover itself by chemical bonding. Nevertheless, such an oxide layer was suspended with loose coverage on the NaK surface, where the NaK may be squeezed out from the dispersed boundary among the oxide layers during the battery assembly. Very recently, Zhang et al. discovered another reactive wetting approach in which the NaK alloy could be intrinsically infused into the fibrous carbon paper with homogeneous distribution at room temperature, by the formation of K-based graphite intercalation compounds (K-GICs, that is KC8), as shown in Fig. 6a.80 Due to the much faster diffusion kinetics of potassium than sodium into the carbon fiber matrices, the K-GICs could be easily achieved, which could improve the wettability and thus induce the infusion of the Na–K alloy. The GICs were also responsible for the fast electron and mass transportations, leading to a stable electrochemical performance, especially in full cells (where an open circuit voltage of 4.2 V after charging could be achieved in a pouch-type cell and it functioned stably for over 60 hours). So far, different contact features between liquid NaK and carbonaceous objects (e.g. carbon cloth and carbon paper) have been observed at room temperature, so a better understanding of the fundamental principles is needed.
 Fig. 6  (a) XRD patterns of carbon paper, Na and K metals and the NaK-GIC-C electrode (the * labeled peak is related to the protective Mylar film). Reproduced with permission.80 Characterization of the PCP, T-PCP, and HCP samples: (b) typical FT-IR spectra, (c) Raman shifts, (d) XRD pattern, and (e–i) the corresponding photographs of the carbon substrates (left), the process of NaK absorption on carbon substrates (middle), and the final state of NaK on carbon substrates (right). The MXene film was obtained by a direct vacuum filtration process from the exfoliated MXene solution. (j) Pristine graphite is intrinsically sodi-/potassiophilic, and the NaK can penetrate the graphite layers underneath the top surface through the grain boundaries and/or in-plane defects of the graphite layers based on a previous investigation,100 while partially functional groups (such as O and N) or water/carbon dioxide molecules adsorbed onto the surface would act as wetting barriers for the diffusion of NaK alloy. (k) Schematic illustration of the design of a NaK-scaffold composite. The NaK infusion into porous materials can be engineered by the introduction of sodi-/potassiophilic coatings (such as Si and ZnO). 
In our view, owing to the high activity of NaK alloy towards graphite, its infusion into porous carbon substrates should be more spontaneous at room temperature,101 and would be boosted if sodi-/potassiophilic sites were anchored onto the carbon surface, by using co-contributors such as metal and metal oxides, which have already been demonstrated to effectively improve lithiophilicity.102 Nevertheless, the infusion process is quite difficult at room temperature according to previous studies,12,62,82,100 which may be possibly attributed to the varied surface properties among these carbon matrices. In order to explain this phenomenon, commercial carbon substrates consisting of tremendously porous and largely graphitic carbon, such as carbon fibers, papers and felts, should be investigated. Additionally, it should be carefully studied to discover what the diffusion kinetics of NaK are indeed for such substrates. The surfaces of most of the commercial carbon substrates can be kept in their pristine state of highly graphitic behavior, or specifically designed to be hydrophilic by further introducing functional groups (oxygen-containing) or designed to become hydrophobic by using materials such as a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) coating.103 The hydrophobic and hydrophilic coatings can have great influences on the NaK infusion.
Considering the example of PTFE coated carbon papers (PCPs), we found that the successful removal of the PTFE layer can alter the behavior from non-absorption to absorption of NaK at room temperature. Firstly, the PCPs were pre-handled at 380 °C (since the melting point of PTFE is 350 °C) under Ar gas for 30 min after purchase to obtain T-PCPs, and afterwards, these T-PCPs were directly used to absorb liquid NaK without further treatment (such as vacuum infiltration or heat treatment). As shown in Fig. 6b and c, both the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum and Raman shifts indicate the presence of PTFE in the PCPs. However, after the heat treatment, no obvious peaks were indexed to PTFE in the T-PCPs. Furthermore, NaK could be rapidly adsorbed by the T-PCPs within several seconds, leaving a smooth and shiny surface (Fig. 6f). Each of the T-PCPs could be loaded with NaK alloy up to 32 μL cm−2. In contrast, the liquid NaK droplet tends to ball up and avoid contact with the surfaces of the PCPs (Fig. 6e), suggesting an unfavorable wettability, which was mainly attributed to the sodi-/potassiophobic behavior of the PTFE that covered the PCPs.
In the case of the purchased hydrophilic carbon papers (HCPs, Fig. 6g), poor wetting behaviour at room temperature was also observed, very similar to the results of previous investigations, which found that molten Li cannot successfully wet carbon nanofibers104 and porous carbon papers101 at room temperature. Importantly, the functional groups are deduced to be one of the reasons why the poor wetting behaviour of Li infusion is observed in both carbon nanofibers and porous carbon papers. A trace amount of air in the carbon substrates (containing water, carbon dioxide, and oxygen due to their porous structure) and functional groups would react with molten Li and form Li oxides, carbonates, or nitrides. The ionic transfer channels and pathways would be therefore blocked by those impurities, resulting in poor wetting behavior at room temperature. It can be expected from the wetting behavior of Li infusion that, although graphite is intrinsically sodi-/potassiophilic and is beneficial to the diffusion of NaK alloy, there are surface contaminants that pin the contact-line motion and cause contact-angle hysteresis (Fig. 6j).101 These reasons may also be responsible for the non-absorption of NaK in the HCPs at room temperature. As can be seen in Fig. 6c, the intense peak of the D band in Raman shift indicated a low degree of graphitization, which further showed the existence of defects in the structure. After processing the HCPs at 200 °C for 60 min to obtain pre-treated HCPs (T-HCPs) and vacuuming in the antechamber for 30 min before transferring them into the glovebox, an improved wetting behavior was observed at room temperature (Fig. 6h). This result should possibly be attributed to the successful removal of adsorbed air and/or partially functional groups.
Moreover, two obvious peaks were assigned to the K-GICs (KC8) in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of T-PCPs with adsorbed NaK, while no peak was found in the sample of T-HCPs with adsorbed NaK, demonstrating the low content of GICs during the NaK alloy infusion (Fig. 6d). This was possibly attributable to the varied potassiophilic properties caused by the different degrees of graphitization. Importantly, the XRD pattern of the Na-GICs showed no peaks in either sample. The thermodynamically unstable nature of the Na counterparts and/or the undetectable concentration of Na-GICs are speculated to be the reasons.105,106 In addition, although the potassium/sodium metal consumption to form the GICs in the T-HCPs is negligible and the T-HCPs own the advantage when considering the energy density, the T-HCPs were believed to be suitable for the porous substrate for NaK infusion. Firstly, the presence of GICs indicates a good wetting behaviour of the selected porous objects. Secondly, the GICs exhibit fast diffusion kinetics, good wettability, and superior conductivity.12,101 Thirdly, the charge carriers located at GICs should be reversible during cycling, which has a little influence on the energy density. More importantly, the porous structure will alleviate the huge volume changes of NaK during cycling, leading to an improved electrochemical performance.
Basically, successful scaffold materials in Li confinement can be directly applied to NaK anodes, but with a specifically functionalized sodi-/potassiophilic sites, such as metals, oxides, and sulfides (Fig. 6k), especially should be emphasized on the capability of mechanical toughness.107 The dimensional structures of the promising candidates should not be densely packed, however, because the reactive wetting behavior requires sufficient absorption or reactive sites on the substrate. For example, a two-dimensional (2D) MXene (Ti3C2Tx, the typically studied MXene) with high electronic conductivity (∼104 S cm−1) is an ideal matrix for NaK confinements. Conventional freestanding MXene films acquired by vacuum filtration, however, exhibits a decreased number of achievable sodi-/potassiophilic sites, finally offering inferior NaK wettability (Fig. 6i). As reported previously, the introduction of a 3D framework (such as melamine foam) to build up a porous structure has been demonstrated as an effective route.107
3.2.2.2 Understanding the NaK SEI layer. 
The electrolyte has a significant influence on SEI formation in NaK based systems. For example, in an electrolyte consisting of 1 M sodium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (NaFSI) in ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate/fluoroethylene carbonate (EC/DEC/FEC), a small amount of NaK alloy was formed in situ on the K metal anode due to the formation of a functional Na+ permeable SEI layer (e.g. NaF). No NaK formation was detected in two other electrolytes containing NaPF6 and NaClO4 salts, respectively, because of the lack of such a layer.108 Building on this concept, one can deduce that the FSI−-containing species is more favored (as will be fully discussed later), and again, the mechanism of the SEI layer formed has a dominant role in the selection of charge carriers. The remaining open questions are mainly related to whether this electrolyte suffices to provide ample Na+ transport and exchange at the electrodes in order to generate enough NaK liquid metals. Crucially, Guo et al. further extended this concept to build a hybrid-ion NaK RTLMB with a lithium intercalation-based cathode (NMC, Li2Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2) and a hybrid-ion electrolyte containing both K and Li-ion salts (LiTFSI:KTFSI in EC:DEC). With the dendrite-free NaK LM, the full cell (paired with NMC) delivered superior electrochemical performance in galvanostatic charge–discharge tests, which could be comparable to lithium cells in terms of capacity, with a more stable anode than the Li anode after 250 cycles.21 As expected, both Li and K ions serve as charge carriers to separately allow Li intercalation into the cathode and K stripping deposition on the anode. Na ions would not be involved during the electrochemical process, but their involvement in other processes is unavoidable. Specifically, from the spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve results, the whole SEI layer was identified as consisting of both a contact SEI and a cycled SEI. The contact SEI was readily formed from the Na+-containing components at a low current density, while the K+/Li+-containing parts existed in both the contact SEI and cycled SEI at high current rates. On the one hand, the formation of a contact SEI on the top of the anode surface in an alkali metal battery is inevitable, which is caused by the rapid reaction between the reactive NaK metal and the chemically unstable electrolyte. This will be more drastic for NaK owing to the increased contact area when a carbon matrix is introduced. Although stable Na ion channels in the contact SEI layer could cause the stripping of Na ions derived from NaK into the electrolyte, the electrolyte decomposition could be significant due to the large overpotential at high rates, so that the previously constructed pathways for Na+ transportation are finally blocked.
As might be expected, the composition of solvents in the electrolyte is important to the SEI layer formation because most of the organic components in the SEI layer are derived from the decomposition of solvents. Recently, the local distribution of the SEI layer over the anode surface was identified in an all-liquid NaK‖1 M NaClO4 FEC/dimethoxyethane (DME) (5:95, wt%)‖Ga–In battery at room temperature.88 The time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy analysis provided clear evidence of the structure of the SEI layer, which was attributed to the traditional mosaic mode; that is, the outer surface of the SEI layer was comprised of an integrated organic–inorganic SEI layer (C2HO−, NaCOH−, C2OF−, NaF2−, and KF2−), while the inner layer close to the NaK alloy mainly contained inorganic products (NaClO−). In their work for battery designs, only Na ions served as the charge carriers to form the dominant Na-containing SEI layer, possibly owing to the electrochemical inactivity of Ga toward K ions. Altogether, this interesting study makes quite an effort to enhance our understanding of the composition and chemical stability of SEI layers. It pays attention to the issue that the crystalline grains that are formed, within an ideal SEI layer, must be distributed uniformly to avoid both the spatial variation in ionic conductivity and the potential electrolyte consumption. The SEI layers with such a mosaic mode would possibly feature high porosity with an uneven grain distribution, however, also making them highly fragile and incapable of avoiding continuous electrolyte consumption (Fig. 7a and b). A similar report also attributed the drastic decomposition of solvent in the electrolyte (e.g. in 0.5 M KPF6 in EC/DEC) when in contact with NaK alloy to the instability of the formed SEI layer.62
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrolyte consumption during NaK cycling. (b) Schematic depicting the function of the alloy-protected NaK–carbon paper sheet, which can guide the homogeneous deposition of an SEI and reduce the parasitic reactions (the purple color indicates the functional alloy). (c) Cycling performance with lean and flooded electrolytes. (d) XRD and XPS characterization results of the protected NaK anode. (e–g) Comparisons of cycling performance between bare NaK and protected NaK anodes in symmetric batteries. 
3.2.2.3 Criterion of electrolyte selection. 
Looking ahead, we expect that new solvent–salt combinations should be a key area of research focus for achieving stable NaK–metal cycling. Understanding how to select a suitable electrolyte for NaK LMBs is necessary when considering achieving sufficient stability of the SEI film, and some components, such as solvents, salts, additive types, and their concentrations, may routinely determine the physicochemical properties of SEI layers.109 In the case of salts, most reported studies have so far employed one or more of these simple Na+ or K+ salts, but the highly recommended compositions for LM anodes are FSI− or bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide anion (TFSI−) containing solutes. Specifically, ClO4− anions with the high oxidation state of chlorine(VII) with their safety concerns and PF6− with low solubility are not recommended for use with NaK alloy based on existing findings.110 FSI− or TFSI− ions have been proved to be safe, thermally stable, and highly conducting. However, attention should be paid to possible corrosion of the cathode current collector (Al foil). Fluorine functional group containing additives, such as FEC, are also encouraged to be applied to improve SEI stability.26
Organic solvents, especially esters and ethers, have so far been the prevailing choice in batteries.6,109,110 As confirmed in Li metal batteries, ether electrolytes can realize much better cycling stability of Li metal anodes compared with ester electrolytes since the main reduction products for ethers on the Li metal are ROLi species (where R = alkyl) and flexible oligomers, which provide a more flexible SEI layer compared with that formed in the ester-based electrolytes. The ether-based solvents are highly flammable, however, which, together with their limitation in terms of chemical instability against oxidation (>4 V), hinders their practical applications in high voltage cathodes. In the case of NaK alloy, in principle, the ether electrolytes are only encouraged for applications in NaK–O2 and NaK–sulfur batteries with moderate voltage windows. Another limitation is the possible incompatibility between NaK and ether-based electrolytes, which has been observed in TEGDME solvents, even though mixed solvents (DME/FEC 95:5, wt%) were proved to be effective.88 Thus, attention should be paid before directly employing ether solvents in NaK battery systems, especially their potential hazardous effect on electrochemical performance. Finally, protonic solvent contamination during the ether production process in most ether-based solvents must be thoroughly eliminated to minimize possible parasitic reactions. Alternatively, because of their excellent stability against oxidation on electrode surfaces and donicity, esters are the main solvents in Li based batteries, especially for EC and linear carbonates. EC can dissolve Li salts very well due to its high dielectric constant, but has a high viscosity and poor wettability. Linear esters can decrease the viscosity and improve the ionic conductivity of ester electrolytes. Therefore, esters are still the first choice in electrolyte compositions for NaK based LMBs. Nevertheless, the exact composition and structure of the formed SEI layer in esters for NaK LMBs remain uncertain, so it is still challenging to provide a universal rule for the describing the relationship between the electrolyte formulation and the SEI structure.
It should be noted that the afore-described frequently used electrolytes are flammable and most certainly responsible for fire and thermal runaway in failed batteries. Recently, flame-retardant or nonflammable electrolytes have attracted special interest for next-generation LIBs, and this concept would be even more suitable for NaK LMBs because of the potential hazard of possible NaK liquid leakage. One emerging solvent candidate is alkyl phosphate ester,52 although the phosphate ester reacts vigorously with metal, which causes poor cycling stability of the cell. To solve this problem, mature technologies for LIBs, such as those involving high contents of co-solvents or all-fluorinated electrolytes, should be applied. Most salts and solvents in LIBs are versatile, so they may be suitable for NaK LMBs.
Recently, superconcentrated electrolytes have drawn much attention in LIBs due to the improvement in their electrochemical stability toward the cathodes, anodes, and SEI films, which is attributed to the competitive solvation of Li+ by solvent molecules and anions.111 When superconcentrated electrolytes are applied, the much higher anion population in the electrolyte disturbs the Li+ solvation sheath structure, so that the interphase chemistry is no longer solvent derived (ester or ether) but originates from anion reduction as well. This result is significant for the interfacial/interphasial properties and does not exist in diluted salt systems, which can also be extended to NaK anodes. Indeed, it was found that superconcentrated FSI− based electrolytes in NaK LMBs were effective in promoting excellent electrochemical performance. However, sufficient knowledge regarding interfacial characteristics is yet to become available,12 and future work on the topic is urgently required. Notably, superconcentrated electrolytes have the drawbacks of high viscosity and costs, low ionic conductivity, and poor wettability. Accordingly, localized superconcentrated electrolytes containing fluorinated ethers will possibly be more promising as a trade-off between advantages and drawbacks.
The compositions of liquid electrolytes also have a substantial influence on the separator, which plays a crucial role in maintaining electrode integrity and enabling batteries to exhibit excellent and stable electrochemical performance.112 For example, Celgard is the most common choice for LIBs because of its outstanding electrochemical stability, especially its stable interfacial characteristics and homogeneous ionic transport in common electrolytes. Most recent studies on sodium ion batteries (SIBs) have focused on glass fiber separators; however, due to the varied composition in the electrolytes for SIBs, the choice of separator is still not optimized. In SIBs, it is generally believed that cyclic solvents should be chosen for higher concentrations in electrolytes because Na+ is preferentially solvated with the cyclic solvents to achieve sufficient solubility, but these cyclic solvents are incompatible with polyolefin separators. Glass fiber is chosen due to its superior wettability with the Na+ containing electrolytes that are employed. Therefore, one should not expect a simple transition of the knowledge regarding previous separators to NaK counterparts, although the former still have a heavy influence on the development of the latter. Previous studies indicate that both Celgard12,21,62,88,108 and glass fiber79,82 were functional as separators during the testing of symmetric NaK LMBs, although the selection process for the separator should be strongly related to the preferred electrolyte composition and concentration.
The electrolyte is the essential part of NaK LMBs and has an impact on the SEI nanostructures, the SEI thickness, and the composition and distribution of the SEI, regardless of which separator is chosen. Besides the possibility of side-reactions occurring with the electrolyte due to the chemical (electrical) instability of NaK, there are many other intrinsic issues related to the properties of the SEI layer, such as whether there are lean electrolyte conditions, the ion–ion and ion–solvent interactions, the anode volume expansion, the (de)solvation dynamics in a hybrid electrolyte, and many other parameters. A detailed understanding of these influences is helpful to better comprehend the key role of the SEI layer in the development of better NaK LMBs. Meanwhile, with regard to the morphology, formation mechanism, components, and properties of the SEI film on NaK metals, detailed information should be obtained by in situ characterization, including cryo-microscopies, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy. A better understanding of the SEI is both helpful for rational design of both electrolytes and NaK anodes, and also a critical research area for providing highly efficient deposition of metallic Na or K.
3.2.2.4 Proof-of-concept in stabilizing NaK anodes by interface engineering. 
Apart from the electrolyte engineering strategy, adequate protection of the NaK alloy is crucial in rationally designing a robust SEI layer to minimize electrolyte consumption. As gained from the knowledge of LIBs, an unstable SEI layer, Li dendrite growth, and the sequential formation of dead Li lead to the continuous consumption of electrolyte.113 Acquiring a corresponding understanding of electrolyte consumption in NaK LMBs has been ignored by previous research studies, largely, because the NaK electrode was generally accepted to be a dendrite-free anode. The electrolyte consumption was also believed to be neglected due to the presence of the carbon substrate. Nevertheless, it has recently been found that the electrolyte consumption may affect the cycling stability of the NaK alloy anode. Fig. 7a schematically illustrates the potential electrolyte consumption during the K plating/stripping process. When plating, the K ion flux in the liquid electrolyte moves toward the substrate under the electric field, and electrolyte loss may occur due to the cracked or pulverized structure of the SEI layer, leading to the reformation of the SEI. This further results in battery failure once the electrolyte is exhausted.
To confirm this approach, the effect of different electrolyte loadings (1 M potassium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (KFSI) in EC/DEC) on the cycling stability of T-PCPs with adsorbed NaK was investigated, as shown in Fig. 7c. The mass per unit area of each NaK alloy in T-PCPs was 0.03 g cm−2. For the cell using lean electrolyte (an amount of 5 μL cm−2), the overpotential significantly increased with extended cycling time, and then the cell suddenly failed after running for about 300 h. After refilling the electrolyte (another 20 μL cm−2), the overpotential for continued cycling was back to normal values after 1600 hours running (inset of Fig. 7c). For the other two cells with flooded electrolyte that operated at the same current density, more stable voltage hysteresis without obvious oscillation was observed. Based on these results, the cell failure mode could be attributed to the electrolyte depletion. There are three possible reasons proposed to be responsible for this failure: (i) the uneven ionic conductivity due to the inhomogeneous distribution of grains in the SEI layer; (ii) cracks of the SEI layer induced by volume changes of NaK; and (iii) the large specific surface area for the SEI layer formation due to the presence of the three-dimensional carbon substrate.
Since NaK alloy is highly catalytic towards unstable SEI growth, a promising method to stabilize the interface is to introduce an artificial barrier between the metal and the electrolyte, which minimizes or altogether prevents their contact. For instance, a K2O layer applied on the NaK surface was believed to prevent severe chemical corrosion by EC/DEC electrolytes,82 while the protected NaK electrode exhibited lower hysteresis, enhanced cycling stability, and higher coulombic efficiency in both symmetric cells and full cells, while the amount of electrolyte was in excess, when around 1.6 μL mg−1 electrolyte was applied.
Inspired by a valid approach in LIBs114 and as a proof-of-concept, a protective layer was introduced on a T-PCP adsorbed with NaK electrode (T-PCP-NaK) before cycling to resist the corrosion due to the electrolyte. Also, this protective film was believed to improve the interfacial stability between the electrolyte and the NaK anode (Fig. 7b). The approach was facile and realized through a direct reduction (dip-reacted strategy for 30 seconds in the glovebox) of the indium chlorides in tetrahydrofuran solution by T-PCP-NaK at room temperature. Afterwards, the protected T-PCP-NaK was characterized by the required instruments. As shown in the XRD pattern in Fig. 7d, the film consisted of metal chlorides (KCl and NaCl), indium metal, and KxIny alloy. From the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results, the main peak located at 442.3 eV indicated that the In-based alloy phase was formed on the surface of the modified NaK alloy (Fig. 7d). Interestingly, two dominant peak shifts were observed in the K 2p spectrum, which exhibited the successful formation of the In-based alloy and KCl. Notably, although the metal and the alloy are electronic conductors, the co-production of insulating chloride rendered the composite film resistive. Meanwhile, the KCl and KxIny alloy can possibly serve as ionic conductors, so that K migration could also take place through them. In this work, stripping/plating measurements were carried out in symmetric cells to validate the role of the protective layer, as shown in Fig. 7e–g. The protected T-PCP-NaK cell in a lean electrolyte system (0.08 μL mg−1) delivered flat voltage plateaus during the plating and stripping processes with a low voltage hysteresis of around 0.2 V, which remained steady without obvious oscillation even when exceeding 1000 h of cycling. Even when operating at a high rate, the T-PCP-NaK with a protected foil showed a very stable voltage profile, which proves that the protection layer is effective in stabilizing ionic electrodeposition. It can be expected from such results that the alloy layers are less reactive with the electrolyte than bare T-PCP-NaK due to their lower chemical potential.114 Apart from this strategy, other useful approaches, such as the atomic layer deposition-assisted method,115 electrostatic interaction,116 use of self-healing protective films,117 multifunctional complementary gradient protection,118 and use of other alloy metals (such as Li doped alloys),119,120 may be helpful to deal with the NaK interface issues.
In short, for NaK alloys, there is a need to further advance investigations and for systematic studies in order to understand metal battery stability; their compatibility with intercalation-type cathodes (e.g., Na-based or K-based layered materials),121 chalcogen electrodes,122,123 oxygen electrodes,22 carbon dioxide electrodes,124 and some of the most intriguing materials in LIB chemistry;125–127 and the potential for NaK leakage during battery assembly, especially due to the pressure effect. These parameters are needed to exhibit in detail the practical conditions in real NaK metal batteries with high-energy-density and long-term stability. Helpful techniques and appropriate experiments are highly desirable to quantify the formation of dead K and dead Na, so as to evaluate their negative effects on dendrite-free features, performance, and fatal safety issues. The safety concerns related to the liquid NaK alloy are more serious than those of either one of them, and the alloy has a quicker and sharper reaction with oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and moisture. The risks of fire and explosion during cell assembly and battery leakage under some conditions need to be paid more attention. Additionally, significant suppression of electrolyte consumption and significant interface reactions could be gradually achieved by optimizing the synergetic effects of all the required components in a full cell, rather than simple optimization of individual components. Also, with the help of massive research efforts on liquid–metal batteries, problems for the development of solid-state electrolyte based batteries are being solved, which have been hindered by many intrinsic limitations, including the incompatibility between solid electrolytes and solid metal anodes, which resulted in the progress of many aspects of this topic and will continue to do so in the future.14 Although there remain numerous challenges concerning the development of functional NaK cells, the promising results of some chemistries call for realistic assessments of figures-of-merit for practical applications, to meet market demands in terms of energy density, safety, and cost-effectiveness.

4. Conclusions
In the past few decades, as one of the beyond Li-ion battery chemistries, the emergence of LMBs has continuously unfolded. The representative anode candidates based on molten metals, gallium-based alloys, and NaK alloys, along with an expansion of the types of cathode electrochemistry in LMBs, have witnessed speedy development with huge achievements in the past few years. Revisiting LMBs from new angles with new approaches to electrolyte engineering has reached a fresh starting point, although the electrochemical performance advantage of LMBs has yet to be leveraged in a practical cell.
On reviewing the state-of-the-art rechargeable liquid metal based batteries, it is clear that remarkable scientific discoveries have been made in understanding the critical hurdles and surpassing many of them. In terms of HTLMBs, given the severe chemical reactivity and rigorous thermal management that is needed due to the employment of molten metals and electrolytes, it is difficult to achieve high energy densities and long lives simultaneously at the current stage. It is suggested that acceptable performance can be possibly achieved by selecting the appropriate electrode pairs, and manipulating electrolyte compositions, along with the development of new elevated temperature hermetic sealing techniques. RTLMBs hold the promise of achieving the goal of high energy density, but one should note that the concept of self-healing liquid metal has eclipsed the focus on the existing problems, with many papers only reporting the routine electrochemical performance, whereas the associated problems, such as those related to interfaces, electrolytes, and the parameters of practical cells, still lack enough attention. If truly reversible electrochemistry can be achieved in RTLMBs, this field will undoubtedly witness rapid engineering advancements of RTLMBs using the experience built-up over decades based on knowledge acquired from the development of commercial batteries. Also, the important role played by solid-state chemistry in addressing the parasitic reactions in LMBs has also been confirmed. Alternative technologies, such as liquid metal–gas, liquid metal–solid, and flow batteries, might be reasonable in terms of superior energy densities but further development is still challenging due to their persistent drawbacks, in aspects such as reversibility, cell configuration, and safety. Notably, it is unlikely that each alternative strategy can be applied universally to solve all problems associated with LMBs. More importantly, although LMBs are quite intriguing for future energy storage, there are still several concerns that must be addressed before practical applications: (i) in the case of HTLMBs, it should be emphasized that grid storage is still a multidimensional cost-based challenge, although the LMBs are well positioned to simultaneously address multiple end uses at a commercially competitive price. Therefore, we believe that finding how to operate this system at a moderate temperature while keeping the advantage of rapid transfer kinetics is a good research direction, and that appropriate current chemistries and technologies in electrode engineering and electrolyte selection can be applied to this field. (ii) In the case of RTLMBs, the interfaces between the electrode and the electrolyte would be a sophisticated problem that has complicated their further deployment. The correlations between alloy features, morphological evolution, and the performance of the electrode are worthy of intensive investigation. There is no doubt that hermetic seals with advanced assembly methods would be in strong demand.
Due to the incomplete knowledge of their characteristics, continuous exploration of materials and characterization at the manufacturing level can promote the progress of LMBs toward their practical applications. Not only the intrinsic properties of the materials, but also appropriate cell configurations and testing protocols have significant influences on battery performance. In a rational approach to discovery, both negative and positive findings with logical explanations are important for the design of better liquid metal batteries. It should be further emphasized that there are a series of requirements for different sorts of energy services, and LMBs are well-positioned to satisfy customized demands, ranging from grid-scale to portable-scale dimensions, so the prospects for liquid metal batteries are promising. Accordingly, we hope that this report could shed fresh light on the thriving field of liquid metal batteries to help it become a vital base for developing rechargeable battery systems that can be practically used in our daily lives.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51802357) and the Australian Research Council (DP210101486, DP200101862, and DE190100504). The authors thank Dr T. Silver for critical reading of the manuscript.
Notes and references
M. Park, J. Ryu, W. Wang and J. Cho, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 2, 1–18 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 540–550 CrossRef .
H. Li, H. Yin, K. Wang, S. Cheng, K. Jiang and D. R. Sadoway, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600483 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Y. Zheng, X. Huang, J. Hong, B. Cao, J. Hao, Q. Fan, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900081 CrossRef .
W. Chen, G. Li, A. Pei, Y. Li, L. Liao, H. Wang, J. Wan, Z. Liang, G. Chen and H. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Arroyo-de Dompablo, A. Ponrouch, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, Chem. Rev., 2019, 120, 6331–6357 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gao and B. M. Gallant, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 566–583 CrossRef .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, F. Xie, C. Ye, H. Li, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, D. A. Boysen, J. M. Newhouse, B. L. Spatocco, B. Chung, P. J. Burke, D. J. Bradwell, K. Jiang, A. A. Tomaszowska and K. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 2075–2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11683–11720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, L. Zhang, Y. Ding, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2605–2619 RSC .
Y. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Qian and G. Yu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 2287–2293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, X. Guo and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2021 DOI:10.1002/adma.202100052 .

          H. William, Electrolytically-refined aluminum and articles made therefrom, US Pat., US1534315A,  1925 Search PubMed .
R. Chen, Q. Li, X. Yu, L. Chen and H. Li, Chem. Rev., 2019, 120, 6820–6877 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. D. J. Bradwell, Liquid metal batteries: ambipolar electrolysis and alkaline earth electroalloying cells, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2011 Search PubMed .
D. J. Bradwell, H. Kim, A. H. Sirk and D. R. Sadoway, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1895–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, B. Chung, F. Chen, T. Ouchi, J. Zhao, N. Tanaka and D. R. Sadoway, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 127–131 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, K. Jiang, B. Chung, T. Ouchi, P. J. Burke, D. A. Boysen, D. J. Bradwell, H. Kim, U. Muecke and D. R. Sadoway, Nature, 2014, 514, 348–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, Y. Ding, H. Gao, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. Peng and J. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1933–1970 RSC .
X. Lin, M. Salari, L. M. R. Arava, P. M. Ajayan and M. W. Grinstaff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5848–5887 RSC .
J. Hao, B. Li, X. Li, X. Zeng, S. Zhang, F. Yang, S. Liu, D. Li, C. Wu and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Xi, X. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Hao, W. K. Pang, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 437–465 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X.-B. Cheng, J.-Q. Huang, S. Kaskel, S. Chou, H. S. Park and Q. Zhang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 217–229 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, H. Zhang, W. Fan, C. Zhong, W. Hu and D. Mitlin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1908007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Shao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 RSC .
P. Gifford and J. Palmisano, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 650 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Wang, H. Zhou, X. Guo, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 267–271 CrossRef .
T. Ouchi, H. Kim, B. L. Spatocco and D. R. Sadoway, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ning, S. Phadke, B. Chung, H. Yin, P. Burke and D. R. Sadoway, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 370–376 CrossRef CAS .
W. Weppner and R. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 7 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, H. Zhao, J. Wang, P. Chu, Z. Yang, C. Han and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 472, 228634 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ni, X. Bi, Y. Jiang, L. Li and J. Lu, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 356–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, D. Shin, Y. Jung, S. M. Hwang, T. Song, Y. Kim and U. Paik, J. Power Sources, 2018, 377, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12830–12835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dai, Y. Zhao, X.-H. Ning, R. Lakshmi Narayan, J. Li and Z.-W. Shan, J. Power Sources, 2018, 381, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, P. Li, Z. Liu, D. He, K. Han, H. Zhao and X. Qu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8739–8746 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Ukshe and N. Bukun, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1961, 30, 90–107 CrossRef .

          M. Bredig, Mixtures of metals with molten salts, US Atomic Energy Commission,  1963 Search PubMed .
G. Haarberg and J. Thonstad, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1989, 19, 789–801 CrossRef CAS .
G. Haarberg, K. Osen, R. Heus and J. Egan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2777 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Bredig, H. Bronstein and W. T. Smith Jr, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1955, 77, 1454–1458 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, W. Ding, A. Bonk, H. Li, K. Wang, A. Jianu, A. Weisenburger, A. Bund and T. Bauer, J. Power Sources, 2020, 475, 228674 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Jung, Design and optimization of cell components for liquid metal battery and investigation of low operating temperature molten salt electrolyte with Li|LiCl-LiI-KI|Bi composition,  2019 Search PubMed .
G. Nikiforidis, M. Van De Sanden and M. N. Tsampas, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 5649–5673 RSC .
X. Lu, G. Li, J. Y. Kim, D. Mei, J. P. Lemmon, V. L. Sprenkle and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jin, S. Choi, W. Jang, A. Soon, J. Kim, H. Moon, W. Lee, Y. Lee, S. Son, Y.-C. Park, H. Chang, G. Li, K. Jung and W. Shim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2917–2924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. E. Bowden, V. L. Sprenkle and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5915–5922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Baclig, G. McConohy, A. Poletayev, A. Michelson, N. Kong, J.-H. Lee, W. C. Chueh and J. Rugolo, Joule, 2018, 2, 1287–1296 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, S. M. A. Mousavie, T. K. Oh, T. Yang, Y. Lu, C. Farley, R. J. Bodnar, L. Niu, R. Qiao and Z. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701991 CrossRef .
D. H. Kelley and T. Weier, Appl. Mech. Rev., 2018, 70, 020801 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, T. P. Pollard, X. Feng, O. Borodin, K. Xu and Z. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1070–1076 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Cui, J. Stuart, B. Wang and J. Lau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3646–3657 RSC .
K. Baek, W. C. Jeon, S. Woo, J. C. Kim, J. G. Lee, K. An, S. K. Kwak and S. J. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Giordani, D. Tozier, H. Tan, C. M. Burke, B. M. Gallant, J. Uddin, J. R. Greer, B. D. McCloskey, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2656–2663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, K. Liu, J. Lang, D. Zhuo, Z. Huang, C.-A. Wang, H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, Y. Li, A. Zhou, N. Wu, S. Xin, Z. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7414–7418 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, M. Wan, B. Zhang, Y. Yuan, Y. Jin, W. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li, L. Wang and J. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000952 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xue, H. Gao, W. Zhou, S. Xin, K. Park, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9608–9612 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yan, Z. Lu, H.-W. Lee, F. Xiong, P.-C. Hsu, Y. Li, J. Zhao, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. He, Q. Li, Y. Shen and Y. Ding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18466–18470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, Y. Ding, L. Xue, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804649 CrossRef .
M. Yarema, M. Wörle, M. D. Rossell, R. Erni, R. Caputo, L. Protesescu, K. V. Kravchyk, D. N. Dirin, K. Lienau and F. von Rohr, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12422–12430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ye, Z. J. Zheng, H. R. Yao, S. C. Liu, T. T. Zuo, X. W. Wu, Y. X. Yin, N. W. Li, J. J. Gu and F. F. Cao, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 1106–1111 CrossRef .
R. J. Y. Park, C. M. Eschler, C. D. Fincher, A. F. Badel, P. Guan, M. Pharr, B. W. Sheldon, W. C. Carter, V. Viswanathan and Y.-M. Chiang, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 314–322 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Bae, Y. Ding, X. Zhang and G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010863 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, K. Khoshmanesh, N. Mahmood, I. De Castro, D. Esrafilzadeh, S. Barrow, M. Dickey and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4073–4111 RSC .
L. Wang, S. S. Welborn, H. Kumar, M. Li, Z. Wang, V. B. Shenoy and E. Detsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902086 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, L. Huang, X. Huang, X. Guo, D. Liu, D. Zheng, X. Zhang, R. Ren, D. Qu and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1854–1861 RSC .
K. Khoshmanesh, S.-Y. Tang, J. Y. Zhu, S. Schaefer, A. Mitchell, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and M. D. Dickey, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 974–993 RSC .
Y. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Qian, L. Zhang, L. Xue, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806956 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, X. Guo and G. Yu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1355–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Deshpande, J. Li, Y.-T. Cheng and M. W. Verbrugge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A845 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liang, L. Hong, H. Yang, F. Fan, Y. Liu, H. Li, J. Li, J. Y. Huang, L.-Q. Chen and T. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5212–5217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, Y. Yang, X. Shi, G. Zhang, L. Gong, D. Xu, H. Zeng, C. Wang, M. Gu and Y. Deng, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 359–366 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xue, H. Gao, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3292–3298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Peng, Y. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Qian, H. Celio, G. He and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1989–1998 RSC .
J. Zhou, J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. Peng and J. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1933–1970 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. Xia, Y. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Liu, X. Wang and J. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804011 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao, Z. Yan, J. L. Gray, X. He, D. Wang, T. Chen, Q. Huang, Y. C. Li, H. Wang and S. H. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 384–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Dickey, R. C. Chiechi, R. J. Larsen, E. A. Weiss, D. A. Weitz and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Regan, H. Tostmann, P. S. Pershan, O. Magnussen, E. DiMasi, B. Ocko and M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 10786 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zavabeti, J. Z. Ou, B. J. Carey, N. Syed, R. Orrell-Trigg, E. L. Mayes, C. Xu, O. Kavehei, A. P. O’Mullane and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2017, 358, 332–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, H. Fei, Y. An, Y. Tao, J. Feng and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18861–18870 RSC .
Y. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Qian, L. Xue, A. Dolocan and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002577 CrossRef CAS .
F. Scharmann, G. Cherkashinin, V. Breternitz, C. Knedlik, G. Hartung, T. Weber and J. Schaefer, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36, 981–985 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, Y. Lu, G. Chen, M. Yang and Z. Gu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2518–2533 RSC .
J. Yan, M. H. Malakooti, Z. Lu, Z. Wang, N. Kazem, C. Pan, M. R. Bockstaller, C. Majidi and K. Matyjaszewski, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 684–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, F.-M. Allioux, M. A. Rahim, J. Han, J. Tang, M. B. Ghasemian, S.-Y. Tang, M. Mayyas, T. Daeneke and P. Le-Clech, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4808–4819 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Huang, L. Huang, X. Guo, R. Ren, D. Liu, D. Qu and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1395–1399 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, N.-J. H. Kneusels, L. E. Marbella, E. Castillo-Martínez, P. C. M. M. Magusin, R. S. Weatherup, E. Jónsson, T. Liu, S. Paul and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9854–9867 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Y. Kim, M. Wang, J. Y. Woo, L. Wang, D. Zou and J. K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703652 CrossRef .
D. Liu, L. Su, J. Liao, B. Reeja-Jayan and C. Majidi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902798 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, H. Fei, Y. Tian, Y. An, H. Guo, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 223–233 CrossRef .
C. Wei, L. Tan, Y. Tao, Y. An, Y. Tian, H. Jiang, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 34, 12–21 CrossRef .
B. Han, D. Xu, S.-S. Chi, D. He, Z. Zhang, L. Du, M. Gu, C. Wang, H. Meng, K. Xu, Z. Zheng and Y. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xue, W. Zhou, S. Xin, H. Gao, Y. Li, A. Zhou and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 14380–14383 CrossRef .
J. Duan, Y. Zheng, W. Luo, W. Wu, T. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Li, J. Li and Y. Huang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 1208–1217 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y.-K. Bai, X. Shen, H.-J. Peng and Q. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 51, 1–6 CrossRef .
D. Bevers, R. Rogers and M. Von Bradke, J. Power Sources, 1996, 63, 193–201 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, D. Lin, J. Zhao, Z. Lu, Y. Liu, C. Liu, Y. Lu, H. Wang, K. Yan and X. Tao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Xu, G. Yoon, K.-Y. Park, H. Park, O. Tamwattana, S. J. Kim, W. M. Seong and K. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2598 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. V. Merinov and W. A. Goddard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 3735–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, D. Zhou, P. Li, X. Guo, B. Sun, H. Liu, K. Yan, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Qian, H. Gao, D. H. Weber, L. Zhang, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12170–12177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, X.-Q. Zhang, P. Shi and Q. Zhang, Joule, 2019, 3, 2647–2661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, L. Chen, X. Ji, T. Deng, S. Hou, J. Chen, J. Zheng, F. Wang, J. Jiang and K. Xu, Chem, 2018, 4, 174–185 CAS .
M. F. Lagadec, R. Zahn and V. Wood, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 16–25 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, D. Chao, B. Chen, X. Chen, C. Chuah, Y. Tang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2012–2022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, Q. Pang, I. R. Kochetkov, M. S. Sempere, H. Huang, X. Sun and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. V. Goncharova, A. Lushington, Q. Sun, H. Yadegari, B. Wang, W. Xiao, R. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606663 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu and X.-B. Zhang, Matter, 2019, 1, 881–892 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, Y.-B. Yin, J.-L. Ma, Z.-W. Chang, T. Sun, Y.-H. Zhu, X.-Y. Yang, T. Liu and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 382–388 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, G. Huang, J.-Z. Wang, K. Li, J.-L. Ma and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-l. Ma, F.-l. Meng, Y. Yu, D.-p. Liu, J.-m. Yan, Y. Zhang, X.-b. Zhang and Q. Jiang, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 64–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, D.-Y. Yang, G. Huang and X.-B. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 632–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Z. Hu, M. Chen, C. Zou, H. Jin, S. Wang, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Small, 2019, 15, 1805381 CrossRef .
Z. Yan, Y. Liang, J. Xiao, W. Lai, W. Wang, Q. Xia, Y. Wang, Q. Gu, H. Lu and S. L. Chou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Tai, Q. Zhang, H. Wang, W. K. Pang, H. K. Liu, K. Konstantinov and Z. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 36–43 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Zhou, J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Bi, T. Liu, T. He, J. Cheng, F. Zhang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903852 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, T. Zhou, X. Zhao, W. K. Pang, H. Gao, S. Li, Z. Zhou, H. Liu and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700396 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, F. Yao, L. Yang, F. Zhang and S. Xu, Carbon, 2015, 93, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Tai, T. Zhou, V. Sencadas, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, K. Konstantinov, Z. Guo and H. K. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703028 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Shilin Zhang
	Dr Shilin Zhang is now a research fellow in the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Superconducting & Electronic Materials in the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 2020, after he graduated from Beijing University of Chemical Technology with an MSc in 2016. His current research interests focus on the design, synthesis and characterization of materials in the field of electrochemical devices such as ion batteries and metal batteries.

Ye Liu
	Ye Liu is currently a PhD candidate at the Institut für Chemie and IRIS Adlershof, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany. His research focuses on the design and fabrication of novel materials in new-generation energy storage and conversion, such as Li/Na/K-ion batteries.

Qining Fan
	Qining Fan received his BS degree in Chemical Engineering from China University of Petroleum in 2013 and his MS degree in Chemical Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate in Chemical Engineering at the University of Wollongong under the supervision of Prof. Jiazhao Wang and Prof. Zaiping Guo. His research focuses on Li2S cathodes and their application in lithium sulphur batteries and lithium ion batteries.

Tengfei Zhou
	Prof. Tengfei Zhou's research is focused on Li/Na/K ion batteries, metal–CO2 batteries, and interfacial and catalysis problems encountered in battery systems. Zhou started his professional research career as a Chutian Scholar at the Key Laboratory of Catalysis and Materials Science of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission. After that, he worked as a research fellow and an ARC DECRA Fellow in the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials at the University of Wollongong from 2018 to 2020. He is currently a professor in the Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology at Anhui University.

Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh
	Prof. Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh is a professor of Chemical Engineering at UNSW and one of the Australian Research Council Laureate Fellows of 2018. Prof. Kalantar-Zadeh is involved in research in the fields of materials science and sensors, has co-authored ∼450 scientific papers and is also a member of the editorial boards of journals including ACS Sensors, ACS Applied Nano Materials, and ACS Nano. He has received many international awards including the 2017 IEEE Sensor Council Achievement, the 2018 ACS Advances in Measurement Science Lectureship award and the 2020 Robert Boyle Prize of RSC. He has also appeared in the Clarivate Analytics most highly cited list since 2018.

Zaiping Guo
	Prof. Zaiping Guo is now working at the School of Chemical Engineering & Advanced Materials, University of Adelaide (Australia). She received her PhD degree from the University of Wollongong in 2003, and her BSc and MSc in 1993 and 1996 from Xinjiang University (China), respectively. Her current research interests mainly focus on energy storage systems such as lithium ion batteries, sodium ion batteries, potassium ion batteries, and metal batteries, as well as electrochemistry characterization and computer modelling.

Broader context
The need for higher energy-density rechargeable batteries invokes interest in metal electrodes. Most solid metal anodes, however, suffer from the risk of dendrite growth, which raises safety concerns and impedes further security-critical applications. Among the available battery chemistries to solve this problem, the liquid metal electrode chemistry, in some aspects, is one of the most promising chemistries. This is dominantly attributed to the unique liquid–liquid electrode–electrolyte interface, which could allow liquid metal batteries to operate without solid dendrite growth and to obtain relatively high round-trip efficiencies at high current densities. However, practical liquid metal batteries can only be successfully developed after current hurdles are properly addressed. In this review, we systematically summarize recent advances in the development of liquid metal batteries and, in particular, provide our understanding of the electrochemistry of liquid metal batteries, along with discovered problematic issues that have been realized from researchers’ efforts. This work will promote the fundamental understanding of LMBs for practical applications and serve as a comprehensive guide for further liquid metal electrode research.


 	Fig. 1  Promise and challenges of current LMBs. (a) Timeline of liquid metal batteries. (b) Representative classification of LMBs. Most reducing liquid alkali metals can couple with oxidizing positive electrodes in an electrochemical reaction, for which an appropriate choice of electrolyte is required. (c) Summary of the key challenges that are limiting the life span and practical application of current high temperature (HT) and room temperature (RT) LMBs. (d) A comparison of the theoretical capacity–voltage metrics of LMBs, including selected conventional room temperature batteries (RT batteries), HTLMBs, and RTLMBs. Most data in part (d) were collected from ref. 3, 6, 7, 10 and 12.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Typical plating morphologies of solid metal and liquid metal electrodes during charging/discharging. The liquid metals are desirable and have established the reputation as safe anodes due to their limited structural deformation. (b) Comparison of the melting points, potentials vs. SHE, commercial prices, and liquid densities at the melting points of representative electrode candidates. (c) A phase diagram of eutectic metal with two components. (d) Coulombic efficiency, energy efficiency, and discharge capacity density as functions of cycle number in a typical Li‖Sb–Pb cell cycled at 275 mA cm−2. Inset: Profiles of voltage and current density during charge–discharge (15th cycle). Reproduced with permission.20 (e) Both advantages and disadvantages of the current alloy strategies in HTLMBs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Solubility of selected metals in their molten salt electrolytes at their melting point. (b) Phase diagram of the liquidus line of the typical NaI–LiI–KI system simulated using FactSage software. The melting point is as low as 290 °C. Reproduced with permission.46 (c) A simulation of thermal convection in a HTLMB. The vertical cross section through the centre of the battery shows that the temperature is much higher in the electrolyte than in either electrode. Reproduced with permission.54 (d) Schematic illustration of the garnet type of LLZO (left) and the perovskite type of LLTO (right). (e) Illustration of effective strategies from the perspective of the whole HTLMB design. (f) Schematic of a Li–Pb‖PbCl2 cell fitted with a porous faradaically selective membrane. Reproduced with permission.19 (g) Possible electrolyte candidates for future HTLMBs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Possible problems in current RTLMBs and potential approaches for addressing the associated problems. As can be seen, the wetting behaviour, volume change, unstable SEI layer, and inferior energy density are concluded to be dominant problems in RTLMBs. Because of typical RTLMBs originate from the prevalent LIBs, the physio- and electrochemical features of RTLMBs can be directly engineered from the successful experience of Li ions.	 

 	Fig. 5  Potentially representative failure modes of RTLMBs. (a) Illustration of the principal failure reasons of Ga based LIBs when coupled with a high voltage cathode. At the anode, the organic ligands are required to disperse the Ga LM to obtain a sheet-like electrode. Non-uniform Ga distribution is achieved even by applying various mechanical approaches. During cycling, some Ga LM partially self-healed due to their strong surface tensions, while some others could be isolated by the binder or the formed SEI layer. Some active Ga LM would undergo a huge volume change, leaving a fractured structure after cycling. Moreover, electrolyte consumption can be attributed to the continuous SEI formation. At the cathode, a cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI) is formed by the decomposition of electrolytes. The problem of decomposition of cathode materials under high voltages should be avoided. (b) At the anode, only a limited amount of NaK alloy can be adsorbed by carbon substrates. The risk of squeezing out of the NaK alloy during battery operation cycles due to the over-dose can induce the anode crossover to the cathode during assembly. The strong activity of NaK results in the decomposition of electrolyte, which further induces SEI formation and NaK consumption to limit the long-term operation of NaK based RTLMBs.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) XRD patterns of carbon paper, Na and K metals and the NaK-GIC-C electrode (the * labeled peak is related to the protective Mylar film). Reproduced with permission.80 Characterization of the PCP, T-PCP, and HCP samples: (b) typical FT-IR spectra, (c) Raman shifts, (d) XRD pattern, and (e–i) the corresponding photographs of the carbon substrates (left), the process of NaK absorption on carbon substrates (middle), and the final state of NaK on carbon substrates (right). The MXene film was obtained by a direct vacuum filtration process from the exfoliated MXene solution. (j) Pristine graphite is intrinsically sodi-/potassiophilic, and the NaK can penetrate the graphite layers underneath the top surface through the grain boundaries and/or in-plane defects of the graphite layers based on a previous investigation,100 while partially functional groups (such as O and N) or water/carbon dioxide molecules adsorbed onto the surface would act as wetting barriers for the diffusion of NaK alloy. (k) Schematic illustration of the design of a NaK-scaffold composite. The NaK infusion into porous materials can be engineered by the introduction of sodi-/potassiophilic coatings (such as Si and ZnO).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrolyte consumption during NaK cycling. (b) Schematic depicting the function of the alloy-protected NaK–carbon paper sheet, which can guide the homogeneous deposition of an SEI and reduce the parasitic reactions (the purple color indicates the functional alloy). (c) Cycling performance with lean and flooded electrolytes. (d) XRD and XPS characterization results of the protected NaK anode. (e–g) Comparisons of cycling performance between bare NaK and protected NaK anodes in symmetric batteries.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
