Photoelectrocatalytic materials for environmental applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B821991E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B821991E
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5089-5121Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsPhotoelectrocatalytic materials for environmental applications

        
          
            Huanjun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guohua 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Detlef W. 
            Bahnemann
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zhanghj@ust.hk; kechengh@ust.hk;  Fax: +852 2358 0054;   Tel: +852 2358 7138
bInstitut für Technische Chemie, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Callinstrasse 3, D-30167, Hannover, Germany. E-mail: bahnemann@iftc.uni-hannover.de;  Fax: +49 511 762 2774;   Tel: +49 511 762 5560
Received 
      8th December 2008
    , Accepted 4th March 2009First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      3rd April 2009
    AbstractThis feature article summarizes recent research on and development of semiconductor-based photocatalyst materials that are applicable to environmental remediation and/or chemical synthesis purposes. A wide variety of TiO2 particles and/or films have been studied during the past 30 years because they are the most stable and powerful photocatalysts leading to the degradation of various organic pollutants. The photocatalytic performance of other semiconductor materials such as ZnO, SnO2, WO3, Fe2O3 and CdS has also been intensively investigated. A general limitation in the efficiency of any photocatalytic process is the recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers, i.e., of electrons and holes, following bandgap illumination. Considerable efforts have been made to suppress this recombination and hence to enhance the charge carrier separation and the overall efficiency by means of coupling of different semiconductors with desirable matching of their electronic band structures, or incorporation of noble metal nanoclusters onto the surface of semiconductor photocatalyst particles. Modification of the physicochemical properties, such as particle size, surface area, porosity and/or crystallinity of the semiconductor materials, and optimization of the experimental conditions, such as pH, illumination conditions and/or catalyst loading, during photocatalytic reactions have also been carefully addressed to achieve high reaction rates or yields. To utilize solar energy more efficiently, i.e., to extend the optical absorption of the mostly UV-sensitive photocatalysts into the visible light range, numerous research groups have contributed to the development of novel visible light active photocatalysts. With the application of semiconductors with narrower bandgaps such as CdS, Fe2O3 and WO3 being straightforward choices, doping of wide bandgap semiconductors like TiO2 has been the most popular technique to enhance the catalysts' optical absorption abilities. Research on mixed-oxide-based semiconductor photocatalysts with deliberately modulated band structures has also attracted tremendous attention in the past decade, concentrating on, for example, the generation of H2 and/or O2 from H2O splitting, and the degradation of organic pollutants under visible light irradiation. Both theoretical calculations and experimental results have convincingly shown that the developed materials can serve as highly efficient photocatalysts that are both environmentally and economically significant.Huanjun ZhangHuanjun Zhang received his degrees of B.Eng. and M.Eng. in Chemical Engineering from Tsinghua University, China, in 2001 and 2004, respectively. Since September 2004, he has been working on his PhD program in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. His current research interests include syntheses and applications of noble metal-containing nanocomposite materials.Guohua ChenGuohua Chen is a Professor at the Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department, Director of Center for Green Products and Processing Technologies, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He obtained his B.Eng. from Dalian University of Technology, M.Eng. and Ph.D. (Chem. Eng.) from McGill University. He is a member of the Editorial Board of Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering, International Journal of Environment and Waste Management, Drying Technology and an Editor of Separation and Purification Technology. His research interests include electrochemical technologies for industrial wastewater treatment, advanced environmental materials synthesis, energy storage and utilization, green products and process development.Detlef W. BahnemannDetlef W. Bahnemann has been Head of the Photocatalysis and Nanotechnology Research Unit at the Institute of Technical Chemistry of the Leibniz University Hannover since 2002. In the same year he was appointed as Honorary Professor of the Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, UK. His research interests include—besides the entire field of photocatalysis—photoelectrochemical solar cells and fuel synthesis, fundamental aspects of semiconductor and metal nanoparticles, and membrane concepts for low temperature fuel cells. In close collaboration with industrial partners he also develops nanotechnological concepts for future product generations as well as appropriate analytical tools to determine their functionality.
1. Introduction
Since the demonstration by Honda and Fujishima1 of the photoelectrolysis of water using a TiO2 electrode under an anodic bias potential, intensive research efforts have been devoted to the development of photocatalytic materials, with the aim of utilizing solar energy and thus addressing the increasing global concerns of environmental remediation and clean fuel production. Decades of efforts have successfully produced a wide range of efficient semiconductor-based photocatalytic materials. A timely review of these materials is therefore appropriate. Thorough discussions concerning the mechanism of photocatalytic reactions are not the purpose of the present feature article. The interested reader will find detailed mechanistic discussions in various focused reviews, for example, by Hoffmann et al.2–4 On the other hand, several reviews5–8 have recently been published specifically focusing on photocatalytic materials for solar hydrogen production. In this feature article, a wider range of recently developed photocatalytic semiconductor materials will be discussed with particular emphasis on the improvement of their photocatalytic performance and on their visible-light-driven activities.
For a better understanding of the subsequent discussions, it will be crucial to clarify a few fundamental definitions that are most relevant to this context. The electronic energy structure within a semiconductor consists of three distinguished regimes, i.e., the conduction band (CB), the valence band (VB) and the forbidden band. The forbidden band represents a region in which, for an ideal, undoped semiconductor, energy states do not exist. Energy states only exist above and below this region. Taking the energy level of the electron in the vacuum as reference and as the uppermost level, the upper band is called the conduction band, and the lower one the valence band. In terms of energy, the difference between the upper edge of the valence band and the lower edge of the conduction band is called the bandgap (Eg) of the semiconductor. If the two levels can be described with the same wave vector, the semiconductor is considered to have a direct bandgap; otherwise it has an indirect bandgap. The bandgap is one of the most critical parameters defining the optical properties of semiconductors.
A semiconductor immersed into a solvent (in most cases water) and illuminated with photons exceeding its bandgap energy will be called a photocatalyst provided that at its surface it is able to catalyze reactions with ΔG < 0 (e.g., the oxidation of organic compounds by molecular oxygen). In the case of endothermic reactions, such as the splitting of water into O2 and H2 that is found to occur at the semiconductor photocatalyst surface upon ultra-bandgap illumination, the system can be viewed as “photosynthetic” and will be able to store part of the light energy in the form of chemical energy. Most studies of photocatalytic reactions are nowadays focused on particulate systems,9–11 employing either colloidal semiconductor particles or their suspensions, due to the apparent reality that particles possess much higher surface areas (therefore higher yields from utilizing the incoming light energy, called photonic efficiency) than their bulk counterparts. The photocatalyst particles can actually be regarded as individual microelectrodes, always kept under open circuit potential, inside which charge carriers (electrons and holes) can be generated upon bandgap irradiation. The thus formed charge carriers then migrate to the surface to participate in possible chemical reactions with the surface-adsorbed species. A series of reactions is given as follows to represent a simplified description of the events taking place on photocatalyst particles upon bandgap illumination:2 SC + hv(≥Eg) → hVB+ + eCB− (charge carrier generation)(1) hVB+ + eCB− → SC + heat (bulk recombination)(2) hVB+ + SC–OH → SC–OH˙+ (hole trapping)(3) eCB− + SC–OH → SC–OH/etr− (electron trapping)(4) SC–OH˙+ + Red → SC–OH + Red˙+ (hole transfer)(5) SC–OH/etr− + Ox → SC–OH + Ox˙− (electron transfer)(6)where “SC” denotes the semiconductor; eCB− is the photoexcited electron in the conduction band; hVB+ is the photoexcited hole in the valence band; SC–OH/etr− is the surface-trapped CB electron; SC–OH˙+ is the surface-trapped VB hole (i.e., the surface-bound hydroxyl radical); Red and Ox are the electron donor and acceptor, respectively. It should be noted that the interfacial charge carrier transfer described by Eq. (5) and (6) is generally much slower than the preceding events described by Eq. (1–4). This is a highly simplified description of photocatalytic reactions that turns out to be rather more complicated if one takes a closer look.
2. Charge transfer at semiconductor particles
In photocatalytic reactions, the essential advantage of using semiconductor particles is their large surface area. In addition, the photogenerated charge carriers can easily reach the surface before they recombine, so that a high quantum yield (which will be defined later) can also be expected. However, two reactions, an oxidation and a reduction, must proceed simultaneously on the same particle surface (otherwise the particle will be charged, eventually leading to the overall reaction being stopped), as presented in Fig. 1. The slower process then determines the overall reaction rate. In this way, the particle behaves practically as a microelectrode kept always under the open circuit potential with the anodic and cathodic current being equal in magnitude.
 Fig. 1  Charge carrier transfer on large (left) and small (right) semiconductor particles in the presence of an electron donor, D, and an acceptor, A. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, Copyright 2001 Wiley-VCH. 
Using larger-sized semiconductor particles, the partial currents in the dark are of rather limited magnitude under open circuit conditions, because the major carrier (e.g., the. electrons in an n-type semiconductor) density at the surface is small due to the depletion layer beneath the electrode surface, as indicated in Fig. 1(left). In contrast, no space charge region is formed in much smaller particles of size d ≪ dsc (Fig. 1(right), where dsc is the thickness of the space charge region). Upon light excitation, some minor carriers (e.g., the holes in n-type semiconductors) in larger particles are transferred to the electron donor in the solution, which results in a negative charging of the particle that alleviates the positive space charge. Accordingly, this event causes a flattening of the energy bands (see the dashed line in Fig. 1(left)), equivalent to a negative shift of the rest potential of a bulk electrode under illumination. With much smaller semiconductor particles (d ≪ dsc), on the other hand, the photogenerated electrons and holes can be easily transferred to the surface and react with the electron and hole acceptors, provided that the energy requirements are fulfilled. The average transit time, τtr, within a particle of diameter d can be obtained by solving Fick's diffusion law: (7)in which D is the diffusion coefficient. Taking typical values of D = 0.1 cm2s−1 and d = 20 nm, the average transit time is about 1 picosecond, which is much shorter than the recombination time so that most charge carriers can reach the surface before recombination.
Quantum size effects
Nanosized semiconductor particles have been very popular as photocatalysts because of their large surface areas. Yet the most striking feature of the semiconductor nanoparticles is the remarkable change in their optical absorption spectra due to size reduction, compared with bulk materials.13–15 For example, the bandgap of CdS can be tuned between 2.5 and 4.5 eV as the size is varied from a macroscopic crystal down to the molecular regime. This interesting phenomenon has been addressed with success using the effective mass model. As mentioned earlier, in bulk semiconductors, light excitation results in the formation of electron–hole pairs, which experience a Coulomb interaction and can form excitons with usually small bond energies (<0.03 eV) and large radii. The exciton radii can be determined based on the Bohr radius of an electron in an H atom modified by introducing the dielectric constant of the semiconductor and its reduced effective mass, m*, with the latter being given by (8)Using a “particle in a box” model with an infinite potential drop at the wall as the boundary condition, and taking into account that the exciton consists of an electron–hole pair, the Schrödinger equation can be solved yielding the energy of the lowest excited state,16–18i.e., the lower edge of the conduction band, as (9)in which Eg is the bandgap energy; m0 is the electron mass in vacuum. According to Eq. (9), when a semiconductor has a reduced effective mass that is significantly smaller than the free electron mass, a large variation of its bandgap can be expected. Examples of such semiconductors are given: CdS (me* = 0.21m0, mh* = 0.80m0), CdSe (me* = 0.13m0, mh* = 0.45m0), GaAs (me* = 0.067m0, mh* = 0.082m0) and ZnO (me* = 0.24m0, mh* = 0.45m0).19,20 There are, however, semiconductors with larger effective mass in which quantization does not occur before its radius becomes extremely small, e.g., r << 5nm. One example is TiO2, which has been the most intensively studied photocatalyst material during the past decades. Experimentally, TiO2 particles synthesized with an average size between 5 and 20 nm were confirmed to exhibit the bandgap properties of the bulk solid. However, when the TiO2 particle size is kept below 3 nm (i.e., corresponding to a few hundred TiO2 molecules), the quantum size effect could be identified indicating a bandgap increase of ∼0.25 eV.21 To explore the precise quantum size effect, it should be emphasized that bandgap shifts can only be measured with sufficient precision employing colloidal suspensions possessing a sufficiently narrow size distribution. Besides dispersed particles, techniques have also been available for the fabrication of semiconductor films consisting of nanocrystalline particles.20 Such films may exhibit similar quantum size effects as individual particles, depending on the effective mass of the semiconductor as just described.
Accompanying the bandgap widening due to reduced particle size, electrons at the lower edge of the conduction band and holes at the upper edge of the valence band then possess higher negative and positive potentials, respectively. In consequence, electrons and holes have a higher reduction and oxidation power, respectively, in such quantized particles.
Besides bandgap widening, variation in the semiconductor particle size also has possible interesting consequences for the charge carrier transfer in photocatalytic reactions. For instance, differences in the pathways of the photocatalytic reaction of acetic acid between a system using a TiO2 bulk electrode short-circuited to a Pt electrode and that using Pt-loaded TiO2 particles provide a very suitable illustration of such size-dependent consequences.22 Using spatially separated electrodes, acetic acid is oxidized by photogenerated holes at the illuminated TiO2 electrode to form CH3˙ radicals that then combine with each other to yield ethane, while H2 evolves at the Pt electrode. Distinctively, in Pt-loaded TiO2 particles, a photogenerated electron (most likely trapped at the Pt sites) and a hole are able to reduce a proton and oxidize acetic acid to yield surface-adsorbed hydrogen, Had, and a CH3˙ radical, respectively. Then, at adjacent TiO2 and Pt sites, methane can be formed due to the reaction between neighboring Had and CH3˙. Another interesting consequence of the size effect concerns the density of the photons absorbed by the semiconductor particles. Considering two colloidal solutions of different particle sizes and assuming that all photons are absorbed in both, the time interval between the absorption of the two photons in the smaller-particle solution can be exceedingly larger than that in the bigger-particle solution. This difference can be very influential on these reaction pathways requiring multiple-electron transfer.
Photonic efficiency and quantum yield in photocatalytic systems
Extensive studies on heterogeneous photocatalysis have been undertaken worldwide, employing significantly diverse experimental conditions including illumination, photocatalyst preparation and reactor design. To make the experimental data comparable among various researchers, a unified, unambiguous definition of the efficiencies of the photocatalytic processes is compulsory.
The term photonic efficiency (η) is defined as the ratio of the rate of a photocatalytic reaction (usually the initial rate) to the rate of incident photons entering the system at a given wavelength interval. This parameter attracts considerable attention for photocatalysis applications in that it does provide a basis for engineering efficiency. Quantum yield, ϕ, is defined as the ratio of the quantity of the reactant molecules consumed or the product molecules formed to the quantity of absorbed photons at a given wavelength. In practice, this ratio is often alternatively measured by the reaction rate and the absorption rate of the photon flow, i.e., the volumetric rate corresponding to a given reactant (or product) divided by the rate of photons absorbed in the system, as given by ϕ = r/Ia(10)in which r is the photocatalytic reaction rate and Ia is the absorbed photon flux. The latter can be obtained from Ia = I0 × F(11)in which I0 is the incident photon flux, and F is the integrated absorption fraction in the system over the useful wavelength range as follows: (12)where Iλ is the relative incident photon flux in the wavelength band, dλ; TλF is the transmittance of the filter used in the experiment; and fλ is the fraction of photons absorbed at wavelength λ as given by fλ = 1 − Tλ = 1 − 10−Aλ(13)in which Tλ and Aλ are the transmittance and absorbance, respectively, of the photocatalytic system at wavelength λ. I0 and F can be determined by actinometry and spectrophotometry, respectively.
3. Single semiconductor photocatalysts
3.1 TiO2
The virtues of TiO2, including high photostability (i.e., resistance to photocorrosion), low cost and non-toxicity, have led it to be widely used in photocatalytic applications, including the degradation of organic pollutants in aqueous and gaseous phases, removal of heavy metals from contaminated waters, hydrogen gas generation from photocatalytic water splitting, etc. Studies of TiO2 photocatalysis have been increasingly thriving since the first pioneering articles appeared in the 1970s.1,23,24 Anatase and rutile TiO2 are commonly used as photocatalysts, with anatase showing a higher photocatalytic activity in most cases.13 The difference in their photocatalytic activity arises from their different lattice structures and electronic band structures.
It has been generally accepted that upon bandgap illumination of TiO2 particles the physical events simply proceed as follows. Firstly, electrons are raised into the CB and holes left in the VB of TiO2; then, a portion of the electrons and holes successfully reach the particle surface where subsequent chemical reactions can take place. Experimental techniques,25–28 such as pulsed laser photolysis, transient absorption spectroscopy, and photoacoustic spectroscopy, are useful to probe the behavior of photogenerated charge carriers in the degradation of organic pollutants by aqueous colloidal suspensions of TiO2. Upon pulsed laser excitation, electrons and holes are generated inside a TiO2 particle. Their subsequent behavior can then be probed by the transient absorption spectroscopy technique. To do this, it is necessary to identify the absorption bands of the electrons and holes. However, a precise assignment of the electron and hole absorption bands is rather difficult because their absorption spectra are very broad and the bands overlap each other in the visible wavelength range.27 Optically transparent colloidal TiO2 systems are best chosen to investigate the transient absorption of photogenerated charge carriers. Considerable progress in synthetic methods to produce extremely small TiO2 clusters29 makes it possible for such investigations to be carried out under well-defined experimental conditions.30,31
Detailed spectroscopic investigations on aqueous colloidal TiO2 suspensions upon bandgap irradiation in the absence of any hole scavengers showed that, while photogenerated electrons are trapped instantaneously, i.e., on the time scale of nanoseconds, holes can be trapped in electronically shallow or deep states. Deeply trapped holes are rather long-lived and inactive, while shallowly trapped holes, which are in a thermally activated equilibrium with free holes, exhibit a very high oxidation potential as probed by using dichloroacetate (DCA−) and thiocyanate (SCN−) as substrates.27 In a recent work by Yoshihara et al.,32 the free and trapped electrons and trapped holes were identified employing transient absorption spectra. Their reactivity was evaluated by transient absorption spectroscopy in the presence of hole- and electron-scavengers indicating that the trapped electrons and holes are localized at the surface of the TiO2 particles and the free electrons are distributed in the bulk, as depicted in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Spatial distribution of photogenerated charge carriers in TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2004 ACS. 
The primary cause for the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 is believed to be the formation of ˙OH radicals33–37 by rapid conversion of photogenerated holes upon contact with the adsorbed H2O molecules on TiO2 according to the following reaction pathways: TiO2 + hv(≥Eg) → hVB+ + eCB−(14) hVB+ + eCB− → TiO2 + heat(15) hVB+ + TiIVOH/H2O → TiIVOH˙+/OH˙+ + H+(16)The highly active ˙OH radicals are capable of mineralizing most organic pollutant molecules. Oxygen molecules dissolved in H2O, which usually serve as scavengers of photogenerated electrons, also lead to the formation of ˙OH radicals. Other oxidizing routes have also been proposed, including direct oxidation by the photogenerated holes,27,32 generation of oxidizing species from reactions involving intermediates formed in the solution,38etc.
Besides colloidal TiO2, various nanosized TiO2 particulate aqueous suspensions have also been used in photocatalytic degradation of organic molecules, such as methanol,39,40 dichloroacetate, oxalic acid, phenols, dyes and other pollutants, including herbicides, pesticides and their derivatives, etc. Commercially available TiO2 products such as Degussa P25 and Sachtleben Hombikat UV100 have also been studied for different reactions,39,41–44 with the former being regarded as a model photocatalyst widely used as a reference to be compared with other photocatalytic materials.
The photocatalytic activity of TiO2 towards a specific reaction depends on both its physicochemical properties45,46 and external conditions. The influential physicochemical properties include the morphology, primary particle size, degree of aggregation, surface area, and crystalline structures, while the external conditions involve the irradiation intensity, the pH of the aqueous system, the presence/absence of electron/hole scavengers, and the bias potential if applied to TiO2 film photoelectrodes. These factors often interactively affect the overall photocatalytic activity.2
Particle size, degree of aggregation and surface area determine the adsorption ability of TiO2 photocatalysts for substrate molecules, which has proved to be a prerequisite for many photocatalytic reactions to proceed efficiently. Most currently used and commercially available photocatalyst powders, for example, consist of nanocrystalline primary particles that are aggregated to form secondary structures with dimensions in the micrometer range. Aggregation of particles would inevitably reduce their total surface area exposed to the outer environment, leading to a lowered photocatalytic activity as observed in many reaction systems. Only in a certain special agglomerated fashion, i.e., adjacent crystallites are aligned in a given crystallographic orientation to enable a strong electronic coupling between the primary particles, can the photocatalytic activity be maintained at a high level due to the so-called “antenna effect”.36,37,47 As illustrated in Fig. 3, compared with randomly agglomerated TiO2 particles, a chain of well-aligned particles will act as the antenna system to transfer the photon energy from the spot of light absorption to the reaction site since the electron transfer resistance at the grain boundaries is now considerably reduced. This scenario explains how photons are accumulatively used on one TiO2 particle in such systems even at reduced photon flux from a laser pulse.
 Fig. 3  Antenna effects of charge carrier transfer during Ag photodeposition in self-assembled TiO2 aggregates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2007 Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag GmbH. 
Based on similar arguments, because of the attractive features of the high surface area (hence the high adsorption capacity) and crystallite alignment, mesoporous TiO2 films with ordered structures have also been actively developed recently as efficient photocatalysts.48–56 The employed illumination mode can also affect the adsorption properties of TiO2 particles via a deaggregation scheme,37,40 in which the high intensity, e.g., pulsed laser irradiation, exposes more surface area for adsorption originally blocked due to particle–particle aggregation. The deaggregation scheme is valid since most TiO2 nanoparticles do not have a spherical shape, as revealed by a high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) study shown in Fig. 4, but they possess flat facets upon contact of which the number of adsorption sites can be notably reduced.57
 Fig. 4  HRTEM images and reconstructed shapes of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles: a), b) truncated cube; c), d) prism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57, Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. 
More importantly, knowledge of the adsorption behavior of different molecules onto the TiO2 surface provides more profound insight into the mechanisms of the corresponding photocatalytic reactions.58–62 In this regard, attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) serves as a powerful tool to probe the interactions between the TiO2 surface and organic molecules, such as carboxylic acids.63–65 For example, three forms of oxalate structures are formed upon chemisorption of oxalic acid on the TiO2 surface in a low-pH aqueous system, as illustrated in Fig. 5, with complex (I) being the most stable and complex (III) being the least stable. Sequential ATR-FTIR spectra of these adsorbed oxalates under UV illumination suggest that the photocatalytic oxidation of oxalate proceeds through the most stable surface complex, i.e., complex (I) in Fig. 5. Complexes (II) and (III) undergo structural rearrangements to replenish the surface availability of complex (I) during its oxidation.
 Fig. 5  Schematic evolution of the surface composition of oxalates chemisorbed on TiO2 surface during UV illumination. Reprinted from ref. 64, Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier. 
The pH of the aqueous environment of the TiO2 particles appears to be one of the most influential external conditions determining their photocatalytic activity. Apparently, the surface adsorption behavior towards ionic species can be directly modified by changing the pH of the solution: at lower pH, the TiO2 surface is protonated to be positively charged, which favors the adsorption of anionic species from the solution; at higher pH, the surface is negatively charged thus repelling anionic species from approaching the surface. On the other hand, the pH also has an influence on the levels of energy bands in TiO2. The flatband potential, Efb, of a single crystal TiO2 photoelectrode varies with pH according to Efb = Efb(pH = 0) −0.059pH(17)where Efb(pH = 0) is the flatband potential of the photoelectrode at 25 °C at pH 0. In other words, the flatband potential shifts cathodically by 59 mV upon changing the pH by one unit. The value of Efb(pH = 0) in rutile TiO2 photoelectrodes has been determined to be 0.06, −0.038 or −0.05 V (vs. NHE) by different researchers. Particulate TiO2 also exhibits such a Nernstian pH-dependence at 25 °C as reported by Duonghong et al.66 using colloidal TiO2 composed mainly of amorphous and anatase TiO2: Efb(TiO2.particle) = −(0.12 ± 0.02) − 0.059pH(18)
The difference between the Efb(pH = 0) values of particulate and film photoelectrode TiO2 can, for example, be explained by the different crystal structures of particles and electrodes. Anatase particles possess a larger bandgap than rutile particles and electrodes. As the valence band position appears to be rather insensitive to the TiO2 lattice structure, this difference is thus reflected in a more negative value of Efb(pH = 0) of anatase particles than of rutile electrodes. Since the flatband potential is usually very close to the Fermi level of electrons and the conduction band edge in n-type TiO2, the pH-dependence of Efb also determines the position of the conduction band edge and hence the rate of interfacial electron transfer. Consequently, reduction reactions initiated by conduction band electrons will be more favored (i.e., occur at a higher rate or yield) at high pH values while oxidation processes are favored at low pH values. Depending upon the desired reactions, the proper choice of pH will therefore be crucial for the overall process efficiency. Since this so-called Nerstian behavior is by no means limited to TiO2 but is a general phenomenon of almost any semiconductor/water interface, the above considerations can readily be generalized for all of the subsequently described systems.
3.2 ZnO
ZnO has a similar bandgap to that of TiO2 as shown in Fig. 6 and is expected to exhibit similar photocatalytic capacity to that of TiO2, provided that this property is largely dependent on the energy level of CB and VB.67 Therefore, it has been comparatively studied with TiO2 in terms of its photocatalytic performance.68–75 The main drawback of particulate ZnO in an aqueous environment is, however, its chemical instability: ZnO + 2Haq+ ⇌ Znaq2+ + H2O(19) ZnO + H2O ⇌ Zn(OH)2(20)Hence, the pH range in which ZnO is found to be stable is very limited.19
 Fig. 6  CB and VB energy levels of several semiconductors. (The semiconductors are in contact with aqueous electrolyte at pH 1. The energy scale is indicated in electron volts using either the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) or the vacuum level as reference. On the right, the standard potentials of several redox couples are presented against the standard hydrogen electrode potential.) Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: [Nature] (ref. 67), copyright (2001). 
ZnO has shown photocatalytic activities in the reduction or oxidation of several compounds including organic dyes and pulp and paper bleaching effluents, etc.69,70,72,76–82 Similar oxidation pathways to those of TiO2 were confirmed in ZnO photocatalysts, including the formation of ˙OH radicals as well as the direct oxidation by photogenerated holes, etc. But the implementation of ZnO photocatalytic systems has not flourished like TiO2 systems have, mainly because of their unsatisfactory photostability. Under prolonged optical irradiation, ZnO suffers from photodecomposition, which is mainly attributed to the oxidation of ZnO from the solid phase into the aqueous phase by holes according to the following reaction:83 ZnO + 2hVB+ → Zn2+ + ½O2(21)
Although its photocatalytic application is not as successful as TiO2, ZnO has been attracting more and more attention in other fields, including sensors,84–86 optoelectronics87 and field emission units.88–90
3.3 SnO2
SnO2 is also an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap energy of ∼3.8 eV, which corresponds to an optical absorption edge below 330 nm. However the CB position of SnO2 is such that it is incapable of reducing oxygen molecules (Fig. 6). Therefore, in the past, semiconductors of such kind have not been considered as suitable photocatalysts that can be used individually. On the other hand, such materials may have an advantage regarding their band structures and can possibly provide another way to serve in photocatalytic systems, i.e., when coupled with other semiconductors with suitable matching of band levels.91 This has been demonstrated in a number of publications,91–95 the details of which are given later. A much narrower bandgap of 2.53 eV was also reported for SnO2, corresponding to an absorption edge of 490 nm.93 Quite recently, an interesting type of SnO2 photocatalyst, nanosized V-shaped bipods, was reported by Wang and coworkers,96 and the materials showed a broad photoresponse in the visible region up to ∼550 nm. This was believed to be caused by the presence of oxygen vacancies, together with abundant surface states.
3.4 WO3, Fe2O3 and CdS
WO3, Fe2O3 and CdS are jointly discussed in this section simply because of their similar and relatively narrow bandgaps, 2.6, 2.1, and 2.25 eV, respectively, which make them capable of being excited by visible light. Fig. 6 shows that the upper edge of the VB of WO3 is close to that of TiO2, which exceeds the H2O/O2 oxidation potential. Thus, the photogenerated holes in WO3 upon bandgap excitation are capable of oxidizing a wide range of compounds. The advantage of WO3 as a photocatalyst is that the bandgap is only ∼2.6 eV, which is ∼0.6 eV narrower than TiO2. Therefore, more visible light can be harnessed by WO3 from the sunlight spectrum.97 Another virtue of WO3 is its remarkable photostability in acidic aqueous solutions making it a powerful photocatalyst, e.g., for the treatment of wastewater contaminated by organic acids.98 For example, formic acid and Rhodamine B have been reported to be effectively degraded on WO3 photoelectrodes.
Another important application of WO3 is in photocatalytic water splitting to produce hydrogen gas using visible solar light, due to its narrow bandgap. Earlier studies of the photoelectrochemical behavior of both polycrystalline and monocrystalline WO3 provided instructive knowledge for the development of photocatalytic water-splitting systems.99,100 The difficulty in the overall water splitting (both reduction and oxidation of H2O molecules are to be achieved) by WO3 is that the lower edge of the CB lies below the redox potential of H2O/H2, as illustrated in Fig. 6. This means that the reduction of water molecules to generate hydrogen gas is thermodynamically unfavorable.101 Applying a bias potential to the system can overcome the energy barrier for the photogenerated electrons to be ejected into the adsorbed water molecules.97 Coupling with other semiconductor materials102 and doping by metal ions103,104 are other alternatives to make use of the oxidation power of WO3 for water splitting. WO3 has also been applied in electrochromic105–107 and photochromic108–112 devices such as large area displays and “smart windows” because WO3 films can be switched between different optical states under different electrochemical or optical conditions. The electrochromic effect is caused by the electrochemical reaction between the WO3 electrode and protons in the electrolyte solution, under the influence of a bias potential to provide charge carriers (electrons in this case). The electrons can then create color centers by reducing the W6+ species to W5+ species. The photochromism effect of WO3 is due to the formation of an identical absorption band upon light irradiation.113 This process is completely reversible by exposing the reduced sample to oxygen gas.
The band structure of α-Fe2O3 is quite similar to that of WO3, with the VB edge exceeding the standard redox potential of H2O/O2 and the CB edge being lower than the standard redox potential of H2/H2O. Upon optical irradiation, the recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers is reported to be very rapid (within 1 ns) if no electron or hole scavengers are present in the electrolyte.114 In the presence of appropriate scavengers, however, the holes can function as powerful oxidants, and the electrons as moderately powerful reductants. For example, S4+ species, such as aqueous SO2, HSO3− and SO32−etc., have been shown to be readily oxidized on the surface of α-Fe2O3.115,116 Using Fe3+ as the electron scavengers, α-Fe2O3 is capable of oxidizing H2O to evolve oxygen gas.117 A bias potential can also help to achieve total H2O splitting under visible irradiation.118 A number of organic compounds (e.g., salicylic acid,119 phenols,120 azo dyes and 2-naphthol121) can also be photocatalytically degraded on α-Fe2O3 photocatalysts, either by adding sacrificial scavengers or through the application of a bias potential, although the efficiency remains to be improved.
In the area of photoelectrochemistry, CdS has been the most heavily studied II–VI group semiconductor.122 It has a higher VB edge as compared with the above-mentioned metal oxides, as shown in Fig. 6. This is because the VBs of metal oxides are mainly formed by O 2p states, while that of CdS is formed by S 2p states. The electronegativity of S is smaller than that of O, resulting in the different VB positions. Quantum size effects, represented by the markedly different properties of materials when their sizes decrease, are often emphasized in the study of CdS semiconductors. For example, the onset of light absorption by CdS varies significantly as the particles decrease in size. Moreover, this quantum size effect can be maintained during the assembly of CdS films from quantum-sized CdS particles.123–125 For example, assembly of p-aminothiophenol-capped CdS nanoparticles onto a p-aminothiophenol-functionalized Au electrode was achieved by electropolymerization, resulting in flexible charge carrier behavior upon optical irradiation under a bias potential.124 Chemoselective photocatalytic reduction of aromatic azides to aromatic amines was recently reported on CdS quantum dots in the presence of sacrificial electron donors.126 As commonly seen in other low CB edge semiconductors, CdS also suffers from photocorrosion by photogenerated holes.127 Moreover, as reported by Meissner et al.,128 there might even be fundamental problems concerning the principal ability of CdS to form molecular hydrogen from water in a photoelectrochemical cell based upon the position of its conduction band edge. This problem has been recently addressed by a new method for the preparation of CdS electrodes, meanwhile obtaining high photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production.129
4. Coupled semiconductor photocatalysts
Coupling between different semiconductors in photocatalytic systems was designed to alleviate the charge carrier recombination in individual photoelectrodes. A good matching of their CB and VB levels can realize a vectorial transfer of photogenerated charge carriers from one to the other as illustrated in Fig. 7, where the relative positions of the energy bands of the two particles are shown in terms of energetic rather than spatial levels. After coupling in the shown manner, the energy gap between corresponding band levels drives the charge carriers from one particle to its neighbor to form a spatial separation between electrons and holes. But coupling of semiconductors does not always enhance the charge separation, because the design of a coupled photoelectrode relies on the band structures of its components, which are determined by many other factors (e.g., surface area, defect density, crystallinity and quantum size effects). More detailed aspects of such coupling effects will be discussed below in a few examples.
 Fig. 7  Coupling two different semiconductor particles and charge carrier separation. 
Other than the mutually photosensitive components, coupling between one photosensitive and another non-sensitive (e.g., very wide bandgap) semiconductor may also have positive effects on the photocatalytic performance of the sensitive one. For example, Kisch and Weiss130,131 studied the SiO2-supported CdS photoelectrode in an organic addition reaction and found that the enhanced photocatalytic activity was related to the changes in the bandgap and the flatband potential of CdS, which originate from an electronic semiconductor-support interaction mediated by [Si]–O–Cd–S bonds. The surface chemistry, in particular the acidity, can also be modified to benefit the performance of photocatalysts, as exemplified by TiO2/SiO2 and TiO2/ZrO2.132,133
4.1 TiO2/WO3
The coupling scheme depicted in Fig. 7 has been achieved for WO3/TiO2 photoelectrodes. As shown in an earlier study134 concerning the effect of adding WO3 to TiO2 on the photocatalytic activity of TiO2, the observed enhanced photocatalytic degradation of 1,4-dichlorobenzene was explained by the increased electron transfer from TiO2 to WO3via the formation of an intermediate W(V) species, together with the increased surface acidity in the coupled photoelectrode. Protonated surface hydroxyl groups, and hence the surface acidity, can promote the electron transfer from the CB of TiO2 to the adsorbed oxygen molecules.135 In a study by Kwon et al.,136 the role of the increased surface acidity due to WO3 addition was confirmed by treating the photocatalytic reactions on WO3/TiO2 electrodes using the Langmuir–Hinshelwood equation137 as follows: (22)where r is the rate of photocatalytic reaction; k is the reaction rate constant only related to the illumination source, the catalyst activity and the reaction media, but not to the structure of the reactants; K represents the equilibrium adsorption constant and is a function of the reactant molecular structure; C denotes the concentration of the reactant. The magnitude of k is indicative of the decomposition rate of the adsorbed organics, which is closely related to the charge carrier separation and trapped charge density on the surface. Meanwhile, K represents the adsorption efficiency of the organics, which is intimately related to the Lewis surface acidity of the particles. Therefore, the contribution to the enhanced photocatalytic activity by WO3 incorporation can be divided into two aspects: 1) improved charge carrier separation and 2) increased surface adsorption affinity. The authors suggested that under certain circumstances the second might be the predominant effect. Fuerte et al.138 observed continuously enhanced photocatalytic activity in toluene degradation by TiO2/WO3 when the W concentration was enhanced. They ascribed the effect to the creation of W-related trapping centers on the catalyst surface and intraband electronic states. As proposed by Miyauchi et al.139 who studied the effect of layered WO3/TiO2 structures, both the surface hydrophilicity of the top TiO2 layer and the photocatalytic efficiency for the oxidation of the test molecule methylene blue were increased, which was also explained by a charge carrier transfer between the TiO2 and WO3 layers. Similar effects were observed by Somasundaram et al. when they studied the photoaction spectra of TiO2/WO3 composite films.140
The TiO2/WO3 coupling does not always enhance the photocatalytic activity of TiO2. For example, too much loading of WO3 shows adverse effects because some W sites can act as charge recombination centers according to the following scheme:141 W6+ + e(TiO2)CB− → W5+(23) W5+ + h(TiO2)VB+ → W6+(24)
Another negative example was reported to be due to the difference in WO3 crystallinity. Higashimoto et al.142 studied two systems of TiO2 coupled with either amorphous or crystalline WO3. Their bandgap calculations on the two systems revealed different CB and VB positions of amorphous and crystalline WO3, and so are the different CB positions between TiO2 and WO3 in the two systems, as depicted in Fig. 8. The band structures in the crystalline-WO3/TiO2 couple do not favor the separation of charge carriers. Although the CB electron transfer is favored in amorphous-WO3/TiO2, the bandgaps and band edge levels in WO3 and TiO2 may vary from sample to sample due to different preparation methods.142,143 Therefore, the fabrication of coupled semiconductors with controlled band structure properties is still a challenging task.
 Fig. 8  Energetic diagram of amorphous- and crystalline-WO3/TiO2. Reprinted from ref. 142, Copyright (2006), with permission from Elsevier. 
4.2 TiO2/SnO2
As mentioned previously, SnO2 has a very large bandgap (∼3.8 eV) and has been traditionally viewed as a poor candidate for photocatalytic applications. However, coupling SnO2 with other semiconductors can greatly enhance its photocatalytic activities in organic pollutant degradation,91,92,144–148 especially when an external bias potential is applied.91
Vinodgopal and Kamat91 reported a very rapid decolorization of Acid Orange 7 using a coupled SnO2/TiO2 photoelectrode under a bias potential. They ascribed the enhanced degradation rate as improved charge separation due to good matching in the energy levels (ECB for SnO2 = 0 V vs. NHE at pH 7, while for TiO2ECB = −0.5 V vs. NHE at pH 7). The anodic bias potential was also reported to be responsible for the enhancement in photocatalytic activity by driving away the electrons into the conduction band of SnO2, thus promoting the oxidation of dye molecules on the TiO2 surface where photogenerated holes are more abundant. The photoelectrocatalytic degradation of naphthol blue black by a similar system92 again was significantly improved compared with pure TiO2, due to the enhanced charge separation between TiO2 and SnO2 nanoparticles. As the content of SnO2 was increased, the influence of oxygen on both the short-circuit photocurrent and the open-circuit photovoltage became less and less significant, indicating the rapid injections of electrons from TiO2 into SnO2 before recombination with holes or being scavenged by oxygen molecules. A scheme depicting this coupled photoelectrode is shown in Fig. 9. The network of three-dimensionally interconnected nanoparticles of both kinds generates sufficient contact points between these two kinds of particles and thus creates a large SnO2/TiO2 interface.
 Fig. 9  Idealized photoinduced charge separation in a SnO2/TiO2 semiconductor film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92, Copyright 1996 ACS. 
Another coupling approach is to deposit one type of semiconductor film over another, thus a clear-cut two-dimensional interface layer will be achieved. Employing this approach, the charge carrier transfer between TiO2 and SnO2 was also confirmed as the dominant factor in the improved photocatalytic activity. Hattori et al.146,149 prepared double-layered SnO2/TiO2-coupled films (as shown in Fig. 10) and studied their photocatalytic activity in both the oxidation of formic acid and 1,3,5,7-tetramethylcyclotetrasiloxane and the reduction of Ag+ and bis(2-dipyridyl)disulfide. By comparing the amount of CO2 evolved, the photooxidation of formic acid on SnO2/TiO2-coupled films was confirmed to occur more efficiently than on pure TiO2 films. The degradation of 1,3,5,7-tetramethylcyclotetrasiloxane was also more efficient on the coupled SnO2/TiO2 films. On the other hand, photocatalytic reduction processes on SnO2/TiO2 couple were found to be less efficient than on pure TiO2 films. These results are unanimously consistent with the vectorial charge carrier transfer as proposed earlier.91,92 Note that the electrode substrates in these studies are non-conducting, therefore electrons transferred from TiO2 into SnO2 can only exit these layers via the edges of the SnO2 layer in contact with the electrolyte.146
 Fig. 10  SnO2 and TiO2/SnO2 deposited on glass substrates. Reproduced from ref. 146 by permission of the Electrochemical Society. 
Shang et al.150 also confirmed the positive effect of the coupled semiconductors by the higher photocatalytic degradation of formaldehyde on SnO2/TiO2 bilayers which were compared with pure TiO2. They further studied the effect of the thickness of the TiO2 layer on the photocatalytic activity of the couple. As the TiO2 thickness increased, the activity was found to decline, until a similar value as that of the pure TiO2 film was attained. As the TiO2 layer became thicker, more electrons generated far away from the SnO2/TiO2 interface recombined with the holes before they could reach the region of the interface in which a gradient could “pull” them towards the SnO2 CB. The outermost TiO2 region functioned very much the same way as a pure TiO2 film. If TiO2 was firstly deposited on the glass substrate, followed by depositing a SnO2 layer over the TiO2 film, the photocatalytic activity of this couple was much lower than that of the glass/SnO2/TiO2 configuration. This observation supports the coupling effect in that the electrons in the SnO2 conduction band now could not be transferred into TiO2 due to the energy barrier. More complex patterns can also be formed in combining SnO2 and TiO2 layers into a film photoelectrode.151,152 As shown in Fig. 11, a first layer of SnO2 followed by two layers of TiO2 stripes orthogonal to each other resulted in much higher activity, as compared with non-patterned structures.
 Fig. 11  3D imaging of a cross-patterned SnO2/TiO2 coupled film. (The SnO2 layer was at the bottom, with two orthogonal TiO2 stripes on top.) Reprinted with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2001 ACS. 
4.3 TiO2/CdS
The relative energy positions of CBs and VBs between CdS and TiO2 are shown in Fig. 12. Both the CB and VB of CdS particles are higher than their counterparts in the TiO2 particles.153 The smaller bandgap of CdS (∼2.5 eV) enables it to absorb visible light to generate electrons and holes. Subsequently the electrons will flow from the CB of CdS to the CB of the adjacent TiO2, leaving the holes behind in the VB of CdS. The enhanced charge separation under visible light illumination has made the couple widely used in photo(electro)catalytic reactions, e.g., for the degradation of organic pollutants,154–158 the production of hydrogen gas159,160 and in visible-light-driven solar cells, etc.161
 Fig. 12  Band positions in the coupled TiO2/CdS system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. 
Studies on the coupling effect between CdS and TiO2 can be traced back to the early 1980s, when the hydrogen generation via photocatalytic H2S splitting by CdS was found to be enhanced upon the addition of TiO2 particles.162 Spanhel et al.163 also found a 10-fold increase in the quantum yield for the photoreduction of methyl viologen by coupled CdS/TiO2. Evans et al.164 suggested that the CB electron transfer from CdS to TiO2 could be completed on a time scale of picoseconds, resulting in a significantly slower recombination for the charge carriers formed upon light absorption in CdS.
Earlier research on TiO2/CdS couples was mostly limited to colloidal systems, and CdS was usually the dominant component. Subsequent research started to reverse this trend by using CdS as a “sensitizer”. A small amount of CdS dispersed in a TiO2 matrix can absorb visible light, making the coupled photocatalyst sensitive to visible light. Yu et al.165 prepared a CdS-sensitized TiO2 nanocrystalline photocatalyst and obtained much higher activity toward the degradation of methylene blue under visible light illumination (λ > 400 nm) than with pure TiO2 or CdS due to the rectified electron transfer from CdS to TiO2, as shown by the formation of Ti3+ observed in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra.166 Wang et al.167 prepared a coupled TiO2/CdS hydrogel with a CdS loading of only about 0.9%. The hydrogel consisted of uniform crystalline CdS particles (∼2 nm in size) well dispersed in TiO2. At this size, the quantum size effect from CdS could be expected, i.e., the bandgap of CdS was widened to increase the energy difference between the CBs of CdS and TiO2. Meanwhile, the coupled semiconductor was still sensitive to visible light for the degradation of methylene blue under visible light (with an excitation wavelength longer than 420 nm). The degradation mainly took place on the TiO2 surface since most of the CdS surface was covered by the TiO2 matrix.
Another benefit of a thus-structured couple is that the surrounding TiO2 matrix can protect the CdS quantum dots against photocorrosion, which has been a major problem for CdS photocatalysts to be used in aqueous environments.168 The effects of quantized TiO2 particles were also studied in TiO2/CdS couples. Sant and Kamat169 prepared extremely small TiO2 particles coupled with CdS. The quantum size effects from both TiO2 and CdS were confirmed by the blue shift of the absorption edges as the size of the particles decreased. When the TiO2 size went down to about 0.5 nm, the bandgap of TiO2 was widened by 0.85 eV. This in turn shifted the energy of the conduction band edge of TiO2 by over 0.5 eV towards negative values. Such a shift in TiO2 CB now created an energy barrier for the electron transfer from CdS to TiO2, because the CB edge of TiO2 had become more negative than that of CdS. This was confirmed by the CdS emission spectra, i.e., the quenching of the CdS emission (the electron transfer from CdS to TiO2) could no longer be observed as the TiO2 particle size dropped to 0.5 nm with the CdS size remaining unchanged, as illustrated in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Energy level diagram of quantized TiO2/CdS coupled semiconductors. Reproduced from ref. 169, by permission of the PCCP owner societies. 
It is straightforward that an adequate physical and electric contact (e.g., an ohmic contact) between different semiconductors in a coupled semiconductor assembly is necessary for an effective transfer and hence a significant separation of the charge carriers. Thus, many efforts have been dedicated to this regard. Jang et al.160 prepared a coupled CdS/TiO2 photocatalyst by coupling CdS nanoparticles with TiO2 nanosheets to maximize the contact between the two phases. The thus-coupled photocatalyst showed higher activity for hydrogen production and methylene blue degradation under visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm) than did a physical mixture of CdS nanoparticles and TiO2 nanorods. Co-axial arrays of TiO2/CdS sheath/core couples were also prepared to increase the contact interface,170 as shown in Fig. 14. The outer layer of the TiO2 sheath was firstly grown as guided by an anodic aluminium oxide template; then the CdS core was grown within the TiO2 sheath. This coupling mode has been found to be highly favorable to the vectorial electron transfer between the co-axial CdS and TiO2.
 Fig. 14  SEM image of TiO2/CdS nanocables prepared by templated liquid-phase deposition. Reprinted from ref. 170, Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier. 
While the above-mentioned methods tried to couple TiO2 with CdS via direct contact between hard particles, a “soft” coupling scheme was also proposed. Robel et al.161 used bi-functional organic molecules as the surface modifier to link CdSe quantum dots (QDs) with TiO2 nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 15. The optical absorption properties of the QDs remained unchanged but the emission yield decreased by ∼80% when linked to TiO2. This indirectly proved the hypothesis that TiO2 nanoparticles interact with the excited CdSe QDs via a vectorial electron transfer scheme. It should be emphasized that photoactivity depends strongly on the physicochemical properties of the coupled semiconductors, such as the surface area, porosity, adsorption capacity, distribution of the active sites, etc. Upon coupling, besides the vectorial charge transfer, the original properties of the components might also be modified. This complicates the comparison of photoactivity before and after coupling. In many cases, only the total photocatalytic activity, which is the collective performance of many factors, was studied.
 Fig. 15  TiO2/CdSe couple linked by organic molecules: (a) particle–particle; (b) particle–film.161 
5. Metal/semiconductor composites
Combining noble metals with semiconductor photocatalysts171,172 on a nanometer scale was proposed to enhance the photocatalytic activity due to their different Fermi levels, characterized by the work function of the metals and the band structure of the semiconductors. Upon contact, a Schottky barrier can be formed between the semiconductor and the metal particle, leading to a rectified charge carrier transfer similar to that in the coupled semiconductors.13,173,174 As shown in Fig. 16, irradiation by photons with higher energy than the semiconductor bandgap generates electrons in the CB of the semiconductor and raises its Fermi level to more negative values.175 Then, the energetic difference at the semiconductor/metal interface drives the electrons from the CB of the semiconductor into the metal nanoparticles. The Fermi level of the metal is thereby also negatively shifted so that a secondary electron transfer can occur between the metal and electron acceptors in the redox couples from the surrounding electrolyte. A large number of reports on nanosized Ag, Au and Pt combined with photocatalysts such as TiO2 have indeed shown increased photoactivity that was consequently explained by this effect.176,177
 Fig. 16  Electron transfer and Fermi level shift at a metal/semiconductor interface.175 
5.1 Ag/TiO2
The combination of Ag and TiO2 can be achieved in different manners. For instance, Ag nanoparticles can be deposited on the TiO2 surface by photo-assisted reduction of Ag+ ions in aqueous solutions under UV illumination.178,179 Ag/TiO2 core/shell structures can also be obtained, for example, by firstly reducing Ag+ ions to form an Ag core and then hydrolyzing titanium-(triethanolaminato)isopropoxide to form a TiO2 shell around the Ag particles.180,181 In the absence of electron scavengers, such materials have shown the ability to store the photogenerated electrons transferred from TiO2 to the Ag cores upon UV excitation, as shown in Fig. 17. The electron transfer continues until a Fermi level equilibrium is established between Ag and TiO2. The shift in the surface plasmon resonance band is used to measure the number of electrons stored in the Ag core, with an estimation of about 66 electrons per Ag/TiO2 core/shell structure. This electron storage ability shows the importance of such structures in photon energy conversion by storing electrons during excitation and delivering them back in the dark. Their photocatalytic activity is limited, however, as indicated by a C60/C60− probe under UV irradiation.181 Similar electron transfer and Fermi-level equilibration were observed in noble metal/ZnO nanocomposites.182
 Fig. 17  Electron accumulation in an Ag/TiO2 core-shell particle under UV irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180, Copyright 2004 ACS. 
High photoactivity of Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites has been reported, for example, in the decoloration of methyl orange solutions.183 This was attributed to the multi-heterojunctions formed by Ag/TiO2 (anatase), Ag/TiO2 (rutile) and anatase/rutile, etc. Although anatase TiO2 has been known to be more active than rutile TiO2, their coexistence has a positive effect on the photocatalytic activity, as exemplified by the highly active Degussa P25 with a two-phase formula.184 Ag nanoparticles were also intercalated between TiO2 nanosheets, and a larger photocurrent could be obtained as compared with pure TiO2 films.185 This was explained by the enhanced photoelectron conduction between TiO2 layers due to metallic Ag. Under visible light irradiation (wavelengths longer than 470 nm), photooxidation of Rhodamine B by Ag/TiO2 can be achieved due to the following mechanisms:186 1) the dye molecules are photosensitive and can be excited to generate electrons that are then transferred to the TiO2 CB; 2) TiO2 under visible light illumination only acts as the electron acceptor from the excited dye due to its large bandgap; 3) the Ag nanoparticles attract the electrons from the TiO2 CB due to the Schottky barrier effect; 4) Ag nanoparticles can also act as efficient dye-adsorption sites, where oxidant species can be formed from electron scavenging by adsorbed oxygen molecules. Under a bias potential, Ag/TiO2 thin film photoelectrodes on ITO glass can efficiently degrade formic acid. Both Ag loading and the bias potential are responsible for the increased activity. Ag not only traps the photoelectrons from TiO2 but also assists the bias electric field to drive the photoelectrons into the external circuit.
Photocatalytic reduction has also been studied employing Ag/TiO2 nanocomposite powders with very small Ag clusters (diameter ∼ 1.5 nm) and low Ag loading (∼0.24wt%) prepared by a photo-assisted deposition method.187–189 The composite showed very high efficiency in the photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene and bis(2-dipyridyl)disulfide. The Ag0 nanoclusters attracting the photoelectrons from the TiO2 CB worked as selective adsorption/reduction sites for nitrobenzene and bis(2-dipyridyl)disulfide, while the TiO2 surface with trapped photogenerated holes served as oxidation sites. The high efficiency of such reactions was explained by the combined effects of selective adsorption and rectified charge separation. Photoactivity enhancement was also observed in the photoreduction of selenate ions by Ag/TiO2.190 Without Ag, the selenate was firstly reduced by photoelectrons to Se0. Then, upon the exhaustion of the selenate in the solution, the as-formed Se0 was further reduced to H2Se. In the presence of Ag, the selenate was directly reduced to H2Se. The photoelectrons were thought to be transferred from TiO2 to Se0via Ag. The accumulation of electrons in Se0 before the exhaustion of Se(VI) led to the reduction of Se0 to Se2−. It is necessary to take into account the reaction kinetics to elucidate the mechanism of this photoreduction process, in addition to thermodynamics considerations (i.e., the Fermi level differences between TiO2, Ag, Se4+/Se0 and Se0/Se2−, etc.).
It is the contact between metallic particles and semiconductors that forms the Schottky barrier between them, but noble metals do not always exist in the pure metallic form in their composite. Certain parts of the metals can be oxidized to form ions. Xin et al.191 reported three types of silver species, including Ag2O, AgO and Ag0, in the Ag/TiO2 composites prepared by a sol-gel method. At lower Ag loadings (< 0.3mol%), silver mainly exists as Ag2O and AgO, whereas at higher loadings (up to 5 mol%), all three types exist with Ag0 being the dominant one. Ag2O may introduce impurity band levels within the material. The oxygen-related surface states are multiple due to various valence states of Ag species. Two O1s peaks from Ag–O and Ag0-adsorbed O were confirmed in addition to the lattice O, surface bridging O and the surface hydroxyl O in TiO2. The improved photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B by Ag/TiO2 indicates that both oxidized and metallic silver can effectively capture the photogenerated electrons and enhance the photoactivity of TiO2. Kumar et al.192 studied the photooxidation of aniline using Ag/Ag+-loaded TiO2 and found an improvement in the photoactivity due to similar reasons.
Noble metal nanoparticles are expected to undergo morphology transformation after long time exposure to light.184,193–196 For example, Ag particles 40–60 nm in size in water can be fragmented into smaller particles when exposed to highly energetic laser pulses.197 Photoinduced structural changes were also observed in Ag nanoparticles deposited on glass.198 Moreover, optical irradiation was used for synthesis purposes to convert Ag nanoparticles into triangular nanoprisms with special optical properties.199 The size and morphology dependence of the catalytic activity of nanomaterials has been well emphasized in the literature.200–204 Moreover, the electron or hole scavengers in solution can also affect the oxidation or reduction of the metals.205 For example, in an Ag/TiO2-nanorod composite, the Ag particles diminished upon UV irradiation with oxygen as electron scavengers in the solution.206 Recognition of such problems is of great importance in designing high-efficiency nanocomposite photocatalysts.207
Photochromic materials, which change their colors reversibly in response to light, can be used in smart windows, displays and memory devices.208 While conventional photochromic materials respond monochromatically, multicolor photochromism often requires combinations of different materials or filters. If this can be achieved on a single material, photochromic devices would find broader applications such as in rewritable color copy paper, electronic paper and multi-wavelength optical memory.209 Tatsuma and coworkers210–212 recently explored an interesting property of Ag/TiO2 film, as shown in Fig. 18. The film color was initially brownish-gray. Upon visible light irradiation, it was changed to be identical to the incident light and could be changed back to brownish-gray under UV light. This multi-color response arose from the broad absorption of the Ag/TiO2 film ranging from 350 to 700 nm, due to the diversity in size and morphology of Ag particles and to the high refractive index of the TiO2 matrix.
 Fig. 18  Multi-colored Ag/TiO2 film. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: [Nature Materials] (ref. 210), copyright (2003). 
5.2 Au/TiO2
Despite its bulk inertness, Au nanoparticles with diameters smaller than 5 nm on TiO2 supports have shown high catalytic activity in chemical reactions such as low-temperature CO oxidation,213–215 water-gas-shift reactions and epoxidation of propylene.216 Au nanoparticles are also able to enhance photocatalytic reactions if incorporated into photocatalysts like TiO2.217 For example, Au/TiO2 photoelectrodes under visible light irradiation generate photocurrents due to Au surface plasmon resonance. Photoelectrocatalytic production of hydrogen gas using Au/TiO2 film electrodes was also attempted.218 Different preparation methods such as impregnation, photodeposition, deposition-precipitation and sol-gel have been employed to achieve Au/TiO2 composites. Their photoactivity indeed showed a dependence on the preparation methods. Mechanisms on the role of Au nanoparticles were investigated with the aid of electrochemical, photochemical and spectroelectrochemical probing techniques.218,219 For example, due to the stability of C60− in N2 and the ease to follow its optical absorption at 1075 nm, C60/C60− redox couples were used as a convenient probe to determine the Fermi levels of the Au/TiO2 composite system. According to the report by Subramanian et al.,175,220 the Fermi-level shift in Au/TiO2 composites showed a size dependence (20 mV for 8 nm, 40 mV for 5 nm and 60 mV for 3 nm Au particles). The influence of the Au particle size on the photoelectrochemical behavior of the respective Au/TiO2 system was probed by isolating the individual charge transfer steps as shown in Fig. 19. Upon UV irradiation in the presence of ethanol, photoelectrons were trapped in Ti4+ sites in the TiO2 nanoparticle suspension. After addition of Au nanoparticles with controlled size, the trapped electrons were then transferred to Au, as indicated by the decreased blue coloration. Once C60 was introduced, the electrons trapped at the Au nanoparticles were further transferred to reduce C60 to form C60− as confirmed by the quantifiable increase in the 1075 nm absorption intensity. This probing technique is very helpful for understanding photoreduction processes on these nanocomposite materials.
 Fig. 19  Photoelectron transfer in Au/TiO2 probed by C60/C60− couple. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2004 ACS. 
Au/TiO2 nanocomposites have shown high activity in photocatalytic degradation of various organic compounds. Li et al.221 studied photooxidation of methylene blue by Au-loaded TiO2 in aqueous solutions. The high Schottky barrier existing between TiO2 and Au nanoparticles facilitated the photoelectron transfer out of the TiO2 CB and enhanced the electron/hole separation. Meanwhile, the existence of ionic Au+ and Au3+ species served as traps for charge carriers, which also contributed to the charge separation. Au loading should be controlled properly to achieve the optimum performance. This is because Au ionic impurity levels can also act as charge recombination centers, which becomes relevant particularly at very high Au loadings. A similar tendency was found in Au/TiO2 thin film composites with Au deposited over the TiO2 layer via electron beam evaporation.222 With these structures, the highest photoactivity for methyl orange degradation was obtained at a surface Au concentration of about 0.8 µg cm−2. The Au particle size also affected the performance. As the Au concentration increased, its particle size also increased to benefit the photoelectron transfer because the distance between the trapped electrons and remaining holes became larger. Very high Au loadings, however, resulted in a high coverage of the TiO2 surface area, leaving a smaller surface exposed for light absorption and methyl orange adsorption. Compared with bare TiO2, enhancement in phenol photodegradation was also reported with Au/TiO2 thin film electrodes.223
Based on their experimental results concerning ethanol and methanol photooxidation by Au/TiO2 composites under visible light illumination, Tatsuma et al.224 proposed a plasmon-induced charge separation scheme. They observed a interesting phenomenon in which the photoelectrons were excited from Au nanoparticles and transferred to the TiO2 CB.175,182 Meanwhile, the oxidized Au species accepted electrons from the donor molecules present in the solution to recover the charge balance. The process is illustrated in Fig. 20.
 Fig. 20  Charge separation upon visible-light irradiation on Au/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224, Copyright 2005 ACS. 
The photocatalytic activity of Au/TiO2 nanocomposites mainly depends on the effectiveness of the electron transfer between Au and TiO2 resulting in an improved electron-hole separation. The charge transfer behavior is dictated by the specific electronic structures of both Au and TiO2. The so-called Schottky barrier effect only provides the conceptual explanations of how the charge transfer proceeds. Other factors such as the particle sizes, lattice defects, oxygen vacancies, surface states in both components225 and the chemical environment surrounding the heterojunctions, etc. also influence the characteristics of the heterojunctions within the composite materials.
5.3 Pt/TiO2
Platinization of semiconductor photocatalysts like TiO2 has become a routine practice to enhance photoactivity.226–228 Pt nanoparticles showed very fast electron trapping from semiconductor CB upon light excitation.182 Other factors such as selective adsorption of reactants at the Pt surface may also contribute to the observed activity enhancement. There were also cases in which Pt loading showed no positive effects on photocatalytic performance.141,184,229 This indicates that the charge carrier transfer in a Pt/semiconductor composite is as complicated as in the Ag and Au counterparts.
Platinized TiO2 has long been used as a photocatalyst for a variety of reactions.40,230–232 The role of Pt nano-contacts as electron traps was confirmed by transient absorption spectra analysis of Pt/TiO2 powders.233 As shown in Fig. 21, in addition to the normal decay of the transient absorption of the trapped CB electrons in TiO2 at 600 nm due to the electron/hole recombination following 390 nm excitation, a new decay component lasting a few picoseconds was observed and interpreted as the photoelectron migration from TiO2 to Pt. In pure TiO2 samples, no such decay occurred within 25 picoseconds. This clearly proved that the charge carrier separation can be enhanced by Pt trapping of the electrons from the TiO2 CB. Consistent with this mechanism, a recent study234 revealed that the photoluminescence of Pt/TiO2 under UV irradiation was blue-shifted upon increasing Pt content. The excited electrons accumulated in the Pt particles possess higher energy, so that the electron/hole recombination emitted shorter-wavelength luminescence, as compared with that for pure TiO2.
 Fig. 21  Transient absorption spectra of irradiated TiO2 and Pt/TiO2. Reprinted from ref. 233, Copyright (2001), with permission from Elsevier. 
Bahnemann et al.231 studied the surface trapping of photoelectrons and holes in a platinized TiO2 sol and assigned the trapping mode to different scavengers by the laser flash photolysis technique combined with transient absorption spectroscopy. Anpo et al.235 compared the effect of Pt loading on the photoactivity for the hydrogenation of CH3CCH and C3H6 by TiO2 and ZnO and found that Pt increased the photoactivity of both catalysts. Electron trapping by adsorbed protons on Pt may be responsible for this enhancement. A comparative study on photocatalytic H2 generation between Pt/TiO2 and Au/TiO2 powders suggested that Pt can be a better trapping site for photoelectrons than is Au.217 Another comparison was made between Ag/TiO2, Pt/Ag/TiO2 and Pt/TiO2 catalysts for the photocatalytic dehydrogenation of 1-propanol.236 In Pt/Ag/TiO2, the photoelectrons can be effectively transferred from TiO2via Ag to Pt clusters where chemically dissociated hydrogen was adsorbed to generate H2. Favorable adsorption of reactants on Pt clusters was also confirmed in the photooxidation of CO.194 Uchida et al.237 proposed a novel configuration of Pt/TiO2 electrodes for the photodegradation of 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB). As shown in Fig. 22, TiO2 and PTFE particles were first deposited together on an ITO substrate via an electrophoretic method. Then Pt nanoparticles were photo-deposited into the TiO2/PTFE matrix. PTFE showed affinity towards both O2 and TCB, which led to efficient TCB adsorption and photoelectron consumption for O2 reduction. Pt particles promoted the electron transfer within the matrix and their reaction with O2 molecules.
 Fig. 22  Pt-loaded TiO2-PTFE film photoelectrode deposited on ITO glass substrate. Reprinted from ref. 237, Copyright (1998), with permission from Elsevier. 
Zhao et al.238 studied the photo-destruction of sulforhodamine-B in Pt/TiO2 suspension under visible light. The electrons excited from dye molecules were accepted by Pt islands. The accumulated electrons then reacted with O2 to form O2−˙ and ˙OH, which ultimately caused the self-destruction of the dye molecules. Photocatalytic destruction of oxalic acid239 and H2 generation240 from an aqueous methanol solution were also promoted by platinizing TiO2. Under anoxic conditions, products from photocatalytic reactions using Pt/TiO2 may be different from those using pure TiO2. For example, although the reaction rate of alkylamine degradation was increased by the presence of Pt, some undesirable toxic byproducts were also generated.227 Quan et al.241 reported a synergetic effect on the photoelectrocatalytic degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid using a Pt/TiO2/Ti electrode. The degradation efficiency was higher than the sum of the individual photocatalytic and electrochemical efficiencies. Suppression of the charge carrier recombination benefits from the trapping of photoelectrons by Pt while the charge carrier separation is improved by the external bias potential.
6. Doped semiconductor photocatalysts
Wide bandgap semiconductor materials have long served as active photocatalysts. But their main drawback is actually the wide bandgap, as it only allows very limited utilization of solar energy. Accordingly, the red-shift of their absorption edge into the visible light region has been widely attempted. Sensitization by dye molecules has shown encouraging results in dye-sensitized solar cells.49,67,242–244 However, in most photocatalytic systems, the dyes are usually not stable once the photocatalyst is exposed to bandgap illumination. Another way to shift the absorption towards the visible region is to dope the semiconductors with ionic species.245 Although not all the results were successful, quite a few studies provided very encouraging results for the development of visible-light-active photocatalysts. While the light absorption edge could be red-shifted by this type of doping, the photoactivity after doping may not necessarily be improved. The measured absorption spectra of a photocatalyst are the overlapped results from several absorption bands of different origins, such as intrinsic bulk absorption, surface states absorption, and absorptions from defects, etc. As a result, the absorption by intra-bandgap states may not form sufficiently strong oxidants for certain reactions. The absorption spectra for a photocatalyst should not be expected to match entirely with the action spectra of its photocatalytic performance. Although numerous theoretical and experimental results concerning doped photocatalysts have already been published, a clear mechanistic understanding of the role of dopants and the behavior of the photocatalysts is far from being established.
6.1 Non-metal-doped semiconductor photocatalysts
Earlier studies246–248 on anionic doping used N-containing TiO2 obtained from calcination of titanium hydroxide/NH4Cl (or NH4OH), thermal oxidation of TiN, or chemical vapor deposition with titanium(IV) isopropoxide and nitrous oxide. Other choices of dopants included C, F, S and P, etc., which have been subject to investigations on optical absorption, photocatalytic activity and/or band structure calculations. Nitrogen has been the most intensively studied non-metal-ion dopant for TiO2, as can be seen from the increasing number of publications every year on N-doped TiO2. Even for this single dopant, various mechanisms have been proposed to explain its effect on the light absorption and photoactivity of N-doped TiO2, i.e., the bandgap narrowing by overlapping between N 2p and O 2p orbitals,249,250 creation of oxygen vacancies,251,252 generation of intra-bandgap surface states, or combined effects among them.253 A schematic diagram shown in Fig. 23 displays these possible mechanisms.251
 Fig. 23  Various schemes of band structure change of: (a) pure anatase TiO2; (b) doped TiO2 with localized dopant levels near the CB and VB edges; (c) bandgap narrowing due to VB broadening; (d) localized dopant levels and electronic transitions to the CB; (e) electronic transitions of dopant levels near the VB edge to corresponding excited states for Ti3+ and F+ centers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251, Copyright 2006 ACS. 

6.1.1 Bandgap narrowing. 
Asahi and coworkers250 published results from both theoretical density-of-states (DOS) calculations of the band structures and photocatalytic experiments of non-metal-ion doped TiO2 in 2001. They claimed that among C, N, F, P and S, the most effective substitutional dopant was N for the bandgap narrowing of TiO2. As shown in Fig. 24, the calculated p states from N dopants mix with O 2p states from TiO2 to narrow the bandgap and effectively transfer the photoexcited charge carriers to the reactive sites at the TiO2 surface within their lifetime. Although doping by S shows a similar bandgap narrowing, the ionic radius of S is too big to enable it to be substituted into the TiO2 lattice. (This may not be a serious problem if S-doped TiO2 is prepared by thermal oxidation of TiS2 instead of using S to attack the O in the TiO2 lattice.254) The states introduced by C and P are energetically too deep in the bandgap of TiO2 to promptly transfer the charge carriers to the surface reactive sites.
 Fig. 24  Total DOSs of doped anatase TiO2 (A) and the projected DOSs into the doped anion sites (B). The results for N-doping at the interstitial site (Ni-doped) and that at both substitutional and interstitial sites (Ni+s-doped) are also shown. From ref. 250. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
Calculations on interstitial N doping and substitutional-and-interstitial N doping indicate the existence of molecular dopants with bonding states quite similar to those of NO and N2 molecules. Such dopants give rise to bonding states below the O 2p valence bands and antibonding states deep in the bandgap (Fig. 24B, Ni-doped and Ni+s-doped), which hardly interact with the band states of TiO2 and therefore are not effective in transferring the photogenerated charge carriers. This argument was confirmed by testing the visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation of aqueous methylene blue and gaseous acetaldehyde and XPS analysis of the atomic-N peak area (corresponding to a binding energy of 396 eV247), because the N-doped TiO2 sample with the highest fraction of the atomic N state (the area of the 396 eV peak over the total area of 396, 400 and 402 eV peaks; the latter two peaks correspond to the molecularly chemisorbed states247) shows the highest photocatalytic degradation rate. Contrary opinions exist about whether substitutional or interstitial N-doping is more effective. Diwald et al.255 doped TiO2(110) single crystals with N by an NH3 treatment at 870 K and found that it was the interstitial nitrogen that was responsible for the red-shift of the light absorption down to a lower energy.
The work by Asahi et al.250 inspired a new tide of research to find visible-light-active photocatalysts based on doped TiO2, which seemed to be able to benefit from the guidance of theoretical calculations although their reliability could not be easily estimated. Umebayashi et al.256 found that the mixing of S 3p states with the VB of anatase TiO2 resulted in the bandgap narrowing of S-doped TiO2, which is consistent with Asahi and coworkers' results. Based on first-principles calculations, Yamamoto et al.257 also obtained a bandgap narrowing of rutile TiO2 induced by S doping. Based on plane-wave-based pseudopotential density functional theory calculations, Tian and Liu258 presented a similar bandgap narrowing by mixing O 2p with S 3p states in S-doped anatase TiO2. Recently, Wang and Lewis259 recalculated the band structures of C, N and S-doped TiO2, showing that their dopant of choice was C for the development of visible-light-active TiO2-based photocatalysts, in contrast to the suggestion by Asahi et al. that the energy states induced by C do not effectively overlap and mix with O 2p states. These groups of researchers do share a common recognition concerning the bandgap narrowing by mixing the O 2p orbitals with the introduced energy states near the VB edge of TiO2. Umebayashi et al.260 experimentally investigated the optical properties of S-doped anatase TiO2 prepared by annealing TiS2. The diffuse reflectance spectra showed that the absorption edge was shifted towards the lower energy region due to the bandgap narrowing by mixing S 3p states with the TiO2 VB. By studying the visible-light-activity of C-doped TiO2 made from thermal oxidation of TiC powders, Irie et al.261 suggested that the bandgap narrowing could be seen even at a low carbon loading (∼0.32%). It is obvious from these results that considerable hesitation concerning the reliability of theoretical calculations, aiming for the prediction of the electronic band structures of doped semiconductors, is most certainly indicated because the predictions of these studies do not agree with each other. Moreover, a large number of experiments seem to prove that it is not by bandgap narrowing but by newly formed localized energy states that the visible-light absorption of doped-TiO2 is enhanced.


6.1.2 Formation of intra-bandgap energy states. 
6.1.2.1 States close to the conduction band edge. 
Color centers are one type of intra-bandgap energy state in semiconductor materials. Color centers are formed in a metal oxide upon the loss of an oxygen atom. The electron pair that remains trapped at the cavity gives rise to an F center; a positively charged F+ center is equivalent to a single electron residing at the oxygen vacancy. The electron-pair deficient oxygen vacancy is referred to as a doubly charged F++ center; the electrons left in the cavity can also react with adjacent Ti4+ ions to give Ti3+ centers.262,263
In most fluoride (F−)-doped TiO2 photocatalysts, the main reason for the improved light absorption was the color centers formed upon F− incorporation. For example, Li et al.264 studied F−-doped TiO2 from spray pyrolysis of H2TiF6 and found high photocatalytic activity in the decomposition of gaseous acetaldehyde under both UV and visible light irradiation. XPS analysis revealed two types of color centers in the sample, i.e., the oxygen vacancies with either two trapped electrons (F centers) or one trapped electron (F+ centers). As indicated in the excitation/emission pathways shown in Fig. 25, both types of color centers formed trapped states below the CB edge of TiO2 (0.53 eV for F centers and 0.84 eV for F+ centers) as deduced from the photoluminescence spectra. Ho and coworkers265 prepared hierarchical-structured F−-doped TiO2 nanospheres exhibiting visible light photoactivity, which was also explained by the extrinsic absorption resulting from the color centers formed upon F−-doping. Ihara et al.252 prepared an N-doped TiO2 photocatalyst by calcination of the hydrolysis products of Ti(SO4)2 with ammonia. The resulting powder showed visible light absorption between 400 and 550 nm that was interpreted as being due to the creation of oxygen vacancies preferably at the grain boundaries of TiO2. These oxygen vacancies were thought, in turn, to reduce the cation charge and coordination number, leading to localized states between the CB and VB of TiO2 (without pinning their positions) and thus allowing excitation pathways to be initiated with sub-bandgap energy.266 Lin et al.267 quantified the position of the donor states introduced by oxygen vacancies by theoretical calculations as being localized at 0.15–0.30 eV below the CB edge. Martyanov et al.268 prepared oxygen-deficient TiO2 by annealing TiO and Ti2O3 powders under O2 atmosphere. In this way, the interference from N-doping on oxygen vacancies could be excluded since no N was involved in the preparation of TiO2.
 Fig. 25  Possible energy states between the CB and VB of fluorine-doped TiO2. Reprinted from ref. 264, Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier. 
Oxygen vacancies were also said to be responsible for the visible-light activity of C- and S-doped TiO2. Li et al.269 prepared C-doped titania by carbonization of anatase TiO2, and the product showed optical absorption bands up to 700 nm and much higher photooxidation activity for gas-phase benzene than pure TiO2 under artificial solar irradiation. These observations were explained by the presence of oxygen vacancies and the formation of Ti3+ levels between the CB and VB. Yu and coworkers270 observed considerable anti-bacterial photoactivity of S-doped TiO2 for killing bacteria under visible light illumination that was explained by the formation of intra-bandgap S6+ states close to the CB edge of TiO2. Ohno et al.271,272 proposed that sulfur incorporated into a TiO2 lattice mainly substitutes S4+ for Ti4+ based on XPS analysis (the S6+ peaks found in their XPS spectra were claimed to be sulfuric acid adsorbed on the TiO2 surface). First-principles calculations carried out by the authors indicate the formation of S4+ states near the CB edge of TiO2 that account for the visible light absorption and photoactivity for 2-propanol decomposition. Note that S dopants do not always substitute for Ti with the specific doping mode depending largely on the methods of preparation.254,273 Theoretical calculations also showed that oxygen vacancies in TiO2 lattices were also able to accommodate S atoms.274 Visible-light-active P-doped TiO2 was also prepared and it was reported that phosphorus atoms exist in their pentavalent form and act as impurity levels to trap photogenerated electrons.275 Based on the common features reported for most doped TiO2 photocatalysts, i.e., the formation of oxygen vacancies and color centers that are inevitably due to a partial reduction of TiO2 at a certain point during the preparations of the materials, Serpone251,276 argued that the red-shift of the absorption edge is indeed caused by such color centers (Fig. 23e).
6.1.2.2 States close to the valence band edge. 
Theoretical calculations by Lin et al.267 suggested that N-doping did not narrow the bandgap of TiO2 by mixing O 2p with N 2p orbitals, even at much higher N concentrations than those used by Asahi et al.250 Instead, their calculations predicted that the N 2p states are localized near the top of the VB of TiO2. Only at very high dopant levels (∼20%) would the N 2p states mix with the O 2p orbitals, leading to bandgap narrowing. However, in practice, too much N loading results in the formation of TiN, which is not transparent in the visible region. Moreover, it is questionable whether or not a semiconductor can maintain its chemical and electronic structural integrity after incorporating a large amount of foreign dopants.251 The highest experimentally achieved N loading in TiO2 was reported to be 8%,277 which is far below the amount required for bandgap narrowing as calculated by Lin et al.267 While dopant loading is pertinent to the properties of the doped materials, their distribution within the materials, which is closely related to the preparation methods, should never be ignored. As shown by Takeshita and coworkers,254 even with similar sulfur loadings in TiO2, different distributions of S resulted in significant differences in their photoactivity under visible light illumination. Di Valentin et al.278 conducted density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealing that besides the substitutional N 2p states, states formed by interstitial N are located higher than substitutional N 2p states above the VB edge and are expected to contribute to the red-shift of the absorption edge. However, these interstitial N dopants might behave as strong hole trapping sites thus reducing the direct oxidizing power of doped TiO2.279
Theoretical calculation results predicting the localized states above the VB edge have been confirmed by some photocatalytic experiments using N-doped TiO2 photoelectrodes. Nakamura et al.280 determined the mid-bandgap surface state positions by studying the photooxidation of various hole scavengers (e.g., SCN−, Br− and I−, etc.) with unique oxidation potentials, under both UV and visible light irradiation. The estimated energy levels of the surface states are shown in Fig. 26. Hence, the possibility of a bandgap narrowing resulting from an overlapping between O 2p and N 2p orbitals was excluded by the observed oxidizing power variation of the photogenerated holes under different irradiation conditions.
 Fig. 26  The band structure of N-doped TiO2 with the oxidation potentials of a few redox couples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280, Copyright 2004 ACS. 
Miyauchi et al.281 supported this conclusion by testing the photoactivity of N-doped TiO2 under visible light illumination. They compared the photocatalytic decomposition of 1-propanol under UV and visible light illumination and found that the reaction rate under UV irradiation is much higher than that under visible light illumination. If the visible-light activity of N-doped TiO2 were due to the mixing of N 2p with O 2p levels, then the photoactivity should not differ much under these different irradiation conditions. However, the quantum yield (defined as the number of oxidized 1-propanol molecules per absorbed photon) of N-doped TiO2 is lower than that of pure TiO2 under UV irradiation. This observation suggested a negative effect of N-doping, i.e., the energy states formed by doping acted as the recombination centers for electrons and holes and should thus be located in the mid-bandgap region between VB and CB.
The possible role of dopant species as recombination centers was also confirmed by other researchers. Lindgren et al.282 studied the photoelectrochemical i–V characteristics of a N-doped TiO2 film electrode under modulated irradiation. As shown in Fig. 27, white light caused hardly any photoresponse from the un-doped TiO2 film electrode (Fig. 27a), whereas there was an obvious photoresponse with the N-doped TiO2 film electrode (Fig. 27b). Pronounced photocurrent transients were seen in a wide bias-potential range around the photocurrent onset, indicated by the circle in Fig. 27b. The transients together with the nearly linear increase in the photocurrent under a positive bias-potential are typical indicators of a high electron/hole recombination rate under stable irradiation.
 Fig. 27  
i–V characteristics of pure TiO2 (a) and N-doped TiO2 (b) irradiated by white light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282, Copyright 2003 ACS. 
Sakthivel and Kisch253 prepared nitrogen-doped (0.08–0.13wt%) titania by hydrolysis of TiCl4 with nitrogen-containing bases, followed by a 400 °C calcination in air. Diffuse reflectance spectra showed that the catalyst could absorb visible light (a wavelength between 400 and 520 nm). The bandgap energy of the doped TiO2 was estimated to be 3.12 eV by plotting the modified Kubelka–Munk function in relation to the photon energies. This bandgap is slightly smaller than that of pure anatase TiO2 and was ascribed to bandgap narrowing due to a modest anodic shift in the CB edge. Since the light absorption edge was 520 nm (2.39 eV, which is much smaller than 3.12 eV), the authors proposed that some localized energy states above the VB edge must exist. The positions of these states were determined by measuring the wavelength dependence of the photooxidation of different charge carrier scavengers. The final band structure suggested by these authors is shown in Fig. 28.
 Fig. 28  Electrochemical potentials (versus NHE) for band edges, surface states (shaded areas) and oxygen reduction at pH 7 for TiO2 and N-doped TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 253, Copyright 2003 Wiley-VCH. 

6.2 Transition-metal-doped semiconductor photocatalysts
In transition-metal-doped semiconductors, there are also two different positions that the dopant ions can occupy in a semiconductor lattice, i.e., substitutional and interstitial. If the ionic radius of the dopant is similar to that of the matrix cation, the dopant will conveniently take the substitutional mode; if the dopant radius is much smaller than the matrix cation, interstitial doping is also possible.283 Some studies even suggest that interstitial doping is possible for dopant ions larger than the matrix cation.284 Note that the dopant ions should be within an appropriate concentration to exclude phase separation between the dopant and the matrix.285,286 Compared with the valence states of the matrix cations, cationic dopants can be divided into two categories: those with valence states higher than those of the matrix cations, and those valence states that are lower than those of the matrix cations. In the TiO2 matrix, these two types of dopants behave in distinctly different ways, i.e., the higher-valence dopants act as electron donors and are therefore called n-type dopants, while the lower-valence dopants act as electron acceptors and are called p-type dopants.
Transition metal dopants influence wide bandgap semiconductor photocatalysts with at least two effects:283,287 changing the bulk electronic structure of the matrix semiconductor (resulting in, e.g., changes in the position of the Fermi level, the formation of new energy levels by the interaction of the dopant with the matrix lattice, changes in the electron conductivity within the matrix semiconductor288,289), and/or modification of the surface properties. The latter can be linked with the variations of the thickness of the space charge layer, changes in the concentration of surface states, and the initiation of photocorrosion processes.290,291 Studies focused on metal-ion-doped photocatalysts can be traced back to the 1980s.226,292 Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) was applied by researchers to study the doped TiO2 to discriminate the various doping modes in both anatase and rutile TiO2. Since then, doping of photocatalysts with metal ions has been investigated extensively with the consequence that nearly all metals in the periodic table of elements have been tried as dopants.176,283,287,291,293–325 In this section, only some mechanistic principles and a few examples based on doped TiO2 have been selected to illustrate the influence of metal-ion dopants on photocatalysts.

6.2.1 Formation of new energy levels. 
Upon metal-ion doping, new energy states can be formed either within or beyond the bandgap of semiconductors. The diagram in Fig. 29 qualitatively provides a scenario illustrating where the dopant levels could be within the energy diagram of a metal-ion-doped TiO2.283
 Fig. 29  Energy states in TiO2 after being doped by Fe, Cr and V ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283, Copyright 1994 ACS. 
The most frequently employed valence states of Cr and Fe ions are Cr3+ and Fe3+, respectively. If these cations are incorporated into the TiO2 lattice by substituting Ti4+ cations, the electroneutrality as a whole requires the simultaneous formation of oxygen vacancies, the amount of which should be equal to half of the substitutional trivalent cation dopants incorporated at Ti4+ sites, as shown in Eq. (25): M2O3 → 2|MIII|Ti′ + VO˙˙ + 3OO(25)where M refers to the corresponding metals (Fe or Cr); VO˙˙ represents the oxygen vacancy, the energy level of which lies slightly below the CB edge as shown in Fig. 29; OO denotes the oxygen atom at its normal lattice site. Consequently, only a fraction of the dopant centers will have a full coordination sphere of lattice oxygen atoms, while the other dopant centers are in the position of having an oxygen vacancy at a nearest neighbor site. Similarly, for pentavalent dopants such as V5+, the following equation holds: 2M2O5 → 4|M|Ti5˙ + 5VTi4′ + 10OO(26)where VTi4′ represents cation vacancies that are good hole acceptors (as shown in Fig. 29, after excitation holes in the VB can be trapped at these sites to form VTi‴ and VTi″ states above the VB edge); |M|Ti5˙ denotes the defect sites that are good electron acceptors (upon acceptance of one or two photoelectrons, V4+ and V3+ states can be formed within the bandgap).


6.2.2 Enhanced visible light absorption. 
Due to the formation of intra-bandgap energy levels, the light absorption edge can be red-shifted by electronic transitions from the VB to these levels and/or from these levels to the CB. In Cr3+-doped TiO2, both the Cr3+ states and the visible light activity were confirmed by many research groups.326–328 Zhu et al.329 prepared Cr3+-doped TiO2 by a sol-gel/hydrothermal procedure and observed visible light absorption at a doping level between 0.15–0.30%. An absorption shoulder at around 450 nm was ascribed to the excitation of Cr3+ resulting in CB electrons. Lu and coworkers330 prepared Cr3+-doped TiO2 by a diffusion-doping-sensitization technique. Their products showed an absorption edge at around 750 nm. Ghicov et al.331 recently reported enhanced visible light absorption up to 520 nm by TiO2 nanotubes doped with Cr3+ by ion implantation. Although during ion implantation a certain amount of defects was created that could potentially act as recombination centers, such adverse effects could be minimized by reannealing the doped TiO2 samples. Umebayashi et al.326 also reported that Cr-dopant levels appeared close to the VB edge of TiO2 following material preparation by an ion implantation method.
In Fe3+-doped TiO2, the red-shift of the absorption edge was ascribed to the excitation of 3d-Fe3+ electrons to the CB of TiO2, or the charge transfer between dopant ions (Fe2+ and Fe4+) via the CB.294,332 Wang and coworkers36,37,333 described a sol-gel method to prepare Fe(III)-doped TiO2 nanopowders with high uniformity of Fe(III) distribution throughout the TiO2 matrix, which was considered to be responsible for the high quantum efficiency of the materials in the photocatalytic oxidation of methanol to form formaldehyde. Yamashita and coworkers334 prepared iron-doped TiO2 by ion implantation and reported a visible light absorption up to 600 nm. Jeong et al.335 observed a red-shift in the absorption edge of Fe-doped TiO2 films deposited on glass substrates. Zhou et al.336 prepared mesoporous Fe-doped TiO2 powders and found that the absorption was red-shifted as the dopant concentration increased from 0.05atm% to 0.25atm%. Zhang and coworkers337 prepared Fe-doped TiO2 supported on activated carbon. It also showed a red-shift in its light absorption edge. Very recently, Wang et al.338 demonstrated that Fe3+-doped TiO2 nanopowders prepared by plasma oxidative pyrolysis could degrade methyl orange under visible light irradiation. Nahar et al.339 prepared Fe-doped TiO2 by calcination of FexTiS2 (x varies from 0.002 to 0.01). The material was able to photocatalytically degrade phenol under visible light illumination (405–436 nm). Teoh et al.340 prepared Fe-doped TiO2 by flame spray pyrolysis. It showed considerable activity in the degradation of oxalic acid under visible light illumination above 400 nm. Other metal (e.g., Mn,341 V, Co,342 Ni,313,320 Mg104 and Pt314,343,344) ion-doped photocatalysts were also found to exhibit visible-light activities. Although quite a large number of examples exist in the literature on materials exhibiting enhanced light absorption properties, it should be pointed out that the absorption of light is a necessary but not a sufficient condition to promote photocatalytic activity.342


6.2.3 Changing the lifetime of charge carriers and photocatalytic activity. 
Metal-ion dopants can greatly alter the lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers and thus photocatalytic activities.345 At appropriate concentrations, the dopants can selectively trap one charge carrier and allow another one to reach the particle surface to be able to take part in the desired redox reactions. For example, Grätzel et al.346 demonstrated by electron paramagnetic resonance measurements that doping of colloidal TiO2 particles with Fe3+ and V4+ resulted in a drastic augmentation in the lifetime of the photogenerated electron/hole pairs upon bandgap irradiation, which would recombine within a few nanoseconds without these dopants. Quite a few photocatalytic activity measurements of metal-ion-doped TiO2 also confirmed the enhancement of charge carrier lifetimes and the corresponding photocatalytic activity.325,347
On the other hand, dopant ions can also act as recombination centers for the photoelectrons and holes and thus decrease the photocatalytic performance.226,341 The frequently reported decrease in photoactivity of metal-ion-doped TiO2 with increasing dopant concentration above a certain doping level is a good illustration of this phenomenon. In fact, visible-light photoactivity could hardly be observed in a Fe3+-doped TiO2 at a Fe loading of 10wt%, although the visible light absorption was very considerable. Radecka et al.348 studied the photoelectrochemical behavior of Cr3+-doped TiO2 electrodes and found that the addition of Cr3+ led to an increase in the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers, and therefore the energy conversion efficiency for the doped electrodes was lower than that of an undoped TiO2 electrode. Wilke and Breuer291 examined the relationship between dopant concentration, charge carrier lifetime and photocatalytic performance of Cr3+- and Mo5+-doped TiO2. Their study revealed that in both Cr3+- and Mo5+-doped TiO2, the lifetime of the charge carriers was drastically decreased from about 90 µs for pure TiO2 down to about 25 µs at a dopant concentration of 1atm%. Meanwhile, the photocatalytic activity decreased to a low level with dopant concentrations below 1atm% for both systems. This was ascribed to the substitutional doping by the cations that act as recombination centers. Wang and coworkers338 studied the photodegradation of methyl orange by both pure and Fe3+-doped TiO2 nanopowders under UV irradiation and found that the photoactivity of the former is higher than that of the latter, which was explained by the more serious recombination loss of the charge carriers in Fe3+-doped TiO2.
All the examples given above seemingly suggest that a direct relationship exists between the charge carrier lifetime and the photoactivity of metal-ion-doped photocatalysts. The longer the lifetime, the higher the photoactivity. However, such a statement should not be generalized because the relationship between the charge carrier lifetime and the photoactivity is not straightforward and unambiguous. As pointed out by Bahnemann and coworkers,27 photogenerated holes could be trapped either deeply or shallowly. Those deeply trapped holes that were rather long-lived exhibited almost no activity, i.e., they were not able to oxidize dichloroacetate (DCA−). Shallowly trapped holes, on the other hand, were able to oxidize DCA− almost instantaneously (t1/2 < 5 µs). Moreover, there are also other effects caused by metal-ion doping on the photoactivity of catalysts, such as changes in the surface hydrophilicity,349,350 changes in the adsorption ability towards reactant molecules, shifting of Fermi levels,287 changes in the thickness of the space charge region near the surface, and induction of crystalline phase transitions within the catalysts.342 Sometimes these factors may exhibit opposite effects when present simultaneously.295,349
Although the different ways to increase the efficiency of photocatalysts, e.g., coupled semiconductors, deposition of noble metals, and doping, have been discussed here separately, these techniques can also be combined to achieve synergetic effects in improving photocatalytic performance. In a recent report, Tada et al.351 showed that an Au/TiO2 photocatalyst was capable of effectively photoreducing elemental S to S2− in an aqueous environment.352 Based on this finding, the authors prepared an Au/CdS/TiO2 nanocomposite photocatalyst by the selective deposition of CdS on Au deposited on the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles. Convincing evidence was presented that a vectorial electron transfer takes place from TiO2 via Au to CdS under irradiation, as a result of the simultaneous excitation of CdS and TiO2. Under these reaction conditions, the CdS surface was found to predominantly function as the reductive site leaving the exposed TiO2 surface as the oxidizing site, as probed by the photodeposition of Pt selectively on the CdS surface. This observation is in clear contrast with the simple electrochemical picture in which, according to the energetic positions of CB and VB in TiO2 and CdS (cf.Fig. 6), the former should be the place for the reduction processes and the latter for the oxidation reactions.

7. Mixed transition metal oxide photocatalysts
The development of mixed transition metal oxide (i.e., binary, ternary or quaternary) photocatalysts is a newer research subject than that of their single-oxide counterparts (e.g., TiO2).353–355 In particular, application of mixed oxide photocatalysts in visible-light-driven H2 and/or O2 generation has been very actively addressed during recent years, although the choice of applicable materials for direct photocatalytic H2O splitting (with no need of sacrificing agents) under visible light is still limited.6,356 Photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds using mixed oxides under visible light illumination has also been frequently reported in the literature. The most attractive feature of using mixed transition metal oxides as photocatalysts results from at least two important aspects: 1) their capability of absorbing photons in the visible light range (λ > 420 nm) due to appropriately modulated electronic band structures, and 2) the vast possibilities of combinations of different elements, thus providing a wide range of photocatalyst candidates. Theoretically, calculations of the electronic band structures of the photocatalysts, although often underestimating their bandgaps,357 provide a powerful tool in the prediction and design of visible-light-active photocatalysts. As often practiced with their single-oxide counterparts, modifications of the mixed oxide materials to enhance their photocatalytic performances have also been attempted by various techniques, such as doping,358,359 coupling of different semiconductors,360 and introducing nanoclusters as trapping sites355 for the charge carriers.
In addition to the mixed oxides, the recent literature also presents a number of other complex semiconductors as photocatalysts under visible light irradiation, such as mixed sulfides (e.g., ZnIn2S4,361 Zns–CuInS2–AgInS2 solid solutions,362 CdxCuyZn1−x−yS363), oxynitrides (e.g., TaON,364 Zr2ON2,365 Y2Ta2O5N2,366 Nb2Zr6O17−xNx367), and oxyhalides (e.g., Bi4NbO8Cl,368xBiOBr–(1 − x)BiOI369). A few materials from this category will also be analyzed in the following discussions.
7.1 Band structures and optical properties
The optical absorption property and the photocatalytic activity of a semiconductor are essentially related to its electronic band structure. If one expects the semiconductor to be an efficient photocatalyst under visible light illumination, the following requirements should be met:370 1) a narrow bandgap (usually <3.0 eV); 2) suitable potentials of the conduction and/or valence band edges; and 3) high mobility of the photogenerated charge carriers within in the conduction and/or valence bands.
In most cases, mixed oxide photocatalysts that are efficient under visible light illumination possess narrowed bandgaps due to either the elevation of the valence band edge caused by the hybridization between the O 2p orbitals and the newly introduced orbitals (which ought to have a more negative potential than that of O 2p), or the lowering of the conduction band edge contributed by the introduced components in the materials.356 Calculations of their electronic band structures, although often predicting much smaller bandgaps than those experimentally determined from optical absorption spectra,371,372 are nonetheless very helpful in interpreting the band structure formation and the electronic/optical properties of the materials.
Bi3+-containing mixed oxides can serve as excellent examples to illustrate the mechanism of bandgap narrowing. Kudo et al.353 synthesized and comparatively studied the optical absorption properties of two types of BiVO4, one with a tetragonal structure and the other exhibiting a monoclinic structure. Their different bandgaps, i.e., 2.9 eV for the tetragonal and 2.4 eV for the monoclinic structure, respectively, arise from the unequal participation of Bi 6s orbitals in the formation of the valence bands. With the bottom of the conduction band being composed of V 3d orbitals in both cases, the top of the valence band in the tetragonal BiVO4 consists only of O 2p orbitals, while in the monoclinic case it contains both O 2p and Bi 6s orbitals, resulting in a negative shift of the valence band edge to allow the absorption of longer-wavelength photons than in the former case. Slightly different values of the bandgap energies of BiVO4, e.g., 2.34 eV for the monoclinic structure and 3.11 eV for the tetragonal structure, respectively, were recently reported by other researchers373 when they employed different synthesis methods.
Sayama et al. studied the photoelectrochemical decomposition of H2O on BiVO4 electrodes and argued that the difference in the bandgap (i.e., 0.3 eV) between BiVO4 and WO3 results from different potentials of their valence band edges,374 consistent with the report by Kudo et al.353 The authors also conducted comparative tests on YVO4 and InVO4 electrodes, both of which showed much lower activity towards H2O splitting. This indicates that the Bi orbitals possibly played a significant role in defining the high efficiency of BiVO4 electrodes.
Bi3+ has also been found to be responsible for the bandgap narrowing of other mixed oxide semiconductors. For instance, the valence band of CaBi2O4 is composed of hybridized Bi 6s and O 2p orbitals,375 resulting in a shift of the valence band edge towards more negative potentials. It appears to be, in fact, a common feature of mixed oxide semiconductors containing Bi3+ that the valence band involves the hybridization between the Bi 6s and O 2p orbitals. In contrast, in Bi5+-containing materials, this hybridization is rather limited because the Bi 6s orbitals are now empty. However, the empty 6s orbitals of Bi5+ can possibly provide a way to tune the conduction band edge potential, as reported recently by Tang et al.370 The authors synthesized BaBiO3 containing both Bi3+ and Bi5+via a soft chemical method and discovered an impressive visible-light response under illumination even at λ > 600 nm. Their calculations using plane-wave-based density functional theory suggested that the top of the valence band is composed of Bi3+ 6s and O 2p orbitals, while the bottom of the conduction band contains the 6s orbitals originating from Bi5+. Details of the density contour maps of the LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, i.e., the bottom of the conduction band) and HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital, i.e., the top of the valence band) orbitals in BaBiO3 are presented in Fig. 30. Clearly, the HOMO is composed solely of Bi3+ 6s and O 2p orbitals, while the LUMO consists of both Bi5+ 6s and 6p orbitals besides O 2p orbitals. This is in vast contrast to Bi3+-containing oxides such as BiVO4 and CaBi2O4 whose conduction bands are formed exclusively from V 3d orbitals (BiVO4) or Bi 6p orbitals (CaBi2O4), respectively. The coexistence of these two types of Bi cations results in a considerably narrowed bandgap, i.e., 2.05 eV, as experimentally derived from its optical absorption spectrum.370
 Fig. 30  Density contour maps of the LUMO orbitals (a) and of the HOMO orbitals (b) in BaBiO3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 370, Copyright 2007 ACS. 
A bandgap narrowing by shifting the conduction band edge towards more positive potentials has also been attempted by other research groups. Kako and coworkers376 studied the optical absorption behavior of NaBiO3, which exhibits a sharp absorption edge at around 470 nm, corresponding to a bandgap of ∼2.6 eV. Calculations of its electronic structure revealed that the hybridization between Na 3s and O 2p orbitals occurred at the bottom of the conduction band (accounting for the bandgap narrowing), while a flat structure of O 2p orbitals was observed at the top of the valence band. Ouyang et al.377 compared the band structures between AgAlO2 and Ag2CrO4 and concluded that the lower edge of the conduction band in AgAlO2 mainly consists of empty Ag 5s5p orbitals, while in Ag2CrO4 the lower edge is formed by the hybridization of Ag 5s, 5p and Cr 3d orbitals. This leads to a much narrower bandgap in Ag2CrO4 (1.75 eV) as compared with that of AgAlO2 (2.95 eV).
With more metal ion components present, the electronic structures of ternary and even more complex oxide semiconductors can be, unsurprisingly, more flexibly modulated than can their binary oxide counterparts. A few examples of ternary and quaternary oxide materials will be presented here to illustrate the multiplicity of their band structures.
Tang et al.378 prepared AgInW2O8 powders exhibiting activity for O2 evolution under visible light illumination. The authors speculated that the top of the valence band consists of hybridized Ag 4d and O 2p orbitals with its Fermi level being more positive than the H2O oxidation potential (E = 1.23 V vs. NHE). The conduction band of AgInW2O8, on the other hand, has a complicated structure due to the coexistence of three types of metal ions. Consequently, the bottom of the conduction band consists of both W 5d orbitals and hybridized In 5s and Ag 5s orbitals. When illuminated by visible light, the photogenerated electrons were excited only to the W 5d orbitals, with their potential being more positive than that required for the H2O reduction reaction (E = 0 V vs. NHE). Under full arc (i.e., both UV and visible light) irradiation, however, the electrons can be further promoted to the hybridized In 5s and Ag 5s band, which has a sufficiently negative potential to reduce H2O.379
Kim et al.380 prepared a single-phase PbBi2Nb2O9, which exhibits a sharp absorption edge at ∼500 nm. This narrow bandgap is reported to result from a shift of the top of the valence band towards more negative potentials as compared with simple metal oxides. The valence band of AgInW2O8 is formed by the hybridization of O 2p, Bi 6s and Pb 6s orbitals.
The valence band of Zn2.5VMoO8381 is composed by contributions from both Zn 3d and O 2p orbitals, although their hybridization does not elevate the valence band edge because the Zn 3d orbitals are lower in potential than the O 2p orbitals. Yet the hybridization itself still facilitates the hole transfer within the valence band. The conduction band of Zn2.5VMoO8, however, is composed of disordered V 3d and Mo 4d orbitals, both of which possess a potential that is more positive than the potential of the H2O reduction reaction. Therefore, even under UV irradiation in the presence of CH3OH as the sacrificial agent, this material could not generate H2 from H2O.
Being composed of four types of metal ions, In12NiCr2Ti10O42382 has a valence band consisting of O 2p orbitals hybridized with occupied Ni 3d and Cr 3d orbitals, both of which are located above the O 2p orbitals. In fact, these 3d orbitals are spread over different potential levels and hybridize quite well. To be more precise, the top of the valence band was assigned to be due mainly to the Cr 3d states, followed by the Ni 3d states at more positive potential. The conduction band, on the other hand, is formed primarily from empty Ti 3d and In 5s orbitals, in combination with empty Ni 3d b2g and Cr 2d eg orbitals. With such a band structure, the bandgap of In12NiCr2Ti10O42 is found to be as narrow as 2.14 eV.
Ca1−xBixVxMo1−xO4 solid solutions were found to have bandgap energies between 2.34 and 2.7 eV, monotonically dependent on the variation of x, i.e., the concentration of Bi and V in the materials.383 The valence band in these materials was regarded as the result of the hybridization between Bi 6s and O 2p orbitals, similar to the case of BiVO4.375 The contribution of Bi 6s orbitals to the valence band becomes more dominant as the content of Bi ions is increased. The bottom of the conduction band results from the mixed V 3d and Mo 4d orbitals, which can also be shifted by adjusting the composition of the material. Similar band shifts were achieved in other mixed oxide solid solutions as well, such as (AgNbO3)1−x(NaNbO3)x,384 Na1−xLaxTa1−xCoxO3385 and (Ag0.75Sr0.25)(Nb0.75Ti0.25)O3.386 These results indicate that the band structures of complex solid solutions can be feasibly modulated by controlling the synthesis recipe.
7.2 Factors determining the photocatalytic properties

7.2.1 Effects of band structures. 
Calculations of the electronic band structures of mixed oxide photocatalysts indicate that the hybridization between different orbitals of the component ions can change the potentials of the conduction and/or valence band edges. This in turn will enable the materials to absorb longer-wavelength photons, hence exhibiting photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation. Besides narrowing the bandgap, the orbital hybridization can render band structures with different configurations, i.e., flat or abrupt. This can also influence the photocatalytic performance of the materials, because the effective masses of the charge carriers, and therefore their mobilities, are sensitive to the band configurations.
Usually, the charge carriers are highly mobile in the hybridized conduction or valence bands. In many Bi3+-containing mixed oxides, for example, the transfer of holes in the valence band can be improved by the hybridization between Bi 6s and O 2p orbitals, as proposed by a number of research groups.374–376 The mobility of electrons in the conduction band of NaBiO3 was also increased due to the hybridization between Na 3s and O 2p orbitals.376
On the other hand, Ouyang et al.387 reported a reduced charge carrier mobility in AgAlO2. While the mobility of the electrons in its conduction band (mainly composed of Ag 5s5p orbitals) is still high, the mobility of the holes in the valence band (hybridized Ag 4d and O 2p orbitals) is lowered due to the very flat configuration. The holes are easily localized at Ag or O sites, or move very slowly when being transferred along the O–Ag–O chains.
Furthermore, an indirect bandgap structure can also be beneficial to the suppression of the charge carrier recombination.372,387


7.2.2 Effects of physicochemical properties. 
Other than the intrinsic band structures, the physicochemical properties, e.g., the crystallinity, the particle size, and the surface area, of mixed oxide semiconductors can also significantly influence their photocatalytic activities.356,358 A wide range of mixed oxides has been produced by solid-state reaction (SSR) routes,355 which require very high reaction temperatures (usually above 1000 °C) thus reducing the surface area of the catalysts to even below 1 m2/g. Compared with the typical surface area of traditional photocatalysts such as TiO2, i.e., 50–200 m2/g, the small surface area will undoubtedly limit their surface adsorption capacity and the overall photocatalytic performance in many reactions. Novel preparation techniques, such as sonochemical,388,389 sol-gel,390 and deposition-precipitation391 methods, have recently been proposed and tested to achieve high-surface-area products. High crystallinity is also indispensable for an efficient transfer of charge carriers. Fortunately, most of the currently employed preparation methods are also able to deliver highly crystalline products.
Zhou et al.389 employed a sonochemical route to synthesize BiVO4, which possesses a surface area 16 times larger than that obtained using the SSR route. Its photocatalytic activity in the decoloration of methyl orange under visible light irradiation was found to be much higher than that of the SSR product. Ultrasound-assisted methods have also been used to prepare Bi2MO6 (M = W, Mo) photocatalysts, as reported by Zhou et al.392 Highly crystalline Bi2WO6 nanoplates (∼100 nm in size) and Bi2MoO6 nanoparticles (∼150 nm in size) were obtained after calcination at ∼500 °C.
Zhang et al.393 prepared nanometer-sized InVO4 particles by calcination at ∼600 °C. Instead of using commercial In2O3 or In(OH)3 (both hardly soluble in most inorganic and organic acids) as the precursor, they produced fresh In(OH)3 precipitates that were dissolved together with V2O5 in diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid yielding a transparent solution upon heating. The dried residues from this solution were then subject to calcination in air to yield the final products. Their photocatalytic activities in the degradation of formaldehyde were once again found to be much higher than those of the corresponding SSR product.
A non-aqueous sol-gel method was proposed by Zhang and coworkers390 to synthesize InNbO4 with particle sizes of 10–30 nm and a BET surface area of ∼54 m2/g. The key parameter of this synthesis was the exceptionally low calcination temperature, i.e., 200 °C, at which, however, highly crystalline nanoparticles can still be obtained, as indicated in the TEM images shown in Fig. 31. The photocatalytic activity of the material towards the degradation of Rhodamine B was found to be much higher than that of its bulk counterpart under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).
 Fig. 31  TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) images of InNbO4 nanoparticles synthesized via a non-aqueous sol-gel method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 390, Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. 
Li and Ye391 prepared Pb3Nb4O13/fumed silica composite photocatalysts via a deposition-precipitation method. The photocatalysts exhibited notably improved activities in the degradation of Rhodamine B, as compared with that of unsupported Pb3Nb4O13. Due to the high surface area of the fumed silica, the adsorption uptake of Rhodamine B onto the composite catalysts was found to be more than 5 times higher than that of bare Pb3Nb4O13. Interestingly, the reaction mechanisms in the two cases were different. The degradation in the unsupported case mainly proceeded via the typical photocatalytic pathways. In the supported case, however, the improved photocatalytic activities after introducing fumed SiO2 were explained by the strengthened interaction between the adsorbed Rhodamine B molecules and the nearby active Pb3Nb4O13 sites.

7.3 Applications of mixed-oxide photocatalysts

7.3.1 Overall H2O splitting. 
Thermodynamically, when the conduction band edge of a photocatalyst has a more negative potential than the H2O/H2 redox potential (i.e., 0 eV vs. NHE), the material is expected to be able to generate H2 from H2O under bandgap illumination; when its valence band edge has a more positive potential than that of the H2O/O2 potential (i.e., 1.23 eV vs. NHE), it can catalyze the evolution of O2 from H2O. Hence, the theoretically required bandgap of a photocatalyst for the overall splitting of H2O is at least 1.23 eV. However, considering the overall H2O splitting reaction to form H2 and O2 in a photocatalysis scheme, at least two electrons and four holes are needed on the surface of the photocatalyst. Such a multiple charge carrier system might involve a broad range of energy, as predicted by the gradual, rather than sharp, onset of the optical absorption. Together with the bandgap energy, Eg, an extra phonon energy, Ep, which accounts for the conservation of the momentum, is required to induce the optical absorption, as pointed out by Orenstein.394 In other words, higher energy than the bandgap itself seems to be necessary to fulfill the requirement of an overall photocatalytic H2O splitting reaction.356
Mixed oxide semiconductors apparently provide a much higher flexibility of tuning the bandgaps than their single-oxide counterparts. Therefore, with appropriate bandgaps, a wide range of mixed oxides are expected to be applicable to the visible-light-driven splitting of H2O. Although most of the hitherto investigated mixed oxides possess bandgaps notably larger than 1.23 eV, the choice of suitable materials for the overall splitting of pure H2O is very limited,355,356 due to the following reasons: 1) the mismatching of the band edge potentials with the H2O reduction/oxidation reactions, 2) the extremely low efficiencies of charge carrier separation and/or surface reactions, 3) the fast back reaction to form H2O again, and 4) the insufficient stability against photocorrosion in the presence of O2.395,396
Visible-light-driven generation of H2 and O2 from pure H2O to produce stoichiometric amounts of H2 and O2 with promising stability has only been achieved on a few materials, including In1−xNixTaO4 and (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx).397–399 Co-catalysts such as Ni/NiO, RuO2 and/or noble metal nanoclusters are routinely deposited on the surface of the photocatalysts to serve as the active H2 evolution sites, thus increasing the overall reaction rate.
Zou et al.355 synthesized an Ni-doped indium-tantalum-oxide, In1−xNixTaO4 (x = 0–0.2), via the SSR route and reported a quantum yield of ∼0.66% for the direct splitting of water under visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation. The presence of RuO2 or NiOx nanoparticles on the surface of In1−xNixTaO4 is necessary to act as electron transfer catalysts at the cathodic sites for the H2O reduction. The photocatalytic activity was found to vary with the changing of x. In the presence of RuO2 as the co-catalyst, undoped InTaO4 catalyzes the evolution of H2 and O2 at rates of 0.75 and 0.35 µmol/h, respectively; while when NiOy is used as the co-catalyst, the reaction rates are 3.2 and 1.1 µmol/h, respectively. Doping of InTaO4 by nickel significantly enhances the reaction rate, i.e., 5–10 times, depending on the dopant concentration. The highest activity was achieved with x = 0.1.
Very recently, Maeda and coworkers397,399 reported a solid solution of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) that catalyzed the overall water splitting at a quantum efficiency of 2.5% (illumination wavelength 420–440 nm) when its surface was loaded with nanoparticles of rhodium-chromium mixed oxide. The material was prepared by the nitridization of a mixture of Ga2O3 and ZnO powders under NH3 flow at 1123 K, resulting in a yellow powder with an absorption edge at around 510 nm. Density functional theory calculations indicated that the bottom of the conduction band of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) mainly consisted of Ga 4s and 4p orbitals, while the top of the valence band was formed by N 2p and Zn 3d orbitals, hence resulting in a narrowed bandgap. Both the particle size and the loading of the co-catalyst, i.e., a Rh(III)-Cr(III) mixed oxide, seem to considerably influence the reaction rate. The maximum activity was achieved at 1wt% Rh and 1.5wt% Cr, with a particle size of 15–20 nm. The authors also examined another type of co-catalyst, i.e., noble metal/Cr2O3 core/shell nanoparticles400 prepared by a two-step photodeposition method. The noble metal cores and Cr2O3 shells were deposited selectively at the reduction sites on the surface of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx). Coating the core metal particles by Cr2O3 appeared to effectively suppress the back reaction of re-forming H2O over the metal particle surface, thus leading to improved activity, as compared with that using only noble metal particles as the co-catalyst.
MIn0.5Nb0.5O3 (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) powders401 were also found to be able to generate H2 from pure water under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), although the reaction rate was very limited, i.e., below 0.18 µmol/h at a catalyst loading of ∼2 g/L. An interesting phenomenon is that no O2 gas was detected within the reaction system. Similar results were also obtained from the pure H2O splitting experiments using InMO4 (M = Ta, Nb, V) photocatalysts.402 Some researchers ascribed the absence of O2 to its adsorption onto the surface of the photocatalysts,13,378 which is observable from the measurement of the DC magnetic susceptibility of the photocatalysts before and after the photocatalytic reactions.
Regarding photocatalyst materials that are inherently unable to catalyze the pure H2O splitting due to inappropriate band edge levels, application of a bias potential on the photocatalyst electrodes can help to adjust the band levels, as exemplified by WO3 and Fe2O3 photoelectrodes.403 Moreover, the overwhelming recombination of charge carriers, which restricts the overall activity, can also be efficiently suppressed by applying a bias potential. One example in the context of mixed oxides is the monoclinic BiVO4, as mentioned earlier.353 This material shows no activity in the photocatalytic H2O reduction to evolve H2 under visible light irradiation, apparently due to the low potential of the conduction band edge. However, when a bias potential is applied, the conduction band edge can be shifted towards more negative potentials sufficient to reduce water under visible light illumination. Sayama et al.374 reported an excellent incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE = 29% at 420 nm) for the decomposition of water using nanocrystalline BiVO4 film electrodes under a 1.3 V bias potential (vs. a Ag/AgCl reference electrode).


7.3.2 Evolution of H2 or O2. 
Compared with the photocatalytic H2 production, research on the materials for only O2 evolution is equally important in the fundamental understanding of their properties (e.g., crystalline and electronic structures, optical and photocatalytic properties). Yet in the light of providing solutions to the problem of “clean energy”, efforts devoted to developing photocatalysts for H2 evolution seem more prominent, both economically and environmentally. Despite the fact that many materials were developed for the visible-light-driven H2O oxidation to produce O2, the details of all the studies in this field will not be covered in this feature article. Instead, a few mixed oxides and chalcogenides for H2 evolution have been selected as the focus of this section. In most cases, both co-catalysts and sacrificing agents are needed to achieve high efficiency in H2 generation.404
In12NiCr2Ti10O42 was investigated by Wang et al.382 for visible-light-driven H2 evolution from an aqueous solution of methanol using 0.2wt% Pt as the co-catalyst. With a very narrow bandgap, i.e., 2.14 eV, its absorption spectrum is in good accordance with its photocatalytic action spectrum. The evolution of H2 can be observed under illumination starting approximately at its absorption edge, i.e., 560 nm.
Tian et al.357 investigated photocatalytic H2 evolution under visible light illumination employing K4Ce2Nb10O30 as the photocatalyst. Even though this material possesses a very narrow bandgap, i.e., 1.8 eV (corresponding to an absorption edge of ∼690 nm), its conduction band edge still holds an appropriate potential level for H2O reduction from an aqueous Na2SO3 solution. The authors also pointed out the role played by Ce in the band structure configuration, based on density functional theory calculations. While the widely distributed Ce 4f states in the valence band are well hybridized with the Nb 4d and O 2p states, the unoccupied Ce 4f states in the conduction band are narrowly localized. This feature implies their reduced effectiveness in photocatalysis, because it is more difficult to transfer the photoexcited electrons from the highly localized Ce 4f orbitals to the surface of the catalyst.
Yi and Ye385 measured the rates of H2 evolution over single-phase Na1−xLaxTa1−xCoxO3 solid solutions from CH3OH/H2O mixtures under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). They found that the reaction rates are closely related to the value of x, i.e., the concentration of Co in the solid solutions. Density of states calculations reveal that the split Co 3d states contribute, by hybridization with the O 2p orbitals, to the formation of both the LUMO and HOMO, as displayed in Fig. 32. When the Co concentration is too low, it is insufficient to induce the density of states needed for the maximum H2 evolution rate, whereas a too high Co concentration would result in unsuitable redox potentials.
 Fig. 32  Densities of states of NaTaO3 (a) and Na0.9La0.1Ta0.9Co0.1O3 (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics. 
The single-phase oxide, PbBi2Nb2O9, synthesized by Kim et al.380 achieves a quantum yield of 0.95% in photocatalytic H2 evolution from an aqueous methanol solution under visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm). More impressively, its quantum yield for O2 formation is about 29%, using AgNO3 as the sacrificial electron accepting agent.
Wang et al.405 comparatively investigated photocatalytic H2 evolution rates using three isostructural oxide semiconductors, i.e., In6NiTi6O22, In3CrTi2O10, and In12NiCr2Ti10O42, possessing bandgaps of 2.48, 2.0 and 2.14 eV, respectively. Interestingly, these materials exhibited very different activities in photocatalytic H2 evolution. In12NiCr2Ti10O42, in which both Ni and Cr are present as minor cations, had the highest activity (∼8.2 µmol/h) at a catalyst loading of 1.85 g/L, while the H2 evolution rates of the other two materials were only ∼0.3 (In6NiTi6O22) and 0.2 µmol/h (In3CrTi2O10). To explain this considerable difference, the authors proposed that the presence of either Ni or Cr does not form continuous conduction or valence bands, as depicted in Fig. 33a and b. In contrast, the coexistence of Ni and Cr establishes continuous bands (Fig. 33c), which is well known to be crucial for improving the mobility of the photogenerated charge carrier, and hence the photocatalytic activities.
 Fig. 33  Schematic band structures of In6NiTi6O22 (a), In3CrTi2O10 (b), and In12NiCr2Ti10O42 (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 405, Copyright 2007 ACS. 
Lei et al.361 synthesized a cubic spinel-phase chalcogenide, ZnIn2S4, which functions actively in photocatalytic H2 production from an Na2S–Na2SO3 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. As deduced from the diffuse reflectance spectra, its bandgap is 2.3 eV, corresponding to an absorption edge at 570 nm. The high photocatalytic activity of this material can be related, at least partially, to its high surface area (i.e., 103 m2/g) being the result of a novel hydrothermal synthesis, which is about two orders of magnitude higher than that of the products from the SSR regime. Stability tests were also conducted on this catalyst, which demonstrated that more than 8.7 mmol H2 was steadily produced with 0.3 g catalyst (with Pt as the co-catalyst) within 150 hours of illumination.
Besides H2O, other materials can also serve as the H source for photocatalytic H2 generation, including hydrogen sulfide, a highly polluting gas released routinely from petroleum, natural gas and the coal industries. Kanade et al.367 synthesized an oxynitride, Nb2Zr2O17−xN2, by thermal ammonolysis of Nb2Zr6O17, which performs actively as a H2 production photocatalyst from H2S splitting under visible light irradiation. At a catalyst loading of 2.0 g/L, a quantum yield as high as 13.5% was obtained in an aqueous KOH solution under constant H2S flow (2.5 ml/min) when a 420 nm cutoff filter was used.


7.3.3 Degradation of organic compounds. 
Many research groups have studied the photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds under visible light irradiation to examine the activities of mixed transition metal oxide semiconductor materials. A wide range of compounds has been used as the organic substrates, including primarily organic dyes such as methylene blue,406,407 methyl orange,377,408 Rhodamine B,409 together with some other pollutants (e.g., benzene,377 CHCl3, chlorophenol410) and a few simpler molecules such as CH3CHO411 and 2-propanol.359,412 In the case of dye degradation, most researchers focused on the decoloration kinetics, while only a few examined the total destruction of the dyes.
It has long been recognized that three reaction pathways possibly exist that may account for dye decomposition: 1) photocatalytic degradation, 2) photosensitization-induced reaction and 3) direct photolysis. These reaction routes have been observed in many mixed-oxide photocatalytic systems. For instance, CaIn2O4413 has an absorption edge of ∼480 nm, but it can catalyze the degradation of methylene blue when a 580 nm cutoff filter is used. The reaction pathway was explained by the dye-photosensitization scheme. The electrons excited from the ground state (via the intramolecular π–π* transition) of the adsorbed dye molecules can be instantaneously injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor particles. Subsequently, the trapped electrons can react with adsorbed O2 molecules to generate O2˙− as the oxidizing species for further destruction of the dyes. In contrast, in the degradation of Alizarin Red dye catalyzed by AgAlO2, the change in its photocatalytic properties closely followed the variation of the light wavelength, suggesting that this process is an intrinsic photocatalytic reaction, but not a dye-assisted photocatalytic reaction.387 In addition, as elucidated in many reports,370,414 direct photolysis of dyes is another possible reaction pathway, during which the electron transfer from the excited dyes to O2 takes place to form oxidizing singlet oxygen atoms. Nevertheless, it is usually the photocatalytic reaction routes that are considered to play a major role in the overall degradation.
Fu et al.409 carefully monitored variations in the total organic carbon (TOC) and the concentrations of NH4+ and NO3− during the degradation of Rhodamine B catalyzed by Bi2WO6 nanoparticles under visible light illumination. The authors clarified that the total mineralization of the dyes was much slower than the initial decoloration process. TOC measurement results indicated a two-stage mineralization mechanism: 1) the ring cleavage in the first place, and 2) subsequent oxidation of the fragments. The dye-photosensitization pathway was also confirmed in this report.
To test the activities of a series of Ag-based oxides, i.e., AgAlO2, AgCrO2 and Ag2CrO4, Ouyang et al.377 employed two types of compounds, i.e., methyl orange and gaseous benzene as the organic substrates. Ag2CrO4 with a bandgap of 1.75 eV was found to be the most active photocatalyst for the destruction of both substrates under visible light irradiation up to 570 nm. It is worth mentioning that Ag2CrO4 was found to perform much more efficiently than traditional Degussa P25 powder in the decomposition of gaseous benzene under full arc irradiation, even though its surface area is lower than that of P25 by one order of magnitude.
BaBiO3, another novel material with a very narrow bandgap (2.05 eV), exhibited considerable activity in the destruction of acetaldehyde and methylene blue.370 The efficiency of the acetaldehyde conversion into CO2 remained at a high level when the wavelength of the irradiation light was changed from 350 nm (∼75%) to ∼550 nm (∼60%). Using a 440 nm cutoff filter, a CO2 conversion yield of more than 80% could be achieved within one hour of illumination. In the degradation of methylene blue, on the other hand, total decoloration (containing a factor of pure photolysis efficiency of ∼20%) using a 420 nm cutoff filter was achieved within one hour.
Li et al.384 investigated the dependence of the rate of photocatalytic isopropanol oxidation upon the composition of the (AgNbO3)1−x(NaNbO3)x solid solutions. The authors explicitly correlated the composition parameter, x, with both the physicochemical properties (e.g., particle size, surface area, and capacity of isopropanol adsorption) and the electronic band structures of the catalysts. The value of x = 0.4 was considered as the optimum composition, under which the competition among the optical absorption, surface area and the oxidizing power of the material was balanced to achieve the highest efficiency.
The photocatalytic activity in the CO2 evolution from CH3CHO decomposition over another solid solution, (Ag0.75Sr0.25)1−x(Ag0.75Sr0.25)O3, under visible light irradiation was examined by Wang et al.386 The authors reported a quantum efficiency of 1.48% at λ = 440 nm, which tripled that of N-doped TiO2 at λ = 436 nm (0.42%),250 although the BET surface area of (Ag0.75Sr0.25)1−x(Ag0.75Sr0.25)O3 (∼1 m2/g) was much smaller than that of TiO2−xNx (∼67 m2/g).
Oxyhalide-based materials were also tested for photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds under visible light irradiation. As described in a report by Wang et al.,369xBiOBr–(1 − x)BiOI was most active when x = 0.25 for methyl orange degradation at λ > 420 nm. Another Bi-based narrow-bandgap (2.38 eV) oxychloride, Bi4NbO8Cl, exhibiting a layered structure, was tested for the destruction of the same dye by Lin et al.368 The material performed well under visible light irradiation, due to, at least partially, the internal electric fields between the [Bi2O2] and [Cl] layers in the crystalline structure of Bi4NbO8Cl.
Photoelectrocatalytic experiments employing mixed oxide electrodes were also conducted to investigate their activities under visible light illumination. Zhao et al.410,415 investigated the degradation of triazine-containing azo dyes, i.e., anionic reactive brilliant red K-2G, reactive brilliant red X-3B, and reactive yellow KD-3G, using γ-Bi2MoO6 films (bandgap 2.67 eV) as the photoelectrodes. The authors applied a 3.0 V (vs. SCE) bias potential, which by itself could induce the electrooxidation of the dyes. Synergetic effects between the electrooxidation and photocatalysis were confirmed based upon the degradation kinetics and the TOC variation. In particular, after analyzing the degradation intermediates, the authors proposed that the destruction of K-2G proceeds first through the cleavage of the azo bond leading to the decoloration, followed by the opening of the phenyl and naphthalene ring for further degradation. Similar synergetic effects were also observed by Zhao et al.410 when they studied the photocatalytic oxidation of 4-chlorophenol using Bi2WO6 nanoflake films under bias potentials. It was commonly recognized that electrooxidation in the dark resulted in the deactivation of the electrode surface due to the electro-polymerization of the intermediate radicals on the surface, a process frequently encountered in the electrooxidation of organic pollutants. The synergetic effects were then interpreted by the fact that the photogenerated charge carriers can efficiently react with the intermediate radicals, thus reactivating the electrode surface.

8. Concluding remarks
The photocatalytic oxidation of mainly organic pollutants in water and air as an advanced oxidation process has been proved to be an effective technique for environmental remediation. To develop efficient photocatalytic systems, high-quality semiconductor-based materials have been actively studied in recent years. Among a wide spectrum of semiconductors, TiO2 has attracted significant attention over the past decades due to its excellent performance as a photocatalyst under UV light irradiation. The development of synthesis methods for various nanostructures based on TiO2 allows further enhancement of the photocatalytic performance of TiO2. Considerable efforts have also been expended on the development of visible-light-sensitive materials to extend the usable solar energy spectrum. For example, photocatalysts based on mixed oxide semiconductors have attracted considerable attention during the past ten years. Studies in this field have brought profound understanding to materials science, which continuously contributes to the design of visible-light-sensitive photocatalysts. These efforts are of special environmental and economic significance in the context of solving several environmental problems, e.g., seeking “clean energy”. Although the photocatalysts reviewed here only cover a small portion of the full range of applicable materials, theoretical and experimental evidence has accumulated confirming that such materials can serve as the basis upon which highly efficient photocatalysts for solar energy utilization can be developed.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Agrios and P. Pichat, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2005, 35, 655–663 CrossRef .

          M. Kaneko and I. Okura, Photocatalysis: Science and Technology, Kodansha: Tokyo; Springer: Berlin, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mat., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
R. van de Krol, Y. Q. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
B. D. Alexander, P. J. Kulesza, L. Rutkowska, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2298–2303 RSC .
K. Rajeshwar, N. R. de Tacconi and C. R. Chenthamarakshan, Chem. Mat., 2001, 13, 2765–2782 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Ollis, E. Pelizzetti and N. Serpone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1991, 25, 1522–1529 .
H. Gerischer, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 1277–1281 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer and A. Heller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 113–118 CAS .

          R. Memming, Semiconductor Electrochemistry, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226–13239 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 5566–5571 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rossetti, J. L. Ellison, J. M. Gibson and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4464–4469 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Bahnemann, C. Kormann and M. R. Hoffmann, Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1987, 91, 3789–3798 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Wong and P. C. Searson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 2939–2941 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kormann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 5196–5201 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4317–4318 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 7427–7433 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 303–304 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bahnemann, A. Henglein, J. Lilie and L. Spanhel, Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1984, 88, 709–711 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bahnemann, A. Henglein and L. Spanhel, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1984, 78, 151–163 RSC .
D. W. Bahnemann, M. Hilgendorff and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4265–4275 CrossRef CAS .
N. Murakami, O. O. P. Mahaney, T. Torimoto and B. Ohtani, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 426, 204–208 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Bahnemann, Isr. J. Chem., 1993, 33, 115–136 CAS .
N. Serpone, D. Lawless, R. Khairutdinov and E. Pelizzetti, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16655–16661 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Colombo Jr. and R. M. Bowman, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 11752–11756 CrossRef .
T. Yoshihara, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Tamaki, M. Murai, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS .
R. Enriquez, A. G. Agrios and P. Pichat, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 196–202 CrossRef .
C. S. Turchi and D. F. Ollis, J. Catal., 1990, 122, 178–192 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Gao, J. Stark, D. W. Bahnemann and J. Rabani, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2002, 148, 387–391 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wang, C. Bottcher, D. W. Bahnemann and J. K. Dohrmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2322–2329 RSC .
C. Y. Wang, R. Pagel, J. K. Dohrmann and D. W. Bahnemann, C.R. Chim., 2006, 9, 761–773 CrossRef CAS .
C. Richard and P. Boule, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 38, 431–440 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wang, J. Rabani, D. W. Bahnemann and J. K. Dohrmann, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2002, 148, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wang, R. Pagel, D. W. Bahnemann and J. K. Dohrmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 14082–14092 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torimoto, N. Nakamura, S. Ikeda and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 5910–5914 RSC .
C. Wang, D. W. Bahnemann and J. K. Dohrmann, Water Sci. Technol., 2001, 44, 279–286 Search PubMed .
U. Siemon, D. Bahnemann, J. J. Testa, D. Rodriguez, M. I. Litter and N. Bruno, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2002, 148, 247–255 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Nosaka, T. Fujiwara, H. Yagi, H. Akutsu and Y. Nosaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9121–9125 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Cheng, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, N. R. de Tacconi and K. Rajeshwar, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2007, 33, 225–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gumy, S. A. Giraldo, J. Rengifo and C. Pulgarin, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2008, 78, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
D. Friedmann, H. Hansing and D. Bahnemann, Z. Phys. Chemie-Int. J. Res. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 221, 329–348 Search PubMed .
D. M. Antonelli and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem.-Int. Edit. Engl., 1995, 34, 2014–2017 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef .
E. L. Crepaldi, G. Soler-Illia, D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9770–9786 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, J. G. Yu and J. C. Zhao, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2002, 36, 31–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, J. C. Yu, W. K. Ho and Z. T. Jiang, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 607–613 RSC .
J. Tang, Y. Y. Wu, E. W. McFarland and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1670–1671 RSC .
H. Choi, E. Stathatos and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2006, 63, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pan and W. I. Lee, Chem. Mat., 2006, 18, 847–853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sakatani, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, C. Boissiere, G. Soler-Illia and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 77–82 RSC .
A. Feldhoff, C. Mendive, T. Bredow and D. Bahnemann, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 805–809 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Blesa, A. D. Weisz, P. J. Morando, J. A. Salfity, G. E. Magaz and A. E. Regazzoni, Coordination Chemistry Reviews, 2000, 196, 31–63 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Weisz, A. E. Regazzoni and M. A. Blesa, Solid State Ion., 2001, 143, 125–130 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Weisz, A. E. Regazzoni and M. A. Blesa, Croat. Chem. Acta, 2007, 80, 325–332 CAS .
C. B. Mendive, T. Bredow, A. Feldhoff, M. Blesa and D. Bahnemann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1960–1974 RSC .
D. V. Kozlov, E. A. Paukshtis and E. N. Savinov, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2000, 24, L7–L12 CrossRef CAS .
P. Z. Araujo, C. B. Mendive, L. A. G. Rodenas, P. J. Morando, A. E. Regazzoni, M. A. Blesa and D. Bahnemann, Colloids and Surfaces a-Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 2005, 265, 73–80 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Mendive, D. W. Bahnemann and M. A. Blesa, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Mendive, T. Bredow, M. A. Blesa and D. W. Bahnemann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3232–3247 RSC .
D. Duonghong, J. Ramsden and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 2977–2985 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
C. Richard, New J. Chem., 1994, 18, 443–445 Search PubMed .
A. A. Khodja, T. Sehili, J. F. Pilichowski and P. Boule, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2001, 141, 231–239 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Jing, B. F. Xin, F. L. Yuan, B. Q. Wang, K. Y. Shi, W. M. Cai and H. G. Fu, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2004, 275, 49–54 CrossRef CAS .
O. Seven, B. Dindar, S. Aydemir, D. Metin, M. A. Ozinel and S. Icli, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2004, 165, 103–107 CrossRef CAS .
N. Daneshvar, D. Salari and A. R. Khataee, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2004, 162, 317–322 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakthivel, B. Neppolian, M. V. Shankar, B. Arabindoo, M. Palanichamy and V. Murugesan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 65–82 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Yeber, J. Rodriguez, J. Freer, N. Duran and H. D. Mansilla, Chemosphere, 2000, 41, 1193–1197 CrossRef CAS .
L. Amalric, C. Guillard and P. Pichat, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1994, 20, 579–594 CAS .
A. Akyol, H. C. Yatmaz and M. Bayramoglu, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2004, 54, 19–24 CAS .
H. C. Yatmaz, A. Akyol and M. Bayramoglu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 6035–6039 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakrabarti and B. K. Dutta, J. Hazard. Mater., 2004, 112, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Jing, Z. L. Xu, Y. G. Du, X. J. Sun, L. Wang, X. Q. Zhou, H. Y. Shan and W. M. Cai, Chem. J. Chin. Univ.-Chin., 2002, 23, 871–875 Search PubMed .
S. Sakthivel, B. Neppolian, M. Palanichamy, B. Arabindoo and V. Murugesan, Water Sci. Technol., 2001, 44, 211–218 Search PubMed .
S. Sakthivel, B. Neppolian, M. Palanichamy, B. Arabindoo and V. Murugesan, Indian J. Chem. Technol., 1999, 6, 161–165 Search PubMed .
C. Richard, A. M. Martre and P. Boule, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1992, 66, 225–234 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, T. Kato, E. Maekawa and K. Honda, Bulletin of The Chemical Society of Japan, 1981, 54, 1671–1674 CAS .
Q. Wan, Q. H. Li, Y. J. Chen, T. H. Wang, X. L. He, J. P. Li and C. L. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3654–3656 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ozgur, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Dogan, V. Avrutin, S. J. Cho and H. Morkoc, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 103 .
S. J. Pearton, D. P. Norton, K. Ip, Y. W. Heo and T. Steiner, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2005, 50, 293–340 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, C. J. Summers and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Studenikin, N. Golego and M. Cocivera, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 2287–2294 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, G. W. Meng, L. D. Zhang and F. Phillipp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2011–2013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kong, D. P. Yu, B. Zhang, W. Fang and S. Q. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 407–409 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinodgopal and P. V. Kamat, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 841–845 CAS .
K. Vinodgopal, I. Bedja and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mat., 1996, 8, 2180–2187 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. C. Zhao, X. M. Wang, B. X. Mai, G. Y. Sheng, P. Peng and J. M. Fu, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2002, 39, 269–279 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cun, X. M. Wang, B. Q. Xu, J. C. Zhao, B. X. Mai, P. Peng, G. Y. Sheng and H. M. Fu, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2004, 168, 47–52 CrossRef .
M. L. Zhang, T. C. An, X. H. Hu, C. Wang, G. Y. Sheng and J. M. Fu, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2004, 260, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, W. Lu, J. H. Li, J. Choi, Y. S. Jeong, S. Y. Choi, J. B. Park, M. K. Ryu and K. Lee, Small, 2006, 2, 1436–1439 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santato, M. Odziemkowski, M. Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10639–10649 CrossRef CAS .
D. Monllor-Satoca, L. Borja, A. Rodes, R. Gomez and P. Salvador, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 2540–2551 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, D. Cahen and J. Manasson, Nature, 1976, 260, 312–313 CAS .
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 215–224 CAS .
W. Gissler and R. Memming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1710–1714 CAS .
R. Abe, T. Takata, H. Sugihara and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3829–3831 RSC .
A. Hameed, M. A. Gondal and Z. H. Yamani, Catal. Commun., 2004, 5, 715–719 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Hwang, J. Kim, T. J. Park and J. S. Lee, Catal. Lett., 2002, 80, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Baeck, K. S. Choi, T. F. Jaramillo, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1269–1273 CrossRef CAS .
S. Badilescu and P. V. Ashrit, Solid State Ion., 2003, 158, 187–197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Papaefthimiou, G. Leftheriotis and P. Yianoulis, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2145–2150 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, C. Seo and H. Cheong, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2006, 48, 1657–1660 Search PubMed .
N. Xu, M. Sun, Y. W. Cao, J. N. Yao and E. G. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 157, 81–84 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Su, J. H. Fang and Z. H. Lu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1997, 51, 85–87 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bechinger, E. Wirth and P. Leiderer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 2834–2836 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shigesato, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics Part 1-Regular Papers Short Notes & Review Papers, 1991, 30, 1457–1462 Search PubMed .
C. Bechinger, G. Oefinger, S. Herminghaus and P. Leiderer, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 4527–4533 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Faust, M. R. Hoffmann and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 6371–6381 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1977, 81, 1484–1488 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Leland and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 5076–5083 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohmori, H. Takahashi, H. Mametsuka and E. Suzuki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 3519–3522 RSC .
S. U. M. Khan and J. Akikusa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7184–7189 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pal and M. Sharon, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1998, 73, 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pulgarin and J. Kiwi, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawahara, K. Yamada and H. Tada, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 294, 504–507 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ohtani, J. Kawaguchi, M. Kozawa, Y. Nakaoka and Y. Nosaka, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1995, 90, 75–80 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirai, Y. Bando and I. Komasawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8967–8970 CrossRef CAS .
E. Granot, F. Patolsky and I. Willner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5875–5881 CrossRef CAS .
R. Baron, C. H. Huang, D. M. Bassani, A. Onopriyenko, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angewandte Chemie-International Edition, 2005, 44, 4010–4015 CrossRef CAS .
M. Warrier, M. K. F. Lo, H. Monbouquette and M. A. Garcia-Garibay, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2004, 3, 859–863 RSC .
D. Meissner and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 3476–3483 CrossRef .
D. Meissner, R. Memming, B. Kastening and D. Bahnemann, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1986, 127, 419–423 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Jing and L. J. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11139–11145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Weiss, A. Fernandez and H. Kisch, Angewandte Chemie-International Edition, 2001, 40, 3825–3827 CrossRef .
H. Kisch and H. Weiss, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Fu, L. A. Clark, Q. Yang and M. A. Anderson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Zorn, D. T. Tompkins, W. A. Zeltner and M. A. Anderson, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 1999, 23, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Do, W. Lee, K. Dwight and A. Wold, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 108, 198–201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Papp, S. Soled, K. Dwight and A. Wold, Chem. Mat., 1994, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Kwon, K. Y. Song, W. I. Lee, G. J. Choi and Y. R. Do, J. Catal., 2000, 191, 192–199 CrossRef .
H. Hidaka, J. Zhao, E. Pelizzetti and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 2226–2230 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fuerte, M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, A. J. Maira, A. Martinez-Arias, M. Fernandez-Garcia, J. C. Conesa, J. Soria and G. Munuera, J. Catal., 2002, 212, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyauchi, A. K. Nakajima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Mat., 2002, 14, 4714–4720 CrossRef CAS .
S. Somasundaram, N. Tacconi, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, K. Rajeshwar and N. R. de Tacconi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 577, 167–177 CrossRef CAS .
V. Keller, P. Bernhardt and F. Garin, J. Catal., 2003, 215, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Higashimoto, M. Sakiyama and M. Azuma, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 503, 201–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyauchi, A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1923–1927 CrossRef CAS .
B. Levy, W. Liu and S. E. Gilbert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 1810–1816 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kanai, T. Nuida, K. Ueta, K. Hashimoto, T. Watanabe and H. Ohsaki, Vacuum, 2004, 74, 723–727 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hattori, Y. Tokihisa, H. Tada and S. Ito, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2279–2283 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bedja and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 9182–9188 CrossRef CAS .

          P. V. Kamat, in Molecular Level Artificial Photosynthetic Materials, ed. G. J. Meyer, John Wiley and Sons, New York,  1997, pp. 273–343 Search PubMed .
A. Hattori, Y. Tokihisa, H. Tada, N. Tohge, S. Ito, K. Hongo, R. Shiratsuchi and G. Nogami, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shang, W. Q. Yao, Y. F. Zhu and N. Z. Wu, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2004, 257, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Cao, H. B. Wan, L. H. Huo and S. Q. Xi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 244, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawahara, Y. Konishi, H. Tada, N. Tohge and S. Ito, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7442–7445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Srinivasan, J. Wade and E. K. Stefanakos, Journal of Nanomaterials, 2006, 2006, 87326 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar and A. K. Jain, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2001, 165, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yin, Y. Wada, T. Kitamura, T. Sakata, H. Mori and S. Yanagida, Chem. Lett., 2001, 334–335 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bessekhouad, D. Robert and J. Weber, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2004, 163, 569–580 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Tristao, F. Magalhaes, P. Corio and M. T. C. Sansiviero, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2006, 181, 152–157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bessekhouad, N. Chaoui, M. Trzpit, N. Ghazzal, D. Robert and J. V. Weber, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2006, 183, 218–224 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. So, K. J. Kim and S. J. Moon, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2004, 29, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jang, S. H. Choi, H. Park, W. Choi and J. S. Lee, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 3642–3646 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385–2393 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, E. Borgarello and M. Gratzel, ChemPhysChem, 1983 Search PubMed .
L. Spanhel, H. Weller and A. Henglein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6632–6635 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Evans, K. W. Springer and J. Z. Zhang, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 6222–6225 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, L. Wu, J. Lin, P. Li and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1552–1553 RSC .
L. Wu, J. C. Yu and X. Fu, Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical, 2006, 244, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Wang, Z. H. Liu, Q. Zheng, Z. K. He and R. X. Cai, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4561–4566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bessekhouad, N. Chaoui, M. Trzpit, N. Ghazzal, D. Robert and J. V. Weber, TiO2 electrode; Photoelectrochemical oxidation; Microwave; Hydrothermal treatment, 2006, 183, 218–224 Search PubMed .
P. A. Sant and P. V. Kamat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 198–203 RSC .
M. C. Hsu, I. C. Leu, Y. M. Sun and M. H. Hon, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 285, 642–648 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pichat, New J. Chem., 1987, 11, 135–140 Search PubMed .
B. Ohtani, M. Kakimoto, S. Nishimoto and T. Kagiya, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1993, 70, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Schierbaum, U. K. Kirner, J. F. Geiger and W. Gopel, Sens. Actuator B-Chem., 1991, 4, 87–94 CrossRef .
Y. M. Gao, W. Lee, R. Trehan, R. Kershaw, K. Dwight and A. Wold, Mater. Res. Bull., 1991, 26, 1247–1254 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu and X. J. Zhao, Rare Metal Mat. Eng., 2000, 29, 390–393 Search PubMed .
T. Sano, N. Negishi, D. Mas and K. Takeuchi, J. Catal., 2000, 194, 71–79 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sclafani, M. N. Mozzanega and P. Pichat, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1991, 59, 181–189 CrossRef CAS .
D. Friedmann, H. Hansing and D. Bahnemann, Zeitschrift fur Physikalische Chemie, 2007, 221, 329–348 Search PubMed .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5645–5647 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928–3934 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wood, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810–8815 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, J. F. Xiong, B. Cheng and S. W. Liu, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2005, 60, 211–221 CrossRef .
B. Sun, A. V. Vorontsov and P. G. Smirniotis, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 3151–3156 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. He, P. J. Yang, H. Sato, Y. Umemura and A. Yamagishi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 566, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Sung-Suh, J. R. Choi, H. J. Hah, S. M. Koo and Y. C. Bae, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2004, 163, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, K. Teranishi, Y. Inubushi and S. Ito, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 3304–3309 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, T. Ishida, A. Takao and S. Ito, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7898–7900 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, K. Teranishi and S. Ito, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7084–7087 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Y. Tan, C. K. Yip, D. Beydoun and R. Amal, Chem. Eng. J., 2003, 95, 179–186 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Xin, L. Q. Jing, Z. Y. Ren, B. Q. Wang and H. G. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2805–2809 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and N. Mathur, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2004, 275, 189–197 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stathatos and P. Lianos, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2398–2400 CrossRef CAS .
H. Einaga, M. Harada, S. Futamura and T. Ibusuki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9290–9297 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawahara, K. Suzuki, Y. Ohka and T. Tatsuma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 3851–3855 RSC .
C. S. Ah, H. S. Han, K. Kim and D. J. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8153–8159 CrossRef .
P. V. Kamat, M. Flumiani and G. V. Hartland, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 3123–3128 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murakoshi, H. Tanaka, Y. Sawai and Y. Nakato, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3041–3045 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Jin, Y. W. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. G. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901–1903 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, T. K. Sau and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 115–121 CrossRef .
A. Roucoux, J. Schulz and H. Patin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3757–3778 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pradhan, A. Pal and T. Pal, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 1800–1802 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8340–8347 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Cozzoli, E. Fanizza, R. Comparelli, M. L. Curri, A. Agostiano and D. Laub, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9623–9630 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Cozzoli, R. Comparelli, E. Fanizza, M. L. Curri, A. Agostiano and D. Laub, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3868–3879 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Zhang and J. C. Yu, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 684–687 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Yao, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, Nature, 1992, 355, 624–626 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irie, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1685–1716 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohko, T. Tatsuma, T. Fujii, K. Naoi, C. Niwa, Y. Kubota and A. Fujishima, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 29–31 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, Y. Ohko and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3664–3668 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, Y. Ohko and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1288–1290 RSC .
J. D. Grunwaldt, M. Maciejewski, O. S. Becker, P. Fabrizioli and A. Baiker, J. Catal., 1999, 186, 458–469 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Bollinger and M. A. Vannice, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 1996, 8, 417–443 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Lee, C. Y. Fan, T. P. Wu and S. L. Anderson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5682–5683 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hayashi, K. Tanaka and M. Haruta, J. Catal., 1998, 178, 566–575 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Bamwenda, S. Tsubota, T. Nakamura and M. Haruta, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1995, 89, 177–189 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 277, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakato, K. Ueda, H. Yano and H. Tsubomura, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 2316–2324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jakob, H. Levanon and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353–358 CrossRef .
X. Z. Li and F. B. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 2381–2387 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Arabatzis, T. Stergiopoulos, D. Andreeva, S. Kitova, S. G. Neophytides and P. Falaras, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sonawane and M. K. Dongare, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2006, 243, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okazaki, Y. Morikawa, S. Tanaka, K. Tanaka and M. Kohyama, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 8 .
J. G. Highfield and P. Pichat, New J. Chem., 1989, 13, 61–66 Search PubMed .
J. S. Lee and W. Y. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 4026–4033 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Egerton and J. A. Mattinson, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2008, 194, 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
A. Linsebigler, C. Rusu and J. T. Yates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5284–5289 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, B. Lindig and J. Westerhausen, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 1627–1628 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Bahnemann, A. Henglein and L. Spanhel, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 709–711 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Bahnemann, J. Mönig and R. Chapman, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 3872–3788 CrossRef .
A. Furube, T. Asahi, H. Masuhara, H. Yamashita and M. Anpo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 336, 424–430 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakajima, T. Mori and M. Watanabe, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 925–927 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, K. Chiba, M. Tomonari, S. Coluccia, M. Che and M. A. Fox, Bulletin of the Chemical Society of Japan, 1991, 64, 543–551 CAS .
A. Sclafani and J. M. Herrmann, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1998, 113, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uchida, S. Katoh and M. Watanabe, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 2111–2116 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, C. C. Chen, X. Z. Li, J. C. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5022–5028 CrossRef CAS .
V. Iliev, D. Tomova, L. Bilyarska, A. Eliyas and L. Petrov, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2006, 63, 266–271 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sreethawong, Y. Suzuki and S. Yoshikawa, C.R. Chim., 2006, 9, 307–314 CrossRef CAS .
X. Quan, S. Chen, J. Su, J. W. Chen and G. H. Chen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2004, 34, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402–407 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mat., 2002, 14, 2930–2935 CrossRef CAS .
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bindaar, M. P. Dareedwards, J. B. Goodenough and A. Hamnett, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 79, 1199–1213 RSC .
S. Sato, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1986, 123, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Saha and H. G. Tompkins, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 3072–3079 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, Y. S. Cho, W. I. Yi, T. S. Kim, J. K. Lee and H. J. Jung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 815–816 CrossRef CAS .
T. Morikawa, R. Asahi, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 2-Lett., 2001, 40, L561–L563 Search PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24287–24293 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ihara, M. Miyoshi, Y. Iriyama, O. Matsumoto and S. Sugihara, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2003, 42, 403–409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 487–490 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takeshita, A. Yamashita, T. Ishibashi, H. Onishi, K. Nishijima and T. Ohno, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2006, 177, 269–275 CrossRef CAS .
O. Diwald, T. L. Thompson, T. Zubkov, E. G. Goralski, S. D. Walck and J. T. J. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6004–6008 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, H. Itoh and K. Asai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 454–456 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, F. Yamashita, I. Tanaka, E. Matsubara and A. Muramatsu, Mater. Trans., 2004, 45, 1987–1990 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Tian and C. B. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17866–17871 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and J. P. Lewis, J. Phys.-Condes. Matter, 2006, 18, 421–434 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, S. Tanaka and K. Asai, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 330–331 CrossRef CAS .
H. Irie, Y. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 772–773 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Lu, S. Y. Wu, L. B. Lin and W. C. Zheng, Physica B, 2001, 304, 147–151 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H. Haneda, S. Hishita and N. Ohashi, Chem. Mat., 2005, 17, 2596–2602 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H. Haneda, S. Hishita, N. Ohashi and N. K. Labhsetwar, J. Fluor. Chem., 2005, 126, 69–77 Search PubMed .
W. Ho, J. C. Yu and S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1115–1117 RSC .
S. A. Bilmes, P. Mandelbaum, F. Alvarez and N. M. Victoria, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 9851–9858 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Lin, A. Orlov, R. M. Lambert and M. C. Payne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20948–20952 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Martyanov, S. Uma, S. Rodrigues and K. J. Klabunde, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2476–2477 RSC .
Y. Z. Li, D. S. Hwang, N. H. Lee and S. J. Kim, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 404, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, W. K. Ho, J. G. Yu, H. Yip, P. K. Wong and J. C. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1175–1179 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, T. Mitsui and M. Matsumura, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 364–365 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, M. Akiyoshi, T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Mitsui and M. Matsumura, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2004, 265, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, T. Tsubota, M. Toyofuku and R. Inaba, Catal. Lett., 2004, 98, 255–258 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rodriguez, J. Hrbek, J. Dvorak, T. Jirsak and A. Maiti, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 336, 377–384 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, D. Yang, Z. Y. Jiang and J. Li, J. Mol. Catal. B-Enzym., 2006, 43, 44–48 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Kuznetsov and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25203–25209 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Ma, M. Akiyama, E. Abe and I. Imai, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2543–2547 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni, A. Selloni, S. Livraghi and E. Giamello, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11414–11419 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mrowetz, W. Balcerski, A. J. Colussi and M. R. Hoffman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17269–17273 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nakamura, T. Tanaka and Y. Nakato, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10617–10620 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyauchi, A. Ikezawa, H. Tobimatsu, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 865–870 RSC .
T. Lindgren, J. M. Mwabora, E. Avendano, J. Jonsson, A. Hoel, C. G. Granqvist and S. E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 5709–5716 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, D. Lawless, J. Disdier and J. M. Herrmann, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 643–652 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Shah, W. Li, C. P. Huang, O. Jung and C. Ni, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2002, 99, 6482–6486 CrossRef .
J. A. Wang, R. Limas-Ballesteros, T. Lopez, A. Moreno, R. Gomez, O. Novaro and X. Bokhimi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9692–9698 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miyake and H. Kozuka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17951–17956 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Karakitsou and X. E. Verykios, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1184–1189 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Bally, E. N. Korobeinikova, P. E. Schmid, F. Levy and F. Bussy, J. Phys. D-Appl. Phys., 1998, 31, 1149–1154 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma and M. C. Bhatnagar, Sens. Actuator B-Chem., 1999, 56, 215–219 CrossRef .
O. Carp, C. L. Huisman and A. Reller, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2004, 32, 33–177 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wilke and H. D. Breuer, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1999, 121, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel and R. F. Howe, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 2566–2572 CrossRef .
H. Kikkawa, B. Oregan and M. A. Anderson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 309, 91–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Litter and J. A. Navio, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1996, 98, 171–181 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Ranjit and B. Viswanathan, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 1997, 108, 79–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Navio, G. Colon, M. Trillas, J. Peral, X. Domenech, J. J. Testa, J. Padron, D. Rodriguez and M. I. Litter, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 1998, 16, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Navio, J. J. Testa, P. Djedjeian, J. R. Padron, D. Rodriguez and M. I. Litter, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 1999, 178, 191–203 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Wang, H. M. Cheng, Y. Z. Hao, J. M. Ma, W. H. Li and S. M. Cai, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 349, 120–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iwasaki, M. Hara, H. Kawada, H. Tada and S. Ito, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 224, 202–204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Wang, H. M. Cheng, L. Zhang, Y. Z. Hao, J. M. Ma, B. Xu and W. H. Li, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2000, 151, 205–216 CrossRef CAS .
U. Gesenhues, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2001, 139, 243–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Klosek and D. Raftery, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2815–2819 CrossRef CAS .
A. Di Paola, E. Garcia-Lopez, S. Ikeda, G. Marci, B. Ohtani and L. Palmisano, Catal. Today, 2002, 75, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Xu, Y. Gao and H. Q. Liu, J. Catal., 2002, 207, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, J. C. Yu, B. Cheng and X. J. Zhao, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2002, 24, 39–48 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Yuan, J. H. Jia and L. D. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2002, 73, 323–326 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zheng, M. F. Tang, Y. K. Gong, X. J. Deng and B. H. Wu, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2003, 23, 246–248 CAS .
J. Arana, J. M. Dona-Rodriguez, O. Gonzalez-Diaz, E. T. Rendon, J. A. H. Melian, G. Colon, J. A. Navio and J. P. Pena, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2004, 215, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Cao, W. S. Yang, W. F. Zhang, G. Z. Liu and P. L. Yue, New J. Chem., 2004, 28, 218–222 RSC .
L. Q. Jing, X. J. Sun, B. F. Xin, B. Q. Wang, W. M. Cai and H. G. Fu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 3375–3382 CrossRef .
Y. M. Wang, S. W. Liu, M. K. Lu, S. F. Wang, F. Gu, X. Z. Gai, X. P. Cui and J. Pan, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2004, 215, 137–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. J. Li, J. T. Chen and L. Y. Wang, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2004, 163, 517–522 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Jing, Y. J. Zhang and L. J. Guo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 415, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, S. J. Hwang and W. Y. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24260–24267 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sahoo, A. K. Gupta and A. Pal, Dyes Pigment., 2005, 66, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bettinelli, A. Speghini, D. Falcomer, M. Daldosso, V. Dallacasa and L. Romano, J. Phys.-Condes. Matter, 2006, 18, S2149–S2160 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, M. A. Aramendia, A. Marinas, J. M. Marinas and F. J. Urbano, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2006, 306, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
G. Colon, M. Maicu, M. C. Hidalgo and J. A. Navio, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2006, 67, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Ha, E. D. Jeong, M. S. Won, H. G. Kim, H. K. Pak, J. H. Jung, B. H. Shon, S. W. Bae and J. S. Lee, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2006, 49, S675–S679 Search PubMed .
D. H. Kim, K. S. Lee, Y. S. Kim, Y. C. Chung and S. J. Kim, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 515–518 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, N. H. Leea, S. H. Shin, H. G. Lee and S. J. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng. B-Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2006, 129, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Mohamed and M. M. Al-Esaimi, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2006, 255, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, Z. Miyamoto, K. Nishijima, H. Kanemitsu and X. Y. Feng, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2006, 302, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tsuge, K. Inokuchi, K. Onozuka, O. Shingo, S. Sugi, M. Yoshikawa and S. Shiratori, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 499, 396–401 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, H. G. Yu, C. H. Ao, S. C. Lee, J. C. Yu and W. K. Ho, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 273–280 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umebayashi, T. Yamaki, T. Sumita, S. Yamamoto, S. Tanaka and K. Asai, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2003, 206, 264–267 Search PubMed .
J. Osterwalder, T. Droubay, T. Kaspar, J. Williams, C. M. Wang and S. A. Chambers, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 484, 289–298 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Karvinen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 1035–1043 CrossRef .
J. F. Zhu, Z. G. Deng, F. Chen, J. L. Zhang, H. J. Chen, M. Anpo, J. Z. Huang and L. Z. Zhang, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2006, 62, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Lu, Y. Z. Liu, L. B. Lin, X. T. Zu, J. M. Zhu and L. P. Wu, J. Inorg. Mater., 2001, 16, 373–376 Search PubMed .
A. Ghicov, B. Schmidt, J. Kunze and P. Schmuki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 433, 323–326 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Egerton, E. Harris, E. J. Lawson, B. Mile and C. C. Rowlands, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 497–504 RSC .
C. Y. Wang, D. W. Bahnemann and J. K. Dohrmann, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1539–1540 RSC .
H. Yamashita, M. Harada, J. Misaka, M. Takeuchi, B. Neppolian and M. Anpo, Catal. Today, 2003, 84, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Jeong, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Kim, Y. S. Jeon, K. O. Jeon and K. S. Hwang, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2005, 46, 559–561 Search PubMed .
M. H. Zhou, J. G. Yu and B. Cheng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 137, 1838–1847 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Zhang, M. H. Zhou and L. C. Lei, Catal. Commun., 2006, 7, 427–431 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, J. G. Li, H. Kamiyama, Y. Moriyoshi and T. Ishigaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6804–6809 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nahar, K. Hasegawa and S. Kagaya, Chemosphere, 2006, 65, 1976–1982 CrossRef .
W. Y. Teoh, R. Amal, L. Madler and S. E. Pratsinis, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dvoranova, V. Brezova, M. Mazur and M. A. Malati, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2002, 37, 91–105 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gracia, J. P. Holgado, A. Caballero and A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17466–17476 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zang, C. Lange, I. Abraham, S. Storck, W. F. Maier and H. Kisch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10765–10771 CrossRef CAS .
W. Macyk, G. Burgeth and H. Kisch, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 322–328 RSC .
A. Fuerte, M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, A. J. Maira, A. Martinez-Arias, M. Fernandez-Garcia, J. C. Conesa and J. Soria, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2718–2719 RSC .
M. Gratzel and R. F. Howe, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 2566–2572 CrossRef .
S. Sakthivel, M. V. Shankar, M. Palanichamy, B. Arabindoo, D. W. Bahnemann and V. Murugesan, Water Res., 2004, 38, 3001–3008 CrossRef CAS .
M. Radecka, M. Wierzbicka, S. Komornicki and M. Rekas, Physica B, 2004, 348, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, M. H. Zhou, H. G. Yu, Q. J. Zhang and Y. Yu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 95, 193–196 .
E. Arpac, F. Sayilkan, M. Asilturk, P. Tatar, N. Kiraz and H. Sayilkan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 140, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kiyonaga, T. Mitsui, M. Torikoshi, M. Takekawa, T. Soejima and H. Tada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10771–10778 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Omori and H. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11459–11467 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye and H. Arakawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 332, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Zou and H. Arakawa, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A-Chem., 2003, 158, 145–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Tian, W. F. Shangguan, J. Yuan, L. Jiang, M. X. Chen, J. W. Shi, Z. Y. Ouyang and S. J. Wang, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2006, 309, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ye and Z. G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 3137–3142 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Wang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mat., 2005, 17, 3255–3261 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Lei, W. S. You, M. Y. Liu, G. H. Zhou, T. Takata, M. Hara, K. Domen and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2142–2143 RSC .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mat., 2006, 18, 1969–1975 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Liu, L. Zhao, L. J. Ma and L. J. Guo, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 126–130 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1698–1699 RSC .
T. Mishima, M. Matsuda and M. Miyake, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 324, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Liu, W. S. You, Z. B. Lei, G. H. Zhou, J. J. Yang, G. P. Wu, G. J. Ma, G. Y. Luan, T. Takata, M. Hara, K. Domen and L. Can, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2192–2193 RSC .
K. G. Kanade, J. O. Baeg, B. B. Kale, S. M. Lee, S. J. Moon and K. J. Kong, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2007, 32, 4678–4684 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Lin, T. Huang, F. Q. Huang, W. D. Wang and J. L. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2145–2150 RSC .
W. D. Wang, F. Q. Huang, X. P. Lin and J. H. Yang, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 8–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12779–12785 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Fu, L. W. Zhang, W. Q. Yao and Y. F. Zhu, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2006, 66, 100–110 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maruyama, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23274–23278 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. H. Ai, F. L. Jia, L. Z. Zhang, X. X. Fan and Z. G. Zou, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 103, 162–167 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, A. Nomura, Z. G. Zou, R. Abe, Y. Abe and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2908–2909 RSC .
J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem.-Int. Edit., 2004, 43, 4463–4466 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kako, Z. G. Zou, M. Katagiri and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mat., 2007, 19, 198–202 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Ouyang, Z. S. Li, Z. Ouyang, T. Yu, J. H. Ye and Z. G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3134–3141 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14265–14269 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12441–12447 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Kim, D. W. Hwang and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8912–8913 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Wang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Catal. Today, 2004, 93–95, 891–894 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Wang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 411, 285–290 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Yao and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11188–11195 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Li, T. Kako, D. F. Wang, Z. G. Zou and J. Ye, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 2845–2850 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Yi and J. H. Ye, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 254108 CrossRef .
D. F. Wang, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2724–2725 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Ouyang, H. T. Zhang, D. F. Li, T. Yu, J. H. Ye and Z. G. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11677–11682 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Liu, R. Nakamura and Y. Nakato, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, G856–G861 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, W. Z. Wang, S. W. Liu, L. S. Zhang, H. L. Xu and W. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2006, 252, 120–124 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Zhang, I. Djerdj, M. H. Cao, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2083–2086 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13109–13116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, W. Z. Wang and L. S. Zhang, J. Mol. Catal. A-Chem., 2007, 268, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. P. Yang and Y. F. Zhu, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 873–882 CrossRef CAS .
J. Orenstein, Nature, 1999, 401, 333–334 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, N. Saito, D. L. Lu, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4749–4755 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, S. Y. Ryu, W. Balcerski, T. K. Lee and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2371–2378 RSC .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, K. Toda, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20504–20510 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem.-Int. Edit., 2006, 45, 7806–7809 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ye, Z. G. Zou, M. Oshikiri, A. Matsushita, M. Shimoda, M. Imai and T. Shishido, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 356, 221–226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, D. Hazen, J. N. Park and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Mat., 2008, 20, 3803–3805 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajeshwar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 765–787 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Wang, J. H. Ye, H. Kitazawa and T. Kimura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12848–12854 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou, J. Yin and J. Ye, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 382, 175–179 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou, M. Katagiri, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Catal. Today, 2004, 93–95, 885–889 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Jiang, J. G. Li, X. T. Sui, G. L. Ning, C. Y. Wang and X. M. Gu, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2007, 42, 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Fu, C. S. Pan, W. Q. Yao and Y. F. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22432–22439 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, T. G. Xu, W. Q. Yao, C. Zhang and Y. F. Zhu, Appl. Catal. B-Environ., 2007, 72, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tang and J. Ye, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 410, 104–107 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Li, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Appl. Catal. A-Gen., 2007, 326, 1–7 CrossRef .
J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Chem. Mat., 2004, 16, 1644–1649 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Lin, T. Huang, F. Q. Huang, W. D. Wang and J. L. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24629–24634 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, J. H. Qu, H. J. Liu and C. Hu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 6802–6807 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
Huanjun Zhang	Huanjun Zhang received his degrees of B.Eng. and M.Eng. in Chemical Engineering from Tsinghua University, China, in 2001 and 2004, respectively. Since September 2004, he has been working on his PhD program in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. His current research interests include syntheses and applications of noble metal-containing nanocomposite materials.
Guohua Chen	Guohua Chen is a Professor at the Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department, Director of Center for Green Products and Processing Technologies, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He obtained his B.Eng. from Dalian University of Technology, M.Eng. and Ph.D. (Chem. Eng.) from McGill University. He is a member of the Editorial Board of Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering, International Journal of Environment and Waste Management, Drying Technology and an Editor of Separation and Purification Technology. His research interests include electrochemical technologies for industrial wastewater treatment, advanced environmental materials synthesis, energy storage and utilization, green products and process development.
Detlef W. Bahnemann	Detlef W. Bahnemann has been Head of the Photocatalysis and Nanotechnology Research Unit at the Institute of Technical Chemistry of the Leibniz University Hannover since 2002. In the same year he was appointed as Honorary Professor of the Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, UK. His research interests include—besides the entire field of photocatalysis—photoelectrochemical solar cells and fuel synthesis, fundamental aspects of semiconductor and metal nanoparticles, and membrane concepts for low temperature fuel cells. In close collaboration with industrial partners he also develops nanotechnological concepts for future product generations as well as appropriate analytical tools to determine their functionality.
SC + hv(≥Eg) → hVB+ + eCB− (charge carrier generation)	(1)
hVB+ + eCB− → SC + heat (bulk recombination)	(2)
hVB+ + SC–OH → SC–OH˙+ (hole trapping)	(3)
eCB− + SC–OH → SC–OH/etr− (electron trapping)	(4)
SC–OH˙+ + Red → SC–OH + Red˙+ (hole transfer)	(5)
SC–OH/etr− + Ox → SC–OH + Ox˙− (electron transfer)	(6)

 	Fig. 1  Charge carrier transfer on large (left) and small (right) semiconductor particles in the presence of an electron donor, D, and an acceptor, A. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12, Copyright 2001 Wiley-VCH.	 
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
ϕ = r/Ia	(10)
Ia = I0 × F	(11)
	(12)
fλ = 1 − Tλ = 1 − 10−Aλ	(13)

 	Fig. 2  Spatial distribution of photogenerated charge carriers in TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2004 ACS.	 
TiO2 + hv(≥Eg) → hVB+ + eCB−	(14)
hVB+ + eCB− → TiO2 + heat	(15)
hVB+ + TiIVOH/H2O → TiIVOH˙+/OH˙+ + H+	(16)

 	Fig. 3  Antenna effects of charge carrier transfer during Ag photodeposition in self-assembled TiO2 aggregates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2007 Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 4  HRTEM images and reconstructed shapes of anatase TiO2 nanoparticles: a), b) truncated cube; c), d) prism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57, Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic evolution of the surface composition of oxalates chemisorbed on TiO2 surface during UV illumination. Reprinted from ref. 64, Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier.	 
Efb = Efb(pH = 0) −0.059pH	(17)
Efb(TiO2.particle) = −(0.12 ± 0.02) − 0.059pH	(18)
ZnO + 2Haq+ ⇌ Znaq2+ + H2O	(19)
ZnO + H2O ⇌ Zn(OH)2	(20)

 	Fig. 6  CB and VB energy levels of several semiconductors. (The semiconductors are in contact with aqueous electrolyte at pH 1. The energy scale is indicated in electron volts using either the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) or the vacuum level as reference. On the right, the standard potentials of several redox couples are presented against the standard hydrogen electrode potential.) Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: [Nature] (ref. 67), copyright (2001).	 
ZnO + 2hVB+ → Zn2+ + ½O2	(21)

 	Fig. 7  Coupling two different semiconductor particles and charge carrier separation.	 
	(22)
W6+ + e(TiO2)CB− → W5+	(23)
W5+ + h(TiO2)VB+ → W6+	(24)

 	Fig. 8  Energetic diagram of amorphous- and crystalline-WO3/TiO2. Reprinted from ref. 142, Copyright (2006), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Idealized photoinduced charge separation in a SnO2/TiO2 semiconductor film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92, Copyright 1996 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 10  SnO2 and TiO2/SnO2 deposited on glass substrates. Reproduced from ref. 146 by permission of the Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  3D imaging of a cross-patterned SnO2/TiO2 coupled film. (The SnO2 layer was at the bottom, with two orthogonal TiO2 stripes on top.) Reprinted with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2001 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 12  Band positions in the coupled TiO2/CdS system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153.	 

 	Fig. 13  Energy level diagram of quantized TiO2/CdS coupled semiconductors. Reproduced from ref. 169, by permission of the PCCP owner societies.	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM image of TiO2/CdS nanocables prepared by templated liquid-phase deposition. Reprinted from ref. 170, Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  TiO2/CdSe couple linked by organic molecules: (a) particle–particle; (b) particle–film.161	 

 	Fig. 16  Electron transfer and Fermi level shift at a metal/semiconductor interface.175	 

 	Fig. 17  Electron accumulation in an Ag/TiO2 core-shell particle under UV irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180, Copyright 2004 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 18  Multi-colored Ag/TiO2 film. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: [Nature Materials] (ref. 210), copyright (2003).	 

 	Fig. 19  Photoelectron transfer in Au/TiO2 probed by C60/C60− couple. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2004 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 20  Charge separation upon visible-light irradiation on Au/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224, Copyright 2005 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 21  Transient absorption spectra of irradiated TiO2 and Pt/TiO2. Reprinted from ref. 233, Copyright (2001), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Pt-loaded TiO2-PTFE film photoelectrode deposited on ITO glass substrate. Reprinted from ref. 237, Copyright (1998), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  Various schemes of band structure change of: (a) pure anatase TiO2; (b) doped TiO2 with localized dopant levels near the CB and VB edges; (c) bandgap narrowing due to VB broadening; (d) localized dopant levels and electronic transitions to the CB; (e) electronic transitions of dopant levels near the VB edge to corresponding excited states for Ti3+ and F+ centers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251, Copyright 2006 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 24  Total DOSs of doped anatase TiO2 (A) and the projected DOSs into the doped anion sites (B). The results for N-doping at the interstitial site (Ni-doped) and that at both substitutional and interstitial sites (Ni+s-doped) are also shown. From ref. 250. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 25  Possible energy states between the CB and VB of fluorine-doped TiO2. Reprinted from ref. 264, Copyright (2005), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  The band structure of N-doped TiO2 with the oxidation potentials of a few redox couples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280, Copyright 2004 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 27  
i–V characteristics of pure TiO2 (a) and N-doped TiO2 (b) irradiated by white light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282, Copyright 2003 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 28  Electrochemical potentials (versus NHE) for band edges, surface states (shaded areas) and oxygen reduction at pH 7 for TiO2 and N-doped TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 253, Copyright 2003 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 29  Energy states in TiO2 after being doped by Fe, Cr and V ions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 283, Copyright 1994 ACS.	 
M2O3 → 2|MIII|Ti′ + VO˙˙ + 3OO	(25)
2M2O5 → 4|M|Ti5˙ + 5VTi4′ + 10OO	(26)

 	Fig. 30  Density contour maps of the LUMO orbitals (a) and of the HOMO orbitals (b) in BaBiO3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 370, Copyright 2007 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 31  TEM (a) and HRTEM (b) images of InNbO4 nanoparticles synthesized via a non-aqueous sol-gel method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 390, Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 32  Densities of states of NaTaO3 (a) and Na0.9La0.1Ta0.9Co0.1O3 (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic band structures of In6NiTi6O22 (a), In3CrTi2O10 (b), and In12NiCr2Ti10O42 (c). Reprinted with permission from ref. 405, Copyright 2007 ACS.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
