Introducing optically polarizable molecules into perovskite solar cells by simultaneously enhanced spin–orbital coupling, suppressed non-radiative rec ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC01033A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC01033A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6164-6171Introducing optically polarizable molecules into perovskite solar cells by simultaneously enhanced spin–orbital coupling, suppressed non-radiative recombination and improved transport balance towards enhancing photovoltaic actions†

        
          
            Changfeng 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haomiao 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiashun 
            Duan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jia 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ming 
            Shao
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Hu
          
        
      *abc
aKey Laboratory of Luminescence and Optical Information, Ministry of Education, School of Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China. E-mail: bhu@utk.edu; mshao@bjtu.edu.cn
bWu Han National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wu Han 430074, China
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA
Received 
      1st March 2018
    , Accepted 13th April 2018First published on 13th April 2018AbstractBy considering facile molecular diffusion and optically generated electrical polarization, this article reports, for the first time, that directly introducing optically polarizable non-fullerene electron acceptor ITIC molecules into organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) films with uniform and non-uniform gradient distributions can surprisingly enhance spin–orbital coupling (SOC) with the consequence of increasing the conversion from photogenerated spin-singlets to spin-triplets, boosting the spin states available for photovoltaic actions and enhancing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 15.3% to 17.2% with a Jsc of 20.2 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.08 V, and a FF of 79% in perovskite solar cells [ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/PEI/Ag]. Specifically, we find that dispersing ITIC molecules can largely decrease the ΔJsc (photocurrent difference) generated by switching the photoexcitation from linear to circular polarization with the same intensity. This phenomenon provides direct evidence that dispersed optically polarizable ITIC molecules can increase the SOC in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites through interaction between introduced electrical polarization and SOC. Furthermore, impedance studies indicate that dispersing ITIC molecules can decrease the density of trap states by passivating the grain boundary defects and simultaneously increases the carrier mobilities. Consequently, non-radiative recombination is reduced upon decreasing the density of trap states through dispersing the ITIC molecules, according to transient photoluminescence studies. The UV-Vis and FTIR spectral studies indicate formation of a bond between Pb, N and O, showing a direct interaction between the hybrid perovskite MAPbI3−xClx and dispersed ITIC molecules. Clearly, introducing optically polarizable non-fullerene electron acceptor molecules presents a new opportunity to enhance photovoltaic actions in perovskite solar cells through SOC and grain boundary passivation effects.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have drawn significant research interest to understand remarkable photovoltaic actions with power conversion efficiencies quickly reaching 22.1% based on the coexisting semiconducting, electrical polarization, and strong spin–orbital coupling.1–5 Doping provides a convenient method to enhance the device efficiencies. Different materials have been explored including high-molecular-weight polymers and low-molecular weight molecules serving as n-type and p-type dopants to enhance photovoltaic efficiencies.6–9 In general, doping can passivate grain boundary defects, change domain sizes, and improve film quality with the consequence of decreasing non-radiative recombination and balancing ambipolar transport.10–14 Here, we explore a new doping opportunity by introducing optically polarizable molecules to enhance the photovoltaic actions in perovskite solar cells. Specifically, the non-fullerene electron acceptor [3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylpheny1)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indanceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]-dithiophene], named ITIC, was selected as the optically polarizable molecule. In particular, the ITIC molecules contain both electron donating and withdrawing structures, indacenodithieno[3,2-b]thiophene (IT) and 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)alononitrile (INCN).15 Upon photoexcitation, the electron donating and withdrawing units can become positively and negatively charged units through intramolecular charge transfer, leading to optically induced dipoles in ITIC molecules.16,17 As a consequence, the non-fullerene electron acceptor ITIC molecules can demonstrate optically induced polarization under photoexcitation. Clearly, with optically induced polarization, the non-fullerene electron acceptor ITIC molecules provide new opportunities to explore the deeper doping effects on perovskite solar cells. On the other hand, non-fullerene electron acceptor ITIC molecules can exhibit high diffusivity in a polycrystalline perovskite network due to a low dielectric constant. In this study the ITIC molecules were dispersed into perovskite MAPbI3−xClx films with uniform and gradient distributions by using mixing and dripping methods to further reveal the underlying mechanisms responsible for doping effects. By combining optically induced dipoles with facile molecular diffusion, optically polarizable non-fullerene electron acceptor molecules present a unique platform to explore deeper doping effects in perovskite solar cells. Experimental studies were performed by using circular photoexcitation-induced photocurrent, impedance, and photoluminescence measurements to address doping effects on spin–orbital coupling, non-radiative recombination and ambipolar transport.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the surface morphology and depth profiles of the reference inverted planar heterojunction (PHJ) perovskite film, a uniform distributed bulk heterojunction (UBHJ) and gradient distributed bulk heterojunction (GBHJ) perovskite–ITIC films. As shown in Fig. 1a–c, the UBHJ perovskite–ITIC sample shows a more compacted film with much fewer vacancies compared with the PHJ sample. The average grain size of the UBHJ perovskite–ITIC film is about 400 nm, two times larger than that of the PHJ perovskite film (200 nm). In the GBHJ perovskite–ITIC sample, we observe that a thin layer of ITIC molecules is covered on the surface of perovskite crystals based on the fuzzy images that may be caused by charge accumulation due to less conductive organic materials. We also observe that the ITIC shows stronger hydrophobicity than perovskites and PCBM evidenced by the contact angle measurement (Fig. S1, ESI†). The hydrophobicity of the instantaneously formed ITIC layer can protect the perovskite crystals from the interaction of sensitive polar aprotic solvent vapor with an unstable perovskite intermediate, which is important to device reproducibility and stability. The vertical profiles of perovskite films are examined by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS). As illustrated in Fig. 1d–f, the PHJ sample exhibits a constant distribution of I along the direction perpendicular to the film plane and a very low intensity of the S signal. In contrast, the intensity of the S signal from the UBHJ sample is increased by two orders of magnitude and presents homogeneous distribution throughout the UBHJ perovskite–ITIC film thickness. The GBHJ sample displays a high intensity of S near the film surface with the low intensity of the I signal. This result further confirms the formation of a thin layer of ITIC on top of the perovskite layer, which is in line with our SEM images (Fig. 1c). Moreover, the exponential decrease of S from the top surface to the bottom of the perovskite film implies the formation of ITIC gradient distribution in the GBHJ sample. By comparing the depth profiles of three samples, we experimentally confirm differently distributed ITIC molecules in perovskite films.
 Fig. 1  Top-view SEM surface images of (a) PHJ, (b) UBHJ and (c) GBHJ perovskite–ITIC BHJ films formed on ITO/PEDOT:PSS. Insets show images with higher resolution. Tof-SIMS depth profiles of (d) PHJ, (e) UBHJ and (f) GBHJ perovskite–ITIC BHJ films from top to bottom. Perovskite is tracked by the I element, ITIC is tracked by the S element. 

Fig. 2a presents the J–V characteristics of PHJ, UBHJ, and GBHJ perovskite–ITIC solar cells and the critical photovoltaic parameters of devices are summarized in Table 1. We can see that introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules leads to a large enhancement in Jsc from 18.9 mA cm−2 to 19.6 mA cm−2 (UBHJ) and 20.2 mA cm−2 (GBHJ), and simultaneously increases the FF from 74% to 77% (UBHJ) and 79% (GBHJ). As a result, the maximum PCE is improved from 15.3% to 16.4% (UBHJ) and 17.2% (GBHJ). Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows the corresponding incident photo-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra for the three devices. The integrated photocurrent densities are 18.4 (PHJ), 19.4 (UBHJ) and 19.9 mA cm−2 (GBHJ), which are in good agreement with the Jsc derived from the J–V measurement. At the same time, the photocurrent hysteresis was also suppressed, especially in the GBHJ device the hysteresis can be ignored (as shown in Fig. S3, ESI†). By holding a bias near the maximum power output point (0.88 V), Fig. S4 (ESI†) shows the photocurrent density over an illumination period of 300 s. The stabilized photocurrents reflect the steady-state power output of our devices.18 Here, we also present the performance histogram of 50 devices fabricated under almost identical conditions for each type of device shown in Fig. 2b. As compared to PHJ devices, the UBHJ devices increase the average PCE from 14.2% to 15.5%. The GBHJ devices present the highest average PCE of 16.6%. In addition, the excellent reproducibility is indicated by the narrower distribution of PCE values for both UBHJ and GBHJ devices. Clearly, introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules into perovskite films can enhance photovoltaic performance with increased Jsc and FF.
 Fig. 2  (a) J–V curves measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 illumination from the forward (short circuit to open circuit) direction of solar cells with PHJ (black) perovskite, UBHJ (blue) and GBHJ (green) perovskite–ITIC. (b) Histogram of PCE measured using forward scans for 50 devices for PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ perovskites, respectively. 
Table 1 A summary of photovoltaic performance for PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ devices as shown in Fig. 2a







V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCE [%]


Max
Average




PHJ
1.09
18.9
74
15.3
14.2


UBHJ
1.09
19.6
77
16.4
15.5


GBHJ
1.08
20.2
79
17.2
16.6




We should note that introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules has little influence on the absorption of perovskite–ITIC devices, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). Our early studies found that organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites possess an electric–magnetic coupling through the interaction between electric dipoles and intrinsic SOC.19 This electric–magnetic coupling provides the possibilities to change the intrinsic SOC through optically induced dipoles when the ITIC molecules with optically generated polarization are dispersed into perovskite films. Here, we can hypothesize that dispersing ITIC molecules can increase the SOC and consequently change spin states, enhancing internal photovoltaic actions.
Here, we use circular-photoexcitation induced photocurrent studies to explore the effect of optically polarizable ITIC molecule dispersion on spin states in perovskite solar cells.20,21 As schematically shown in Fig. 3a, circular photoexcitation generates all spin-polarized spin-singlets ϕml=+1ϕ↑e↓h with same-directional orbital momenta (ml = +1 for each spin state), providing a higher total orbital momentum to flip the photogenerated spin singlets ϕml=±1ϕ↑e↓h into spin triplets ϕml=0ϕ↑e↑h through SOC effects. In contrast, linear photoexcitation, equivalent to the combination of left-hand (LH) and right-hand (RH) circular polarizations, generates spin-polarized spin-singlets ϕml=+1ϕ↑e↓h and ϕml=−1ϕ↑e↓h, with opposite orbital momenta (ml = +1 and ml = −1). The combination of two opposite orbital momenta provides a lower total orbital momentum to flip spins though SOC. Clearly, switching the photoexcitation between circular and linear polarizations can change the intensity of spin flipping, consequently shifting the spin population between spin singlets and triplets. Because the spin-singlets and spin-triplets are allowed and forbidden to recombine, increasing the spin-triplets can boost the spin states available for generating photocurrent. Therefore, we can theoretically expect that linear and circular photo-excitation leads to lower and higher Jsc, leading to ΔJsc. We should point out that the SOC can increase the conversion from photogenerated spin-singlets to spin-triplets by flipping the spins, decreasing the ΔJsc generated by switching the photoexcitation from linear to circular polarization. Therefore, upon switching the photoexcitation between linear and circular polarizations, measuring the ΔJsc upon doping the ITIC molecules can reflect whether doping can change the SOC in the doped hybrid perovskites. Specifically, small/large ΔJsc corresponds to strong/weak SOC while switching the photoexcitation between linear and circular polarizations. Fig. 3b–d shows the ΔJsc with switching linearly and circularly polarized photoexcitation based on PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ perovskite solar cells. We find that the Jsc with circular photoexcitation is larger than that of linear photoexcitation. This means that Jsc can be essentially increased by shifting the spin-singlets toward spin-triplets, boosting the spin-triplets available for photovoltaic actions in the bulk heterojunction perovskite–ITIC solar cells. More importantly, the ΔJsc, generated by switching photoexcitation between linear and circular polarization, decreases from 1.5% (PHJ) to 0.5% (UBHJ) and 0.2% (GBHJ), respectively. A weaker SOC effect makes the conversion of spin-singlets to spin-triplets more difficult, resulting in a larger ΔJsc. In contrast, a strong SOC effect insures that spin-singlets can easily convert into spin-triplets, leading to a smaller ΔJsc, and also a better photovoltaic performance. Clearly, the result of decreasing ΔJsc shown in Fig. 3b–d provides the experimental evidence that introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules into perovskite can increase the intrinsic SOC and boost the spin-triplets available for photovoltaic actions in the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite. To further confirm that introducing optically polarizable ITIC can boost the intrinsic SOC in hybrid perovskites, we explore the dependence of ΔJsc on photoexcitation energy upon switching linear and circular polarizations at different laser wavelengths. Here, we can expect that high and low photoexcitation energies generate high and low orbital polarizations in optically generated spin-singlets. Consequently, high and low orbital polarizations can cause strong and weak interactions between orbitals, leading to more and less spin flipping in optically generated spin-singlets. Specifically, with high-energy photoexcitation the linear and circular polarizations lead to more different total orbital momenta due to the stronger interaction between orbitals as compared to the situation with low-energy photoexcitation, according to the diagram shown in Fig. 3a. As a result, at high-energy photoexcitation, switching linear polarization to circular polarization causes a larger ΔJsc relative to a low-energy photoexcitation. As compared to doping effects, introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules can increase the intrinsic SOC to flip spins in optically generated spin-singlets, which minimizes the ΔJsc caused by switching the photoexcitation between linear and circular polarizations at a given energy, as shown in the results in Fig. 3. Here, the ΔJsc dependence on photoexcitation energy provides further evidence to support the SOC effect of spin flipping in optically generated spin-singlets in hybrid perovskites upon introducing the optically polarizable ITIC molecules.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of operating the spin states in the perovskite:ITIC complex with circular and linear polarized photoexcitation. LH and RH represent left-hand and right-hand circular polarized light, respectively. Spin effects of Jsc in (b) PHJ, (c) UBHJ and (d) GBHJ perovskite–ITIC solar cells operated by linearly and circularly polarized light with the same wavelength (532 nm). 

Fig. 4a and b show the ΔJsc upon switching linearly and circularly polarized photoexcitation based on PHJ perovskite solar cells excited by 405 nm and 635 nm lasers, respectively. We can see that the higher excitation energy (405 nm) generates a larger ΔJsc (2.0%) when switching the photoexcitation between linear and circular polarizations. Clearly, using high-energy photoexcitation leads to a strong SOC due to strong interaction between orbitals. Using the low-energy photoexcitation (635 nm) causes a lower ΔJsc (0.9%) upon switching linear polarization to circular polarization. This verifies the SOC effect upon introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules in hybrid perovskites.
 Fig. 4  Spin effects of Jsc of PHJ perovskite solar cells operated by linearly and circularly polarized light of (a) 405 nm and (b) 635 nm. 
It is interesting to see that doping ITIC can influence the SOC effect in perovskites. Our earlier studies have shown that the SOC can externally be induced by applying the spins from ferromagnetic Co onto the surface polarization of a hybrid perovskite film.22 Here, we should note that the ITIC consists of an A–D–A structure, where A represents the acceptor (INCN), and D stands for the donor (IT). Under photoexcitation the A and D structures become negative and positive units, leading to an optically induced electrical dipole between A− and D+. This optically induced dipole in the dispersed ITIC molecules can interact with the intrinsic SOC in the hybrid perovskites. This provides a mechanism to increase the SOC upon doping in perovskite solar cells. We have recently shown that photoinduced polarization can be studied by capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics in hybrid perovskites.23 Specifically, the C–V measurements continuously increase the DC voltage, leading to a continuous drifting on cations/anions while an AC voltage detects the dielectric response. The continuously moving cations/anions cannot respond to a low AC voltage (30 mV at 100 kHz). In this situation, only bulk dipolar/orientational polarization can respond to a low AC voltage, presenting a convenient method to detect bulk polarization in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites where mobile ions exist. Here, we observe that doping non-fullerene electron acceptor ITIC molecules can enhance photoinduced bulk polarization based on capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics. Fig. 5 shows the C–V characteristics for three devices by scanning the DC voltage from −0.1 V to +1.3 V at a low AC voltage of 30 mV (100 kHz) at different photoexcitation intensities. Increasing the photoexcitation intensity generates an interesting phenomenon: the amplitude of the C–V signal within the depletion zone from −0.1 V to +0.5 V is increased by 3.2%, when the excitation increases to 100 mW cm−2. This phenomenon evidences that photoexcitation enhances bulk polarization in the perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) film. Compared with PHJ devices, the ratio of the capacitance signal is increased to 6.0% and 7.2% for UBHJ and GBHJ devices under 100 mW cm−2 excitation, respectively. It is known that the total polarization (Ptotal) measured in the depletion zone combines the polarization (Pdark) under dark conditions and the polarization (Pphoto) upon photoexcitation: Ptotal = Pdark + Pphoto, where the photo-induced bulk polarization is given by . By comparing the photoinduced bulk polarizations before and after dispersing ITIC molecules, we can clearly see that introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules into perovskite film increases photoinduced bulk polarization. This phenomenon suggests that introducing optically polarizable non-fullerene electron-acceptor ITIC molecules can decrease the defects at grain boundaries, leading to a passivation effect in the perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) film.
 Fig. 5  
C–V characteristics of PHJ (black), UBHJ (red) and GBHJ (blue) devices under dark (solid) and 1 sun (dotted) conditions. 
Now we study the passivation effects of introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules into perovskite films by measuring the trap density of states (tDOS) by thermal admittance spectroscopy.24,25 As shown in Fig. 6a, the PHJ device possesses the largest tDOS on the order of 1017–1019 cm−3 eV−1, which is similar to the studies performed elsewhere.26 After doping ITIC into the perovskite, the tDOS of UBHJ devices decreases by 25% at a low energy depth (0.25–0.3 eV); however, the tDOS of GBHJ devices only slightly decreases in the low energy regime. Instead, we notice that tDOS of GBHJ devices shows a significant decrease by 55% in a high energy depth regime (0.4–0.5 eV). These results indicate that uniform distributed ITIC can effectively passivate the shallow traps that are located in the perovskite bulk, while gradient distributed ITIC is more efficient in passivating the deep traps which mainly occur at grain boundaries and crystal surfaces. As a result, the non-radiative recombination can be decreased upon doping optically polarizable ITIC into the perovskites. Fig. S6 (ESI†) displays the Nyquist plots of the device with PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ structures. The data were fitted with the equivalent circuit model as reported elsewhere.27 The recombination resistance (Rrec) is enhanced from 1280 Ω (PHJ) to 1470 Ω (UBHJ) and 1510 Ω (GBHJ). The increased Rrec means that the recombination is decreased. Fig. 6b displays the photoluminescence (PL) spectra for pure perovskite and perovskite–ITIC films. The PL peak of the perovskite–ITIC film shows a blue shift from 768 nm (PHJ) to 756 nm (UBHJ) and 753 nm (GBHJ). It has been shown that the passivation of these trap states can blue-shift the PL peak.28 Therefore, the observed blue-shift, shown in Fig. 6b, indicates that the trap states are passivated by introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules. Fig. 6c shows the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay curves of pure perovskites and perovskite–ITIC films monitored at 768 nm. The lifetimes were extracted by fitting the PL decay curves using the following bi-exponential model: (1)where A1 and A2 are fractions of two decay components, and τ1 and τ2 are the lifetimes responsible for the fast and slow recombinations, respectively. As shown in Table 2, the UBHJ film shows a significantly increased τ1 from 0.42 ns to 4.48 ns, and the GBHJ film exhibits the longest τ1 of 11.79 ns. In order to rule out the possibility that increased τ1 may be caused by energy transfer from the ITIC to the perovskite, we measured UV/Vis absorption and PL spectroscopy of the ITIC film on glass (Fig. S7, ESI†), the ITIC film shows negligible absorption at the excited wavelength of 480 nm and thus therefore does not have any contribution to the PL emission in the ITIC–perovskite film. The results indicate that the optically polarizable ITIC molecules can passivate the trap states and suppress non-radiative recombination. Furthermore, we measured the J–V curves in the dark for three perovskite solar cells shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†). The BHJ device shows a lower dark current than the PHJ device, which implies that dispersing ITIC can reduce the trap density of states. Therefore, introducing optically polarizable ITIC can suppress non-radiative recombination by passivating trap states, consequently increasing the Jsc in perovskite solar cells.
 Fig. 6  (a) Trap density of states (tDOS) obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy. (b) Steady-state PL spectroscopy with a 480 nm green laser as the excitation source from the film surface. (c) Time-resolved PL decay curves were excited by a 480 nm pulse laser diode from the film surface. The samples of PHJ (red), UBHJ (green) and GBHJ (pink) perovskite–ITIC films were formed on glass. 
Table 2 A summary of the fitted lifetime values for PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ films as shown in Fig. 6c. And a summary of the fitted electron mobility values of electron-only devices with PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ films as shown in Fig. 7







τ
1 [ns]

τ
2 [ns]
Electron mobility [cm2 V−1 s−1]




PHJ
0.42
21.90
8.17 × 10−5


UBHJ
4.48
22.27
1.60 × 10−4


GBHJ
11.79
40.83
2.27 × 10−4




Moreover, we investigate the electron mobility of PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ perovskite films with the space-charge limited current (SCLC) model. Fig. 7 shows the J–V curves of electron-only devices measured in the dark, and the extracted mobility values are summarized in Table 2. It should be noted that electron mobility of the pure perovskite is almost one order of magnitude lower than hole mobility, indicating an unbalanced electron–hole transport in perovskite.29 Doping ITIC into the perovskite obviously increases the electron mobility from 8.17 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 1.6 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Moreover, the GBHJ film exhibits the highest electron mobility of 2.3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Therefore, the optically polarizable ITIC molecules can enhance the electron mobility, and then lead to balanced ambipolar transport, increasing the FF towards enhancing photovoltaic efficiencies in perovskite solar cells. In addition, we also fabricated inverted p-i-n planar perovskite solar cells by replacing the electron transport layer PCBM with ITIC. The devices with ITIC as the electron transport layer show an efficiency of 10% as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†) which is lower than the PCBM based counterpart. The electron mobility of ITIC was reported as 3.0 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Thus, the moderate performance is possibly due to the lower electron mobility of ITIC compared to PCBM (1.3 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). A higher efficiency of the perovskite can be expected by incorporating other n-type non-fullerene acceptors with high electron mobility and better energy alignment with the perovskite.
 Fig. 7  The dark J–V curves of the electron-only devices with PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ perovskite–ITIC films. The device consists of ITO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. 
At last, we discuss the underlying passivation mechanism of ITIC for the defects in perovskites. Due to decomposition of MAPbI3 at an elevated annealing temperature (>80 °C), halide (iodine) loss can generate vacancies and under-coordinated Pb atoms and Pb clusters.30 These under-coordinated Pb results in the positive charges on the atom, which act as the electronic trap centers, and are also known to be Lewis acids. On the other hand, ITIC contains electron-withdrawing groups such as cyano (CN) and carbonyl (CO), in which N and O can donate electrons and essentially act as Lewis bases. Therefore, the under-coordinated Pb atoms form coordinate bonding with the N and O donors of ITIC through Lewis acid–base adduct reaction as shown in Fig. 8a. In order to examine the coordinate bonding of Pb with N and O, we measure the absorption spectrum of pure ITIC and ITIC–PbI2 mixed solution, shown in Fig. 8b. We observed a spectral shift of 5 nm in the ITIC absorption peak at a low concentration (0.5 wt%) of PbI2, which indicates a strong bonding interaction between PbI2 and ITIC. Furthermore, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) is employed to analyze this interaction. Fig. 8c represents the IR spectra of ITIC, MAPbI3 and the ITIC·MAPbI3 blend. The symmetric stretching vibrations of CO and C≡N bonds in pure ITIC appear at 1703 and 2218 cm−1, respectively. After normalizing these two characteristic vibrational peaks with the maximum peak (1540 cm−1) assigned to the vibrations of CC bonds, which is less influenced by Pb ions, the CO and C≡N peak intensities were reduced by 79% and 81% in the ITIC·MAPbI3 blend. This significant decrease of the vibrational peak intensity indicates that the carbonyl group (CO) and the cyano group C≡N of ITIC can react with the perovskite through the Lewis acid–base adduct. Therefore, ITIC molecules can be used to passivate defects at grain boundaries of perovskite films using the method of Lewis base passivation,31 consequently enhancing the photovoltaic performance of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the interaction of the π-conjugated Lewis base and Pb2+. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of ITIC and ITIC–PbI2 solutions. (c) FTIR of the powders of ITIC and MAPbI3·ITIC. MAPbI3·ITIC was prepared by mixing ITIC and MAPbI3 in a molar ratio of 1:1. 
Conclusions
In summary, by introducing optically polarizable non-fullerene electron-donor–acceptor ITIC molecules with uniform and gradient dispersions, we found that the SOC can be surprisingly enhanced in hybrid perovskite (MAPbI3−xClx) films by using circularly polarized photoexcitation induced photocurrent measurements. Specifically, we observed that the ΔJsc measured by switching the photoexcitation between linear and circular polarizations is decreased from 1.5% to 0.2% by introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules into the perovskite film. This provides evidence that the dispersed non-fullerene electron-acceptor ITIC molecules can increase the SOC in the hybrid perovskites under photoexcitation. We hypothesized that the optically generated dipoles in the ITIC molecules can directly interact with the SOC in the hybrid perovskites, leading to an increase in the SOC. This hypothesis was verified by photoinduced polarization in the hybrid perovskites upon dispersing the ITIC molecules. Therefore, our results present an interesting method to change the SOC in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites by introducing optically polarizable non-fullerene electron-acceptor molecules. Furthermore, increasing the SOC can essentially increase the conversion from photogenerated spin-singlets to spin-triplets, boosting the spin states available for generating Jsc. On the other hand, our impedance study indicates that dispersing ITIC molecules can decrease the densities of both deep and shallow traps in the hybrid perovskites. The SCLC measurements show that ITIC dispersion can increase electron mobility by a factor of 2 or 3, leading to balanced ambipolar mobilities with the consequence of increasing the FF in perovskite solar cells. Our TRPL measurement provides the direct information that ITIC molecules can suppress non-radiative recombination by decreasing traps at grain boundaries. Suppressing non-radiative recombination can also increase the probability of excitons dissociating to generate photocurrent. Therefore, introducing optically polarizable ITIC molecules leads to an enhancement in the PCE from 15.3% to 17.2% in perovskite solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61634001, U1601651, 61475051 and 61604010), The Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts of China, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
Notes and references
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim and J. H. Noh, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Leguy, J. M. Frost, A. P. McMahon, V. G. Sakai, W. Kochelmann, C. Law, X. Li, F. Foglia, A. Walsh and B. C. O’regan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7124 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. Van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Zhang, M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, Y.-R. Jiang, H.-R. Liu, Y.-G. Yang, X.-Y. Gao and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2572–2579 CAS .
T. Zhao, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, A. Rajagopal and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, H. Rao, W. Yan, Y. Li, W. Sun, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Z. Bian, Y. Li and C. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chang, C.-Y. Chu, Y.-C. Huang, C.-W. Huang, S.-Y. Chang, C.-A. Chen, C.-Y. Chao and W.-F. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4955–4961 CAS .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Q. Hu, T. Liu, L. Zhao, D. Luo, J. Wu, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, F. Liu and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10718–10724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi and D. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z. G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ahmadi, Y. C. Hsiao, T. Wu, Q. Liu, W. Qin and B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 7, 1601575 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Hsiao, T. Wu, M. Li, W. Qin, L. Yu and B. Hu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 595–602 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Christians, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 852–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, L. Li, R. Mukherjee, K. Wang, Q. Liu, Q. Zou, H. Xu, J. Tisdale, Z. Gai and B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603667 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Qin, H. Xu and B. Hu, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2821–2827 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wu, J. Duan, M. Ahmadi, F. Jiang, Y. Zhou and B. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 297–303 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Li, R. Mukherjee, K. Wang, Q. Liu, Q. Zou, H. Xu, J. Tisdale, Z. Gai and B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603667 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wu, L. Collins, J. Zhang, P.-Y. Lin, M. Ahmadi, S. Jesse and B. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11542–11549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Carr and S. Chaudhary, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3414–3438 CAS .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song, H. J. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, D. Kim, H. W. Shin, T. K. Ahn, C. Wolf and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3424–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, C.-C. Chueh, P.-W. Liang, M. Crump, F. Lin, Z. Zhu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 328–337 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Leever, C. A. Bailey, T. J. Marks, M. C. Hersam and M. F. Durstock, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 120–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc01033aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Top-view SEM surface images of (a) PHJ, (b) UBHJ and (c) GBHJ perovskite–ITIC BHJ films formed on ITO/PEDOT:PSS. Insets show images with higher resolution. Tof-SIMS depth profiles of (d) PHJ, (e) UBHJ and (f) GBHJ perovskite–ITIC BHJ films from top to bottom. Perovskite is tracked by the I element, ITIC is tracked by the S element.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) J–V curves measured under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 illumination from the forward (short circuit to open circuit) direction of solar cells with PHJ (black) perovskite, UBHJ (blue) and GBHJ (green) perovskite–ITIC. (b) Histogram of PCE measured using forward scans for 50 devices for PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ perovskites, respectively.	 


PHJ	1.09	18.9	74	15.3	14.2
UBHJ	1.09	19.6	77	16.4	15.5
GBHJ	1.08	20.2	79	17.2	16.6

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of operating the spin states in the perovskite:ITIC complex with circular and linear polarized photoexcitation. LH and RH represent left-hand and right-hand circular polarized light, respectively. Spin effects of Jsc in (b) PHJ, (c) UBHJ and (d) GBHJ perovskite–ITIC solar cells operated by linearly and circularly polarized light with the same wavelength (532 nm).	 

 	Fig. 4  Spin effects of Jsc of PHJ perovskite solar cells operated by linearly and circularly polarized light of (a) 405 nm and (b) 635 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  
C–V characteristics of PHJ (black), UBHJ (red) and GBHJ (blue) devices under dark (solid) and 1 sun (dotted) conditions.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Trap density of states (tDOS) obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy. (b) Steady-state PL spectroscopy with a 480 nm green laser as the excitation source from the film surface. (c) Time-resolved PL decay curves were excited by a 480 nm pulse laser diode from the film surface. The samples of PHJ (red), UBHJ (green) and GBHJ (pink) perovskite–ITIC films were formed on glass.	 

PHJ	0.42	21.90	8.17 × 10−5
UBHJ	4.48	22.27	1.60 × 10−4
GBHJ	11.79	40.83	2.27 × 10−4

 	Fig. 7  The dark J–V curves of the electron-only devices with PHJ, UBHJ and GBHJ perovskite–ITIC films. The device consists of ITO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the interaction of the π-conjugated Lewis base and Pb2+. (b) UV-vis absorption spectra of ITIC and ITIC–PbI2 solutions. (c) FTIR of the powders of ITIC and MAPbI3·ITIC. MAPbI3·ITIC was prepared by mixing ITIC and MAPbI3 in a molar ratio of 1:1.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8tc01033a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
