Metallopolymers for advanced sustainable applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00656J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00656J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 558-636Metallopolymers for advanced sustainable applications

        
          
            Yanlan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Didier 
            Astruc
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Alaa S. 
            Abd-El-Aziz
          
          
        
      *c
aLiaocheng University, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 252059, Liaocheng, China. E-mail: wangyanlan@lcu.edu.cn
bUniv. Bordeaux, ISM, UMR CNRS No. 5255, Talence 33405, France. E-mail: didier.astruc@u-bordeaux.fr
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Prince Edward Island, 550 University Avenue, Charlottetown, PE C1A 4P3, Canada. E-mail: abdelaziz@upei.ca
Received 
      10th September 2018
    First published on 3rd December 2018AbstractSince the development of metallopolymers, there has been tremendous interest in the applications of this type of materials. The interest in these materials stems from their potential use in industry as catalysts, biomedical agents in healthcare, energy storage and production as well as climate change mitigation. The past two decades have clearly shown exponential growth in the development of many new classes of metallopolymers that address these issues. Today, metallopolymers are considered to be at the forefront for discovering new and sustainable heterogeneous catalysts, therapeutics for drug-resistant diseases, energy storage and photovoltaics, molecular barometers and thermometers, as well as carbon dioxide sequesters. The focus of this review is to highlight the advances in design of metallopolymers with specific sustainable applications.
Yanlan Wang
Dr Yanlan received her BSc from Liaocheng University in 2007 and her MSc from Shanghai Jiao Tong University under the supervision of Prof. Wanbin Zhang. She received her PhD in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Didier Astruc from the University of Bordeaux 1. In 2014, she joined the research team of Prof. Max Malacria at CNRS-ICSN as a postdoctoral fellow. She won the Marie Curie Fellowship in 2015 and joined Professor Gouverneur's group at Oxford University. In 2017, she became a Full Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Liaocheng University, China.
Didier Astruc
Didier Astruc was born in Versailles and received his PhD from the University of Rennes under the supervision of Professor René Dabard. He was then a NATO post-doctoral fellow at MIT with Prof. Richard R. Schrock and later spent a sabbatical year in Berkeley with Prof. K. Peter C. Vollhardt. He is a professor of chemistry at the University of Bordeaux and a Member of the Institut Universitaire de France and several Academies. He is the author of more than 500 publications including “Electron Transfer and Radical Processes in Transition Metal Chemistry” (VCH, 1995) and “Organometallic Chemistry and Catalysis” (Springer, 2007).
Alaa S. Abd-El-Aziz
Dr Alaa S. Abd-El-Aziz received his BSc and MSc from Ain Shams University in Cairo, Egypt, and his PhD from the University of Saskatchewan, Canada, followed by an NSERC postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Toronto. He is also a Fellow of the Chemical Institute of Canada. In 2011, Dr Abd-El-Aziz became the President and Vice-Chancellor of the University of Prince Edward Island. He has remained involved in chemistry, making significant contributions to research and teaching in organometallic polymers and materials. He has authored over 160 peer-reviewed articles, two books, edited 16 books, and has chaired several national and international conferences.
1. Introduction
Although contemporary human achievements have been unprecedented in all aspects of life, they have raised a number of sustainability issues. Climate change, drug resistance, and depleting fossil fuel reserves all highlight the unsustainable aftermath of these achievements. Materials scientists are designing metallopolymers as innovative solutions or connections to these issues.1 Combined with the rich and continuously growing array of ligands and synthesizing methods for varieties of transition metals, these compounds have outstanding potential for use in a broad range of advanced sustainable applications including materials science,1–18 catalysis and biocatalysis,19–29 healthcare,30–34 energy,35–45 and environment.46–53 As a remarkable example, polymetallocenylsilanes discovered by Manners's group showed key properties of metallopolymers and built a connection between new fundamental properties and sustainable applications.54–80 The implications of these metallopolymers for addressing these sustainability issues are now established.
Previous review articles81–99 on metallopolymers mainly examined the synthesis and functionalities, but the present review will connect these functionalities with sustainable applications, specifically outlining how the functionalities of the metal center help in addressing the global challenges of climate change, energy crisis, and the burden of diseases as well as advancing sustainable chemistry. Our literature search reveals that a review presenting metallopolymers in this context is timely given the current importance of sustainable development. The review will mainly discuss the following aspects for advanced sustainable applications: metallopolymer design and synthesis, sustainable catalysis and biocatalysis, sustainable biomedical materials, sustainable energy storage and production, and mitigation of climate change. We will discuss these developments as well as challenges and outlook.
2. Metallopolymer design and synthesis
Metallopolymers contain a variety of metal centers from main group metals to transition metals and lanthanides. In addition, the metals are located either in the polymer main chain or in the side group structure. As a further subdivision, metallopolymers are linear, highly branched, or dendritic. The linkages binding the metals are covalent, leading to essentially irreversible or ‘static’ binding, or noncovalent, which could allow potentially reversible ‘dynamic’ binding.
In the past decades, groups worldwide have overcome many of the obstacles to the preparation of high molecular weight and soluble metallopolymers. A multitude of protocols for the synthesis of well-defined metallopolymers have been established through the development of new synthetic approaches that are compatible with the presence of metal centers.100–127 Thus, chemists rely on a rich tool box to obtain desired metallopolymers with examples including polycondensation, ring-opening polymerization, chain-growth condensation polymerization, electro-polymerization, and living ionic as well as controlled radical polymerization. Besides these methods, many examples are known of post-synthesis installation: polymers modified by attaching metal centers to an already existing backbone or where metal-containing residues have been added to a polymer chain. Simultaneously, new advanced or improved characterization techniques have become available making the structural analysis of metal-containing polymers much easier.128–132 Access to usable quantities of metallopolymers with a variety of structures has allowed detailed studies of their properties and a range of advanced sustainable applications.
3. Sustainable catalysis and biocatalysis
Recent developments concerning the application of metallopolymers in catalysis are reviewed in this section, with a special focus on carbon–carbon formation. Examples of reactions that are covered include not only the classical Suzuki, Sonogashira and Heck couplings, but also aryl amination, epoxide opening, rearrangements, metathesis and cyclopropanation etc. Applications of metallopolymers as metalloenzymes in the field of biocatalytic asymmetric synthesis and its DFT are also discussed. This section covers the literature concerning the application of metallopolymer reagents in catalysis from 2008 until August 2018. For earlier reports in this area we refer to comprehensive reviews.19–22,133,134 A variety of metallopolymer- and metallodendrimer-stabilized metal nanoparticles have been designed and applied to various catalytic reactions.135–147
3.1 Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis
According to the different types of metals the metallopolymers contained, this section will be mainly discussed and divided into: (1) Pd-complex containing metallopolymers; (2) Pd nanoparticles incorporating metallopolymers; (3) Pt-containing metallopolymers (4) Au-containing metallopolymers; (5) Ru-containing metallopolymers; (6) Rh-containing metallopolymers; (7) Ag-containing metallopolymers; (8) Cu-containing metallopolymers; (9) Fe-containing metallopolymers; (10) Ni-containing metallopolymers; (11) Co-containing metallopolymers; (12) other metal-containing metallopolymers; (13) mixed-metal-containing metallopolymers.

3.1.1 Palladium-containing polymers. 
Palladium catalyzed C–C couplings are among the most powerful reactions in the toolbox of modern organic synthesis. The reason for their importance is their wide generality, the mild reaction conditions employed and the compatibility of C–C coupling with many different functional groups. Palladium-containing polymers are mainly divided into palladium complex-containing and palladium nanoparticle-containing polymers as follows.148–160
Increasing numbers of efficient polymer-supported palladium complexes have been developed for catalytic purposes. For example, Karimi and coworkers described the preparation and characterization of a group of main-chain organometallic polymers (NHC–Pd MCOP) with different N-alkyl substituted groups such as benzyl, n-hexyl, and n-dodecyl (Fig. 1).161 The polymers bearing the more lipophilic group, n-dodecyl, were found to be more reactive and recoverable catalytic systems in the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction of chloroarenes with different types of arylboronic acid under aqueous conditions. Several experiments on the reaction mixture such as bright-field microscopy, dynamic light scattering (DLS) and kinetic monitoring at an early stage confirmed not only that the described organometallic polymers are a source of production of trace amounts of Pd nanoparticles, but the capsular structures of these lipophilic polymers in water provide a means of entrapment of nanoclusters in a hydrophobic region, thus accelerating the reaction in pure water in the absence of any co-organic solvent.
 Fig. 1  A study on applications of N-substituted main-chain NHC–palladium polymers as recyclable self-supported catalysts for the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of aryl halides in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Reusable, self-assembled catalysts of poly(imidazole-acrylamide) and palladium species have been developed by Yamada, Uozumi and coworkers, who applied their methodology to the preparation of polymeric metal catalysts (Fig. 2).162 This metalloenzyme-inspired polymeric imidazole Pd catalyst (MEPI-Pd) was readily prepared by the coordinative convolution of (NH4)2PdCl4 and poly[(N-vinylimidazole)-co-(N-isopropylacrylamide)5] in a methanol/water solution. MEPI-Pd (0.8–40 mol ppm Pd) promoted the allylic arylation/alkenylation of allylic acetates and carbonates with tetraarylborates, arylboronic acid, and alkenyl boron reagents in alcohol and/or water. Moreover, MEPI-Pd efficiently drove the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction of a variety of inactivated aryl chlorides as well as aryl bromides and iodides with aryl boron reagents in water with a TON of up to 3570000. MEPI-Pd was reused for the allylic arylation and Suzuki–Miyaura reaction of an aryl chloride without loss of catalytic activity.
 Fig. 2  (A) Preparation of metalloenzyme-inspired polymeric imidazole Pd catalyst (MEPI-Pd) and photo images of MEPI (left) and MEPI-Pd (right). (B) Applications of MEPI-Pd in recycling of MEPI-Pd for allylic arylation. (C) Applications of MEPI-Pd in the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction of an electron-rich aryl chloride in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The synthesis of heterogeneous catalysts for selective oxidation of C–H bonds by co-polymerization of new N-heterocyclic carbene–palladium(II) (NHC–PdII) monomers with divinylbenzene has been developed by Wendt and coworkers (Fig. 3).163 The polymer-supported NHC–PdII catalyzed undirected C–H acetoxylation of simple and methylated arenes as well as polyarenes, with similar or superior efficiency compared to their homogeneous analogues. The authors proved that their new polymer-supported catalysts maintained the original oxidation state of PdII after repeated catalytic reactions and exhibited no significant leaching of palladium. In addition, the new catalysts were successfully recovered and reused without loss of activity over several cycles of reactions.
 Fig. 3  Polymerized NHC–PdII monomer can catalyze C–H acetoxylation of undirected arene. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Heterogeneous catalysts, as an emerging research hotspot, have shown excellent advantages of stability, recyclability, and separation from reactants compared with homogeneous catalysts in recent years.
Shi and coworkers constructed a pillar[5]-arene-based organometallic cross-linked polymer (P[5]-OCP) via the complexation between imidazolium derivative pillar[5]arene (P[5]) and Pd(OAc)2 (Fig. 4).164 The catalytic activity and process of P[5]-OCP were investigated in the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction. The P[5]-OCP showed outstanding catalytic activity under mild reaction conditions. Meanwhile, the catalyst P[5]-OCP possessed excellent stability and recyclability, and it was reused at least five times without significant loss of activity.
 Fig. 4  P[5]-OCP derived from the complexation between P[5] and Pd(OAc)2 and cartoon representation of the cross-linked structure of the P[5]-OCP and its application in the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 
A new type of heterogeneous transition-metal catalyst comprising a polymer-supported terpyridine palladium(II) complex was synthesized by Suzuka and coworkers, and it was found to promote the Suzuki–Miyaura, Mizoroki–Heck, Sonogashira, and Tsuji–Trost reactions in water under aerobic conditions with a high to excellent yield.165 Li and coworkers employed Pd(II) organometallic catalysts immobilized on a triphenylphosphine-functionalized microporous knitting aryl polymer (KAPs(Ph-PPh3)-Pd) as a new heterogeneous catalyst in the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction of benzyl chloride and exhibited excellent catalytic activity under mild conditions with a turnover frequency (TOF) of up to 76 min−1 (4569 h−1).166 Additionally, a heterogeneous secondary amine Pd(II) complex anchored to macroporous polystyrene beads, P-[Pd2(seam)2(OAc)2] (seam = secondary amine), were prepared by Islam and coworkers and used in catalytic oxidation of organic substrates.167


3.1.2 Pd nanoparticles incorporating metallopolymers. 
Astruc's group designed and prepared new metallopolymers by “click” polycondensation between bis(ethynyl)biferrocene and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG400 and PEG1000) fragments (Fig. 5).168 These metallopolymers were used for multiple functions and uses including the improvement of water solubility and biocompatibility, the stabilization of Pd and Au nanoparticles, in catalysis, electrode derivatization, and sensing, and as a polyelectrochrome and polyelectrolyte. As the stability of the palladium complex was low, most of the catalytic activity was attributable to clusters and NPs present during most of the reaction time and not to the initial palladium complex.
 Fig. 5  Multi-function redox polymers prepared by “click” polycondensation as an electrochrome, polyelectrolyte, sensor, electrode modifier, nanoparticle stabilizer and catalyst template. Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The fabrication of a Pd nanocubes@ZIF-8 composite material by encapsulation of Pd nanocubes in ZIF-8 has been reported by Jiang's group (Fig. 6).169 This composite was used for the catalytic hydrogenation of olefins at room temperature under 1 atm H2 and light irradiation, and benefits from plasmonic photothermal effects of the Pd nanocube cores while the ZIF-8 shell plays multiple roles; it accelerates the reaction by H2 enrichment, acts as a “molecular sieve” for olefins with specific sizes, and stabilizes the Pd cores. Remarkably, the catalytic efficiency of a reaction under 60 mW cm−2 full-spectrum or 100 mW cm−2 visible-light irradiation at room temperature turned out to be comparable to that of a process driven by heating at 50 °C. Furthermore, the catalyst remained stable and was easily recycled.
 Fig. 6  Self-assembly of Pd NCs@ZIF-8 and plasmon-driven selective catalysis of the hydrogenation of olefins. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
A new phosphorus-doped porous organic polymer (POP) was developed by Ding and coworkers. This polymer was used not only as a support but also as a ligand for palladium nanoparticles (Fig. 7).170 This dual-functional material-supported palladium nanocatalyst was successfully used for the efficient and chemoselective hydrogenation of varieties of nitroarenes and α,β-unsaturated compounds, as well as for the synthesis of indoles from 2-nitrophenylacetonitrile under 1 atm hydrogen in green solvents at room temperature. No obvious aggregation and loss of catalytic activity of the new nanocatalyst were observed after 10 runs in the reaction.
 Fig. 7  Palladium/phosphorus-doped porous organic polymer as a recyclable chemoselective and efficient hydrogenation catalyst under ambient conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To diversify the field of Pd nanoparticles involved in metallopolymer-catalyzed coupling reactions, Kirschning and coworkers described the example of polyionic polymers as heterogeneous media for metal nanoparticles as catalysts in the Suzuki–Miyaura and Heck–Mizoroki reactions under flow conditions.171 Also, Karakhanov and coworkers investigated the use of nanostructured regular materials based on cross-linked polypropylene imine (PPI) dendrimers and silica-gel polyamine composites for the synthesis of Pd nanoparticles. These materials were tested as catalysts and displayed high activity and selectivity for the hydrogenation of conjugated double bonds.172 Holliday and coworkers prepared a conducting metallopolymer as a precursor to fabricate palladium nanoparticle/polymer hybrids for oxygen reduction.173 Mastrorilli and coworkers reported resin-immobilized palladium nanoparticle catalysts for organic reactions in aqueous media.174 Vaidhyanathan and coworkers reported a Pd loaded amphiphilic metallopolymer as a catalyst for multi-fold Heck reactions, C–C couplings and CO oxidation.175


3.1.3 Pt-Containing metallopolymers. 
Pt-Containing metallopolymers are interesting materials exposing single Pt atoms for photo/electrocatalysis and thus represent a potential low-cost alternative for bulk or nanoparticulate platinum group metals (PGMs).
Nann and coworkers synthesized an electropolymerizable monomer bearing a pendant terpyridine Pt unit for the selective complexation of PGMs (Fig. 8).176 Electrocatalytic tests of the resulting metallopolymer, poly-[(tThTerpy)PtCl]Cl, revealed activity both in the oxygen reduction reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction. Their fabrication of Pt metallopolymers proved to be simple, nonhazardous and versatile.
 Fig. 8  Platinum terpyridine metallopolymer electrode used as a cost-effective replacement for bulk platinum catalysts in the oxygen reduction reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 


3.1.4 Au-Containing metallopolymers. 
Peris and coworkers synthesized two triphenylene-based tris(N-heterocyclic carbene)–gold–acetylide main-chain organometallic microporous polymers (MOMPs) (Fig. 9).177 The new metallopolymers were tested in the catalytic reduction of nitroarenes with NaBH4 and in the three-component Strecker reaction for the synthesis of α-aminonitriles and showed high activity in both processes. Whereas the activity of the solids in the reduction of nitroarenes may be attributed to the formation of Au nanoparticles due to the use of NaBH4 as a reducing agent, the activity in the Strecker reaction may originate from the Lewis acidic activation of the ketone or imine on coordination to Au.
 Fig. 9  Structures of MOMPs and their applications in the catalytic reduction of nitroarenes with NaBH4 and in the three-component Strecker reaction for the synthesis of α-aminonitriles. Adapted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Metallodendrimers containing redox-robust centers may have applications in molecular redox recognition, sensing, biosensing and catalysis. Understanding the relationship between the location of nanoparticles (NPs) in an organic matrix and their catalytic performances is essential for catalyst design.
Astruc and coworkers reported metallodendrimers with two electronically communicating iron centers that are stable and isolated in both the FeII and FeIII oxidation states, and in addition as class-II mixed-valent FeIIFeIII complexes (Fig. 10).178 These dendrons are branched to arene-centered dendrimer cores either by Sonogashira coupling or ‘click’ reactions. The latter reaction involves the introduction of intradendritic 1,2,3-triazolyl ligands, which allows investigation of the selective role of these ligands in intradendritic AuIII coordination and Au0 nanoparticle stabilization. As a result, and using the various metallodendrimers with different oxidation states, small Au0 nanoparticles were intradendritically stabilized by the triazole ligands, whereas with the related non-‘click’ dendrimers large Au0 nanoparticles are formed outside the dendrimers and stabilized by a group of dendrimers. These dendrimer stabilized AuNPs with controlled sizes are potentially applicable in catalytic reactions.
 Fig. 10  Schematic picture representing the AuNP stabilized by dendrimers. (A) Intradendritic AuNP stabilization by a ‘click’ dendrimer 6B27+ involving AuNP–triazole interactions. (B) Interdendritic stabilization by many ‘Sonogashira’ dendrimers 6A27+. It is likely that chloride anions surround the AuNPs in both cases. Adapted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright © 2014, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
Astruc's group showed that catalytic activities of Au, Ag and CuNPs stabilized by dendrimers using coordination to intradendritic triazoles, galvanic replacement or stabilization outside dendrimers strongly depend on their location (Fig. 11).179 AgNPs are found at the inner click dendrimer periphery, whereas CuNPs and AuNPs are encapsulated in click dendrimer nanosnakes. AuNPs and AgNPs formed by galvanic replacement are larger than precursors and only partly encapsulated. AuNPs are better 4-nitrophenol reduction catalysts as they are less sterically inhibited by the dendrimer interior, whereas CuNPs are better alkyne azide cycloaddition catalysts, as they are better protected from aerobic oxidation inside dendrimers. Their work highlights the role of the location in macromolecules in the catalytic efficiency of metal nanoparticles and rationalizes optimization in catalyst engineering.
 Fig. 11  (A) Synthesis of AuNPs and CuNPs stabilized by dendrimers. Catalytic reactions conducted with the AuNPs and CuNPs as catalysts, like, (B) 4-nitrophenol reduction; (C) alkyne azide cycloaddition. Adapted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2016, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
According to the efforts of Astruc's group, upon catalyst and substrate encapsulation, an amphiphilic dendrimer containing 27 triethylene glycol termini and 9 intradendritic triazole rings served as a catalytic nanoreactor by considerably accelerating the CuI-catalyzed alkyne–azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) “click” reactions of various substrates in water using the catalyst Cu(hexabenzyltren)Br (tren = triaminoethylamine) (Fig. 12).180 Moreover this recyclable nanoreactor with intradendritic triazole rings also strongly activated the simple Sharpless–Fokin catalyst CuSO4 + sodium ascorbate in water under ambient conditions leading to exceptional TONs of up to 510000. This fully recyclable catalytic nanoreactor allowed a considerable decrease in the amount of this cheap copper catalyst down to industrially tolerable residues.
 Fig. 12  Recyclable catalytic dendrimer nanoreactor for part-per-million Cu catalysis of “Click” chemistry in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
A highly active and selective Au@UIO-67 catalyst has been recently assembled by Xu's group.181 Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were monodispersed on the UIO-67 surface of a porous metal–organic framework, with the micropores in UIO-67 as templates for adsorbing Au ions and enhancing the interaction between AuNPs and UIO-67, favoring the formation of isolated and well-dispersed AuNPs. The catalyst exhibited high catalytic activity and CO selectivity for the reverse water–gas shift reaction in a fixed-bed flow reactor.


3.1.5 Ru-Containing metallopolymers. 
Direct use of low pressures of CO2 as a C1 source without concentration from gas mixtures is of great interest from an energy-saving viewpoint. Ru-Containing metallopolymers as porous heterogeneous catalysts containing both adsorption and catalytically active sites are excellent candidates for such applications.
Kitagawa and coworkers reported a porous coordination polymer (PCP)-based catalyst, a PCP–RuII composite, bearing a RuII–CO complex active for CO2 reduction (Fig. 13).182 The PCP–RuII composite showed improved CO2 adsorption behavior at ambient temperature. In the photochemical reduction of CO2 the PCP–RuII composite produced CO, HCOOH, and H2. Catalytic activity was comparable with that of the corresponding homogeneous RuII catalyst. Additionally, catalytic activity was maintained even under a 5% CO2/Ar gas mixture, revealing a synergistic effect between the adsorption and catalytically active sites within the PCP–RuII composite.
 Fig. 13  Photochemical reduction of low concentrations of CO2 in the porous coordination polymer with a ruthenium(II)–CO Complex. Adapted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Polymer-supported metal (Ru or Fe) complexes for epoxide ring opening reactions by anchoring the bis(2-picolyl)amine ligand onto the polymer poly(chloromethylstyrene-co-divinylbenzene) (PCD) were prepared by Lee et al. These catalysts showed heterogeneous catalytic activity and easy recyclability in the ring opening reactions of various epoxide substrates with methanol or H2O at room temperature under mild and neutral conditions.183


3.1.6 Rh-Containing metallopolymers in catalysis. 
The intramolecular cycloisomerization of 1,6-enynes (in 95–99% ee) using an immobilized Rh catalyst-organic framework synthesized from alternating ring-opening metathesis polymerization (altROMP) assembly was reported by Bergens and coworkers (Fig. 14).184 The framework was reused up to seven times, and it was used in high turnover number (TON) batch reactions. The immobilized Rh catalyst-organic framework provided great TONs (up to 890) for the cycloisomerizations, with catalyst loadings ranging from 0.2 to 0.06 mol%.
 Fig. 14  Highly reusable rhodium catalyst-organic framework for the intramolecular cycloisomerization of 1,6-enynes. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Oppelt and coworkers synthesized a 2,2′-bipyridyl-containing poly(arylene-ethynylene)-alt-poly(arylene-vinylene) polymer, acting as a light harvesting ligand system and coupled it to an organometallic rhodium complex applied in photocatalytic NAD+/NADH reduction (Fig. 15).185 Photocatalytic reduction of nucleotide redox cofactors was performed under visible light irradiation (390–650 nm). Their new metallopolymer was used to cover large surface areas (e.g. glass beads) and, due to this immobilization step, was easily separated from the reaction solution after photolysis. Because of its high stability, the polymer-based catalyst system was repeatedly used under different reaction conditions for (photo)chemical reduction of NAD+.
 Fig. 15  Rhodium-coordinated poly(arylene-ethynylene)-alt-poly(arylenevinylene) copolymer acting as a photocatalyst for visible-light-powered NAD+/NADH reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The design of a hydroformylation catalyst through the immobilization of air-stable Rh nanoparticles (NPs) on a magnetic support functionalized with a hyperbranched polymer that bears terminal phosphine groups was reported by Rossi and coworkers.186 The catalyst modification with the hyperbranched polymer improved the metal–support interaction, the metal loading, and the catalytic activity. The catalyst was active for the hydroformylation of natural products, such as estragole, and was used in successive reactions with negligible metal leaching.
Hapiot and coworkers have implicated the cooperativity to explain the catalytic performances of cyclodextrin-substituted polymers in aqueous rhodium-catalyzed hydroformylation of 1-hexadecene.187 Additionally, the results of this structure–activity investigation have provided compelling evidence that positive cooperativity was operative in this catalytic system, thus encouraging the elaboration of even more effective polytopic receptors for aqueous organometallic catalysis.


3.1.7 Ag-Containing metallopolymers. 
The widely studied porous coordination polymers, possessing large pores to adsorb waste carbon dioxide gas and further transform it into valuable chemical products, have been attracting research interest, both industrially and academically. Their applications in CO2 sequestering and absorbing will be discussed in detail in the climate section in the review.
The active silver(I) ions impart the specific alkynophilicity to activate carbon–carbon triple bonds of alkyne containing molecules via π activation. Incorporating catalytic Ag metal sites into the porous frameworks represents a promising approach to construct heterogeneous catalysts that cyclize propargylic alcohols with CO2, which is highly desirable for the environmentally benign conversion of carbon dioxide to fine chemicals. Duan and coworkers reported the preparation of porous coordination polymers (PCPs) with active silver sites and efficient silver–silver bond formation by carefully modifying the coordination geometries of the silver sites (Fig. 16).188 The decentralized silver(I) chains in the porous frameworks enable the efficient conversion of CO2 and derivatives of acetylene to α-alkylidene cyclic carbonates in a heterogeneous manner. They also presented the successful example of tandem conversion of simple alkynes and carbon dioxide to α-alkylidene cyclic carbonates.
 Fig. 16  Representation of the porous silver coordination polymer for the carboxylic cyclization of a phenyl propargylic alcohol with CO2 to α-alkylidene cyclic carbonates. Adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Hou, Mi and coworkers synthesized a series of solvent-induced Ag-based coordination polymers (CPs) by regulating the size, shape, and polarity of solvent molecules (EtOH, iPrOH, 1,4-dioxane) as structure-directing agents (Fig. 17).189 These materials were used as heterogeneous catalysts to explore how the metal–metal bonds served as cooperative catalysts for the tandem acylation–Nazarov cyclization reaction to prepare cyclopentenone[b]pyrrole frameworks. They found that the unique structure containing the Ag–Ag–Ag bonds endows them with intact multinuclear reaction pathways and well-defined multinuclear platforms that executed the tandem acylation–Nazarov cyclization reaction through the cooperative effect of Ag–Ag–Ag interactions during the catalytic process.
 Fig. 17  Solvent-induced assembly of silver coordination polymers (CPs) as cooperative catalysts for synthesizing cyclopentenone[b]pyrrole frameworks. Adapted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 


3.1.8 Cu-Containing metallopolymers. 
Ring-opening metathesis polymerization has been used for the synthesis of the amphiphilic block-copolymer poly(M1-co-M3)-b-poly which was loaded with Cu and the resulting CuI-loaded polymer poly(M1-co-M3)-b-poly-Cu was used for a series of Cu-catalyzed reactions under micellar conditions, i.e. for the [3+2] cycloaddition of azides to alkynes and for carbonyl hydrosilylation reactions. Under such micellar conditions, the polymer-bound Cu-catalyst was found to be an efficient catalyst for all reactions investigated. Turn-over numbers (TONs) in cycloaddition reactions were in the range of 200–375, and those in hydrosilylation reactions ∼2000 allowing for Cu-loadings of 0.05 mol% with respect to the substrate (Fig. 18).190
 Fig. 18  Ring-opening metathesis polymerization-derived, poly(M1-co-M3)-b-poly-Cu for click-chemistry (A) and hydrosilylation reactions (B) under micellar conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Wu and coworkers synthesized a new 1D macrocyclic copper(II) coordination polymer, [CuL2] (L = N-(4-pyridyl)-D,L-valine), based on a valine derived ligand.191 The catalytic experiments showed that compound [CuL2] was an efficient catalyst for the cross-coupling reaction of arylboronic acids with imidazole in the absence of additional additives. Jia, Xu and coworkers synthesized porous CuO-T (T = 400, 500, and 600 °C) nanofibers by thermolysis of Cu-Asp nanofibers at different temperatures. The CuO-500 nanofibers showed an excellent photocatalytic property for the catalytic reduction of RhB in the presence of H2O2, with the degradation rate reaching 96% within 160 min under visible light irradiation.192 Additionally, the CuO-500 nanofiber photocatalyst displays good photochemical stability under visible light irradiation. These results of the active species trapping experiments indicated that the holes play a predominant role in the photodegradation process.


3.1.9 Fe-Containing metallopolymers. 
Xu and coworkers reported the synthesis and assessment of a new non-precious-metal catalyst from pyrolysis of an iron-coordinated complex, which manifested superior activity in both alkaline and acidic media and applied this activity in an oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) (Fig. 19).193 11,11′-Bis(dipyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′-c]phenazinyl) (bidppz) was selected as a ligand for the formation of a nitrogen-rich iron-coordinated coordination polymer (Fe–bidppz). The catalyst pyrolyzed at 800 °C (Fe-N/C-800) showed the highest ORR activity with onset and half-wave potentials of 923 and 809 mV in 0.1 M KOH, respectively, which are comparable to those of Pt/C (half-wave potential 818 mV vs. RHE) at the same catalyst loading. The optimal Fe-N/C-800 catalyst displayed much greater durability and tolerance of methanol than Pt/C. Electrochemical measurements showed that the Fe-N/C-800 catalyst in KOH and HClO4 follows the effective four-electron-transfer pathway. Because Fe-N/C-800 possesses excellent ORR activity while its specific surface area is not high, the authors proposed that the Fe-N/C-800 catalyst has a considerably high density of surface active sites.
 Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of the Fe-N/C-800 catalyst from the chemical structure of bidppz and the corresponding Fe–bidppz precursor. Cyclic voltammograms (B) and RDE voltammograms (C) of Pt/C and Fe-N/C-800 in O2–saturated 0.1 M HClO4. For all tests, the catalyst loading is 0.1 mg cm−2 and the scan rate is 10 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Graphitic carbon nitrides have appeared as a new type of photocatalyst for water splitting, but their broader and more practical applications are oftentimes hindered by the insolubility or difficult dispersion of the material in solvents.
Wang, Zhang and coworkers prepared new two-dimensional (2D) carbon nitride-type polymers doped by iron under a mild one-pot method through preorganizing formamide and citric acid precursors into supramolecular structures, which eventually polycondensed into a homogeneous organocatalyst for highly efficient visible light-driven hydrogen evolution with a rate of ∼16.2 mmol g−1 h−1 and a quantum efficiency of 0.8% (Fig. 20).194 Laser photolysis and electrochemical impedance spectroscopic measurements suggested that iron-doping enabled strong electron coupling between the metal and the carbon nitride and formed unique electronic structures favoring electron mobilization along the 2D nanomaterial plane, which might facilitate the electron transfer process in the photocatalytic system and lead to efficient H2 evolution. They depicted the electron transfer dynamics during water reduction in combination with electrochemical measurements and the earth-abundant Fe-based catalyst may open a sustainable strategy for conversion of sunlight into hydrogen energy to help cope with current challenging energy issues worldwide.
 Fig. 20  Iron-doped carbon nitride-type polymers as homogeneous organocatalysts for visible light-driven hydrogen evolution. Adapted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Ming and coworkers found that FeIII complexes of pyridine-containing copolymers were efficient and selective catalysts toward phosphodiester hydrolysis and showed significant activity toward oxidative DNA cleavage.195 The catalysis toward bis(p-nitrophenyl) phosphate (BNPP) hydrolysis exhibits enzyme-like pre-equilibrium kinetics with maximum activities in the range of ca. pH 6–8 and a first-order catalytic proficiency (kcat/ko) of 4.2 × 107-fold at the acidic pH value of 5.3 and 25 °C, entitling this FeIII copolymer an acid phosphodiester catalyst.


3.1.10 Ni-Containing metallopolymers. 
The cycloaddition of carbon dioxide to epoxides to produce cyclic carbonates is quite promising and does not result in any side products. Duan and coworkers synthesized a discrete single walled Ni-containing metal–organic nanotube by incorporating a tetraphenyl-ethylene moiety as the four-point connected node (Fig. 21).196 The assembled complex has a large cross-section, with an exterior wall diameter of 3.6 nm and an interior channel diameter of 2.1 nm. It features excellent activity toward the cycloaddition of carbon dioxide, with a turnover number of 17500 per mole of catalyst and an initial turnover frequency as high as 1000 per mole of catalyst per hour. Only minimal decreases in the catalytic activity were observed after 70 h under identical reaction conditions, and a total turnover number as high as 35000 was achieved.
 Fig. 21  Ni-Containing discrete single-walled metallopolymers as a heterogeneous catalyst for the cycloaddition of carbon dioxide to epoxides. Adapted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Astruc and coworkers prepared catalytically remarkably efficient ligand-free first-row late transition-metal nanoparticles using a zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8) as a MOF template (Fig. 22).197 Upon scrutiny of the catalytic principles in the hydrolysis of ammonia-borane, the highest total turnover frequency among these first-row late transition metals is achieved for the templated Ni nanoparticles with 85.7 molH2 molcat−1 min−1 at room temperature, which is even better than some noble metal nanoparticle systems. Mechanistic studies especially using kinetic isotope effects show that cleavage by oxidative addition of an O–H bond in H2O is the rate-determining step in this reaction. Inspired by these mechanistic studies, the highly selective and sharp volcano-type synergistic Ni2Pt@ZIF-8-catalyzed hydrogen evolution process from ammonia borane hydrolysis was further achieved.198
 Fig. 22  Hydrolysis of ammonia-borane over a Ni/ZIF-8 nanocatalyst and the total turnover frequency and the proposed effective “on–off” control of hydrogen production. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Alkordi and coworkers reported a heterogeneous catalyst composite of graphene and a porous organic polymer, post-synthetically loaded with NiII ions (Fig. 23).199 The composite has a very low Ni loading of 0.7 wt%, combined with an efficient electrocatalytic behavior towards water oxidation, as demonstrated by an onset potential of 1.51 V vs. RHE and a considerably low overpotential of 0.28 V. Moreover, a low overpotential of 0.4 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 was attained, and the composite also shows a high 100 mA cm−2 current density for the OER at 1.8 V vs. RHE. The Tafel slope for the Ni-loaded catalyst (45 mV decade−1) indicated enhanced water oxidation characteristics as a result of the Ni ion loading. Their Ni-loaded composite shows excellent durability in the water oxidation reaction, with enhanced performance upon progression of the cycles.
 Fig. 23  (A) Synthesis of PyPOP–Ni@G. (B) Controlled current electrolysis (chronopotentiometry) for OER using PyPOP–Ni@G in 1 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Kazemi and coworkers presented an example of a new two-step electrochemical route for fabrication of nanoparticles of a conducting metallopolymer of Ni–curcumin (Ni–Curc-NPs).200 Additionally, application of the Ni–Curc-NPs modified electrode toward glucose electro-oxidation was examined. A lower limit of detection and enhanced dynamic linear range for determination of glucose were observed at the Ni–Curc-NPs modified electrode compared to the Ni-NPs modified electrode.


3.1.11 Co-Containing metallopolymers. 
Jones and coworkers synthesized Co–salen complexes supported on a highly cross-linked polymer resin and applied these CoIII–salen complexes in catalyzing regioselective ring opening of 1,2-epoxyhexane with methanol.201 Co–salen catalysts are immobilized on various batches of the same polymeric support with different Co densities by manipulating the metalation degree of a polymeric resin containing salen ligands. They found that the supported catalysts have different turnover frequencies on a CoIII basis in the reaction, with the rates correlating with the overall cobalt content.
Zang, Li and coworkers prepared a new cationic triazole-based metal–organic framework encapsulating Keggin-type polyoxometalates, with the molecular formula [Co(BBPTZ)3][HPMo12O40]·24H2O[BBPTZ = 4,4′-bis(1,2,4-triazol-1-ylmethyl)biphenyl] (Fig. 24).202 This structure contains a non-interpenetrating 3D CdSO4 (cds)-type framework with two types of channels that are interconnected with each other; straight channels that are occupied by the Keggin-type POM anions, and wavelike channels that contain lattice water molecules. The catalytic activity of this Co-containing material in the oxidative desulfurization reaction indicated that it was an effective and size-selective heterogeneous catalyst.
 Fig. 24  Co-Containing polyoxometalate-encapsulating cationic metal–organic framework as a heterogeneous catalyst for desulfurization. Adapted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Jones and coworkers demonstrated a new class of hybrid organic/inorganic molecular catalysts with high, local catalyst concentrations by supporting magnetic nanoparticle based polymer brushes (MPB). Poly(styrene) brushes containing CoIII–salen or piperazine side chains were prepared via atom-transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) from Fe3O4 nanoparticles modified with appropriate initiator molecules. In the hydrolytic kinetic resolution of racepichlorohydrin, the polymer brush architecture promoted the cooperative interactions required for Co–salen catalyzed ring-opening of epoxides.203 Tang and coworkers presented a neutral 18-electron exo-substituted η4-cyclopentadiene CpCo(I) unit-containing polymer prepared in a controlled/“living” fashion by combining facile click chemistry and ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP). This Co(I)-containing polymer was further used as a heterogeneous macromolecular catalyst for atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) of methyl methacrylate and styrene yielding polymers free of catalyst color.204 Wang, Zhang and coworkers fabricated another new cobalt-coordinated graphitic carbon nitride-type polymer (Co-g-CN) integrating the advantages of both molecular catalytic efficiency and nano semiconductor stability, which served as homogeneous photocatalyst exhibiting superior hydrogen evolution efficiency (ca. ∼12.3 mmol g−1 h−1) under visible light irradiation in the absence of noble metal cocatalyst.205


3.1.12 Other metal-containing metallopolymers. 
Mano, Heller and coworkers prepared an osmium-containing metallopolymer as a catalyst allowing the electroreduction of O2 to water (at pH 5) at a greatly reduced voltage loss relative to that for pure and smooth platinum (at pH 0) (Fig. 25).206 At a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2, the overpotential was −0.07 V, approximately one-fifth of the 0.37 V overpotential of Pt. A miniature, membraneless glucose–O2 biofuel cell, built with the new cathode, operated at the highest voltage to date, 0.88 V while producing 350 μW cm−2 in a stagnant pH 5 citrate buffer at 37.5 °C.
 Fig. 25  (A) The pyridine-quarternizing functions are randomly distributed in the backbone of osmium-containing metallopolymer. (B) This four-electron O2-electroreduction biocatalyst superior to platinum and a biofuel cell operating at 0.88 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society. 
Nguyen, Hupp and coworkers reported the formation of coordination polymers by the reaction of [bis(catechol)salen]MnIII with several di- and trivalent metal ions. They function as enantioselective heterogeneous epoxidation catalysts and exhibit good catalytic activity.207
A titanium-based POSS, reported by Monticelli, characterized by an amino group as a reactive side, was contacted with poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride) (PSMA) nanofibers, which were dispersed in a solvent capable of solubilizing the above metal silsesquioxane. The catalytic activity of the PSMA/Ti-POSS-NH2 system was proved in the degradation of sulforhodamine B under UV light.208
Zhang, Zhuang and coworkers prepared a new phosphorus-containing porous polymer from tris(4-vinylphenyl)phosphane by radical polymerization. Upon ionic exchange, transition-metal-containing anions, such as tetrathiomolybdate (MoS42−) and hexacyanoferrate (Fe(CN)63−), were successfully loaded into the framework of the porous polymer, resulting in a polymer framework containing complex anions (termed HT-Met, where Met = Mo or Fe) (Fig. 26).209 After pyrolysis under a hydrogen atmosphere, the HT-Met materials were efficiently converted on a large scale to metal-phosphide containing porous carbons (denoted as MetP@PC, where again Met = Mo or Fe). The MetP@PC composites exhibited superior electrocatalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) under acidic conditions. In particular, MoP@PC with a low loading of 0.24 mg cm−2 (on a glass carbon electrode) affords an iR – corrected (where i is the current and R is the resistance) current density of up to 10 mA cm−2 at 51 mV versus the reversible hydrogen electrode and a very low Tafel slope of 45 mV dec−1, in rotating disk measurements under saturated N2 conditions.
 Fig. 26  Preparation of HT-Mets and related mesoporous carbons with embedded metal phosphides (MetP@PCs). Reaction conditions: (i) AIBN, toluene, 65 °C, 24 h; (ii) dioxane, aqueous hydroiodic acid, room temperature (r.t.), 24 h; (iii) (NH4)2 MoS4 or K3 Fe(CN)6, DMF/water, 80 °C, 24 h; (iv) H2, 480 °C, 1 h, then annealed under argon at 1000 °C for 2 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Hock and coworkers synthesized a single-site chromium catecholate porous organic polymer and characterized this material via AT-IR, XAS, and EPR spectroscopy (Fig. 27).210 Their well-defined, four-coordinate, 11-electron Cr(III) centers bound to catecholate POP were demonstrated to be active hydrogenation catalysts for nonpolar unsaturated organic substrates under mild conditions (5 mol% of Cr, 200 psi of H2, 60 °C). This material constituted the first example of a well-defined, supported organometallic chromium hydrogenation precatalyst.
 Fig. 27  Synthesis and catalytic hydrogenation reactivity of a chromium catecholate porous organic polymer. Adapted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Mondal and coworkers described a new strategy for noble-metal-free Mn3O4@POP (porous organic polymer) hybrid synthesis by encapsulation of Mn3O4-NP in the interior cavity of a porous organic polymer which exhibited enhanced catalytic activity and stability for oxidation of diverse activated and nonactivated alcohols to demonstrate the benefits of such a nanoarchitecture in heterogeneous nanocatalysis (Fig. 28).211 Their use of a non-precious catalyst, tremendous recyclability (up to 15 catalytic runs) and exceptional stability made this system innovative in nature, addressing the profound challenges in the noble-metal-free heterogeneous catalyst development community.
 Fig. 28  (A) Synthesis of a Mn3O4@POP hybrid material using a hydrothermal technique. (B–E) TEM images of the Mn3O4@POP hybrid material. Adapted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A series of InIII sulfonate salts attached to a polyether ether ketone (PEEK) polymer by ultrasonic activation was prepared by Dunach and coworkers.212 The efficiency of these polymers as heterogeneous catalysts was examined in the Friedel–Crafts acylation of activated aromatic compounds. These studies showed that the InIII sulfonate polymer was an active catalyst and the catalytic activity of this polymeric catalyst was also compared to that of the corresponding nonpolymeric analogues. The InIII polymer catalyst was recycled for use in five runs without the loss of its catalytic activity.
The quantitative conversion of [MIV6(μ3-O)4(μ3-OH)4Cl12]6− nodes in the MCl2-BTC metal–organic framework into the [MIII6(μ3-O)4(μ3-ONa)4H6]6− nodes in MIIIH-BTC (M = Zr, Hf; BTC is 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate) via bimetallic reductive elimination of H2 from putative [MIV6(μ3-O)4(μ3-OH)4H12]6− nodes was reported by Lin and coworkers (Fig. 29).213 The coordinatively unsaturated MIIIH centers in MIIIH-BTC are highly active and selective for 1,4-dearomative hydroboration and hydrosilylation of pyridines and quinolines. Their work demonstrated the potential of secondary building unit transformation in generating electronically unique and homogeneously inaccessible single-site solid catalysts for organic synthesis.
 Fig. 29  Reduction of MIVCl2-BTC to MIIIH-BTC (M = Zr and Hf) by NaBEt3H via bimetallic reductive elimination of H2. Adapted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
A series of heterogeneous catalysts were prepared based on metal–organic frameworks and microporous polymers used as macroligands for heterogenized organometallic complexes.214 They showed that both homogeneous and heterogenized catalysts follow the same linear correlation between the electronic effect of the ligand, described by the Hammett parameter, and the catalytic activity. This correlation highlights the crucial impact of the local electronic environment surrounding the active catalytic center over the long-range framework structure of the porous support.


3.1.13 Mixed metal-containing metallopolymers. 
The development of efficient and stable electrocatalysts on the basis of non-precious mixed metals (Co, Fe) is considered as one of the most promising routes to replace expensive and susceptible platinum as the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalyst.
Bruller et al. reported a synthetic strategy for the precursor controlled, template-free preparation of new mono-(Fe; Co) and bimetallic (Fe/Co) nitrogen-doped porous carbons and their electrocatalytic performance towards the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) (Fig. 30).215 In acidic media the bimetallic catalyst demonstrated a synergistic effect for cobalt and iron active sites, mainly through a 4-electron transfer process, achieving an onset potential of 0.88 V (versus a reversible hydrogen electrode) and a half-wave potential of 0.78 V, which is only 0.06 V less than that of the state-of-the-art Pt/C catalyst.
 Fig. 30  Bimetallic porous porphyrin polymer-derived nonprecious metal electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Newkome and coworkers prepared a bismetallo-organic polymer by treating a Ru-containing metallo-ligand with AgI, and characterization was accomplished by NMR, UV-vis, and single crystal X-ray analyses (Fig. 31).216 Their heteronuclear polymer achieved more than a two-fold turnover number (TON) and a faster reaction rate in comparison to a Ce-driven Ru-monomer in catalytic water oxidation.
 Fig. 31  (A) Illustration of the synthetic route for the organic metallic monomer and linear organic bimetallic polymer. (B) Kinetic plots of oxygen evolution vs. time for the monomer (black) and polymer (red). Adapted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The types of metallic or bimetallic polymers for catalysis and the reaction types they catalyzed are quite large in number according to literature. The development of metallopolymers for catalysis was contributed by many other groups.217–228

3.2 Metalloenzymes and biocatalysis
Numerous enzymes are useful catalysts in synthetic organic chemistry, but they did not catalyze the myriad transition-metal-mediated transformations customary in daily chemical work. For this reason, the concept of directed evolution of hybrid catalysts was proposed some time ago. A synthetic ligand/transition-metal moiety is anchored covalently or non-covalently to a host biomolecule, thereby generating a single artificial metalloenzyme, which was then optimized by molecular biological methods. Also, some metals are catalysts and cofactors in enzymes, thus creating low energy pathways to speed up many chemical and biochemical processes. Scientists, therefore, incorporate metals into polymers to design metallopolymer catalysts with hallmarks of recyclability, phase separation, reactivity and selectivity.23–29
Supramolecular anchoring of transition metal complexes to a protein scaffold is an attractive approach to the construction of artificial metalloenzymes since this is conveniently achieved by self-assembly. Artificial metalloenzymes have emerged as an attractive new approach to enantioselective catalysis.
Roelfes and coworkers presented a new strategy towards the creation of an artificial metalloenzyme, which involves grafting a new active site onto the dimer interface of the protein LmrR by conjugation of a bidentate ligand capable of binding CuII ions (Fig. 32).229 The dimer interface provides the chiral microenvironment for the catalyzed reaction. The artificial metalloenzyme is capable of catalyzing a Diels–Alder reaction with excellent enantioselectivities, namely up to 97% ee, and it was shown that the hydrophobic pocket of LmrR indeed functions as the active site where the reaction takes place. These results represented the first example of an artificial metalloenzyme in which the metal complex was linked covalently that gave rise to excellent enantioselectivities in catalysis.
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed artificial metalloenzyme in which a CuII complex is grafted on the dimer interface of a protein scaffold. (b) Ligands used for grafting on the dimer interface. (c) Pymol representations of dimeric LmrR in a ribbon and a space-filling model (protein data bank (pdb) code: 3F8B). Either position 89 (red) or 19 (yellow) was used for the covalent attachment of ligand a or b. Adapted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Roelfes and coworkers also introduced a new strategy for preparation of artificial metalloenzymes utilizing an amber stop codon suppression methodology for the in vivo incorporation of CuII-binding unnatural amino acids. The resulting artificial metalloenzymes were applied in catalytic asymmetric Friedel–Crafts alkylation reactions and up to 83% ee for the product was achieved (Fig. 33).230
 Fig. 33  Cartoon representation of the new artificial metalloenzyme with an in vivo incorporated ligand BpyAla and the reaction scheme of the benchmark catalytic Friedel–Crafts reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A new design was developed for supramolecular artificial metalloenzymes that exploited the promiscuity of the central hydrophobic cavity of the transcription factor Lactococcal multidrug resistance regulator (LmrR) as a generic binding site for planar coordination complexes that did not provide specific protein binding interactions (Fig. 34).231 The success of this approach was manifested in the excellent enantioselectivities that are achieved in the Cu(II) catalyzed enantioselective Friedel–Crafts alkylation of indoles.
 Fig. 34  (a) Schematic representation of the design of the supramolecular artificial metalloenzyme in which a Cu(II) complex is bound at the dimer interface of LmrR, followed by application in a catalyzed Friedel–Crafts alkylation. (b) Space filled representation of dimeric LmrR (pdb 3F8B) and ribbon representation of the ligand binding pocket (inset). Tryptophan residues W96 and W96′ are shown in gray. Pictures were generated with Pymol. Adapted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
More recently, another artificial metallohydratase, based on the transcriptional repressor LmrR, in which the non-canonical amino acid (2,2′-bipyridin-5yl)alanine was used to bind the catalytic Cu(II) ion.232 The agreement observed between the computationally predicted and experimentally observed catalysis results in an enantioselective hydration reaction demonstrated the power of the artificial metalloenzyme design approach.
In general, artificial metalloenzymes result from anchoring an active catalyst within a protein environment. Toward this goal, various localization strategies have been pursued: covalent, supramolecular, or dative anchoring. Ward's group found that synthetic cascades are enabled by combining biocatalysts with artificial metalloenzymes.233
Introduction of a suitably positioned histidine residue that contributed to firmly anchor, via a dative bond, a biotinylated rhodium piano stool complex within streptavidin was reported. The resulting artificial metalloenzyme displayed significantly improved catalytic performance, both in terms of activity and selectivity in the transfer hydrogenation of imines (Fig. 35).234
 Fig. 35  The dual anchoring strategy for the localization and activation of artificial metalloenzymes based on the biotin–streptavidin technology and applications in the transfer hydrogenation of imines. Adapted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Stereoselectively labeled isotopomers of NAD(P)H are highly relevant for mechanistic studies of enzymes that utilize them as redox equivalents. Whereas several methods are firmly established for their generation in high diastereomeric purity by enzymatic methods, alternative methods have so far not been investigated.
The stereoselective deuteration of NAD+ at the 4-position (90% de) of the pyridinium-ring by means of an artificial metalloenzyme was presented by Ward's group. The artificial metalloenzyme consists of a biotinylated iridium cofactor embedded in streptavidin isoforms and the resulting constructs have been previously shown to be compatible with natural enzymes.235 Subsequently, they showed that NADH mimics (mNADHs) accelerated and orthogonally activated ene reductase-catalyzed reactions.236 With 10 mol% mNAD+, a preparative scale reaction (>100 mg) gave full conversion with 98% ee, where TTNs reached 2000, with respect to the Ir cofactor under an ambient atmosphere in aqueous medium. They also applied aryl-sulfonamide-bearing IrCp* piano stool complexes in catalyzing the asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of imines as well (Fig. 36).237 In the presence of human carbonic anhydrase II, critical cofactor–protein interactions revealed by the X-ray structure of the catalyst were genetically optimized to improve the catalytic performance of the artificial metalloenzyme (68% ee, kcat per KM 6.11 × 10−3 min−1 mM−1).
 Fig. 36  Human carbonic anhydrase II as a host protein for the creation of artificial metalloenzymes and its application in the asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of imines. Adapted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Artificial metalloenzymes (ArMs) based on the incorporation of a biotinylated metal cofactor within streptavidin (Sav) combine attractive features of both homogeneous and enzymatic catalysts. To speed up their optimization, a streamlined protocol was adopted for the design, expression, partial purification and screening of Sav libraries. In order to produce an artificial transfer hydrogenase, Sav was coupled to a biotinylated three-legged iridium piano-stool complex Cp*Ir(Biot-p-L)Cl (the cofactor).238 In this application, it was best to first immobilize Sav on Sepharose-iminobiotin beads and then perform washing steps. Catalysis using the test compound (in this protocol, 2-(4-(N,N-diallylsulfamoyl)phenyl)-N,N,N-trimethylethan-1-aminium iodide) was performed using the formed metalloenzyme. A metal-substitution strategy was applied to afford an iridium-substituted myoglobin for challenging cyclopropanation and intramolecular C–H activation reactions. The performance of the iridium-loaded myoglobin was improved through directed evolution of eight active-site residues.239 More recently, an artificial imine reductase was generated by incorporation of a biotinylated iridium piano-stool complex within streptavidin (Fig. 37).240 Two streptavidin isoforms were yielded with improved catalytic activity and selectivity for the reduction of cyclic imines. With this system, both enantiomers of the product were obtained in high ee after only a few rounds of saturation mutagenesis.
 Fig. 37  Directed evolution of an artificial imine reductase and catalysis. Adapted with permission from ref. 240. Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Natural enzymes contain highly evolved active sites that lead to fast rates and high selectivities. Although artificial metalloenzymes have been developed for the catalysis of abiological transformations with high stereoselectivity, the activities of these artificial enzymes are much lower than those of natural enzymes.
Dydio, Key and coworkers reported a reconstituted artificial metalloenzyme containing an iridium porphyrin that exhibited kinetic parameters similar to those of natural enzymes. In particular, variants of the P450 enzyme CYP119 containing iridium in place of iron catalyzed insertions of carbenes into C–H bonds with up to 98% enantiomeric excess, 35000 turnovers, and 2550 hours−1 turnover frequency. This activity leads to intramolecular carbene insertions into unactivated C–H bonds and intermolecular carbene insertions into C–H bonds (Fig. 38).241
 Fig. 38  Directed evolution of Ir(Me)-PIX CYP119 for enantioselective insertions of carbenes into C–H bonds. (A) Model reaction converting diazoester to dihydrobenzofuran. (B) Enantioselectivity and yields for the formation of dihydrobenzofuran catalyzed by evolved variants of CYP119 (0.17% catalyst loading, 10 mM substrate). (C) Kinetic parameters describing the formation of dihydrobenzofuran by variants of CYP119 (0.1 mol% catalyst loading, 5 mM substrate). For free Ir(Me)-PIX, (onset) dependence of TOF on the initial concentration of diazoester for reactions using 0.005 mM catalyst. (D and E) Comparison of KM and kcat values for CYP119-Max with those of natural enzymes involved in the metabolism of intermediate and secondary metabolites (5); for comparison, the kinetic parameters for Ir(Me)-PIX mOCRmyoglobin (H93A and H64V) catalyzing the same transformation are shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Ward and coworkers also demonstrated the in vivo applicability of the streptavidin–biotin technology for creating artificial metalloenzymes that catalyze olefin metathesis, a reaction mechanism that was not present among natural enzymes. Although the free cofactor biot-Ru is nearly inactive in cellulo, the corresponding wild-type artificial metalloenzyme biot-Ru–SAVperi endows the cell with metathesis activity.242
Zhao and coworkers encapsulated a hydrophobic rhodium catalyst in crosslinked micelles, which requires no structural modification of the catalyst and enables hydrophobic substrates to access the catalyst in the biphasic catalytic hydrogenation of water-insoluble alkenes in water. Overall, the Rh(I)–[PPh3]2@SCM catalyst showed remarkable resemblance to natural metalloenzymes with water-solubility, modifiable surface groups, an internal catalytic site, and hydrophobic binding sites (Fig. 39).243
 Fig. 39  Preparation of the SCM-encapsulated rhodium catalyst and schematic representation of the biphasic catalytic hydrogenation of water-insoluble alkenes in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gebbink presented the first (soluble) artificial metalloenzymes formed by covalent active site-directed hybridization obtained by a Rh(NHC) phosphonate complex reacting with the lipases cutinase and Candida antarctica lipase B. When compared to unsupported complexes, these new robust hybrids showed enhanced chemoselectivity in the (competitive) hydrogenation of olefins over ketones (Fig. 40).244,245
 Fig. 40  Covalent inhibition of lipases with P-functionalized phosphonate esters towards metal(NHC)–protein (M = Rh) hybrids. Adapted with permission from ref. 244. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Jia, Li and coworkers presented the idea of G-quadruplex-targeting anticancer drug design to construct a G-quadruplex DNA metalloenzyme.246 They found that a series of terpyridine–Cu(II) complexes (CuLn) served as excellent cofactors to dock with human telemetric G-quadruplex DNA. The resulting G-quadruplex DNA metalloenzyme utilizing CuL catalyzed an enantioselective Diels–Alder reaction with enantioselectivity of >99% enantiomeric excess and about 73-fold rate acceleration, compared to CuL alone. The terpyridine–Cu(II) complex cofactors demonstrated dual functions, both as an active site to perform catalysis and as a structural regulator to promote the folding of human telemetric G-quadruplex DNA towards excellent catalysts. The field of catalysis with metalloenzymes has been rapidly enriched in the past few years with the utilization of diversified types of metals and biomolecules.247–263
3.3 DFT on metalloenzymes
The development of artificial enzymes aims at expanding the scope of biocatalysis. Over recent years, artificial metalloenzymes based on the insertion of homogeneous catalysts in biomolecules have received an increasing amount of attention. Rational or pseudorational design of these composites is a challenging task because of the complexity of the identification of efficient complementarities among the cofactor, the substrate, and the biological partner.
Molecular modeling represents an interesting alternative to help in this task. However, little attention has been paid to this field so far. Several groups reviewed their efforts in developing efficient strategies to computationally drive the design of artificial metalloenzymes. From protein–ligand dockings to multiscale approaches, they demonstrated that modeling was useful at the different steps of the design.264–267
3.4 Metallopolymers for bio-fuel upgrading and H2 production
With the rapidly diminishing fossil fuel resources, development of a new strategy for synthesis of biofuels from renewable resources can provide a sustainable alternative to our energy demand. Metallopolymers were found to be extremely applicable for bio-fuel upgrading and TpPON were proved to hold wide potential for large-scale biodiesel production from renewable resources.
Mondal, Bhaumik and coworkers presented the design, synthesis, and characterization of a new porous organic network (TpPON) through acid-catalyzed condensation of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp) and triphenylamine (TPA). Ru0 nanoparticles were successfully fabricated at the porous surface of TpPON to obtain a novel catalytic system Ru@TpPON, which exhibited excellent catalytic performance together with outstanding stability for the hydrodeoxygenation of various vegetable oils to long-chain alkanes in water (Fig. 41).268
 Fig. 41  Ruthenium nanoparticle-decorated porous organic network for direct hydrodeoxygenation of long-chain fatty acids to alkanes. Adapted with permission from ref. 268 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Mondal's group also reported a N-rich porous organic polymer-anchored bimetallic Cu–Pd nanoalloy that exhibited superior catalytic activity with improved stability for biomass-derived selective hydrodeoxygenation of vanillin (Fig. 42).269 In particular, bimetallic Pd–Cu nanocatalysts composed of Cu3Pd@BBA-1 exhibited the highest catalytic activity towards a vanillin conversion of 99.3% with exclusive selectivity (93.6%) for the hydrogenolysis product 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol.
 Fig. 42  Schematic illustration showing the CuPd bimetallic nanoalloy supported POP catalyst and its selective catalysis for hydrodeoxygenation of biomass-derived vanillin. Adapted with permission from ref. 269 Copyright © 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Mondal and coworkers have also developed a highly active, robust, and selective porous organic polymer encapsulated magnetically retrievable Pd–Fe3O4 nanohybrid catalyst in a one-step solvothermal route and investigated its catalytic performance in levulinic acid (LA) hydrogenation, a key platform molecule in many biorefinery schemes, to γ-valerolactone (GVL), employing formic acid as a sustainable H2 source (Fig. 43).270 It was found that the nanohybrid Pd–Fe3O4/PPTPA-1 catalyst exhibited a substantially enhanced activity in comparison with the monometallic catalysts (Pd/PPTPA-1 and Fe3O4/PPTPA-1). Evidence of the electronic interaction between Pd and Fe attributable to the intrinsic hybrid synergistic effect was thought to be responsible for this superior catalytic performance and improvement in catalyst stability. The recycling experiments revealed that the magnetic nanohybrid catalyst sustained remarkable recycling efficiency and magnetism after being used in 10 successive catalytic runs, which made Pd–Fe3O4/PPTPA-1 a potential catalyst for the production of GVL in industry. Therefore, these results suggest that designing a polymer-anchored bimetallic catalyst with superior stability is an important factor for the improvement of activity in catalytic bio-fuel upgrading.
 Fig. 43  Magnetic nanohybrid decorated porous organic polymer: synergistic catalyst for high performance Levulinic acid hydrogenation. Adapted with permission from ref. 270 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Pradhan, Mondal and coworkers have successfully constructed a CoSx@POP robust nanohybrid comprising only earth-abundant elements by a facile two-step chemical synthesis: selective and homogeneous growth of Co3O4 nanoparticles on a N-rich POP framework surface by hydrolysis of cobalt acetate, followed by sulfidation of Co3O4 to CoSx with hydrothermal treatment. The obtained CoSx@POP nanohybrid has been found to serve as a remarkable photoelectrocatalyst in HER (Fig. 44).271 The intrinsic synergistic effect of CoSx and POP leads to the formation of a unique CoSx@POP nanoarchitecture with high porosity, which facilitates easy diffusion of the electrolyte and efficient electron transfer from POP to CoSx during hydrogen generation with the tunable band gap that may contribute to the high PEC activity of this material.
 Fig. 44  Schematic illustration of the sequential synthesis of the CoSX@POP hybrid material employed as a photoelectrocatalyst in water splitting. Adapted with permission from ref. 271 Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Meanwhile, Sinha, Mondal and coworkers also successfully designed a novel MnFe2O4− porous organic polymer (POP) nanocomposite that exhibited photocatalytic performance in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) from pure water without addition of any sacrificial agent under one AM 1.5 G sunlight illumination.272 The efficient photocatalysis for the HER with the newly designed architecture with POP involves the following main advantages: (1) use of earth abundant elements; (2) an easily scalable and cost-effective synthetic method has been utilized; and (3) a photocatalytic water splitting experiment has been performed without addition of any sacrificial agent and any noble-metal cocatalyst. The remarkable photocatalytic efficiency of the nanocomposites could be attributed to the intrinsic synergistic effect of the spinel crystal with POP leading to the reduction of the chances of electron–hole recombination upon photo-excitement of the photocatalyst. The work on metallopolymers could encourage further research for designing of novel porous-organic–polymer encapsulated noble-metal-free spinel complex oxides for advanced catalytic applications in photocatalytic water splitting and energy storage.
4. Sustainable biomedical materials
Metallopolymers are promising nanomedicine platforms featuring biodegradability and versatile functionalities providing multiple methodologies and applications in healthcare science. However, multi-step post-synthesis surface modification is usually required to functionalize as-made metallopolymers before their biomedical applications. New nanomaterials and advanced nanotechnologies continue to promote the fast development of new approaches for efficient tumor therapy. Different aspects of biomedical applications are embedded in numerous excellent reviews on metal-containing polymers.30–34
More promising metallopolymers showing healthcare applications have emerged since Tang's review31 on metal-containing and related polymers for biomedical applications. Here a survey of the most recent progress in the healthcare applications of metallopolymers is given. Due to the unique optical, electrochemical, and magnetic properties, at least 30 different metal elements, most of them transition metals, have been introduced into polymeric frameworks for interactions with biology-relevant substrates via various means. According to their different applications, this review summarizes the following aspects: (1) metallopolymers as anticancer drugs; (2) metallopolymers as antimicrobial and antiviral agents; (3) metallopolymers for bioimaging; (4) metallopolymers as biosensors; (5) metal-containing polymers as drug delivery vehicles; and (6) photodynamic metallopolymers.
4.1 Metallopolymers as anticancer drugs
Platinum-based anticancer drugs are the mainstay of clinical chemotherapy regimens (Fig. 45).273 Nevertheless, the efficacy of platinum drugs is badly affected by serious systemic toxicities and drug resistance, and the pharmacokinetics of most platinum drugs is largely unknown. The design of platinum-containing metallopolymers is an emerging strategy that has been explored to significantly enhance performance, specifically to address relevant questions of many conventional therapeutics and prophylactics.
 Fig. 45  (A) General procedure for self-assembly of NCPs with lipid and PEG coatings. (B) Proposed uptake pathways of NCPs and the mechanism of action. Adapted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright © 2014, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
Lin's group contributes excellent work on nanoscale coordination polymers (NCPs) self-assembled from metal ions and organic bridging ligands. These metallopolymers overcame many of the drawbacks of existing drug delivery systems by virtue of tunable compositions, sizes and shapes, high drug loadings, ease of surface modification and intrinsic biodegradability.
For example, the self-assembly of new zinc bisphosphonate NCPs that carry 48 ± 3 wt% cisplatin prodrug and 45 ± 5 wt% oxaliplatin prodrug was reported by Lin and coworkers (Fig. 46).274In vivo pharmacokinetic studies in mice showed minimal uptake of PEGylated NCPs by the mononuclear phagocyte system and excellent blood circulation half-lives of 16.4 ± 2.9 and 12.0 ± 3.9h for the NCPs carrying cisplatin and oxaliplatin, respectively. In all tumor xenograft models evaluated, including CT26 colon cancer, H460 lung cancer and AsPC-1 pancreatic cancer, PEGylated NCPs showed superior potency and efficacy compared with free drugs.
 Fig. 46  Preparation and characterization of NCP-1/siRNAs. (A) Schematic representation of NCP-1/siRNAs carrying cisplatin in the solid core and siRNAs in the lipid shell. (B) TEM image of NCP-1/siRNAs showing the spherical and monodispersed nanostructure. Bar = 100 nm. (C) siRNA release from NCP-1/siRNAs in the presence or absence of reducing agents. (D) Improved siRNA stability in serum of NCP-1/siRNAs compared to free siRNA and DSPE-siRNA conjugate as evaluated by electrophoresis (2% agarose gel). “M” stands for untreated siRNA marker. Adapted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Drug resistance impedes the successful treatment of many types of cancers, especially ovarian cancer (OCa). To counter this problem, Lin and coworkers developed new long-circulating, self-assembled core–shell nanoscale coordination polymer (NCP) nanoparticles that efficiently deliver multiple therapeutics with different mechanisms of action to enhance synergistic therapeutic effects.275 These NCP particles contain high payloads of chemotherapeutics cisplatin or cisplatin plus gemcitabine in the core and pooled siRNAs that target multidrug resistant (MDR) genes in the shell. Even at low doses, intraperitoneal injections of nanoparticles led to effective and long-lasting tumor regression/eradication in subcutaneous and intraperitoneal xenograft mouse models of cisplatin-resistant OCa.
Due to the ability of ovarian cancer (OCa) to acquire drug resistance, it has been difficult to develop efficient and safe chemotherapy for OCa. The therapeutic use of a new self-assembled core–shell nanoscale coordination polymer nanoparticle (NCP-Carbo/GMP) that delivered high loadings of carboplatin (28.0 ± 2.6 wt%) and gemcitabine monophosphate (8.6 ± 1.5 wt%) was also examined (Fig. 47).276 A strong synergistic effect was observed between carboplatin and gemcitabine against platinum-resistant OCa cells, SKOV-3 and A2780/CDPP, in vitro. The coadministration of carboplatin and gemcitabine in the NCP led to a prolonged blood circulation half-life (11.8 ± 4.8 h) and improved tumor uptake of the drugs (10.2 ± 4.4% ID g−1 at 24 h), resulting in 71% regression and 80% growth inhibition of SKOV-3 and A2780/CDDP tumors, respectively. Their findings demonstrated that NCP particles provided great potential for the codelivery of multiple chemotherapeutics for treating drug-resistant cancer.
 Fig. 47  (A) Schematic of NCP-Carbo/GMP. (B) Number-average size distribution of NCP-Carbo/GMP particles. Bare and lipid coated particles were measured in THF and PBS, respectively. (C) TEM micrographs of NCP-Carbo/GMP. Scale bar = 100 nm. Right: Subcutaneous SKOV-3 xenografts: (D) in vivo tumor growth inhibition. Carbo (dose, 10 mg kg−1) and gemcitabine (4.6 mg kg−1) and NCP-Carbo/GMP (doses, 10 mg kg−1 and 4.6 mg kg−1) were administered on days 0, 3, and 6. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5). (E) End-point tumor weights. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5). Subcutaneous A2780/CDDP xenografts: (F) in vivo tumor growth inhibition. Carbo (dose, 10 mg kg−1) and gemcitabine (4.6 mg kg−1) and NCP-Carbo/GMP (doses, 10 mg kg−1 and 4.6 mg kg−1) were administered on days 0, 3, and 6. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5). (G) End-point tumor weights. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5), p < 0.001. Adapted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
More recently, Chen and coworkers discovered a general strategy to synthesize a series of polyethylene glycol (PEG) modified NCPs via a one-step method by adding poly-histidine-PEG co-polymer into the mixture of metal ions and organic ligands during NCP formation (Fig. 48).277 With NCPs consisting of Ca2+/dicarboxylic cisplatin(IV) prodrug as the example, Ca/Pt(IV)@pHis-PEG NCPs were highly sensitive to pH changes. With slightly negative charges and compact structure under pH 7.4 during blood circulation, those NCPs exhibit efficient passive accumulation in the tumor, in which the reduced pH (ca. 6.5) would trigger charge conversion and size expansion to enhance their tumor retention and cell internationalization. After cellular uptake, NCPs within cell endo-/lysosomes with further reduced pH would then lead to decomposition of those NCPs and thus drug release. Chemotherapy with Ca/Pt(IV)@pHis-PEG NCPs in the animal tumor model demonstrated great efficacy under low drug doses, and was found to be particularly effective towards solid tumors with reduced pH.
 Fig. 48  The scheme illustrating the one-pot synthesis of PEGylated nanoscale coordination polymers (NCP-PEG) and their application for TME-responsive anticancer therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
Wu and coworkers demonstrated the use of self-assembled nanostructures consisting of red light-responsive Ru(II)-containing block copolymers (BCPs) for anticancer phototherapy (Fig. 49).278 Three Ru-containing BCPs with different molecular weights were synthesized. Each BCP contains a hydrophilic poly(ethylene glycol) block and an Ru-containing block. In the Ru-containing block, more than half of the side chains were coordinated with [Ru(2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine) (2,2′-biquinoline)]2+, resulting in more than 40 wt% Ru complex in the BCPs. Depending on their molecular weights, the BCPs assemble into micelles, vesicles, and large compound micelles. All of the BCP assemblies were taken up by the cancer cells. Red light irradiation released the Ru complex and generated singlet oxygen (1O2) in cancer cells. The released Ru complex and 1O2 inhibited the growth of cancer cells.
 Fig. 49  (A) Chemical structures of red-light-responsive Ru-containing block copolymers (BCPs). Red-light irradiation releases the Ru complex and generates singlet oxygen (1O2). P1, P2, and P3 are BCPs with different molecular weights. (B) Schematic illustration of self-assembly of Ru-containing BCPs. P1, P2, and P3 self-assemble into micelles, hollow spheres, and large compound micelles, which exhibit morphology-dependent cellular uptake and anticancer performance. Adapted with permission from ref. 278. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
There are other examples of applications of supramolecular polymeric chemosensors for biomedical applications. Chow designed and synthesized a luminescent zinc metallopolymer as a chemosensor for adenine detection.279 Winnik, Reilly and coworkers modified panitumumab with a new MCP that presented multiple DOTA chelators enabling stable and efficient complexation of 111In or 177Lu, which was an EGFR-targeted theranostic for pancreatic cancer.280
4.2 Metallopolymers as antimicrobial and antiviral agents
Antimicrobial resistance threatens the achievements of science and medicine, as it deactivates conventional antimicrobial therapeutics. Scientists respond to the threat by developing new antimicrobial platforms to prevent and treat infections from these resistant strains. Metal-based antimicrobial macromolecules are emerging as an alternative to conventional platforms because they combine multiple mechanisms of action into one platform due to the distinctive properties of metals. For example, metals interact with intracellular proteins and enzymes, and catalyze various intracellular processes. Recent advances demonstrate the potential of metal-based antimicrobial macromolecules as effective platforms that prevent and treat infections from resistant strains (Fig. 50).281–286
 Fig. 50  Antimicrobial organometallic dendrimers with tunable activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria. Adapted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Bacterial infections have become a serious threat to global healthcare due to the diminishing effectiveness of existing antibiotics. Inappropriate and frequent use of antibiotics has led to the development of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, which cause infectious diseases that are difficult to treat. With the rising threat of antibiotic resistance, the need to develop effective new antimicrobial agents is prominent.
Wang, Mao and coworkers synthesized a series of quaternary ammonium (Qa) or imidazolium (Im) cation-based poly(ionic liquid) (PIL) membranes and their corresponding zinc ion-coordinated PIL membranes (Fig. 51).287 The Zn-containing PIL membranes showed higher antibacterial activities compared to pristine PIL membranes due to the synergistic attributes of both organic cations (Qa or Im) and zinc atoms. A wound healing test using a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infected mouse as the model further demonstrated that zinc ion-coordinated PIL membranes were antibacterially active, biologically safe, and may have potential application as an antimicrobial wound dressing in a clinical setting.
 Fig. 51  Zinc ion coordinated poly(ionic liquid) antimicrobial membranes for wound healing. Adapted with permission from ref. 287. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Tang and coworkers reported a nontraditional therapy, in which boronic acid adheres to peptidoglycan or lipopolysaccharide via boron-polyol based boronolectin chemistry, cationic metal polymer frameworks interact with negatively charged cell membranes, and β-lactam antibiotics were reinstated with enhanced vitality to attack bacteria via evading the detrimental enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis (Fig. 52).288 These macromolecular systems exhibited high efficacy in combating pathogenic bacteria, especially Gram-negative strains. In vitro and in vivo cytotoxicity and hemolysis evaluation indicated that these multifunctional copolymers did not induce cell death by apoptosis, as well as not altering the phenotypes of immune cells and did not show observable toxic effects on red blood cells.
 Fig. 52  (A) Preparation of cationic cobaltocenium-containing organogels (PCoPF6-Gel) via copolymerization of CoAEMAPF6 and PEGDMA. (B) Preparation of a chloride-paired hydrogel (PCoCl-Gel) from the organogel PCoPF6-Gel via ion-exchange with tetrabutylammonium chloride (TBACl). (C) Solid state 31P NMR spectra of organogel PCoPF6-Gel, hydrogel PCoCl-Gel and sodium hexafluorophosphate (NaPF6, as a reference). (D) Illustration of synergistic antimicrobial mechanisms of multifunctional macromolecules against Gram-negative bacteria via a trio Act of boronolectin chemistry on lipopolysaccharide, electrostatic attraction between cationic metal and negatively charged membrane, and reinstated antibiotic targeting on peptidoglycan. Adapted with permission from ref. 288. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Antimicrobial metallopolymer nanoparticles were prepared by surface-initiated reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer polymerization of a cobaltocenium containing methacrylate monomer from silica nanoparticles (Fig. 53).289 Disk diffusion assays showed significantly increased antibacterial activities against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. The improved efficiencies were attributed to the inhibition of hydrolysis of the β-lactam antibiotics and enhancement of the local antibiotics’ concentration on a nanoparticle surface. In addition, hemolysis evaluations demonstrated minimal toxicity to red blood cells.
 Fig. 53  Charged metallopolymer-grafted silica nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications. Adapted with permission from ref. 289. Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Development of surface coatings with high antimicrobial activity is also urgently required to fight bacteria and other microorganisms on technical and hygiene relevant surfaces. Control over structure and topology of the surface coatings, combined with the ability to include functional molecules within the structure, is crucial for optimizing their performance.
Tsotsalas and coworkers described a new strategy to synthesize structurally well-defined porphyrin polymer thin films via a template approach in which bisazido-functionalized porphyrin molecules were preorganized within a metal–organic framework (MOF) structure.290 Afterward, porphyrin units within the MOF were covalently connected via a secondary linker. Removal of the metal ions of the MOF resulted in water-stable porphyrin polymer thin films that demonstrated high antibacterial activity against pathogens via visible-light promoted generation of reactive oxygen species. With the rising threat of antibiotic resistance, the research to develop effective new antimicrobial agents is productive for many groups.291–300
4.3 Photoactive and magnetic metallopolymers for bioimaging
Metallopolymers have been extensively studied as new imaging probes in the field of biomedical imaging. For example, quantum dots have been used as optical imaging agents, whereas superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles have been used as contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). As hybrid materials, metallopolymers were tailored to function as contrast agents for many imaging modalities, including MRI, CT, and optical imaging (OI).301
Nanoscale metal–organic particles (NMOPs) are constructed from metal ions and organic bridging ligands via the self-assembly process. Yang et al. fabricated NMOPs composed of Mn2+ and a near-infrared (NIR) dye, IR825, obtaining Mn-IR825 NMOPs, which were then coated with a shell of polydopamine (PDA) and further functionalized with polyethylene glycol (PEG) (Fig. 54).302 Upon intravenous injection, Mn-IR825@PDA–PEG showed efficient tumor homing together with rapid renal excretion behaviors, as revealed by MR imaging and confirmed by biodistribution measurement. Notably, when irradiated with an 808 nm laser, tumors on mice with Mn-IR825@PDA–PEG injection are eliminated without recurrence within 60 days, demonstrating the high efficacy of photothermal therapy with this agent. Their study demonstrated the use of NMOPs as a potential photothermal agent, which features excellent tumor-targeted imaging and therapeutic functions, together with rapid clearance, the latter of which would be particularly important for future clinical translation of nanomedicine.
 Fig. 54  Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of Mn-IR825@PDA–PEG and the nanoscale metal–organic particles with rapid clearance for magnetic resonance imaging-guided photothermal therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Zhao and coworkers reported two metallopolymers (Pt–P and Pd–P) through coupling of PtII or PdII porphyrin with fluorene derivatives (Fig. 55).303 Nanoprobes based on Pt–P and Pd–P for bioimaging of HeLa cancer cells were explored. The biological experimental results showed that Pt–P NPs exhibited good biocompatibility and specificity to HeLa cancer cells due to favorable NP size. Subsequent fluorescence imaging ability of Pt–P and Pd–P NPs was studied in HeLa cells with confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). HeLa cells treated with Pt–P NPs clearly revealed the blue and red fluorescence derived from fluorene and porphyrin moieties, respectively. These results indicated that Pt–P NPs were efficiently internalized into tumors.
 Fig. 55  Structure and photoactivity of porphyrin-based Pt/Pd-containing metallopolymers Pt–P and Pd–P. Confocal luminescence imaging (λex = 405 nm) of the HeLa cells incubated with (A and B) Pt–P NPs and (C and D) Pd–P NPs collected at wavelengths of 420–480 nm and 620–680 nm, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 303. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
Pang and coworkers prepared a monodispersed nanometalated covalent organic polymer (MCOP, M = Fe, Gd) with sizes around 120 nm by a self-templated two step solution-phase synthesis method (Fig. 56).304 The metal ions (Fe3+, Gd3+) were believed to play important roles in generating a small particle size and in the functionalization of the products during the reaction with p-phenylenediamine (Pa). The authors used the resultant Fe–Pa complex as a template for the subsequent formation of MCOP following the Schiff base reaction with 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp). They found high tumor suppression efficiency for this Pa-based COP. This study demonstrated the potential use of MCOP as a photothermal agent for photothermal therapy (PTT) and provided an alternative route to fabricate nano-sized MCOPs.
 Fig. 56  Illustration for the formation and biomedical application of metalated covalent organic polymers (MCOP). Adapted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Polymer-modified metal–organic frameworks combine the advantages of both soft polymers and crystalline metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). It is a big challenge to develop simple methods for surface modification of MOFs.
Xie and coworkers reported a UiO-66 core with various sizes that acts as a heterogeneous nucleation center and enables aniline polymerization under ambient conditions (Fig. 57A).305 UiO-66@PAN is internalized by cancer cells via endocytosis, and exhibits significant photothermal therapeutic effect in vitro, and can effectively inhibit the growth of colon cancers in vivo. Xie, Wang and co-workers also prepared another new metal–organic frameworks@polymer composite (UiO-66@CyP) with bioimaging and PTT activity by introducing a cyanine-containing polymer (CyP) via a multicomponent Passerini reaction in the presence of Zr-based nanoscale metal–organic frameworks (UiO-66) (Fig. 57B).306 UiO-66@CyP appears to be an excellent phototherapy agent for ablation of tumor cells under low-power laser irradiation and a near-infrared fluorescence imaging agent. Soon later, Xie and coworkers synthesized MOF@microporous organic polymer (MOP) hybrid nanoparticles (UNP) by epitaxial growth of luminescent boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPYs)-imine MOPs on the surface of UiO-MOF seeds, which exhibited low cytotoxicity, smaller size distribution, well-retained pore integrity, and available functional sites. After folic acid grafting, the enhanced intracellular uptake and bioimaging was validated.307 Their work might open up a new avenue to develop multifunctional composites by integrating metal–organic frameworks with carboxyl, aldehyde, and isocyano-containing materials.
 Fig. 57  (A) Nanoscale polymer metal–organic framework hybrids for effective photothermal therapy of colon cancers. Adapted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Metal–organic frameworks@polymer composites containing cyanines for near-infrared fluorescence imaging and photothermal tumor therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Magnetofection has received increasing attention for its great potential on gene therapy. To promote its clinical therapeutic applications, development of safe and effective magnetic nanocarriers is in high demand.
Chang and coworkers presented a redox-sensitive polymer/metal nanocomplex system (PSPIO) for efficient magnetofection and magnet resonance imaging (MRI) on cancer cells (Fig. 58).308 PSPIO efficiently condensed plasmid DNA (pDNA) into nanoparticles, which exhibited several favorable properties for gene delivery, including protection of nucleic acids from enzymatic degradation, stable colloids in serum, and redox responsive pDNA release. As a potential MR imaging agent, PSPIO displayed good magnetization (28.3 emu g−1) and dose-dependent T2-weighted imaging contrast (R2 = 291.1 s−1 mM−1) in vitro. In vitro transfection efficiency of PSPIO was significantly enhanced under an external magnetic field and possesses great potential for cancer gene therapy and molecular imaging.
 Fig. 58  Redox-sensitive polymer/SPIO nanocomplexes for efficient magnetofection and MR imaging of human cancer cells. Adapted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the wide and practical applications, meaningful research on photoactive and magnetic metallopolymers for bioimaging has been quite productive for many groups in the past decade.309–311
4.4 Metallopolymers as biosensors
Metallopolymers combine the processing advantages of polymers with the functionality offered by the metal centers.312–316 Here we will outline the progress and recent developments in the area of electrochemical chemo/biosensors that are based on metallopolymers. We will focus on materials in which the metal centers provide the functionality, allowing these materials to be used in electrochemical sensing applications based on various transduction mechanisms.
Sun, Zhang and coworkers prepared multicompartment vesicles of ferrocene-containing triblock terpolymer containing on–off switchable pores in the vesicular membrane by seeded RAFT polymerization (Fig. 59).317 In these multicompartment vesicles, the incompatible solvophobic poly(4-vinylbenzyl ferrocenecarboxylate) (PVFC) and poly(benzyl methacrylate) (PBzMA) blocks form the porous phase-segregated membrane and the solvophilic poly[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate] block locates at the inner and outer sides of the membrane. These porous multicompartment vesicles are redox-responsive and the membrane pores are on–off switched through redox triggering. These porous multicompartment vesicles are deemed to be new nanoassemblies of ABC triblock terpolymers and are anticipated to be a smart host to load and release guests.
 Fig. 59  Synthesis of the porous multicompartment vesicles of the PDMAEMA-b-PBzMA-b-PVFC triblock terpolymer by seeded RAFT polymerization and the schematic on–off switch of the membrane pores of the multicompartment vesicles through oxidation/reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Another redox-responsive poly(ferrocenylsilane) (PFS) was used to construct nanocontainers that were loaded with hydrophobic cargo by a miniemulsion approach. Wurn and coworkers reported structures comprising a solid shell surrounding a liquid oil core and have diameters of approximately 470 nm with a shell thickness of ca. 29 nm (Fig. 60).318 Electrochemical oxidation and the thereby caused change of container morphology are shown. Hydrophobic molecules (Nile red and 2-propylpyiridine) are loaded into the nanocontainers and can be released upon oxidation of the shell material. The oxidation is achieved chemically by the addition of hydrogen peroxide or by the enzymatic oxidation of glucose to release 2-propylpyridine over a period.
 Fig. 60  Stimulus-responsive release of hydrophobic molecules from poly(ferrocenylsilane) nanocontainers. Adapted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
The swelling–shrinking transition of metallopolymer-containing hydrogels is crucial for their wide applications such as in actuators and drug delivery. Wang and coworkers fabricated a smart hydrogel with ferrocene groups on the pendant of polymer networks (Fig. 61).319 While it was immersed in a water-soluble pillar[6]arene (WP6) aqueous solution, the hydrogel was dramatically swollen, which was an approximately 11-fold promotion in weight compared with that in pure water, due to the formation of the inclusion complexes between WP6 and ferrocene groups in the hydrogel. In particular, the well-swollen hydrogel exhibited good responsiveness to multiple stimuli including temperature, pH, redox, and competitive guests by tuning the dissociation/formation of WP6–ferrocene inclusion complexes or the strength of their charges.
 Fig. 61  Structures of polymer networks G1, WP6, MP, and doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX·HCl). Illustration of the dramatically promoted swelling of G1c by WP6–ferrocene host–guest interactions, and the subsequent pH-responsive swelling–shrinking transition and application in controlled drug (DOX·HCl) release. Adapted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Xu, Fu and coworkers proposed a method for regulating biomolecule immobilization performance of metal–organic coordination polymers (MOCPs) through pre-coordination for highly sensitive biosensing (Fig. 62).320 MOCPsCu+Au showed several advantages including improved mass transfer efficiency and biocatalytic sensitivity compared with conventional MOCPs using single metal ions. Glucose oxidase (GOx) was used as the representative biomolecule; the entrapment ratio of enzyme in the MOCPsCu+Au case reached an extreme value of 100%. These MOCPsCu+Au biocomposite modified electrodes also showed greatly enhanced biocatalytic sensitivity (127 mA cm−2 mM−1) and very low detection limit (58 nM), compared with those of reported analogues. The new materials/strategy may create new avenues to regulate the performance of ligand-constructed polymers and their composites for entrapment-based applications.
 Fig. 62  Illustration of the preparation of MOCPsCu and MOCPsCu+Au. SEM pictures of MOCPsCu+Au. The chronoamperometric responses to successive additions of glucose obtained in PBS (pH 7.0) at 0.7 V vs. SCE for MOCPsCu (1), MOCPsAu(2), and MOCPsCu+Au (3) modified Au electrodes fabricated under optimized conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
Gai and coworkers constructed a label-free visual platform Cu–GMP CPNs based on the horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-like activity of the new metal coordination polymer nanoparticles formed between Cu2+ and guanosine monophosphate (GMP) and successfully utilized it for both self-correcting logic gate construction and sensitive biosensing (Fig. 63).321
 Fig. 63  (A) Absorbance at 652 nm of the H2O2–TMB system in the presence of different metal–GMP CPNs at pH 7.0; the inset shows the photographs of the corresponding reaction solution. (B) FT-IR spectra of (a) GMP powder and (b) Cu–GMP CPN powder. (C) Cu2p XPS spectrum of Cu–GMP CPNs. (D) TEM image of Cu–GMP CPNs. (E) Schematic illustration of Cu–GMP CPN formation through the coordination between Cu2+ and GMP. Adapted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.5 Metallopolymers for drug delivery
The redox-activity of metallopolymers has been increasingly harnessed to address needs in drug delivery in recent years.322–325
Metallopolymers amplified the radioactivity delivered to cancer cells by monoclonal antibodies or their Fab fragments. Winnik, Reilly and coworkers reported the synthesis and characterization of a biotin (Bi) end-capped metallopolymer Bi-PAm(DET-DTPA)36 and compared its behavior in vivo and in vitro to a similar one with ethylenediamine (EDA) pendant groups (Bi-PAm(EDA-DTPA)40) (Fig. 64).326 These metallopolymers were complexed to a streptavidin-modified Fab fragment of tmAb, then labeled with 111In to specifically deliver multiple copies of 111In to HER2+ cancer cells. Upon decay, 111In emits γ-rays that were used in single-photon emission computed tomography radioimaging, as well as Auger electrons that cause lethal double strand breakage of DNA. The researchers concluded that zwitterionic metallopolymers represented a much better choice than polymers with charges along the backbone for in vivo delivery of RICs to HER2+ cancer cells.
 Fig. 64  Metal-chelating polymers (MCPs) with zwitterionic pendant groups complexed to trastuzumab exhibit decreased liver accumulation compared to polyanionic MCP immunoconjugates. Adapted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The development of efficient multiresponsive drug delivery systems (DDSs) to control drug release has been widely explored.
Yuan and coworkers developed a method for fabricating a taste-masked oral drug delivery system (DDS) that regulated the release of unpleasant drug taste via the change in pH value in the physiological environment of the alimentary canal (Fig. 65).327 In this drug delivery system, a pH-sensitive metal–organic coordination polymer (CP), Fe–4,4′-bipyridine (Fe–bipy) complex, works as a taste-masker. The pH sensitive Fe–bipy was grafted onto the mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) containing the model bitter drug mequindox (MEQ) in its mesopores through metal–organic coordination cross-linking, resulting in the CP-coated nanodrug MSN-NH2-MEQ@Fe–bipy. In artificial saliva (pH 6.6), Fe–4,4′-bipyridine CPs effectively prevent the leaking of the loaded guest molecule MEQ. On the other hand, in artificial gastric fluid (pH 1.0), the coordination bonds of the Fe–4,4′-bipyridine complex were broken, leading to the release of MEQ molecules from MSN-NH2-MEQ@Fe–bipy.
 Fig. 65  Schematic illustration of the working protocol for the taste masking drug based on physiological pH-responsive release of the unpleasant-tasting drug from mesoporous silica nanoparticles capped with a metal–organic coordination shell. Adapted with permission from ref. 327. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lago and coworkers prepared a series of new zinc compounds easily under mild synthetic conditions with the drug ibuprofen incorporated as a ligand to form different coordination polymers (Fig. 66).328 The host materials have a high drug content and exhibit high stability, low cytotoxicity, good biodegradability and high biocompatibility. They uncovered the ion exchange mechanism involved in the ibuprofen release process and the pH-controlled drug release.
 Fig. 66  The Zn-containing metallopolymeric system capable of stimuli-responsive controlled release of the drug ibuprofen. Adapted with permission from ref. 328. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Huang, Huo, Xu and coworkers reported a method that enables the micelles of a selenium-containing polymer with the drug to be encapsulated in metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) (Fig. 67).329 In this case, the micelles of selenium-containing polymers, as the core, easily disassemble in the presence of redox agents, then release the drug in MOF matrixes. In the presence of external redox agents as well as the pH stimuli, the prepared nanocomposite (P@ZIF-8) drug system exhibited the capability of multiresponsive release of doxorubicin (DOX) and possessed good selectivity in releasing DOX under low pH conditions instead of normal pH conditions.
 Fig. 67  Schematic representation of the synthetic procedures of the P@ZIF-8 nanocomposites as a DDS for the loading and multiresponsive release of DOX. HMeIM: 2-methylimidazolate. Adapted with permission from ref. 329. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Functional drug carrier systems have the potential for increasing the solubility and potency of drugs while reducing side effects. Complex polymeric materials, particularly anisotropic structures, are especially attractive due to their long circulation times.
More recently, Jolliffe, Perrier and coworkers have conjugated cyclic peptides to the biocompatible polymer poly(2-hydroxypropyl methacrylamide) (pHPMA) (Fig. 68).330 The resulting conjugates were functionalized with organoiridium anticancer complexes. Small angle neutron scattering and static light scattering confirmed the self-assembly and elongated cylindrical shape of these conjugates. Drug-loaded nanotubes exhibited more potent antiproliferative activity toward human cancer cells than either free drug or the drug-loaded polymers, while the nanotubes themselves were nontoxic. Cellular accumulation studies revealed that the increased potency of the conjugate appears to be related to a more efficient mode of action rather than a higher cellular accumulation of iridium.
 Fig. 68  Antiproliferative activity in A2780 cells: IC50 values for free organoiridium complexes (purple), drug-bearing polymers (blue), and drug-bearing conjugates (gray). Adapted with permission from ref. 330. Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 
4.6 Photodynamic metallopolymers
As an alternative choice to various traditional therapies, non-invasive photothermal therapy (PTT) has attracted significant attention, mainly due to its low cost, highly localizing, specific tumor treatment and minimal side effects on healthy tissues. PTT was induced by photo-absorbing agents that can absorb and convert the external NIR laser into heat to ablate tumors.
Maggioni and coworkers synthesized a polymer complex (1P) by binding bis(cyclometalated) Ir(ppy)2+ fragments (ppy = 2-phenylpyridyl) to phenanthroline (phen) pendants of a poly-(amidoamine) copolymer (Fig. 69).331 The corresponding molecular complex [Ir(ppy)2(bap)]+ (1M, bap = 4-(butyl-4-amino)-1,10-phenanthroline) was also prepared for comparison. Photoreaction of O2 with 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene showed that 1P was able to sensitize 1O2 generation. Cellular photodynamic therapy tests showed that both 1M and 1P were able to induce cell apoptosis upon exposure to Xe lamp irradiation. The fraction of apoptotic cells for 1M was higher than that for 1P (74 and 38%, respectively) 6 h after being irradiated for 5 min, but cells incubated with 1P showed much lower levels of necrosis as well as lower toxicity in the absence of irradiation. These results indicated that cell damage induced by 1M was avoided by binding the iridium sensitizers to the poly(amidoamine).
 Fig. 69  The luminescent poly(amidoamine)–iridium complex as a new singlet-oxygen sensitizer for photodynamic therapy and percentages of dead cells resulting from apoptotic or necrotic events upon PDT treatments (6 h after being irradiated for 5 min) in control samples and samples sensitized by 1M or 1P. Adapted with permission from ref. 331. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Wang, Xie and coworkers synthesized a nanoscale metal–organic framework (MOF)@POP composite, named UNM, by epitaxial growth of the photoactive porphyrin-POPs (H2P-POP) on the outer surface of amine containing UiO-66 (UiO-AM) (Fig. 70).332 After the growth of POPs, the crystallization, pore structure, and size distribution of UNM were well retained. The formed UNM possessed a small size of less than 200 nm and were internalized by cancer cells. Such light-activated UNMs exhibited efficient ability to generate 1O2 under various experimental conditions that were further applied for PDT efficacy. Their work demonstrated the great potential of nanoscale porous polymers in biomedical fields and cancer treatment.
 Fig. 70  Metal–organic framework@porous organic polymer nanocomposite for photodynamic therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Wang and coworkers reported the one-step self-assembly preparation of multifunctional gadolinium (Gd)–ytterbium (Yb) mixed-metal nanoscale coordination polymers (NCPs) with Ru[4,4′-(COOH)2bpy]32+ (LRu, bpy = bipyridyl) as a ligand. The Gd/Yb ratio in the NCPs is easily tuned by their ratio in the precursors while the self-limiting growth was realized with the high coordination valence and rigid steric structure of the precursors (Fig. 71).333In vivo fluorescence-MR-X-ray computed tomography (CT), triple-modality imaging and photodynamic therapy (PDT) were achieved using the mixed-metal NCPs as a probe. The triple-modality imaging integrates the high sensitivity of red fluorescence imaging, the deep penetration of MR imaging, and the 3D spatial resolution of CT imaging, thus providing comprehensive and complementary imaging information and facilitating the efficient imaging-guided PDT.
 Fig. 71  The construction of multifunctional mixed metal NCPs with ligand LRu, Gd3+ and Yb3+ for fluorescence-MR-CT triple modality imaging guided therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 333. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yang and coworkers prepared water-soluble polymer nanoparticles NP-1 and NP-2 by using a three-component self-assembly of an iridium complex, poly(4-vinyl pyridine-b-ethylene oxide) (P4VP-b-PEO), and methane sulfonic acid (MSA) (Fig. 72).334 Due to the unique metal–ligand charge-transfer transition property and the heavy-atom effect of the iridium atom, NP-1 and NP-2 showed bright phosphorescence and generated the singlet oxygen (1O2) species effectively under visible-light irradiation (l > 400 nm) with a power density of 300 mW cm−2. NP-2, an example of the polymer nanoparticles, showed minimal cytotoxic activity in the dark. Laser confocal fluorescence and flow-cytometry microscopy experiments demonstrated that NP-2 was taken up by a model cancer-cell line of 4T1 cells, which were used as a phosphorescent probe for cell imaging by preferentially staining the cytoplasm. After 6 hours of incubation with NP-2 (100 μg mL−1), the cell viability of 4T1 cells decreased to approximately 10% upon visible-light irradiation (l > 400 nm, 300 mW cm−2) only for 10 minutes as a result of the generation of the 1O2 species, thus indicating a proof of concept for effective photodynamic therapy for cancer cells.
 Fig. 72  Schematic diagrams of the (A) synthesis and (B) three-component self-assembly and phosphorescent imaging/photodynamic therapy for cancer cells. Adapted with permission from ref. 334. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5. Sustainable energy storage and production
Metallopolymers have recently emerged with the ultimate goal of combining the rich magnetic and optical properties of open-shell transition metals with the processability and structural variety of polymeric organic scaffolds. The focus of this section will be on the fundamentals of photophysical processes in the metallopolymers including electrochromic, energy storage, luminescent and emissive, NLO and optical limiter, photosensitizing, photovoltaic, magnetic, sensing and self-healing properties. The examples in the section will be the recently presented metallopolymers in the sustainable energy field which will be a development based on the earlier reviews in this field.37–45
5.1 Electrochromic metallopolymers
The functionalities of the metal center enable intelligent responses to external stimuli, allowing the design of smart materials such as electrochromic materials. Ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) has become available for the formation of living polymers using highly efficient initiators such as the 3rd generation Grubbs catalyst. Astruc and coworkers described two viable pathways to introduce 4 blocks of metallopolymers into a tetrablock metallocopolymer by ROMP and presented the remarkable electrochromic properties of these new nanomaterials (Fig. 73).335
 Fig. 73  Electrochromic activity of the tetrablock copolymer x: reaction of HAuCl4 with x selectively oxidizes its 25Fc* centers to green x[Cl]25 and ligand-stabilized AuCl that disproportionates overnight at RT, finally producing very large globular purple Au nanoparticles with a size of 130 ± 5 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 335. Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Bellemin-Laponnaz, Mauro and coworkers synthesized two new supramolecular metallo-heteropolymers bearing a photoisomerizable telechelic bis-terpyridine ligand and either Fe(II) or Co(II) coordination metal (Fig. 74).336 Judicious choice of the electronic and photophysical properties of both ditopic ligand and metal ion enabled achieving control over the photomechanical response in supramolecular organogels upon UV light irradiation through molecular design.
 Fig. 74  Control of the light-response in supramolecular metallopolymeric gels by tuning the coordination metal. Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhong, Yao and coworkers presented that reductive electropolymerization of the biscyclometalated ruthenium complex [(vtpy)Ru(tpb)Ru(vtpy)]2+ [vtpy = 4′-vinyl-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine; tpb = 1,2,4,5-tetra(2-pyridyl)benzene] proceeded smoothly on electrode surfaces (Fig. 75A).337 The produced adherent metallopolymeric films exhibited near-IR electrochromism with tricolor switching, a good contrast ratio (40% at 1165 nm), short response time, low-switching voltage, and long memory time. Zhong and coworkers also deposited a biscyclometalated ruthenium complex bridged by the 2,7-deprotonated form of 1,3,6,8-tetra(2-pyridyl)pyrene onto indium-tin oxide glass electrodes by reductive electropolymerization (Fig. 75B).338 The resulting metallopolymeric films exhibited also tricolor electrochromic behavior in the near infrared region upon switching of the two well-separated RuII/III processes at low potentials. A good contrast ratio (35%) at 2050 nm and a long memory time up to 100 min were achieved for this electrochromic behavior. More recently, Zhong and coworkers designed and prepared the phen-1,4-diyl-bridged tris-bidentate diruthenium complex 3(PF6)2 with four vinyl substituents. This complex was successfully deposited onto platinum and ITO glass electrodes by reductive electropolymerization. The resulting metallopolymeric films displayed promising electrochromism at the fiber-optic communication wavelength (1300 nm) with low operation potential. A highest contrast ratio of 41% with a coloration efficiency of 200 cm2 C−1 was achieved (Fig. 75C).339
 Fig. 75  (A) Near-IR electrochromism in electropolymerized films of a biscyclometalated ruthenium complex bridged by 1,2,4,5-tetra(2-pyridyl)benzene. Adapted with permission from ref. 337. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (B) Metallopolymeric films based on a biscyclometalated ruthenium complex bridged by 1,3,6,8-tetra(2-pyridyl)pyrene: applications in near-infrared electrochromic windows. Adapted with permission from ref. 338. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (C) Near-infrared electrochromism in electropolymerized metallopolymeric films of a phen-1,4-diyl-bridged diruthenium complex. Adapted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Higuchi and coworkers synthesized a series of Fe/Ru-based bimetallo-supramolecular polymers by a stepwise coordination of Fe(II) and Ru(II) ions to bis(terpyridyl)benzene (Fig. 76).340 The polymers exhibited multi-color electrochromic behavior based on the redox potential of the metal ion. Electrochemical and electrochromic properties of the polymer films were analyzed in acetonitrile with 0.1 M lithium perchlorate as an electrolyte. The polymer films showed high optical contrast and very fast response times, demonstrated by transmittance changes (DT) at 508 and 585 nm that were 68% and 37%, respectively, within a few seconds.
 Fig. 76  Synthesis of metallo-supramolecular polymers containing Fe(II), Ru(II), and the ligand L1 at a molar ratio of 0.5:0.5:1. (a) In situ UV-vis spectra of a FeL1Ru-2 film in 0.1 M LiClO4/ACN at different applied potentials of 0, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, 1.1, and 1.2 V. (b) Detailed color switching of Fe/Ru polymers operated at 0, 0.9, and 1.2 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 340. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A series of Fe(II)-based metallo-supramolecular polymers with a 3-D structure were synthesized by Higuchi's group using a tris-(terpyridine) ligand L2 as the cross-linker (Fig. 77).341 An FeL185%L215% film with a highly porous surface (pore size: approximately 30–50 nm in diameter) showed the best electrochromic properties among the 3-D and 1-D polymers (response time for the coloring, 0.19 s; response time for the bleaching, 0.36 s; ΔT, 50.7%; η, 383.4 cm2 C−1), probably because of the smooth anion transfer inside the porous polymer film. The other types of metallopolymers were studied by many groups and enriched the diversity of their applications as electrochromes.342–356
 Fig. 77  Three-dimensional Fe(II)-based metallo-supramolecular polymers with electrochromic properties. (a) Transmittance change (ΔT, %) of the FeL185%L215% film at 580 nm during voltage switching between 0 and 1.2 V (interval: 5 s) in 0.1 M LiClO4/ACN. (b) Change of charge in the FeL1100%, FeL185%L215%, and FeL180%L220% films during switching between 0 and 1.2 V. T. Adapted with permission from ref. 341. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
5.2 Metallopolymers for energy storage
The presence of multiple redox-active metals in polymers endows them with nanobattery and nanowire functions, which are integral to nanoelectronics. A rational design of the polymer framework and selection of metal center allow scientists to tune the redox-activity and photophysics of metallopolymers, enabling electron or photon transfer processes to efficiently harness energy from chemical bonds, sunlight, or biochemical systems. Indeed, metal-enabled electron or photon transfer processes in polymers permit the design of energy-storage materials.357–369
Multilevel organic memories have attracted considerable interest due to their high capacity of data storage. Astruc and coworkers synthesized giant redox dendrimers with ferrocenyl and pentamethylferrocenyl termini up to a theoretical number of 39 tethers (seventh generation) (Fig. 78).370 Lengthening of the tethers proved to be a reliable strategy to overcome the bulk constraint at the dendrimers periphery. Cyclic voltammetry revealed full chemical and electrochemical reversibility up to G7, showing that electron transfer is fast among the flexible peripheral redox sites. Indeed, the redox stability of these new electrochromic dendrimers, i.e., a battery behavior, was established by complete chemical oxido-reduction cycles, and the blue 17-electron ferricenium and deep-green mixed-valence Fe(III)/Fe(II) dendritic complexes were isolated and characterized.
 Fig. 78  (A) Giant dendritic molecular electrochrome batteries with ferrocenyl and pentamethylferrocenyl termini and their rapid transfer of a large number of electrons at once (14000 electrons for G7) (B and C). Adapted with permission from ref. 370. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Zhou and coworkers prepared a micelle-like hybrid natural-artificial light-harvesting nanosystem through protein-framed electrostatic self-assembly of phycocyanin and a four-armed porphyrin star polymer (Fig. 79).371 The nanosystem has a special structure of pomegranate-like unimolecular micelle aggregate with one phycocyanin acceptor in the center and multiple porphyrin donors in the shell. It can inhibit donor self-quenching effectively and display efficient transfer of excitation energy (about 80.1%) in water. Furthermore, the number of donors contributing to a single acceptor reached as high as about 179 in this nanosystem.
 Fig. 79  Self-assembly of the pomegranate-like porphyrin-phycocyanin light-harvesting nanosystem (Ex light = exciting light; Em light = emitted light). Adapted with permission from ref. 371. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Holliday and coworkers have prepared and studied in detail a series of conducting polymers, formed from an electropolymerizable Schiff-base ligand, N,N′-((2,2′-dimethyl)propyl)bis(2-thiophenyl)salcylidenimine and the corresponding metal complexes (i.e., Ni(II), Cu(II), V(IV)O, Co(II), and Zn(II)) (Fig. 80).372 Cyclic voltammetry and in situ conductivity show superior charge transport in the CMPs compared to the ligand polymer, especially in systems containing redox-active metal centers with redox potentials higher than, but similar to, that of the conjugated organic backbone. These results indicated that inner-sphere charge transport within the organic backbone, which was serving as a hopping station, was the dominant mechanism of conductivity enhancement and favorable for efficient charge transport in Schiff-base CMPs.
 Fig. 80  Conductivity profiles of ligand polymer and CMPs in CH2Cl2 electrolyte solution (scan rate 10 mV s−1, 40 mV offset potential) and mechanisms of intrachain electron transfer in Wolf type III64 CMPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 372. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Zhong and coworkers described that a diruthenium complex capped with two triphenylamine units was polymerized by electrochemical oxidation to afford metallopolymeric films with alternating diruthenium and tetraphenylbenzidine structures (Fig. 81).373 The obtained thin films feature rich redox processes associated with the reduction of the bridging ligands (tetra(pyrid-2-yl)pyrazine) and the oxidation of the tetraphenylbenzidine and diruthenium segments. The sandwiched ITO/polymer film/Al electrical devices showed excellent resistive memory switching with a low operational voltage, large ON/OFF current ratio (100–1000), good stability (500 cycles tested), and long retention time.
 Fig. 81  Schematic representation of the memory device structure and the typical I–V characteristics of the ITO/poly-14+/Al device with an active area of 6.0 mm2. The arrows denote switching order and direction. The thicknesses of the polymer film and Al electrode are 100 and 80 nm, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 373. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lu, Xu and coworkers presented a rational design and synthesis of a class of polymers containing an azobenzene-pyridine group (PAzo-py) and its derivatives, for multilevel organic memory storage (Fig. 82).374 In this design, a metal complex (M(Phen)Cl2, M = Cu, Pd) was employed to modify the HOMO–LUMO energy levels of azo polymers, thereby converting the memory state from binary to ternary. More importantly, this approach enables modulating the energy levels of azo polymers by varying the coordination metal ions.
 Fig. 82  Synthetic route of PAzo-py and PAzo-py-Cu(Phen)Cl2. Adapted with permission from ref. 374. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lin and coworkers synthesized a class of porphyrin-containing polyimides, ZnPor–s-DSDA, ZnPor–t-DSDA, Por–s-DSDA and Por–t-DSDA, from porphyrin-containing diamines and 3,3′,4,4′-diphenylsulfone tetracarboxylic dianhydride for resistor-type memory applications (Fig. 83).375 The memory devices with different retention times derived from polymers ZnPor–s-DSDA (WORM, >3 h) and ZnPor–t-DSDA (DRAM, 30 s) demonstrated the importance of the linkage effect, and the insulation property of polyimides Por–s-DSDA and Por–t-DSDA also implies a crucial memory behavior by metal chelation.
 Fig. 83  Chemical structure of porphyrin-based PIs and a memory device. Adapted with permission from ref. 375. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Grzybowski and coworkers reported that single crystals of a cyclodextrin-based metal–organic framework (MOF) infused with an ionic electrolyte and flanked by silver electrodes act as memristors (Fig. 84).376 They were electrically switched between low and high conductivity states that persist even in the absence of an applied voltage. In this way, these small blocks of nanoporous sugar function as a non-volatile RRAM memory elements that were repeatedly read, erased, and re-written.
 Fig. 84  Construction of a memory device based on a metal–organic framework. (a) A MOF memory device comprising two silver electrodes and a Rb-CD-MOF crystal containing hydroxy ions, rubidium ions, and water. The device is not drawn to scale. (b) A photograph of a circa 1 mm cubic Rb-CD-MOF crystal (in a red rectangle) placed on a flash memory stick. (c) Cyclic voltammetry analysis of a silver/MOF/silver device heterostructure. The Rb-CD-MOF crystal was infiltrated with a 100 mm methanolic solution of RbOH and methanol was evaporated prior to electrical testing. A first cycle is needed to activate the device. Subsequent cycles exhibit negative differential resistance (red arrows) and pinched hysteresis with two hysteresis loops meeting at (0 V, 0 A) (indicated by the blue arrow). Adapted with permission from ref. 376. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5.3 Luminescent and emissive metallopolymers
Metallopolymers offered a variety of unique characterizations, which include luminescence as well as emissive properties, functional characteristics towards implications in molecular optoelectronics.377–386
Holliday and coworkers carried out the oxidative electrochemical polymerization of a new Eu(III) complex that contains 3,4-ethylenedioxythenyl (EDOT) groups, giving an inner sphere conducting metallopolymer (Fig. 85).387 The photophysical measurements revealed energy transfer to the europium center and the corresponding stimulated red emission. Importantly, the europium-containing conducting metallopolymer displayed only a europium-based emission profile leading to excellent color purity in this material.
 Fig. 85  (A) Photoluminescent europium-containing inner sphere conducting metallopolymer. (B) The energy transfer to the europium center giving the corresponding stimulated red emission. Adapted with permission from ref. 387. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society. 
According to the study of Lü, Su and coworkers, in the series of homoleptic trinuclear complexes {[Ln3(L)4Cl4(MeOH)(H2O)]·Cl} (Ln = La, 1; Ln = Eu, 2; Ln = Tb, 3 or Ln = Gd, 4), a suitable energy level match results in efficient green luminescence (Φoverall = 72%) of Tb3-arrayed complex 3. They obtained two kinds of material: PMMA-supported doping hybrid materials 1@PMMA, 2@PMMA, 3@PMMA and 4@PMMA and PNBE-supported metallopolymer-type hybrid materials poly-(NBE-1), poly(NBE-2), poly(NBE-3) and poly(NBE-4), respectively. In particular, for both 3@PMMA and poly(NBE-3) with high color-purity characteristic green emission of TbIII ions, improved physical properties including significantly enhanced luminescence (Φoverall = 76% or 83%) were observed, and covalent-bonding affords a higher-concentration self-quenching as compared to physical doping (Fig. 86).388
 Fig. 86  (A) Reaction scheme for the synthesis of PMMA-supported doping hybrid materials 1@PMMA, 2@PMMA, 3@PMMA and 4@PMMA and PNBE-supported metallopolymer-type hybrid materials poly(NBE-1), poly(NBE-2), poly(NBE-3) and poly(NBE-4). (Ln = La, 1; Ln = Eu, 2; Ln = Tb, 3 or Ln = Gd, 4). (B) Visible emission and excitation spectra of 2@PMMA and 4@PMMA, or poly(NBE-2) and poly(NBE-4) with the feeding molar ratio of 400:1 in the solid state at RT. Adapted with permission from ref. 388. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The isolation of emissive materials with lanthanide ions is a topic of interest for imaging, display, and sensing applications, and it requires tuning of the electronics of the systems, such that energy transfer from the sensitizer to the lanthanide ion during the process of sensitization of the metal-centered luminescence is efficient and the resulting materials have the characteristics required for a given application.
Bettencourt-Dias's group worked in controlling the singlet- and triplet-state energies of sensitizing ligands through the choice of functional groups on the pyridine rings chelating to the lanthanide ions and showed how to achieve progressively higher emission efficiencies (Fig. 87).389 They found targeted functionalization that led to highly emissive systems in solution and in the solid state and to new metallopolymers with norbornene or dicyclopentadiene-based backbones and pyridinebis(oxazoline) pendants, which displayed red EuIII-based, green TbIII-based, and, for the first time, blue TmIII-based emission.
 Fig. 87  (A) Excitation (solid magenta line) and emission (solid red line) spectra of [Eu(PyboxONorb)3]3+ and excitation (solid blue line) and emission spectra of [Tb(PyboxONorb)3]3+ (solid green line) measured as nitrate salts in acetonitrile. [LnIII] = 1.0 × 10−4 M. λexc = 286 nm. (B) Left to right: Photographs of the emission of Eu-poly(PyboxONorb-Norb50), TbIII-poly(PyboxONorbNorb50), and EuTb-poly(PyboxONorb-Norb50) metallopolymers observed under a hand-held UV lamp (λ = 254 nm). Adapted with permission from ref. 389. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Chan and coworkers described the synthesis of soluble, conjugated poly(Znsalphen)-alt-(p-phenyleneethynylene)s with a coilable structure and bearing acetylated sugar substituents, and investigated their photophysical properties and conformational behavior (Fig. 88).390 Their CD spectra confirm that these systems are chiral and signify ordered (helical) coiling of the polymer backbone arising from chirality transfer from the β-D-glucopyranosyl groups. They found that low-polarity solvents give a tighter, more compressed helical structure with increased CD intensities via analysis of the effects of different solvents on these systems by UV-vis absorption, emission, and CD spectroscopy.
 Fig. 88  (A) Dynamic helical metallopolymer poly(Zn-salphen)-alt-(p-phenyleneethynylene)s. (B) The UV-vis absorption spectra in different solvents at 298 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Nitschke and coworkers reported that the self-assembly of bifunctional subcomponents around CuI yields long, double helical metallopolymers. Terminating groups are employed that govern the regiochemistry of the two strands within the polymer. Varying the stoichiometry of the monomer to terminating group alters the polymer length, thereby enabling tunable white-light emission (Fig. 89).391
 Fig. 89  (a) Self-assembly of conjugated metallopolymers with tunable length and controlled regiochemistry. (b) CIE 1931 coordinates show that these species emit white light, shifting along the sequence and from blue-white to yellow-white emissions. Monomer A was observed to emit orange light. Adapted with permission from ref. 391. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
More types of luminescent and emissive metallopolymers were reported by many other groups in the past few years in order to offer more new active matrixes for advanced devices.392–406
5.4 NLO and optical limiters
The nonlinear optical properties of some metallopolymers are increasingly explored in nonlinear frequency conversion and amplification, and in signal processing. Within the scope of nonlinear optics, optical power limiting (OPL) materials are commonly regarded as an important class of compounds which protect the delicate optical sensors or human eyes from sudden exposure to damaging intense laser beams. Metallopolymers are frontline precursors in the design of optical power limiters thanks to the synergy between the electronic property of the metal center and an organic ligand in the polymer. These metalated materials offer a new avenue towards a new family of highly transparent homo- and heterometallic optical limiters with good solution processability which outperform those of current state-of-the-art visible-light-absorbing competitors.407–411
According to the report of Schanze, a series of platinum(II) acetylide complexes containing p-phenylenevinylene and moieties end-capped with triphenylamine groups have been incorporated into poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) monoliths for optical power limiting applications (Fig. 90).412 The absolute two photon absorption cross-section values for the monolith samples were measured and were comparable to the values obtained in solution. In the PMMA monoliths, the complexes retained the important two-photon absorption and reverse saturable absorption properties necessary for optical power limiting via a dual mode mechanism, and their strong nonlinear absorption property was demonstrated by the open-aperture Z-scan method.
 Fig. 90  Polymer monoliths containing two-photon absorbing phenylenevinylene platinum(II) acetylide chromophores for optical power limiting and its open-aperture Z-scan. Adapted with permission from ref. 412. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, new photochromic dithienylethene-based platinum(II) complexes (C–N–N)Pt(C ≡ C–DTE–C6H4–D) ((C–N–N) = 4,4′-di(n-hexyl)-6-phenyl-2,2′-bipyridine; D = H, NMe2) were prepared and characterized by Roberto's group (Fig. 91).413 Their excellent photochromic properties allow the photoinduced switching of their second-order nonlinear optical properties in solution, as measured by the EFISH technique, due to formation of an extended π-conjugated ligand upon suitable electromagnetic radiation. These new Pt(II) complexes were nanoorganized in polymer films that were poled, affording new materials characterized by a good second-order NLO response that was easily switched with an excellent NLO contrast.
 Fig. 91  Second-order NLO switches from molecules to polymer films based on photochromic cyclometalated platinum(II) complexes. Adapted with permission from ref. 413. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Main-chain nonlinear optical polymers based on new chromophores with special structures presented good solubility in most of the organic solvents. Ouyang, Cao and coworkers described that their polymers PE-1 and PE-2 attained the thermal decomposition temperatures of 305 and 223 °C and glass transition temperatures of 113 and 108 °C, and exhibited only negligible decay in the SHG signal baked at 85 °C over hundreds of hours, respectively. The SHG coefficients of poled films from polymers PE-1 and PE-2 were 26.3 and 35.8 pm V−1, respectively. These results indicated that this class of polymers could be used in the preparation of organic electro-optic devices (Fig. 92).414
 Fig. 92  Main-chain polymers based on new monomers with a D–π–A structure and application in organic second-order nonlinear optical materials. Adapted with permission from ref. 414. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5.5 Photosensitisers
Metallopolymers designed as photosensitisers are well developed by many groups.415–420 Hisaeda and coworkers synthesized the hybrid polymer by a radical polymerization of a B12 derivative and a Ru complex having styrene moieties in each peripheral position, and the hybrid polymer showed photocatalytic activity for molecular transformation with visible light irradiation (Fig. 93).421 The catalytic reaction was carried out using phenethyl bromide as a substrate. After 24 h with visible light irradiation, most of the phenethyl bromide was converted to ethylbenzene and styrene in 82 and 8% yields, respectively. The reaction did not proceed under dark conditions.
 Fig. 93  Photocatalytic function of a polymer-supported B12 complex with a ruthenium trisbipyridine photosensitizer. Adapted with permission from ref. 421. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Lin and coworkers have successfully encapsulated tetranickel-containing Ni4P2 POMs into the pores of phosphorescent MOFs built from [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+ and [Ru(bpy)3]2+-derived dicarboxylate ligands (Fig. 94).422 Visible-light-driven hydrogen evolution experiments showed that the proximity of Ni4P2 to multiple photosensitizers in Ni4P2 @MOF is key to facile multi-electron transfer and efficient HER. Photophysical and electrochemical studies established the oxidative quenching of the photosensitizer excited state by Ni4P2 as the initiating step of HER and explained the drastic catalytic activity difference between the two POM@MOF systems.
 Fig. 94  (a) Chemical structures of H2L1 and H2L2. (b) Polyhedral view of the structure of [Ni4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10− (Ni4P2). (c) Structural model of Ni4P2@MOF as viewed along the [1,1,1] direction. (d) Structural model showing unoccupied tetrahedral cavities and the central Ni4P2-loaded octahedral cavity. (e) Schematic showing the injection of three electrons to the same Ni4P2 upon photoexcitation of the MOF to enable proton reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 422. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
5.6 Photovoltaics
A few new polymers containing transition-metal complexes have been exploited, and significant advances in their optical and electronic applications have been achieved. In this section, we summarize some new research trends in the applications of this important class of optoelectronic polymers, such as photovoltaic devices because the application of heavy-metal complexes in bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells is a promising new research field that has attracted increasing attention in the past decade.423–435
New solution-processable platinum(II) polyyne polymers containing zinc(II) porphyrinate chromophores and their corresponding dinuclear model complexes were synthesized by Wang's group via the CuI-catalyzed dehydrohalogenation reaction of the platinum(II) chloride precursor and the respective bis(ethynyl)-zinc(porphyrin) metalloligands (Fig. 95).436 They examined the effect of the thiophene ring along the polymer chain on the extent of π-conjugation, and luminescent and photovoltaic properties of these metalated materials. Bulk heterojunction solar cells using these metallopolymers as an electron donor blended with a methanofullerene electron acceptor were studied. In one case, the metallopolymer showed a power conversion efficiency of 1.04% with an open-circuit voltage of 0.77 V, short-circuit current density of 3.42 mA cm2 and fill factor of 0.39 under illumination of an AM 1.5 solar cell simulator.
 Fig. 95  Synthesis and photovoltaic properties of new metalloporphyrin-containing polyplatinyne polymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 436. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Kimoto and coworkers synthesized a new low-bandgap conjugated polymer with the phenylazomethine moiety as a pendant metal-collecting unit (PImCDTBT) via Suzuki cross-coupling copolymerization (Fig. 96).437 Its basic physicochemical properties were revealed, and the optical bandgap and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels were estimated to be 1.73 eV and −5.36 eV, respectively. PImCDTBT successfully assembles metal ions on its phenylazomethine site, as evidenced by a spectral change similar to that of its monomeric model compounds. In a bulk heterojunction photovoltaic device, the open-circuit voltage was clearly enhanced from 0.46 to 0.52 V by complexation of PImCDTBT, with only 1 wt% of SnCl2. This was due to a change in either the electronic state of the polymer or its environment by complexing with the cationic Sn2+ ion.
 Fig. 96  Open-circuit voltage modulation of solution-processed organic photovoltaic devices induced by Sn2+ complexation. Adapted with permission from ref. 437. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Another pyridyl benzimidazole based Ru complex decorated polyaniline assembly (PANI–Ru) was covalently grafted onto reduced graphene oxide sheets (rGO) via a covalent functionalization approach by Neppolian and coworkers (Fig. 97).438 The resultant hybrid metallopolymer assembly was successfully demonstrated as an electron donor in bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells (PSCs). A PSC device fabricated with rGO/PANI–Ru showed an utmost ∼6 fold and 2 fold enhancement in open circuit potential (Voc) and short circuit current density (Jsc) with respect to the standard device made with PANI–Ru (i.e., without rGO) under the illumination of AM 1.5 G. The excellent electronic properties of rGO significantly improved the electron injection from PANI–Ru to PCBM and in turn the overall performance of the PSC device was enhanced.
 Fig. 97  (A) Synthesis procedure of rGO/PANI–Ru hybrid nanocomposite. (B) J–V characteristic curve of PTB7:PCBM incorporated inverted PSC devices. Adapted with permission from ref. Copyright © 2014, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. Adapted with permission from ref. 438. Copyright © 2017, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
Schanz's group synthesized a series of cyclometalated platinum-containing diketopyrrolopyrrole complexes and polymers (Fig. 98).439 Efficient solar spectrum coverage was observed for all chromophores; specifically, the polymer poly-DPP-Th-Pt has an onset of absorption at ∼900 nm with an optical band gap of 1.4 eV. Both polymers were employed as donors in bulk-heterojunction solar cells with a polymer:PC71BM ratio of 1:7. The thiophene-containing polymer poly-DPP-Th-Pt shows a respectable power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.66% with a high fill factor (FF) of ∼66%. Higher charge carrier mobility was observed for poly-DPP-Th-Pt when used in field-effect transistors compared to poly-DPP-Ph-Pt.
 Fig. 98  Cyclometalated platinum-containing diketopyrrolopyrrole complexes and polymers and their photophysics and photovoltaic applications. Adapted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Huang and coworkers developed an amino-functionalized conjugated metallopolymer PFEN–Hg as a cathode interlayer for inverted polymer solar cells. The resulting devices exhibited significantly improved performance with power efficiencies exceeding 9%. Moreover, good device performance was achievable with the PFEN–Hg over a wider range of film thickness, likely due to the Hg–Hg interactions and improved π–π stacking (Fig. 99).440
 Fig. 99  High-efficiency polymer solar cells via the incorporation of an amino-functionalized conjugated metallopolymer as a cathode interlayer and J–V curves of the electron-only devices with PFN–OX (a) and PFEN–Hg (b) interlayers of varying thickness. Electron-only device configuration: ITO/Al/interlayer/PTB7:PC71BM/Ba/Al. Adapted with permission from ref. 440. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
5.7 Metallopolymers with magnetism
Pong, Wong and Manners found that a polyferroplatinyne polymer was patterned on the surface of a Si wafer in ordered nanoline or nanodot shapes with PDMS molds through nanoimprint lithography (NIL), and subsequent thermal treatment gave rise to the nanopatterned arrays of L10-FePt nanoparticles with the same periodicities. The method offers excellent potential to be utilized in the simple and rapid fabrication of bit patterned media for magnetic data recording (Fig. 100A).441 Later, Ho, Leung and coworkers reported another FePt-containing metallopolymer as the single-source precursor for the synthesis of magnetic metal alloy nanoparticles. This polymer was synthesized from a random copolymer poly(styrene-4-ethynylstyrene) PES-PS and the bimetallic precursor TPy-FePt ([Pt(4′-ferrocenyl-(N^N^N))Cl]Cl) by the CuI-catalyzed dehydrohalogenation. After pyrolysis of P, the stoichiometry of Fe and Pt atoms in the synthesized nanoparticles is nearly close to 1:1, which is more precise than that by using TPy-FePt as the precursor. Also, polymer P is more suitable for patterning by high-throughput nanoimprint lithography (NIL) compared to TPy-FePt (Fig. 100B).442
 Fig. 100  (A) A polyferroplatinyne precursor for the rapid fabrication of L10-FePt-type bit patterned media by nanoimprint lithography. Adapted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Nanopatterned L10-FePt nanoparticles from single-source metallopolymer precursors for potential application in ferromagnetic bit-patterned media magnetic recording. Adapted with permission from ref. 442. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Ferromagnetic (L10 phase) CoPt alloy nanoparticles (NPs) with extremely high magnetocrystalline anisotropy are promising candidates for the next generation of ultrahigh-density data storage systems. It is a challenge to generate L10 CoPt NPs with high coercivity, controllable size, and a narrow size distribution. So, ferromagnetic (L10 phase) CoPt alloy nanoparticles (NPs) have attracted wide research interest due to their potential application in data storage, catalysis and biomedicine, etc.
Leung and coworkers reported the fabrication of L10 CoPt NPs by employing a heterobimetallic CoPt-containing polymer as a single-source precursor (Fig. 101A).443 The average size of the resulting L10 CoPt NPs is 3.4 nm with a reasonably narrow size standard deviation of 0.58 nm. The coercivity of L10 CoPt NPs is 0.54 T that is suitable for practical application. They also fabricated L10 CoPt NP-based nanoline and nanodot arrays through nanoimprinting the polymer blend of CoPt-containing metallopolymer and polystyrene followed by pyrolysis. The successful transfer of the pre-defined patterns of the stamps onto the surface of the polymer blend implied that this material holds great application potential as a data storage medium.
 Fig. 101  (A) Metallopolymer precursors to L10-CoPt nanoparticles and nanopatterning. Adapted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Patterning study of Co-containing and Pt-containing polymer CoPtNPs by nanoimprint lithography. Adapted with permission from ref. 444. Copyright © 2016, Elsevier B.V. All right reserved. 
In the same year, Dong and coworkers reported the fabrication of L10 CoPt NPs by employing Co-containing and Pt-containing polymer blend as a single source precursor without any post-annealing treatment (Fig. 101B).444 The average size of the resulting L10 CoPt NPs is 6.54 nm with a reasonably narrow size standard deviation of 1.28 nm. The coercivity of L10 CoPt NPs is 362 Oe and 1026 Oe at 300 K and 10 K, respectively. They also fabricated the nanoline and nanodot arrays through nanoimprinting the polymer blend, which then underwent pyrolysis to generate a L10 CoPt NP based nanoline array. The successful transfer of the pre-defined patterns of the stamps onto the surface of the polymer blend implies that this material holds great application potential in data storage systems and electronics based on magnetic nanostructures.
5.8 Sensing and self-healing metallopolymers
Liang and coworkers developed a facile and efficient approach for scalable synthesis of polymer flowers decorated with Prussian blue (PB) and graphene nanosheets (Fig. 102).445 This approach involved graphene-induced crystallization of polyethylene capped with a cyanoferrate complex (PE-Fe), followed by in situ coordination polymerization of the cyanoferrate complex with Fe3+ on the surface. The morphological and thermal analyses demonstrated that graphene nanosheets prompted the crystallization of PE-Fe, affording the formation of hybrid flowers of 3 μm. The tiny flowers were composed of ultrathin petals of 10 nm thickness, which consisted of a single polyethylene lamella sandwiched between two PB/graphene nanolayers. Hybrid flowers exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activity toward reduction of hydrogen peroxide. The maximum reduction current of hybrid flowers was two orders of magnitude higher compared with conventional PB particles. Moreover, the sensors based on hybrid flowers showed by far higher successive performance ability as contrast to conventional PB particles. Such graphene-induced flower-like nanoarchitectures offer a catalog of functional nanomaterials useful for biosensing and nanodevices.
 Fig. 102  (A) Schematic illustration for synthesis of PE–PB/graphene hybrid flowers, chemical structure and ball-stick modeling of polyethylene terminated with [Fe(II)(CN)5(4-(dimethylamino)-pyridine)] (PE-Fe). For clarity, a methyl group is used to stand for polyethylene in the ball-stick modeling. (B) Successive performance ability of PE–PB/graphene flowers deposited on glassy carbon electrodes in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer solution in the presence of 5 mM H2O2. Applied potential: 0.1 V, under N2. Adapted with permission from ref. 445. Copyright © 2015, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
Liang and coworkers also advanced the development of growing tiny flowers of organometallic polymers along carbon nanotubes.446,447 Also metallopolymers were programmed to assemble and disassemble via dynamic interactions, a phenomenon that is explored in the design of self-healing materials. Expanding the useful lifespan of materials is becoming highly desirable, and self-healing and self-repairing materials may become valuable commodities.
The formation of supramolecular hydrogels and their redox-responsive and self-healing properties are due to host–guest interactions (Fig. 103).448 They employed cyclodextrin (CD) as a host molecule, a transparent supramolecular hydrogel quickly forms upon mixing poly(acrylic acid) (pAA) possessing β-CD as a host polymer with pAA possessing ferrocene as a guest polymer. Redox stimuli induce a sol–gel phase transition in the supramolecular hydrogel and could control self-healing properties such as re-adhesion between cut surfaces.
 Fig. 103  (A) Redox-responsive sol–gel transition experiment. (A) Schematic illustration of sol–gel transition. (B) After standing for 24 h, two cut pAA-6βCD/pAA-Fc hydrogel (1 + 1 wt%) pieces were rejoined, and the crack sufficiently healed to form one gel. Adapted with permission from ref. 448. Copyright © 2011, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
The self-healing capability is particularly desirable for multifunctional polymeric materials because it could make the materials more reliable, reduce repair costs, and extend their lifetime in many applications.
Gong and coworkers developed and demonstrated a multi-stimuli responsive self-healing metallo-supramolecular polymer nanocomposite exhibiting superior mechanical properties.449 Terpyridine ligand-terminated polyurethane (PU) was prepared by in situ polymerization on the surface of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The terpyridine ligand-terminated CNT/PU prepolymers were dynamically crosslinked with the metal ion Zn2+ to obtain a metallo-supramolecular polymer nanocomposite. The tensile strength and tensile strain-at-break of the CNT/PU polymer nanocomposite increased from 14.2 MPa and 620% to 22.8 MPa and 1076%, respectively, with the addition of Zn2+. The Zn2+-coordinated metallo-supramolecular polymer nanocomposite showed a rare combination of strong, tough, and elastic mechanical properties and was able to self-heal via multiple stimuli, including remotely controlled near infrared (NIR) light (4.2 mW mm−2, 30 min), relatively low temperatures (90 °C, 1 h), and/or solvents, all with excellent healing efficiencies (i.e., higher than 93%) and short healing times.
6. Environment and climate change
The coordination chemistry of metals is versatile and has inspired the design of porous coordination polymers. The porosity and the ability to functionalize these pores allow the design of technologies that sequester CO2. Also, some of the functionalities of metallopolymers are responsive to many important molecules like NO2 and halogens, as well as to changes in humidity and temperature, enabling these polymers to function as sensors, molecular barometers, and molecular thermometers. We will discuss advances that push the frontiers of metallopolymers towards their use as sensors and sequesters.
6.1 Metallopolymers for sequestering CO2
The stringent targets to minimize greenhouse gases demand a wide spectrum of corresponding measures. Recently, carbon dioxide capture and utilization (CCU) technologies, whereby CO2 is captured from a specific source and utilized as a green C1 chemical feedstock to produce valuable chemicals and fuels, are seen as sustainable approaches to reduce this greenhouse gas and achieve a carbon-neutral energy cycle. So far, various MOF solid adsorbents and metallopolymers have been constructed for this purpose, and the related studies have been summarized in some outstanding reviews.46–53
The incorporation of accessible nitrogen-donor sites into the pore walls of porous adsorbents dramatically affected the CO2 uptake capacity and selectivity on account of the dipole–quadrupole interactions between the polarizable CO2 molecule and the accessible nitrogen site. With this strategy, Yaghi and coworkers reported that the use of two primary alkylamine functionalities covalently tethered to the linkers of IRMOF-74-III resulted in a material that took up CO2 at low pressures through a chemisorption mechanism (Fig. 104).450 In contrast to other primary amine-functionalized solid adsorbents that take up CO2 primarily as ammonium carbamates, they observed using solid state NMR that the major chemisorption product for this material was carbamic acid. The equilibrium of reaction products also shifts to ammonium carbamate when water vapor is present. Yaghi's method is a new finding that has an impact on the control of the chemistry of CO2 capture in MOF materials and one that highlights the importance of geometric constraints and the mediating role of water within the pores of MOFs.
 Fig. 104  View of the modeled IRMOF-74-III-(CH2NH2)2 [staggered amine] structure down the crystallographic c-axis, depicting the three possible pore environments before (left pore wall) and after exposure to CO2 under 95% RH (bottom right pore wall) and dry (upper right pore wall) conditions. Dashed boxes clarify the chemisorbed species upon the reaction between linker-based alkylamine and CO2 under the respective conditions. H atoms are omitted for clarity. Color code: C, gray; O, red; N, green; and Mg, blue. Adapted with permission from ref. 450. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
By using the supermolecular building block (SBB) strategy, Liu and coworkers synthesized a polyhedron-based metal–organic framework (PMOF), which features three types of cages with multiple sizes and shapes (Fig. 105).451 It exhibited high performance for CO2 capture (170 cm3 g−1 at 273 K under 1 bar) and selectivity for CO2/CH4 (9.4) and C3H8/CH4 (271.5).
 Fig. 105  (A) Description of the structure JLU-Liu22: (a) binary MBBs; (b) three types of cages with different sizes (diagonal Cu–Cu distance, regardless of van der Waals radii); (c) ball and stick model of the 3D framework; (d) polyhedral view of the net. Color scheme: carbon = gray, oxygen = red, and copper = green. Guest molecules and H atoms have been omitted for clarity. (B) CO2, CH4, C2H6 and C3H8 adsorption isotherms at 298 K along with the dual-site Langmuir–Freundlich (DSLF) fits (a and b); CO2/CH4; C2H6/CH4 and C3H8/CH4 adsorption selectivity are predicted by IAST at 298 K and 1 bar for JLU-Liu22 (c and d). Adapted with permission from ref. 451. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gómora-Figueroa and coworkers described the reaction of ZrCl4 with 2′,3′,5′,6′-tetramethylamino-p-terphenyl-4,4′′-dicarboxylic acid (H2tpdc4CH2NH2·3HCl) in the presence of NaF affords Zr6O4(OH)2.1F1.9(tpdc-4CH2NH2·3HCl)6, and exhibited high porosity with BET and Langmuir surface areas of 1910 m2 g−1 and 2220 m2 g−1, respectively (Fig. 106).452 Indeed, exposure of this material to acetonitrile solutions of the organic bases, 1,8-bis(dimethylamino)naphthalene (DMAN) or trimethylamine, afforded a partially deprotonated material, which exhibited enhanced CO2 uptake. Exposure of basic amine sites also facilitates the postsynthetic chelation of copper(I) ([Cu(MeCN)4]·CF3SO3) to yield a new material with an enhanced CO2 uptake of 4 wt% at 0.15 bar, which is double that of the parent framework.
 Fig. 106  (A) Synthesis conditions for Zr6O4(OH)2.1F1.9(tpdc-4CH2NH2·2HCl)6 (tpdc4 = 2′,3′,5′,6′-tetramethylamino-p-terphenyl-4,4′′-dicarboxylate), using the zwitterionic form of the ligand, giving the proposed structure, where the framework structural model is obtained from the crystal structure of UiO-68. The methyl amino groups of H2tpdc-4CH2NH2·3HCl are not depicted. (B) Adsorption isotherms for CO2 (green circles), N2 (blue circles), and O2 (red squares) uptake in 1 at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 452. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Suh and coworkers have prepared 3D pillared coordination networks, by using NiII bismacrocyclic complexes (Fig. 107).453 The desolvated solids obtained from these 3D coordination polymer networks exhibited highly selective adsorption of CO2 over N2, H2, and CH4 gases along with thermal stability to 300 °C and air and water stability. Their presented 3D coordination networks incorporating flexible pillars were applied in the selective capture, storage, and sensing of CO2 gas as well as in the separation of the CO2/H2 mixture resulting from the water gas shift reaction. Through exchanging the guest molecules with MeCN afforded [(Ni2L2)(bptc)]·3MeCN(1MeCN) and then removed the MeCN guests by heating at 100 °C under vacuum for 6 h to obtain [(Ni2L2)(bptc)].
 Fig. 107  (A) Alkyl-bridged NiII bismacrocyclic complexes and H4bptc. (B) Design strategies for construction of 3D networks. Bismacrocyclic complexes located upward and downward with respect to a 2D plane are indicated by the different colors (pink and orange). (C) A view of the ab plane showing the rhombic channels. (D) A view of the ac plane, showing the tilted ethyl pillars. Color scheme: bptc4− light gray; alternately located NiII bismacrocyclic complexes on the 2D grids brown and green. H atoms are omitted for clarity. Adapted with permission from ref. 453. Copyright © 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Long and coworkers demonstrated the use of BTTri3− in generating its air- and water-stable analogue Cu-BTT, as well as described the ability of Cu-BTTri to incorporate ethylenediamine molecules that afforded a highly selective affinity for CO2 binding (Fig. 108).454 Significantly, the en-functionalized framework Cu-BTTri-en exhibited a higher uptake of CO2 at very low pressures compared with the nongrafted material and displayed a record isosteric heat of adsorption of 90 kJ mol−1.
 Fig. 108  (A) A portion of the Cu-BTTri framework showing the surface functionalization of a coordinatively unsaturated CuII site with ethylenediamine, followed by the attack of an amino group on CO2. (B) Isosteric heat of adsorption for CO2 in Cu-BTTri (black) and Cu-BTTri-en (red). Reproduced with permission from ref. 454. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Later on, Long and coworkers also enhanced the carbon dioxide capture ability upon incorporation of N,N′-dimethylethylenediamine in the metal–organic framework CuBTTri (Fig. 109).455 High porosity was maintained despite stoichiometric attachment of mmen to the open metal sites of the framework, resulting in a BET surface area of 870 m2 g−1. The high capacity and selectivity are consequences of the exceptionally large isosteric heat of CO2 adsorption, calculated to be 96 kJ mol−1 at zero coverage. Their study showed that the incorporation of alkylamine functional groups could greatly improve the CO2 adsorption characteristics of metal–organic frameworks.
 Fig. 109  A portion of the structure of the N,N′-dimethylethylenediamine functionalized metal–organic framework mmen-CuBTTri, with red, green, blue and gray spheres representing Cu, Cl, N and C atoms, respectively. Isotherms for CO2 (squares) and N2 (circles) adsorption at 25 °C for mmen-CuBTTri (green for CO2 and blue for N2). Adapted with permission from ref. 455. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Shimizu and coworkers reported a porous metal organic framework Zn-aminotriazolato-oxalate compound, with a formula Zn2(C2O4)(C2N4H3)2(H2O)0.5, with amine-lined pores giving high values for surface area and heat of adsorption with CO2 gas (Fig. 110).456 Soon after, Shimizu's group carried out the computational studies that modeled the gas sorption isotherms, high heat of adsorption, and CO2 lattice positions of this material and the results showed high agreement on all three fronts.457 The modeling showed specific binding interactions for each CO2 molecule, including substantial cooperative binding effects among the guest molecules. The validation of the capacity of such simulations to accurately model molecular-scale binding modes well for the theory-aided development of amine-based CO2 sorbents. Their analysis showed that the combination of appropriate pore size, strongly interacting amine functional groups, and the cooperative binding of CO2 guest molecules was responsible for the low-pressure binding and large uptake of CO2 in this sorbent material.
 Fig. 110  (A) Structure of the Zn-Atz layer in Zn2(C2O4)(C2N4H3)2(H2O)0.5 (Zn, cyan; C, black; N, blue; H, not shown). (B) Three-dimensional structure of Zn2(C2O4)(C2N4H3)2(H2O)0.5, wherein the Zn-Atz layers are pillared by oxalate moieties (O, red) to form a six-connected cubic network shown as green struts. (C) Adsorption isotherms for different gases carried out using Zn2(C2O4)(C2N4H3)2(H2O)0.5. The inset shows heat-of-adsorption data calculated with the CO2 isotherms measured at 273 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 456. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
More recently, Feng, Petek and coworkers investigated the chemisorption of CO2 molecules on Au-PDI decorated Au single crystal surfaces (Fig. 111).458 The propensity of chemisorbed CO2δ− species to condense clusters over nanometer length scales suggested that the chemistry at such sites could be significantly modified by secondary interactions, which are triggered by the primary chemisorption process. Their work thus provided an experimental avenue for exploring the microscopic insights into the CO2 capture and reduction, as well as for exploring the nature of weak intermolecular forces in physical phenomena such as molecular condensation and ion solvation.
 Fig. 111  (a) STM image acquired at 4.5 K after dosing CO2 molecules onto the clean Au(100) surface. (b) STM image at 4.5 K of the Au-PDI chain modified Au(100) surface after submonolayer of CO2 is dosed at 20 K. (c) The magnified image of the rectangular region. (d) Cooperative chemisorption-induced physisorption of CO2 molecules by metal organic chains. Adapted with permission from ref. 458. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Liu, Zhong and coworkers reported copper incorporated porous metal–organic polyhedron contained mixed-matrix membranes for the effective separation of a CO2–CH4 mixture.459 To enhance dispersion and adhesion, functionalized porous metal–organic polyhedrons were incorporated into polysulfone as a filler to obtain mixed-matrix membranes, which exhibited largely improved gas permeability and separation factor simultaneously. Later, Liu, Zhong and coworkers designed a nanoporous material TSIL@NH2-MIL-101(Cr) to selectively facilitate CO2 transport by combining the advantages of TSIL and NH2-MIL-101(Cr) (Fig. 112).460 The material was fabricated using a mixed-matrix membrane (MMM) containing a metal–organic framework composite with a task specific ionic liquid. The prepared TSIL@NH2-MIL-101(Cr)/PIM-1 membrane exhibited largely improved gas permeability and selectivity for CO2/N2 separation, with CO2 permeation values of 2979 Barrer and a CO2/N2 separation selectivity of 37 at 5 wt% loading.
 Fig. 112  Schematic illustration of preparing the TSIL@NH2-MIL-101(Cr)/PIM-1 MMMs, and the gas separation process. Adapted with permission from ref. 460. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Mixed matrix membranes (MMMs) for gas separation applications have enhanced selectivity when compared with the pure polymer matrix, but are commonly reported with low intrinsic permeability, which has major cost implications for implementation of membrane technologies in large-scale carbon capture projects. High-permeability polymers rarely generate sufficient selectivity for energy-efficient CO2 capture.
Sivaniah and coworkers reported substantial selectivity enhancements within high-permeability polymers as a result of the efficient dispersion of amine-functionalized, nanosized metal–organic framework (MOF) additives (Fig. 113).461 The enhancement effects under optimal mixing conditions occur with minimal loss in overall permeability. Amination of such MOFs increases their interaction with the polymer matrix, resulting in a measured rigidification and enhanced selectivity of the overall composite. The optimal MOF MMM performance was verified in three different polymer systems, and also over pressure and temperature ranges suitable for carbon capture.
 Fig. 113  (a) UiO-66 synthesized from zirconium ion and terephthalic acid. (b) Reducing the UiO-66 size using water modulation and functionalization of the MOF walls. (c) Molecular structure of PIM-1. (d) Combination of PIM-1 and MOF particles to form MMMs for separation of CO2 from N2. Carbon atoms are depicted in green; oxygen and hydrogen atoms are in red and white, respectively; nitrogen, NH2 and bromine are presented in blue. Adapted with permission from ref. 461. Copyright © 2017, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
The diversity and smart design strategy of the present metallopolymer catalyst might be a significant step towards the development of more rational heterogeneous catalysts with integrated and enhanced properties for clean-up CO2 fixation.
Yoon and coworkers demonstrated a new covalent triazine framework functionalized with an Ir(III)–N-heterocyclic carbene complex (Fig. 114).462 Because of the strong σ-donating and poor π-accepting characters of the N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) ligand, the heterogenized Ir–NHC complex efficiently catalyzes the hydrogenation of CO2 to formate with a turnover frequency of up to 16000 h−1 and a turnover number of up to 24300 which were the highest values reported in heterogeneous catalysis for the hydrogenation of CO2 to formate.
 Fig. 114  A covalent triazine framework, functionalized with Ir/N-heterocyclic carbene sites, for the efficient hydrogenation of CO2 to formate. Adapted with permission from ref. 462. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Leng and coworkers designed and synthesized a series of bifunctional heterogeneous salen-bearing ionic polymer networks M-salen-TBB-R (M = Co, Zn, Al) (Fig. 115).463 These materials were used as recyclable bifunctional catalysts for the cycloaddition of CO2 with epoxides under mild and solvent-cocatalyst-free conditions. The optimum catalyst Co-salen-TBB-Py exhibited the highest conversion of 97.8% with 100% selectivity under 0.5 MPa, 80 °C, 8 h reaction conditions, and was steadily reused without significant decrease in activity and leaching of active Co species.
 Fig. 115  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for bifunctional catalysts M-salen-TBB-R. (B) Cycloaddition of CO2 with various epoxides catalyzed by the Co-salen-TBB-Py catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 463. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
Chen, Yang and coworkers presented the preparation of CO2 stimuli-responsive, injectable block copolymer hydrogels cross-linked by discrete organoplatinum(II) metallacycles (Fig. 116).464 Through the combination of coordination-driven self-assembly and stepwise post-assembly polymerization, star block copolymers (SBCPs) containing well-defined hexagonal metallacycles as cores were successfully prepared, which featured CO2 stimuli-responsive properties including CO2-triggered morphology transition and CO2-induced thermoresponsive behavior. Interestingly, the resultant SBCPs were capable of forming supramolecular hydrogels with MOMs as junctions near physiological temperature, which allowed the realization of a reversible gel-to-sol transformation through the removal and addition of CO2.
 Fig. 116  Schematic presentation of the CO2 stimuli-responsive hydrogel of SBCP 5. Adapted with permission from ref. 464. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Belmabkhout, Nugent and coworkers reported CO2 adsorption study on a series of isoreticular MOFs with periodically arrayed hexafluorosilicate (SIFSIX) pillars, called SIFSIX-2-Cu-i and SIFSIX-3-Zn.465 They proved such MOMs offer an unprecedented CO2 sorption selectivity over N2, H2 and CH4, even in the presence of moisture. The same group then presented the construction of an isostructural metal–organic framework (SIFSIX-3-Cu) based on pyrazine/copper(II) two-dimensional periodic 44 square grids pillared by silicon hexafluoride anions and thus allows further contraction of the pore system to 3.5 versus 3.84 Å for the parent zinc(II) derivative.466 This enhances the adsorption energetics and subsequently displayed carbon dioxide uptake and selectivity at very low partial pressures relevant to air capture and trace carbon dioxide removal.
Extreme toxicity, corrosiveness, and volatility pose serious challenges for the safe storage and transportation of elemental chlorine and bromine, which play critical roles in the chemical industry. Solid materials capable of forming stable nonvolatile compounds upon reaction with elemental halogens may partially mitigate these challenges by allowing safe halogen release on demand.
Dincă and coworkers demonstrated that elemental halogens quantitatively oxidize coordinatively unsaturated Co(II) ions in a robust azolate metal–organic framework (MOF) to produce stable and safe-to-handle Co(III) materials featuring terminal Co(III)–halogen bonds (Fig. 117).467 Thermal treatment of the oxidized MOF causes homolytic cleavage of the Co(III)–halogen bonds, reduction to Co(II), and concomitant release of elemental halogens. The reversible chemical storage and thermal release of elemental halogens occur with no significant losses of structural integrity, as the parent cobaltous MOF retains its crystallinity and porosity even after three oxidation/reduction cycles.
 Fig. 117  Reversible capture and release of Cl2 and Br2 with a redox-active metal–organic framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 467. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Besides that, Swager and coworkers have demonstrated the rational design and synthesis of a cobalt-containing conducting metallopolymer which proved to be an effective and selective solid-state sensor material for nitric oxides.468
Jiang and Zhao and coworkers reported a nitrogen-rich rth-type metal–organic framework (MOF) which was constructed based on rational design and careful synthesis.469 Coskun and coworkers have demonstrated that the combination of triptycene and the bis(o-diiminobenzosemiquinonato)metal(II) (M = Cu, Ni) complexes could point in a good direction toward the introduction of coordinatively unsaturated metal sites into porous polymers for enhanced CO2 gas capture and separation.470 Zhou and coworkers presented experimental data for 20 adsorption materials (metal–organic frameworks, porous polymer networks, and zeolite-5A), including CO2 and N2 isotherms and heat capacities.471 Falcaro, Hill and coworkers reported that magnetic metal–organic framework (MOF) composites also showed highly efficient CO2 desorption capacities upon their exposure to an alternating magnetic field, demonstrating a magnetic induction swing strategy for potentially low-energy regeneration of MOF adsorbents.472 Chung and coworkers demonstrated a new strategy to design amphiphilic mixed matrix membranes (MMMs) by incorporating a zeolitic imidazolate framework, ZIF-71, into the PEOT/PBT copolymer.473 The resultant membrane showed great potential for industrial CO2 capture and dehumidification with an excellent CO2 permeance of 131 GPU (gas permeation units) and an ideal CO2/N2 selectivity of 52.6 surpassing the original PEOT/PBT and Robeson's upper bound line, and water-removal capability of 30.9%.
Because of the implications for global warming, many other groups contributed to the development of efficient methods for carbon dioxide capture and sequester by metallopolymers in the scientific community in recent years.474–478
6.2 Metallopolymers as molecular barometers
Relative humidity is a crucial environmental factor in industry, food, and health care applications. In particular, humidity sensors have rapidly developed and generally used in many application fields including environmental control, industrial production, food storage, meteorology, aerospace science, etc.479,480
The simple concept and use of ultra-low-cost materials suggested the potential for applications of porous metal-film-based optical humidity sensors in many fields. The sensor developed was capable of detecting and localizing water leaks in a number of pipeline networks in metropolitan areas or in industrial facilities, very fast and precisely. These sensors are cheap, easy to fabricate, and are ideal to be used in high end environmental and health monitoring applications including food handling, storage, transport and environmental detection as an economically attractive alternative to electronic-circuit-based humidity sensors.
Stark and coworkers prepared a series of porous metal films for optical humidity sensing from copper nanoparticles protected by a 2–3 nm carbon coating, a silicon tenside, and a polymeric wetting agent (Fig. 118).481 Exposure to water or solvent vapor revealed an exceptional sensitivity with optical shifts in the visible light range of up to 50 nm for a change of 1% in relative humidity. At low humidity, the effect was assigned to SPR shifts while thin-film interference within a condensed water or solvent layer formed on top of the film accounted for the intense coloration at higher humidity. Fratoddi and coworkers have studied a nanostructured organometallic polymer and palladium/polymer hybrid to investigate the surface properties and sensitivity to relative humidity and hydrogen in surface acoustic wave sensors.482
 Fig. 118  (top) At low humidity, the polymer/tenside matrix of the dry hybrid film (left) takes up water or solvent. Swelling results in a volume increase (middle). At high humidity, additional vapor condenses on top of the porous film with partial leaching of tenside into the surface liquid layer (right). (bottom) Preparation of carbon-coated copper nanoparticles (left) resulted in core–shell structures of considerable air stability. The particles were completely dispersed in water, yielding a narrow particle-size distribution (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 481. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society. 
Márquez-Lucero designed and prepared an ultrafast water distributed sensor employing polyvinylamine cross-linked with Cu(II) (Fig. 119).483 This water sensor prototype presented a very short response time and an acceptable accuracy on the pinpointing of water leakages. Besides, the absorption water mechanism evaluated by swelling tests suggests a non-Fickian diffusion process. Zhao, Na and coworkers made a new highly sensitive humidity sensor derived from sulfonated poly(ether ketone) with metal salt-ion substitution.484
 Fig. 119  Synthesis of a water distributed sensor employing polyvinylamine cross-linked with Cu(II). (A) Measured currents vs. time graph for sensor cable when it is exposed to water leakage. (B) Currents ratio (i1/i2) vs. time graph. Adapted with permission from ref. 483. Copyright © 2009, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
M. Kolahdouz, Z. Kolahdouz and coworkers developed and optimized a method for fabrication of an ionic polymer-metal composite (IPMC)-based humidity sensor (Fig. 120).485 IPMC is a kind of smart material that could work as a sensor or an actuator in wet environments or liquids. Mechanical roughening, plasma treatment of the polymer surface and sputtering a thin layer of Ti and Cr as adhesion layers between polymer and Au electrodes are proposed to solve the poor adhesion issue. They used different fabricated IPMC electrodes as a capacitor to measure the relative humidity variations at different deflections and relative humidity conditions and compared the results. They found that IPMC using Au with 990 nm thickness worked properly and a sensitivity value of 13.43% was obtained.
 Fig. 120  (A) Schematic picture of an IPMC including Au electrodes deposited on a thin layer of Ti. (B) Capacitance variation of sample (150 nm Ti + 990 nm Au) vs. relative humidity under different deflections (bending degree is written in the charts’ legends) at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 485. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
Choi and coworkers have fabricated a linear humidity sensor based on bi-layered sensing area using exfoliated chromium carbide (Cr3C2) and polyacrylamide (PAM) thin films through all print methods (Fig. 121).486 Based on the working principle and sensing results of the single layered sensors, the new bi-layered structure was proposed and fabricated with a stable linear response and good sensitivity. The sensors are capable of measuring percentage relative humidity accurately in the range of 0% RH to 90% RH with an absolute change of 660 Ω per %RH and fast response and recovery times of 1 s and 1.9 s respectively.
 Fig. 121  (a) XRD crystallographic spectra of Cr3C2, (b) surface AFM of the exfoliated Cr3C2 thin film with the inset showing a single flake, and (c) height profile of the Cr3C2 thin film showing thickness of particles. Adapted with permission from ref. 486. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
Yadav and coworkers reported the effect of humidity on the transmitted power through a nanostructured copper(II) nitrate polyacrylamide (AAm) complex film at room temperature. For this purpose, the pre-cursor of Cu(II) nitrate polyAAm was prepared and used for the deposition of a film on the substrates of borosilicate (Fig. 122).487 The film was employed as a transmission based opto-electronic humidity sensor. The maximum sensitivity was found to be ∼0.838 μW per %RH. The response and recovery times were found to be 31 s and 76 s respectively. Experiments were repeated time to time and reproducibility was found to be ∼96% with negligible ageing effect. Their investigated sensor being optical in nature has the capability of multiplexing the information with the signal.
 Fig. 122  Synthesis and characterization of copper(II) nitrate polyacrylamide and its application as an opto-electronic humidity sensor. Adapted with permission from ref. 487. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved. 
6.3 Metallopolymers as molecular thermometers
To make use of the luminescent properties of metallopolymers, lanthanide coordination molecular compounds were realized for their temperature sensing back in 2004.488 In order to use this kind of lanthanide molecular compounds for temperature sensing, they need to be dispersed and stabilized in a polymeric matrix.489–494 One method is to assemble metal ions with organic bridging linkers into coordination polymers (CPs).495–505 The solid CP materials are very promising platforms to explore stable temperature sensors.
Because metal ions were rationally incorporated into the isostructural lanthanide MOFs/CPs, we also made use of dual luminescent intensities from two different metal ions (e.g., Tb3+ and Eu3+) to establish self-calibrated robust temperature sensors. The first few examples of mixed-lanthanide metal MOF thermometers have been realized since 2012.506–511 Tuning the triplet excited state energy of the organic linker could lead to the achievement of a new mixed-lanthanide MOF thermometer with higher sensitivity.
A number of examples have been reported of ratiometric luminescence thermometers that are based on the temperature-dependent phosphorescence of either the ligand or embedded dyes.512–514
Besides that, Yan and coworkers have prepared a series of photofunctional polymer hybrid thin films based on rare earth ion functionalized metal organic frameworks via a polymerization reaction of ethyl methacrylate (EMA) and 4-vinylpyridine (VPD) (Fig. 123).515 These hybrid polymer thin films are dense and transparent and display multiple colors, including blue, red and blue-green. Among them, the Y0.9Tb0.0999Eu0.0001 fabricated hybrid thin film displayed a white light output. More significantly and interestingly, the Tb0.999Eu0.001 fabricated hybrid thin film can be used as a luminescent ratiometric thermometer based on the energy transfer from Tb3+ to Eu3+, whose color will change from blue-green to pink from 100 K to 320 K.
 Fig. 123  (A) Procedure for obtaining luminescent rare earth polymer thin films: polymers including EMA and VPD coordinate with the rare earth ions loaded into the substrate and then both of them react via a polymerization reaction in the presence of the initiator. (B) The emission spectra of the Tb0.999Eu0.001-2 thin film recorded in the range from 100 K to 320 K excited at 329 nm and the inset is the photograph of the corresponding transparent thin film, (C) temperature dependent intensity of the 5D4 → 7F5 and 5D0 → 7F2 transitions, and (D) CIE chromaticity diagram showing the luminescence colors changing from blue-green to pink across the white area at different temperatures. Adapted with permission from ref. 515. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Andres, Monge and coworkers have obtained and studied isostructural compounds [Ln7(3,5-DSB)4(OH)9(H2O)15]·4H2O (Ln = Eu, Gd and Tb) (DSB = 3,5-disulfobenzoate) with excellent optical properties (Fig. 124).512 By combining the lanthanide cations with the DSB ligand the formation of a singular heptanuclear [Ln7(OH)9]+12 metallic core secondary building unit (SBU) has been promoted. The highly efficient emission from the triplet state of the disulfobenzoic ligand in the Gd-MOF and the exponential temperature dependence of ITriplet/ILn = I0exp(−EA/kBT) allow the design of thermometers with different color ranges through adequate multimetal combinations that cover almost the whole visible spectrum and are useful in a wide temperature range (10–300 K) with unprecedented sensitivities of up to 32% K−1.
 Fig. 124  [Ln7(3,5-DSB)4(OH)9(H2O)15]·4H2O. (a) View of the ligand coordinated to the metallic cluster, (b) tetrahedral arrangement of the Ln cations, and (c) vertex sharing bicapped dicubane SBU. In order to discard any phase transformation at low temperature the single crystal data of RPF17-Gd were collected at 120 K, showing no phase transition. Adapted with permission from ref. 512. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Carlos and Millán reported the first ratiometric luminescent molecular thermometer implemented in a self-assembled polymer monolayer functionalized Si surface (Fig. 125).516 The functionalization of Si surfaces with luminescent thermometers constitutes a proof-of-concept that foretells a wide range of applications in Si-based micro and nanostructures. The thermometric functionalization of the Si surface with Tb3+ and Eu3+ complexes lead to a thermal sensitivity of up to 1.43% K−1, a cycle–recycle reliability of 98.6%, and a temperature uncertainty of less than 0.3 K. The functionalized surface presented reversible bistability that could be used as an optically active molecular demultiplexer.
 Fig. 125  (A) Schematic of the Si surface functionalization with thermometric SAM showing the activation step, the functionalization with APTES, the reaction with the PEGA polymer (structure in inset) and the formation of the Eu3+ and Tb3+ complexes. (B) Schematic of the Si functionalized surface incorporating the temperature responsive Ln3+ complexes. (C) Exploded view of the setup used for the thermometric characterization of the sample, showing the thermofoil heater, the copper holder, and the Si-functionalized surface. (D) Schematic of the setup under 280 nm excitation that emits in the visible range. (E) Excitation spectrum of the functionalized Si surface at 296 K. The top and bottom lines correspond to the monitoring of the 5D4 → 7F5 (Tb3+) and 5D0 → 7F2 (Eu3+) transitions, respectively. (F) Emission spectra excited at 280 nm. The transitions assigned to Tb3+ and to Eu3+ are presented in gray and black, respectively. The asterisk marks the spectral region where an overlap between the Tb3+ transition 5D4 → 7F4 and Eu3+ transitions 5D0 → 7F0,1 is observed. (G) Normalized integrated area of the 5D4 → 7F5 (top) and 5D0 → 7F2 (bottom) transitions in a single heating–cooling cycle between 296 and 338 K, computed from the emission spectra under 280 nm excitation. Adapted with permission from ref. 516. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Chen, Qian and coworkers have developed a new ratiometric thermometer by encapsulating the luminescent perylene dye into the pores of the europium MOF ZJU-88 to yield the dual-emitting MOF⊃dye composite ZJU-88⊃perylene (Fig. 126).514 The unique energy transfer between perylene molecules and Eu3+ enables this ZJU-88⊃perylene thermometer to be highly temperature-sensitive over the physiological temperature range. The sensitivity of 1.28% °C−1 at 20 °C is higher than the best one of 0.31% °C−1 previously reported for the mixed lanthanide MOF, Tb0.99Eu0.01(BDC)1.5(H2O)2. They found that the ZJU-88⊃perylene has very low toxicology and very good stability under simulated physiological conditions, indicating that ZJU-88⊃perylene could be potentially utilized as a luminescent thermometer for biological applications.
 Fig. 126  (A) Design of dual-emitting ZJU-88⊃perylene composite (EnT: energy transfer, Em: emission). (B) Emission spectra of ZJU-88⊃perylene recorded from 20 to 80 °C, excited at 388 nm. (C) Temperature-dependent intensity ratio of Eu3+ (615 nm) to perylene (473 nm) and the fitted curve for ZJU-88⊃perylene. Adapted with permission from ref. 514. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Demessence and coworkers described a copper thiolate coordination polymer, [Cu(p-SPhCO2Me)]n, that exhibited luminescence thermochromism under UV associated with a unique well-separated triple emission (Fig. 127).517 This compound was a promising candidate as a ratiometric temperature sensor, working in a wide temperature range, from 100 to 500 K, with high sensitivity; it owned a wide color variation making it possible to read the temperature by the eye.
 Fig. 127  Structure representations of [Cu(p-SPhCO2Me)]n. (a) View of the Cu3S3 hexagons of the inorganic sheet on the (ac) plane. (b) View of the half-chair conformation of Cu3S3 hexagons. (c) View on the (ab) plane and (d) central projection along the a axis. Orange, Cu; yellow, S; red, O; grey, C. Hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity. (e) CIE chromaticity diagram showing the temperature dependence luminescence color change of [Cu(p-SPhCO2Me)]n in the 93–503 K temperature range (λex = 380 nm). Adapted with permission from ref. 517. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, Bouwman and coworkers have prepared a ratiometric thermometer based on a lanthanoid coordination polymer LaHL ({[La(HL)(H2O)2]·H2O}n, H4L = 5-hydroxy-1,2,4-benzenetricarboxylic acid) by hydrothermal methods.518 Cui, Qian and coworkers synthesized a Eu/Tb mixed lanthanide coordination polymer with rare 2D thick layers for ratiometric temperature sensing.519
7. Concluding remarks
The review discussed and concluded the strategies explored by materials scientists to position metallopolymers for sustainable applications in healthcare, therapeutics, photovoltaics, data storage, carbon dioxide capture, heterogeneous catalysis, etc. Connecting the merger between metals and polymers with sustainability will stimulate interest in the exploration of metals, generally considered to be toxic, as untapped resources in the pursuit of sustainability chemistry.
Metallopolymers showed wide applications as electronically unique and homogeneously or heterogeneously accessible catalysts for organic synthesis and catalysis via hiring a variety of metal types. Scopes of catalytic reactions that are covered include not only the classical Suzuki, Sonogashira and Heck couplings, but also aryl amination, epoxide opening, rearrangements, metathesis and cyclopropanation etc. In particular, the metal-containing polymers or dendrimer stabilized nanoparticles with controlled sizes are perfectly effective and recyclable in a variety of catalytic reactions. Applications of metallopolymers as metalloenzymes in the field of biocatalytic asymmetric synthesis and its DFT are also well recognized and prospected.
Metal-containing polymers also showed great potential in biomedical fields and cancer treatment due to their unique optical, electrochemical, and magnetic properties. Several groups have proved that metallopolymers were contributory in the codelivery of multiple chemotherapeutics for treating drug-resistant cancer. These functional drug carrier systems have the potential for increasing solubility and potency of drugs while reducing side effects. Recent advances in metallopolymers have also demonstrated their possibility as effective platforms that could prevent and treat infections from resistant strains. These metal-based macromolecules were proved to be antibacterially active, biologically safe, and may have application as an antimicrobial and antiviral wound dressing in a clinical setting. Metallopolymers as a photothermal agent for photothermal therapy (PTT) feature excellent tumor-targeted imaging and therapeutic functions, which would be particularly important for future clinical translation of nanomedicine. To promote their clinical therapeutic applications, development of safe and effective magnetic nanocarriers is needed. In vitro transfection efficiency of metallopolymers could be significantly enhanced under an external magnetic field and they possess great potential for cancer gene therapy and molecular imaging.
The presence of multiple redox-active metals in metallopolymers endows them with nanobattery and nanowire functions, which are integral to nanoelectronics. Indeed, metal-enabled electron or photon transfer processes in metallopolymers hold great application potential in sustainable energy storage as data storage medium. These methods offer excellent possibility of metallopolymers to be utilized in the simple and rapid fabrication of bit patterned media for magnetic data recording. Isolation of these luminescent and emissive nanomaterials draw great interest of researchers for imaging, display, electrochromic, photosensitizer, photovoltaic and sensing applications. Metallopolymers showed self-healing capability that is particularly desirable for multifunctional polymeric materials because it could make the materials more reliable, reduce repair costs, and extend their lifetime in many applications. Experimental results indicated that this class of metallopolymers could be used in the preparation of organic electro-optic devices. Metallopolymers are frontline precursors in the design of optical power limiters thanks to the synergy between the electronic property of the metal center and an organic ligand in the polymer. Optical power limiting (OPL) metal-containing nanomaterials are commonly regarded as an important class of compounds which could protect the delicate optical sensors or human eyes from sudden exposure to damaging intense laser beams.
Functionalities of metallopolymers are responsive to many important molecules like CO2, NO2 and halogens, as well as to changes in humidity and temperature, enabling these polymers to function as sensors, molecular barometers, and molecular thermometers. Incorporation of alkylamine functional groups into metallopolymers could greatly improve the CO2 adsorption characteristics. Employing this smart design, metallopolymers showed great potential for industrial CO2 capture and dehumidification with an excellent CO2 permeance and an ideal CO2 selectivity. Experimental results proved that metallopolymers have very low toxicology and very good stability under simulated physiological conditions, indicating that these materials could be potentially utilized as a luminescent thermometer for biological applications. Simply by tuning the triplet excited state energy of the organic linker could lead to the achievement of a new metallopolymer thermometer with high sensitivity. Metallopolymers are also a kind of smart material that could work as sensors or actuators in wet environments or liquids.520,521 The simple concept and use of ultra-low-cost metallopolymers suggested great potential for applications of porous metal-film-based optical humidity sensors and barometers in many fields.
The following schematic representation summarizes the state-of-the-art of sustainable metallopolymers for applications in numerous fields, such as catalysis, healthcare, energy storage and production, environment and climate change.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
R. L. N. Hailes, A. M. Oliver, J. Gwyther, G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5358–5407 RSC .
R. Sakamoto, K.-H. Wu, R. Matsuoka, H. Maeda and H. Nishihara, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7698–7714 RSC .
S. Chakraborty and G. R. Newkome, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3991–4016 RSC .
K. Yamamoto and T. Imaoka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Horike, S. Shimomura and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 695–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O’Keeffe and N. W. Ockwig, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
G. R. Newkome, C. N. Moorefield and S. Chakraborty, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2018, 28, 360–368 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsuoka, R. Sakamoto, K. Hoshiko and H. Nishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3145–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kambe, R. Sakamoto, T. Kusamoto and H. Nishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14357–14360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, M. Igushi, S. Shiki, M. Tsurata and H. Chiba, Nature, 2002, 415, 509–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Albrecht, K. Matsuoka, K. Fujita and K. Yamamoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5677–5682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bousseksou, G. Molnar, L. Salmon and W. Nicolazzi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3313–3335 RSC .
N. Li, P. Zhao and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 52, 1756–1789 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Polshettiwar, D. Cha, X. X. Zhang and J.-M. Basset, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9652–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Bronstein and Z. B. Shifrina, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 5301–5344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, J. L. Pilfold, B. Z. Momeni, A. J. Proud and J. K. Pearson, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 3453–3465 RSC .
Y. B. Huang, J. Liang and X. S. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 126–157 RSC .
Q. Yang, Q. Xu and H. L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4774–4808 RSC .
D. A. Pelletier and J. M. Basset, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 664–677 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Astruc, E. Boisselier and C. Ornelas, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1857–1959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Thomas and T. R. Ward, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 337–346 RSC .
O. Pamies, M. Dieguez and J.-E. Backvall, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 1567–1586 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hoarau, C. Hureau, E. Gras and P. Faller, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 308, 445–459 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Sauer, S. Gotzen and J. Okuda, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 9174–9183 RSC .
Y. W. Lin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 336, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wieszczycka and K. Staszak, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 351, 160–171 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schwizer, Y. Okamoto, T. Heinisch, Y. Gu, M. M. Pellizzoni, V. Lebrun, R. Reuter, V. Köhler, J. C. Lewis and T. R. Ward, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 142–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abd-El-Aziz and C. Agatemor, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2018, 28, 369–382 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Zhang, L. Rend and C. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5232–5263 RSC .
A. Zhang, A. Li, W. Zhao and J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4215–4227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor and N. Etkin, Biomaterials, 2017, 118, 27–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Siepe, B. B. Mamba, Innamuddin, A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and A. K. Mishra, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2018, 28, 467–480 CrossRef .
G. Whittell, M. D. Hager, U. S. Schubert and I. Manners, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 176–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ramanathana and S. B. Darling, Polym. Int., 2013, 62, 1123–1134 CrossRef .
F. Lu and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 356, 147–164 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Ho, Z.-Q. Yu and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5264–5295 RSC .
K. Y. Zhang, S. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 319, 180–195 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3439–3468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hofmeier and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 373–399 RSC .
C. Wang and D. Astruc, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 94, 306–383 CrossRef CAS .
E. Boisselier and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1759–1782 RSC .
X. Yan, T. Goodson, T. Imaoka and K. Yamamoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9321–9329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishihara and M. Murata, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2005, 15, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Darensbourg, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 10765–10780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 796–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-P. Hao, W.-C. Li and A.-H. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6447–6451 RSC .
J. R. Li, Y. Ma, M. C. McCarthy, J. Sculley, J. Yu, H. K. Jeong, P. B. Balbuen and H.-C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1791–1823 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sumida, D. L. Rogow, J. A. Mason, T. M. McDonald, E. D. Bloch, Z. R. Herm, T.-H. Bae and J. R. Long, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 724–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, P. K. Thallapally, B. P. McGrail, D. R. Brown and J. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2308–2322 RSC .
A. Samanta, A. Zhao, G. K. H. Shimizu, P. Sarkar and R. Gupta, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 1438–1463 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 3529–3543 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Wang, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12921–12930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Rider, K. Liu, J.-C. Eloi, L. Vanderark, L. Yang, J.-Y. Wang, D. Grozea, Z.-H. Lu, T. P. Russell and I. Manners, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 268–270 CrossRef PubMed .
U. F. J. Mayer, J. B. Gilroy, D. O’Hare and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10382–10383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Herbert, J. B. Gilroy, W. Y. Chan, L. Chabanne, A. Staubitz, A. J. Lough and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14958–14968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, T. Gadt, M. Jones, G. D. Scholes, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7953–7960 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Soto and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 40–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. McDowell, N. S. Zacharia, D. Puzzo, I. Manners and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3236–3237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. M. Yusoff, J. B. Gilroy, G. Cambridge, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11220–11230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, T. Gadt, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9095–9103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Gilroy, P. A. Rupar, G. R. Whittell, L. Chabanne, N. J. Terrill, M. A. Winnik, I. Manners and R. M. Richardson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17056–17062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Eloi, D. A. Rider, G. Cambridge, G. R. Whittell, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8903–8913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qi, G. Guerin, G. Cambridge, W. Xu, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6136–6144 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ahmed, S. K. Patra, L. Chabanne, C. F. J. Faul and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9324–9334 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, Y. Lu, G. Cambridge, G. Guerin, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 8363–8372 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiu, J. B. Gilroy and I. Manners, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 42–44 RSC .
G. Molev, Y. Lu, K. S. Kim, I. C. Majdalani, G. Guerin, S. Petrov, G. Walker, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 2604–2615 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Russell, J. B. Gilroy and I. Manners, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4077–4085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baljak, A. D. Russell, S. C. Binding, M. F. Haddow, D. O’Hare and I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5864–5867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nunns, G. R. Whittell, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 8420–8428 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hadadpour, J. Gwyther, I. Manners and P. J. Ragogna, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3430–3440 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cambridge, M. J. Gonzalez-Alvarez, G. Guerin, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 707–716 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Musgrave, A. D. Russell, G. R. Whittell, M. F. Haddow and I. Manners, Organometallics, 2015, 34, 897–907 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Boott, D. J. Lunn and I. Manners, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2016, 54, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Robinson, A. Nazemi, D. J. Lunn, D. W. Hayward, C. E. Boott, M.-S. Hsiao, R. L. Harniman, S. A. Davis, G. R. Whittell, R. M. Richardson, L. D. Cola and I. Manners, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9162–9175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Oliver, J. Gwyther, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 222–231 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Choueiri, A. Klinkova, S. Pearce, I. Manners and E. Kumacheva, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700554 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 995–1031 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Newkome, E. He and C. N. Moorefield, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1689–1746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and I. Manners, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2005, 15, 157–195 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. J. Scott, O. M. Wilson and R. M. Crooks, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 692–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Williams, A. J. Boydston and C. W. Bielawski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 729–744 RSC .
A. Corma, H. Garcıa and F. X. Llabres i Xamena, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4606–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, P. O. Shipman, B. N. Boden and W. S. McNeil, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 714–836 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gasser, I. Ott and N. Metzler-Nolte, J. Med. Chem., 2011, 54, 3–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Moon, D.-W. Lim. and M. P. Suh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1807–1824 RSC .
J. Zhang and C.-Y. Su, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1373–1408 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dragutan, V. Dragutan, B. C. Simionescu, A. Demonceau and H. Fischer, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2015, 11, 2747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Lutz, J.-M. Lehn, E. W. Meijer and K. Matyjaszewski, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16024 CrossRef CAS .
A. Winter and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5311–5357 RSC .
H. Gu, S. Mu, G. Qiu, X. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Yuan and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 364, 51–85 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and E. K. Todd, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 246, 3–52 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and E. A. Strohm, Polymer, 2012, 53, 4879–4921 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor and N. Etkin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 513–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Szymczak and D. R. Tyler, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 212–230 CrossRef CAS .
L. Babel, K. Baudet, T. N. Y. Hoang, H. Nozary and C. Piguet, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 5423–5433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Shultz, J. M. Zemke and D. R. Tyler, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7644–7649 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Shultz, L. N. Zakarahov and D. R. Tyler, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5555–5558 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liang, H. Ni, S. Bao, F. Zhu, H. Gao, Q. Wu and B. Z. Tang, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6294–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, C. J. W. Jim, F. Mahtab, J. Liu, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, Y. Dong and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 680–690 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haussler, Q. Sun, K. Xu, J. W. Y. Lam, H. Dong and B. Z. Tang, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2005, 15, 67–81 CrossRef .
M. J. Dunlop, C. Agatemor, A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and R. Bissessur, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2017, 27, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor, N. Etkin and R. Bissessur, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2268–2281 RSC .
D. Bellows, E. Gingras, S. M. Aly, A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, M. Leclerc and P. D. Harvey, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11720–11733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Otero, P. O. Shipman, A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and S. G. Urquhart, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9532–9541 CrossRef CAS .
E. Otero, P. O. Shipman, A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and S. G. Urquhart, Organometallics, 2009, 28, 2160–2172 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, P. O. Shipman and P. R. Shipley, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 459–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, D. J. Winram, P. O. Shipman and L. Bichler, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1992–1997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, D. J. Winram, P. O. Shipman, S. S. Dalgakiran, P. Shipley, L. Bichler and B. Patrick, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2341–2348 RSC .
M. Kumar and K. H. Pannell, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2007, 17, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dragutan, V. Dragutan and H. Fischer, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2008, 18, 311–324 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dragutan, I. Dragutan and H. Fischer, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2008, 18, 18–31 CrossRef CAS .
E. Schreiber, U. Ziener, A. Manzke, A. Plettl, P. Ziemann and K. Landfester, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1750–1760 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, A. A. Buelt, J. M. Hanley, B. P. Morgan, A. G. Tennyson and R. C. Smith, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 6344–6352 CrossRef CAS .
U. Stoeck, G. Nickerl, U. Burkhardt, I. Senkovska and S. Kaskel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17335–17337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Jackson, F. L. Beyer, S. C. Price, B. C. Rinderspacher and R. H. Lambeth, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 5416–5422 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Brady and D. R. Tyler, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2013, 23, 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, G. Li, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung, P. W.-T. Pong, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Jackson, S. D. Walck, K. E. Strawhecker, B. G. Butler, R. H. Lambeth and F. L. Beyer, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Song, S. Ha, K.-B. Seo, J. Lee, T.-L. Choi, T. Premkumar and C. Song, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 107994 RSC .
Q. Dong, W. Qu, W. Liang, F. Tai, K. Guo, C.-W. Leung, Y. H. Lo and W.-Y. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5010–5018 RSC .
A. Alkan, T. Gleede and F. R. Wurm, Organometallics, 2017, 36, 3023–3028 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Beto, E. D. Holt, Y. Yang, I. Ghiviriga, K. S. Schanze and A. S. Veige, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9934–9937 RSC .
C. Rüttiger, H. Hübner, S. Schöttner, T. Winter, G. Cherkashinin, B. Kuttich, B. Stühn and M. Gallei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4018–4030 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Baytekin, H. T. Baytekin and C. A. Schalley, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2006, 4, 2825–2841 RSC .
X. Li, Y.-T. Chan, M. Casiano-Maldonado, J. Yu, G. A. Carri, G. R. Newkome and C. Wesdemiotis, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 6667–6674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5922–5932 RSC .
A. Pastor and E. Martínez-Viviente, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 2314–2345 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ras-a and U. S. Schubert, Soft Matter, 2006, 2, 561 RSC .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, F. Lu and J. Ruiz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7852–7872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Diallo, C. Ornelas, L. Salmon, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8644–8648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ornelas, D. Méry, E. Cloutet, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1495–1506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6949–6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, C. Deraedt, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1871–1880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, C. Deraedt, L. Salmon, C. Labrugère, L. Etienne, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 1508–1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Deraedt, D. Wang, L. Salmon, L. Etienne, C. Labrugère, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 303–308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. Wang, S. Yu, T. Cornilleau, J. Ruiz, L. Salmon and D. Astruc, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5424–5431 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 816–854 RSC .
C. Wang, L. Salmon, R. Ciganda, L. Yates, S. Moya, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 644–646 RSC .
F. Fu, A. Martinez, C. Wang, R. Ciganda, L. Yate, A. Escobar, S. Moya, E. Fouquet, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5384–5387 RSC .
X. Liu and D. Astruc, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605305 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, R. Ciganda, L. Yate, S. Moya, L. Salmon, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 9465–9476 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11134–11137 RSC .
K. C. Nicolaou, P. G. Bulger and D. Sarlah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4442–4489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Kim and S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1696–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hassan, M. Sevignon, C. Gozzi, E. Schulz and M. Lemaire, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 1359–1469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin and J. Liebscher, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 133–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zeni and R. C. Larock, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4644–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Corbet and G. Mignani, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 2651–2710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cacchi and G. Fabrizi, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2873–2920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Sammelson and M. J. Kurth, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 137–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Thom, A. Nijs and C. Bolm, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 979–987 RSC .
H. Doucet and J.-C. Hierso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 834–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Littke, C. Dai and G. C. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 132, 4020–4028 CrossRef .
K. Endo, T. Ohkubo, M. Hirokami and T. Shibata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11033–11035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Su, S. Urgaonkar, P. A. McLaughlin and J. G. Verkade, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16433–16439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Karimi and P. F. Akhavan, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 6063–6072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. A. Yamada, S. M. Sarkar and Y. Uozumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3190–3198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Majeed, P. Shayesteh, L. R. Wallenberg, A. R. Persson, N. Johansson, L. Ye, J. Schnadt and O. F. Wendt, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 8457–8465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. Lou, L. Shangguan, J. Cai, H. Zhu and B. Shi, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 1351–1356 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suzuka, K. Kimura and T. Nagamine, Polymers, 2011, 3, 621–639 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guan, B. Li, G. Hai, X. Yang, T. Li and B. Tan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36437–36443 RSC .
M. Islam, P. Mondal, A. S. Roy and K. Tuhina, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 118, 52–62 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deraedt, A. Rapakousiou, Y. Wang, L. Salmon, M. Bousquet and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8445–8449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Q. Xu, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3685–3689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-C. Ding, C.-Y. Li, J.-J. Chen, J.-H. Zeng, H.-T. Tang, Y.-J. Ding and Z.-P. Zhan, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 2280–2287 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mennecke and A. Kirschning, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2009, 5, 2–8 Search PubMed .
E. Karakhanov, A. Maximov, S. Kardashev, Y. Kardasheva, A. Zolotukhina, E. Rosenberg and J. Allen, Macromol. Symp., 2011, 304, 55–64 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Edelman, K. J. Stevenson and B. J. Holliday, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 610–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mastrorilli, M. M. Dell’Anna, A. Rizzuti, M. Mali, M. Zapparoli and C. Leonelli, Molecules, 2015, 20, 18661–18684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mullangi, S. Nandi, S. Shalini, S. Sreedhala, C. P. Vinod and R. Vaidhyanathan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10876 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Elmas, W. Beelders, S. J. Bradley, R. Kroon, G. Laufersky, M. Andersson and T. Nann, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10206–10214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gonell, M. Poyatos and E. Peris, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 5746–5751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Salmon, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3489 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Gregurec, J. Irigoyen, A. Martinez, S. Moya, R. Ciganda, P. Hermange, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Deraedt, N. Pinaud and D. Astruc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12092–12098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Li, X. Luo, Z. Xu and J. Ge, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7953–7956 RSC .
T. Kajiwara, M. Fujii, M. Tsujimoto, K. Kobayashi, M. Higuchi, K. Tanaka and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2697–2700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, E. Y. Lee, D.-W. Yoo, S. J. Hong, J. H. Lee, H. Kwak, Y. M. Lee, J. Kim, C. Kim and J.-K. Lee, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1579–1582 RSC .
E. G. Corkum, M. J. Hass, A. D. Sullivan and S. H. Bergens, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 3522–3525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Oppelt, J. Gasiorowski, D. A. M. Egbe, J. P. Kollender, M. Himmelsbach, A. W. Hassel, N. S. Sariciftci and G. Knör, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12721–12729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. S. Garcia, R. S. Heyder, K. C. B. Oliveira, J. C. S. Costa, P. Corio, E. V. Gusevskaya, E. N. dos Santos, R. C. Bazito and L. M. Rossi, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1951–1960 CrossRef CAS .
J. Potier, S. Menuel, D. Fournier, S. Fourmentin, P. Woisel, E. Monflier and F. Hapiot, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1417–1420 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, C. He, L. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Liu and C. Duan, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2248–2256 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, X. Han, Z. Shao, K. Gao, M. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Wu, H. Hou and L. Mi, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 4874–4884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Pawar, B. Bantu, J. Weckesser, S. Blechert, K. Wurst and M. R. Buchmeiser, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9043–9051 RSC .
C. Wu, L. Li and L.-X. Shi, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6790–6794 RSC .
Q.-X. Zeng, G.-C. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Lin, Y. Lv and D.-Z. Jia, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 7016–7024 RSC .
L. Lin, Q. Zhu and A.-W. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11027–11033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Gao, T. Wen, J.-Y. Xu, X.-P. Zhai, M. Zhao, G.-W. Hu, P. Chen, Q. Wang and H.-L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 617–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Lykourinou, A. I. Hanafy, K. S. Bisht, A. Angerhofer and L.-J. Ming, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 1199–1207 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, C. He, J. Xiu, L. Yang and C. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15066–15069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Tuninetti, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, R. Ciganda, L. Salmon, S. Moya, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11610–11615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, C. Wang, Q. Wang, A. M. Martinez-Villacorta, A. Escobar, H. Chong, X. Wang, S. Moya, L. Salmon, E. Fouquet, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10034–10042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Soliman, M. H. Hassan, A. A. Abugable, S. G. Karakalos and M. H. Alkordi, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 2946–2951 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kazemi and R. Mohamadi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 823–827 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, M. E. Lydon and C. W. Jones, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 3636–3643 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Hao, Y.-Y. Ma, H.-Y. Zang, Y.-H. Wang, Y.-G. Li and E.-B. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 3778–3784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Gill, W. Long and C. W. Jones, Catal. Lett., 2009, 131, 425–431 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Zhang, Y. Qiao, P. Wilbon and C. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1840–1845 CAS .
L.-F. Gao, Z.-Y. Zhu, W.-S. Feng, Q. Wang and H.-L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28456–28462 CrossRef CAS .
V. Soukharev, N. Mano and A. Heller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8368–8369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Cho, T. Gadzikwa, M. Afshari, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 4863–4867 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Cozza, V. Bruzzo, F. Carniato, E. Marsano and O. Monticelli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 604–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, Y. Feng, F. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Yao, W. Zhao, F. Qiu, L. Yang, Y. Yao, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3899–3906 CrossRef CAS .
J. Camacho-Bunquin, N. A. Siladke, G. Zhang, J. Niklas, O. G. Poluektov, S. T. Nguyen, J. T. Miller and A. S. Hock, Organometallics, 2015, 34, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dhanalaxmi, R. Singuru, S. K. Kundu, B. M. Reddy, A. Bhaumik and J. Mondal, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 36728–36735 RSC .
V. Morizur, D. Hector, S. Olivero, J. R. Desmurs and E. Dunach, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016, 3126–3129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ji, X. Feng, S. S. Veroneau, Y. Song and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15600–15603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Wisser, P. Berruyer, L. Cardenas, Y. Mohr, E. A. Quadrelli, A. Lesage, D. Farrusseng and J. Canivet, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1653–1661 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bruller, H.-W. Liang, U. I. Kramm, J. W. Krumpfer, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23799–23808 RSC .
D. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, M. Wang, X. Yang, T. Wu, C. Moorefield, P. Wang and G. R. Newkome, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 11269–11273 RSC .
M. S. El-Shall, V. Abdelsayed, A. E. Rahman, S. Khder, H. M. A. Hassan, H. M. El-Kaderi and T. E. Reich, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7625–7631 RSC .
T. V. Magdesieva, O. M. Nikitin, O. V. Polyakova, A. V. Yakimansky, M. Ya. Goikhman and I. V. Podeshvo, ECS Trans., 2011, 35, 1–17 CAS .
V. C. Ferreira, A. I. Melato, A. F. Silva and L. M. Abrantes, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3567–3574 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yoo, H. Miyamura and S. Kobayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3095–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. El-Hamshary, M. H. El-Newehy and S. S. Al-Deyab, Molecules, 2011, 16, 9900–9911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, X. Yang, F. Zhu, J. Huang, W. He, W. Wang and H. Li, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 476–484 RSC .
B. D. Nhi, A. R. Maratovich, A. A. Garipovna and A. S. Ivanova, J. Sulfur Chem., 2014, 35, 74–85 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiang, Y. Xue, D. Cao, L. Huang, J.-F. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2433–2437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Huang, Q. Wang, J. Liang, X. Wang and R. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10104–10107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. Wen, D. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
C. Moreno-Marrodan, F. Liguori, P. Barbaro, S. Caporali, L. Merlo and C. Oldani, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 4256–4267 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ye, G. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Han, L. Xue, F. Cao, Q. Zhang, L. Yang, L. Lin and X. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2018, 4256–6478 Search PubMed .
J. Bos, F. Fusetti, A. J. M. Driessen and G. Roelfes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7472–7475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Drienovsk, A. Rioz-Martınez, A. Draksharapu and G. Roelfes, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 770–776 RSC .
J. Bos, W. R. Browne, A. J. M. Driessen and G. Roelfes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9796–9799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Drienovska, L. Alonso-Cotchico, P. Vidossich, A. Lledos, J.-D. Marechal and G. Roelfes, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 7228–7235 RSC .
V. Köhler, Y. M. Wilson, M. Dürrenberger, D. Ghislieri, E. Churakova, T. Quinto, L. Knörr, D. Häussinger, F. Hollmann, N. J. Turner and T. R. Ward, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 93–99 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Zimbron, T. Heinisch, M. Schmid, D. Hamels, E. S. Nogueira, T. Schirmer and T. R. Ward, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5384–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Häussinger, V. Köhler and T. R. Ward, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 357–360 RSC .
Y. Okamoto, V. Köhler, C. E. Paul, F. Hollmann and T. R. Ward, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3553–3557 CrossRef CAS .
F. W. Monnard, E. S. Nogueira, T. Heinisch, T. Schirmer and T. R. Ward, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3269–3274 RSC .
H. Mallin, M. Hestericová, R. Reuter and T. R. Ward, Nat. Protoc., 2016, 11, 835–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Ward, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14909–14911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hestericov, T. Heinisch, L. Alonso-Cotchico, J.-D. Marechal, P. Vidossich and T. R. Ward, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1863–1868 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Dydio, H. M. Key, A. Nazarenko, J. Y.-E. Rha, V. Seyedkazemi, D. S. Clark and J. F. Hartwig, Science, 2016, 354(6308), 102–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeschek, R. Reuter, T. Heinisch, C. Trindler, J. Klehr, S. Panke and T. R. Ward, Nature, 2016, 537(7622), 661–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9998–10000 RSC .
M. Basauri-Molina, C. F. Riemersma, M. A. Wurdemann, H. Kleijn and R. J. M. Klein Gebbink, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6792–6795 RSC .
M. Basauri-Molina, D. G. A. Verhoeven, A. J. Schaik, H. Kleijn and R. J. M. K. Gebbink, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15676–15685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Cheng, J. Hao, C. Wang, G. Jia and C. Li, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5578–5585 RSC .
A. Chevalley and M. Salmain, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11984–11986 RSC .
P. J. Deuss, G. Popa, A. M. Z. Slawin, W. Laan and P. C. J. Kamer, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1184–1191 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Lewis, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2954–2975 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chevalley, M. V. Cherrier, J. C. F-Camps, M. Ghasemia and M. Salmain, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 5482–5489 RSC .
D. Gamenara and P. D. María, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 2989–2992 RSC .
H. Yang, P. Srivastava, C. Zhang and J. C. Lewis, ChemBioChem, 2014, 15, 223–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Srivastava, H. Yang, K. Ellis-Guardiola and J. C. Lewis, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Herrero, N. Nguyen-Thi, F. Hammerer, F. Banse, D. Gagné, N. Doucet, J.-P. Mahy and R. Ricoux, Catalysts, 2016, 6, 202 CrossRef .
W. Ghattas, L. Cotchico-Alonso, J.-D. Mar|chal, A. Urvoas, M. Rousseau, J.-P. Mahy and R. Ricoux, ChemBioChem, 2016, 17, 433–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Wang, M. Pan, J. Wei, F. Jiang, R. Lu, X. Liu, Y. Huang and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25387–25396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Jarvis, L. Obrecht, P. J. Deuss, W. Laan, E. K. Gibson, P. P. Wells and P. C. J. Kamer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13596–13600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dey, C. L. Rehl and A. Jaschke, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 12162–12170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pocquet, N. Vologdin, G. F. Mangiatordi, I. Ciofini, O. Nicolotti, S. Thorimbert and M. Salmain, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 3622–3634 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang and M. Bols, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 13766–13775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Grimm, D. Sauer, T. Polen, L. Zhu, T. Hayashi, J. Okuda and U. Schwaneberg, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2611–2614 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, A. M. Swartz, H. J. Park, P. Srivastava, K. Ellis-Guardiola, D. M. Upp, G. Lee, K. Belsare, Y. Gu, C. Zhang, R. E. Moellering and J. C. Lewis, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 318–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Schneider, A. C. Manesis, M. J. Stevenson and H. S. Shafaat, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4681–4684 RSC .
Z. Ke, S. Abe, T. Ueno and K. Morokuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15418–15429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ortega-Carrasco, A. Lledos and J.-D. Marechal, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2014, 11, 20140090 CrossRef PubMed .
V. M. Robles, E. Ortega-Carrasco, L. Alonso-Cotchico, J. Rodriguez-Guerra, J. Lledós and J.-D. Maréchal, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2469–2480 CrossRef .
T. Heinisch, M. Pellizzoni, M. Dürrenberger, C. E. Tinberg, V. Köhler, J. Klehr, D. Häussinger, D. Baker and T. R. Ward, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10414–10419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mondal, R. Singuru, S. C. Shit, T. Hayashi, S. Irle, Y. Hijikata, J. Mondal and A. Bhaumik, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1610–1619 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Shit, R. Singuru, S. Pollastri, B. Joseph, B. S. Rao, N. Lingaiah and J. Mondal, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2195–2210 RSC .
K. Dhanalaxmi, R. Singuru, S. Mondal, L. Bai, B. M. Reddy, A. Bhaumik and J. Mondal, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1033–1045 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Shit, S. Khilari, I. Mondal, D. Pradhan and J. Mondal, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 14827–14838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dhanalaxmi, R. Yadav, S. K. Kundu, B. M. Reddy, V. Amoli, A. K. Sinha and J. Mondal, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 15639–15644 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Wang and Z. Guo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2622–2631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Poon, K. Lu, C. He and W. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4182c CrossRef PubMed .
C. He, C. Poon, C. Chan, S. D. Yamada and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6010–6019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Poon, X. Duan, C. Chan, W. Han and W. Lin, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2016, 13, 3665–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, L. Xu, W. Zhu., L. Feng, J. Liu, Q. Chen, Z. Dong, J. Zhao, Z. Liu and M. Chen, Biomaterials, 2018, 156, 121–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, M. Parowatkin, W. Steffen, H.-J. Butt, V. Mailänder and S. Wu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 467–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Chow, J. Fluoresc., 2012, 22, 1539–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aghevlian, Y. Lu, M. A. Winnik, D. W. Hedley and R. M. Reilly, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2018, 15, 1150–1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor, N. Etkin, D. P. Overy, M. Lanteigne, K. McQuillan and R. G. Kerr, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 3694–3703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, A. A. Abdelghani, J. K. Pearson, M. K. Awad, D. P. Overy and R. G. Kerr, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 987–996 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor, N. Etkin, R. Bissessur, D. Overy, M. Lanteigne, K. McQuillan and R. G. Kerr, Macromol. Biosci., 2017, 17, 1700020 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, A. A. Abdelghani, S. K. El-Sadany, D. P. Overy and R. G. Kerr, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 82, 307–323 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor, N. Etkin and R. Bissessur, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 369–379 CrossRef CAS .
A. Munoz-Bonilla and M. Fernandez-Garcia, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 281–339 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Z. Zheng, B. Wang, H. Mao and F. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14656–14664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, M. Bam, P. Pageni, T. Zhu, Y. P. Chen, M. Nagarkatti, A. W. Decho and C. Tang, ACS Infect. Dis., 2017, 3, 845–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pageni, P. Yang, Y. P. Chen, Y. Huang, M. Bam, T. Zhu, M. Nagarkatti, B. C. Benicewicz, A. W. Decho and C. Tang, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 417–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, S. Begum, Z. Wang, P. Krolla, D. Wagner, S. Bräse, C. Wöll and M. Tsotsalas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1528–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Yan, P. Pageni, Y. Yan, A. Wirth, Y.-P. Chen, Y. Qiao, Q. Wang, A. W. Decho and C. Tang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Younus, B. I. Khalil, T. M. Salih and R. M. Rumez, Int. J. Chem. Eng. Appl., 2016, 7, 115–119 CAS .
I. Pradeep, B. Balajothi, S. Arunachalam, R. Dhivya, A. Vinothkanna, M. A. Akbarsha and S. Sekar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 31831–31839 RSC .
M. S. Hassana and H. M. M. Ibrahim, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2016, 27, 532–541 CrossRef .
S. M. Morgan, A. Z. El-Sonbati and M. A. El-Mogazy, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4264 CrossRef .
A. Z. El-Sonbati, M. A. Diab, S. M. Morgan, A. M. Eldesoky and M. Z. Balboula, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4207 CrossRef .
M. Dhanasekara, V. Jeneferb, R. B. Nambiarc, S. G. Babua, S. P. Selvamc, B. Neppoliana and S. V. Bhata, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 97, 238–243 CrossRef .
D. Carvalho, T. Sousa, P. V. Morais and A. P. Piedade, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 379, 489–496 CrossRef CAS .
N. Punitha, P. Saravanan, R. Mohan and P. S. Ramesh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
N. Thokala, C. Kealey, J. Kennedy, D. B. Brady and J. B. Farrell, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 78, 1179–1186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. L. Vivero-Escoto, R. C. Huxford-Phillips and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2673–2685 RSC .
Y. Yang, J. Liu, C. Liang, L. Feng, T. Fu, Z. Dong, Y. Chao, Y. Li, G. Lu, M. Chen and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2774–2781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bian, H. Lian, Y. Zhang, F. Tai, H. Wang, Q. Dong, B. Yu, X. Wei and Q. Zhao, J. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 835, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, X. Deng, S. Bao, B. Liu, B. Liu, P. Ma, Z. Cheng, M. Pang and J. Lin, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 2183–2188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Li, S. Liu, Z. Xie and X. Jing, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9320–9325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Wang, S. Liu and Z. Xie, Bioconjugate Chem., 2017, 28, 2784–2793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Wang, X. Zheng, Z. Li and Z. Xie, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 1379–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-Y. Huang, P.-H. Chiang, W.-C. Hsiao, C.-C. Chuang and C.-W. Chang, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 6523–6531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Shapiro, Magn. Reson. Med., 2015, 73, 376–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Razzaque, S. Z. Hussain, I. Hussain and B. Tan, Polymer, 2016, 8, 156 Search PubMed .
X. Dong, Y. Ding, P. Wu, C. Wang and C. G. Schafer, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 7625–7636 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rengaraj, P. Puthiaraj, N.-S. Heo, H. Lee, S. K. Hwang, S. Kwon, W.-S. Ahn and Y.-S. Huh, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 160, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Zhang, M. A. Hempenius and G. J. Vancso, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 106355 RSC .
Y. Zeng, Z. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 781, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, X. Qi, X. Wang, X. Wang, Q. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Fu and S. Yao, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 79, 18–22 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Bairagi and N. Verma, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 814, 134–143 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shi, Y. Qu, C. Liu, H. Khan, P. Sun and W. Zhang, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
L. Thomi, P. Schaefer, K. Landfester and F. R. Wurm, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, N. Zhang, W. Xia, X. Wu, C. Yao, X. Liu, X.-Y. Hu, C. Lin and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6643–6649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, X. Qi, X. Wang, X. Wang, Q. Wang, P. Qi, Z. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Fu and S. Yao, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1005, 27–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hou, T. Zhao, W. Li, F. Li and P. Gai, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4607–4613 RSC .
S. Beg, M. Rahman, A. Jain, S. Saini, P. Midoux, C. Pichon, F. J. Ahmad and S. Akhter, Drug Discovery Today, 2017, 22, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yu, R. Zhao, D. Wu, F. Zhang, L. Shao, J. Zhou, J. Yang, G. Tang, X. Chen and F. Huang, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6178 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Chen, X. Bao, T. Li, Y. Ling, C. Li, C. Wu and Y. Zhao, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1811–1820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, N. Lv, X. Li, B. Liu, J. Feng, X. Ren, T. Guo, D. Chen, J. F. Stoddart, R. Gref and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7454–7463 RSC .
P. Liu, A. J. Boyle, Y. Lu, J. Adams, Y. Chi, R. M. Reilly and M. A. Winnik, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 3613–3623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-M. Bao, L. Wang, H.-Q. Yuan, X.-Y. Wang, T.-X. Mei and M.-R. Qu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 109453 RSC .
A. B. Lago, A. Pino-Cuevas, R. Carballo and E. M. Vázquez-López, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 1614–1621 RSC .
W. Zhou, L. Wang, F. Li, W. Zhang, W. Huang, F. Huo and H. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605465 CrossRef .
S. C. Larnaudie, J. C. Brendel, I. Romero-Canelón, C. Sanchez-Cano, S. Catrouillet, J. Sanchis, J. P. C. Coverdale, J.-I. Song, A. Habtemariam, P. J. Sadler, K. A. Jolliffe and S. Perrier, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 239–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Maggioni, M. Galli, L. D’Alfonso, D. Inverso, M. V. Dozzi, L. Sironi, M. Iannacone, M. Collini, P. Ferruti, E. Ranucci and G. D’Alfonso, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 544–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, L. Wang, Q. Pei, S. He, S. Liu and Z. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Wang, W. Liu and X.-B. Yin, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3891–3897 RSC .
Q. Yang, M. Shi, H. Zhao, J. Lin, L. An, L. Cui, H. Yang, Z. Zhou, Q. Tian and S. Yang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 3728–3734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gu, R. Ciganda, P. Castel, S. Moya, R. Hernandez, J. Ruiz and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2204–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Borre, J.-F. Stumbe, S. Bellemin-Laponnaz and M. Mauro, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8344–8347 RSC .
C.-J. Yao, Y.-W. Zhong, H.-J. Nie, H. D. Abruña and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20720–20723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Yao, J. Yao and Y.-W. Zhong, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6259–6263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Nie and Y.-W. Zhong, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 11316–11322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Hu, T. Sato, J. Zhang, S. Moriyama and M. Higuchi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3408–3413 RSC .
C.-W. Hu, T. Sato, J. Zhang, S. Moriyama and M. Higuchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9118–9125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maier and B. Tieke, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 925–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Matsuse, M. Abe, Y. Tomiyasu, A. Inatomi, H. Yonemura, S. Yamada and Y. Hisaeda, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2013, 23, 136–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bandyopadhyay and M. Higuchi, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1688–1697 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bao, Q. Zhao, H. Wang, K. Liu and D. Qiu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2013, 38, 88–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schott, W. Szczerba and D. G. Kurth, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10721–10727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Watesa-Chorab and W. G. Skene, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 19053–19060 RSC .
A. E. Taouil, J. Husson and L. Guyard, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 728, 81–85 CrossRef .
C. Satheeshkumar, J.-Y. Park, D.-C. Jeong, S. G. Song, J. Lee and C. Song, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60892–60897 RSC .
D. Qiu, X. Bao, Q. Zhao, Q. Yang, Y. Feng, H. Wang, C. Yang and K. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 8264–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Hsu, J. Zhang, T. Sato, S. Moriyama and M. Higuchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18266–18272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, D. Strohecker, V. Lynch, B. J. Holliday and R. A. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34568–34580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chakraborty, R. K. Pandey, U. Rana, M. Kanao, S. Moriyama and M. Higuchi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9428–9437 RSC .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, C. Agatemor, N. Etkin and B. Wagner, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1235–1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, A. A. Abdelghani, B. D. Wagner and E. M. Abdelrehim, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 3277–3299 RSC .
X. Bao, Q. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yu, Q. Yang, D. Bi, Y. Feng, H. Fan, Y. Zhu and D. Qiu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 86, 295–298 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ornelas, J. Ruiz, E. Cloutet, S. Alves and D. Astruc, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Y. Wong, X.-Z. Wang, Z. He, A. B. Djurišić, C.-T. Yip, K.-Y. Cheung, H. Wang, C. S. K. Mak and W.-K. Chan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ornelas, L. Salmon, J. Ruiz Aranzaes and D. Astruc, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 50–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tamura, N. Akutagawa, M. Satoh, J. Wada and T. Masuda, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1944–1949 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mai, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 106–121 RSC .
H. Zhong, G. Wang, Z. Song, X. Li, H. Tang, Y. Zhou and H. Zhan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6768–6770 RSC .
W. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Ang, H. Wang, H. T. Tan, D. Yang, C. Xu, N. Xiao, B. Li, W. Liu, X. Wang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7164–7170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiang, C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6905–6930 RSC .
Z. Meng, K. Sato, T. Sukegawa, K. Oyaizu, C.-L. Ho, J. Xiang, Y.-H. Feng, Y. H. Lo, H. Nishide and W.-Y. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 812, 51–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiang, K. Sato, H. Tokue, K. Oyaizu, C.-L. Ho, H. Nishide, W.-Y. Wong and M. Wei, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 1030–1035 CrossRef CAS .
D. Scheid, M. von der Lühe and M. Gallei, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1573–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schöttner, R. Hossain, C. Rüttiger and M. Gallei, Polymers, 2017, 9, 491–496 CrossRef .
L. Yan, C. Li, L. Cai, K. Shi, W. Tang, W. Qu, C.-L. Ho, G. Yu, J. Li and X. Wang, J. Organomet. Chem., 2017, 846, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ornelas, J. Ruiz, C. Belin and D. Astruc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 590–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Jin, H. Deng, K. Li, Y. Zheng, C. Yu and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7952–7957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Nguyen, R. A. Jones and B. J. Holliday, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 872–883 CrossRef CAS .
B.-B. Cui, Z. Mao, Y. Chen, Y.-W. Zhong, G. Yu, C. Zhan and J. Yao, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 1308–1315 RSC .
Y. Ma, H.-X. Chen, F. Zhou, H. Li, H. Dong, Y.-Y. Li, Z.-J. Hu, Q.-F. Xu and J.-M. Lu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7659–7664 RSC .
C.-L. Tsai, K. S. K. Reddy, C.-Y. Yeh, C.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Lin, H.-J. Yen, M.-C. Tsaia and G.-S. Liou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 88531–88537 RSC .
S. M. Yoon, S. C. Warren and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4437–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shunmugam and G. N. Tew, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1355–1362 CrossRef CAS .
A. Batagin-Neto, E. S. Bronze-Uhle, D. M. Fernandes, I. Fratoddi, I. Venditti, F. Decker, E. Bodo, M. V. Russo and C. F. O. Graeff, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 8047–8053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hatten, N. Bell, N. Yufa, G. Christmann and J. R. Nitschke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3158–3164 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-S. Wu, Y.-T. Lee and Y. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 2776–2784 RSC .
J. J. Walsh, Q. Zeng, R. J. Forster and T. E. Keyes, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2012, 11, 1547–1557 RSC .
J. J. Walsh, J. Zhu, Q. Zeng, R. J. Forster and T. E. Keyes, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 9928–9937 RSC .
B. Du, D. Fortin and P. D. Harvey, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2013, 23, 81–88 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zha, C. Ding, X. Rui and Y. Xie, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 4583–4590 CrossRef CAS .
D. Volz, A. F. Hirschbiel, D. M. Zink, J. Friedrichs, M. Nieger, T. Baumann, S. Brase and C. Barner-Kowollik, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1457–1462 RSC .
W. Chen, X. Tang, W. Dou, Z. Ju, B. Xu, W. Xu and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5124–5127 RSC .
X.-Y. Chen, X. Yang and B. J. Holliday, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1546–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Feng, L. Liu, C. Yu, X. Lü, X. Zhu, W.-K. Wong, R. A. Jones, M. Pan and C. Su, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 6229–6241 RSC .
A. Bettencourt-Dias and J. S. K. Rossini, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 9954–9963 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, S. Sun, W.-L. Tong and M. C. W. Chan, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 6896–6902 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Greenfield, F. J. Rizzuto, I. Goldberga and J. R. Nitschke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7541–7545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, M. Pang, H. Chen, G. Fu, B. Li, X. Lu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9021–9027 RSC .
B. Happ, J. Schafer, R. Menzel, M. D. Hager, A. Winter, J. Popp, R. Beckert, B. Dietzek and U. S. Schubert, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6277–6287 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, W. Feng, P. Su, X. Lu, J. Song, D. Fan, W.-K. Wong, R. A. Jones and C. Su, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5950–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Z. Miao, W.-X. Feng, Z. Zhang, P.-Y. Su, X.-Q. Lü, J.-R. Song, D.-D. Fan, W.-K. Wong, R. A. Jones and C.-Y. Su, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 2839–2848 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang and X. Cui, Asian J. Chem., 2014, 26, 7081–7082 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Mehr, N. C. Romano, R. Altamimi, J. M. Modarellic and D. A. Modarelli, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 3176–3184 RSC .
X. Wang, T. Kenny, D. Fortin, S. M. Aly, G. Brisard and P. D. Harvey, Organometallics, 2015, 34, 1567–1581 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Liu, C. Yu, X. Lü, X. Zhu, W.-K. Wong and R. A. Jones, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2015, 60, 51–53 CrossRef CAS .
E. Borr, J.-F. Stumb, S. Bellemin-Laponnaz and M. Mauro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1313–1317 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He, L. Liu, G. Fu, X. Lü, W.-K. Wong and R. A. Jones, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2016, 72, 62–64 CrossRef CAS .
P. Su, G. Fu, L. Liu, W. Feng and X. Lü, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 83, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Einkauf, J. M. Clark, A. Paulive, G. P. Tanner and D. T. Lill, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 5544–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-X. Feng, S.-Y. Yin, M. Pan, H.-P. Wang, Y.-N. Fan, X.-Q. Lu and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1742–1750 RSC .
G. Fu, J. Guan, B. Li, L. Liu, Y. He, C. Yu, Z. Zhang and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4114–4121 RSC .
L. Babel, L. Guenee, C. Besnard, S. V. Eliseeva, S. Petoud and C. Piguet, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 325–335 RSC .
G. J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong, C. Ye and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 963–975 CrossRef .
G. J. Zhou and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2541–2566 RSC .
H. Gu, S. Li, J. Wang, W. J. Blau and Y. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 188–193 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dragonetti, A. Colombo, D. Marinotto, S. Righetto, D. Roberto, A. Valore, M. Escadeillas, V. Guerchais, H. L. Bozec, A. Boucekkine and C. Latouche, J. Organomet. Chem., 2014, 751, 568–572 CrossRef CAS .
D. Espa, L. Pilia, L. Marchiò, F. Artizzu, G. Di Carlo, D. Marinotto, A. Serpe, F. Tessore and P. Deplano, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 17431–17438 RSC .
R. S. Price, G. Dubinina, G. Wicks, M. Drobizhev, A. Rebane and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10795–10805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Boixe, V. Guerchais, H. L. Bozec, D. Jacquemin, A. Amar, A. Boucekkine, A. Colombo, C. Dragonetti, D. Marinotto, D. Roberto, S. Righetto and R. D. Angelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5367–5375 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ouyang, J. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, D. Yan, Q. Wang, M. Guo and A. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10366–10370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Chan, C. S. Hui, K. Y. K. Man, K. W. Cheng, H. L. Wong, N. Zhu and A. B. Djurisi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1351–1359 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. McCluskey, T. N. Smith, P. K. Madasu, C. E. Coumbe, M. A. Mackey, P. A. Fulmer, J. H. Wynne, S. Stevenson and J. P. Phillips, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 882–887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Balamurugan, M. L. P. Reddy and M. Jayakannan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 10789–10800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Soliman, E. Zysman-Colman and P. D. Harvey, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 627–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, L. Du, K. C. Lo, W. Xiong, W. K. Chan and D. L. Phillips, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8145–8152 CrossRef .
C.-P. Ye, G. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Han, L. Xue, F.-Y. Cao, Q. Zhang, L.-F. Yang, L.-Z. Lin and X.-D. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 6470–6478 RSC .
H. Shimakoshi, M. Nishi, A. Tanaka, K. Chikama and Y. Hisaeda, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6548–6550 RSC .
X.-J. Kong, Z. Lin, Z.-M. Zhang, T. Zhang and W. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6411–6416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu and B. J. Holliday, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. He, A. Wild, H. Wu, Y. Cao, U. S. Schubert, C.-H. Chui and W.-Y. Wong, Chem. – Asian J., 2011, 6, 1766–1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, W.-C. Chow, W.-Y. Wong, C.-H. Chui and R. S.-M. Wong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2011, 696, 1189–1197 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gendron, P.-O. Morin, P. Berrouard, N. Allard, B. R. Aich, C. N. Garon, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7188–7193 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qin, Y. Fu, C.-H. Chui, C.-W. Kan, Z. Xie, L. Wang and W.-Y. Wong, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1472–1477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Padhy, M. Ramesh, D. Patra, R. Satapathy, M. K. Pola, H.-C. Chu, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei and H.-C. Lin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 528–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2436–2440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ng, C.-L. Ho, M. K. Fung, Y. C. Sun, S.-Y. Shao, Y.-Y. Fu, A. M. C. Ng, C. H. Li, W. K. Cheung, Y. H. Leung, A. B. Djurisic, Q. Wang, Z. He, X. Wang, W.-K. Chan, Z.-Y. Xie, J. A. Zapien, C. H. To and W.-Y. Wong, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 1300–1310 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, G. Wen, Q. Xiu, L. Guo, J. Deng and C. Zhong, J. Coord. Chem., 2012, 65, 1632–1644 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Chen, W. Xu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 461–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Feng, X. Shen, Y. Li, Y. He, D. Huang and Q. Peng, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5701–5710 RSC .
G. Marzano, C. V. Ciasca, F. Babudri, G. Bianchi, A. Pellegrino, R. Po and G. M. Farinola, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2014, 6583–6614 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-N. Liu, S.-F. Wang, Y.-T. Tao and W. Huang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2016, 71, 250–1258 Search PubMed .
H. Zhan, S. Lamare, A. Ng, T. Kenny, H. Guernon, W.-K. Chan, A. B. Djurisic, P. D. Harvey and W.-Y. Wong, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5155–5167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kimoto and Y. Tajima, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 667–671 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vinoth, S. G. Babu, V. Bharti, V. Gupta, M. Navaneethan, S. V. Bhat, C. Muthamizhchelvan, P. C. Ramamurthy, C. Sharma, D. K. Aswal, Y. Hayakawa and B. Neppolian, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goswami, J. L. Hernandez, M. K. Gish, J. Wang, B. Kim, A. P. Laudari, S. Guha, J. M. Papanikolas, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8449–8461 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, K. Zhang, J. Lu, J. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15326–15329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, G. Li, C.-L. Ho, M. Faisal, C.-W. Leung, P. W.-T. Pong, K. Liu, B.-Z. Tang, I. Manners and W.-Y. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1034–1040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Meng, G. Li, S.-M. Ng, H.-F. Wong, S.-C. Yiu, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung and W.-Y. Wong, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 4467–4475 RSC .
Q. Dong, W. Qu, W. Liang, K. Guo, H. Xue, Y. Guo, Z. Meng, C.-L. Ho, C.-W. Leung and W.-Y. Wong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7068–7074 RSC .
T. Gong, Z. Gao, W. Bian, F. Tai, W. Liang, W. Liang, Q. Dong and C. Dong, J. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 819, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liang, L. Zheng, S. Bao, H. Gao, F. Zhu and Q. Wu, Carbon, 2015, 93, 719–730 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liang, X. Li, S. Bao, H. Gao, F. Zhu and Q. Wu, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4447–4454 RSC .
G. Liang, L. Zheng, S. Bao, B. Fei, H. Gao, F. Zhu and Q. Wu, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 4115–4121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, L.-T. Weng, W. Qin, G. Liang and B. Z. Tang, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 593–597 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, Z. Mac and S. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3324–3334 RSC .
R. W. Flaig, T. M. O. Popp, A. M. Fracaroli, E. A. Kapustin, M. J. Kalmutzki, R. M. Altamimi, F. Fathieh, J. A. Reimer and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12125–12128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, B. Liu, S. Yao, T. Wang, G. Li, Q. Huo and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15287–15289 RSC .
A. P. Gómora-Figueroa, J. A. Mason, M. I. Gonzalez, E. D. Bloch and K. R. Meihaus, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 4308–4316 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-S. Choi and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6865–6869 (
            Angew. Chem.
            , 2009
            , 121
            , 6997–7001
          ) CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demessence, D. M. D’Alessandro, M. L. Foo and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8784–8786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. McDonald, D. M. D’Alessandro, R. Krishna and J. R. Long, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2022–2028 RSC .
R. Vaidhyanathan, S. S. Iremonger, K. W. Dawson and G. K. H. Shimizu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5230–5232 RSC .
R. Vaidhyanathan, S. S. Iremonger, G. K. H. Shimizu, P. G. Boyd, S. Alavi and T. K. Woo, Science, 2010, 330, 650–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Feng, H. Petek, Y. Shi, H. Sun, J. Zhao, F. Calaza, M. Sterrer and H.-J. Freund, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12124–12136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Y. Ying, Q. Yang, Y. Ban, H. Huang, X. Guo, Y. Xiao, D. Liu, Y. Li, W. Yang and C. Zhong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4249–4251 RSC .
J. Ma, Y. Ying, X. Guo, H. Huang, D. Liu and C. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7281–7288 RSC .
B. Ghalei, K. Sakurai, Y. Kinoshita, K. Wakimoto, A. P. Isfahani, Q. Song, K. Doitomi, S. Furukawa, H. Hirao, H. Kusuda, S. Kitagawa and E. Sivaniah, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17086 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Gunasekar, K. Park, V. Ganesan, K. Lee, N.-K. Kim, K.-D. Jung and S. Yoon, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6740–6748 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, D. Lu, Y. Leng and P. Jiang, Mol. Catal., 2017, 439, 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, G. Yang, N. Shao, L.-J. Chen, B. Ou, S.-T. Jiang, G. Chen and H.-B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13811–13820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nugent, Y. Belmabkhout, S. D. Burd, A. J. Cairns, R. Luebke, K. Forrest, T. Pham, S. Ma, B. Space, L. Wojtas, M. Eddaoudi and M. J. Zaworotko, Nature, 2013, 495, 80–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, T.-T. Wang, X.-H. Liu, K. Zoumm and W.-Q. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1960–1966 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tulchinsky, C. H. Hendon, K. A. Lomachenko, E. Borfecchia, B. C. Melot, M. R. Hudson, J. D. Tarver, M. D. Korzyński, A. W. Stubbs, J. J. Kagan, C. Lamberti, C. M. Brown and M. Dinca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5992–5997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Holliday, T. B. Stanford and T. M. Swager, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5649–5651 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Wang, P.-Z. Li, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. X. Chan, R. Ganguly, Y. Li, J. Jiang and Y. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1149 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Song, D. Kim, K. Polychronopoulou and A. Coskun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26860–26867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Verdegaal, K. Wang, J. P. Sculley, M. Wriedt and H.-C. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 636–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. M. Sadiq, K. Suzuki, R. Ricco, C. Doblin, A. J. Hill, S. Lim, P. Falcaro and M. R. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1839–1844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yong, Y. X. Ho and T.-S. Chung, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4046–4055 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Culp, L. Sui, A. Goodman and D. Luebke, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 393, 278–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoon and D. Moon, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 215, 116–122 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Q. Liu, B. Xia, J. Huang, S. Li, Y. Guan, H. Zhou, B. Liao, Z. Zhou and B. Liu, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 91, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, M. Errahali, G. Gatti, L. Marchese, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 701–713 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, R. Newby, V. Garcia-Sakai, P. Manuel, S. K. Callear, S. I. Campbell, C. C. Tang and M. Schröder, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 121–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chu, X. Peng, P. Feng, Y. Sheng and J. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 178, 508–513 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen and C. Lu, Sens. Lett., 2005, 3, 274–295 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Luechinger, S. Loher, E. K. Athanassiou, R. N. Grass and W. J. Stark, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3473–3477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Caliendo, G. Contini, I. Fratoddi, S. Irrera, P. Pertici, G. Scavia and M. V. Russo, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 125504 CrossRef .
J. G. Mendoza-Payán, S. F. Gallardo and A. Márquez-Lucero, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 142, 130–140 CrossRef .
Z. Zhuang, D. Qi, C. Zhao and H. Na, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 236, 701–711 CrossRef CAS .
E. Esmaeli, M. Ganjian, H. Rastegar, M. Kolahdouz, Z. Kolahdouz and G. Q. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 247, 498–504 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Kim, M. Sajid, K. T. Kim, K. H. Na and K. H. Choi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 252, 725–734 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chaudhary, S. Sikarwar, B. C. Yadav, G. I. Dzhardimalieva, N. D. Golubeva and I. E. Uflyand, Sens. Actuators, A, 2017, 263, 415–422 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Khalil, K. Lau, G. D. Phelan, B. Carlson, M. Gouterman, J. B. Callis and L. R. Dalton, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75, 192 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, O. S. Wolfbeis and R. J. Meier, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7834–7869 RSC .
H. Peng, M. I. Stich, J. Yu, L. N. Sun, L. H. Fischer and O. S. Wolfbeis, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 716–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Sun, J. B. Yu, H. S. Peng, J. Z. Zhang, L. Y. Shi and O. S. Wolfbeis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12642 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. S. Brites, P. P. Lima, N. J.
O. Silva, A. Millan, V. S. Amaral, F. Palacio and L. D. Carlos, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4499–4504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. J. Stich, S. Nagl, O. S. Wolfbeis, U. Henne and M. Schäferling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1399–1406 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Borisov and O. S. Wolfbeis, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 5094–5101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Falcaro, R. Ricco, C. M. Doherty, K. Liang, A. J. Hill and M. J. Stylesb, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5513–5560 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5444 RSC ; P. Ramaswamy, N. E. Wong and G. K. Shimizu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5913–5932 RSC .
B. Chen, S. Xiang and G. Qian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1115–1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5815–5840 RSC .
K. A. White, D. A. Chengelis, K. A. Gogick, J. Stehman, N. L. Rosi and S. Petoud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18069–18071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Zheng, J. J. Bu, T. Wu, C. Chou, P. Feng and X. Bu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8858–8862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Mir, L. L. Koh, G. K. Tan and J. J. Vittal, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 390–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Jiang, Y. Tatsu, Z.-H. Lu and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5586–5587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Allendorf, C. A. Bauer, R. K. Bhakta and R. J. T. Houk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1330–1352 RSC .
Y. Furukawa, T. Ishiwata, K. Sugikawa, K. Kokado and K. Sada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10566–10569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, N. Li, C. Tian, T. Liu, F. Du, P. Lin, Z. Li and S. Du, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 670 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, L. Zhou, J. Wei, Z. Li, P. Lin and S. Du, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21210–21217 RSC .
Y. J. Cui, H. Xu, Y. F. Yue, Z. Y. Guo, J. C. Yu, Z. X. Chen, J. K. Gao, Y. Yang, G. D. Qian and B. L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3979–3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyata, Y. Konno, T. Nakanishi, A. Kobayashi, M. Kato, K. Fushimi and Y. Hasegawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6413–6416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Haquin, M. Etienne, C. Daiguebonne, S. Freslon, G. Calvez, K. Bernot, L. L. Pollès, S. E. Ashbrook, M. R. Mitchell, J.-C. G. Bünzli, S. V. Eliseeva and O. Guillou, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 3464 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Rao, T. Song, J. K. Gao, Y. J. Cui, Y. Yang, C. D. Wu, B. L. Chen and G. D. Qian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15559–15564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. D'Vries, S. Alvarez-Garcia, N. Snejko, L. E. Bausa, E. Gutierrez-Puebla, A. de Andres and M. A. Monge, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6316–6324 RSC .
Y. J. Cui, F. L. Zhu, B. L. Chen and G. D. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7420–7431 RSC .
Y. J. Cui, R. J. Song, J. C. Yu, M. Liu, Z. Q. Wang, C. D. Wu, Y. Yang, Z. Y. Wang, B. L. Chen and G. D. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen and B. Yan, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1875–1881 RSC .
M. Rodrigues, R. Piñol, G. Antorrena, C. D. S. Brites, N. J. O. Silva, J. L. Murillo, R. Cases, I. Díez, F. Palacio, N. Torras, J. A. Plaza, L. Pérez-García, L. D. Carlos and A. Millán, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 200–209 CrossRef CAS .
O. Veselska, D. Podbevsek, G. Ledoux, A. Fateeva and A. Demessence, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12225–12228 RSC .
X. Liu, M. A. Siegler and E. Bouwman, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 2984–2988 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, T. Xia, Q. Zhang, Y. Cui, Y. Yang and G. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 259, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mikolasek, M. D. Manrique-Juarez, H. J. Shepherd, K. Ridier, S. Rat, V. Shlabaeva, A. C. Bas, I. E. Collings, F. Mathieu, J. Cacheux, T. Lechle, L. Nicu, W. Nicolazzi, L. Salmon, G. Molnar and A. Bousseksou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8970–8979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kudernac, N. Ruangsupapichat, M. Parschau, B. Marcia, N. Katsonis, S. R. Harutyunan, K.-H. Ernst and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 2011, 479, 208–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Yanlan Wang
	Dr Yanlan received her BSc from Liaocheng University in 2007 and her MSc from Shanghai Jiao Tong University under the supervision of Prof. Wanbin Zhang. She received her PhD in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Didier Astruc from the University of Bordeaux 1. In 2014, she joined the research team of Prof. Max Malacria at CNRS-ICSN as a postdoctoral fellow. She won the Marie Curie Fellowship in 2015 and joined Professor Gouverneur's group at Oxford University. In 2017, she became a Full Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Liaocheng University, China.

Didier Astruc
	Didier Astruc was born in Versailles and received his PhD from the University of Rennes under the supervision of Professor René Dabard. He was then a NATO post-doctoral fellow at MIT with Prof. Richard R. Schrock and later spent a sabbatical year in Berkeley with Prof. K. Peter C. Vollhardt. He is a professor of chemistry at the University of Bordeaux and a Member of the Institut Universitaire de France and several Academies. He is the author of more than 500 publications including “Electron Transfer and Radical Processes in Transition Metal Chemistry” (VCH, 1995) and “Organometallic Chemistry and Catalysis” (Springer, 2007).

Alaa S. Abd-El-Aziz
	Dr Alaa S. Abd-El-Aziz received his BSc and MSc from Ain Shams University in Cairo, Egypt, and his PhD from the University of Saskatchewan, Canada, followed by an NSERC postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Toronto. He is also a Fellow of the Chemical Institute of Canada. In 2011, Dr Abd-El-Aziz became the President and Vice-Chancellor of the University of Prince Edward Island. He has remained involved in chemistry, making significant contributions to research and teaching in organometallic polymers and materials. He has authored over 160 peer-reviewed articles, two books, edited 16 books, and has chaired several national and international conferences.

 	Fig. 1  A study on applications of N-substituted main-chain NHC–palladium polymers as recyclable self-supported catalysts for the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of aryl halides in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Preparation of metalloenzyme-inspired polymeric imidazole Pd catalyst (MEPI-Pd) and photo images of MEPI (left) and MEPI-Pd (right). (B) Applications of MEPI-Pd in recycling of MEPI-Pd for allylic arylation. (C) Applications of MEPI-Pd in the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction of an electron-rich aryl chloride in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Polymerized NHC–PdII monomer can catalyze C–H acetoxylation of undirected arene. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  P[5]-OCP derived from the complexation between P[5] and Pd(OAc)2 and cartoon representation of the cross-linked structure of the P[5]-OCP and its application in the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Multi-function redox polymers prepared by “click” polycondensation as an electrochrome, polyelectrolyte, sensor, electrode modifier, nanoparticle stabilizer and catalyst template. Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  Self-assembly of Pd NCs@ZIF-8 and plasmon-driven selective catalysis of the hydrogenation of olefins. Adapted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  Palladium/phosphorus-doped porous organic polymer as a recyclable chemoselective and efficient hydrogenation catalyst under ambient conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  Platinum terpyridine metallopolymer electrode used as a cost-effective replacement for bulk platinum catalysts in the oxygen reduction reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures of MOMPs and their applications in the catalytic reduction of nitroarenes with NaBH4 and in the three-component Strecker reaction for the synthesis of α-aminonitriles. Adapted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic picture representing the AuNP stabilized by dendrimers. (A) Intradendritic AuNP stabilization by a ‘click’ dendrimer 6B27+ involving AuNP–triazole interactions. (B) Interdendritic stabilization by many ‘Sonogashira’ dendrimers 6A27+. It is likely that chloride anions surround the AuNPs in both cases. Adapted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright © 2014, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Synthesis of AuNPs and CuNPs stabilized by dendrimers. Catalytic reactions conducted with the AuNPs and CuNPs as catalysts, like, (B) 4-nitrophenol reduction; (C) alkyne azide cycloaddition. Adapted with permission from ref. 179. Copyright © 2016, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Recyclable catalytic dendrimer nanoreactor for part-per-million Cu catalysis of “Click” chemistry in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Photochemical reduction of low concentrations of CO2 in the porous coordination polymer with a ruthenium(II)–CO Complex. Adapted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  Highly reusable rhodium catalyst-organic framework for the intramolecular cycloisomerization of 1,6-enynes. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Rhodium-coordinated poly(arylene-ethynylene)-alt-poly(arylenevinylene) copolymer acting as a photocatalyst for visible-light-powered NAD+/NADH reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Representation of the porous silver coordination polymer for the carboxylic cyclization of a phenyl propargylic alcohol with CO2 to α-alkylidene cyclic carbonates. Adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Solvent-induced assembly of silver coordination polymers (CPs) as cooperative catalysts for synthesizing cyclopentenone[b]pyrrole frameworks. Adapted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Ring-opening metathesis polymerization-derived, poly(M1-co-M3)-b-poly-Cu for click-chemistry (A) and hydrosilylation reactions (B) under micellar conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of the Fe-N/C-800 catalyst from the chemical structure of bidppz and the corresponding Fe–bidppz precursor. Cyclic voltammograms (B) and RDE voltammograms (C) of Pt/C and Fe-N/C-800 in O2–saturated 0.1 M HClO4. For all tests, the catalyst loading is 0.1 mg cm−2 and the scan rate is 10 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Iron-doped carbon nitride-type polymers as homogeneous organocatalysts for visible light-driven hydrogen evolution. Adapted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Ni-Containing discrete single-walled metallopolymers as a heterogeneous catalyst for the cycloaddition of carbon dioxide to epoxides. Adapted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Hydrolysis of ammonia-borane over a Ni/ZIF-8 nanocatalyst and the total turnover frequency and the proposed effective “on–off” control of hydrogen production. Adapted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Synthesis of PyPOP–Ni@G. (B) Controlled current electrolysis (chronopotentiometry) for OER using PyPOP–Ni@G in 1 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 24  Co-Containing polyoxometalate-encapsulating cationic metal–organic framework as a heterogeneous catalyst for desulfurization. Adapted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) The pyridine-quarternizing functions are randomly distributed in the backbone of osmium-containing metallopolymer. (B) This four-electron O2-electroreduction biocatalyst superior to platinum and a biofuel cell operating at 0.88 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 206. Copyright © 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Preparation of HT-Mets and related mesoporous carbons with embedded metal phosphides (MetP@PCs). Reaction conditions: (i) AIBN, toluene, 65 °C, 24 h; (ii) dioxane, aqueous hydroiodic acid, room temperature (r.t.), 24 h; (iii) (NH4)2 MoS4 or K3 Fe(CN)6, DMF/water, 80 °C, 24 h; (iv) H2, 480 °C, 1 h, then annealed under argon at 1000 °C for 2 h. Adapted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 27  Synthesis and catalytic hydrogenation reactivity of a chromium catecholate porous organic polymer. Adapted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) Synthesis of a Mn3O4@POP hybrid material using a hydrothermal technique. (B–E) TEM images of the Mn3O4@POP hybrid material. Adapted with permission from ref. 211. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  Reduction of MIVCl2-BTC to MIIIH-BTC (M = Zr and Hf) by NaBEt3H via bimetallic reductive elimination of H2. Adapted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Bimetallic porous porphyrin polymer-derived nonprecious metal electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reactions. Adapted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) Illustration of the synthetic route for the organic metallic monomer and linear organic bimetallic polymer. (B) Kinetic plots of oxygen evolution vs. time for the monomer (black) and polymer (red). Adapted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed artificial metalloenzyme in which a CuII complex is grafted on the dimer interface of a protein scaffold. (b) Ligands used for grafting on the dimer interface. (c) Pymol representations of dimeric LmrR in a ribbon and a space-filling model (protein data bank (pdb) code: 3F8B). Either position 89 (red) or 19 (yellow) was used for the covalent attachment of ligand a or b. Adapted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 33  Cartoon representation of the new artificial metalloenzyme with an in vivo incorporated ligand BpyAla and the reaction scheme of the benchmark catalytic Friedel–Crafts reaction. Adapted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Schematic representation of the design of the supramolecular artificial metalloenzyme in which a Cu(II) complex is bound at the dimer interface of LmrR, followed by application in a catalyzed Friedel–Crafts alkylation. (b) Space filled representation of dimeric LmrR (pdb 3F8B) and ribbon representation of the ligand binding pocket (inset). Tryptophan residues W96 and W96′ are shown in gray. Pictures were generated with Pymol. Adapted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  The dual anchoring strategy for the localization and activation of artificial metalloenzymes based on the biotin–streptavidin technology and applications in the transfer hydrogenation of imines. Adapted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Human carbonic anhydrase II as a host protein for the creation of artificial metalloenzymes and its application in the asymmetric transfer hydrogenation of imines. Adapted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 37  Directed evolution of an artificial imine reductase and catalysis. Adapted with permission from ref. 240. Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 38  Directed evolution of Ir(Me)-PIX CYP119 for enantioselective insertions of carbenes into C–H bonds. (A) Model reaction converting diazoester to dihydrobenzofuran. (B) Enantioselectivity and yields for the formation of dihydrobenzofuran catalyzed by evolved variants of CYP119 (0.17% catalyst loading, 10 mM substrate). (C) Kinetic parameters describing the formation of dihydrobenzofuran by variants of CYP119 (0.1 mol% catalyst loading, 5 mM substrate). For free Ir(Me)-PIX, (onset) dependence of TOF on the initial concentration of diazoester for reactions using 0.005 mM catalyst. (D and E) Comparison of KM and kcat values for CYP119-Max with those of natural enzymes involved in the metabolism of intermediate and secondary metabolites (5); for comparison, the kinetic parameters for Ir(Me)-PIX mOCRmyoglobin (H93A and H64V) catalyzing the same transformation are shown. Adapted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 39  Preparation of the SCM-encapsulated rhodium catalyst and schematic representation of the biphasic catalytic hydrogenation of water-insoluble alkenes in water. Adapted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright © 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 40  Covalent inhibition of lipases with P-functionalized phosphonate esters towards metal(NHC)–protein (M = Rh) hybrids. Adapted with permission from ref. 244. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 41  Ruthenium nanoparticle-decorated porous organic network for direct hydrodeoxygenation of long-chain fatty acids to alkanes. Adapted with permission from ref. 268 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 42  Schematic illustration showing the CuPd bimetallic nanoalloy supported POP catalyst and its selective catalysis for hydrodeoxygenation of biomass-derived vanillin. Adapted with permission from ref. 269 Copyright © 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 43  Magnetic nanohybrid decorated porous organic polymer: synergistic catalyst for high performance Levulinic acid hydrogenation. Adapted with permission from ref. 270 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 44  Schematic illustration of the sequential synthesis of the CoSX@POP hybrid material employed as a photoelectrocatalyst in water splitting. Adapted with permission from ref. 271 Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 45  (A) General procedure for self-assembly of NCPs with lipid and PEG coatings. (B) Proposed uptake pathways of NCPs and the mechanism of action. Adapted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright © 2014, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 46  Preparation and characterization of NCP-1/siRNAs. (A) Schematic representation of NCP-1/siRNAs carrying cisplatin in the solid core and siRNAs in the lipid shell. (B) TEM image of NCP-1/siRNAs showing the spherical and monodispersed nanostructure. Bar = 100 nm. (C) siRNA release from NCP-1/siRNAs in the presence or absence of reducing agents. (D) Improved siRNA stability in serum of NCP-1/siRNAs compared to free siRNA and DSPE-siRNA conjugate as evaluated by electrophoresis (2% agarose gel). “M” stands for untreated siRNA marker. Adapted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 47  (A) Schematic of NCP-Carbo/GMP. (B) Number-average size distribution of NCP-Carbo/GMP particles. Bare and lipid coated particles were measured in THF and PBS, respectively. (C) TEM micrographs of NCP-Carbo/GMP. Scale bar = 100 nm. Right: Subcutaneous SKOV-3 xenografts: (D) in vivo tumor growth inhibition. Carbo (dose, 10 mg kg−1) and gemcitabine (4.6 mg kg−1) and NCP-Carbo/GMP (doses, 10 mg kg−1 and 4.6 mg kg−1) were administered on days 0, 3, and 6. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5). (E) End-point tumor weights. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5). Subcutaneous A2780/CDDP xenografts: (F) in vivo tumor growth inhibition. Carbo (dose, 10 mg kg−1) and gemcitabine (4.6 mg kg−1) and NCP-Carbo/GMP (doses, 10 mg kg−1 and 4.6 mg kg−1) were administered on days 0, 3, and 6. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5). (G) End-point tumor weights. Data are expressed as mean ± SD (n = 5), p < 0.001. Adapted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 48  The scheme illustrating the one-pot synthesis of PEGylated nanoscale coordination polymers (NCP-PEG) and their application for TME-responsive anticancer therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 49  (A) Chemical structures of red-light-responsive Ru-containing block copolymers (BCPs). Red-light irradiation releases the Ru complex and generates singlet oxygen (1O2). P1, P2, and P3 are BCPs with different molecular weights. (B) Schematic illustration of self-assembly of Ru-containing BCPs. P1, P2, and P3 self-assemble into micelles, hollow spheres, and large compound micelles, which exhibit morphology-dependent cellular uptake and anticancer performance. Adapted with permission from ref. 278. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 50  Antimicrobial organometallic dendrimers with tunable activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria. Adapted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 51  Zinc ion coordinated poly(ionic liquid) antimicrobial membranes for wound healing. Adapted with permission from ref. 287. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 52  (A) Preparation of cationic cobaltocenium-containing organogels (PCoPF6-Gel) via copolymerization of CoAEMAPF6 and PEGDMA. (B) Preparation of a chloride-paired hydrogel (PCoCl-Gel) from the organogel PCoPF6-Gel via ion-exchange with tetrabutylammonium chloride (TBACl). (C) Solid state 31P NMR spectra of organogel PCoPF6-Gel, hydrogel PCoCl-Gel and sodium hexafluorophosphate (NaPF6, as a reference). (D) Illustration of synergistic antimicrobial mechanisms of multifunctional macromolecules against Gram-negative bacteria via a trio Act of boronolectin chemistry on lipopolysaccharide, electrostatic attraction between cationic metal and negatively charged membrane, and reinstated antibiotic targeting on peptidoglycan. Adapted with permission from ref. 288. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 53  Charged metallopolymer-grafted silica nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications. Adapted with permission from ref. 289. Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 54  Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of Mn-IR825@PDA–PEG and the nanoscale metal–organic particles with rapid clearance for magnetic resonance imaging-guided photothermal therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 55  Structure and photoactivity of porphyrin-based Pt/Pd-containing metallopolymers Pt–P and Pd–P. Confocal luminescence imaging (λex = 405 nm) of the HeLa cells incubated with (A and B) Pt–P NPs and (C and D) Pd–P NPs collected at wavelengths of 420–480 nm and 620–680 nm, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 303. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 56  Illustration for the formation and biomedical application of metalated covalent organic polymers (MCOP). Adapted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 57  (A) Nanoscale polymer metal–organic framework hybrids for effective photothermal therapy of colon cancers. Adapted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Metal–organic frameworks@polymer composites containing cyanines for near-infrared fluorescence imaging and photothermal tumor therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 58  Redox-sensitive polymer/SPIO nanocomplexes for efficient magnetofection and MR imaging of human cancer cells. Adapted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 59  Synthesis of the porous multicompartment vesicles of the PDMAEMA-b-PBzMA-b-PVFC triblock terpolymer by seeded RAFT polymerization and the schematic on–off switch of the membrane pores of the multicompartment vesicles through oxidation/reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 60  Stimulus-responsive release of hydrophobic molecules from poly(ferrocenylsilane) nanocontainers. Adapted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 61  Structures of polymer networks G1, WP6, MP, and doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX·HCl). Illustration of the dramatically promoted swelling of G1c by WP6–ferrocene host–guest interactions, and the subsequent pH-responsive swelling–shrinking transition and application in controlled drug (DOX·HCl) release. Adapted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 62  Illustration of the preparation of MOCPsCu and MOCPsCu+Au. SEM pictures of MOCPsCu+Au. The chronoamperometric responses to successive additions of glucose obtained in PBS (pH 7.0) at 0.7 V vs. SCE for MOCPsCu (1), MOCPsAu(2), and MOCPsCu+Au (3) modified Au electrodes fabricated under optimized conditions. Adapted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright © 2018, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 63  (A) Absorbance at 652 nm of the H2O2–TMB system in the presence of different metal–GMP CPNs at pH 7.0; the inset shows the photographs of the corresponding reaction solution. (B) FT-IR spectra of (a) GMP powder and (b) Cu–GMP CPN powder. (C) Cu2p XPS spectrum of Cu–GMP CPNs. (D) TEM image of Cu–GMP CPNs. (E) Schematic illustration of Cu–GMP CPN formation through the coordination between Cu2+ and GMP. Adapted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 64  Metal-chelating polymers (MCPs) with zwitterionic pendant groups complexed to trastuzumab exhibit decreased liver accumulation compared to polyanionic MCP immunoconjugates. Adapted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 65  Schematic illustration of the working protocol for the taste masking drug based on physiological pH-responsive release of the unpleasant-tasting drug from mesoporous silica nanoparticles capped with a metal–organic coordination shell. Adapted with permission from ref. 327. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 66  The Zn-containing metallopolymeric system capable of stimuli-responsive controlled release of the drug ibuprofen. Adapted with permission from ref. 328. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 67  Schematic representation of the synthetic procedures of the P@ZIF-8 nanocomposites as a DDS for the loading and multiresponsive release of DOX. HMeIM: 2-methylimidazolate. Adapted with permission from ref. 329. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 68  Antiproliferative activity in A2780 cells: IC50 values for free organoiridium complexes (purple), drug-bearing polymers (blue), and drug-bearing conjugates (gray). Adapted with permission from ref. 330. Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 69  The luminescent poly(amidoamine)–iridium complex as a new singlet-oxygen sensitizer for photodynamic therapy and percentages of dead cells resulting from apoptotic or necrotic events upon PDT treatments (6 h after being irradiated for 5 min) in control samples and samples sensitized by 1M or 1P. Adapted with permission from ref. 331. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 70  Metal–organic framework@porous organic polymer nanocomposite for photodynamic therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 71  The construction of multifunctional mixed metal NCPs with ligand LRu, Gd3+ and Yb3+ for fluorescence-MR-CT triple modality imaging guided therapy. Adapted with permission from ref. 333. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 72  Schematic diagrams of the (A) synthesis and (B) three-component self-assembly and phosphorescent imaging/photodynamic therapy for cancer cells. Adapted with permission from ref. 334. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 73  Electrochromic activity of the tetrablock copolymer x: reaction of HAuCl4 with x selectively oxidizes its 25Fc* centers to green x[Cl]25 and ligand-stabilized AuCl that disproportionates overnight at RT, finally producing very large globular purple Au nanoparticles with a size of 130 ± 5 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 335. Copyright © 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 74  Control of the light-response in supramolecular metallopolymeric gels by tuning the coordination metal. Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 75  (A) Near-IR electrochromism in electropolymerized films of a biscyclometalated ruthenium complex bridged by 1,2,4,5-tetra(2-pyridyl)benzene. Adapted with permission from ref. 337. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society. (B) Metallopolymeric films based on a biscyclometalated ruthenium complex bridged by 1,3,6,8-tetra(2-pyridyl)pyrene: applications in near-infrared electrochromic windows. Adapted with permission from ref. 338. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (C) Near-infrared electrochromism in electropolymerized metallopolymeric films of a phen-1,4-diyl-bridged diruthenium complex. Adapted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 76  Synthesis of metallo-supramolecular polymers containing Fe(II), Ru(II), and the ligand L1 at a molar ratio of 0.5:0.5:1. (a) In situ UV-vis spectra of a FeL1Ru-2 film in 0.1 M LiClO4/ACN at different applied potentials of 0, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, 1.1, and 1.2 V. (b) Detailed color switching of Fe/Ru polymers operated at 0, 0.9, and 1.2 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 340. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 77  Three-dimensional Fe(II)-based metallo-supramolecular polymers with electrochromic properties. (a) Transmittance change (ΔT, %) of the FeL185%L215% film at 580 nm during voltage switching between 0 and 1.2 V (interval: 5 s) in 0.1 M LiClO4/ACN. (b) Change of charge in the FeL1100%, FeL185%L215%, and FeL180%L220% films during switching between 0 and 1.2 V. T. Adapted with permission from ref. 341. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 78  (A) Giant dendritic molecular electrochrome batteries with ferrocenyl and pentamethylferrocenyl termini and their rapid transfer of a large number of electrons at once (14000 electrons for G7) (B and C). Adapted with permission from ref. 370. Copyright © 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 79  Self-assembly of the pomegranate-like porphyrin-phycocyanin light-harvesting nanosystem (Ex light = exciting light; Em light = emitted light). Adapted with permission from ref. 371. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 80  Conductivity profiles of ligand polymer and CMPs in CH2Cl2 electrolyte solution (scan rate 10 mV s−1, 40 mV offset potential) and mechanisms of intrachain electron transfer in Wolf type III64 CMPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 372. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 81  Schematic representation of the memory device structure and the typical I–V characteristics of the ITO/poly-14+/Al device with an active area of 6.0 mm2. The arrows denote switching order and direction. The thicknesses of the polymer film and Al electrode are 100 and 80 nm, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 373. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 82  Synthetic route of PAzo-py and PAzo-py-Cu(Phen)Cl2. Adapted with permission from ref. 374. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 83  Chemical structure of porphyrin-based PIs and a memory device. Adapted with permission from ref. 375. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 84  Construction of a memory device based on a metal–organic framework. (a) A MOF memory device comprising two silver electrodes and a Rb-CD-MOF crystal containing hydroxy ions, rubidium ions, and water. The device is not drawn to scale. (b) A photograph of a circa 1 mm cubic Rb-CD-MOF crystal (in a red rectangle) placed on a flash memory stick. (c) Cyclic voltammetry analysis of a silver/MOF/silver device heterostructure. The Rb-CD-MOF crystal was infiltrated with a 100 mm methanolic solution of RbOH and methanol was evaporated prior to electrical testing. A first cycle is needed to activate the device. Subsequent cycles exhibit negative differential resistance (red arrows) and pinched hysteresis with two hysteresis loops meeting at (0 V, 0 A) (indicated by the blue arrow). Adapted with permission from ref. 376. Copyright © 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 85  (A) Photoluminescent europium-containing inner sphere conducting metallopolymer. (B) The energy transfer to the europium center giving the corresponding stimulated red emission. Adapted with permission from ref. 387. Copyright © 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 86  (A) Reaction scheme for the synthesis of PMMA-supported doping hybrid materials 1@PMMA, 2@PMMA, 3@PMMA and 4@PMMA and PNBE-supported metallopolymer-type hybrid materials poly(NBE-1), poly(NBE-2), poly(NBE-3) and poly(NBE-4). (Ln = La, 1; Ln = Eu, 2; Ln = Tb, 3 or Ln = Gd, 4). (B) Visible emission and excitation spectra of 2@PMMA and 4@PMMA, or poly(NBE-2) and poly(NBE-4) with the feeding molar ratio of 400:1 in the solid state at RT. Adapted with permission from ref. 388. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 87  (A) Excitation (solid magenta line) and emission (solid red line) spectra of [Eu(PyboxONorb)3]3+ and excitation (solid blue line) and emission spectra of [Tb(PyboxONorb)3]3+ (solid green line) measured as nitrate salts in acetonitrile. [LnIII] = 1.0 × 10−4 M. λexc = 286 nm. (B) Left to right: Photographs of the emission of Eu-poly(PyboxONorb-Norb50), TbIII-poly(PyboxONorbNorb50), and EuTb-poly(PyboxONorb-Norb50) metallopolymers observed under a hand-held UV lamp (λ = 254 nm). Adapted with permission from ref. 389. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 88  (A) Dynamic helical metallopolymer poly(Zn-salphen)-alt-(p-phenyleneethynylene)s. (B) The UV-vis absorption spectra in different solvents at 298 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 89  (a) Self-assembly of conjugated metallopolymers with tunable length and controlled regiochemistry. (b) CIE 1931 coordinates show that these species emit white light, shifting along the sequence and from blue-white to yellow-white emissions. Monomer A was observed to emit orange light. Adapted with permission from ref. 391. Copyright © 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 90  Polymer monoliths containing two-photon absorbing phenylenevinylene platinum(II) acetylide chromophores for optical power limiting and its open-aperture Z-scan. Adapted with permission from ref. 412. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 91  Second-order NLO switches from molecules to polymer films based on photochromic cyclometalated platinum(II) complexes. Adapted with permission from ref. 413. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 92  Main-chain polymers based on new monomers with a D–π–A structure and application in organic second-order nonlinear optical materials. Adapted with permission from ref. 414. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 93  Photocatalytic function of a polymer-supported B12 complex with a ruthenium trisbipyridine photosensitizer. Adapted with permission from ref. 421. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 94  (a) Chemical structures of H2L1 and H2L2. (b) Polyhedral view of the structure of [Ni4(H2O)2(PW9O34)2]10− (Ni4P2). (c) Structural model of Ni4P2@MOF as viewed along the [1,1,1] direction. (d) Structural model showing unoccupied tetrahedral cavities and the central Ni4P2-loaded octahedral cavity. (e) Schematic showing the injection of three electrons to the same Ni4P2 upon photoexcitation of the MOF to enable proton reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 422. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 95  Synthesis and photovoltaic properties of new metalloporphyrin-containing polyplatinyne polymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 436. Copyright © 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 96  Open-circuit voltage modulation of solution-processed organic photovoltaic devices induced by Sn2+ complexation. Adapted with permission from ref. 437. Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 97  (A) Synthesis procedure of rGO/PANI–Ru hybrid nanocomposite. (B) J–V characteristic curve of PTB7:PCBM incorporated inverted PSC devices. Adapted with permission from ref. Copyright © 2014, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group. Adapted with permission from ref. 438. Copyright © 2017, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 98  Cyclometalated platinum-containing diketopyrrolopyrrole complexes and polymers and their photophysics and photovoltaic applications. Adapted with permission from ref. 439. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 99  High-efficiency polymer solar cells via the incorporation of an amino-functionalized conjugated metallopolymer as a cathode interlayer and J–V curves of the electron-only devices with PFN–OX (a) and PFEN–Hg (b) interlayers of varying thickness. Electron-only device configuration: ITO/Al/interlayer/PTB7:PC71BM/Ba/Al. Adapted with permission from ref. 440. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 100  (A) A polyferroplatinyne precursor for the rapid fabrication of L10-FePt-type bit patterned media by nanoimprint lithography. Adapted with permission from ref. 441. Copyright © 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (B) Nanopatterned L10-FePt nanoparticles from single-source metallopolymer precursors for potential application in ferromagnetic bit-patterned media magnetic recording. Adapted with permission from ref. 442. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 101  (A) Metallopolymer precursors to L10-CoPt nanoparticles and nanopatterning. Adapted with permission from ref. 443. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Patterning study of Co-containing and Pt-containing polymer CoPtNPs by nanoimprint lithography. Adapted with permission from ref. 444. Copyright © 2016, Elsevier B.V. All right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 102  (A) Schematic illustration for synthesis of PE–PB/graphene hybrid flowers, chemical structure and ball-stick modeling of polyethylene terminated with [Fe(II)(CN)5(4-(dimethylamino)-pyridine)] (PE-Fe). For clarity, a methyl group is used to stand for polyethylene in the ball-stick modeling. (B) Successive performance ability of PE–PB/graphene flowers deposited on glassy carbon electrodes in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer solution in the presence of 5 mM H2O2. Applied potential: 0.1 V, under N2. Adapted with permission from ref. 445. Copyright © 2015, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 103  (A) Redox-responsive sol–gel transition experiment. (A) Schematic illustration of sol–gel transition. (B) After standing for 24 h, two cut pAA-6βCD/pAA-Fc hydrogel (1 + 1 wt%) pieces were rejoined, and the crack sufficiently healed to form one gel. Adapted with permission from ref. 448. Copyright © 2011, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 104  View of the modeled IRMOF-74-III-(CH2NH2)2 [staggered amine] structure down the crystallographic c-axis, depicting the three possible pore environments before (left pore wall) and after exposure to CO2 under 95% RH (bottom right pore wall) and dry (upper right pore wall) conditions. Dashed boxes clarify the chemisorbed species upon the reaction between linker-based alkylamine and CO2 under the respective conditions. H atoms are omitted for clarity. Color code: C, gray; O, red; N, green; and Mg, blue. Adapted with permission from ref. 450. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 105  (A) Description of the structure JLU-Liu22: (a) binary MBBs; (b) three types of cages with different sizes (diagonal Cu–Cu distance, regardless of van der Waals radii); (c) ball and stick model of the 3D framework; (d) polyhedral view of the net. Color scheme: carbon = gray, oxygen = red, and copper = green. Guest molecules and H atoms have been omitted for clarity. (B) CO2, CH4, C2H6 and C3H8 adsorption isotherms at 298 K along with the dual-site Langmuir–Freundlich (DSLF) fits (a and b); CO2/CH4; C2H6/CH4 and C3H8/CH4 adsorption selectivity are predicted by IAST at 298 K and 1 bar for JLU-Liu22 (c and d). Adapted with permission from ref. 451. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 106  (A) Synthesis conditions for Zr6O4(OH)2.1F1.9(tpdc-4CH2NH2·2HCl)6 (tpdc4 = 2′,3′,5′,6′-tetramethylamino-p-terphenyl-4,4′′-dicarboxylate), using the zwitterionic form of the ligand, giving the proposed structure, where the framework structural model is obtained from the crystal structure of UiO-68. The methyl amino groups of H2tpdc-4CH2NH2·3HCl are not depicted. (B) Adsorption isotherms for CO2 (green circles), N2 (blue circles), and O2 (red squares) uptake in 1 at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 452. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 107  (A) Alkyl-bridged NiII bismacrocyclic complexes and H4bptc. (B) Design strategies for construction of 3D networks. Bismacrocyclic complexes located upward and downward with respect to a 2D plane are indicated by the different colors (pink and orange). (C) A view of the ab plane showing the rhombic channels. (D) A view of the ac plane, showing the tilted ethyl pillars. Color scheme: bptc4− light gray; alternately located NiII bismacrocyclic complexes on the 2D grids brown and green. H atoms are omitted for clarity. Adapted with permission from ref. 453. Copyright © 2009, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 108  (A) A portion of the Cu-BTTri framework showing the surface functionalization of a coordinatively unsaturated CuII site with ethylenediamine, followed by the attack of an amino group on CO2. (B) Isosteric heat of adsorption for CO2 in Cu-BTTri (black) and Cu-BTTri-en (red). Reproduced with permission from ref. 454. Copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 109  A portion of the structure of the N,N′-dimethylethylenediamine functionalized metal–organic framework mmen-CuBTTri, with red, green, blue and gray spheres representing Cu, Cl, N and C atoms, respectively. Isotherms for CO2 (squares) and N2 (circles) adsorption at 25 °C for mmen-CuBTTri (green for CO2 and blue for N2). Adapted with permission from ref. 455. Copyright © 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 110  (A) Structure of the Zn-Atz layer in Zn2(C2O4)(C2N4H3)2(H2O)0.5 (Zn, cyan; C, black; N, blue; H, not shown). (B) Three-dimensional structure of Zn2(C2O4)(C2N4H3)2(H2O)0.5, wherein the Zn-Atz layers are pillared by oxalate moieties (O, red) to form a six-connected cubic network shown as green struts. (C) Adsorption isotherms for different gases carried out using Zn2(C2O4)(C2N4H3)2(H2O)0.5. The inset shows heat-of-adsorption data calculated with the CO2 isotherms measured at 273 K. Adapted with permission from ref. 456. Copyright © 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 111  (a) STM image acquired at 4.5 K after dosing CO2 molecules onto the clean Au(100) surface. (b) STM image at 4.5 K of the Au-PDI chain modified Au(100) surface after submonolayer of CO2 is dosed at 20 K. (c) The magnified image of the rectangular region. (d) Cooperative chemisorption-induced physisorption of CO2 molecules by metal organic chains. Adapted with permission from ref. 458. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 112  Schematic illustration of preparing the TSIL@NH2-MIL-101(Cr)/PIM-1 MMMs, and the gas separation process. Adapted with permission from ref. 460. Copyright © 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 113  (a) UiO-66 synthesized from zirconium ion and terephthalic acid. (b) Reducing the UiO-66 size using water modulation and functionalization of the MOF walls. (c) Molecular structure of PIM-1. (d) Combination of PIM-1 and MOF particles to form MMMs for separation of CO2 from N2. Carbon atoms are depicted in green; oxygen and hydrogen atoms are in red and white, respectively; nitrogen, NH2 and bromine are presented in blue. Adapted with permission from ref. 461. Copyright © 2017, Right Managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 114  A covalent triazine framework, functionalized with Ir/N-heterocyclic carbene sites, for the efficient hydrogenation of CO2 to formate. Adapted with permission from ref. 462. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 115  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process for bifunctional catalysts M-salen-TBB-R. (B) Cycloaddition of CO2 with various epoxides catalyzed by the Co-salen-TBB-Py catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 463. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 116  Schematic presentation of the CO2 stimuli-responsive hydrogel of SBCP 5. Adapted with permission from ref. 464. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 117  Reversible capture and release of Cl2 and Br2 with a redox-active metal–organic framework. Adapted with permission from ref. 467. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 118  (top) At low humidity, the polymer/tenside matrix of the dry hybrid film (left) takes up water or solvent. Swelling results in a volume increase (middle). At high humidity, additional vapor condenses on top of the porous film with partial leaching of tenside into the surface liquid layer (right). (bottom) Preparation of carbon-coated copper nanoparticles (left) resulted in core–shell structures of considerable air stability. The particles were completely dispersed in water, yielding a narrow particle-size distribution (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 481. Copyright © 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 119  Synthesis of a water distributed sensor employing polyvinylamine cross-linked with Cu(II). (A) Measured currents vs. time graph for sensor cable when it is exposed to water leakage. (B) Currents ratio (i1/i2) vs. time graph. Adapted with permission from ref. 483. Copyright © 2009, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 120  (A) Schematic picture of an IPMC including Au electrodes deposited on a thin layer of Ti. (B) Capacitance variation of sample (150 nm Ti + 990 nm Au) vs. relative humidity under different deflections (bending degree is written in the charts’ legends) at 25 °C. Adapted with permission from ref. 485. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 121  (a) XRD crystallographic spectra of Cr3C2, (b) surface AFM of the exfoliated Cr3C2 thin film with the inset showing a single flake, and (c) height profile of the Cr3C2 thin film showing thickness of particles. Adapted with permission from ref. 486. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 122  Synthesis and characterization of copper(II) nitrate polyacrylamide and its application as an opto-electronic humidity sensor. Adapted with permission from ref. 487. Copyright © 2017, Elsevier B.V. All Right reserved.	 

 	Fig. 123  (A) Procedure for obtaining luminescent rare earth polymer thin films: polymers including EMA and VPD coordinate with the rare earth ions loaded into the substrate and then both of them react via a polymerization reaction in the presence of the initiator. (B) The emission spectra of the Tb0.999Eu0.001-2 thin film recorded in the range from 100 K to 320 K excited at 329 nm and the inset is the photograph of the corresponding transparent thin film, (C) temperature dependent intensity of the 5D4 → 7F5 and 5D0 → 7F2 transitions, and (D) CIE chromaticity diagram showing the luminescence colors changing from blue-green to pink across the white area at different temperatures. Adapted with permission from ref. 515. Copyright © 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 124  [Ln7(3,5-DSB)4(OH)9(H2O)15]·4H2O. (a) View of the ligand coordinated to the metallic cluster, (b) tetrahedral arrangement of the Ln cations, and (c) vertex sharing bicapped dicubane SBU. In order to discard any phase transformation at low temperature the single crystal data of RPF17-Gd were collected at 120 K, showing no phase transition. Adapted with permission from ref. 512. Copyright © 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 125  (A) Schematic of the Si surface functionalization with thermometric SAM showing the activation step, the functionalization with APTES, the reaction with the PEGA polymer (structure in inset) and the formation of the Eu3+ and Tb3+ complexes. (B) Schematic of the Si functionalized surface incorporating the temperature responsive Ln3+ complexes. (C) Exploded view of the setup used for the thermometric characterization of the sample, showing the thermofoil heater, the copper holder, and the Si-functionalized surface. (D) Schematic of the setup under 280 nm excitation that emits in the visible range. (E) Excitation spectrum of the functionalized Si surface at 296 K. The top and bottom lines correspond to the monitoring of the 5D4 → 7F5 (Tb3+) and 5D0 → 7F2 (Eu3+) transitions, respectively. (F) Emission spectra excited at 280 nm. The transitions assigned to Tb3+ and to Eu3+ are presented in gray and black, respectively. The asterisk marks the spectral region where an overlap between the Tb3+ transition 5D4 → 7F4 and Eu3+ transitions 5D0 → 7F0,1 is observed. (G) Normalized integrated area of the 5D4 → 7F5 (top) and 5D0 → 7F2 (bottom) transitions in a single heating–cooling cycle between 296 and 338 K, computed from the emission spectra under 280 nm excitation. Adapted with permission from ref. 516. Copyright © 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 126  (A) Design of dual-emitting ZJU-88⊃perylene composite (EnT: energy transfer, Em: emission). (B) Emission spectra of ZJU-88⊃perylene recorded from 20 to 80 °C, excited at 388 nm. (C) Temperature-dependent intensity ratio of Eu3+ (615 nm) to perylene (473 nm) and the fitted curve for ZJU-88⊃perylene. Adapted with permission from ref. 514. Copyright © 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 127  Structure representations of [Cu(p-SPhCO2Me)]n. (a) View of the Cu3S3 hexagons of the inorganic sheet on the (ac) plane. (b) View of the half-chair conformation of Cu3S3 hexagons. (c) View on the (ab) plane and (d) central projection along the a axis. Orange, Cu; yellow, S; red, O; grey, C. Hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity. (e) CIE chromaticity diagram showing the temperature dependence luminescence color change of [Cu(p-SPhCO2Me)]n in the 93–503 K temperature range (λex = 380 nm). Adapted with permission from ref. 517. Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
