Nanowire architectures for iodide free dye-sensitized solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA13997B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13997B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3543-3550Nanowire architectures for iodide free dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Venkat Kalyan 
            Vendra
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tu Quang 
            Nguyen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Thad 
            Druffel
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jacek B. 
            Jasinski
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Delaina A. 
            Amos
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Mahendra K. 
            Sunkara
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA. E-mail: mahendra@louisville.edu; delaina.amos@louisville.edu
bConn Center for Renewable Energy Research, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA
Received 
      4th October 2013
    , Accepted 14th December 2013First published on 18th December 2013AbstractIn this study, we show that the performance of iodide free redox couples in dye-sensitized solar cells could be significantly improved by engineering the electron transport and surface properties of the electrode materials. Specifically, tin oxide nanowires electrophoretically coated with titania nanoparticles and subsequently passivated with a submonolayer of alumina by atomic layer deposition show a remarkable ten-fold increase in short-circuit current densities over those obtained with titania nanoparticles, even when a typical N-719 dye is used for sensitization. Comparison of the performance of different electrode materials such as nanowires, nanoparticles and nanowire–nanoparticle hybrid architectures of tin oxide and titania suggests that fast electron transport helps in improving the short-circuit current density with ferrocene/ferrocenium and TEMPO redox couples. The nature of the surface trap states and their passivation have a significant effect on the electron lifetimes in the semiconductor and the resulting open-circuit voltage with these redox couples. The higher electron diffusion lengths with the tin oxide nanowire based architectures allow for thicker electrodes with enhanced dye loading. The analysis of literature data on DSCs made using different dyes and alternate redox couples suggests smaller delta G or reorganization energy for non-ruthenium based dyes.
1. Introduction
Rapid improvements in the efficiency and durability of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are being made by looking at alternatives to the conventional DSC components – the iodide/triiodide redox electrolyte, the ruthenium based N-719 dye and the titania nanoparticle (NP) electrode. There has been significant effort in improving the electrode materials for faster electron transport, designing dye molecules to improve the optical absorption and investigating new redox chemistries for improving the voltage.1,2 In particular, replacing the iodide redox electrolyte is of prime importance because of its highly corrosive nature, huge driving force required for dye regeneration and resulting loss in open-circuit voltage, loss of I2 due to its high vapor pressure and competition for visible light absorption between the triiodide and the dye. Hence, there has been renewed interest in studying iodide-free redox electrolytes for DSCs that overcome all the shortcomings of the iodide electrolyte.2–12
The significant developments with various redox couples used for dye-sensitized solar cells are graphically reviewed here in Fig. 1. Fig. 1a depicts the power conversion efficiency as a function of short-circuit current density for the conventional ruthenium based dyes (N-719, N3, Z-907) respectively6,7,9,16,18–21 and Fig. 1b shows the same for the newly engineered organic dyes.5–7,13–17 From Fig. 1, two major reasons can be identified for the low performance of alternate redox electrolytes. First, alternate redox electrolytes using the N-719 dye yield poor performance due to the poor matching of the HOMO energy level of the dye with the redox potential of the electrolyte leading to an insufficient driving force for dye regeneration. The slow regeneration kinetics of the dye increases the recombination of the electrons in the semiconductor with the oxidized state of the dye, lowering the efficiency. Second, the electrode characteristics such as fast electron transport, slow recombination kinetics, good dye adsorption, low overpotential and fast electron transfer kinetics at the counter electrode were not necessarily engineered for these alternate redox electrolytes to achieve high short-circuit current densities. The high efficiencies observed with the iodide electrolyte and the N-719 dye are due to an optimized energetic alignment between the redox potentials of the electrolyte with the dye. Further, the slow recombination kinetics allows for high collection efficiencies even with nanoparticle based electrodes.
 Fig. 1  State of the art of different redox electrolytes (from ref. 2–12) used for dye-sensitized solar cells for the conventional Ru based dyes (a) and alternative dyes (b). 
Among the different electrolytes studied, one-electron redox electrolytes have garnered significant interest. These electrolytes have more positive redox potentials and a lower barrier for dye regeneration than that of the I−/I3− couple, therefore yielding higher open circuit voltages. The large scale availability and low cost of these electrolytes also make them an attractive choice of electrolytes for DSCs. Despite these numerous advantages, the major challenge with this class of electrolytes is to design electrode materials to slow down the fast electron recombination kinetics with the electrolyte. To circumvent these challenges, approaches for improving the DSC performance with one-electron redox couples have been focused on surface modification of semiconductors with barrier layers and on designing new dyes.
In an attempt to slow down the interception of electrons in the semiconductor with the electrolyte and the dye, several studies have focused on depositing submonolayers of wide band gap semiconductors or insulating metal oxides on titania nanoparticles by atomic layer deposition (ALD).8–10,22,23 These layers have been found to act as tunneling barriers for back electron transfer to the electrolyte and the dye. Further, they also passivate surface trap states that promote recombination of trapped electrons.24 The current state-of-the-art techniques using alternate redox couples in DSCs rely on using new organic dyes and thinner titania nanoparticle films (1–2 microns) compared to the conventional electrode (10–12 microns) to lower recombination losses.6,7 Efficiencies as high as 7% with ferrocene/ferrocenium,6 4.2% with ferricyanide/ferrocyanide7 and 5.4% with TEMPO11 have been achieved using thin titania nanoparticle electrodes and new organic dyes. In contrast, nanoparticle DSCs using the above redox electrolytes used in conjunction with the N-719 dye have exhibited efficiencies much less than 1%, indicating that the dye plays an important role in determining the performance (Fig. 1a).
While most of the efforts to improve the performance of DSCs with alternate redox electrolytes have been heavily focused on designing new dyes (Fig. 1), little attention has been paid to designing semiconductor architectures for improved electron collection. Our previous studies have shown that one can manipulate the transport and recombination characteristics by using tin oxide nanowire (NW) based architectures with an iodide redox electrolyte.25 The question remains if using such nanowire based architectures with modified electron transport and semiconductor–electrolyte interface properties would yield any performance improvement of DSCs using alternate redox couples. To address this question, the performance of DSCs fabricated with different nanowire based architectures with one-electron redox electrolytes is investigated in this work.
In addition to the semiconductor properties, the dye also plays a dominant role in determining the performance of alternate redox electrolytes as shown in Fig. 1. To separate the influence of the dye from the semiconductor electrode on the performance gains, here, we studied the photovoltaic characteristics of tin oxide nanowire based architectures sensitized with the conventional N-719 dye. Particularly, the fundamental questions about the effects of surface traps and their passivation in different electrode architectures are addressed. The performance of the following two iodide-free, one-redox couples has been investigated in this study – (a) ferrocene/ferrocenium and (b) TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyl oxy radical). The photovoltaic characteristics and electron dynamics with different material architectures involving nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanoparticle–nanowire hybrids are investigated to gain fundamental insights into the underlying factors governing the performance of these DSCs.
2. Experimental
The titania nanoparticle films were prepared using a commercial paste (18 NRT paste from Dyesol, Australia). For preparing the nanowire pastes, terpineol (Sigma Aldrich) was used as the solvent, and ethyl cellulose (Sigma Aldrich) was employed as a binder. The synthesis of tin oxide and the fabrication of tin oxide nanowire paste have been described elsewhere.25 The synthesis of rutile titania nanowires was carried out using a solvo-plasma technique described in detail earlier.26 In brief, the potassium chloride powder was uniformly spread onto a titanium foil and exposed to an atmospheric microwave plasma flame for 5 minutes to form potassium titanate nanowires. An air flow rate of 8 LPM and a plasma power of 900 W were used. The as-synthesized potassium titanate nanowires were washed with deionized water several times and dipped in 1 M HCl to make hydrogen titanate. The hydrogen titanate nanowires were exposed to a high power plasma (∼1000 W, 8 LPM air) to form rutile titania nanowires. The rutile titania nanowires were scraped off the foil and a nanowire paste was prepared in a similar fashion to that of tin oxide nanowires.
Photoanodes were prepared by doctor blading the paste using an adhesive tape as the spacer (Scotch Magic™ Tape, thickness ≅ 50 μm). Subsequently, the spacer was removed and the electrodes were sintered at 500 °C for 1 h. These electrodes were then cooled to 60 °C and were immersed in a 0.5 mM solution of N-719 dye (Dyesol, Australia) solution in ethanol for ∼20 h. To fabricate hybrid architectures, the nanowire electrodes were immersed in colloidal solutions (2% by wt) of the appropriate nanoparticles (tin oxide or titania), a bare FTO slide was used as a counter electrode and a potential of 5 V was applied for 15 s. The tin oxide nanoparticle dispersions were made by dispersing nanopowder (Nano Arc tin oxide, Alpha Aesar) in ethanol using Triton X as the surfactant. Anatase titania colloidal solution was obtained from Optical Dynamics, Louisville, KY. The counter electrode for the cells was prepared by brush deposition of a platinum counter electrode solution (Dyesol, Australia) on the FTO glass and heating the electrode to 420 °C for 20 min and subsequently cooling it down to room temperature. The cells were fabricated by sandwiching the photoanode and the counter electrode with a 25 microns thick Surlyn film (Dyesol, Australia) and followed by aging at 100 °C for 5 min. The dye desorption experiments were performed by soaking the N-719 sensitized electrodes in 6 mL of 0.1 M NaOH solution for 1 h (ESI†). In addition the BET surface area of the electrodes was also determined (Micromeritics Tristar 3000).
The ferrocene electrolyte is comprised of 0.05 M ferrocenium hexafluorophosphate, 0.1 M ferrocenium, 0.01 M chenodeoxycholic acid and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in acetonitrile. The ferrocene redox couple was left to age in air for 24 h prior to use. The TEMPO electrolyte is comprised of 1 M TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyl oxy radical), 0.5 M N-butylbenzimidazole and 0.16 M NOBF4 in acetonitrile.
The redox electrolyte was infiltrated into the DSC using vacuum backfilling through the holes drilled into the counter electrode prior to the platinum coating. The DSCs were illuminated using a xenon lamp of a 150 W solar simulator (New Port Model 96000) equipped with an Air Mass 1.5 filter. All electrochemical measurements were performed using a potentiostat (EG&G-PAR 273A). The light intensity incident on the cells was adjusted to 100 mW cm−2 using a silicon power meter (Thorlabs S120UV). For the current decay measurements, the light from the solar simulator (100 mW cm−2) was used as the bias light and a light pulse from a diode laser (∼550 nm) was used as the perturbation light. The time constant was determined by an exponential fit to the photocurrent decay.27 The electron lifetimes were determined using the open-circuit voltage decay technique described by Bisquert and co-workers.28
3. Results and discussion
The performance of bare tin oxide nanowires and titania particles without any barrier layers using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox electrolyte is shown in Fig. 2a. The current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of DSCs made with tin oxide nanowires exhibit a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 1.8 mA cm−2 which is several orders of magnitude higher than those obtained for DSCs fabricated with titania nanoparticles (a few tens of μA cm−2). The highest reported Jsc for un-modified electrodes sensitized with the N-719 dye is only 0.1 mA cm−2 which is substantially lower than that obtained with tin oxide nanowires. In an effort to boost the Jsc a thin layer of titania was deposited onto the nanowires using a TiCl4 treatment; however, this resulted in a lowered Jsc. This is in contrast to the increased performance when an iodide electrolyte was used.25 The unpassivated surface traps on titania obtained from TiCl4 treatment could be responsible for lowering the performance when using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox electrolyte. The enhanced performance with tin oxide nanowires can be explained by considering the surface properties, electron transport and recombination characteristics of tin oxide nanowires and titania nanoparticles.
 Fig. 2  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of DSC SnO2 NWs, TiCl4 treated SnO2 NWs and TiO2 NPs, using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox electrolyte, (b) energy diagram showing the band edge positions of TiO2 and SnO2 and the redox potentials of ferrocene/ferrocenium and tempo/tempo+ redox electrolytes (c) dark current vs. voltage for SnO2 NWs and TiO2 NPs using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox electrolyte, and (d) current–voltage characteristics of DSCs fabricated using the SnO2 NW photoanode of different thicknesses and using the ferrocene/ferrocenium couple. 
Electron transport through titania nanoparticles can be described through a trap-limited diffusive transport model where the electrons perform a random walk in the nanoparticle network, and undergo trapping and detrapping events through a distribution of electron trap states localized below the conduction band edge.29,30 This leads to slow electron transport within the nanoparticle films. Unlike nanoparticles, the single crystalline nature of the tin oxide nanowires with reduced trap states and no grain boundaries provides efficient direct conduction pathways for electron transport. Measurements of transport time constants in iodide based DSCs fabricated on tin oxide nanowires and titania nanoparticles using a transient short-circuit current decay method also support this argument. Tin oxide nanowires exhibit a transport time constant of 2 ms in comparison with titania nanoparticles that show a transport time constant of 8 ms at a light intensity of 1 Sun.31 Most importantly, the location of transport limiting traps also plays a significant role in determining the transport properties. In the case of tin oxide nanowires, the majority of the transport limiting traps are located very close to the conduction band edge at 0.071 eV below the conduction band edge,32 while in titania nanoparticles the majority of the traps are located at 0.24 eV below the conduction band edge.33 The steeper trap state location in titania nanoparticles results in longer time scales for the release of the trapped electrons and hence slower electron transport in titania nanoparticles when compared with tin oxide nanowires.
The difference in electron recombination between tin oxide nanowires and titania nanoparticles is a direct result of the difference in the nature and the density of the surface trap states. Two major pathways have been proposed for the recombination of electrons from the semiconductor with the electrolyte – (i) recombination of electrons from the conduction band and (ii) recombination of electrons from the surface trap states.24 Of these, the recombination of electrons from the trap states is found to be faster and hence is the major pathway for electron recombination. Low electron recombination rates with tin oxide nanowires are expected to be lower due to a reduced number of surface traps when compared to titania nanoparticles.32 Prior attempts to improve the open-circuit voltages with tin oxide NPs and the iodide redox electrolyte used submonolayers of alumina to passivate surface trap states.34 In contrast, such high performance can be obtained from tin oxide nanowires and the iodide redox electrolyte, without any surface passivation, also indicating lower trap state density on the tin oxide nanowire surface.32 Analysis of the dark current at the same potential (Fig. 2c) shows that tin oxide NW DSCs exhibit lower dark currents with the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple compared to titania nanoparticles, indicating lower recombination rates with tin oxide nanowires. Thus, the lowered surface trap site density coupled with fast charge transport properties of tin oxide nanowires allowed for efficient electron collection and higher short-circuit current densities to be attained.
The open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the tin oxide nanowire DSCs employing the ferrocene/ferrocene redox couple was about 250 mV, but was orders of magnitude higher than that of titania NP DSCs which only exhibited a few tens of mV. In comparison, Hamann and co-workers reported that titania nanoparticles passivated with a one cycle ALD of Al2O3 showed a Voc of 500 mV and a Jsc of 1 mA cm−2.10 These results clearly demonstrate the excellent suitability of tin oxide nanowires in DSCs employing redox couples with fast recombination kinetics. As shown in Fig. 2b, the conduction band edge of tin oxide is located 400 mV lower than the conduction band edge of titania, resulting in a lower Fermi level in tin oxide. Hence, a lower Voc is theoretically expected with tin oxide when compared with titania. Further, low dye adsorption onto nanowires compared with nanoparticles could lower the Fermi level of tin oxide nanowires and result in a lower Voc than titania nanoparticles.
The higher electron diffusion coefficient (D) along with higher electron lifetimes (τ) for tin oxide nanowires results in higher diffusion lengths (L) according to the relationship . Fig. 2d shows the J–V characteristics of DSCs fabricated with tin oxide NW films of different thicknesses using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple. An increase in the Jsc is observed with increasing the film thickness up to 15 microns indicating higher diffusion lengths in tin oxide nanowires. The films thicker than 15 microns had poor mechanical stability resulting in delamination. Current state-of-the-art DSCs using these redox electrolytes are comprised of a few micron (1–2 μm) thick TiO2 nanoparticle film sensitized with a high extinction coefficient dye. The reduced titania film thickness compared to the conventional DSCs (10–15 μm) lowers the recombination losses and allows for efficient charge carrier collection. As a result of the reduced film thickness, the Jsc and hence the efficiencies that can be achieved with one electron redox couples such as ferrocene/ferrocenium and TEMPO have been twice as low as the best performing redox electrolytes. The efficiency with these redox couples is still not on par with the efficiency of DSCs employing the iodide redox electrolyte (Fig. 1). Further improvement in efficiency is only possible by finding ways to increase Jsc. Increasing the film thickness to improve the electron concentration in films is not possible with the conventional titania nanoparticles due to the low electron diffusion length when kinetically fast redox couples are used. The use of tin oxide nanowires which exhibit higher diffusion lengths could potentially overcome the bottle-neck in the achievement of higher Jsc with one-electron redox couples.
DSCs fabricated with unpassivated tin oxide nanowires and the TEMPO redox couple exhibited very low performance. J–V characteristics with the TEMPO redox electrolyte also show a similar trend compared to the ferrocene redox electrolyte, where the tin oxide nanowires outperform titania nanoparticles (ESI Fig. S1†). However, the Jsc and Voc obtained were very low (a few μA cm−2 and a few tens of mV) indicating much faster recombination kinetics of the TEMPO redox electrolyte when compared with that of ferrocene.
In order to increase dye adsorption and the open-circuit voltage with tin oxide nanowire based DSCs, anatase nanoparticles were coated onto tin oxide nanowires to form hybrid architectures. These hybrid architectures were subsequently coated with a single layer of alumina by atomic layer deposition to passivate the trap states on the titania surface. In previous studies, atomic layer deposition was used primarily to produce titania shells.35,36 But, a major shortcoming of this approach is that the amorphous titania shells formed from atomic layer deposition tend to exhibit a high resistance of 1–10 GΩ with poor charge transport properties leading to reduced current densities.35 Similarly, tin oxide nanowires coated with a shell of titania by ALD and subsequently passivated with a submonolayer of alumina did not result in any performance improvement over titania nanoparticles due to the high resistivity of the titania layer (see ESI, Fig. S2†). Here, we used an electrophoretic deposition technique to coat the tin oxide nanowires with anatase TiO2 nanoparticles (∼10 nm diameter). The upward shift in the quasi-Fermi level of titania coated tin oxide nanowires after equilibration and increased dye loading is expected to yield open-circuit voltages higher than those of tin oxide nanowires alone. Fig. 3e depicts a schematic showing the titania nanoparticle coated tin oxide nanowire arrays for the electrode structure used in this work. The scanning electron microscopy images of the nanowires (Fig. 3a and b) and the hybrid architectures (Fig. 3c and d) illustrate that the anatase nanoparticles were uniformly coated on the nanowires. Fig. 4 shows transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of titania nanoparticle–tin oxide nanowire hybrid architectures. The TEM images confirm that crystalline titania nanoparticles are uniformly coated onto the tin oxide nanowires.
 Fig. 3  Scanning electron microscopy images of (a) SnO2 NWs, (b) rutile TiO2 NWs, (c) anatase TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architectures and (d) anatase TiO2 NP/rutile TiO2 NW hybrid architectures. (e) Schematic illustrating the hybrid architecture of TiO2 NPs deposited on SnO2 NWs. 
 Fig. 4  Transmission electron microscopy images of TiO2 nanoparticle–SnO2 nanowire hybrid architectures. 
The J–V characteristics of alumina coated titania nanoparticles and alumina coated titania nanoparticle–tin oxide nanowire hybrid architectures are compared in Fig. 5a. DSCs fabricated with hybrid architectures show about ten times higher Jsc than those of the conventional DSCs employing titania nanoparticle films of the same thickness (∼10 μm). The Voc values observed with the hybrid architectures are slightly lower than those observed with titania nanoparticles alone. This difference is due to the lowering of the quasi-Fermi level after equilibration of the Fermi levels of titania and tin oxide. Analysis of the electron transport time constants of tin oxide nanowire hybrids and titania nanoparticles (Fig. 5b) shows that the electrons diffuse faster in the tin oxide nanowire–titania nanoparticle hybrids when compared to titania nanoparticles. The improved electron collection efficiency due to faster electron transport results in an increase in the Jsc of cells fabricated with tin oxide nanowire–titania nanoparticle hybrids. The electron recombination times (Fig. 5c) indicate slightly higher recombination losses in tin oxide NW hybrids when compared with titania NPs. These trends in electron lifetimes are quite opposite to what was observed in our previous studies with the iodide redox couple without any surface passivation treatments.25 Interestingly, tin oxide nanowire–titania nanoparticle hybrids show a significant improvement in Jsc, regardless of the slightly lowered electron lifetimes. These results highlight that faster electron transport and lower density of surface trap states are key factors in achieving higher current densities when using alternate redox couples with faster recombination kinetics.
 Fig. 5  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of the TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architecture and TiO2 NP based DSCs with ferrocene and the TEMPO redox electrolytes, (b) transport time constant vs. light intensity for Al2O3 coated TiO2 NPs and the Al2O3 coated TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architecture, and (c) recombination time constant vs. voltage for Al2O3 coated TiO2 NPs and the Al2O3 coated TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architecture. 

J–V characteristics and electron lifetimes of DSCs based on different architectures such as nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanowire–nanoparticle hybrids of tin oxide and titania are compared in Fig. 5 to understand the role of different factors in improving the photovoltaic performance. All these electrodes were coated with 1 cycle of alumina prior to dye adsorption to passivate surface traps on the semiconductor. The factors contributing to improvements in the performance can be summarized as follows: (1) surface area, (2) surface chemistry and surface trap states, and (3) band edge alignments of the core and shell materials in the case of hybrid architectures. Fig. 6a compares the electron lifetimes for different architectures when the TEMPO redox electrolyte was used to the ferrocene redox electrolyte. Electron lifetimes in tin oxide based architectures were found to be in the following order: tin oxide nanoparticles > tin oxide nanoparticle–tin oxide nanowire hybrids > tin oxide nanowires, indicating that the surface area and hence the number of reactive surface sites available for alumina ALD affect the electron lifetimes and surface recombination rates. The higher lifetimes obtained when tin oxide nanowires are coated with titania nanoparticles than tin oxide nanoparticles alone indicates that alumina coating for surface passivation works more effectively on the titania surface than on a tin oxide surface. The electron lifetimes in rutile titania nanowires coated with anatase titania nanoparticles were found to be the highest among all the architectures investigated. The higher passivation on the titania nanowire–titania nanoparticle hybrid architectures could be due to the higher number of ALD reactive sites on the surface of these architectures.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of electron lifetimes (a) and (b) J–V curves for different architectures coated with 1 cycle of Al2O3 when using the TEMPO redox electrolyte. 

Fig. 6b compares the J–V characteristics of different tin oxide and titania based electrode architectures. Among these, rutile titania nanowire–anatase nanoparticle hybrids exhibit the highest Voc of 730 mV (for the TEMPO redox electrolyte) due to high electron lifetimes. On the other hand, the tin oxide nanowire–anatase nanoparticle hybrids exhibit the highest Jsc due to the fast electron transport in tin oxide nanowires and good dye adsorption and fast electron injection into titania nanoparticles. The electron transport in titania nanowires is similar to that of titania nanoparticles (ESI, Fig. S3†) and this limits high current densities from being achieved. The presence of a higher number of Ti3+ trap states has been shown to be responsible for the slow charge transport in 1-D titania nanostructures.26 Therefore, having single crystalline nanowires of titania does not necessarily improve electron transport.37 This explains why the short-circuit current densities obtained with titania nanowire based architectures are not as high as in tin oxide nanowires. Further, the band edge alignment of tin oxide and titania allows enhanced electron collection in the case of tin oxide nanowires coated with titania. The conduction band edge of anatase titania is about 200 meV higher than that of rutile titania.38 This band offset contributes to improved charge collection and slightly higher current densities of titania nanoparticle–nanowire hybrids when compared with titania nanoparticles. It is interesting to note that the hybrid architectures fabricated with nanowires exhibit high short-circuit current densities even though they possess a lower surface area for dye adsorption than that of nanoparticles (ESI, Fig. S4†). Dye desorption experiments also reveal that hybrid architectures and nanowires have a lower surface area than that of nanoparticles alone (Table S2, ESI†). Strategies to improve dye loading onto the hybrid architectures will be crucial for further enhancement of the current density and improving their performance. Further, the light scattering from nanowire architectures needs to be reduced to allow efficient penetration of light into the nanowire film and thereby improve light harvesting.39
In addition to improving dye adsorption, another key aspect for enhancing the performance is to select a sensitizer that can be efficiently regenerated by the redox couple. Fig. 7 shows the power conversion efficiencies vs. the thermodynamic driving force for the commercial Ru based dyes and the new organic dyes for different redox couples summarized in Fig. 1. For the organic dyes, a driving force of about 0.3 eV is the optimized driving force (−ΔG) for achieving high efficiencies and is consistent with literature reports.40 Analysis of literature data on commercial Ru based dyes shows that they need a much higher driving force of about 0.6 eV for efficient dye regeneration when compared with organic dyes indicating that inefficient dye regeneration is a shortcoming of using the N-719 dye with alternate redox electrolytes. According to Marcus theory, the electron transfer rate is maximum at −ΔG = λ, where λ is the reorganization energy. Hence, the driving force corresponding to the maximum efficiency could be taken as a measure of the reorganization energy.41 These reported values of λ are consistent with the −ΔG corresponding to the maximum efficiency in Fig. 6. For an N-719 dye with an absorption onset of 780 nm (1.6 eV), the maximum theoretical efficiency would be estimated to be around 18% for a 0.3 eV loss-in potential and around 11% for 0.6 eV loss-in potential. The design of a sensitizer with a lower band gap and a lower loss-in potential is crucial for improving the DSC efficiency.
 Fig. 7  Power conversion efficiency vs. the thermodynamic driving force for dye-regeneration for (a) the conventional Ru based dye and (b) alternate dyes (organic) plotted from the literature. 
The insights gained from this work can also be extended to solid state electrolytes. For instance the recombination time scale for spiro-OMeTAD has been shown to be at least two orders of magnitude greater than liquid electrolytes.42 The hybrid architectures of tin oxide nanowires, with high electron diffusion lengths, would be of high importance to gain performance improvements for such solid state electrolytes. Future work is also focused on using new sensitizers in conjunction with the hybrid architectures developed in this work to obtain higher efficiencies.
4. Conclusion
The photoanodes fabricated with tin oxide NWs and tin oxide nanowire–anatase titania nanoparticle hybrids are promising for attaining high performance with alternate redox couples. Improved electron transport properties of tin oxide nanowire based architectures enabled significantly higher current densities with various iodide free redox couples. Alumina deposition by atomic layer deposition provided better passivation of surface trap states on the titania surface than on the tin oxide surface. Hybrid architectures of anatase titania NPs coated on rutile titania NWs showed the highest electron lifetimes due to better surface passivation by alumina. However, these hybrid architectures show short-circuit current densities similar to those obtained for nanoparticle based architectures due to poor electron transport properties of single crystal titania nanowires. In comparison with the new organic dyes, commercially available Ru based dyes require a 2× increase in driving force for efficient dye regeneration and result in lowered performance. The use of thick tin oxide nanowire electrodes in conjunction with a sensitizer that can be regenerated efficiently is identified as the route to obtain higher performance with alternate redox electrolytes. Lowering the reorganization energy of the sensitizer plays a dominant role in lowering the potential losses associated with dye regeneration and attaining higher power conversion efficiency.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding support from DOE-EPSCOR (DE-FG02-07ER46375) and access to various facilities within Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research. The authors also acknowledge helpful discussions with Professor Emily Weiss of Northwestern University. The authors acknowledge Minqi Zhu for assistance with the BET measurements.
References
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10592–10601 RSC .
M. Cheng, X. Yang, S. Li, X. Wang and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6290–6293 CAS .
D. Li, H. Li, Y. Luo, K. Li, Q. Meng, M. Armand and L. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3358–3365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yanagida, Y. Yu and K. Manseki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1827–1838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Daeneke, T.-H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 211–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Daeneke, Y. Uemura, N. W. Duffy, A. J. Mozer, N. Koumura, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Feldt, U. B. Cappel, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10551–10558 CAS .
B. A. Gregg, F. Pichot, S. Ferrere and C. L. Fields, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1422–1429 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19756–19764 CAS .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, T. N. Murakami, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Jiayan Cong, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9180–9194 Search PubMed .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Yum, E. Baranoff, F. Kessler, T. Moehl, S. Ahmad, T. Bessho, A. Marchioro, E. Ghadiri, J.-E. Moser and C. Yi, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 631 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-S. Wang, K. Sayama and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22449–22455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chen, M. Wang, J.-Y. Li, N. Pootrakulchote, L. Alibabaei, C.-h. Ngoc-le, J.-D. Decoppet, J.-H. Tsai, C. Grätzel and C.-G. Wu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3103–3109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Li, A. M. Spokoyny, C. She, O. K. Farha, C. A. Mirkin, T. J. Marks and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4580–4582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hattori, Y. Wada, S. Yanagida and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, P. Chen, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska, P. Péchy and M. Grätzel, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 603–612 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Li, M. S. Góes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, P. R. Bueno, C. Prasittichai, J. T. Hupp and T. J. Marks, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18385–18390 CAS .
E. Palomares, J. N. Clifford, S. A. Haque, T. Lutz and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 475–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Katz, M. J. Vermeer, O. K. Farha, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2012, 29, 806–814 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gubbala, V. Chakrapani, V. Kumar and M. K. Sunkara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2411–2418 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar, J. H. Kim, J. B. Jasinski, E. L. Clark and M. K. Sunkara, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 2913–2919 CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5798–5816 RSC .
A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and J. Bisquert, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 859–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fisher, L. Peter, E. Ponomarev, A. Walker and K. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 949–958 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15374 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Vendra, J. Absher, S. R. Ellis, D. A. Amos, T. Druffel and M. K. Sunkara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H728–H733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gubbala, H. B. Russell, H. Shah, B. Deb, J. Jasinski, H. Rypkema and M. K. Sunkara, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1302–1309 CAS .
H. Wang, J. He, G. Boschloo, H. Lindström, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2529–2533 CrossRef CAS .
C. Prasittichai and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall, J. Liphardt and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652–22663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 CAS .
E. Enache-Pommer, B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9648–9652 RSC .
L. Kavan, M. Grätzel, S. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716–6723 CrossRef CAS .
V. O. Williams, N. C. Jeong, C. Prasittichai, O. K. Farha, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6185–6196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Daeneke, A. J. Mozer, Y. Uemura, S. Makuta, M. Fekete, Y. Tachibana, N. Koumura, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16925–16928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Feldt, P. W. Lohse, F. Kessler, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7087–7097 RSC .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 558–562 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13997bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  State of the art of different redox electrolytes (from ref. 2–12) used for dye-sensitized solar cells for the conventional Ru based dyes (a) and alternative dyes (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of DSC SnO2 NWs, TiCl4 treated SnO2 NWs and TiO2 NPs, using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox electrolyte, (b) energy diagram showing the band edge positions of TiO2 and SnO2 and the redox potentials of ferrocene/ferrocenium and tempo/tempo+ redox electrolytes (c) dark current vs. voltage for SnO2 NWs and TiO2 NPs using the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox electrolyte, and (d) current–voltage characteristics of DSCs fabricated using the SnO2 NW photoanode of different thicknesses and using the ferrocene/ferrocenium couple.	 

 	Fig. 3  Scanning electron microscopy images of (a) SnO2 NWs, (b) rutile TiO2 NWs, (c) anatase TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architectures and (d) anatase TiO2 NP/rutile TiO2 NW hybrid architectures. (e) Schematic illustrating the hybrid architecture of TiO2 NPs deposited on SnO2 NWs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Transmission electron microscopy images of TiO2 nanoparticle–SnO2 nanowire hybrid architectures.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of the TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architecture and TiO2 NP based DSCs with ferrocene and the TEMPO redox electrolytes, (b) transport time constant vs. light intensity for Al2O3 coated TiO2 NPs and the Al2O3 coated TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architecture, and (c) recombination time constant vs. voltage for Al2O3 coated TiO2 NPs and the Al2O3 coated TiO2 NP/SnO2 NW hybrid architecture.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of electron lifetimes (a) and (b) J–V curves for different architectures coated with 1 cycle of Al2O3 when using the TEMPO redox electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 7  Power conversion efficiency vs. the thermodynamic driving force for dye-regeneration for (a) the conventional Ru based dye and (b) alternate dyes (organic) plotted from the literature.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13997b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
