Electrically powered artificial black body for low-voltage high-speed interfacial evaporation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA06972E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA06972E
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 22992-23000Electrically powered artificial black body for low-voltage high-speed interfacial evaporation†

        
          
            Fenghua 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongru 
            Pang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yunjiao 
            Gu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuesheng 
            Ning
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Bradley
          
        
      cde, 
      
        
          
            Binyuan 
            Zhao
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Weiping 
            Wu
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of High Field Laser Physics, Key Laboratory of Materials for High Power Laser, Laboratory of Thin Film Optics, Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201800, China. E-mail: wuwp@siom.ac.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China. E-mail: byzhao@sjtu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Materials, University of Oxford, 16 Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PH, UK
dMatSurf Technology Ltd., The Old Stables Marion Lodge, Little Salkeld, Penrith Cumbria, CA10 1NW, UK
eSchool of Energy Resources, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA
Received 
      3rd September 2022
    , Accepted 17th October 2022First published on 17th October 2022AbstractInterfacial steam generation based on micro- or nano-interfaces of porous materials is a game-changing technology that can address the challenges of the global climate and energy utilization. However, the technology based on photothermal evaporation faces the problem that the evaporation rate cannot be greatly increased, and it is difficult to achieve compactness, which severely limits its application. Herein, a low-cost, robust device with a high record-breaking vapor generation rate (98.7 kg m−2 h−1, an order of magnitude higher than the best result reported) has been achieved with a conductive bulk porous carbon material, assisted by low-voltage electrical power. This work is state of the art and a key step toward the industrialization of high-speed evaporation using off-line non-grid green energy, completely unlike traditional heating evaporation technology. A modular model has been designed and tested, demonstrating the industrial potential and new off-grid solutions utilizing the renewable energy harvested by solar cells, wind and tidal power stations.
Introduction
In recent years, novel materials with unique micro–nano structures have been investigated and used for interfacial evaporation with confinement effects. The idea of thermal confinement evaporation based on a micro–nano surface and interface is proposed.1–3 This strategy provides a new path for efficient energy utilization, especially low-density energy. The most typical application is the photothermal steam generation, and a variety of materials such as noble metal nanoparticles,4–6 nanoporous carbon,7–9 graphene,10–12 metal oxides,13–16 polymeric materials17–20 and composites have been proposed and tested. In a typical solar thermal steam generation device, the solar energy can be confined in a thin layer at the air–liquid interface to form a localized hot zone, enabling rapid water evaporation. By reducing the pressure over the evaporation layer through wind or vacuum, the evaporation rates of water can be further enhanced. The negative pressure can remarkably boost the evaporation rate to 7.87 kg m−2 h−1.21 With concentrated solar energy, the vapour generation rate can reach 11.8 kg m−2 h−1 (under 10 suns, 10 kW m−2).22
Although outstanding performances based on solar thermal energy have been achieved, the evaporation rate is still not high enough (typically in the range of 1 to 5 kg m−2 h−1, 1 kW m−2) for practical applications, but it is hard to further enhance it dramatically as it is fundamentally limited by the relatively low energy intensity of solar radiation. More importantly, the method of using solar thermal energy to realize evaporation is often affected by the time, location, weather or other unstable sunlight conditions. Different types of weather (cloudy, rainy) will make it worse, or the systems will stop working. What is more, enormous challenges will appear, especially when evaporation happens in applications that require higher evaporation rates, such as distillation and purification. These industrial applications, which widely use thermal evaporation processes, face problems of high energy consumption and low efficiency. Most cannot adopt the solar thermal solution due to the limitations of space, evaporation rate and stability.
Due to the maturity of solar cell technologies and wind power generation and the utilization of other new energy harvesting technologies, the cost of renewable electricity is gradually decreasing. However, it is still challenging and very expensive to connect it with the electrical power grid or to store a significant amount of global solar capacity (227 GW in 2015) and wind energy (433 GW in 2015).23 It is speculated that the share of solar and wind power will increase from 4.9% in 2015 to 87% in 2050, while the cost of electricity produced by renewable technologies has been dropping significantly (only $0.04 per kW h in 2019).24 In particular, it is possible to use off-line power to provide stable energy to realize industrial-scale evaporation for distillation and purification. Since the evaporation process is widespread in current society and the related industries are huge, this profoundly impacts human beings. Just like using clean energy to prepare hydrogen and form a hydrogen energy industry chain, adopting the concept of combining green energy and evaporation will also be an important measure to flexibly respond to energy shortages and reduce carbon emissions. Based on the concept of clean energy, here a new green energy evaporation industry is proposed, which can be widely used in distillation, purification, desalination, mineral extraction, sewage treatment and so on.
The use of electrical Joule heat combined with micro–nano-structured materials to achieve interfacial evaporation will be a very important approach towards applications, as it provides an ideal solution for the instability, low rate and large area occupied by solar-thermal evaporation and can significantly increase the evaporation rate to expand the scope of application, and can achieve the efficient use of clean, free, infinitely renewable solar energy.25,26 More importantly, this technology is completely different from traditional heating evaporation. One of the most fundamental differences is that the heating carrier has abundant and tunable micro–nano porous features, which realizes the micro-evaporation of the confined micro–nano surface interface and greatly improves the evaporation efficiency. In practical applications, the environmental inertness of the materials, the stability of the evaporation rate, and cost are all important factors that must be considered. From the perspective of material design, other aspects and features, such as good solar-to-thermal conversion ability, a rich and adjustable porous structure, high strength, and suitable resistivity, will need to be integrated into one platform, which is rare or difficult. In previous work, we have confirmed that novel bulk nano-carbon materials have excellent photothermal conversion and high-rate evaporation performance under multiphysics coupling.21 In this paper, a new electrically powered artificial black body, based on three-dimensional (3D), bulk conductive monolithic porous biomass carbon (MPC) with all the above characteristics, can gather energy from multiple physical fields, such as solar, wind and electricity to realize high-performance interfacial evaporation.
Results and discussion
Robust porous electrothermal device design
A new, low-cost, robust device which can use low-voltage electrical power to realize high-speed seawater desalination has been proposed, prepared and demonstrated (Fig. 1a). MPC was produced from inexpensive and readily available biomass raw materials such as corn straw (Fig. 1a and S1†), which served as an artificial black body and a carrier for Joule heat generation, and water evaporation can be powered and operated at low voltages. MPC has several outstanding characteristics, such as low cost and high mechanical strength, and, more importantly, it has suitable electrical conductivity. The internal pore structure is abundant and well developed, and the specific surface area is large, which provides suitable conditions for water conduction and evaporation processes.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration and typical highly efficient vapour generation device based on MPC. (a) The concept of stable interfacial evaporation of biomass nanostructure black body motivated by all-solar energy. (b and c) The microscopic morphology of MPC observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). (d and e) The nitrogen adsorption isotherm and pore size distribution of MPC. (f) Schematic of rapid evaporation using MPC through low-voltage electricity. (g) Microscopic indication of water evaporation process, heat localization and steam escape. 
Water evaporation occurs at the interface between water and air. Therefore, increasing the surface area can effectively enhance water evaporation. It is interesting and important to use a porous, conductive medium as the active component for the heater, to allow evaporation to occur on high-surface-area materials. MPC is obtained by carbonization of naturally grown biomass materials (corn straw), as shown in Fig. S1† (details shown in Methods); therefore it contains a lot of polar functional groups (–OH, CO, etc.), resulting in a certain hydrophilicity (ESI, Fig. S2 and S3†). Seawater or brackish water can be absorbed in the MPC body by capillary action, and the amount of water can be generally regulated by MPC with suitable and abundant pore structures. Also, due to the superior electrical conductivity of MPC, a significant amount of Joule energy can be generated rapidly, even at low voltage. The thermal energy generated can rapidly convert the confined water into steam that escapes from the surface through the pores and channels.
The microscopic pore structures are critical to MPC for water conduction and evaporation. The morphology and microstructure photographs of MPC are shown in Fig. 1b, and it can be seen that MPC consists of carbon nanoparticles that are about 40 nm to 50 nm in size. Many nanoparticles overlap with each other, forming micron-sized connected cavities, providing rich paths for water conduction. As shown in Fig. 1c, cavities with sizes from 10 nm to 20 nm can be clearly seen from the TEM picture, and the size of most of the cavities is about 10 nm. Therefore, MPC contains different sizes of pores and cavity structures.

Fig. 1d shows the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of MPC for pore structure analysis. There is a hysteresis loop, which indicates that MPC has a typical mesoporous structure. The hysteresis loop is formed by the capillary condensation phenomenon of the mesopores. There is a gentle inflection point in the area where the relative pressure is low, indicating monolayer adsorption.27 The slope of the adsorption curve can be identified where the relative pressure goes up from 0.1 to 0.95, indicating that the adsorption becomes multi-layer adsorption. At the position where the relative pressure is close to 1, the adsorption curve rises abruptly, indicating the existence of the large-size cavities formed by the stacking of nanoparticles, which is consistent with the morphology observed by the SEM. The hysteresis loop is closed at a relative pressure of about 0.4, indicating that the sizes of the mesopores are small. The specific surface area of MPC is 383 m2 g−1, which is excellent for a bulk material, with a compressive strength of 32 MPa. The calculated average pore size is about 4.1 nm, which is suitable for water cluster transportation (Fig. 1e).
When a low voltage (any value from 1 V to 9 V) is applied at both ends of MPC, the current flows rapidly through the MPC body, generating a large amount of Joule heat simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 1f. Due to the low thermal conductivity of MPC, the Joule heat was restricted in MPC, so the relatively small amount of water absorbed in MPC microstructures was heated up rapidly (Fig. 1g). The internal connected porous structure realizes the isolation and local heating of water molecules; thus the vapour generated on the surface of MPC was able to spread to the cavity and then enter the fast-escape macro-channel. Ultimately, high-speed water evaporation can be achieved.
Generally, materials used to generate heat via electricity require high resistance, but this will be dangerous for people as the voltage is far too high. Under the premise of ensuring an effective amount of heat, it is beneficial to decrease the applied voltage and keep the current within the safe range. The resistivity should not be too low. If the resistivity is close to that of the metal, the cross-sectional area should be reduced and the length needs to be increased to ensure suitable resistance. Otherwise, the conductive wire will be heated. Therefore, suitable electrical resistivity is critical, especially when designing heaters with bulk materials. The degree of graphitization, reflected from the Raman spectrum (Fig. S4,†ID/IG = 1.45 for this MPC sample), has a direct correlation with the conductivity of MPC. One of the advantages of MPC materials is that samples with different resistivities can be obtained by heat treatment at different temperatures to accommodate the generation of Joule heat.
Electrical performance of MPC
As shown in Fig. 2a, the I–V curves of the MPC material are compared to commercial 80/20 CrNi alloy resistance wire and conductive rubber. As can be seen from the figure, the I–V curves of MPC (dimension: 50 × 10 × 5 mm) in the dry state and immersed in brine are linear, and the resistance values are 7.96 Ω and 4.72 Ω, respectively. A CrNi wire (Φ 0.4 × 20 cm) has similar resistance (2.77 Ω), and conductive rubber of the same size as MPC has a resistance value of 96.43 Ω. The average temperature obtained by using Joule heat at different voltages on MPC is shown in Fig. 2b. The use of MPC allows much faster heating, and the steady state could be reached within 100 seconds after the applied voltage was turned on. The temperature did not rise much when the applied voltage was 1 V or less. As the voltage increased, the temperature was boosted dramatically and continuously, and the temperature gap between different voltages used became larger. The temperatures of MPC at different applied voltages ranged from 1 V to 5 V and reached steady states of 31.1 °C, 53.5 °C, 107.6 °C, 174.1 °C and 238.3 °C, respectively. After turning off the power, the temperature dropped rapidly to room temperature within about 200 seconds.
 Fig. 2  The electrical performance of MPC. (a) A comparison of I–V curves of commercial conductive materials (conductive rubber, CrNi wire) with similar electrical resistance of MPC. (b) Temperature curves under different voltages (1–5 V). (c) Variation curves of input power and resistance of MPC. (d) Curves of average surface temperature and heating rate (before the steady state) at different input powers. (e–h) Infrared (IR) photographs at a voltage of 5 V. Scale bar: 1 cm. 
According to the formula P = U2/R (P is the input power, U is the applied voltage, and R is the resistance), the input power increases exponentially with increased voltage (Fig. 2c). The resistance decreases approximately linearly, as the voltage increases, and the Joule heat increases, resulting in enhanced conductivity of the conductive medium upon elevated temperature in MPC. As the heating temperature increases, the degree of graphitization of MPC increases.28 As shown in Fig. 2d, the temperature obtained by Joule heat is linear with input power, and the slope of the temperature–heating power line is 19.3. During the first 100 seconds after turning on the power, the average heating rate can reach 139 °C min−1 at a voltage of 5 V. The allowable heating rate and input power are linear, with a slope of approximately 12.2, so the heating rate is very high. The temperature mappings from infrared (IR) photographs at an applied voltage of 5 V are shown in Fig. 2e–h, which are consistent with the temperature versus time curves (the heating curves, Fig. 2b). It is also found that the MPC material is relatively homogeneously heated, and the energy can be restricted.
Interfacial evaporation performance by Joule heat
In order to study the differences between MPC and other conventional materials in interfacial evaporation with low voltages, we compared CrNi wire of the same resistance as MPC. The samples of CrNi wire and MPC submerged in salt water were defined as CrNi-S and MPC-S, respectively. The MPC sample which was floated on water was called MPC-F. The device with a sandwich structure (MPC–hydrophilic cloth–insulating foam) that can float on the water was called MPC/cloth-F (Fig. S5†). As shown in Fig. 3a, the samples immersed in water (50 mL), whether CrNi wire or MPC, had a preheating period of up to 30 min after turning on the power, during which the water evaporation was very small and the whole bulk water was heated up. In the first 20 minutes of the preheating period, the evaporation rates of both CrNi wire and MPC were about 0.6 kg m−2 h−1. Afterwards, the rate of weightlessness gradually increased. After the preheating period, water vapor was generated at a steady rate. After an hour, the mass changes in CrNi-S and MPC-S were 11.5 kg m−2 and 23.3 kg m−2, respectively. While the MPC-F and MPC/cloth-F did not have any preheating period, and the evaporation rates were stable after the voltage was applied. With an increase in the amount of water to be treated, the advantages of MPC/cloth-F with thermal local design are more significant, which can directly achieve rapid evaporation and greatly reduce energy consumption (Fig. S6†).
 Fig. 3  The performance of water evaporation via Joule heat. (a) The contrast in salt water mass change between MPC in different conditions and CrNi wire with the same resistance at a voltage of 9 V. (b) The water quality changes at different applied voltages with the MPC/cloth-F device. (c) A comparison of evaporation rates between CrNi-S, MPC-S, MPC-F and MPC/cloth-F at the same voltage (9 V) after reaching a steady state. (d) Variation curves of evaporation rate and energy conversion efficiency of the MPC/cloth-F with voltage. (e) Variation curves of surface average temperature with time of the MPC/cloth-F under different voltages. (f) The cycle performance at different voltages (1 V to 9 V). (g–k) Infrared photographs of the MPC/cloth-F at different voltages. Scale bar: 1 cm. 
Since the MPC/cloth-F sample can effectively control the amount of water absorption, the heat could be located in the MPC body and a reduced amount of water can be heated to vaporization and the steam can easily escape the passage. If the heat is confined in a limited space, the amount of heated water matches the amount of evaporation, and the transfer of matter (water and steam) is free, so the fastest evaporation of water can theoretically be achieved. Thus, the heating element combined with a thin porous hydrophilic layer which can provide a free path for water conduction and steam escape can also in theory reach rapid evaporation of water.
We wrapped CrNi wire with the same resistance as MPC on the surface of the hydrophilic cloth. In order to ensure a more intuitive comparison of its interfacial evaporation performance with MPC, a roughly equivalent macroscopic surface area was also designed (Fig. S7†). The evaporation rate achieved was also 24.2 kg m−2 h−1, which was similar to the evaporation effect of the MPC/cloth-F at the same voltage of 5 V (Fig. S8†). However, metal materials are prone to corrosion in salt water or sea water, especially under an electric field. Therefore, metals or alloys are not suitable for electric heating powered evaporation of water. The inert carbon MPC combines hydrophilicity, porosity and electrical conductivity properties into one material, making the artificial black body suitable for rapid water evaporation applications.
The evaporation rate of MPC/cloth-F at different voltages is shown in Fig. 3b. As the voltage increases, the evaporation rate increases gradually. The evaporation rates at different voltages reached 0.58 kg m−2 h−1 (1 V), 6.86 kg m−2 h−1 (3 V), 26.4 kg m−2 h−1 (5 V), 59.2 kg m−2 h−1 (7 V) and 98.7 kg m−2 h−1 (9 V), respectively. At a voltage of 9 V, the evaporation rate of MPC-S (41.56 kg m−2 h−1) is twice that of CrNi-S (20.08 kg m−2 h−1) (Fig. 3c). The evaporation rates of the two MPC samples floating on the water surface were very high, reaching 74.2 kg m−2 h−1 (MPC-F) and 98.7 kg m−2 h−1 (MPC/cloth-F), which are 23 and 30.8 fold those of hierarchically nanostructured gels, respectively.17
We further studied the relationship between water evaporation rate, applied voltage and efficiency of electrical energy utilization. According to Fig. 3d, the relationship between evaporation rate and voltage is substantially exponential, which is consistent with the input power (Fig. S9†). The energy conversion efficiency (η) from electric energy-to-steam is an important indicator, representing the quality of the evaporation device. The formula is defined as: (1)where m is the amount of water evaporated per unit area, HLV is the total enthalpy change during water evaporation, including the latent heat and sensible heat. Pinput is the input power via Joule heating and t is time. When calculating the mass loss, the natural evaporation in a dark environment (0.224 kg m−2 h−1) should be subtracted. The energy conversion efficiency increases with applied voltage and then gradually reaches stability. When the applied voltage is 9 V, the energy conversion efficiency reaches 81.1%.
In order to clearly and intuitively observe the temperature distribution after the generation of Joule heat, we used an infrared (IR) camera to collect data from the experimental process, as shown in Fig. 3e, g, h and k. From these figures, it is clear that the time required for the temperature to rise to a steady state becomes shorter as the voltage increases. At higher voltages of 7 V and 9 V, the average temperatures reached are very close, around 95 °C. A few areas can reach 100 °C or even higher, and this could cause the water to vaporize faster.
The convection of heat has significant effects on evaporation. In the case where the heat absorbed in the evaporation zone is not high, the increase in the evaporation rate by negative pressure is very obvious.21 However, when the heat in the evaporation zone is high, strong air convection may have a negative effect on the evaporation rate to some extent. The evaporation rate can reach 50.7 kg m−2 h−1 with a wind speed of 3 m s−1 at a voltage of 7 V, which is lower than in the absence of wind (Fig. S10†). This may be due to the fact that wind enhances the loss of heat. The cycle stability of MPC achieving high water evaporation rates at different voltages is shown in Fig. 3f. In the cycling test results, it is found that the stability of the device is excellent (1 hour per cycle). This indicates that the chemical stability of MPC is excellent and there is no damage or degradation at low voltages. This is very important in a practical environment, and this low-cost, high-performance, and robust solution combination brings new possibilities for large-area industrial applications.
Thermal radiation effects and module design
We detected the radiation energy of MPC to the environment when obtaining different temperatures under low voltages by an infrared spectrometer which has been modified. According to black body radiation theory, emissivity is defined as the ratio of the actual emitted energy of a real object to that of a black body at the same temperature, which depends on the surface state of the object. It can be calculated with the following formula:29 (2)
The radiation heat loss of MPC at different temperatures can be obtained with the Stefan–Boltzmann formula: Qrad = σ × ε × Aevap × (TMPC4 − Tenvironment4)(3)where σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant (5.67 × 10−8 W m−2 K−4), and ε is the emissivity of MPC. PB(λ) is the radiant energy of the black body at the same temperature.

Fig. 4a shows the radiant energy of MPC at room temperature (20 °C) and different voltages (3 V, 35 °C and 5 V, 70 °C). The temperature of MPC is relatively low during low-voltage interfacial evaporation, and thermal radiation is at a very low level. The energy is mainly distributed in the waveband of 2.5 μm to 25 μm. At room temperature, there is no external heat radiation. As MPC temperature increases, the radiated energy gradually increases and spreads across the mid-infrared region.
 Fig. 4  The MPC module design and effects. (a) The intensity of MPC versus the wavelength of the emitted radiation. (b) MPC directly absorbs a small amount of a thin layer of brine in the PTFE mold, and the heat convection occurs in a limited space, resulting in less heat loss. (c) MPC absorbs water through a hydrophilic cloth that extends into the surrounding brine, and heat convection is effectively controlled in a small space. (d) The change in ion concentration and ion removal rate in brine. (e) A 3D model of the MPC module. (f) A physical photograph of the MPC module. 
In order to further verify the phenomenon that MPC materials using Joule heat can achieve high-speed water evaporation, we designed and prepared a modular device, as shown in Fig. 4b and c. Graphite was used as the electrode, MPC used as the Joule heat generator, and a plurality of MPC unit arrays was assembled in the PTFE mold. The brine enters through tiny holes on both sides, and MPC is in direct contact with the thin water layer in the module. The heat can be confined in this area, and the heat loss is limited. In addition, MPC can also absorb a small amount of water from a 2D hydrophilic cloth which can transfer the water from the outside. Both of these solutions can limit heat in the evaporation zone and achieve high rates of water evaporation. Based on the design of the macroscopic pores (diameter 2 mm) and abundant internal hierarchical porous structure of MPC, the wettability is enhanced to meet the high rate of water evaporation. Meanwhile, a high thermal gradient and a reverse salinity gradient are formed between MPC and thin-layer water, which greatly increases the ability of salt diffusion from MPC to the bulk water. Therefore, a device, especially a device with a thin-layer water structure, will not be blocked by salt, showing good stability.
The 3D model and real photographs of the modular device are shown in Fig. 4e and f. After the simulated brine with a total ion concentration of 30 g L−1 was purified by Joule heating interfacial evaporation, the ion removal rate reached 99.9%. The specific comparison data before and after desalination are shown in Fig. 4d and Table S1.† This is better than the desalination effect of the membrane method, and fully meets WHO requirements for drinking water.4,30 This modular design can directly utilize off-line clean energy, such as solar power, wind power, stored electricity (e.g. by batteries) and so on, in systems and products for industrial applications.
Interfacial evaporation based on micro–nano structure is a new method that can realize low-density utilization and high-efficiency conversion of energy.31,32 It can not only be widely used in the field of seawater desalination, but also in other fields, such as distillation, purification, chemical synthesis, and mineral extraction, and even environmental protection can play its role.33 Compared with traditional technology, interfacial evaporation based on a micro–nano structure can significantly improve energy utilization efficiency. This is a breakthrough in traditional heating and evaporation technology and is of great significance. The concept of electric field Joule thermal interfacial evaporation using biomass-monolithic porous carbon proposed in this paper has the characteristics of high energy conversion efficiency, wide adaptability and stable performance. It solves the problems of instability and low rate of interfacial evaporation by simply using solar thermal energy. It also actively expands the application range of interfacial evaporation. In the actual working field of realizing stable, high-speed, large-area applications, monolithic porous carbon has the characteristics of robustness, environmental resistance, high-temperature resistance, besides the pore structure, specific surface area, surface properties, and resistivity being adjustable. Monolithic porous carbon is a rare advanced material that can integrate all above characteristics into one material. Moving forward, it will further expand the application range of interfacial evaporation and have an impact on traditional heating and evaporation fields.
The concept of interfacial evaporation is completely different from traditional evaporation. It locally confines the evaporation process to the micro–nano surface interface. It uses the micro-confinement effect to realize control over the heat and phase change process unlike traditional evaporation, and the evaporation efficiency is extremely high. In Fig. 5a, for the same evaporation area (25 cm2) and the same energy input, the change curves of the amount of evaporation with an increase in the initial water amount are shown. It can be seen from the figure that interfacial evaporation can achieve a stable, high-speed and no-delay state regardless of the water volume to be treated (red curve and dots). Traditional evaporation needs to heat the bulk water as a whole. The evaporation process is affected by the volume of water, and the evaporation rate and energy consumption are high (blue curve and dots). With an increase in the initial water amount, mass loss of traditional evaporation at the same power becomes lower and lower, approaching the natural evaporation rate. When the initial water volume is 24 L and the evaporation area is 0.12 cm2, a comparison of the energy consumption required to evaporate 1 g of water is shown in Fig. 5b. The energy consumption of interfacial evaporation is about one-sixth of that of conventional evaporation. Therefore, high-efficiency energy utilization can be achieved by utilizing interfacial evaporation, which is of great value for the comprehensive utilization of energy.
 Fig. 5  The contrast between traditional and interfacial evaporation. (a) With the same evaporation area and energy input, the change curve of the evaporation amount with an increase in the initial water amount. Red is interfacial evaporation, blue is traditional electrothermal evaporation. (b) With the same initial water volume (24 L) and the same evaporation area (0.12 cm2), a comparison of the energy consumption required to evaporate 1 g of water. 
Conclusions
In summary, we proposed and successfully developed a new electrically powered artificial black body based on three-dimensional (3D), conductive monolithic porous carbon (MPC) for low-voltage, high-speed seawater desalination. The creative new path used electricity along with the Joule heating effect to produce high-speed water steam to produce fresh water from seawater, polluted water and water-containing minerals. The 3D porous carbon material has rich mesopores, micron-sized interconnected pores and a relatively high specific surface area, which are suitable for the conduction of substances during steam generation. It has suitable electrical conductivity to ensure that high temperature is achieved at low voltage and is electrochemically inert in brine, which allows high-speed water evaporation. A steam generation rate of 98.7 kg m−2 h−1 can be obtained at a voltage of 9 V, which is 196 times that of natural evaporation. The conversion efficiency of electrical energy to vapor reached 81.1%. If the heat generated by the steam is further used for power generation or heat recovery, the energy utilization efficiency of the technology will be significantly improved. A modular model has been designed and tested, demonstrating industrial potential and new off-grid solutions utilizing renewable energy harvesting by solar cells, wind and tidal power stations. Electrothermal interfacial evaporation based on a micro–nano structure achieves a completely different effect from traditional evaporation and substantially increases the evaporation rate. This work provides a new solution for evaporation, realizing a green, energy-saving and efficient steam generation process, which can be widely used in distillation, purification, mineral extraction and water resources acquisition.
Experimental
Materials and chemicals
Sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl), magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) and calcium chloride (CaCl2) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The electrical resistivity of the deionized water was 18.2 MΩ cm.
Materials fabrication
Typically, monolithic porous carbon (MPC) samples were made from biomass raw materials. In brief, an aqueous phosphoric acid solution (30 wt%, 10 mL) was mixed with a saturated oxalic acid solution (10 mL). Then the mixed solution was slowly added dropwise to corn straw powder (20 g). Then the mixture was stirred evenly at 800 rpm for 20 min. After that, the activator (KOH solution, 8 mL, 5 wt%) was added to the mixture and kept under stirring until the mixture was uniform. It was then vacuum dried at 60 °C overnight. The dried powder was placed in a mold and pressed to become a bulk material (pressure: 40 MPa). Finally, MPC was obtained after being annealed at 800 °C in a vacuum for 30 min.
Characterizations
Structural and morphological characterizations were carried out by FESEM (JSM 7800F). The surface area and pore size distribution were measured using a Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analyzer (TriStar 3000). Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed at 532 nm laser excitation (Senterra R200-L, Bruker Optics, Germany). The I–V curves were tested with a semiconductor parameter tester (Keithley 4200). The infrared photographs were acquired on an IR camera (MAG32, Magnity Electronics, China).
Electrothermal evaporation tests
Simulated brine solution (Ca2+, 9942 mg L−1, K+, 1168 mg L−1, Mg2+, 8018 mg L−1 and Na+, 11210 mg L−1) was prepared in a 250 mL beaker. The MPC-S and the CrNi-S samples were immersed in water, and the MPC-F sample was floated on water with the help of hydrophobic foam. The MPC/cloth-F was prepared from hydrophilic cloth, polystyrene foam and MPC. Among them, the polystyrene foam was wrapped in the cloth. Finally, MPC and the cloth were placed in close contact with each other using bolts. The electricity was provided by a DC power supply (KORAD, KA3005D/P). The balance connected to the computer was responsible for data collection.
Author contributions
Wu W. and Zhao B. proposed the ideas, planned the work and supervised the project. Liu F., Pang H., Ning Y. and Gu Y. carried out the experiments, collected the data and did the data analysis. Liu F., Bradley R. and Wu W. wrote the paper. All the authors participated in the data analysis and discussion and commented on the manuscript. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2021YFB2800700, 2021YFB2800703, 2021YFB2800701) and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Notes and references
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, Y. Zhong, S. Gong and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1771–1793 RSC .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Liao, J. Zhang, E. Huang, L. Ji, Z. Zhang, R. Zhao, Z. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Zhang, B. Xu, G. Qin and X. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2021, 60, 27113–27118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
M. Zou, Y. Zhang, Z. Cai, C. Li, Z. Sun, C. Yu, Z. Dong, L. Wu and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2102443 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef .
G. Zhu, J. Xu, W. Zhao and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31716–31721 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, J. Jia, Z. Wu, C. Qian, R. Chen, P. G. O'Brien, W. Sun, Y. Dong and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601811 CrossRef .
D. Ding, W. Huang, C. Song, M. Yan, C. Guo and S. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6744–6747 RSC .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. A. lexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, Z. Pei, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 623–628 RSC .
X. Xu, S. Ozden, N. Bizmark, C. B. Arnold, S. S. Datta and R. D. Priestley, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2007833 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, L. S. de Vasconcelos, N. Manohar, J. Geng, K. P. Johnston and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2022, 61, e202114074 CAS .
F. Liu, B. Zhao, W. Wu, H. Yang, Y. Ning, Y. Lai and R. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803266 CrossRef .
K. K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7675–7681 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kabir, P. Kumar, S. Kumar, A. A. Adelodun and K. H. Kim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 894–900 CrossRef .
C. Breyer, D. Bogdanov, A. Aghahosseini, A. Gulagi, M. Child, A. S. Oyewo, J. Farfan, K. Sadovskaia and P. Vainikka, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2018, 26, 505–523 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, Y. Sui, J. Zhang, Z. Cai and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25178–25186 RSC .
F. Liu, L. Wang, R. Bradley, B. Zhao and W. Wu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 1900122 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius and L. Mercier, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4478–4511 RSC .
O. Fromm, A. Heckmann, U. C. Rodehorst, J. Frerichs, D. Becker, M. Winter and T. Placke, Carbon, 2018, 128, 147–163 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, L. Miao, G. Xu, L. Lu, Z. Su, N. Wang and S. Tanemura, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 10729–10736 CrossRef CAS .
U. Yermiyahu, A. Tal, A. Ben-Gal, A. Bar-Tal, J. Tarchitzky and O. Lahav, Science, 2007, 318, 920–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, X. Li, G. W. Ni, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 562–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
A. V. Dudchenko, C. Chen, A. Cardenas, J. Rolf and D. Jassby, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 557–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06972eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration and typical highly efficient vapour generation device based on MPC. (a) The concept of stable interfacial evaporation of biomass nanostructure black body motivated by all-solar energy. (b and c) The microscopic morphology of MPC observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). (d and e) The nitrogen adsorption isotherm and pore size distribution of MPC. (f) Schematic of rapid evaporation using MPC through low-voltage electricity. (g) Microscopic indication of water evaporation process, heat localization and steam escape.	 

 	Fig. 2  The electrical performance of MPC. (a) A comparison of I–V curves of commercial conductive materials (conductive rubber, CrNi wire) with similar electrical resistance of MPC. (b) Temperature curves under different voltages (1–5 V). (c) Variation curves of input power and resistance of MPC. (d) Curves of average surface temperature and heating rate (before the steady state) at different input powers. (e–h) Infrared (IR) photographs at a voltage of 5 V. Scale bar: 1 cm.	 

 	Fig. 3  The performance of water evaporation via Joule heat. (a) The contrast in salt water mass change between MPC in different conditions and CrNi wire with the same resistance at a voltage of 9 V. (b) The water quality changes at different applied voltages with the MPC/cloth-F device. (c) A comparison of evaporation rates between CrNi-S, MPC-S, MPC-F and MPC/cloth-F at the same voltage (9 V) after reaching a steady state. (d) Variation curves of evaporation rate and energy conversion efficiency of the MPC/cloth-F with voltage. (e) Variation curves of surface average temperature with time of the MPC/cloth-F under different voltages. (f) The cycle performance at different voltages (1 V to 9 V). (g–k) Infrared photographs of the MPC/cloth-F at different voltages. Scale bar: 1 cm.	 
	(1)
	(2)
Qrad = σ × ε × Aevap × (TMPC4 − Tenvironment4)	(3)

 	Fig. 4  The MPC module design and effects. (a) The intensity of MPC versus the wavelength of the emitted radiation. (b) MPC directly absorbs a small amount of a thin layer of brine in the PTFE mold, and the heat convection occurs in a limited space, resulting in less heat loss. (c) MPC absorbs water through a hydrophilic cloth that extends into the surrounding brine, and heat convection is effectively controlled in a small space. (d) The change in ion concentration and ion removal rate in brine. (e) A 3D model of the MPC module. (f) A physical photograph of the MPC module.	 

 	Fig. 5  The contrast between traditional and interfacial evaporation. (a) With the same evaporation area and energy input, the change curve of the evaporation amount with an increase in the initial water amount. Red is interfacial evaporation, blue is traditional electrothermal evaporation. (b) With the same initial water volume (24 L) and the same evaporation area (0.12 cm2), a comparison of the energy consumption required to evaporate 1 g of water.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06972e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
