General discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD90006D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD90006D
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2011, 151, 199-212General discussionFirst published on 12th July 2011

Dr Mays opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Sun: It would be interesting to compare the total hydrogen uptake data from Professor Sun's molecular simulations with predictions from the analysis of experimental excess isotherms as described in our paper at this meeting.1
1 N. Bimbo, V. P. Ting, A. Hruzewicz-Kołodziejczyk and T. J. Mays, Faraday Discuss., 2011, DOI: 10.1039/c0fd00010h.

Professor Sun responded: Excellent idea, I am looking forward to seeing the comparison.

Mr Wood asked: With Ca in its 2+ state, have you considered the possibility of the material spontaneously decomposing into CaH2 and your original material, or is the Ca bound sufficiently strongly to the lattice that this is negated?

Professor Sun replied: No, we have not. The Ca2+ is not an isolated cation; it binds two hydroxyl oxygens (O−) to form a charge-neutral functional group which does not show strong reactivity under common conditions.

Dr Eijt opened the discussion of the paper by Dr Latroche: I find it very interesting that you observed a clear low temperature hydrogen desorption for the MgH2 nanoparticles. Recently, we found a similar low temperature desorption for MgH2 nanoparticles synthesized using spark discharge generation.1 In your work, you succeeded in addition in establishing a clear and interesting correlation with the sizes of the nanoparticles. I wonder about the mechanism of this effect, which you attribute to diffusion. In our work, we modeled the effect of hydrogen diffusion and we find that, while it is indeed an important factor, by itself diffusion is not sufficient to explain the full set of changes, such as the relative broadness of the thermal desorption spectra. We found that the state of the surfaces of the nanoparticles also plays an important role.1 Surface properties can also lead to pronounced size dependent effects, since the surface to volume ratio increases dramatically with reduced particle size. In your study, could changes in the state of the surfaces of the MgH2 nanoparticles with reduced particle size, for example related to the enhanced availability of surface sites per hydrogen atom or to the presence of impurities at the surfaces (e.g. related to oxidation of surface sites), play a role in determining the shape and temperatures of the thermal desorption spectra?
1 V. A. Vons, A. Anastasopol, W. J. Legerstee, F. M. Mulder, S. W. H. Eijt and A. Schmidt-Ott, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 3070–3080.

Dr Latroche responded: We indeed observed a relationship between desorption temperature and particle size. This agrees very well with your findings recently published in Acta Mater. and we are very happy to add this reference in our manuscript. We attribute this effect to hydrogen diffusion since it is well known that one of the most important factors that limits hydrogen desorption in MgH2 hydride is the poor mobility of hydrogen within this stoichiometric compound. Indeed, whereas for metallic hydrides hydrogen tetrahedral sites are never fully occupied allowing a fast diffusion process, this is not the case for this ionic compound for which all H sites are fully occupied. Therefore, decreasing the particle size has two important effects. It will first reduce the diffusion length for hydrogen to travel from the core of the particle to the surface. Second, it will drastically enhance the surface-to-bulk ratio leading to much larger surface exchange between the gas phase and the solid.
This does not preclude any surface chemistry effects that can be involved in the process. Indeed, such small particles are highly reactive and the synthesis route involving wet chemistry with organometallic precursors could lead to surface contamination. However, we took serious precautions to avoid any oxygen contamination of our samples and we did not observe any impurities (at least at the level of detection of our analysis techniques). Moreover, our synthesis method leads directly to the formation of magnesium hydride, a compound known to be less sensitive to oxidation than its metallic counterpart (i.e. Mg). Finally, we believe that the surface state is more important for absorption (for which the dihydrogen gas dissociation must take place at the particle surface) than for desorption where surface hydrogen recombination is easier to achieve. Therefore, we assume that the diffusion process is the most important factor although, as demonstrated in your work, surface states may also play a significant role.

Dr Parker opened the discussion of the paper by Dr Yang: The effect of ball milling is to generate a higher energy material by the introduction of defects and increased surface area. These are annealed out by repeated cycling and the resulting material closely resembles untreated material. Is there any way to stabilise the ball milled materials so as to preserve the desirable properties generated by ball milling?

Dr Yang replied: Mechanical milling has been widely used to obtain nanosized hydrides, but these ball milled hydrides are in a metastable state and thus tend to aggregate to stable bulk particles upon cycling. To my knowledge there are no effective ways to stabilise the ball milled materials. However, recently, there has been great interest in the synthesis of nanosized hydrides by incorporating metal hydrides and/or complex hydrides into a nanoscaffold (porous materials). It has been suggested that incorporation of hydrogen storage materials into the scaffolds would stabilise ‘nanosized’ materials and preventing aggregation during cycling and accordingly maintain the thermodynamic parameters and kinetic properties.

Dr Hill continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Latroche: You quite rightly emphasise in your paper that the particle sizes obtained from the Scherrer method using the broadened peaks in your XRD should not be given too much weight. However you state that the reason for this is because of the quality of the data. I would suggest not even using the Scherrer method due to its well publicised problems. Instead I recommend looking at a more robust domain size analysis or whole powder pattern modelling (see for example ref. 1 and 2 below).
1 W. I. F. David et al., Mater. Sci. Forum, 2010, 651, 187.
2 P. Scardi et al., Mater. Sci. Forum, 2010, 651, 155.

Dr Latroche responded: I agree that the Scherrer method is not appropriate. It does not allow one to deconvolute from the instrument contribution to the line width and it does not take into account broadening related to strains in the particles. A better analysis can be performed by using other methods like the well known Williamson–Hall analysis or the ‘fundamental parameters’ approach developed in diffraction analysis software like Topas from Bruker. This has not been done in the present work as the data quality was poor. First, the data collection was made over a short period of time. Second, the amount of magnesium hydride within the materials was low leading to relatively weak diffraction peaks sitting on top of the signal of the carbon template. The main goal of the X-ray diffraction analysis was not to determine accurately the structural properties of the metal hydride phase but rather to demonstrate that the magnesium hydride was synthesized following our chemistry route based on organometallic reduction. Identification of the main diffraction lines of MgH2 is indeed observed and confirms the process. A more detailed analysis of the diffraction line broadening might be done in the future using data with a better signal-to-noise ratio and using a more fancy line shape analysis program.

Dr Yang communicated: How did you control the particle size distribution of MgH2 confined in the carbons?

Dr Latroche communicated in reply: The pore size of the carbon template (5 nm) determines the particle size of nano-confined MgH2. For ultra small MgH2 nanoparticles (<5 nm), we assume that they are formed inside the mesoporosity of the carbon template while larger nanoparticles exceeding the pore size are lying at the external surface of the carbon template. The advantage of using a carbon template is that this material shows uniform pore size as compared to other materials such as activated carbons that have a poorly defined structure and a rather wide pore size distribution.

Professor Yvon said: Williamson–Hall plots would be needed to uncouple particle size from strain. Is the quality of the diffraction patterns sufficient to make such plots?

Dr Latroche replied: I agree that Williamson–Hall plot analysis would be better to perform a full analysis of the diffraction line broadening. It will allow us to deconvolute from the instrument contribution and to take into account broadening related to both size and strains within the particles. The data presented in our article does not have high enough quality to perform such analysis. Better work might be done in the future using data with a better signal-to-noise ratio and higher metal hydride-to-carbon template ratio in order to achieve accurate line shape analysis leading to more reliable results.

Dr Yang communicated: What is the pore size distribution of your porous carbon samples? How did you judge whether all the MgH2 nanoparticles were confined in the pores of the carbon, and have you checked the pore volume of the porous carbon after loading of MgH2? In Fig. 12 in your paper, it looks to me as if samples 18MgH2@CT and 22MgH2@CT are more like mixtures of carbon and MgH2 because such a dehydrogenation temperature can be achieved by milling porous carbon with MgH2 and a confined MgH2 would show a much lower dehydrogenation temperature.

Dr Latroche communicated in response: As stated in the article and in my previous responses, our carbon template has a well organized mesoporosity with a mean pore diameter size of 5 nm. Indeed, not all MgH2 nanoparticles are formed inside the pores of the template; we stated that nanoparticles exceeding the pore size are lying at the external surface of the carbon material. These materials are extremely air sensitive and need special handling and a specially designed air-tight sample holder for nitrogen adsorption measurements at 77 K. The determination of the textural properties of the hybrid materials is currently in progress.

Dr Parker commented: In a recent study of hydrous palladium oxide,1 a sophisticated analysis of powder X-ray and neutron data gave a particle size of ~18 Å, which would have indicated a surface area approximately ten times larger than that observed experimentally. TEM showed the particles were agglomerated into larger clusters that reduced the surface area. This emphasises the need for a multi-technique approach to characterisation as used by Latroche et al. in this work.
1 S. F. Parker et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14164–14172.

Dr Latroche replied: I thank Dr Parker for this pertinent comment and I fully agree with the statement that multiple techniques are mandatory for full determination of the particle sizes. Beside classical X-ray diffraction or TEM analysis, one may think about Temperature-Programmed Reduction (TPR) with hydrogen gas or magnetic measurements. Indeed, for some metallic elements like nickel, magnetic measurement allows one to obtain useful information on the particle size in a very independent way compared to diffraction techniques.

Dr Autrey continued the discussion of the paper by Professor Sun: There are two distinct benefits to using theory: (i) to explain complex experimental observations and (ii) in predicting new materials and structures to optimize hydrogen sorption. How well does your computational approach fit experimental observations? Should you benchmark the theory approach against previous observation before using it to predict new structures?

Professor Sun responded: The method has been validated in our first paper on hydrogen storage in MOFs (ref. 45 is this paper1). Using the same approach, our calculated results agree well with some of the latest experimental results which differ significantly from others.
1 J. Fu and H. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21815.

Dr Borgschulte continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Yang: Composites made of various components may result in reactions between the components, causing an exchange of anions in the solid phases and the exchange of atoms in the gas phase. For example, volatile boron trifluoride may be released from mixtures of LiBH4/LiBF4, and F may be incorporated into bulk phases such as LiH/LiF. Did you check these possibilities?

Dr Yang answered: As discussed in the paper, from the XRD patterns shown in Fig. 6, the LiF peaks were shifted to a higher d-spacing, which might suggest the formation of partially substituted LiF1−xHx phases via solid phase interaction between LiH and LiF. Regarding the gas phase of BF3, as indicated from the XRD patterns of the as-milled samples in Fig. 5, LiBF4 had been decomposed producing BF3 and LiF during the milling process, and BF3 would be released once the milling pot was opened after milling.

Professor Gregory said: Concerning Fig. 8 showing the XRD pattern of the dehydrogenated material in your paper, what gases are evolved on dehydrogenation and what can be learnt from the diffraction experiments of the dehydrogenated cycled products? What is the fate of the fluorine?

Dr Yang replied: According to the XRD patterns in Fig. 7 (phases of MgH2, LiF and LiH observed) and the DSC profiles in Fig. 8 (endothermic peaks related to phase transition and melting of LiBH4, dehydrogenation of MgH2 and LiBH4) of the as-milled and the rehydrogenated counterpart samples, the evolved gas should be H2 due to dehydrogenation of MgH2 and LiBH4, although a further TG-MS run of the sample should be carried out to confirm this. The XRD patterns of post DSC of 1stReh (first rehydrogenated sample) in Ar (not included in the paper), show Li0.182Mg0.818 α-alloy, Li0.30Mg0.70 β-alloy and LiF, with much stronger intensity of the LiF peak compared to that of the as-milled sample. Based on the XRD patterns shown in Fig. 7, upon cycling the intensity of the LiF peak is increased with a shift of the peak position to higher d-spacing. This may indicate that fluorine has been in the form of LiF and a partially substituted LiF1−xHx phase via solid phase interaction between LiH and LiF.

Professor Bennington continued the discussion of the paper by Professor Sun: The question is how far can you push physisorption before the hydrogen molecule breaks up and chemisorption occurs?
We have been working on graphite intercalation compounds with the idea that adding charge to the graphite sheets increases the enthalpy of the interaction. This works, and we can push the enthalpy from the ~4 kJ mol−1 that is commonly seen in graphites up to around 10 kJ mol−1. This is reflected in the inelastic neutron scattering of the 14.7 meV rotational mode, for which in the graphite intercalates the degeneracy is split so much that one of the modes is almost at zero energy transfer. In the potassium intercalates the system is right on the cusp between physisorption and chemisorption and under certain conditions the physisorbed hydrogen breaks up to form a two-dimensional metal hydride inside the graphene galleries. So perhaps it is just not possible to go beyond 10 kJ mol−1 in a physisorbed system?

Professor Sun responded: With ca. 4.7 eV bonding energy, H2 is a very stable molecule under normal conditions. However, with catalysis, the activation energy (as the reactions path changes) is a very complicated issue. I do not think a general rule to separate chemi-/physi-sorption simply based on interaction energies can be made. For a specific case, one needs to study how the H–H bond breaks and then calculate the activation energy.

Dr Autrey said: Maybe we can look back at the older zeolite literature to learn something about the cross-over between physisorbed and chemisorbed hydrogen in MOFs and other high surface area materials if we assume a reactivity model that treats the anions and cations as point charges that provide an electric field. Stefan Grimme at the University of Munster has recently been describing research that shows an electric field of 0.1 atomic units (~50 V nm−1) is strong enough to heterolytically split molecular H2 into a proton (H+) and a hydride (H−). Along these lines my colleagues at PNNL, Shawn Kathmann, Greg Schenter and Don Camaioni, have been calculating the electric field between a Lewis acid and a Lewis base and found that H2 can be activated. If the electric field generated between the cation and anion in a MOF is sufficiently large, i.e., > 0.1 a.u. then H2 may become chemisorbed.

Professor Schröder replied: This is a very promising and interesting idea. It is certainly worth pursuing these ideas and to investigate the effects of post-synthetic modification on the electric field and charge distribution within porous materials by variation of Lewis acid and Lewis base sites.

Dr Fisher remarked: Dr Autrey showed a slide of electronic field calculations a moment ago. How does BH3 compare to BCl3 in the calculations? I would expect that there would be a noticeable stereoelectronic effect.

Dr Autrey responded: Dr Fisher brings up an interesting comparison that even surprises us—that the electric field (EF) between H3N and BH3 is not very different from the EF between H3N and BCl3. Boron trichloride is a much better Lewis acid but this does not seem to correlate directly with the EF.

Dr Anderson commented: The interaction of H2 with zeolite exchangeable cations has been found to result in the dissociation of the molecule in a number of cases. In 1999, Baba et al.1 found evidence from 1H MAS NMR that heterolytic dissociation, generating both acidic protons and hydride species, occurred at reduced silver clusters in both AgA (LTA) and AgY, according to the reaction: (Agn)+ + H2 → (Agn) + H− + H+.(1)
Kazansky et al.2 demonstrated dissociation in zinc-containing ZSM5 through direct observation of the resultant Zn–H and O–H vibrational frequencies (and their deuterium counterparts) by transmission IR spectroscopy. Oxidative addition of hydrogen to Ga(I) has also been reported.3 A recent review on the interaction of hydrogen with zeolites, including this work, is available.4
1 T. Baba, N. Komatsu, H. Sawata, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Takahashi, H. Sugisawa and Y. Ono, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7894.
2 V. B. Kazansky, A. I. Serykh, B. G. Anderson and R. A. van Santen, Catal. Lett., 2003, 88, 211.
3 V. B. Kazansky, I. R. Subbotina, R. A. van Santen and E. J. M. Hensen, J. Catal., 2004, 227, 263.
4 P. A. Anderson, Storage of Hydrogen in Zeolites, in Solid-State Hydrogen Storage? Materials and Chemistry, ed. G. Walker, Woodhead, Cambridge, 2008, ch. 9.

Professor Fernandez-Alonso said: Alkali–graphite intercalation compounds are also known to undergo hydrogen chemisorption under certain conditions, as in, for example, MC8 (M = alkali metal).1 This process typically requires temperatures above T = 200 K and can lead to the restaging of the intercalate. The underlying molecular mechanism remains largely unexplored, yet it is hypothesized that a high metal concentration in the graphitic galleries leading to a high local electric field is a key parameter in the process.2,3 For KC8, recent neutron diffraction studies have been unable to locate the hydrogen atoms in the resulting hydride.4
1 T. Enoki, M. Suzuki and M. Endo, Graphite Intercalation Compounds and Applications, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003, ch. 8.
2 R. J.-M. Pellenq, F. Marinelli et al., J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 224701.
3 F. Fernandez-Alonso, F. J. Bermejo and M.-L. Saboungi, in Handbook of Nanophysics, ed. K. D. Sattler, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2010, vol. 5, pp. 1–29.
4 A. Lovell, N. T. Skipper et al., J. Alloy Compd., 2007, 446, 397.

Dr Autrey responded: We are just beginning to think about how we can learn more about hydrogen activation by considering molecules and solids more generically as electric fields. We think this may be an approach that can be used to answer questions about the boundaries between chemi- and physisorption. We will be very interested in reading the references you have cited.

Professor Wang continued the discussion of the paper by Professor Sun: Doping of metals in PAF is a promising method for the enhancement of its hydrogen uptake. It is noticed that, in our results, some metal dopants would induce deformations of the structures of host porous materials. For example, deformations of Covalent Organic Frameworks (COFs) have been found by doping with Sc and Ti from our first principles calculations (see our recent publication1). In addition, it seems that the doping amount is rather difficult to control in our experimental work. Therefore, it is vital that experimental verification of the doping proposed by the authors could be carried out in the future.
1 J. Lan, D. Cao, W. Wang and B. Smit, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4225.

Professor Sun replied: Yes, thanks for the suggestion. A point to be addressed is that we suggested modifications of chemical building blocks before the material is synthesized. This is quite different from doping after the material is synthesized. The advantage of the former approach is that the amount and position of metal cations can be precisely controlled.

Professor Bennington addressed Dr Autrey: Your idea is that the hydrogen is torn apart in the presence of a very large electric field gradient. My thinking was that perhaps the process was much gentler that this, and that it was possible to transfer electrons to the hydrogen molecule which would reside on the H–H bond and change the strength of the molecular bond. When we look at the splitting of the rotational mode of the H2 molecule, if the bond length remains unchanged then the centre of weight of the m = 0 and m = ±1 modes should remain at the same energy as the fully degenerate mode. However, there is some evidence from inelastic neutron scattering that this is not the case in all systems, implying that the moment of inertia of the molecule has changed.

Dr Autrey responded: Well, we can not take credit for the idea of hydrogen scission in electric fields (EF). This was most recently discussed by Grimme in relationship to the electric field that is generated by separation of a Lewis acid/base pair. Ammonia borane and ammonium borohydride are the prototypical examples: H3N: H–H BH3 ⇄ [H3NH][HBH3](2)It is interesting to consider the parallels with EF that can be generated between the cation and anion in a MOF structure with the EF generated in zeolites and furthermore the parallel with Lewis acid base pairs such as ammonia borane for activation of hydrogen. When the EF is large enough it is sufficient to heterolytically break H2 with a very low activation barrier.
I am not as confident about reducing H2 with an electron which is what I believe you are describing. I believe this is a much higher activation barrier but it should be further investigated.

Dr Mays said: As a general comment prompted by Professor Sun's paper and others at this meeting including those by Professor Schröder, Dr Johnson and Dr Bevan, hydrogen storage capacities of materials are not easy to compare with US Department of Energy targets (http://www1.eere.energy.gov/hydrogenandfuelcells/storage/pdfs/targets_onboard_hydro_storage.pdf, accessed 2 May 2011) as the mass of storage components (containment, pipework, valves, mounting brackets, etc.) is system specific. A crude estimation is that material specific storage capacity (mass of hydrogen/mass of storage material) reduces by a factor of at least two to yield system specific capacity (mass of hydrogen/mass of system). Also, there are important potential applications, such as using hydrogen to store intermittent renewable electricity, where the challenging US DoE targets for light-duty vehicles are probably inapplicable.

Professor Sun answered: I agree, the DoE target has been used (or even abused) too much. However, I think it has at least one merit—it provides a common platform for comparison.

Dr Bevan responded: It is an interesting comment that the importance of the DoE targets for hydrogen storage can be over emphasised and possibly adversely affect development of these materials. Indeed there are practical applications where it is possible to use effectively hydrogen storage materials within systems which are below the DoE targets—for example, the current application and stationary power storage.

Dr Autrey commented: There is a lot of discussion and dislike of the US DoE volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage targets. In the real world maybe the ‘economic’ target is more important. If hydrogen storage and fuel cells cannot compete with existing technology on an economic basis it does not matter how much hydrogen the material ‘stores’.

Miss Guo continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Yang: Have you tried to dope halide ions by mixing lithium halide to a LiBH4 + MgH2 system?
Some papers have mentioned that lithium halide could reduce the phase transition temperature of LiBH4 by substituting halide ions for BH4 ions to form a solid solution, but there is no similar effect in your work. What do you think about it?

Dr Yang answered: We have not tried to dope any halide ions by mixing lithium halide to the 2LiBH4:MgH2 system, because as mentioned in the paper the F−/Cl− containing dopants in this study were chosen because, (a) transition metal halides have already been extensively studied with LiBH4 and (b) these F−/Cl− dopants do not contain any transition metals hence the doping effect from the anions will not be masked by transition metal effects (either in the metal acting as a catalyst or thermodynamic destabilization agent).
The F−/Cl− containing doped samples did show a reduction in the phase transition temperature of LiBH4 in our study although we did not discuss it in the paper. You can roughly see the shift from Fig. 2. In detail, the phase transition temperature for the 1-hour as milled LiBH4 only is 126 °C, for the 1-hour as milled 2LiBH4:MgH2 is 120 °C, and for the four halide doped samples is 115 °C, 117 °C, 99 °C, and 110 °C with dopants LiBF4, NH4F, LiAlCl4 and NH4Cl respectively.

Dr Parker addressed Professor Sun and Professor Schröder: The materials described by Professor Sun and Professor Schröder could be regarded as mirror images of each other: Sun's proposed compounds use a metal complex as a linker with an organic molecule at the corners and Schröder's use an organic molecule as the linker and a metal complex at the corners. In both systems it is proposed that the hydrogen clusters around the oxygen are associated with the metal. Is it possible that higher adsorption capacities could be obtained by introducing oxygen functionality into the linker?

Professor Sun replied: Yes, this idea could be explored further. One thing that worries me is the complexity in the synthesis. If both connector and linker are oxides, it may be quite difficult to make porous materials.

Professor Schröder responded: This is a very interesting and promising idea. It would certainly be worth introducing further oxygen functionalities into the linker molecules to probe their effects on H2 uptake before and after metal cation doping.

Ms Zhang continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Latroche: After using TEM dark image to calculate the particle size, do you use other equipment/techniques to repeat the particle size test? For the distribution of particle sizes, how do you test it? Do you choose a different area of the sample to test to obtain the distribution? In this work, is XRD suitable to test particle sizes far lower than 100 nm?

Dr Latroche replied: The particle size determined by TEM has been compared to the value obtained by X-ray diffraction line analysis using the Scherrer formula. Although this latter technique is not the best one to extract the particle size, it allows a comparison between the results obtained by the two techniques and a rather good agreement is observed between the sizes determined by X-ray diffraction and the TEM technique.
The size distribution was obtained by analysing TEM images using the software ImageJ. Several TEM images have been collected from different parts of the sample. The histograms are built from the analysis of several hundreds of nanoparticles.
XRD is suited for particle size analysis down to a few nanometres. The limitation is more related to data quality, signal-to-noise ratio and line shape analysis method. Using data with better quality and a more reliable analysis of the line shape (using Williamson–Hall plots, for instance) would allow us to obtain more robust results.

Ms Zhang continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Yang: I wonder whether some impurity from the milling media was introduced into the samples during milling. Did you use some technique to analyse the elements of the samples as an impurity test, such as EDX or XRD?

Dr Yang responded: We did not observe any impurities of the milled samples from XRD analysis caused by milling process, so we did not further check by EDX.

Dr Deledda continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Latroche: The desorption temperatures and kinetics for the MgH2-based systems presented in the paper are very similar to those reported for nanocrystalline MgH2 processed by ball milling techniques with or without additives (e.g. transition metals, transition-metal oxides or fluorides). Do you think you have reached a limit beyond which the kinetics of hydrogen desorption cannot be improved any further, regardless how small the MgH2 particles are? Do you plan on testing the additives that were found to be beneficial for ball milled MgH2 and see if the kinetics can be improved?

Dr Latroche answered: There are no indications that we have reached such a limit. Some theoretical studies1 claim that below one nanometre the thermodynamics of such a system can be significantly modified as we are then dealing with a very large amount of surface atoms compared to bulk ones. It is very challenging to prepare and to characterize such very tiny particles but there are efforts worldwide to deal with such nanomaterials to verify the modelling hypothesis and to further improve the desorption kinetic of materials. We do not plan to test specifically the additives that have been used so far in ball milling techniques but rather to synthesize nano-alloys combining Mg with transition metals at the nanoscale.
1 R. W. P. Wagemans et al., Hydrogen storage in magnesium clusters: quantum chemical study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16675–16680.

Professor Fernandez-Alonso communicated to Dr Autrey: The ammonium borohydride molecular complex reported in your paper (NH4BH4) looks like a fascinating material. What is known about the phase diagram of this substance and, in particular, the structural and dynamical properties of the hydrogen atoms associated with the NH4 and BH4 groups?

Dr Autrey communicated in response: ABH2 is a fascinating material. While it was first made over 50 years ago there is little information published regarding the structure and dynamics, likely because of stability issues. Richard Parry made the complex by a simple metathesis reaction but noted that it decomposed at room temperature over the course of a few hours. Fortunately it is stable enough to get some spectroscopic results at room temperature and we have found ABH2 to be stable as a solid at −80 °C for months or at room temperature in liquid ammonia for several days. So it can be stored and studied at low temperatures. Professor David has measured some beautiful ND here at RAL on our 11B perdeuterated ABH2 and shown that ABH2 is in the rock salt structure down to about 60 K. Molecular dynamics simulations by my colleagues Greg Schenter and Shawn Kathmann suggest that the ND4 and BD4 ions are quite mobile even at low temperatures.

Dr Feiters commented: On page 8 of your paper it is stated that addition of methyl groups to the amine will increase the proton affinity, which is in line with the numbers in Table 1 (which shows an increase in ΔHpa). Basicity and nucleophilicity do not have to go hand-in-hand in this class of compounds; although steric effects probably do not affect the interaction of an amine with a proton very much, it is quite possible that they decrease the more sterically demanding complexation of the amine with the borane. Is it possible to interpret the numbers in the ΔHprep column in Table 1 in terms of (expected) steric and electronic effects?

Dr Autrey responded: Unfortunately, the methyl groups do not add sufficient steric bulk to prevent the dative bond from forming with the borane. As you point out the same structure reactivity that makes the methyl substituted amines have a higher proton affinity does appear to parallel the basicity in this case and make the dative bond stronger. So Nature provides a compensating effect. On the one hand the proton affinity increases the stability of the ion pair but on the other hand the dative bond increases thereby negating the increase in proton affinity.

Dr Fisher remarked: To increase the likelihood of NR3–BH3 → NR3 + BH3, you could use aromatic groups on the N and vary the substitution around the ring as a means of probing substituent effects on dissociation.

Dr Autrey replied: You are correct and that is what is currently observed in sterically crowded Lewis acid/base pairs. Preventing the dative bond formation gives a unique complex that can split H2 heterolytically. Our thermodynamic analysis appears to show that the dative bond formation in ammonia borane is one important reason why ammonium borohydride is less stable. You lose H2 from ABH2 and make AB. However, if you could prevent the dative bond from forming, then the reaction could be reversible. We are excited about this as it starts to show some important connections between the fields of hydrogen storage for fuel cell applications and hydrogen activation for catalysis.

Professor Ross opened the discussion of the paper by Professor Fernandez-Alonso: When H2 on nanotubes are measured on TOSCA, there is a prominent recoil peak that can be fitted with the perfect gas model for the surface molecules with the effective temperature as a fitted parameter.1 This shows an increase as the concentration on groove sites is increased—due to H2–H2 repulsions—followed by a decrease as the proportion of multiple layer adsorption increases. The difference with the neutron Compton technique is presumably that the higher incident energy excites the H–H stretch?
1 P. A. Georgiev, D. K. Ross et al., Carbon, 2005, 43, 895.

Professor Fernandez-Alonso responded: In the present work, the high incident neutron energies available on the VESUVIO spectrometer (range 10–100 eV) imply that recoil spectra can be described within the impulse approximation (IA), cf. eqn (1) in the paper. These energies are significantly higher than the H–H stretch (ca. 0.5 eV) and deviations from the IA are negligibly small, as demonstrated by the magnitude of the k parameter shown in Fig. 5. Under these experimental conditions, the neutron Compton technique provides a thermodynamically averaged snapshot of the atomic (proton) momentum distribution prior to the scattering event. In ref. 1 below, broad spectral features were observed at energies below the H–H stretch, and these were interpreted as arising from the recoil of the whole H2 molecule for ground-state rotational levels up to J = 7. In this particular case, it was necessary to account for the internal structure of molecular hydrogen in order to fit the experimental data. The transition between molecular and atomic recoil has been explored and discussed in detail by Andreani et al. for the case of bulk molecular hydrogen.2 It must be noted that, within the IA, the calculation of mean atomic kinetic energies can be easily accomplished by recourse to eqn (10) in the manuscript. There are similarities between the data presented in Fig. 6 of ref. 1 and Fig. 7 of our paper, particularly at high coverages where mean kinetic energies decrease as a result of weaker binding forces. Such similarities suggest that the Young–Koppel model3 provides an adequate description of the low-energy scattering of neutrons by adsorbed molecular hydrogen.
1 P. A. Georgiev, D. K. Ross, et al., Carbon, 2005, 43, 895.
2 C. Andreani, D. Colognesi and E. Pace, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 60, 10008.
3 J. A. Young and J. U. Koppel, Phys. Rev. A, 1964, 135, 603.

Dr Parker continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Autrey: The focus so far has been on ammonia borane. Fig. 1 in your paper shows that there are several other compounds in this family with similar hydrogen contents. Do any of the other materials offer advantages over ammonia borane?

Dr Autrey replied: This is a very important question. Unfortunately none of the compounds listed in Fig. 1 can meet all of the DoE targets simultaneously. While the rates are great, economical regeneration is the key challenge. Our initial focus was on ammonia borane (AB) given the high hydrogen density, ease in handling, and commercial availability. The AB compound is stable to water and there are no shipping constraints listed on the MSDS. All of which are properties an experimentalist appreciates, especially if you want to collaborate and send samples to your friends at RAL for neutron studies. More recently we have been looking at DADB since we have learned how to make this ionic isomer of AB from ammonium borohydride. DADB has the advantage of no induction period and a slightly lower temperature for H2 release compared to AB.

Dr Parker continued the discussion of the paper by Professor Fernandez-Alonso: Do you see any evidence for H2–H2 interactions, either experimentally or in your DFT calculations? How would they manifest in the data?

Professor Fernandez-Alonso answered: Our neutron Compton experiments provide an upper (conservative) bound to hydrogen–hydrogen interactions as the width of the proton Compton profile is found to be invariant to adsorbate coverage. Qualitatively speaking, hydrogen–hydrogen interactions would result in an additional broadening of the Compton profile associated with the two-body interaction potential responsible for intermolecular interactions, i.e., an increase in σ in Fig. 7 of the paper. Experimental access to this quantity is in principle possible with present instrumental capabilities on the VESUVIO spectrometer, yet we estimate that such a measurement would require prohibitively long counting times. On the computational front, we have not performed a detailed survey of the coverage dependence of H2 adsorption in this graphite intercalation compound. Preliminary calculations using the computational methods detailed in ref. 1–3 below indicate that the adsorption of two hydrogen molecules per potassium atom can be accomplished at a very modest (few meV) energy cost per hydrogen atom, resulting in an increase in Compton widths well within the experimental uncertainties shown in Fig. 7 of the paper.
1 A. Lovell, F. Fernandez-Alonso et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 126101.
2 R. J.-M. Pellenq, F. Marinelli et al., J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 224701.
3 M. Krzystyniak and F. Fernandez-Alonso, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 83, 134305.

Professor Akiba continued the discussion of the paper by Dr Autrey: Is [BH4]− in [NH4][BH4] the same as that in alkali or alkaline earth borohydrides in terms of crystal structure, bond length, reactivities and thermodynamic stability?
The stability of ionic compounds strongly depends on the size of both cation and anion. If you use larger cations such as tetra ammonium cations, is [NR4]+[BH4]− more stable or not?

Dr Autrey responded: ABH2 is cubic at room temperature and therefore we assume the BH4 is similar in structure to cubic forms of alkali metal borohydrides. But you are correct that the NH4 cation is what makes the difference in reactivity and thermodynamic stability. BH4 is not stable to acids and NH4 is a reasonably strong acid even in the solid state. We believe that is the first step in the decomposition pathway—proton transfer to the BH4. In the case of alkali and alkaline earth metals we believe the first step in the decomposition pathway is almost the opposite—hydride transfer from the BH4 to the metal cation, i.e., MBH4 → MH + BH3.
As to the second question, I believe, to a first approximation, that adding alkyl groups to the amine will increase the size but also decrease the acidity so [MeNH3][BH4] may be more stable but we have not done this experiment to confirm this hypothesis. Fred Hawthorne has made the closo B10H10 and B12H12 dianions by heating [Et4N][BH4] at 200 °C for 5 days.

Dr Parker questioned: In ammonia borane the ‘dihydrogen’ bond between neighbouring molecules appears to be key to understanding the hydrogen release properties of this compound. Would an X–n charge density map provide useful information on this interaction?

Dr Autrey replied: What you say is true and we believed at the outset of our studies that the dihydrogen bonding in ammonia borane (AB) was responsible for the low temperature hydrogen release. If you have a strong interaction between a hydridic and protonic hydrogen in the ground state you are on your way to forming molecular hydrogen. However, our experimental and computational studies have lead us to take a 180 degree turn from our original hypothesis: dihydrogen bonding plays a significant role in stabilizing ammonia borane, the opposite of what you want for releasing hydrogen. In fact, we now believe that the long induction period during decomposition is a result of the energy required to disrupt the hydrogen bonding. Once the dihydrogen bonding is disrupted the ammonia borane isomerizes to form the diammoniate of diborane (DADB) and our current best explanation is that the DADB is more acidic than AB and the initial reaction leading to H2 release is from the reaction of DADB with AB. In the paper we show that you can start with either AB or DADB and get to the same products. This result is consistent with an equilibrium between DADB and AB leading to hydrogen release. So a charge density map of AB and DADB would be insightful and could provide useful information on the decomposition pathways.

Professor Morrison remarked: Further to the discussions regarding the calculation and measurement of electronic charge transfer to and from hydrogen in solids I add that one rigorous definition of charge transfer is the Born-effective charges. It is possible to evaluate this charge tensor within modern electronic structure codes using linear response theory. These charges have a direct experimental link (and can predict) through the TO-LO splitting in measured phonon dispersion curves.

Dr Autrey responded: I completely agree that any further understanding into charge transfer and/or molecular electric fields could provide critical insight into hydrogen activation. Your suggestions sound very exciting. From a more global perspective I believe a fundamental understanding of hydrogen activation in molecular species as well as in solids links two critically important research needs (i) hydrogen or energy storage and (ii) catalysis. In the first field we need novel methods to store energy from intermittent renewable energy sources, e.g., solar, wind, hydro, and energy storage in molecular hydrogen is very efficient when coupled with fuel cells. In the second field, hydrogen activation for catalysis is critical for everything from biomass upgrading, conversion of CO2 to fuels to ammonia production. These two research fields are more related than we currently credit and interactions between these two communities would be mutually beneficial. We believe we can learn from each other and a good example is what you have suggested about measuring and calculating phonon dispersion curves.

Dr Borgschulte commented: There is controversy as to whether an endothermic reaction of hydride formation makes sense energetically. The heat accompanied during desorption (i.e. using of the fuel) is lost. Thus it lowers the total energy efficiency of hydrogen used as an (energetically efficient) energy carrier. Could you please comment on this?

Dr Autrey answered: it is true that materials that require the endothermic formation of the hydrogen carrier are controversial. I am in agreement that we do not want to have the reaction so endothermic that the regeneration requires a large amount of energy to put the hydrogen back on. This will never be economically practical for a rechargeable system.
We should consider weighing the controversy of H2 release by exothermic reactions from a hydrogen carrier from two independent time scales, (i) the rates required for releasing H2 from the carrier to power a fuel cell and (ii) rates required for putting H2 back on the carrier after it has been used. If we recall the DoE targets, peak demand for H2 release to a fuel cell is ~1.6 g H2 s−1, while putting the hydrogen back on requires refilling times of <5 min. However, if we take the spent fuel off the vehicle off-board and replace with a new charged carrier we can extend the time frame for putting the H2 back onto the discharged carrier.
However, if you are willing to let the hydrogen release be modestly exothermic this results in one critically important benefit: where rates of H2 delivery to the fuel cell are most demanding—on-board a vehicle—you have kinetic control of H2 release. Furthermore, H2 release from an exothermic material is more energy efficient on-board. Specifically, you do not need to burn H2 to get your storage vessel heated up to 200–300 °C to get the hydrogen released. You do pay the economy price on the regeneration. But if you are creative you can use chemistry to put the hydrogen back on at your leisure.

Dr Lovell continued the discussion of the paper by Professor Fernandez-Alonso: The KC24 structure is a good prototypical system for exploring the strongly pinned hydrogen–hydrogen interactions through simultaneous neutron Compton scattering/diffraction studies. Could you comment on how these can be extended to physisorptive systems with multiple sorption sites?

Professor Fernandez-Alonso replied: This is largely an open question meriting further exploration. The utility of neutron Compton scattering to investigate complex adsorbents characterized by multiple sorption sites very much depends on the question that is being asked. At the most qualitative level, neutron Compton scattering can provide important insights into the uptake, relative abundance, and binding of different adsorption sites as a function of either temperature or coverage, particularly if diffraction measurements can be performed simultaneously. More quantitatively, we anticipate the need to combine neutron Compton scattering measurements with state-of-the-art calculations in order to provide a physical interpretation of experimental data or validate computational models.

Dr Autrey opened a general discussion: A choice between endothermic or exothermic on-board release is an important topic of debate. You need to balance both the kinetic and thermodynamic considerations. For a car we need to release H2 at 1.6 g H2 s−1 to an 80 kW fuel cell. Do you agree that an exothermic on-board material has the advantages of fast kinetics and high efficiencies compared to an endothermic material such as a metal borohydride? And if this is an advantage, is there a disadvantage to off-board recharging where the kinetic demands are much less demanding?

Dr Borgschulte responded: The questions might be asked in a different way: how is the kinetics linked to thermodynamics? It is true that the higher the driving force the faster the kinetics. However, classical metal hydrides such as LaNi5 deliver very high hydrogen fluxes even without a large thermodynamic driving force (here the driving force is purely entropy). The flux is in most cases limited by the heat required for the endothermic process. An exothermic process does not always help; here the heat has to be dissipated to avoid an uncontrollable decomposition reaction with the same technical problems. However, when it comes to light weight metal hydrides, the corresponding kinetics are far off that of metal hydrides and need a high driving force. I agree that off-board recharging irrespective of whether the reaction is endo- or exothermic has several advantages: not only kinetics, but also the heat issues, the reactor design etc. might be less demanding.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
(Agn)+ + H2 → (Agn) + H− + H+.	(1)
H3N: H–H BH3 ⇄ [H3NH][HBH3]	(2)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
