Measurement of optical properties in organic photovoltaic materials using monochromated electron energy-loss spectroscopy   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA06201F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA06201F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13636-13645Measurement of optical properties in organic photovoltaic materials using monochromated electron energy-loss spectroscopy†

        
          
            Jessica A. 
            Alexander
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Frank J. 
            Scheltens
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lawrence F. 
            Drummy
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michael F. 
            Durstock
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            James B. 
            Gilchrist
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sandrine 
            Heutz
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            David W. 
            McComb
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Electron Microscopy and Analysis, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. E-mail: mccomb.29@osu.edu
bMaterials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, WPAFB, OH, USA
cDepartment of Materials, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, UK
Received 
      21st July 2016
    , Accepted 16th August 2016First published on 16th August 2016AbstractThe optical and electronic properties of organic materials influence the functionality of all organic electronics. These properties can be measured in bulk materials easily, but determining the opto-electronic properties in thin films and at interfaces is challenging. In this report we describe how these properties can be measured with high spatial resolution using an optimized electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) method in the scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). EELS spectra were collected for poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), [6,6]phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), and C60. These organic materials are both susceptible to electron beam damage and commonly utilized in organic photovoltaics (OPVs). In order to prove that these spectra are representative of the pure materials and that the samples have not undergone any significant beam damage, the real and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric function obtained from these spectra have been compared to the same functions obtained using variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE), a technique that should not induce any beam damage to the samples. Comparisons of these two data sets reveal good agreement in both measured peak intensities and their corresponding peak energies, thus validating this low-damage EELS acquisition method. EELS spectrum images were acquired from a CuPc/C60 bilayer structure to demonstrate that it is possible to collect spatially resolved EELS data from device-related structures comprised of these beam-sensitive materials.
Introduction
Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) show promise for clean renewable electrical power due to their low-cost, lightweight, and flexible device architecture. OPV devices can be manufactured using solution processing, which means it is possible to produce large active areas on flexible substrates at low cost and high throughput.1,2
Recent developments in OPV device technology have increased power conversion efficiencies (PCE) to values of 6.7%,3 ∼7.6%,4 and 13.2% (ref. 5) for molecular; and 9.2–10.1% (ref. 6) for polymeric OPVs. These recent reports suggest that OPV devices may finally have reached the stage where they are viable low-cost, environmentally friendly alternatives to inorganic based solar cells. Extending OPV performance significantly beyond the 10% PCE barrier is a critical challenge.
OPV devices consisting of a bulk heterojunction of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) have garnered much interest in recent years due to their relatively high efficiency and stability.7 Since the processes that generate current in these OPVs are highly dependent on the structure and bonding at the P3HT:PCBM donor/acceptor interface, understanding the structure, morphology and chemical bonding at this interface is vital to the further development of such devices. Much research has been done to investigate the morphology of this interface in order to correlate device performance with morphology. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) studies have shown that there is phase separation between P3HT and PCBM domains in a spin-coated active layer.8 Energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM) has been used to enhance the visualization of the P3HT and PCBM domains in a bulk heterojunction layer of these materials.9–11 Electron tomography has also been used in an attempt to understand the morphology of the donor/acceptor interface in OPV devices containing bulk heterojunctions of P3HT and PCBM.12–16 Another study has collected spectroscopic information from the donor/acceptor interface in another organic photovoltaic materials system consisting of a bilayer of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and C60 using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to track the composition of carbon across this donor/acceptor interface, which has led to insights into the morphology and chemical composition at the interface.17 In all of the work to date, information about electronic structure and optical properties at the donor/acceptor interface has not been determined. Knowing this information would allow for the better understanding of charge transport in OPVs, which would in turn lead to the design of better performing OPVs.
A scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) combined with electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) can be used to probe the chemical and electronic structure of donor/acceptor interfaces in OPV devices with nanometer scale spatial resolution. In particular, valence-loss spectra (ΔE < 50 eV) can be used to determine the complex dielectric function of an OPV material with high spatial resolution over a wide energy range that includes that the solar spectral range.18 The complex dielectric function reveals the single electron transitions and collective excitations that occur in OPV materials. Spatial mapping of the single electron transitions is effectively a map of the local partial joint density of states and can provide information about the electronic structure at the donor/acceptor interface. It is anticipated that such knowledge will aid the understanding of how charge generation operates at the donor/acceptor interface, which will then allow for the development of OPVs with better power conversion efficiencies.
When STEM-EELS measurements are made on samples of organic materials electron beam damage can result. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 where it can be observed that the low energy-loss peaks in the EELS spectra of CuPc change in position and intensity as the electron dose is increased by repeatedly exposing the same area of the sample to the incident electron beam. This electron beam damage is due to breaking of chemical bonds and consequently alters the local electronic structure. Thus, in order to use STEM-EELS reliably it is necessary to optimize the acquisition conditions to minimize electron beam damage to the organic samples. The objective is to be certain that the EELS measurements made at the donor/acceptor interface are representative of this interface.
 Fig. 1  Valence-loss spectra collected for CuPc. The electron dose for each spectrum is indicated. As the electron dose increases on the sample, peaks in the spectra lose intensity and disappear (as shown by the arrows), which is indicative of bonds breaking causing the local chemistry of the sample to change. 
In order to achieve this it is desirable to compare the complex dielectric function obtained from STEM-EELS measurements with that obtained from a technique that does not cause damage to the material. Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) can be used to determine the complex dielectric function for a given sample.19 VASE does not allow for these measurements to be made with nanometer scale spatial resolution, but it can be assumed that the organic sample undergoes little or no damage during the acquisition of VASE data. VASE measurements from thin films of organic materials can be used as references for comparisons with data collected using STEM-EELS in order to determine whether or not the organic samples have undergone any significant damage in the electron microscope.
Experimental methods
Four organic materials were selected for the focus of this study (Fig. 2). Since the material system of primary interest is that of the P3HT:PCBM bulk-heterojunction, these were two of the materials studied. In addition, CuPc and C60, which represent a simple molecular system used in OPV devices, were also chosen for this study. As the analysis was based on comparing measurements of optical properties utilizing two different spectroscopy techniques, it was imperative that the samples for each measurement (i.e. EELS and VASE) were identical, as differences in sample preparation could result in modifications of the complex dielectric functions. Thin films of CuPc, C60, and PCBM were prepared by thermal evaporation (see Table 1 for growth parameters) of the organic material onto room temperature, freshly cleaved, rock salt substrates (NaCl and KCl with (100) orientation) using an organic evaporation chamber in an argon-filled glove box. Since P3HT is a polymeric material, thin films were prepared by spin-coating a solution of P3HT in dichlorobenzene onto the room temperature KCl substrates (for the EELS measurements) and glass slides (for the VASE measurements). The deposited films were 50 nm or less in thickness (as confirmed by atomic force microscopy).
 Fig. 2  HAADF images collected for each of the thin films after EELS acquisitions: (a) CuPc, (b) C60, (c) P3HT, and (d) PCBM. Insets show schematics of these materials. 
Table 1 Growth parameters used for CuPc, C60, and PCBM thin films




Material
Growth rate (nm min−1)
Pressure (Torr)




CuPc
∼1.7
∼3 × 10−7


C60
∼0.6
∼6 × 10−7


PCBM
∼0.5
∼4.5 × 10−6




The CuPc/C60 bilayer structure was grown by thermal evaporation. The CuPc and C60 layers were deposited at a rate of 6 nm min−1 on (100) oriented silicon. An aluminum layer was grown on the C60 at a rate of 1.2 nm min−1 for the first 20 nm and at a rate of 3 nm min−1 for the remainder of the layer. All of these depositions were at a chamber pressure of 7.5 × 10−7 Torr. Thicker layers of CuPc and C60 were deposited to ensure that an EELS signal of the bulk materials could be acquired far from their interface.
For the ellipsometry measurements, the films used were as prepared on the rock salt substrates or glass slides. A J. A. Woolam Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer was used to collect ellipsometry data at angles of incidence of 60°, 65°, and 70° for energies in the range of 0.5–4.5 eV in 0.01 eV steps. After data collection, a model was built to fit the experimental data, as will be discussed in the Results section.
For EELS measurements of the pure materials the thin films were floated off by dissolution of the rock salt substrates in room temperature distilled water, from which they were collected onto lacey carbon-coated TEM copper grids. An FEI Titan3 60-300 Image-Corrected S/TEM utilizing a 60 keV monochromated electron beam was used to collect the EELS data on a Gatan Quantum spectrometer. In order to minimize electron beam damage, the samples' exposure to the electron beam was limited to only the EELS acquisitions. The alignment of the microscope and adjustment of the EELS acquisition parameters were conducted on an area of the TEM grid that was not adjacent to the thin film. The sample was brought into the field of view (∼1 μm2) of the electron beam and the electron beam was blanked. With the electron beam blanked, the field of view was blindly adjusted into an area of the thin film that had not been previously scanned. The beam was unblanked, and the EELS measurement was started while the electron beam continuously scanned the area of interest. Short acquisition times were used (2–4 ms) to minimize the electron beam dose, which resulted in noisy data. Thus, ten spectra were acquired and summed together to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. This process was repeated multiple times for each area of the sample so that any damage to the samples could be monitored during acquisition. These measurements were not spatially resolved on the nanoscale. High-angle annular dark field (HAADF) images of the thin films collected after the EELS acquisitions are shown in Fig. 2.
EELS measurements of the CuPc/C60 bilayer structure utilized the technique of spectrum imaging, which allows for EELS data to be collected with nanometer spatial resolution. A thin cross-section foil was extracted from the sample using an optimized focused ion beam method similar to that detailed in Gilchrist et al.17 Similar methods as those outlined above were used to ensure that the sample was not exposed to the electron beam before data acquisition. The spectrum images were collected with a dwell time of 20 μs and a step size of 1.6 nm to further guarantee that the sample was not significantly damaged during the data acquisition.
Results and discussion
I. Ellipsometry analysis
VASE can be used to measure the phase difference, Δ, and the amplitude difference, Ψ, between the parallel and perpendicular components of a linearly polarized light source after it has interacted with a thin film.19 In order to extract the optical properties (i.e. n and k) from the measured data it is necessary to fit Δ and Ψ using a series of oscillators. It is from this modeling that n and k can be extracted, as the models are comprised of general oscillators with initial values of n and k that are varied until the models fit the experimental data of Δ and Ψ (via mean-square error minimization). As shown in Fig. S1† these models (shown in red) agree well with the experimental Ψ and Δ, suggesting the n and k values that are extracted from the fit are representative of these thin films. These values of n and k were used to calculate the real and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric function. The real and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric functions obtained from the VASE experiments were compared with those previously reported in the literature (Fig. 3). For all four materials, the VASE measurements are in excellent agreement with previously published data,20,21 which implies that these ellipsometry measurements can be trusted for comparisons to the EELS data.
 Fig. 3  Comparisons of the real (left column) and imaginary (right column) parts of the complex dielectric function obtained using VASE (blue) compared to those found in the literature (red) for CuPc (a and b),20 C60 (c and d),20 PCBM (e and f),21 and P3HT (g and h).21 
II. EELS analysis
The first step in the processing of the energy-loss spectra is to remove the zero-loss peak (ZLP) from each spectrum. This peak is due to elastically scattered electrons or those that have lost very small amounts of energy (for example by phonon excitation). There are a number of approaches to fitting and extracting the ZLP from a spectrum. In this work the reflected tail model available in DigitalMicrograph was utilized. For the reflected tail model, it is necessary to have a symmetric ZLP so that the reflected tail is actually representative of the form of the ZLP. This is the case if the incident electrons pass through a well-aligned monochromated electron microscope. The experimental spectra were recorded from a negative energy (−10.0 eV) to ensure sufficient data on the negative side of the ZLP for accurate reflection to the positive side. Before applying the zero-loss subtraction, the point at which the reflected tail model spliced with the experimental data was adjusted (given in multiples of full-width quarter maximum) in the global menu of DigitalMicrograph, in an effort to avoid unwanted artifacts in the resulting inelastic spectrum as these artifacts could affect the further analysis of the data. An example of the zero-loss subtraction process is shown for C60 EELS data in Fig. 4, and the inelastic spectra extracted for CuPc, C60, PCBM, and P3HT are also shown in Fig. 4. The spectra for CuPc, PCBM, and P3HT exhibited damage after the first acquisition (similar to Fig. 1), so spectra acquired with an electron beam dose below the critical dose observed for damage were used for analysis. C60 was more electron beam tolerant and did not exhibit damage after the first acquisition, so the spectrum collected for this material utilized a longer dwell time as compared to the other three materials. This enhanced the signal-to-noise ratio for the C60 spectra. The energy resolution of these collected spectra were in the range of 0.18–0.21 eV, and these spectra are similar to other EELS measurements made in the literature for pure films of CuPc, C60, PCBM, and P3HT.8,10,22–27
 Fig. 4  (a) An example EELS spectrum collected for C60, which shows the results from our ZLP removal process. Inelastic spectra collected in the valence-loss region for (b) CuPc, (c) C60, (d) PCBM, and (e) P3HT. 
These inelastic spectra result from both single (one interaction with the sample) and plural (multiple interactions with the sample) scattering. The complex dielectric function, ε(E), is related to the single scattering distribution, J1(E), as:  
Thus, to perform the analysis required to obtain the complex dielectric function, this inelastic spectrum must be deconvolved so that only the single scattering distribution remains.18 Furthermore, in causal (response) functions it is possible to relate the real part of the function to the imaginary part of the function (and vice versa) through Kramers–Kronig analysis.28 As the complex dielectric function is a causal function,28 Re[1/ε(E)] can be obtained through Kramers–Kronig analysis of Im[−1/ε(E)]. The complex dielectric function can be extracted as:  where ε1 and ε2 are the real and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric function, respectively.18
In this work, the Kramers–Kronig analysis routine in DigitalMicrograph was utilized to obtain ε1 and ε2 for each of the four organic materials studied, as shown in Fig. 5. In each case there is considerable fine structure in ε2, particularly at energy-losses below 10 eV. Such peaks in ε2 are associated with single electron transitions between the valence and the conduction band. The presence of the energy levels associated with these transitions confirms that the materials have not undergone any beam damage in the electron microscope as this would break chemical bonds and broaden the range of energy levels. It is also noteworthy that the complex dielectric functions obtained for C60 and PCBM show many similarities in peak positions. This is expected as PCBM is a C60-derivative, but it also suggests that the electron beam has not caused significant damage to the electronic structure of the PCBM thin film.
 Fig. 5  Real (left column) and imaginary (right column) parts of the complex dielectric function determined using Kramers–Kronig analysis on collected EELS spectra for CuPc (a and b), C60 (c and d), PCBM (e and f), and P3HT (g and h). In each of the parts of the complex dielectric function, there is evidence of fine structure, suggesting that the electron beam has not significantly damaged the thin films of these four organic materials. 
III. Comparing VASE and EELS
In order to establish unequivocally that the electron beam has not caused significant damage to the bonding and electronic structure of the organic materials during the EELS acquisitions, ε1 and ε2 resulting from the VASE and EELS measurements were compared (Fig. 6). In terms of the numbers of peaks and their energies it is clear that there is good agreement between the VASE and the EELS derived dielectric functions.
 Fig. 6  Comparisons of the real (left) and imaginary (right) parts of the complex dielectric function obtained using VASE (blue) compared to those obtained using EELS (black) for CuPc (a and b), C60 (c and d), PCBM, (e and f), and P3HT (g and h). All agree well between the two measurements, which shows that the samples have not been significantly beam damaged during the EELS acquisitions. 
When inspecting the CuPc data sets in Fig. 6, the double peak structure at approximately 2.0 eV is observed in both ε1 and ε2. The reversal in the relative peak intensity in the imaginary part of the complex dielectric function of the EELS data when compared to the VASE data is attributed to errors in the zero-loss extraction process. In addition, there is good agreement in the peak energies and intensities for the peaks measured beyond 2.0 eV. This is an important observation, as it definitively proves that the optimized EELS acquisition method is successful; the CuPc sample has not incurred significant electron beam damage and the EELS measurements made are representative of CuPc. Furthermore, comparisons of these two data sets once again emphasizes that a primary advantage of utilizing EELS is the extended energy range that can be probed.
In the C60 data sets, all five peaks in both ε1 and ε2 agree in peak energy and intensity for both the EELS and VASE measurements. This again validates the optimized EELS acquisition method. It is also of note that the two small peaks at approximately 2.0 eV are observed in both the EELS and VASE data sets. While these peaks were not present in the VASE data published in the literature (see Fig. 3), their presence in both data sets indicates that they are real and associated with the C60 film examined here. There is also excellent agreement between the VASE and EELS data sets for the PCBM and P3HT materials (Fig. 6).
In summary, the comparison with the VASE measurements establishes that these EELS spectra can now serve as standards for all four materials, which will be vital for the analysis of donor/acceptor interfaces in actual OPV devices.
IV. Assignment of single electron transitions
It is known that ε2 can be related to n and k as ε2 = 2nk. Furthermore, k can be related to the absorption coefficient, α, through α = 4πk/λ, where λ is the wavelength associated with the absorption. Through substitution, it can be shown that ε2 is directly proportional to α: α = 2πε2/λn. Thus, peaks in the absorption spectrum should correlate to peaks present in ε2.
Peaks in the absorption (and therefore ε2) spectrum are associated with single electron transitions between bonding and anti-bonding states. The molecular orbitals associated with these energy levels can be established from the results of computational modeling which in turn provide a platform for assigning the allowed single electron transitions to features in the absorption spectra, subject to the normal selection rules to determine whether a transition is allowed or forbidden.29,30
Available data has identified the single electron transitions responsible for peaks in the absorption spectra for C60,30 which are consistent with those calculated in the literature.31,32 The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) were identified to be the hu and t1u orbitals, which have an associated energy gap of approximately 1.9 eV.31,32 The allowed electron transitions are shown in the inset of Fig. 7 (adapted from ref. 30). These states have been designated as carbon bonding/anti-bonding orbitals,31 of either π or π* type.33Fig. 7 also shows the peaks in the ε2 spectrum measured for C60via EELS with their assigned electron transitions. The peak at approximately 1.98 eV, which breaks symmetry rules, has been attributed to disorder in the C60 film.30 As this peak is evident in the ε2 spectrum, this suggests that there is also disorder in the C60 films studied in this work. Furthermore, as this peak is observed in both the VASE and EELS ε2 spectra, this symmetry breaking is not electron beam induced. Other peaks associated with single electron transitions (i.e. from hu to t1g) are all observed in the ε2 spectrum.
 Fig. 7  (a) Correlation of the peaks in the imaginary dielectric function for C60 with known single electron transitions.30,33 (b) Correlation of the peaks in the imaginary dielectric function for CuPc with known single electron transitions calculated from density functional theory (DFT) and measured using vapor-phase absorption spectroscopy (Abs.).34,35 
Identified single electron transitions were also readily available in the literature for CuPc. These transitions were determined using density functional calculations34 and measured using vapor-phase absorption spectroscopy.35 Peaks in the measured EELS ε2 spectrum for CuPc were identified based on their corresponding energies to the literature values, as shown in Fig. 7. Rosa and Baerends34 identified the type of bonds associated with each of these transitions, which are outlined in Table 2. The peak at approximately 2 eV (denoted with an asterisk) corresponds in energy to a shoulder in the vapor-phase absorption spectrum that has been attributed to a vibronic transition.35
Table 2 Single electron transitions calculated and identified for CuPc (adapted from Rosa and Baerends34)




Type
Transition
Theoretical energy (eV)




π(C) → π(C, N)
2a1u → 7eg
1.589


π(C, Np), dπ → π(C, Np)
6eg → 4b1u
4.409


π(C, Np), dπ → π(C)
6eg → 6a2u
4.693


π(C) → π(C)
2b2u → 8eg
5.186


π(C, Np), dπ → π(C)
6eg → 3a1u
5.837




The agreement between these two ε2 spectra measured using EELS and the reference data again supports the conclusion that the optimized EELS acquisition method is successful for beam-susceptible organic materials. Furthermore, as a result of identifying the associated single electron transitions for pure C60 and CuPc, it will be possible to determine which (if any) bonds are changing at the interface if the ε2 spectrum measured at the donor/acceptor interface is compared to the ε2 spectrum measured for the pure films.
Known electron transitions were not readily available for comparisons with the ε2 spectra of P3HT and PCBM, and these calculations are beyond the scope of this work.
V. Spatially resolved EELS of a CuPc/C60 bilayer structure
The first step in analyzing the spectrum image of the CuPc/C60 bilayer structure was to align the ZLPs of the individual spectra. Subsequently, pixels/spectra corresponding to the C60 and CuPc films were summed, as shown in Fig. 8 in which 36 rows of 280 pixels (57.6 nm in height, 448 nm in width) were summed for C60 (denoted by the blue box) and 30 rows of 280 pixels (48 nm in height, 448 nm in width) were summed for CuPc (denoted by the green box). These summed spectra were deconvoluted, and Kramers–Kronig analysis was applied to the deconvolved spectra to obtain the imaginary part of the dielectric function as shown in Fig. 8. The peaks in ε2 from the C60 layer correlate well with the peaks measured for the pure C60 film (see Fig. 5), although the features are less intense. ε2 collected from the CuPc layer in this structure and from the pure film (see Fig. 5) are significantly different. This may be due to microstructural differences in the two films that arise from the growth conditions of the CuPc layers. CuPc is an anisotropic material and the orientation of the molecules varies when grown on different substrates36 and at different temperatures. Energy-loss spectra from anisotropic materials are more complex because their dielectric properties depend on the direction of the scattering vector and therefore on the angle between the incident beam and the crystallographic axes of the material. Consequently, the intensity of the peaks in ε2 will vary with the orientation of the CuPc molecules relative to the incident beam direction. The results in Fig. 8 suggest that the CuPc in the bilayer structure has multiple orientations resulting in several overlapping peaks in ε2, whereas in the thin film specimen ε2 is coming from a single or a small number of orientations.
 Fig. 8  (a) HAADF image collected after the acquisition of the spectrum image for the CuPc/C60 bilayer. The area enclosed in the red box denotes from where the data was collected, and the green and blue boxes denote the spectra summed in order to extract the energy-loss spectra for (b) C60 and (c) CuPc. Kramers–Kronig analysis was applied to the low-loss spectra to obtain the imaginary part of the complex dielectric function for (d) C60 and (e) CuPc. 
In Fig. 9, low-loss EELS spectra are shown for the case where the integrated box used for summing the pixels instead has a height of 4.8 nm and a width of 448 nm. While the data is noisier, it is possible to observe changes in the low-loss features of the EELS spectra as the analyzed region moves from the C60 bulk layer (at the top), through the C60/CuPc interface, and into the CuPc bulk layer in approximately 5 nm steps.
 Fig. 9  Low-loss EELS spectra summed from boxes 4.8 nm in height and 448 nm in width. At the top is bulk C60, and subsequent spectra are collected moving down through the interface at a step size of approximately 5 nm until data from bulk CuPc was obtained (bottom). The dashed line shows the transition in the energy of the plasmon peak, and the arrows show the characteristic low-loss peaks associated for C60 and CuPc. 
Theoretically, it should be achievable to measure changes in the low-loss features with a spatial resolution higher than 5 nm. For inelastic scattering in the low-loss region, the limit to the spatial resolution (for an accelerating voltage of 60 keV) is in the range of 4 to 10 nm, depending on the exact energy-loss,37 and single electron transitions should have even higher spatial resolutions.38 However, beam damage can limit the measureable spatial resolution due to the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). For samples that are highly susceptible to beam damage, the electron beam cannot dwell on the sample for an extended time in order to obtain enough signal compared to the noise.37,38 This is why a step size of 5 nm was used for these data; it allowed a sufficient SNR to see a change in the EELS spectra measured across the interface. Further work is necessary to establish experimentally the actual limit to the spatial resolution for these materials. However, this analysis proves that EELS data can be collected for beam-sensitive materials, such as CuPc and C60 with high spatial and spectral resolutions. It also illustrates the potential for this method to be used to probe directly the electronic structure at the donor/acceptor interface in OPV devices.
Conclusions
In this work, pure thin films of CuPc, C60, PCBM, and P3HT have been prepared in order to acquire a set of standard EELS spectra for these organic materials. By comparing collected EELS data to collected VASE data for identical thin films of CuPc, C60, PCBM, and P3HT, it was shown that it is possible to collect EELS spectra for these beam sensitive organic materials by optimizing the acquisition conditions such that the electron dose is minimized. This technique of comparing EELS and VASE data can be used in the future for a multitude of applications in which a beam sensitive material needs to be confidently studied using EELS. Using these EELS spectra as standards, a CuPc/C60 bilayer structure was studied, proving that EELS data can be collected with high spatial and spectral resolutions for these beam-sensitive materials. Utilizing this method, it should not only be possible to measure the EELS signal at interfaces in OPVs, but also in any beam-sensitive materials system. This may include polymeric materials used in flexible electronics, composites, etc. for which the electronic structure is critical to the understanding of the materials system.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all collaborators and technical support at both the Center for Electron Microscopy (CEMAS) at The Ohio State University and the Materials and Manufacturing Directorate at the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. Funding was provided by an AFRL/DAGSI Ohio-Student Faculty Research Fellowship awarded by the Air Force Laboratory Manufacturing and Materials Directorate, and by The Ohio State University through a Distinguished University Fellowship.
References
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374–380 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Keong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu and H. Murata, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 194–195 CrossRef .

          http://www.heliatek.com
        .
R. F. Service, Science, 2011, 332, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 561–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pfannmoller, H. Flugge, G. Benner, I. Wacker, C. Sommer, M. Hanselmann, S. Schmale, H. Schmidt, F. A. Hamprecht, T. Rabe, W. Kowalsky and R. R. Schroder, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3099–3107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pfannmoller, H. Flugge, G. Benner, I. Wacker, W. Kowalsky and R. R. Schroder, Synth. Met., 2012, 161, 2526–2533 CrossRef .
L. F. Drummy, R. J. Davis, D. L. Moore, M. Durstock, R. A. Vaia and J. W. P. Hsu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 907–912 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel, M. Barenklau, G. de With, H. Hoppe and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Andersson, S. Masich, N. Solin and O. Inganas, J. Microsc., 2012, 247, 277–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. V. Andersson, A. Herland, S. Masich and O. Inganas, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 853–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With, K. Frolic and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7396–7403 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Gilchrist, T. H. Basey-Fisher, S. C. Chang, F. Scheltens, D. W. McComb and S. Heutz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6473–6483 CrossRef CAS .

          R. F. Egerton, Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope, Springer, New York,  2011 Search PubMed .

          H. G. Tompkins and W. A. McGahan, Spectroscopic Ellipsometry and Reflectometry: A User's Guide, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
D. Datta, V. Tripathi, P. Gogoi, S. Banerjee and S. Kumar, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 7237–7240 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Gevaerts, L. J. A. Koster, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3252–3255 CAS .
P. L. Hansen, P. J. Fallon and W. Kratschmer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 181, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cohen, E. Kolodney, T. Maniv and M. Folman, Solid State Commun., 1992, 81, 183–186 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sohmen, J. Fink and W. Kratschmer, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 1992, 86, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
K. Flatz, M. Grobosch and M. Knupfer, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 214702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ruocco, M. P. Donzello, F. Evangelista and G. Stefani, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155408 CrossRef .
J. M. Auerhammer, M. Knupfer, H. Peisert and J. Fink, Surf. Sci., 2002, 506, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Johnson, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 1975, 8, 490–496 CrossRef .

          A. M. Lesk, Introduction to Symmetry and Group Theory for Chemists, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA,  2004 Search PubMed .
V. Capozzi, G. Casamassima, G. F. Lorusso, A. Minafra, R. Piccolo, T. Trovato and A. Valentini, Solid State Commun., 1996, 98, 853–858 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saito and A. Oshiyama, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 2637–2640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kelly, P. Etchegoin, D. Fuchs, W. Kratschmer and K. Fostiropoulos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 4963–4968 CrossRef CAS .
G. Orlandi and F. Negri, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 289–308 CAS .
A. Rosa and E. J. Baerends, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 584–595 CrossRef CAS .
L. Edwards and M. Gouterman, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1970, 33, 292–310 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fronk, B. Brauer, J. Kortus, O. G. Schmidt, D. R. T. Zahn and G. Salvan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 235305 CrossRef .
R. F. Egerton, Micron, 2003, 34, 127–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Egerton, Ultramicroscopy, 2007, 107, 575–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta06201fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Valence-loss spectra collected for CuPc. The electron dose for each spectrum is indicated. As the electron dose increases on the sample, peaks in the spectra lose intensity and disappear (as shown by the arrows), which is indicative of bonds breaking causing the local chemistry of the sample to change.	 

 	Fig. 2  HAADF images collected for each of the thin films after EELS acquisitions: (a) CuPc, (b) C60, (c) P3HT, and (d) PCBM. Insets show schematics of these materials.	 

CuPc	∼1.7	∼3 × 10−7
C60	∼0.6	∼6 × 10−7
PCBM	∼0.5	∼4.5 × 10−6

 	Fig. 3  Comparisons of the real (left column) and imaginary (right column) parts of the complex dielectric function obtained using VASE (blue) compared to those found in the literature (red) for CuPc (a and b),20 C60 (c and d),20 PCBM (e and f),21 and P3HT (g and h).21	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) An example EELS spectrum collected for C60, which shows the results from our ZLP removal process. Inelastic spectra collected in the valence-loss region for (b) CuPc, (c) C60, (d) PCBM, and (e) P3HT.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Real (left column) and imaginary (right column) parts of the complex dielectric function determined using Kramers–Kronig analysis on collected EELS spectra for CuPc (a and b), C60 (c and d), PCBM (e and f), and P3HT (g and h). In each of the parts of the complex dielectric function, there is evidence of fine structure, suggesting that the electron beam has not significantly damaged the thin films of these four organic materials.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparisons of the real (left) and imaginary (right) parts of the complex dielectric function obtained using VASE (blue) compared to those obtained using EELS (black) for CuPc (a and b), C60 (c and d), PCBM, (e and f), and P3HT (g and h). All agree well between the two measurements, which shows that the samples have not been significantly beam damaged during the EELS acquisitions.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Correlation of the peaks in the imaginary dielectric function for C60 with known single electron transitions.30,33 (b) Correlation of the peaks in the imaginary dielectric function for CuPc with known single electron transitions calculated from density functional theory (DFT) and measured using vapor-phase absorption spectroscopy (Abs.).34,35	 

π(C) → π(C, N)	2a1u → 7eg	1.589
π(C, Np), dπ → π(C, Np)	6eg → 4b1u	4.409
π(C, Np), dπ → π(C)	6eg → 6a2u	4.693
π(C) → π(C)	2b2u → 8eg	5.186
π(C, Np), dπ → π(C)	6eg → 3a1u	5.837

 	Fig. 8  (a) HAADF image collected after the acquisition of the spectrum image for the CuPc/C60 bilayer. The area enclosed in the red box denotes from where the data was collected, and the green and blue boxes denote the spectra summed in order to extract the energy-loss spectra for (b) C60 and (c) CuPc. Kramers–Kronig analysis was applied to the low-loss spectra to obtain the imaginary part of the complex dielectric function for (d) C60 and (e) CuPc.	 

 	Fig. 9  Low-loss EELS spectra summed from boxes 4.8 nm in height and 448 nm in width. At the top is bulk C60, and subsequent spectra are collected moving down through the interface at a step size of approximately 5 nm until data from bulk CuPc was obtained (bottom). The dashed line shows the transition in the energy of the plasmon peak, and the arrows show the characteristic low-loss peaks associated for C60 and CuPc.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta06201f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
