Insights on the dual role of two-dimensional materials as catalysts and supports for energy and environmental catalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08649E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08649E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2018-2042Insights on the dual role of two-dimensional materials as catalysts and supports for energy and environmental catalysis

        
          
            Li Xin 
            Chen†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhi Wen 
            Chen†
a, 
      
        
          
            Ming 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuole 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chan 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guangming 
            Cai
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Chandra Veer 
            Singh
          
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, 184 College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E4, Canada. E-mail: chandraveer.singh@utoronto.ca
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, 184 College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E4, Canada
cDepartment of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, 5 King's College Road, Toronto, ON M5S 3G8, Canada
Received 
      2nd September 2020
    , Accepted 30th November 2020First published on 8th December 2020AbstractWith the imminent energy crisis and environmental pollution, the development of catalysis is imperative, which involves the storage and conversion of energy, the elimination of sewage and emissions, etc. Two-dimensional (2D) materials trigger new opportunities in the field of catalysis due to their large surface/volume ratio. In this review, for the first time, the application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis is systematically divided into two parts: 2D materials as catalysts and 2D materials as the substrates for atomic catalysts. Firstly, the different roles of 2D materials in the field of catalysis are analyzed through several typical small molecule catalytic reactions. Secondly, the synthesis methods of 2D materials, as the basis for developing new 2D materials and functionalization of 2D materials, are summarized for addressing the different roles of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. Finally, the opportunities and challenges of 2D materials for catalysis are been pointed out, together with the prospects for the development of 2D materials in the field of catalysis.Li Xin ChenDr Li Xin Chen works as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at the University of Toronto, Canada. Dr Chen received her Ph.D in Jilin University, China. Her research is currently focused on energy conversion and storage (including battery and catalyst design) based on 2D materials through experiment methods and density functional theory calculations.Zhi Wen ChenDr Zhi Wen Chen works as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at the University of Toronto, Canada. Dr Chen received his Ph.D in Jilin University, China. His research is currently focused on catalyst design for hydrogen evolution reaction, CO2 reduction reaction, nitrogen reduction reaction, etc. through density functional theory calculations. Some of his works are carried out in close collaboration with experiments.Chandra Veer SinghProf. Chandra Veer Singh is the Erwin Edward Hart Endowed Associate Professor and Associate Chair of Research in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at the University of Toronto, Canada. Dr Singh received his Ph.D. in Aerospace Engineering in 2008 from Texas A&M University. Subsequently, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Cornell University. He obtained industrial experience as a Design Engineer at General Electric Aircraft Engines. His research is currently focused on the atomistic modeling and machine learning enabled development of new materials for applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage, including catalysts and metal-ion batteries.
1. Introduction
With the development of human society and the advancement of science technology, people have higher expectations for renewable energy sources and food supplies, which are mainly dependent on the efficiency of chemical reactions.1 According to statistics, more than 80% of chemical processes require catalysts to improve the corresponding reaction efficiency.2 Thus, catalysts play a vital role in the sustainable development of society with the growing interests on energy, environment, and life science.3 During the long history of catalyst development, the dimension of catalysts gradually reduces from three dimension (3D) to 2D, and even 1D or 0D.4–7 The size of catalysts gradually decreases until reaching single atom catalysts (SACs). All of these strategies are designed to increase the surface/volume ratio for surface chemistry.8,9 Fortunately, the biggest structural advantage of 2D materials is the large surface/volume ratio, which makes 2D materials have tremendous potential in the field of surface catalysis.10 Moreover, with the rapid development of atomic catalysts, the corresponding substrate is increasingly important for regulating the catalytic activity and stability of atomic catalysts.11,12 Due to the unique 2D characteristic, 2D materials are considered to be excellent substrates for supporting atomic catalysts and regulating their catalytic activity through the uniform and tractable compositional advantages of 2D materials. Thus, research on 2D materials is rising to an unprecedental height and will continue to remain a significant topic in the field of catalysis.13,14
The development of 2D materials is incredible: from the beginning of graphene in 2004 to today's 2D materials database (more than 6000 2D materials), there has been a gradual shift of research scope from materials discovery and property exploration toward materials engineering and property tuning for practical applications.15,16 With the successful preparation of graphene by mechanical exfoliation of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite, many novel methods with new 2D materials have sprung up.17–20 All these 2D materials show remarkable physical and chemical properties, such as widely tunable bandgap, high carrier mobility, in-plane anisotropic electrical, optical, or phonon properties, and so on. Moreover, when layered materials become single or few layered materials, their properties become more attractive.21,22 However, the novel properties of 2D materials still do not meet scientists' expectations. Thus, structural engineering of 2D materials provides new avenues for deeply exploring 2D materials to fulfill specific requirements with respect to certain application.23 Successful synthesis and material functionalization strategies have made 2D materials more potential for practical applications, especially in the field of catalysis due to their inherent advantages, as discussed above.
The rapid development of 2D materials has brought new opportunities for catalysis, which is embodied in some successful cases of 2D materials used as catalysts and the substrates for atomic catalysts, especially for small molecule catalysis, such as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), and CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), as shown in Fig. 1.24–28 Firstly, as catalysts, 2D materials have shown a potential due to their novel physical and chemical properties. Unfortunately, the active centers of most 2D materials, such as MoS2, graphene, LDH, are mainly concentrated in a small number of edge sites, which is a huge challenge for 2D materials used as catalysts.29,30 On the other hand, as the substrates for atomic catalysts, the development of 2D materials seems to be more important and more fruitful due to their large surface/volume ratio.31–34 However, most 2D materials are selected for supporting atomic catalysts only by traditional trial-and-error methods, lacking reasonable and efficient design. For atomic catalysts, the catalytic activity not only depends on the active materials, but also is seriously affected by the interaction between active atoms and the corresponding substrates.35–38 Therefore, the interaction between active atoms and the substrates is crucial and need to be explored for getting insight on the structure–activity relationship, further designing optimal catalysts with appropriate substrates of 2D materials. Thus it can be seen that the application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis has both great opportunities and huge challenges.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the rational design of 2D materials-based catalysts for small molecule catalysis. 
To get insight into 2D materials and further development in the catalysis field, some successful reviews have been reported.14,39,40 For examples, Fu et al. reviewed recent representative research efforts and systematic progress of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) as cost-effective HER catalysts.41 Li et al. summarized the recent advances in confined synthesis of 2D nanostructured materials by using layered materials as host matrices and discussed the wide employment of these 2D materials in electrocatalytic applications.42 The preparation methods of 2D materials were systematically analyzed from the viewpoint of methodology by Tan et al., and they enumerated the state-of-the-art applications of 2D material, such as electronics, optoelectronics, electrocatalysis, and energy storage.10 All these reviews demonstrate the great potential of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. However, the different roles of 2D materials in the catalytic process have not been mentioned and analyzed, especially for small molecule catalysis, which are very important for further development of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. The designed strategy should be different due to the different roles of 2D materials (used as catalysts or the substrates for supporting atomic catalysts) in the catalytic process. Although 2D–2D heterostructures have been studied extensively and reviewed,40 note that in our review, we mainly focus on 2D materials supported on atomic catalysts, which belongs to 0D–2D heterostructures.
In this review, we discuss in detail the different roles of 2D materials in the field of catalysis and provide some different strategies for designing 2D materials catalysts based on the different roles. Firstly, we summarize the synthesis methods and characterization strategies of 2D materials and introduce some new 2D materials prepared through some novel strategies, which are the foundation for the development of 2D materials and also show a great potential for design of new materials. Secondly, the applications of 2D materials in the field of catalysis are discussed and divided into two parts: 2D materials as catalysts and 2D materials as the substrates for atomic catalysts. The catalytic reactions are mainly focus on small molecule catalysis, such as HER, ORR, OER, NRR, and CO2RR, which are important chemical reactions related to energy and environment. Finally, we focus on the great opportunities and challenges for the application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. This review provides the understanding of the potential of 2D materials in the catalytic field and the corresponding scientific issues, and guidance for fabricating 2D material based catalysts with a regulable catalytic performance based on different roles in catalytic field.
2. Synthesis and functionalization of 2D materials
The successful exfoliation of graphene indicates that 2D materials have officially entered the history stage of material science. Since then, significant synthesis methods or strategies have been designed for exploring more novel 2D materials.43 The synthesis approaches of 2D materials could be divided into top-down and bottom-up strategies, which mainly include exfoliation, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), wet chemical synthesis, and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) discussed in this section.39,44–50 These conventional and innovative approaches are the prerequisites for developing new 2D materials and expanding 2D materials database.
2.1 Exfoliation
Exfoliation, as one of top-down synthesis approaches, is a traditional and specific strategy for disposing 2D materials with the strong in-plane bond and the weak van der Waals force between the layered structures.50,51 The peculiar structural feature allows parallel delamination, resulting in the atomically thin layer or a few layered materials from their bulk layered precursors. According to the exfoliation conditions or external stimulus, the exfoliation includes three primary approaches: mechanical exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation, and chemical exfoliation, as introduced below one by one:

2.1.1 Mechanical exfoliation. 
Owing to the successfully experience of stripping graphene before, Novoselov et al. synthesized a series of 2D materials including single layers of boron nitride, graphite, several dichalcogenides, and complex oxides from their layered bulk materials through using micromechanical cleavage.52 And they found these atomically thin sheets are stable with high crystal quality under ambient conditions and continuous on a macroscopic scale, which provided a wide opportunity of new material parameters for potential application. Using similar mechanical exfoliation method, Long et al. isolated few-layer black phosphorus flakes with the size from 5 to 20 nm on a highly doped Si wafer covered by a 300 nm-thick SiO2 layer.53 Moreover, Kum et al. broadened a universal mechanical exfoliation method to produce freestanding single-crystalline membranes made from a wide range of complex-oxide materials including perovskite, spinel and garnet crystal structures with varying crystallographic orientations.22 After that, artificial heterostructures directly stacking these freestanding membranes were synthesized and their physical properties were hybridized with different crystal structures and orientations, which demonstrates a novel strategy for stacking and coupling 2D material-based heterostructures to rational design device functionalities. These studies demonstrate that mechanical exfoliation is a very simple method without expensive and complex laboratory equipment, and it is suitable for purposeful research. However, it is hard to avoid the randomness, which means this methods lacks the controllability over the layer number of 2D materials.


2.1.2 Liquid-based exfoliation. 
Liquid-based exfoliation is one of most widely used methods for the extraction of single or few layers of 2D materials form their bulk. It includes three processes: (1) dispersing 2D bulk materials into the appropriate solvent; (2) exfoliating 2D material nanosheets from their bulk through shear force achieved by ultrasonic vibration mill or continuous stirring (if necessary, some surfactant can be used to disperse and stabilize these nanosheets); (3) separating these 2D nanosheets by centrifuge and selecting the appropriate size for further application. The purity of the 2D materials obtained by liquid-based exfoliation is very high and the obtained sample is free from surface defects and oxidation. In addition, this approach is one of the most important candidates for commercial production of layered materials due to its extensibility.
Nicolosi et al. reviewed liquid phase exfoliation as a transformative process in material science, yielding new and exotic materials of layered counterparts from their bulk.54 They identified three main liquid exfoliation mechanisms, as shown in Fig. 2, which are ion intercalation, ion exchange, and sonication-assisted exfoliation. These exfoliation processes create many 2D few-layer materials with high surface area, which are ideal for applications that require large surface/volume ratio and surface activity in the field of catalysis. Ries et al. found some small hydrophobic functional groups (for example the methyl group) could improve the water flow in MoS2 membranes, which efficiently control the interlayer spacing between layered materials and enhance the sieving performance of nanolaminate membranes.55 With that in mind, Lloret et al. applied liquid exfoliation method, in an ionic liquid with the native atoms ready to interact with external reagents, to synthesize highly exfoliated, few layer 2D phosphorene and antimonene in zero oxidation state.56 Notably, this is the first organic reaction catalyzed by the synthesized 2D-pnictogens with high activity and good selectivity. Another interesting work is wet-jet milling (WJM) exfoliation of graphite by Bellani et al. to scale up the production of graphene as a supercapacitor material.57 This WJM exfoliation of graphite in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone endowed a large amount of production, high quality of single or few layers, and fast production rate. The achieved washable micro-supercapacitors exhibited a high areal capacitance of 1.324 mF cm−2, high volumetric capacitance of 0.490 F cm−3, excellent high-rate performance, and a high cycling stability.
 Fig. 2  Schematic description of the main liquid exfoliation mechanisms. (a) Ion intercalation. Ions (yellow spheres) are intercalated between the layers in a liquid environment, swelling the crystal and weakening the interlayer attraction. Then, agitation (such as shear, ultrasonication, or thermal) can completely separate the layers, resulting in an exfoliated dispersion. (b) Ion exchange. Some layered compounds contain ions between the layers so as to balance surface charge on the layers. These ions (red spheres) can be exchanged in a liquid environment for other, often larger ions (yellow spheres). As above, agitation results in an exfoliated dispersion. (c) Sonication assisted exfoliation. The layered crystal is sonicated in a solvent, resulting in exfoliation and nanosheet formation. In “good” solvents-those with appropriate surface energy-the exfoliated nanosheets are stabilized against reaggregation. Otherwise, for “bad” solvents reaggregation and sedimentation will occur. This mechanism also describes the dispersion of graphene oxide in polar solvents, such as water. NB, solvent molecules are not shown in this figure. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2013, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
It is noted that mechanical exfoliation and liquid-base exfoliation are both dealing with layered bulk materials with van der Waals interactions. For non-van der Waals solids, it is still challenging to achieve 2D van der Waals materials. Du et al. explored an effective strategy for synthesizing 2D van der Waals transition-metal chalcogenides layers from non-van der Waals solids exposed into chalcogen vapours.21 The transformation could be controlled through changing enthalpy and vapor pressures of the reaction products, and thus they achieved high throughput production of monolayers and engineered phase-selected 2D transition-metal chalcogenide structures with good stability at 1373 K. This strategy shows a huge potential to synthesize new 2D van der Walls layered materials from non-van der Waals 3D solids and expands the applications of similar 2D materials in fields of energy conversion and storage.

2.2 Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
CVD is a universal, cost-effective, and scalable technique, which could be compatible with industrial production. The method not only achieves single or few layers 2D materials with large surface, but also synthesizes high quality 2D materials with scalable transverse dimensions and controllable thickness, which are necessary to develop 2D-based catalysts into the practical devices.
The growth of graphene by CVD has been extensively studied with many attempts for achieving large domain sizes, uniform layers, fast growth, and facile synthesis conditions. Deng et al. summarized some progress toward the mass production of CVD graphene films from the aspects of manufacturing process, equipment, and critical process parameters, which are necessary for bridging laboratory-scale research and industry-scale fabrication of graphene films.23 In addition to graphene, transition-metal dichalcogenides are also in the spotlight. In general, CVD method synthesizes transition-metal dichalcogenides, which is usually parallel to the growth of substrate, as shown in Fig. 3a and b.58 We applied the right precursors and appropriate CVD growth conditions to grow ReS2 nanosheets orient perpendicular to the substrate (Fig. 3c and d), which increases the wetted or exposed surface area and exposes the sharp edges and corners of ReS2 sheets, further improve their catalytic activity, electrochemical performance, and cycle stability as energy conversion and storage devices.59 Moreover, Shu et al. added salt and a molecular sieve into CVD to synthesize ultrathin PbSnS2 flakes as described in Fig. 3e–i, demonstrating excellent anisotropic mobility and responsivity.60 This strategy lowers the melting point of metal precursors and uniformly distributes source vapors in the reaction system, which provides a new route for designing new 2D materials. Similar to transition metal sulfide, transition metal selenides endow outstanding physical, chemical, and optical properties. Unfortunately, lots of transition metal selenides are environmentally unstable, hindering their further applications for high-performance electrical devices. Lin et al. developed a two-step vapor deposition method to successfully synthesize NbSe2 nanosheets with controllable thickness, wafer size and high quality.61 More importantly, the NbSe2 film shows high stability after a variety of harsh treatments, which simplifies the fabrication procedure and broadens their applications as devices.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic view of the surface growth of MoS2 on Au foils. (b) Experimental setup of the LPCVD system. (c) Schematic of ReS2 growth. (d) Growth-temperature profile. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis method. (f) Schematic illustration of the source vapor transportation through molecular sieve. (g) Schematic illustration of the atomic structure of PbSnS2. (h) Optical image of PbSnS2 nanoplates on mica substrate. (i) AFM image and height profile of a typical thin PbSnS2 flake. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c and d) reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (e–i) reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
2.3 Wet chemical synthesis
Wet chemical synthesis is a bottom-up method involving chemical reactions in the solvent, which is suitable for the mass production of lots of 2D materials. The corresponding mechanism is based on the nucleation and growth of the liquid culture, which is fundamentally different from the diffusion mechanism of the drying synthesis method. Using this approach, we successfully synthesized dual-modified MoS2 nanosheets with nanoporous Ni and reduced graphite oxide applied for electrochemical catalytic HER with a large number of edge sites and fast electron transport achieved by wet chemical synthesis.62 Similarly, transition metal phosphides have emerged as potential electrocatalysts. However, due to the intrinsic nonlayered characteristic of transition-metal phosphides, the synthesis of 2D transition metal phosphides presents enormous challenges. Yang et al. developed a general bottom-up strategy for preparing a series of 2D transition-metal phosphides through the precursors of phosphorene sheets and 2D templates.63 Notably, the synthesized 2D Co2P showed high hole mobility and splendid electrocatalytic performance for OER because of the charge-transport modulation and improved surface exposure. Moreover, few-layer hexagonal and functionalized antimonene nanosheets were synthesized in a colloidal solution by Peng et al.64 The keys to the synthesis were selecting oleylamine as reducing agent and applying dodecylthiol for preventing the formation of antimony oxide, as shown in Fig. 4. More importantly, the anisotropic growth of hexagonal antimonene nanosheets was controlled by the adsorbed halide ions. Another interesting work was a layered 2D material of C2N by Mahmood et al. with evenly distributed holes in its basal plane through a simple wet-chemical reaction.18 The successful synthesis method coupled with the versatility of organic synthesis opens a new avenue for the development of other 2D materials with tunable properties. These novel strategies and approaches will make 2D materials become a flourishing new area of research.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the wet chemical preparation of antimony trioxide, antimony tetrahedral, and hexagonal antimonene nanosheets from Sb-oleate, Sb(OAc)3-DDT, and SbCl3-DDT solutions as precursors, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
2.4 Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
MBE could grow thin films on a heated crystalline substrate through atomic or molecular beam under ultrahigh vacuum conditions. As general, the deposition rate is less than 1000 nm h−1 for allowing the films to grow epitaxially. Except for the high technological costs, this method has unique advantages of precise thickness control compared with other synthesis approaches. Liang et al. successfully achieved Bi2O2Se monolayer from its high-quality crystal through MBE on SrTiO3 (001) substrate, as shown in Fig. 5a.65 They co-evaporated Bi and Se precursors in oxygen atmosphere with controlled growth conditions and the interfacial atomic arrangements of MBE-grown Bi2O2Se/SrTiO3 are clearly revealed, which demonstrated an atomically sharp interface and atom-to-atom alignment. Moreover, for realizing 2D lateral growth with uniform thickness and large scale, a single-step Mo-flux controlled nucleation and growth process was put forward to prevent island growth by He et al., where the synthesized monolayer 2H-MoTe2 showed highly uniform in-plane structural continuity and elite phonon-limited carrier transport behavior.66 Another interesting exploration involves a new atomically thin 2D boron sheet (borophene) achieved through MBE. Mannix et al. synthesized borophene on silver surfaces under ultrahigh-vacuum conditions, as depicted in Fig. 5b and c.67 They found that the new 2D material of borophene, different from bulk boron allotropes, endowed metallic characteristics, which are likely to motivate and inform further researches of metallicity and related phenomena in 2D boron polymorphs. All samples of MBE indicate that MBE is indeed a very promising one for the precise synthesis of 2D materials for exploring their physical and chemistry properties.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of epitaxial growth of atomically thin Bi2O2Se films on a (001)-oriented SrTiO3 (STO) substrate by co-evaporating the Bi and Se precursors in oxygen atmosphere in a home-made MBE setup equipped with reflective high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). (b) Schematics of distorted B7 cluster and growth setup with atomic structure model and STM topography rendering. (c) AES spectra of clean Ag(111) before and after boron deposition. (a) Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (b and c) reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3. Characterization of 2D materials
A lot of characterization techniques of 2D materials have been developed or applied for the application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. Both experimental methods and computational simulations are efficient and feasible techniques, which play vital roles in understanding the structure–activity relationship of 2D materials.68 The detailed and reliable structural information should be provided through the rational, coordinated, and comprehensive application of electron microscopy approach, spectroscopy techniques, and computational simulation.69 In this section, a brief description of these techniques is shown to indicate the importance of characterization of 2D materials.
Microscopes can provide the most intuitive way to investigate the morphology and structure characteristics of 2D materials. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a commonly technique to investigate the surface morphology of 2D materials through high-resolution images without clear atomic structures and surface defects.70 A 2D image is formed after detecting the electrons transmitted through high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and can achieve a significantly higher resolution compared to SEM.71 Li et al. applied HRTEM to reveal parallel stacking and the layered boundary of MoS2 nanosheets (Fig. 6a and b).72 The lattice fringe of the ultrathin MoS2 was further observed by SAED analysis (Fig. 6c). Importantly, the Mo vacancies were found through high-magnification view of HRTEM (Fig. 6d–f). Moreover, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) could also provide some other useful information about 2D materials.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) HRTEM and the corresponding SAED patterns images (c) of HMF-MoS2. (d–f) HRTEM and high magnification view of the defects on HMF-MoS2. (g) XRD patterns of BIF-20, the g-C3N4 nanosheet, and the BIF-20@g-C3N4 nanosheet. (h) High-resolution image of B 1s spectra of BIF-20, the g-C3N4 nanosheet, and the BIF-20@g-C3N4 nanosheet. (i) Diffuse-reflectance UV-vis spectra of BIF-20, the g-C3N4 nanosheet, and the BIF-20@g-C3N4. (j) The structures and the calculated free energy of formation for ECM@Ru and CM@Ru. (k) Calculated distribution of charge density for ECM@Ru. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (g–i) reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (j and k) reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to microscopy techniques, spectroscopy techniques can describe and illustrate the electron states, coordination environments, and chemical bond information, which are very important for the application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. Xu et al. investigated the composite of boron imidazolate framework@g-C3N4 (BIF-20@g-C3N4) though a series of spectral techniques, such as X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, and UV-vis absorption, as shown in Fig. 6g–i.73 XRD results indicated the hybrid structure organized by DIF-10 and g-C3N4 nanosheets. Their strong hybridization interaction and electron transfer were found by the XPS analysis. The optical absorption properties of the synthesized samples were investigated by UV-vis absorption. For the BIF-20@g-C3N4 nanosheet hybrid, an obvious absorption could be detected in the visible-light region because the g-C3N4 nanosheet serves as the visible-light sensitizer. These spectral studies are more helpful to study the structural advantages of 2D materials and reveal the structure–activity relationship in the field of catalysis.74
During the past few decades, computational simulations are widely applied in various fields.75 Currently, computational simulations have become an indispensable method to characterize the atomic and electronic structures. Zhang et al. demonstrated the geometric structure of Ru-decorated edge-rich carbon matrix (ECM@Ru) with the comparison of Ru-decorated carbon matrix (CM@Ru) through DFT calculations, as shown in Fig. 6j.76 The calculation results showed the formation energies were greatly reduced from 0.95 eV of CM@Ru to 0.36 eV of ECM@Ru, indicating that the isolated atoms were preferably stabilized over the edges of the carbon matrix. The interaction between Ru and coordinated atoms involves the effective charge transfer, which was verified by the related distribution of charge density (Fig. 6k). The defects originated from the edges of the carbon matrix cause a localized electric field and high reactant concentration around the active sites, which contribute favorably to charge density distribution and the catalytic activity. The approach of computational simulations could enable us to have a deeper understanding of the application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis.
Note that the characterization of 2D materials is by no means limited to above examples. There are many advanced and scientific characterization techniques for understanding the structural characteristics of 2D materials. With the rapid development of 2D materials, more efficient and accurate characterization techniques should be developed and utilized.
4. Applications of 2D materials for catalysis
2D materials have been investigated in full swing for the field of catalysis due to their intrinsic structure characteristic and novel physical and chemical properties. In this review, for the first time, the application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis is divided into two parts: 2D materials as catalysts and 2D materials as the substrates for atomic catalysts. The corresponding purpose is to better understand the different roles of 2D materials in the field of catalysis, which is more conducive for the rational design of new catalysts due to the different roles have different requirements for 2D materials.
4.1 2D materials as catalysts
The development of catalysts tends to be lower dimensional, smaller nanoparticle size, and larger surface area.77 This is confirmed with intuition of surface chemistry, which requires as many surface active sites as possible. Compared with 3D bulk materials, 2D materials endow a larger surface/volume ratio, which is much in favor of surface catalysis. We reveal the potential of 2D materials as catalysts only by the following examples of important chemical reactions, which are involved to energy conversion and storage.

4.1.1 HER. 
HER plays a vital role during the electrochemical water splitting, which is an advanced technology for producing the most promising clean-energy carrier of H2.78 Therefore, developing highly efficient and low-cost catalysts to improve HER is highly desirable. Currently, Pt and Pt-based materials are considered as the state of the art HER catalysts, however, the high cost and scarcity of Pt metal hinder the further large scale application.79 Thus, exploitation of 2D non-noble-metal catalysts with high catalytic performance and low cost seems to be an effective alternative to Pt-based catalysts.
Molybdenum disulfide, MoS2, has attracted ever-growing interests as the most promising catalyst to substitute Pt-based catalysts for HER due to their abundant reserves and respectable catalytic performance.80 To further improve the catalytic performance of MoS2-based materials, we designed dual-modified MoS2 with nanoporous Ni and graphene, which endowed an excellent catalytic performance with a low onset potential of 85 mV, a small Tafel slope of 71.3 mV dec−1, and a high cycling stability for HER.62Fig. 7a–c described the corresponding structure and its catalytic performance. Both a large number of edge active sites and fast electron transport were responsible for the superior performances. Deng et al. synthesized a uniform mesopores MoS2 foam for significantly enhancing HER performance, as shown in Fig. 7d–f.81 The structural advantages were obvious, which included the sufficient transport of reactants and produces, the favourable accessibility of MoS2 surface, and abundant active edge sites induced by vertically aligned layers. Moreover, the atomic-scale engineering of Co atom doping in mesoporous MoS2 foam further increased the intrinsic catalytic activity. Furthermore, Hu et al. found that the catalytic performance of 2D PtSe2 was related to the number of layers.82 They synthesized single-crystalline 2D PtSe2 with a controlled number of layers and probed their HER catalytic activity for studying the layer-dependent HER catalytic performance (Fig. 7g–i). Both experimental and theoretical results revealed that increased number of layers resulted in the increased active sites and enhanced conductivity when there are few layers in 2D PtSe2, and thus improving catalytic activity. Besides transition metal dichalcogenides, 2D layered transition metal carbides (MXenes) was reported for the first time by Seh et al. as electrocatalysts for HER.83 Firstly, they considered a series of 2D layered M2XTx (M = metal; X = C or N; Tx = surface functional groups) and calculated their catalytic performance for HER. Then, the optimal catalyst of Mo2CTx based on DFT results was synthesized and compared with Ti2CTx. The Mo2CTx with active basal planes showed a far higher HER activity with an initial overpotential of 283 mV at the current density of 10 mA cm−2. This work demonstrated a new strategy for applying 2D materials with active basal planes into the field of catalysis. Due to the low cost and abundant reserves of 2D materials, they show great potential as alternative to Pt-based catalysts for HER, however, their catalytic performance is not comparable with that of Pt-based catalysts for HER. Therefore, more efforts are needed to further enhance the catalytic activity of 2D material-based catalysts.
 Fig. 7  (a–c) Atomic structure, HRTEM image and HER performance of NPNi-MoS2/RGO. (d) HER polarization curves for mPF-MoS2 in comparison with bulk MoS2, rNS-MoS2 and 40% Pt/C. (e) Overpotential at current density of 10, 20 and 50 mA cm−2 for mPF-MoS2 compared with rNS-MoS2 and bulk MoS2. (f) Durability measurement of mPF-MoS2. (g) Polarization curves for the HER obtained on 1–5 L and 20 L PtSe2 flakes and a commercial Pt/C catalyst. (h) Tafel plots derived from (g). (i) Comparison of Tafel slope and overpotential for PtSe2 flakes of 1–5 L and 20 L. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (d–f) reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; (g–i) reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


4.1.2 ORR. 
ORR is absolutely vital for metal–air batteries and fuel cells, which are devices alternative to environmentally unfriendly fossil fuel.84 However, ORR is kinetically sluggish, which usually requires noble-metal-based catalysts with high cost, poor stability, and scarcity.85 Therefore, some alternative catalysts with low cost, earth-abundant elements, and high catalytic performance should be explored, especially 2D materials, which have shown excellent catalytic performances for ORR.
As discussed above, 2D MoS2 was considered a promising catalyst for HER. Mao et al. found MoS2 also could be an effective catalysts for ORR with a satisfactory catalytic activity through tailoring its heterointerfaces.86 They synthesized ultrathin Ni3S2/MoS2 heterostructured nanosheets with abundant highly active Mo edges/Mo–Ni–S sites, fast charge transport, and more oxygen-containing intermediates binding, which showed an outstanding catalytic performance with a half-wave potential of 0.885 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH (Fig. 8a and b). This work provides a new strategy to achieve abundant active edge sites through constructing ultrathin heterostructures. Moreover, graphene, as a rising materials, also has great application potential as ORR catalysts. Xia et al. applied thermal exfoliation of crystal and shape modified metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) to achieve nitrogen-doped graphene nanomesh, which endowed many structural advantages for catalyzing ORR, including ultrathin 2D morphology, high porosity, abundant and accessible nitrogen-doped active sites, and defective graphene edges, as shown in Fig. 8c and d.87 More importantly, this designed catalyst was suitable for large-scale production due to its facile synthetic strategy. To further improve the catalytic activity of graphene-based materials, Hou et al. reported a power methodology of pore engineering and studied the influence of pore structure on the catalytic performance of 2D carbon materials for ORR, as illustrated in Fig. 8e and f.88 The synthesized 2D porous catalyst with N doping contents of 2.6 wt%, average pore sizes of 8 nm in diameter, and specific surface areas of 420 m2 g−1 exhibited a half-wave-potential of 0.74 V and a limiting current density of 4.8 mA cm−2. This work develops a new strategy for enhancing the catalytic performance through tailoring pore structures in porous materials.
 Fig. 8  (a) LSVs of Ni3S2/MoS2-0.05, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.10, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.15, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.2, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.3 and Ni3S2/MoS2-0.4. (b) LSVs of pristine MoS2 nanosheets, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.2 and commercial 20% Pt/C at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (scan rate: 10 mV s−1). (c) AFM image, and (d) HRTEM image of NGM-800 (yellow circles indicates the nanopore). Schematic illustration of the effect of pore structure on masstransport in (e) mNC–rGO–S and (f) mNC–rGO–C. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c and d) reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (e and f) reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Except for the 4-electron transfer pathway with the product of H2O, the 2-electron transfer pathway with the product of H2O2 also plays a vital role to realize sustainable-to-chemical energy conversion. Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) presents giant potential for photocatalytic H2O2 production, but the sluggish charge separation depresses its photocatalytic performance. Yang et al. constructed an interfacial Schottky junction composed of Ti3C2 nanosheets and porous g-C3N4 nanosheets (TC/pCN) by a facile electrostatic self-assembly route, which boosted the spatial charge separation and promoted the activation of O2 for H2O2 production.89 The designed TC/pCN possessed a high H2O2 production rate of 132 μmol L−1 h−1, however, the introduction of Ti3C2 reduces the mass activity to some extent. Zhu et al. applied a thermal treatment to prepare the reduced g-C3N4 material with an efficient visible light driven catalytic performance on H2O2 production (170 μmol L−1 h−1).90 The solar-to-H2O2 chemical conversion efficiency and apparent quantum yield approached to ∼0.26%, ∼4.3%, respectively. This work indicates that the surface defects and functional groups could enhance the catalytic performance of 2D materials, which should be fully utilized for the exploration of 2D-based catalysts.


4.1.3 OER. 
OER is an important component for many energy conversion and storage, for example direct solar, electricity-driven water splitting and rechargeable metal–air batteries. Unfortunately, the kinetics of OER is always sluggish.91 Currently, the recognized viable catalysts for OER are IrO2 and RuO2 with high cost and scarce reserves. The rise of 2D materials with low cost offers new opportunities into designing alternative catalysts for OER.
Layered double hydroxides aroused wide interests as realistic active materials under operando conditions for catalytic OER due to their low cost and optimal electronic configuration for the adsorption of oxygen-based intermediates.30,92 Zhou et al. reported an electrochemical strategy for preparing large-scale catalysts of ultrathin CoOOH nanosheet with high OER activity (Fig. 9a and b) and studied its surface chemistry for catalytic activity.93 Their results indicated that the electrophilic centers of CoOOH should be the oxidized oxygen ions and reducing the deprotonation energy is the key for improving the OER activity. This work open up an avenue of layered hydroxyl hydroxides as catalysts for OER instead of noble metal oxide catalysts (IrO2 and RuO2). Another interesting work was to introduce 2D transition-metal phosphides (TMPs) nanosheets, which could not be achieved by delaminating from their bulk due to their intrinsic nonlayered character. Yang et al. synthesized a series of 2D TMPs (Co2P, Ni12P5, and CoxFe2−xP) through a general bottom-up synthesis approach, where phosphorene sheets were used as the phosphorus precursors and 2D templates, as illustrated in Fig. 9c.63 The synthesized iron-doped Co2P (Co1.5Fe0.5P) showed a low overpotential of 278 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. This work provides a new synthesis method of nonlayered 2D materials for applying into the field of catalysis. In practical application, the harsh reaction conditions of strongly acidic media and highly oxidizing potential during electrocatalytic OER make many 2D materials fail as catalysts due to their unstability. Jain et al. performed a high-throughput screening of more than 11000 2D materials by density functional theory.94 It was found that only 21 and 14 materials are potentially stable during ORR and OER in acidic media, respectively, as shown in Fig. 9d. Moreover, there are no stable conductor under ORR conditions and only NiO3, AgO2F, and AgHO2 conductor showed a high stability for OER. Through considering the stability of 2D materials under reaction conditions, this work provides some suggested 2D materials for OER and ORR with high stability or high conductivity, which can be further applied in experiments.
 Fig. 9  (a) Mass activity of CoOOH-NS, CoOOH-bulk and IrO2 in 1 M KOH (inset: the corresponding LSV curves). (b) Tafel plots for CoOOH-NS and CoOOH-bulk. (c) Exfoliation and transformation of bulk black phosphorus crystals into 2D TMPs. (d) High-throughput screening of more than 11000 2D materials from available material databases, less than 35 materials are stable under the strongly oxidizing operating conditions of oxygen reduction and/or oxygen evolution reaction in acidic media. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (d) reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.4 NRR. 
Reduction of nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) is significantly critical for the earth nitrogen cycle. The product of NH3 is a source of nitrogen for fertilizer, which can supply for about 1/3–1/2 of the population.95 Moreover, it is a clean energy carrier and a potential transportation fuel due to its high energy density and lack of CO2 emissions. However, this process is difficult to implement at ambient temperature and pressure due to the chemical inertness of N2. Haber–Bosch method with high temperature of 350–550 °C and high pressure of 150–350 atm is the main process of NH3 synthesis, although it costs large amount of energy and produces lots of CO2.96 The key to solve this challenge is to design high efficient catalysts for NRR. The advent of 2D materials may present new opportunities for developing NRR catalysts.
MoS2 was first utilized as a catalyst for NRR under room temperature and atmospheric pressure by Zhang et al., which showed a faradaic efficiency of 1.17% and NH3 yield of 8.08 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−1 at −0.5 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode in 0.1 M Na2SO4.97 The reaction mechanism and the corresponding catalytic performance were shown in Fig. 10a–c. Although the catalytic performance is not very satisfactory due to the strong competing reaction of HER, this study made NRR possible under mild reaction conditions using MoS2 as the catalysts. Moreover, Zhao et al. found the ultrathin layered-double-hydroxide (LDH) could be used as photocatalysts for NRR, especially, CuCr-LDH nanosheets showed outstanding photocatalytic activity in water at 25 °C under visible-light irradiation, as displayed in Fig. 10d–f.98 Their results indicated that the severely distorted structure achieved by compressive strain in the LDH nanosheets could improve N2 chemisorption and thus promote NH3 formation. This work suggests an unusual phenomenon that compressive strain could enhance the adsorption through special structural features of LDH. Another interesting work reported MXene (Ti3C2Tx) nanosheets with a smaller size attached on vertically aligned nanosheet materials exposed a larger number of active edge sites, resulting in a high faradaic efficiency of 5.78% at an ultralow potential for NH3 electrosynthesis (see Fig. 10g–i).99 Furthermore, suppressing the competitive HER was another advantage of this catalyst. It means that vertically aligned 2D material is an effective way to increase the active edge sites for catalytic reactions. Based on DFT calculation, we designed a new 2D material of MoC6 with high stability and excellent catalytic activity (a low potential of −0.54 V vs. RHE), the corresponding reaction mechanism was shown in Fig. 10j and k.19 Firstly, the stability of MoC6 was considered from the cohesive energy and the dynamical stability. And then we suggested a feasible synthetic route for confirming the utility of MoC6 and studied its catalytic nature for NRR. Our results indicated that the optimal active site, high utilization, selective stabilization of N2H* species and destabilization of the  species were keys for achieving the high activity of MoC6, which could be extended to other catalytic systems. More importantly, the active sites of this system are concentrated on a large number of surfaces, rather than fewer edges. Although it is a theoretical work, it is still worth our further study in experiments.
 Fig. 10  (a) Free-energy profile for NRR at MoS2 edge site. An asterisk (*) denotes as the adsorption site. (b) Average NH3 yields and FEs of MoS2/CC at different potentials. (c) Recycling test of MoS2/CC at the potential of −0.5 V. (d) Schematic illustrating the photocatalytic N2 fixation process. (e) Yield of NH3 over a 1 h test period under UV-vis illumination. (f) Time course of NH3 evolution in the photofixation of N2 or argon (Ar) in the presence of water under visible-light illumination over CuCr-NS and CuCr-bulk. (g) Optimized structures (the gray, red, sky blue, green, and blue balls represent C, O, Ti, H, and N, respectively), (h) faradaic efficiency and (i) NH3 yield rate of MXene/FeOOH at various potentials. (j) Adsorption energies of N2H* and  on the bridge site and top site of MoC6, including the corresponding adsorbed structures. (k) The enzymatic mechanism for nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) on MoC6. The free energy profiles and the structures of intermediates are shown in the reaction path. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (d–f) reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (g–i) reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (j and k) reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.1.5 CO2RR. 
One reason of global warming and possible ocean acidification is the increasing concentration of CO2, which is the main air pollutant came from industrial manufacture, human life, and automobile exhaust. Therefore, the conversation of CO2 has received great interests because the corresponding products are very important for chemical industry.100 However, the products are very complex and include 16 different gas and liquid on the only known Cu catalysts.101 Moreover, the overpotential is up to almost 1 V, indicating the poor catalytic activity. Thus, designing new catalysts with high selectivity and activity is a long goal of researchers.
Kim et al. found that Mo2C endowed better catalytic activity with the onset potential of −0.55 V vs. RHE than Cu electrocatalyst.102 A detailed theoretical analysis on the basis of DFT calculations, microkinetic analysis, and simulated Pourbaix diagram suggested that the potential-limiting step of CO2 converting into CH4 was the formation of H2O and the rate-limiting step is the nonelectrochemical C–O bond scission, as shown in Fig. 11a and b. This work provides guidelines for understanding the catalytic mechanism of CO2RR. In electrochemical CO2RR, nonelectrochemical reaction process is also very important, which should be considered during the research of catalytic mechanism. Linear scaling relationships of adsorption energies are ubiquitous in all kinds of catalytic reactions, which poses a fundamental limitation for improving the catalytic performance. Hong et al. broken the linear scaling relationships between the adsorption energies of CO* and other key intermediates, such as COOH*, CHO*, and COH*, through the catalyst of doped sulfur edge of MoS2, which provided two binding sites for CO* and other intermediates (see Fig. 11c), respectively.103 This work provides a novel strategy for breaking the linear scaling relations not only for CO2RR but also for other chemical reactions. As we all know the dominating basal plane of MoS2 are inert, while only few edge sites are usually active sites. For activating the MoS2 basal plane, we introduced sulfur vacancies in MoS2, which can reduce CO into CH4.104 More importantly, the steric hindrance in sulfur vacancy of MoS2 facilitate the conversion of CO into CH4 with high selectivity and high activity with a low potential of −0.53 V vs. RHE under ambient conditions, as described in Fig. 11d. Furthermore, we also found the strain can affect the selectivity and catalytic activity, which provided a new strategy for achieving the optimal catalytic activity with satisfying selectivity for engineering of catalysts.
 Fig. 11  (a) Free energy diagram of CO2 conversion to CH4 over Mo2C(100) surfaces at 0 V vs. RHE. (b) Free energy diagram of hydrogenation of OH* (color code: green, θpre-OH = 0; red, θpre-OH = 0.25; blue, θpre-OH = 0.5). (c) Binding configurations of CO* and CHO* on the Ni-doped sulfur edge of MoS2. CHO* binds to the bridging S atoms, whereas CO* binds to the Ni atoms. (d) Free energy changes of CORR on DV-MoS2 at the applied potential of 0 V, the corresponding geometric structures and reaction pathways are shown above the free energy diagram. The corresponding S values of intermediates are shown below the free energy changes. The red points indicate the rate-determining step R5 . (a and b) Reproduce with permission.102 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (d) reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Moreover, 2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs) are currently popular among the most widely studied heterogeneous catalysts.105,106 Huang et al. developed the OH−-coordinated MOF (NNU-15) to simulate the surface state of catalyst in the alkaline environment of electrocatalytic CO2RR and then further explored the activation mechanism to CO2.107 They found that the coordinated OH− could activate the CO2 into HCO3−, resulting in high faradaic efficiency of 99.2% for CO at −0.6 V vs. RHE. This important discovery may modulate the future research emphasis on the CO2RR mechanism involving the participation of OH− ions for various catalytic materials and dramatically promote the progress of CO2RR. Zhou et al. investigated about ten thousand M–Salen-COF structures using Salen–metals as the catalytic centre for CO2RR by theoretical calculations and then based on the simulated results, the optimal Zn–Salen-COF-SDU113 was synthesized with an outstanding catalytic performance for CO2RR.108 Importantly, the pore enrichment effect was found for CO2 fixation process caused by the molecular aggregation state. This work provides a new insight into porous 2D materials for the field of catalysis. However, the stability of MOFs and COFs should be of particular concern during reaction processes due to their weaker stability than inorganic materials.

4.2 2D materials as the substrates for atomic catalysts
In addition to 2D materials as catalysts, another important application of 2D materials is used as substrates for supporting atomic catalysts, which is a potential catalyst systems as well as rapid development projects.13,109 The traditional catalytic activity and selectivity of atomic catalysts should be considered, moreover, we should also pay great attention to the stability, dispersibility and mass loading of active materials.69,110,111 Therefore, the interaction between the substrates and the active materials is vital and necessary for considering these performances. It means that the development of atomic catalysts is closely related to the selection of substrates. 2D materials are considered to have a great potential as substrates due to their large surface/volume ratio.

4.2.1 HER. 
Single Mo atoms supported on N-doped carbon was first synthesized by Chen et al. and further confirmed through aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (AC-STEM) and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy (Fig. 12a–c).112 They found the moiety of Mo single atom bonded with one nitrogen atom and two carbon atoms (Mo1N1C2) showed better catalytic activity compared with Mo2C and MoN by DFT calculation and experimental analysis. This work indicates that the coordination configuration of the SACs is very important for the optimal catalytic activity. N-doped carbon materials could provide different coordination configurations for supporting single metal atoms and further regulate the catalytic activity for different catalytic reactions. Another work also applied N-doped graphene to support platinum single atom and platinum clusters for HER, where the synthesized single atom catalyst showed excellent catalytic performance (up to 37 times) and high stability compared with the state-of-the-art commercial platinum/carbon catalysts, as shown in Fig. 12d–f.113 This work again demonstrates N-doped graphene is a versatile substrate due to the different coordination configurations. Moreover, graphdiyne (GDY), is another allotrope of carbon material with an evenly distributed pores, has great potential to substitute graphene as substrate in catalytic reactions.34 Xue et al. fabricated atomic catalysts with only isolated nickel/iron atoms anchored on GDY, which had outstanding catalytic activity and stability for HER, as described in Fig. 12g–i.114 Such excellent HER performance was due to the strong chemical interaction and electronic coupling between the single atoms and GDY achieved by a facile and precise synthesis strategy. Although the coordination configuration of GDY is monotonous with only C atom coordinations, the porous structures of GDY provide steric hindrance effect for supporting single atoms, enhancing the stability of SACs, which should be a new strategy for preparing SACs. For increasing the loading of single atoms and the strong interaction between substrate and single atoms, we synthesized directly (CoMo)S2 with abundant surface active sites, as shown in Fig. 12j.115 Moreover, graphene was combined into (CoMo)S2/graphene to further enhance the catalytic performance, where the overpotential at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 could reach to 100 mA and the Tafel slope was 60.8 mV dec−1, as shown in Fig. 12k and l. This work provides a new strategy for achieving high stability and high loading SACs through direct synthesis of new compounds. Similarly, Qi et al. applied 1T-MoS2 as the substrate for supporting single-atom cobalt array, which endowed a Pt-like activity and good long-term stability for HER.116 The interface of atomic cobalt array covalently bound to distorted 1T MoS2, was achieved through the phase transforming of MoS2 from 2H to 1T, demonstrating an ensemble effect for tuning hydrogen binding, leading to the superior catalytic behaviour for HER.
 Fig. 12  (a) AC-STEM image of the Mo1N1C2. (b) XANES and (c) FT-EXAFS curves of the Mo1N1C2 at Mo Kedge. (d) The HER polarization curves for ALDPt/NGNs and Pt/C catalysts were acquired by linear sweep voltammetry with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 at room temperature. N2 was purged before the measurements. The inset shows the enlarged curves at the onset potential region of the HER for the different catalysts. (e) Mass activity at 0.05 V (vs. RHE) of the ALDPt/NGNs and the Pt/C catalysts for the HER. (f) Durability measurement of the ALD50Pt/NGNs. The polarization curves were recorded initially and after 1000 cyclic voltammetry sweeps between +0.4 and −0.15 V (vs. RHE) at 100 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (g) Onset values and (h) overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 of Ni/GD and Fe/GD (red square) along with other nonprecious single-atom HER catalysts (green circle) and several bulk catalysts (olivine triangle). (i) Stability tests of Ni/GD (insets: respective time-dependent current density curves). (j) HRTEM image of (CoMo)S2. (k) Polarization curves of Pt/C, bulk MoS2, (CoMo)S2 and (CoMo)S2/RGO. (l) Tafel curves of Pt/C, bulk MoS2, (CoMo)S2 and (CoMo)S2/RGO. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (d–f) reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group; (g–i) reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group; (j–l) reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 


4.2.2 ORR. 
To understand the role of the coordination-N in atomic catalysts, Li et al. grafted FeN4 moiety on MXene, which induces remarkable Fe 3d electron delocalization and spin-state transition of Fe(II) ions, resulting in an easier oxygen adsorption and reduction on active FeN4 sites, and thus an enhanced ORR activity, as shown in Fig. 13a and b.117 This work introduces a new 2D material of MXene as the substrate for supporting Fe SAC and influencing the catalytic activity of the active centers through the appropriate coordination environment. However, the low mass loading hinders the rapid development of atomic catalysts, although the atomic catalysts show high catalytic activity, stability, selectivity, and 100% atom utilization. Li et al. rationally designed and synthesized a single atom catalyst with high Cu single atom loading of 20.9 wt% through introducing ultrahigh addition N species in 2D carbon matrix, as illustrated in Fig. 13c–g.118 The doped-N species could trap and protect the Cu atoms, which is the key to achieve the high mass loading, leading to a ultrahigh catalytic performance with 54 times higher mass activity than metallic Cu nanoparticles at a potential of 0.85 V vs. RHE. This work provides a new strategy for synthesizing single atomic non-noble metal highly doped 2D materials for efficient and stable catalysts through introducing the N species coordination environments. 2D materials with porous structures have unique advantage as substrates due to the confinement effects of pores make the active materials firmly fixed into the pores. Gao et al. predicted that there was a strong covalent Fe–C bonds in graphdiyne-supported single-atom Fe catalyst (Fe-graphdiyne) by DFT calculations, indicating a high stability, and thus synthesized this predicted catalyst.119 Fortunately, the high catalytic performance of this catalyst could be comparable to 20 wt% Pt/C catalyst. Both DFT calculations and experimental results demonstrated that Fe-graphdiyne catalyst can facilitate the 4e− ORR while limiting the 2e− transfer reaction, showing a high 4e− selectivity for ORR. This work indicates that the 2D materials with porous structures provide a unique platform for single atom catalysts with well-defined and uniform active materials. Another product of ORR is H2O2, which is a versatile and environmentally friendly oxidant. Choi et al. reported that a sulfur-doped carbon could stabilize a relatively high loading of Pt (5 wt%) single atoms and this catalyst showed high catalytic activity for selectively producing H2O2.120 This work demonstrates that the coordination configuration of SACs not only determines the catalytic activity, but also influences the catalytic selectivity.
 Fig. 13  (a) LSV curves, and (b) Tafel plots of pristine FePc, FePc/Ti3C2Tx, and Pt/C. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Cu–N–C. (d) TEM image of the as-prepared Cu–N–C. (e) Elemental mapping (blue: carbon; yellow: nitrogen; red: copper) of Cu–N–C. (f) Atomic-resolution TEM images of Cu–N–C. (g) BF-STEM image of Cu–N–C. The representative Cu single atom is indicated by a red circle. Scale bar: 500 nm (d); 100 nm (e); 5 nm (f); 2 nm (g). (a and b) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (c–g) reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.2.3 OER. 
As we all know perfect graphene could not hinder the diffusion of metal atoms, indicating the unstability of single atoms on perfect graphene. Zhang et al. introduced some defects in graphene to trap single Ni atoms for forming single atom catalyst of aNi@defect, as shown in Fig. 14a–d.121 They found that diverse defects in graphene induced different influences for catalytic reactions through X-ray adsorption characterization and electronic structure analysis achieved by DFT calculations. For example, the Ni atoms anchored on the defect of G585 (aNi@G585) exhibited excellent catalytic activity with an overpotential of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for OER, which is even better than that of Ir oxide. This work again proved the importance of the coordination environments of SACs, which has to been considered for designing SACs. To get insight into the fundamental understanding of the origin of OER activity, Zhang et al. designed single Au atoms supported on NiFe LDH for clarifying the reaction mechanism, as illustrated in Fig. 14e and f.122 A high OER activity with an overpotential of 237 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 14g and h) was achieved on the designed catalyst due to the charge redistribution of active Fe and its surrounding atoms causing by the neighboring Au atoms. Note that the single Au atoms activate the 2D materials instead of acting as active sites, which is different from the traditional sense for SACs. For further reducing the cost of catalysts, Kou et al. used Ni foam instead of the precious metal of Au atoms supported Fe-doped Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, which showed a better catalytic activity with an overpotential of 219 mV at the current density of 10 mA cm−2.123
 Fig. 14  (a) The zoomed-in image of the defective area (vacancy) marked with the yellow dashed frames. (b–d) Illustrations of three different types of catalytic active sites corresponding to a single Ni atom supported on (b) perfect hexagons, (c) D5775, and (d) di-vacancy. (e) Two-layer slab model for sAu/NiFe LDH with interlayer CO32− anions and water molecules. (f) Free energy diagram for the OER at different potentials on the surface of sAu/NiFe LDH model. (g) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of sAu/NiFe LDH, pure NiFe LDH and bare Ti mesh in 1 M KOH. (h) Overpotential (η) at 10 mA cm−2 (left) and Tafel slope (right) for sAu/NiFe LDH and pure NiFe LDH. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (e–h) reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


4.2.4 NRR. 
Although NRR represents an attractive prospect, this reaction suffers from low yield rate of NH3 and low efficient under ambient conditions. Geng et al. designed and synthesized a Ru SAC with the substrate of nitrogen-doped carbon (Ru SAs/N–C), which showed a record-high activity for NRR with a Faradaic efficiency of 29.6% at −0.2 V vs. RHE and a yield rate of 120.9 μgNH3 mgcat.−1 h−1, as shown in Fig. 15a and b.124 This work not only designs an outstanding catalyst for NRR, but also provides a guideline for the rational design of highly active and robust SACs with the substrate of 2D materials. Through DFT calculation, Zhao et al. scanned a series of metal atoms (Sc to Zn, Mo, Ru, Rh, Pd, and Ag) doped on the experimentally available defective boron nitride (TM-BN) monolayer with a boron monvacancy as catalysts for NRR.125 The calculation results indicated that the best catalyst was Mo-BN with a low overpotential of 0.19 V, which came from the high spin polarization, selective stabilization of N2H* species, or destabilizing  species (Fig. 15c and d). However, why only Mo atom has these characteristic is still obscure. SACs are always pursued as the altar of atomic catalysts. We designed some double atom catalysts (DACs) compared with the corresponding SACs for NRR with the appropriate substrate of C2N.126 This is the first time to elaborate that DACs are more suitable than SACs for NRR due to the bridge sites in DACs endow higher activity for activating N2 molecule than that of top sites in SACs, as illustrated in Fig. 15e and f. Of course, no matter SACs or DACs, the crux is optimal choice of substrates.6 For achieving high loading of active atoms, we applied DFT calculation to design a heterostructured substrate of graphdiyne/graphene (GDY/Gra) for supporting triple atom catalyst.69 The designed Fe3-GDY/Gra not only endowed an ultrahigh theoretical mass loading of active metal atoms (35.8 wt%), but also showed outstanding catalytic activity for the electrocatalytic NRR with a potential of −0.26 V vs. RHE. Although this work provides a new strategy for designing atomic catalysts with high loading and high catalytic performance, the experimental synthesis of atomic catalysts with high loading of active atoms is still a huge challenge.
 Fig. 15  (a) FE and (b) yield rate of NH3 production at different applied potentials on Ru SAs/N–C and Ru NPs/N–C. Calculated (c) Gibbs free energies of N2 molecule and (d) adsorption energies of N2H and NH2 species on various single TM atoms supported by defective BN nanosheets. (e) Adsorption energy (Ead) of NNH* and (f) reaction free energy (ΔG) of  on SAC and DAC. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (c and d) reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (e and f) reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Gibbs free energy diagrams of the CO2RR on various sites. (b) Calculated energy profiles for Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty (red line) and Pt NPs (black line). (c and d) Optimized reaction paths in CO2 hydrogenation for Pt1/MoS2 and Pt2iii/MoS2, respectively. (a) Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (b) reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (c and d) reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 


4.2.5 CO2RR. 
SACs with the substrate of N-coordinated graphene are widely studied, however, the nature of MNx moieties supported on defected graphene is controversial. Qin et al. designed two systems of Fe–N4 moieties hosted by complete graphitic layer and embedded in a defective graphitic layer, respectively, for CO2-to-CO conversion.127 They found the former should not be the real active sites due to the poisoning of strong CO adsorption while the latter showed high CO selectively and reaction rate because of the balanced adsorption energies of adsorbed COOH and CO species, as shown in Fig. 16a. It means that only defective graphene supported atomic catalyst is active for some catalytic reactions. Moreover, the 2D materials with defects not only affect the catalytic activity, but also confine single atoms. Zhao et al. reported that abundant Ti-deficit vacancies and a high reducing capability of ultrathin 2D Ti3−xC2Ty MXene could stabilize Pt single atoms with strong metal–carbon bonds.128 The synthesized SAC of Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty shows a high catalytic activity for utilizing greenhouse gas O2, as illustrated in Fig. 16b. Another interesting work introduced the synergetic interaction between neighbouring Pt monomers on the substrate of MoS2 for CO2 hydrogenation by Li et al.129 Increasing the Pt mass loading of SACs up to 7.5% would achieve the neighbouring Pt monomers, which greatly improved the CO2RR catalytic activity with a lower activation energy, as depicted in Fig. 16c and d. This work again indicates that DACs may endow better catalytic activity compared with SACs. However, not only DACs and SACs, but also larger metal clusters in this system, indicate heterogeneous active sites, which are not conducive to the exploration of catalytic mechanisms.
External fields are introduced to catalytic CO2RR for improving the catalytic activity of active centers. For instance, the light field effects play an important role in electrocatalytic processes. Yang et al. successfully synthesized a series of MOF supported electrocatalysts (HNTM-Au-SA, HNTM-Cu-SA, HNTM-Co-SA) based on the structure of chlorophyll for disclosing the light field effects.130 The light-assisted TOF results show a positive shift of 20, 100, and 130 mV for HNTM-Co-SA, HNTM-Cu-SA, and HNTM-Au-SA, respectively, consistent with the calculated energy gaps of 0, 1.5, and 1.7 eV. Coupled with a light field, the porphyrin ligand in MOF serves as a photoswitch to collect photons and motivate external electron transfer from ground state to excited state. This work provides a blueprint for the design of photo-coupled electrocatalysts at the atomic scale, utilizing MOF as a photosensitizer and coordinated metal atom as a catalytic site. Similarly, 2D COFs have the potential as supports to anchor atomically distributed metal centers for photocatalytic CO2RR due to their large surface area and narrow band gaps. Wang et al. synthesized a new 2D COF supported single Co atoms (Co-FPy-CON) with a high CO production of 10.1 μmol and a CO/H2 selectivity of 76% over 6 h irradiation under visible light.131 The COF material in this case does not appear to act as a photocatalyst itself but instead as a semiconductor support that transfers charge carriers that are generated in the dye to the Co centers, which are the active sites. Although both MOFs and COFs have some advantages (such as large surface areas, well-defined pore structures, tunable band gaps) for supporting atomic catalysts, the low loading of active atoms is not satisfactory due to the few support sites, which should be further improved in future studies.

Table 1 enumerates the catalytic performances of some 2D materials-based catalysts and the state-of-the-art bulk metal or metal oxide catalysts. Obviously, some 2D materials-based catalysts have shown better catalytic performances compared with the state-of-the-art catalysts. Although the catalytic activity of some 2D materials-based catalysts are inferior to that of noble-metal catalysts, the low cost and structural characteristics of 2D materials indicate that the 2D materials still have great potential in the field of catalysis. Therefore, more new 2D materials should be explored and the functionalization of 2D materials should be rationally designed according to advanced synthesis technology.
Table 1 Comparisons of the catalytic performances of small molecule catalysis on 2D materials-based catalysts and some state-of-the-art bulk catalysts. η10, ηonset, ΔE1/2, I0.764, FE represent the overpotential at the current density of 10 mA cm−2, the onset potential, the half-wave potential, the current density at the overpotential of 0.764 V, and faradaic efficiency, respectively




Reactions
Catalysts
Catalytic performance
References




HER
Pt/C

η
10 = 30 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

82



NPNi-MoS2/RGO

η
10 = 205 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

62



mPF-Co-MoS2-16.7

η
10 = 156 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

81



mPF-MoS2

η
10 = 210 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

81



PtSe2

η
10 = 60 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

82



Mo2CTx

η
10 = 189 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

83



Mo1N1C2

η
10 = 132 mV (0.1 M KOH)

108



Fe/GD

η
10 = 66 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

110



(CoMo)S2/graphene

η
10 = 100 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

111



ORR
Pt/C
ΔE1/2 = 840 mV (1 M KOH)

113



Ni3S2/MoS2
ΔE1/2 = 885 mV (1 M KOH)

86



NGM-800
ΔE1/2 = 781 mV (1 M KOH)

87



mNC–rGO–C
ΔE1/2 = 740 mV (1 M KOH)

88



FePc/Ti3C2Tx
ΔE1/2 = 886 mV (1 M KOH)

113



Cu–N–C
ΔE1/2 = 869 mV (1 M KOH)

114



OER
IrOx

η
10 = 320 mV (1 M NaOH); η10 = 270 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

91



NiFe LDH

η
10 = 300 mV (1 M KOH)

30



NiFe-LDH/CNT

η
10 = 300 mV (1 M KOH)

92



CoOOH nanosheets

η
10 = 253 mV (1 M KOH)

93



Ru/GDY

η
10 = 44 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

63



Ni@G5775

η
10 = 270 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

117



Au/NiFe LDH

η
10 = 237 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)

118



Fe-doped β-Ni(OH)2

η
10 = 219 mV (1 M KOH)

119



NRR
Au THH NR
1.648 μg h−1 cm−2 (yield); 4.0% (FE)

95



MoS2
8.08 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−1 (yield); 1.17% (FE)

97



CuCr-LDH
184.8 μmol L−1 (yield, 73.9 g)

98



Ti3C2Tx
4.72 μg h−1 cm−2 (yield); 5.78% (FE)

99



Ru SAs/N–C
120.9 μg mg−1 h−1 (yield); 29.6% (FE)

120



CO2RR
Cu

η
onset = −800 mV (CH4)

102



Ag NPs

I
0.764 = 11 mA cm−2 (CO)

100



WSe2 NFs

I
0.764 = 330 mA cm−2 (CO)

100



Mo2C

η
onset = −550 mV (CH4)

102



Fe–N–C
93.5% at −0.5 V (CO FE)

123






5. Perspectives and challenges
In this review, recent developments of 2D materials in the field of catalysis have been summarized and classified. Obviously, 2D materials show many advantages and great potential in various catalytic reactions, such as HER, ORR, OER, NRR, and CO2RR, of course, not limited to these reactions. This is the first detailed classification of 2D materials into two categories in the filed of catalysis: 2D materials as catalysts and 2D materials as the substrates for atomic catalysts. Because of their different roles in the field of catalysis, 2D materials-based catalysts have different requirements (Fig. 1), which are often confused in the design of 2D-material-based catalysts, leading to a misunderstanding of catalyst design. For example, smaller sizes of 2D materials are welcome for achieving more active edges as catalysts, however, as a substrate, smaller sizes are detrimental for supporting more active atoms. Vice versa, fewer layers of 2D materials could provide larger surface–volume ratio to support atomic catalysts, unfortunately, some fewer layers of 2D materials can't guarantee better catalytic activity. Therefore, the emphasis of our research should be adjusted according to the different roles in catalysis for 2D materials, which is crucial for the rational design of catalysts based on 2D materials.
Currently, 2D materials as catalysts have indicated high catalytic activity and selectivity. However, the development of 2D materials as catalysts looks like tepid. Only less than 5% of the 2D materials have been applied as catalysts, which indicate that there are some challenges exist in the application of 2D materials as catalysts. The first challenge is that the active sites of most 2D materials are concentrated at the edges, which are very little relative to a large number of basal planes, resulting in a low catalytic efficient. Therefore, some strategies are proposed for enhancing the catalytic activity and improving the number of active sites, such as decreasing the size of 2D materials, doping, compositing with functional materials, and activating the inert basal planes. The second challenge is the stability of 2D materials, especially for monolayer or few layers. The stability of monolayer or few layers of 2D materials is very unsatisfactory due to the crimp and sintering of 2D materials during the catalytic processes. This requires the researchers to consider the initial synthesis process, where the strong heterogeneous interface should be created, such as vertically oriented 2D materials and coherent interface, or some ligands should be introduced for hindering the sintering of 2D materials nanosheets without reducing the catalytic activity. The third challenge is the industrial production of 2D catalysts. The synthesis of 2D materials with high purity always requires complex preparation process with high cost, which impedes the industrial application of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. Thus, some synthesis methods with high precision, low cost, and facile synthesis conditions should be developed for further industrial production of 2D catalysts. There are many new 2D materials for us to explore as catalysts with high activity, high selectivity, high stability, and low cost.
The development of atomic catalysts has always been a hot field, especially since the advent of single atom catalysts. In addition to the fact that atomic catalyst has a high utilization of active atoms, it often requires an appropriate substrate, where 2D materials show a huge advantage due to their large surface/volume ratio. Some 2D materials, such as N-doped graphene, MoS2, C3N4, and BN, have already successful applied as the substrates for supporting atomic catalysts, and showed excellent catalytic performances. However, the selection of 2D materials is still blind, which is mainly based on the traditional trial-and-error methods in experiments. As we all know, the substrates of 2D materials influence the activity and the stability of atomic catalysts. Unfortunately, it is unclear how the substrate influences the activity and the stability of atomic catalysts. And the required interaction between substrates and atomic catalysts is also controversial, where strong interaction improves the stability but reduces the catalytic activity, vice versa. How to balance the catalytic activity and the stability of atomic catalysts is the first challenge. The key is understanding the interaction between substrates and active materials. Moreover, the second challenge is that the loading of active materials in atomic catalysts is too low to achieve high efficiency, which requires more advanced synthesis technology and an appropriate 2D substrate. This has been one of the most important issues and a long-standing challenge for designing atomic catalysts.
Some successful descriptors of catalytic activity for bulk catalysts have been explored and have been proven to be of great significance for the development of the catalysis field, such as d band center, electronegativity, and coordination number. However, a valid descriptor of 2D materials has not yet been proposed, which is urgently needed for the development of 2D materials in the field of catalysis. 2D materials, either as catalysts or as substrates for atomic catalysts, should have an efficient descriptor of catalytic performance for rationally designing 2D materials-based catalysts. Therefore, the descriptor of 2D materials is both an opportunity and a challenge in the field of catalysis and deserves further exploration.
The development of 2D materials is closely related to the development of catalysis. Whether 2D materials are used as catalysts or the substrates for atomic catalysts, the exploration of new 2D materials will bring new opportunities to the field of catalysis. The rapid development of atomic catalysts provides more application space and value for 2D materials. In addition to the development of new 2D materials, the functionalization of 2D materials is also crucial for catalytic reactions. As long as the different roles of 2D materials in catalysis are revealed, the development of 2D materials in the field of catalysis will be more rapid than any time.
Author contributions
C. V. Singh, L. X. Chen, and Z. W. Chen wrote the paper. All authors discussed and revised the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C. V. Singh.
Acknowledgements
CVS acknowledges financial support from the Nature Science and Engineer Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Hart Professorship and the University of Toronto.
References
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, W. Li, P. Ryabchuk, K. Junge and M. Beller, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 385–397 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, A. W. Castleman and S. N. Khanna, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14456–14492 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, L. X. Chen, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3492–3515 RSC .
C. C. Yang, S. F. Zai, Y. T. Zhou, L. Du and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901949 CrossRef .
R. Q. Yao, Y. T. Zhou, H. Shi, Q. H. Zhang, L. Gu, Z. Wen, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1379–1386 CrossRef CAS .
R. Q. Yao, H. Shi, W. B. Wan, Z. Wen, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907214 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801649 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, T. Fan, N. Xie, G. Nie and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901787 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang and S. Z. Qiao, Matter, 2019, 1, 1454–1455 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, L. Shen, M. D. Costa, K. A. Persson, S. P. Ong, P. Huck, Y. Lu, X. Ma, Y. Chen, H. Tang and Y. P. Feng, Sci. Data, 2019, 6, 86 CrossRef .
D. Akinwande, C. Huyghebaert, C. H. Wang, M. I. Serna, S. Goossens, L. J. Li, H. P. Wong and F. H. L. Koppens, Nature, 2019, 573, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
B. Feng, B. Fu, S. Kasamatsu, S. Ito, P. Cheng, C. C. Liu, Y. Feng, S. Wu, S. K. Mahatha, P. Sheverdyaeva, P. Moras, M. Arita, O. Sugino, T. C. Chiang, K. Shimada, K. Miyamoto, T. Okuda, K. Wu, L. Chen, Y. Yao and I. Matsuda, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1007 CrossRef .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, I. Y. Jeon, S. M. Jung, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, S. Y. Bae, S. D. Sohn, N. Park, J. H. Oh, H. J. Shin and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6486 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9623–9628 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Hou, K. Tu and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5644–5651 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, S. Yang, S. Li, J. Lou, S. Zhang, S. Wang, B. Li, Y. Gong, L. Song, X. Zou and P. M. Ajayan, Nature, 2020, 577, 492–496 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kum, H. Lee, S. Kim, S. Lindemann, W. Kong, K. Qiao, P. Chen, J. Irwin, J. H. Lee, S. Xie, S. Subramanian, J. Shim, S. H. Bae, C. Choi, L. Ranno, S. Seo, S. Lee, J. Bauer, H. Li, K. Lee, J. A. Robinson, C. A. Ross, D. G. Schlom, M. S. Rzchowski, C. B. Eom and J. Kim, Nature, 2020, 578, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deng, Z. Liu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1800996 CrossRef .
H. Qi, P. Yu, Y. Wang, G. Han, H. Liu, Y. Yi, Y. Li and L. Mao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5260–5263 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K. C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, A. P. O'Mullane and A. Du, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, Q. Fu, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, W. C. Cheong, R. Yu, L. Gu, J. Dong, J. Luo, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C. Draxl, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2353 CrossRef .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M. J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T. C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Norskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vile, D. Albani, M. Nachtegaal, Z. Chen, D. Dontsova, M. Antonietti, N. Lopez and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11265–11269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, T. Cao, C. Cao, J. Luo, W. Chen, L. Zheng, J. Dong, J. Zhang, Y. Han, Z. Li, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10004–10011 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, J. M. Yan, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11230 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3463–3468 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yin, T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, S. Wei and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10800–10805 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang and H. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 194–195 CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef .
G. H. Jeong, S. P. Sasikala, T. Yun, G. Y. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907006 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, J. Han, X. Wang, P. Xu, T. Yao, J. Zhong, W. Zhong, S. Liu, T. Gao, Z. Zhang, L. Xu and B. Song, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1907818 CrossRef .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, H. Cheng, J. Liu, M. Shao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans, H. Zhang and X. Duan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1900486 CrossRef .
L. Ge, W. Xu, C. Chen, C. Tang, L. Xu and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5241–5247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef .
Y. C. Lin, R. K. Ghosh, R. Addou, N. Lu, S. M. Eichfeld, H. Zhu, M. Y. Li, X. Peng, M. J. Kim, L. J. Li, R. M. Wallace, S. Datta and J. A. Robinson, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7311 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, X. J. Wu, Y. Gong, Y. Zhu, Z. Yang, B. Li, Q. Lu, Y. Yu, S. Han, Z. Zhang, Y. Zong, Y. Han, L. Gu and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8653–8660 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat.
Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef .
Z. Zuo, D. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Lu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31, 1803762 CrossRef .
C. Moreno, M. Vilas-Varela, B. Kretz, A. Garcia-Lekue, M. V. Coatache, M. Paradinas, M. Panighel, G. Ceballos, S. O. Valenzuela, D. Pena and A. Mugarza, Science, 2018, 360, 199–203 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gao, M. K. Chan and Y. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7493 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, R. Ma, M. Osada, N. Iyi, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4872–4880 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS .
M. Long, A. Gao, P. Wang, H. Xia, C. Ott, C. Pan, Y. Fu, E. Liu, X. Chen, W. Lu, T. Nilges, J. Xu, X. Wang, W. Hu and F. Miao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1700589 CrossRef .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
L. Ries, E. Petit, T. Michel, C. C. Diogo, C. Gervais, C. Salameh, M. Bechelany, S. Balme, P. Miele, N. Onofrio and D. Voiry, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1112–1117 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lloret, M. A. Rivero-Crespo, J. A. Vidal-Moya, S. Wild, A. Domenech-Carbo, B. S. J. Heller, S. Shin, H. P. Steinruck, F. Maier, F. Hauke, M. Varela, A. Hirsch, A. Leyva-Perez and G. Abellan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 509 CrossRef .
S. Bellani, E. Petroni, A. E. Del Rio Castillo, N. Curreli, B. Martín-García, R. Oropesa-Nuñez, M. Prato and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807659 CrossRef .
J. Shi, D. Ma, G.-F. Han, Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, T. Gao, J. Sun, X. Song, C. Li and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10196–10204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, L. Li, J. Tan, H. Sun, B. Li, J. C. Idrobo, C. V. Singh, T. M. Lu and N. Koratkar, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3680–3787 Search PubMed .
Z. Shu, Q. Peng, P. Huang, Z. Xu, A. A. Suleiman, X. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Zhou and T. Zhai, Matter, 2020, 2, 977–987 CrossRef .
H. Lin, Q. Zhu, D. Shu, D. Lin, J. Xu, X. Huang, W. Shi, X. Xi, J. Wang and L. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 602–607 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Chen, Z. W. Chen, Y. Wang, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8107–8114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, G. Chen, A. G. Ricciardulli, P. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Shi, J. Ma, J. Zhang, P. W. M. Blom and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 465–470 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, S. Ye, J. Song and J. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9891–9896 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Chen, Y. Sun, S. Xu, J. Wu, C. Tan, X. Xu, H. Yuan, L. Yang, Y. Chen, P. Gao, J. Guo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901964 CrossRef .
Q. He, P. Li, Z. Wu, B. Yuan, Z. Luo, W. Yang, J. Liu, G. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Shen, P. Zhang, S. Liu, G. Shao and Z. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901578 CrossRef .
A. J. Mannix, X. F. Zhou, B. Kiraly, J. D. Wood, D. Alducin, B. D. Myers, X. Liu, B. L. Fisher, U. Santiago, J. R. Guest, M. J. Yacaman, A. Ponce, A. R. Oganov, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Science, 2015, 350, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and F. Chen, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 011103 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Chen, L. Chen, M. Jiang, D. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Yao, C. V. Singh and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15086–15093 RSC .
L. Shi, K. Chang, H. Zhang, X. Hai, L. Yang, T. Wang and J. Ye, Small, 2016, 12, 4431–4439 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, M. Cheng, X. Duan, Q. Zhang, J. Wang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1451–1458 RSC .
Y. Li, R. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. Wu, H. Zhang and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5533–5540 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, H. Zhang, J. Wei, H. X. Zhang, X. Wu, Y. Li, C. Li, J. Zhang and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5333–5340 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Li, G. Zhao, X. Wang, J. Kong, H. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Chang, X. Meng, T. Kako and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9128–9136 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, L. X. Chen, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23782–23802 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. F. Lu, T. Chen and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000882 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge, W. Xu, C. Chen, C. Tang, L. Xu and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5241–5247 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
Q. Lu, G. S. Hutchings, W. Yu, Y. Zhou, R. V. Forest, R. Tao, J. Rosen, B. T. Yonemoto, Z. Cao, H. Zheng, J. Q. Xiao, F. Jiao and J. G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6567 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, Y. Yu, Q. Ma, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1917–1933 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, H. Li, S. Wang, D. Ding, M. Chen, C. Liu, Z. Tian, K. S. Novoselov, C. Ma, D. Deng and abd X. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14430 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, T. Zhao, X. Ping, H. Zheng, L. Xing, X. Liu, J. Zheng, L. Sun, L. Gu, C. Tao, D. Wang and L. Jiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6977–6981 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lang, G. F. Han, B. B. Xiao, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, Z. Wen, Y. F. Zhu, M. Zhao, J. C. Li and Q. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, P. Liu, C. Du, D. Liang, J. Yan and W. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8785–8789 RSC .
W. Xia, J. Tang, J. Li, S. Zhang, K. C. Wu, J. He and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13354–13359 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hou, J. Zhang, H. Tian, Q. Li, C. Li and Y. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Zeng, G. Zeng, D. Huang, R. Xiao, C. Zhang, C. Zhou, W. Xiong, W. Wang, M. Cheng, W. Xue, H. Guo, X. Tang and D. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117956 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, H. Pan, M. Murugananthan, J. Gong and Y. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Su, S. Gu, R. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Yan, J. Li and S. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 739–746 RSC .
A. Jain, Z. Wang and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1410–1411 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bao, Q. Zhang, F. L. Meng, H. X. Zhong, M. M. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. M. Yan, Q. Jiang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604799 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M. M. Shi, D. Bao, F. L. Meng, Q. Zhang, Y. T. Zhou, K. H. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Z. Wang, Z. W. Chen, D. P. Liu, Z. Jiang, M. Luo, L. Gu, Q. H. Zhang, X. Z. Cao, Y. Yao, M. H. Shao, Y. Zhang, X. B. Zhang, J. G. Chen, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9464–9469 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Zheng, X. Cao, F. Teng, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703828 CrossRef .
Y. Luo, G. F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
S. K. Kim, Y. J. Zhang, H. Bergstrom, R. Michalsky and A. Peterson, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2003–2013 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, K. Chan, C. Tsai and J. K. Norskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4428–4437 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, W. Gao, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1455–1459 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900617 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, B. Ni and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001142 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, Q. Li, J. Liu, Y. R. Wang, R. Wang, L. Z. Dong, Y. H. Xia, J. L. Wang and Y.-Q. Lan, Matter, 2019, 1, 1656–1668 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, Q. W. Deng, G. Q. Ren, L. Sun, L. Yang, Y. M. Li, D. Zhai, Y. H. Zhou and W. Q. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, G. Chen, G. Zhou, L. C. Yin, J. P. Veder, B. Johannessen, M. Saunders, S. Z. Yang, R. De Marco, C. Liu and S. P. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1906157 CrossRef .
R. Qin, P. Liu, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700286 CrossRef .
J. Li, Z. Wen, Z. X. Hui, Z. W. Chen, C. Yang and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14223–14233 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Pei, C. T. He, J. Wan, H. Ren, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Dong, S. Tian, W. C. Cheong, S. Lu, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16086–16090 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T. K. Sham, L. M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, B. Huang, Y. Yi, Y. Guo, Z. Zuo, Y. Li, Z. Jia, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1460 CrossRef .
L. X. Chen, Z. W. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. C. Yang and Q. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 118012 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, X. Cui, L. Gu, S. Yu, X. Fan, M. Luo, S. Xu, N. Li, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Gong, F. Lv, K. Wang, H. Huang, W. Zhang, S. Guo, W. Zheng and P. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5231 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Z. Zhuang, F. Lv, H. Zhu, L. Zhou, M. Luo, J. Zhu, Z. Lang, S. Feng, W. Chen, L. Mai and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803220 CrossRef .
F. Li, G. F. Han, H. J. Noh, S. J. Kim, Y. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu and J. B. Baek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2263–2269 RSC .
Y. Gao, Z. Cai, X. Wu, Z. Lv, P. Wu and C. Cai, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10364–10374 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. T. Kim, K. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Xi, Y. Yu, N. Chen, S. Sun, W. Wang, K. M. Lange and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3876–3879 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kou, S. Wang, J. L. Hauser, M. Chen, S. R. J. Oliver, Y. Ye, J. Guo and Y. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 622–628 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803498 CrossRef .
J. Zhao and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Chen, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800291 CrossRef .
X. Qin, S. Zhu, F. Xiao, L. Zhang and M. Shao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1778–1783 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Yang, S. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, W. C. Cheong, L. Zheng, F. Ren, G. Ying, X. Cao, D. Wang, Q. Peng, G. Wang and C. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4086–4093 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Dai, Z. Pu, Z. Lao, Y. Chen, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, R. Si, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 411–417 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, H. Yu, T. He, S. Zuo, X. Liu, H. Yang, B. Ni, H. Li, L. Gu, D. Wang and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3844 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Fu, L. Zheng, C. Zhao, X. Wang, S. Y. Chong, F. McBride, R. Raval, M. Bilton, L. Liu, X. Wu, L. Chen, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 9107–9114 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Li Xin Chen	Dr Li Xin Chen works as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at the University of Toronto, Canada. Dr Chen received her Ph.D in Jilin University, China. Her research is currently focused on energy conversion and storage (including battery and catalyst design) based on 2D materials through experiment methods and density functional theory calculations.
Zhi Wen Chen	Dr Zhi Wen Chen works as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at the University of Toronto, Canada. Dr Chen received his Ph.D in Jilin University, China. His research is currently focused on catalyst design for hydrogen evolution reaction, CO2 reduction reaction, nitrogen reduction reaction, etc. through density functional theory calculations. Some of his works are carried out in close collaboration with experiments.
Chandra Veer Singh	Prof. Chandra Veer Singh is the Erwin Edward Hart Endowed Associate Professor and Associate Chair of Research in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at the University of Toronto, Canada. Dr Singh received his Ph.D. in Aerospace Engineering in 2008 from Texas A&M University. Subsequently, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Cornell University. He obtained industrial experience as a Design Engineer at General Electric Aircraft Engines. His research is currently focused on the atomistic modeling and machine learning enabled development of new materials for applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage, including catalysts and metal-ion batteries.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the rational design of 2D materials-based catalysts for small molecule catalysis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic description of the main liquid exfoliation mechanisms. (a) Ion intercalation. Ions (yellow spheres) are intercalated between the layers in a liquid environment, swelling the crystal and weakening the interlayer attraction. Then, agitation (such as shear, ultrasonication, or thermal) can completely separate the layers, resulting in an exfoliated dispersion. (b) Ion exchange. Some layered compounds contain ions between the layers so as to balance surface charge on the layers. These ions (red spheres) can be exchanged in a liquid environment for other, often larger ions (yellow spheres). As above, agitation results in an exfoliated dispersion. (c) Sonication assisted exfoliation. The layered crystal is sonicated in a solvent, resulting in exfoliation and nanosheet formation. In “good” solvents-those with appropriate surface energy-the exfoliated nanosheets are stabilized against reaggregation. Otherwise, for “bad” solvents reaggregation and sedimentation will occur. This mechanism also describes the dispersion of graphene oxide in polar solvents, such as water. NB, solvent molecules are not shown in this figure. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2013, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic view of the surface growth of MoS2 on Au foils. (b) Experimental setup of the LPCVD system. (c) Schematic of ReS2 growth. (d) Growth-temperature profile. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis method. (f) Schematic illustration of the source vapor transportation through molecular sieve. (g) Schematic illustration of the atomic structure of PbSnS2. (h) Optical image of PbSnS2 nanoplates on mica substrate. (i) AFM image and height profile of a typical thin PbSnS2 flake. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; (c and d) reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (e–i) reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the wet chemical preparation of antimony trioxide, antimony tetrahedral, and hexagonal antimonene nanosheets from Sb-oleate, Sb(OAc)3-DDT, and SbCl3-DDT solutions as precursors, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of epitaxial growth of atomically thin Bi2O2Se films on a (001)-oriented SrTiO3 (STO) substrate by co-evaporating the Bi and Se precursors in oxygen atmosphere in a home-made MBE setup equipped with reflective high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). (b) Schematics of distorted B7 cluster and growth setup with atomic structure model and STM topography rendering. (c) AES spectra of clean Ag(111) before and after boron deposition. (a) Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (b and c) reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) HRTEM and the corresponding SAED patterns images (c) of HMF-MoS2. (d–f) HRTEM and high magnification view of the defects on HMF-MoS2. (g) XRD patterns of BIF-20, the g-C3N4 nanosheet, and the BIF-20@g-C3N4 nanosheet. (h) High-resolution image of B 1s spectra of BIF-20, the g-C3N4 nanosheet, and the BIF-20@g-C3N4 nanosheet. (i) Diffuse-reflectance UV-vis spectra of BIF-20, the g-C3N4 nanosheet, and the BIF-20@g-C3N4. (j) The structures and the calculated free energy of formation for ECM@Ru and CM@Ru. (k) Calculated distribution of charge density for ECM@Ru. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (g–i) reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (j and k) reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) Atomic structure, HRTEM image and HER performance of NPNi-MoS2/RGO. (d) HER polarization curves for mPF-MoS2 in comparison with bulk MoS2, rNS-MoS2 and 40% Pt/C. (e) Overpotential at current density of 10, 20 and 50 mA cm−2 for mPF-MoS2 compared with rNS-MoS2 and bulk MoS2. (f) Durability measurement of mPF-MoS2. (g) Polarization curves for the HER obtained on 1–5 L and 20 L PtSe2 flakes and a commercial Pt/C catalyst. (h) Tafel plots derived from (g). (i) Comparison of Tafel slope and overpotential for PtSe2 flakes of 1–5 L and 20 L. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (d–f) reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group; (g–i) reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) LSVs of Ni3S2/MoS2-0.05, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.10, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.15, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.2, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.3 and Ni3S2/MoS2-0.4. (b) LSVs of pristine MoS2 nanosheets, Ni3S2/MoS2-0.2 and commercial 20% Pt/C at 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (scan rate: 10 mV s−1). (c) AFM image, and (d) HRTEM image of NGM-800 (yellow circles indicates the nanopore). Schematic illustration of the effect of pore structure on masstransport in (e) mNC–rGO–S and (f) mNC–rGO–C. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c and d) reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (e and f) reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Mass activity of CoOOH-NS, CoOOH-bulk and IrO2 in 1 M KOH (inset: the corresponding LSV curves). (b) Tafel plots for CoOOH-NS and CoOOH-bulk. (c) Exfoliation and transformation of bulk black phosphorus crystals into 2D TMPs. (d) High-throughput screening of more than 11000 2D materials from available material databases, less than 35 materials are stable under the strongly oxidizing operating conditions of oxygen reduction and/or oxygen evolution reaction in acidic media. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (d) reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Free-energy profile for NRR at MoS2 edge site. An asterisk (*) denotes as the adsorption site. (b) Average NH3 yields and FEs of MoS2/CC at different potentials. (c) Recycling test of MoS2/CC at the potential of −0.5 V. (d) Schematic illustrating the photocatalytic N2 fixation process. (e) Yield of NH3 over a 1 h test period under UV-vis illumination. (f) Time course of NH3 evolution in the photofixation of N2 or argon (Ar) in the presence of water under visible-light illumination over CuCr-NS and CuCr-bulk. (g) Optimized structures (the gray, red, sky blue, green, and blue balls represent C, O, Ti, H, and N, respectively), (h) faradaic efficiency and (i) NH3 yield rate of MXene/FeOOH at various potentials. (j) Adsorption energies of N2H* and  on the bridge site and top site of MoC6, including the corresponding adsorbed structures. (k) The enzymatic mechanism for nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) on MoC6. The free energy profiles and the structures of intermediates are shown in the reaction path. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (d–f) reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (g–i) reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (j and k) reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Free energy diagram of CO2 conversion to CH4 over Mo2C(100) surfaces at 0 V vs. RHE. (b) Free energy diagram of hydrogenation of OH* (color code: green, θpre-OH = 0; red, θpre-OH = 0.25; blue, θpre-OH = 0.5). (c) Binding configurations of CO* and CHO* on the Ni-doped sulfur edge of MoS2. CHO* binds to the bridging S atoms, whereas CO* binds to the Ni atoms. (d) Free energy changes of CORR on DV-MoS2 at the applied potential of 0 V, the corresponding geometric structures and reaction pathways are shown above the free energy diagram. The corresponding S values of intermediates are shown below the free energy changes. The red points indicate the rate-determining step R5 . (a and b) Reproduce with permission.102 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (d) reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) AC-STEM image of the Mo1N1C2. (b) XANES and (c) FT-EXAFS curves of the Mo1N1C2 at Mo Kedge. (d) The HER polarization curves for ALDPt/NGNs and Pt/C catalysts were acquired by linear sweep voltammetry with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 at room temperature. N2 was purged before the measurements. The inset shows the enlarged curves at the onset potential region of the HER for the different catalysts. (e) Mass activity at 0.05 V (vs. RHE) of the ALDPt/NGNs and the Pt/C catalysts for the HER. (f) Durability measurement of the ALD50Pt/NGNs. The polarization curves were recorded initially and after 1000 cyclic voltammetry sweeps between +0.4 and −0.15 V (vs. RHE) at 100 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. (g) Onset values and (h) overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 of Ni/GD and Fe/GD (red square) along with other nonprecious single-atom HER catalysts (green circle) and several bulk catalysts (olivine triangle). (i) Stability tests of Ni/GD (insets: respective time-dependent current density curves). (j) HRTEM image of (CoMo)S2. (k) Polarization curves of Pt/C, bulk MoS2, (CoMo)S2 and (CoMo)S2/RGO. (l) Tafel curves of Pt/C, bulk MoS2, (CoMo)S2 and (CoMo)S2/RGO. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (d–f) reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group; (g–i) reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group; (j–l) reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) LSV curves, and (b) Tafel plots of pristine FePc, FePc/Ti3C2Tx, and Pt/C. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Cu–N–C. (d) TEM image of the as-prepared Cu–N–C. (e) Elemental mapping (blue: carbon; yellow: nitrogen; red: copper) of Cu–N–C. (f) Atomic-resolution TEM images of Cu–N–C. (g) BF-STEM image of Cu–N–C. The representative Cu single atom is indicated by a red circle. Scale bar: 500 nm (d); 100 nm (e); 5 nm (f); 2 nm (g). (a and b) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (c–g) reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The zoomed-in image of the defective area (vacancy) marked with the yellow dashed frames. (b–d) Illustrations of three different types of catalytic active sites corresponding to a single Ni atom supported on (b) perfect hexagons, (c) D5775, and (d) di-vacancy. (e) Two-layer slab model for sAu/NiFe LDH with interlayer CO32− anions and water molecules. (f) Free energy diagram for the OER at different potentials on the surface of sAu/NiFe LDH model. (g) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of sAu/NiFe LDH, pure NiFe LDH and bare Ti mesh in 1 M KOH. (h) Overpotential (η) at 10 mA cm−2 (left) and Tafel slope (right) for sAu/NiFe LDH and pure NiFe LDH. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (e–h) reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) FE and (b) yield rate of NH3 production at different applied potentials on Ru SAs/N–C and Ru NPs/N–C. Calculated (c) Gibbs free energies of N2 molecule and (d) adsorption energies of N2H and NH2 species on various single TM atoms supported by defective BN nanosheets. (e) Adsorption energy (Ead) of NNH* and (f) reaction free energy (ΔG) of  on SAC and DAC. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (c and d) reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (e and f) reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Gibbs free energy diagrams of the CO2RR on various sites. (b) Calculated energy profiles for Pt1/Ti3−xC2Ty (red line) and Pt NPs (black line). (c and d) Optimized reaction paths in CO2 hydrogenation for Pt1/MoS2 and Pt2iii/MoS2, respectively. (a) Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (b) reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (c and d) reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

HER	Pt/C	
η
10 = 30 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
82

NPNi-MoS2/RGO	
η
10 = 205 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
62

mPF-Co-MoS2-16.7	
η
10 = 156 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
81

mPF-MoS2	
η
10 = 210 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
81

PtSe2	
η
10 = 60 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
82

Mo2CTx	
η
10 = 189 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
83

Mo1N1C2	
η
10 = 132 mV (0.1 M KOH)	
108

Fe/GD	
η
10 = 66 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
110

(CoMo)S2/graphene	
η
10 = 100 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
111

ORR	Pt/C	ΔE1/2 = 840 mV (1 M KOH)	
113

Ni3S2/MoS2	ΔE1/2 = 885 mV (1 M KOH)	
86

NGM-800	ΔE1/2 = 781 mV (1 M KOH)	
87

mNC–rGO–C	ΔE1/2 = 740 mV (1 M KOH)	
88

FePc/Ti3C2Tx	ΔE1/2 = 886 mV (1 M KOH)	
113

Cu–N–C	ΔE1/2 = 869 mV (1 M KOH)	
114

OER	IrOx	
η
10 = 320 mV (1 M NaOH); η10 = 270 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
91

NiFe LDH	
η
10 = 300 mV (1 M KOH)	
30

NiFe-LDH/CNT	
η
10 = 300 mV (1 M KOH)	
92

CoOOH nanosheets	
η
10 = 253 mV (1 M KOH)	
93

Ru/GDY	
η
10 = 44 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
63

Ni@G5775	
η
10 = 270 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
117

Au/NiFe LDH	
η
10 = 237 mV (0.5 M H2SO4)	
118

Fe-doped β-Ni(OH)2	
η
10 = 219 mV (1 M KOH)	
119

NRR	Au THH NR	1.648 μg h−1 cm−2 (yield); 4.0% (FE)	
95

MoS2	8.08 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−1 (yield); 1.17% (FE)	
97

CuCr-LDH	184.8 μmol L−1 (yield, 73.9 g)	
98

Ti3C2Tx	4.72 μg h−1 cm−2 (yield); 5.78% (FE)	
99

Ru SAs/N–C	120.9 μg mg−1 h−1 (yield); 29.6% (FE)	
120

CO2RR	Cu	
η
onset = −800 mV (CH4)	
102

Ag NPs	
I
0.764 = 11 mA cm−2 (CO)	
100

WSe2 NFs	
I
0.764 = 330 mA cm−2 (CO)	
100

Mo2C	
η
onset = −550 mV (CH4)	
102

Fe–N–C	93.5% at −0.5 V (CO FE)	
123

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
