Metal halide perovskites under compression  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA04930D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04930D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16089-16108Metal halide perovskites under compression

        
          
            Qian 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Liming 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhongwei 
            Chen
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zewei 
            Quan
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China. E-mail: quanzw@susetch.edu.cn
bAcademy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China
Received 
      11th May 2019
    , Accepted 17th June 2019First published on 18th June 2019AbstractWithin the last ten years, the power conversion efficiencies of metal halide perovskite (MHP) solar cells have developed at an unprecedented rate to above ∼24%. The outstanding photoresponse features of MHPs make them promising materials in the photovoltaic field, opening a new chapter for energy conversion from solar power to electricity. Recently, the unique tool of high pressure has been applied to MHPs to optimize their physical properties and obtain an in-depth understanding of their structure–property relationships. High pressure studies on MHPs allow for the in situ and continuous tailoring of MHP structures and properties, which is not feasible using traditional chemical methods. More importantly, the underlying transition and engineering mechanisms, which are hidden at ambient conditions, are successfully revealed through high pressure treatment. In this review, we aim to comprehensively summarize the structure and property engineering of MHPs in the high pressure dimension. Systematic comparisons between MHP systems are expected to reveal the structure/property contributions of different components in MHPs. Our discussions on high pressure MHPs are expected to offer some new strategies for the further design and synthesis of MHPs with promising applications.Zewei QuanZewei Quan is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry at Southern University of Science and Technology in Shenzhen, China. He obtained his PhD in inorganic chemistry from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (with Prof. Jun Lin) in 2009. After that, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow and later a research scientist at the State University of New York at Binghamton with Prof. Jiye Fang (2009–2012). He then joined Los Alamos National Laboratory as Oppenheimer Fellow (2012–2015). His current research interests include solution-phase synthesis, self-assembly, and high-pressure behavior of nanoparticles and their applications.
1. Introduction
Solar energy, the most abundant exploitable resource on earth, has attracted tremendous attention as an environmentally friendly resource to satisfy the increasing global energy consumption.1–3 Developing a secure, clean and efficient technique for solar energy conversion (solar electricity or photovoltaic technology) is undoubtedly one of the most urgent and significant scientific/technical challenges in modern science and technology.4 Traditional photovoltaic devices mainly refer to wafer-based monocrystalline silicon solar cells, which currently dominate the device market. To reduce the manufacturing cost and optimize the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of photovoltaic devices, thin-film polycrystalline semiconductors (cadmium telluride, amorphous silicon, etc.),5 quantum dots (CdSe, InP, etc.)6 and dyes (crocetin, cosmos, etc.)7 have been developed for use in solar cells. Nevertheless, to date, considerable technique and material challenges remain in the further development of photovoltaic devices. Searching for proper photovoltaic materials to optimize the device performance has become one of the central tasks for the further exploration of energy conversion.
In recent years, a new class of materials, metal halide perovskites (MHPs), has emerged as the most promising light absorbers for next-generation solar cells, opening a new chapter of photovoltaic materials in energy conversion fields.8–10 MHPs are low-temperature solution processable without superfluous defects as in traditional semiconductors.11 Additionally, their unique and outstanding features of broad absorption ranges, high absorption coefficients, long charge carrier diffusion lengths, high defect tolerance, tunable band gaps and high charge carrier mobility are all beneficial for the PCE improvement of solar cells.12–14 Since Miyasaka et al. pioneered the utilization of MAPbI3 (MA+ = CH3NH3+) as a light sensitizer in solar cells and obtained 3.8% PCE, MHP photovoltaic devices have been rapidly promoted.15 In less than ten years, the highest certified efficiency of MHP solar cells has astoundingly exceeded 24%.16 This new technology has proven its potential to compete with traditional commercial solar cells.17 Furthermore, MHPs become one of the fastest advancing materials in both the fundamental and technique areas of the photovoltaic field.18–20
In photovoltaic devices, one advantage of MHPs is their multifunctional abilities that they can simultaneously act as excellent light capturers and great carrier conductors.21 MHPs are good at first absorbing light over a broad range and then separating charges to create electricity (photocurrent) after energy excitation. These properties are the basis of their excellent performance as absorber layers in solar cells. However, for some systems, intriguingly and counterintuitively, MHPs can also combine charges with low nonradioactive recombination rates and high colour purity (photoluminescence).18,22 Consequently, in addition to energy conversion and storage, the current MHP explorations have been expanded to other optical areas, including light-emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, semiconductor lasers, etc.23,24 For all these applications, device exploitation depends on deep insights into the fundamental properties and functional mechanisms of MHPs. Additionally, choosing an efficient tool to reveal the structure–property relationships therein, as well as engineering and optimizing the MHP properties for further applications, is also crucial.
Pressure, one of the three fundamental thermodynamic variables in physics, can directly alter the interatomic distance in crystal structures, simultaneously tuning the macroscopic properties therein.25–28 High pressure is considered a new dimension of material science that expands the assortment and properties of materials. For MHPs, high pressure generates diverse new structures and properties that are inaccessible under ambient conditions. High pressure treatment of MHPs not only engineers/optimizes the MHP properties but also reveals the underlying transition mechanisms and structural nature. Additionally, unlike traditional chemical engineering of MHPs, the high pressure technique allows for the continuous modification of MHP structures and properties as well as the in situ detection of their evolution. Such controllable tuning recently initiated explosive high pressure investigations on MHPs. Furthermore, the obtained structure–property relationships in high pressure MHP studies are of guiding significance for the further design, synthesis and application of materials.
In this review, we offer an overview of recent research activities that focus on the structures and properties of MHPs under high pressure. In this section, we intend to first introduce some basic knowledge of (1) MHP structures and properties: the structural nature of MHPs from three dimensional (3D) to two dimensional (2D) and zero dimensional (0D) and their outstanding performance at ambient conditions. Then, a brief introduction to (2) high pressure science and technology: the widely used high pressure techniques, including pressure generation equipment and characterization methods. The main section presents an overall description of the recent developments in (3) high pressure explorations of MHPs, including structure and property engineering. Last, a brief summary and some personal perspectives are given to provide an understanding of the unique capabilities of the high pressure technique for MHPs.
1.1 MHP structures and properties
Currently, the most promising and widely explored MHP systems are 3D lead (Pb)-based MHPs. However, the large-scale commercialization of these Pb-based MHPs still faces two challenges: Pb2+ toxicity, with concerns for the environment, and structural instability, which affect long-term use.29,30 Composition and valence tuning of MHPs bring about new opportunities to address these two issues. Instead of Pb, MHP derivatives with longer organic cations or more stable metal cations have been proposed for photovoltaic devices.14,31 The MHP family has been successfully expanded from traditional 3D perovskites to 2D, 1D and 0D perovskite variants, which exhibit diverse intriguing optical and electronic properties.32,33
The classical MHPs adopt typical 3D perovskite structures with the chemical formula of ABX3. The A-site is commonly occupied by monovalent organic cations of methylammonium (CH3NH3+, MA+) and formamidinium (CH(NH2)2+, FA+), as well as inorganic cations of cesium Cs+ and rubidium Rb+. The B cations include divalent Pb2+, tin (Sn2+) and germanium (Ge2+), and the X anions correspond to the halide ions of chlorine (Cl−), bromine (Br−), iodine (I−), or a mixture of them.34 In the typical 3D-cubic structures of MHPs (Fig. 1a), the B2+ cations localize at the body center of BX64+ octahedra. The highly symmetric 3D architecture is constructed by the corner-sharing of these octahedra with 180° B–X–B bond angles. In the voids of the BX64+ octahedral framework, the A cations are 12-fold cuboctahedrally coordinated by halide anions. The cubic phase is the ideal hypersymmetric perovskite structure of 3D MHPs. In some systems, the BX64+ octahedra are tilted, giving rise to lower symmetry pseudocubic networks with orthorhombic or tetragonal symmetry (Fig. 1b and c).32,35 To identify and predict the structural stabilization of 3D MHPs, the Goldschmidt tolerance factor t is calculated following the equation  where rA, rB, and rX represent the radii of A, B and X ions, respectively.36 In general, cubic MHP structures adopt a t factor between 0.9 and 1, and other 3D distorted MHP structures have a t factor in the range of 0.71 ≤ t ≤ 0.9. When the t factor is calculated to be out of these two ranges, the 3D MHPs collapse to structures of nonperovskite or perovskite variants.37
 Fig. 1  Some typical crystal structures of MHPs under ambient conditions. 3D MHP structures with (a) cubic, (b) orthorhombic and (c) tetragonal symmetry. (d) Crystal structures of double MHP variants with cubic symmetry. 2D MHP structures of (e and f) Ruddlesden–Popper structures with the formula (A′A)n+1BnX3n+1, A′An−1BnX3n+1 (n is the number of inorganic layers, with 1 ≤ n ≤ ∞), (g) A3B2X9, and (h) AB2X5. 0D structures of MHP variants: (i) dimer octahedral structure of A3B2X9 and (j and k) isolated octahedral structures of A2BX6 and A4BX6. 
Stoichiometry and component valence tuning of MHPs has introduced abundant perovskite derivatives with 3D or lower dimensional structures.31–33,37 One typical ABX3 perovskite variant is the 3D double MHPs of A2B+B3+X6, in which every pair of adjacent bivalent B2+ cations in A2B2X6 is replaced by one monovalent B+ cation and one trivalent B3+ cation, leading to the rock-salt arrangement of cations (Fig. 1d). Compared with traditional 3D Pb-based MHPs, double MHPs are more stable and environmentally friendly. Furthermore, numerous species of double MHPs can be obtained by employing different combinations of B+ and B3+ cations.38
In addition to 3D structures, MHP derivatives exhibit more diverse structures with lower dimensions. Here, we emphasize high pressure studies on 2D and 0D structures in perovskite derivatives. For 2D layered MHPs, three types of structures have been explored at high pressure. (1) When the A-site in ABX3 is occupied by long chain amines of A′, such as benzylammonium cations (BA+ = CH3(CH2)3NH3+) and guanidinium cations (GA+ = C(NH2)3+), the organic molecules tailor the 3D frameworks into layered Ruddlesden–Popper structures with the formula (A′A)n+1BnX3n+1, A′An−1BnX3n+1 (n is the number of inorganic layers, with 1 ≤ n ≤ ∞), etc. (Fig. 1e and f).25,39 (2) Corner-sharing octahedral structures of A3B23+X9 (Fig. 1g), such as MA3Bi2I9, are obtained by removing one-third of the B layers along the 〈111〉 direction of a hypothetical A3B3X6 perovskite structure.37 (3) MHP variants with the formula AB22+X5, for instance, CsPb2Br5, exhibit a sandwich structure consisting of intercalated A+ layers and [B2X5]− polyhedron layers. The polyhedron layers within the structures are constructed by alternating triangular prisms and two rectangular pyramids (Fig. 1h).40
For 0D perovskite variants, high pressure investigations have focused on two types of structures, dimer and isolated octahedral structures. (1) Dimer modifications. When the ionic radius of the A-site cation is sufficiently large, as in Cs3Bi2I9, instead of 2D variants, the A3B23+X9 compounds tend to crystallize in the 0D dimer phase with isolated face-sharing [B2X9]3− bioctahedra (Fig. 1i).41 (2) Isolated octahedral structures. The A2B4+X6 MHPs, such as Cs2SnX6, are constructed by isolated [BX6]2− octahedra, derived from the ABX3 perovskite structure by removing half of the B-site cations. The remaining B-site cations and vacancies together form a rock-salt arrangement, which is termed as “vacancy ordered double perovskite” (Fig. 1j).39 In addition, A4B2+X6 materials (Cs4PbBr6, etc.) also adopt 0D isolated octahedral structures in which all the [BX6]4− octahedra are completely decoupled in all dimensions without any shared halide ions (Fig. 1k).42
From 3D to 0D structures, MHP materials feature an immense range of structure engineering, offering diverse possibilities for their further photovoltaic applications. The 3D cubic MHPs possess the most ideal structures for photovoltaic applications. The octahedra in cubic structure are arranged with high symmetry without tilting, which benefits the charge transfer within the structures. Additionally, the smaller effective masses and wide electronic bands in some traditional Pb- and Sn-based cubic MHPs are also highly desirable for photovoltaic applications.40 For instance, the 3D CsPbBr3 NPs with good electronic dimensionality not only improve the charge transport and PCE of perovskite solar cells but also improve the stability of the solar cells through a passivation layer of Cs1−yMAyPbI3−xBrx on top of the cell (Fig. 2a). For 2D MHP variants, the interlayer spaces within the structure act as natural multiple quantum barriers to confine charge transfer in semiconducting perovskite wells. This unique structure exhibit distinct optical and electronic properties compared with the 3D equivalent. For example, the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 solar cell reaches a peak PCE of 12.52% with no hysteresis and exhibits greatly improved stability (Fig. 2b and c). The device based on (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 exhibits greater tolerance to 65% relative humidity than 3D equivalents, and the efficiency remains at 60% for over two weeks under illumination.44 Furthermore, a small addition of 2D CsPb2Br5 to 3D CsPbBr3 absorber films considerably optimizes the surface pagination with prolonged carrier lifetime. The fabricated device shows outstanding stability and a higher PCE (6.81%) than pure CsPbBr3 solar cells (Fig. 2d).45 However, for 0D and double MHP derivatives, the intrinsic structural nature and the band gap properties limit their photovoltaic performance in current applications.46 Taking Cs3Bi2I9 and Cs2SnI6 as examples, the highest PCEs in solar cells using these materials only reach 2.1% (with Br substitution) and 3.2%, respectively (Fig. 2e).47,48 The isolated building blocks in 0D MHP derivatives give rise to a limited electronic dimensionality with low connectivity of the electronic orbitals, which greatly hinders the photovoltaic performance. Additionally, for 3D double MHPs of A2B+B3+X6, the atomic orbital mismatch between B+ and B3+ cations and the highly ionic metal cations introduce electronic isolation within the structure. An inverted planar heterojunction solar cell device based on Cs2AgBiBr6 has a PCE of only 2.23% but exhibits high stability with no hysteresis.49 Nevertheless, the considerably stable structures of 0D and 3D double MHPs are attractive for long-term use in MHP photovoltaic devices.
 Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of perovskite solar cells with and without 2% CsPbBr3. Adapted from ref. 43. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b and c) J–V curves and humidity stability tests of a (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 device. The inset shows the corresponding crystal structures. Reproduced from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) The CsPbBr3–CsPb2Br5 composite film fabrication process and the phase transformation mechanism. J–V characteristics of the device under both reverse and forward scan directions. Reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) J–V curves of assembled Cs3Bi2I9 solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
As discussed above, although MHPs exhibit a variety of intriguing properties and functions, the PCEs of their photovoltaic devices are still nowhere near the solar cell efficiency demand. Rational improvement of MHPs requires an in-depth understanding of the associated structural nature and structure–property relationships. Such explorations should cover the entire MHP field from traditional Pb-based MHPs to newly emerged MHP derivatives. This review introduces the new dimension of high pressure into the structure and property engineering of these functional MHPs. The engineered properties and underlying structural origins at high pressure are expected to offer some new strategies for the further development of MHPs. In the next section of this review, we provide a brief description of high pressure science and technology.
1.2 High pressure science and technology
Compared with the other two basic parameters of temperature and composition, pressure seems to be more efficient in generating new structures and properties of materials. At high pressure, homogenous lattice contraction is accompanied by increased electron density and enhanced repulsive potential within materials. To balance the increased Gibbs free energy, both the crystalline and electronic structures are accordingly adjusted or reconstructed, giving rise to numerous novel phenomena at high pressure.38,50–54 For example, high pressure can convert soft graphite (sp2 C–C bonding) into hard diamond (sp3 C–C bonding) by overcoming the activation barrier between these two phases.55 Each material is theoretically proposed to undergo several phase transitions during compression to several megabars.26 For high pressure application, to probe the detailed structure and property evolution with increasing pressure, the static high pressure technique has been developed, which has significantly accelerated the advancement of high pressure science.
The static high pressure technique involves isothermal compression, and the compression process is slow enough for heat transfer to occur between the compressed material and the external environment. Thus, this technique allows for continuous pressurization of the material, revealing in situ structure and property information during the compression process. The high pressure experiments included in this review were all performed under static high pressure conditions with diamond anvil cell (DAC) equipment.56,57 The principle of a DAC is opposite extrusion, in which external force is applied on the large faces of the two opposed brilliant-cut diamond anvils. A high pressure environment is generated in the sample chamber (drilled in the center of a preindented metallic gasket) between the small flat-parallel face of the diamonds (Fig. 3a). To measure the pressure value, one or several ruby balls should be placed in the sample holder to detect the position of the R1 emission peak during experiments. The standard ruby fluorescence technique is one of the most commonly used methods for pressure calibration (Fig. 3b).58 Additionally, pressure-transmitting medium (PTM) is also added into the sample chamber during compression. PTM is commonly used to maintain the hydrostatic pressure condition, avoiding deviatoric stress on the samples. The PTM materials related to this review and their capabilities to maintain the hydrostatic pressure condition in high pressure experiments are listed in Fig. 3c.59
 Fig. 3  (a) Configuration of DAC equipment. (b) Ruby fluorescence for pressure measurement. (c) The pressure-transmitting media commonly used in high pressure experiments. (d) Integration of commonly used optical and electronic techniques with DAC. 
The light transparency of the diamonds in a DAC allows for the in situ detection of material structures and properties with increasing pressure (Fig. 3d).28 To date, DAC equipment has been integrated with diverse optical and electronic probes, including synchrotron or in-lab techniques, to study the structure and property evolution at high pressure. Therefore, high pressure science has been greatly extended from the geology and physics fields to numerous interdisciplines, such as high pressure chemistry, high pressure material science and high pressure biology. Among the current high pressure detection techniques for MHP materials, synchrotron X-ray diffraction measurements of polycrystalline and powdered MHPs offer the most straightforward information on the long–range crystal structure evolution. In-lab high pressure Raman spectroscopy characterizes the local structural responses with increasing pressure. Additionally, other techniques, including photoluminescence, lifetime and absorption spectroscopy, alternating-current impedance spectroscopy and four-point probe resistance and photocurrent measurements, have all been applied to the in situ detection of the high pressure evolution of optical, electrical, and optoelectronic properties of MHPs.
1.3 Development of high pressure studies on MHPs
Before 2009, only a few high pressure studies had been performed on the fundamental physics, structure and preliminary optical properties of MHPs. The two earliest high pressure investigations on MHPs focused on determining the phase boundaries of MAPbX3 in P–T phase diagrams below 1 GPa using differential thermal analysis (DTA) and dielectric constant measurements.60 Later, in 2003, Lee et al. first reported the different high pressure transition sequences of MASnI3 (Pmm → Im → Immm → amorphization) and FASnI3 (Pmm → Im → I4/mmm → amorphization) using the synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction technique up to 5.2 GPa.61 In 2007, the high pressure neutron diffraction technique was first applied to observe the structural evolution of the Pb-based MHPs of MAPbBr3 (Pmm → Im) below 3 GPa.62 High pressure optical investigations were also conducted on the 3D MHPs of CsGeX3 and 2D MHP variants of (C8H17NH3)2PbI4, demonstrating the pressure-induced shifts of their band edges and PL peak positions, respectively.63,64 These preliminary experimental results are still insufficient to connect the structure and property behaviours.
The rebirth and breakthrough of high pressure MHP instigations began in 2015.65,66 In the past four years, high pressure studies of MHPs have gradually expanded from traditional 3D MHPs (ABX3) to MHP derivatives with double halide perovskite (A2B+B3+X6), 2D (AB2X5, A2BX4 and A3B2X9) and 0D (A2BX6, A3B2X9 and A4BX6) structures.60,67 Nanosized MHPs have also been taken into consideration, exhibiting different high pressure responses compared to their bulk counterparts.68
High pressure effects on MHPs include two mechanisms: structure engineering and property tuning. The microstructure plays a fundamental role in the macroscopic properties of MHPs. Under high pressure, lattice contractions, phase transitions, and even structural amorphization in MHPs can introduce new optical and electronic properties. Taking ABX3 systems as an example, the decrease of the B–X bond length in ABX3 under high pressure could promote orbital coupling and further influence the photoresponse and electrical response, such as the band gap value, valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) positions and charge carrier transport. These properties are of particular importance for MHP performance in solar cells. Therefore, in this review, we intend to introduce the high pressure effects on MHPs from two aspects: structure engineering (Section 2) and property tuning (Section 3). By combining these two aspects together, the underlying structural nature, kinetic mechanisms and structure–property relationships of MHPs are expected to be uncovered, which will be of guiding significance for the further development of MHP materials.
2. High pressure structure engineering of MHPs
High pressure MHP structures are mainly determined by means of the powder/single crystal angle-dispersive synchrotron X-ray diffraction (PXRD/SCXRD) techniques, which combine the DAC technique and a synchrotron X-ray source together.28 The most intuitive and straightforward effect of an external force on MHPs is structural contraction. Under initial compression, MHPs maintain their ambient phase with gradually decreasing atomic distances. With continuous contraction, the increased free energy results in instability of the ambient structures, leading to the formation of new high pressure phases. Finally, the periodic structures could be destroyed upon sufficient compression. MHPs become amorphous above critical pressures.
For phase transitions, the most common mechanism in MHPs is tilting and distortion of inorganic polyhedra. In this section, we will review the high pressure structure engineering of MHPs and compare the structural behaviours of different systems, revealing the structure contributions of A-, B- and X- site ions in 3D ABX3 MHPs and the different structural properties from 3D to 2D and 0D architectures, as well as from bulk to nanomaterials.
2.1 Structure engineering of 3D ABX3 MHPs
Bulk ABX3 materials are the prototypes of MHP systems with traditional 3D perovskite structures. Among these materials, MAPbBr3 is one of most typical compounds and has been widely investigated under both ambient and high pressure conditions. We will take this system as the starting materials to review the structural responses of 3D MHPs, especially to compare the individual contributions of A-, B- and X-site ions to the structural evolution at high pressure (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (a) High pressure transition sequences of typical 3D MHPs. (b) Schematic of different A, B, and X combinations in 3D MHPs. 

2.1.1 High pressure MAPbBr3: starting material for comparison. 
The ambient structure of MAPbBr3 is assigned as an ideal perovskite cubic structure with Pmm symmetry, in which the vertex-sharing PbBr6 octahedra are linearly connected with 180° Pb–Br–Pb bond angles with the Glazer notation of a0a0a0 (Fig. 5).61 The dynamic disordered MA molecules are located in the 3D channels and hydrogen bonded to the inorganic framework. Wang et al. first reported the structural evolution of MAPbBr3 under high pressure based on PXRD experiments with nonhydrostatic pressure conditions (no PTM was applied).69 MAPbBr3 follows the transition sequence of cubic Pmm → cubic Im → orthorhombic Pnma → amorphous at critical pressures of 0.4 GPa, 1.8 GPa, and 2.4 GPa, respectively (Fig. 4a and 5). Both phase transitions of MAPbBr3 are dominated by tilting and distortion of the PbBr6 octahedra (with the Glazer notation of a+a+a+ for Im and a+b−b− for Pnma, Fig. 5). It should be noted that the high pressure phase of cubic Im MAPbBr3 is more easily compressed than its ambient phase of cubic Pmm. This unconscionable phenomenon arises from the different contraction mechanisms in these two structures. The compression of the ambient phase is achieved through linear Pb–Br bond shrinkage. However, the volume decrease of the high pressure phase occurs through a combination of bond length contraction and octahedral tilting.70 The octahedral tilting can promote the contraction of the entire architecture at high pressure. Moreover, for the organic MA cations, Raman and infrared vibrational experiments revealed that the dynamically disordered MA molecules in the ambient phase are locked as static ordered molecules in the phase transitions, driven by the enhanced hydrogen bonds at high pressure.71
 Fig. 5  Some typical structures of MHPs at high pressure with (a) tetragonal, (b and d) cubic, and (c, e and f) orthorhombic crystal systems. 
This transition sequence and the critical pressures of MAPbBr3 have been further confirmed by other groups through high pressure experiments with different pressure conditions (without or with silicon oil as the PTM).72,73 Additionally, Zhang et al. reported another transition sequence under hydrostatic pressure conditions (with He as the PTM) in the absence of further distortion of the orthorhombic phase (Fig. 4a).73 MAPbBr3 follows the phase transitions of cubic Pmm → cubic Im → isostructural cubic Im with increased transition pressures of 0.9 and 2.7 GPa, respectively (Fig. 4 and 5). In another high pressure study of MAPbBr3 structures with He as the PTM, the second phase transition to the isostructural cubic phase was replaced by structural amorphization (Fig. 4a).70 Nevertheless, pressure-induced tilting and distortion of octahedra have been proven to incur the successive phase transitions of MAPbBr3 to lower symmetry. Furthermore, the presence of a deviatoric stress within the DAC can promote the distortion of MAPbBr3, with lower transition pressures and lower symmetry structures exhibited at high pressure.


2.1.2 High pressure MAPbI3: the influence of X-site halide ions. 
When the X-site Br− ions in MAPbBr3 are replaced by I−, the ambient structure of MAPbI3 deviates from the ideal cubic perovskite structure to accommodate the increased radius of the iodide ions. Structural twinning complicates the space group determination in that the ambient phase of MAPbI3 has been assigned to tetragonal I4cm (ref. 74) and I4/mcm (ref. 72 and 75–77) as well as to the orthorhombic Fmmm (ref. 69) symmetry in different studies (Fig. 4 and 5). Compared with the Pmm structure, the octahedra in the I4/mcm phase are tilted about the c axis with the Glazer notation of a0a0c−.
High pressure structural determination of MAPbI3 is much more complex than that of MAPbBr3. Similar critical pressures have been obtained in different studies.70,74–78 With increasing pressure, the ambient structure of MAPbI3 converts to the first high pressure phase at ∼0.3 GPa with octahedral tilting in all lattice axis directions. This first high pressure phase has been assigned as either the orthorhombic Imm2 (ref. 74 and 75) or cubic Im (ref. 60, 76 and 77) structure by several different groups. Upon further compression, Jiang et al. observed another phase transition in PXRD experiments to the second high pressure phase of the orthorhombic Immm structure at 2.7 GPa.76 The structure of the Immm polymorph is similar to that of Im, with only slightly different lattice parameters and more obvious distortion and tilting of inorganic components. Therefore, Szafrański et al. assigned this variation as an isostructural phase transition to cubic Im through the SCXRD technique.77
Compared with the structural responses of MAPbBr3, the transition pressures and mechanisms of MAPbI3 under similar pressure conditions are not greatly changed (Fig. 4). To ensure the accurate structural contribution of X-site halide ions, Jaffe et al. compared the bulk modulus (K0) between MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3. The parameter K0 is calculated through fitting of the second-order Birch–Murnaghan EOS to P–V data.69 For MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3, the K0 values of the first high pressure phase are 12(1) GPa and 14.9(6) GPa, respectively, indicating the lower compressibility of MAPbI3. In addition, the K0 of MAPbBr1.8I1.2 is 12.6(6) GPa, which is much smaller than the value of 17.2(2) GPa for MAPbBr0.6I2.4. I− substitution of Br− ions in 3D ABX3 MHPs has also been suggested to reduce the lattice compressibility of the materials. That is, X-site halide ions are capable of influencing the material compressibility at high pressure.


2.1.3 High pressure FAPbX3 and CsPbX3: the influence of A-site cations. 
Although A-site cations do not play a dominant role in the phase transitions of 3D MHPs, they can influence the structural responses at high pressure, including the lattice parameters, transition pressures, tilting magnitude, etc. In addition to MA+ cations, two additional cations of FA+ (formamidinium, CH(NH2)2+) and Cs+ (cesium) are also commonly used as A-site ions in 3D APbX3. Under ambient conditions, FAPbBr3 adopts the same crystalline structure as MAPbBr3, the cubic Pmm phase.79 For the perovskite phase of FAPbI3, two assignments of trigonal P3m1 (ref. 50) and cubic Pmm (ref. 81–83) have been used in high pressure studies. In addition, for inorganic CsPbX3 MHPs, the ambient perovskite structure of CsPbBr3 is distorted to orthorhombic systems with Pbnm space groups.84 The 3D perovskite structure of bulk CsPbI3 is not stable under ambient conditions, and high pressure CsPbI3 investigations have only been realized for nanomaterials, which will be discussed in the following section.85
At high pressure, FAPbBr3 exhibits a transition sequence similar to MAPbBr3: cubic Pmm → cubic Im → orthorhombic Pnma → amorphous (Fig. 4 and 5). However, under similar pressure conditions with silicon oil as the PTM, the two transition pressures of FAPbBr3 (0.5 GPa and 2.2 GPa) are slightly higher than those of MAPbBr3 (0.4 GPa and 1.7 GPa).79 The more stable nature of the FAPbBr3 structure may arise from two reasons. First, the FA+ cation possesses a greater steric size than MA+, giving rise to more space filling in FAPbBr3 voids. This compact structure is beneficial for structural stabilization, as evidenced by the larger Goldschmidt tolerance factor t (0.84 for MAPbBr3 and 0.90 for FAPbBr3).86 Second, the FA+ cation offers more and stronger N–H⋯Br hydrogen bonds between inorganic and organic components, which also contributes to architecture stabilization.87
An increase of the transition pressure is also observed in FAPbI3. During compression, two distinct transition sequences are reported for FAPbI3. In PXRD experiments, Jiang et al. recently observed the structural transition sequence for perovskite phase FAPbI3 of cubic Pmm → tetragonal P4/mbm → cubic Im → amorphous up to 6.6 GPa.83 The two phase transitions are accomplished by a0a0c+ rotation along the [001] direction and a+a+a+ tilting of the inorganic octahedra. The corresponding two phase transition pressures of 0.5 GPa and 3.1 GPa are also higher than those of MAPbI3 (0.3 GPa and 2.6 GPa) under similar experimental conditions. Although this transition sequence has been partially confirmed by another group through SCXRD measurements, Wang et al. obtained another transition path using neon as the PTM in PXRD experiments (Fig. 4).81 Such inconsistency may arise from the different starting samples and experimental procedures.
For the all-inorganic 3D MHP of CsPbBr3, a more dramatic increase is observed in its transition pressures. The ambient structure of CsPbBr3 undergoes only one isostructural phase transition at high pressure.84 The ambient structure of CsPbBr3 deviates from the ideal cubic structure, and the contraction of the ambient Pbnm phase involves both the shrinking of Pb–Br bonds and the decrease of the Pb–Br–Pb bond angle, accelerating the octahedral rotation during structural variations. Unlike hybrid ABX3 MHPs, no further distortion of the tetragonal phase is observed in CsPbBr3 up to 20 GPa. Additionally, the large K0 (18.1 GPa) of CsPbBr3 demonstrates its rigid and stable structure at high pressure.
As discussed above, the contributions of A-site cations to the structural stabilities of these APbX3 3D MHP structures are Cs+ > FA+ > MA+. This phenomenon not only results from the ionic nature of A cations but also is ascribed to the different interactions between A-site cations and BX3− frameworks. From the structural viewpoint, inorganic CsPbBr3 possesses the most stable structure, which seems to be beneficial for its photovoltaic applications. Nevertheless, the flexible organic cations of MAPbBr3 and FAPbBr3 are capable of promoting octahedral tilting at high pressure, thus introducing some unique high pressure properties in MHPs. This effect will be discussed in detail in Section 3.


2.1.4 High pressure MASnI3: the influence of B-site cations. 
Due to the toxicity concerns regarding Pb, Pb-free MHPs are the next big thing in the photovoltaic field. MASnI3 is a typical Pb-free MHP with a 3D ABX3 structure. Its ambient structure belongs to the tetragonal P4mm space group with tilted SnI3− octahedra along the a axis.88 With increasing pressure, MASnI3 transforms to the orthorhombic Pnma phase at 0.7 GPa and then gradually becomes amorphous above 3 GPa (Fig. 4 and 5).88 This pressure-induced structural variation from tetragonal to orthorhombic involves the tilting of SnI64− octahedra, as well as the deformation and movement of organic MA+ cations. The structure of MASnI3 appears to be more stable than that of MAPbI3, as evidenced by its higher transition pressures. Nevertheless, the obtained bulk modulus of MASnI3 (12.3 GPa) is smaller than the value of 14.9 GPa for MAPbI3, implying the higher compressibility of MASnI3. This contradiction may arise from the different methods used in high pressure experiments and data processing.
To date, no convincing evidence of the structure contribution of B-site cations in ABX3 MHPs has been presented. However, the modulation of B-site cations with different valences undoubtedly significantly influences the ambient crystalline structures of MHPs, ranging from 3D to 0D structures.

2.2 Structure engineering of double MHPs
High pressure double MHP exploration is limited to our explorations of Cs2AgBiBr6.89 Under ambient conditions, the Cs2AgBiBr6 architecture is constructed by alternating AgBr65− and BiBr63− octahedra with cubic Fmm symmetry (Fig. 1d). During compression, the octahedra are compressed in three dimensions with gradually shortening Ag–Br and Bi–Br bonds. At 3.1 GPa, we observed the phase transition of Cs2AgBiBr6 (Fig. 6). Further Rietveld refinements of diffraction patterns indicate that the phase transition is accompanied by tilting and distortion of the octahedra. We assigned the high pressure phase of Cs2AgBiBr6 to the tetragonal I4/m space group, and this structure is further distorted to the amorphous phase above 6.5 GPa. In 3D ABX3 MHPs, the octahedral tilting during the phase transitions occurs in three dimensions. However, the octahedral tilting in Cs2AgBiBr6 only occurs in the ab plane, where the Bi–Br–Ag bonds decrease to 166.4° along the a and b axes but remain 180° along the c axis. Such minimized distortion of Cs2AgBiBr6 is beneficial for some new phenomena at high pressure, which will be discussed in Section 3.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) Rietveld refinements of diffraction patterns collected at 0.6 GPa and 4.5 GPa. The inset shows the corresponding crystal structure. (c and d) Evolution of lattice constants and lattice volume at high pressure. (e) Lengths of Bi–Br and Ag–Br bonds as a function of pressure. All panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
As seen, double MHP of Cs2AgBiBr6 is more rigid than 3D inorganic/hybrid MHPs, exhibiting much higher transition pressures. Further explorations of double MHPs are still needed to obtain an accurate comparison of their high pressure stabilities. Our current high pressure studies have proven that octahedral centres (species of components) in 3D MHPs can affect their structural evolution at high pressure.
2.3 Structure engineering of 2D MHPs
Compared with 3D structures, the 2D layered structures exhibit additional unique behaviors at high pressure, including more flexible interlayer compression with anisotropic compressibility, more complex high pressure structural evolution, etc.90 When the A-site in ABX3 is occupied by long chain amines, the 3D frameworks are tailored into 2D layered hybrid MHPs, which are built from alternating inorganic metal halide octahedral and organic molecular lamellar structures.31 The complex molecular conformation of organic cations provides greater degrees of structural freedom, and performing high pressure structure investigations is more challenging. Nevertheless, 2D hybrid MHPs possess considerable structural stability to moisture and unique excitonic quantum confinement at ambient conditions, which has inspired their explorations at high pressure.32 The bulk 2D MHPs in high pressure studies can be classified into two categories: hybrid Pb-based MHPs with Ruddlesden–Popper structures and Pb-free A3B23+X9 MHPs with layered structures.
Recently, Yin et al. successfully resolved the complete structural evolution of BA2PbI4 (Fig. 7a and b).91 Ambient BA2PbI4 adopts the simplest orthorhombic Pbca structure in the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnX3n+1 class with n = 1, which is constructed by PbI42− inorganic sheets and interdigitated bilayers of BA cations (Fig. 7). At only 0.1 GPa, BA2PbI4 undergoes an isostructural phase transition with octahedral tilting in the ab plane and a varied organic molecular configuration. At 1.6 GPa, another new monoclinic P21/a phase appears, and the transition process lasts to 5.0 GPa. The second phase transition is ascribed to b/2 adjustment between every second layer with an eclipsed arrangement of the adjacent inorganic layers.
 Fig. 7  (a) Selected diffraction signals of XRD peaks of BA2PbI4 at high pressure. (b) Schematic illustrations of three crystal structures of BA2PbI4 under high pressure. (c) High pressure diffraction signals of MA3Bi2I9. (d) High pressure evolution of lattice parameters of MA3Bi2I9. (e) Crystal structures throughout the phase transitions of MA3Bi2I9. (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c–e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
With larger n parameter, the accurate assignment of high pressure phases becomes more difficult. When n = 2, the ambient structure of (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7 is constructed by two sublayer inorganic sheets with corner-sharing PbI64− octahedra, and interdigitating bilayers of bulky BA+ spacer cations are inserted between the inorganic sheets. Liu et al. investigated the anisotropic contraction phenomenon in (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7, revealing that the layer-to-layer compression of organic cations dominates the structural contraction below ∼12 GPa. However, interlayer compression within inorganic sheets becomes dominant with further compression to 42.5 GPa.92 Such obvious anisotropic contraction of 2D MHPs arises from the soft nature of organic cations. Moreover, with increasing n parameter, the greater degrees of structural freedom make the periodically ordered (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 structures become more easily disordered at high pressure. The critical pressures for the structural amorphization gradually decrease from 8 GPa to 4.5 GPa and 2.4 GPa for BA2PbI4, (BA)2(MA)3Pb2I10 and (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13.93
In addition to the Ruddlesden–Popper phases, our group has explored the high pressure structure behaviors of the 2D hybrid MHPs of MA3Bi2Br9, for which anisotropic compressibility has also been observed. The unique geometry of puckered layers and organic cations in MA3Bi2Br9 allows for the observation of the distinct structural contributions of inorganic and organic components, respectively.94 As shown in Fig. 7c–e, the interlayer direction along the c axis in MA3Bi2Br9 is much more compressible than the intralayer directions along the a and b axes. This phenomenon mainly occurs because of the relatively weak interactions between the inorganic layers. At 4.3 GPa, the trigonal phase of MA3Bi2Br9 transforms to the monoclinic phase with distortion and tilting of the octahedra in three dimensions. In the phase transition, organic cations are not obviously modulated, as evidenced by the unchanged cation-related Raman vibrations. Therefore, the inorganic component of MA3Bi2Br9 dominates the phase transition of the crystalline structure at high pressure. Through comparison with the high pressure Cs3Bi2Br9 structure, the organic component of MA+ is proven to be able to promote the structural flexibility of MA3Bi2Br9 (higher compressibility and lower transition pressures). The unique structural nature of hybrid 2D MHPs triggers some novel structural responses at high pressure. The anisotropic contractions in 2D MHPs cannot be achieved in 3D MHPs and are expected to offer some new properties at high pressure.
2.4 Structure engineering of 0D MHPs
High pressure investigations of 0D bulk MHPs are still in the initial stage. Only two systems of Cs3Bi2I9 and Cs2SnX6, with the typical dimer and isolated octahedral structures, have been studied at high pressure. Under ambient conditions, the 0D structure of Cs3Bi2I9 is composed of isolated face-sharing Bi2I93− dimers, among which the Cs+ cations occupy the center of I− anions with cuboctahedral symmetry.95 The 0D Cs2SnX6 perovskite structure contains isolated [SnX6]2− octahedra, which are surrounded by Cs atoms in regular 12-fold coordination with X atoms.96,97
At high pressure, the ambient phase of Cs3Bi2I9 remains stable up to 13.8 GPa and becomes amorphous with further compression (Fig. 8a–c). Both the amorphization pressure and K0 parameter (23.7 GPa) of Cs3Bi2I9 are substantially higher than those of the most stable 3D MHP of CsPbBr3. This result suggests a more rigid and stable structural nature of high pressure Cs3Bi2I9. Additionally, anisotropic contraction is also observed in Cs3Bi2I9, which originates from the directionally arranged Bi2I93+ dimers within the structure. Across the shared octahedral face, the greater flexibility of the bendable bridging Bi–I–Bi bonds leads to the nonlinear contraction and larger compressibility of the c axis (Fig. 8d). Such anisotropic contraction is not observed in Cs2SnX6 materials owing to their structural nature of isolated octahedral arrangements. However, compared with 3D and 2D MHPs, the 0D structure Cs2SnX6 systems exhibit much higher transition pressures during compression.
 Fig. 8  (a–c) High pressure XRD patterns of Cs3Bi2I9 and corresponding lattice parameter evolution as a function of pressure. (d) Inorganic framework of [Bi2I9]3− bioctahedra, illustrating the Bi–I bond and the Bi–I–Bi angle. All panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
As observed, 0D inorganic MHPs are considerably stable at high pressure. Comparing the different MHP systems, the high pressure structure stability sequence of MHPs seems to be 0D inorganic MHPs > 3D inorganic MHPs > 3D hybrid MHPs > 2D hybrid MHPs. Thus, the intrinsic structures of MHPs, including the structure dimensions, octahedral center metals, and length of organic cations, all play significant roles in the structural evolution at high pressure. In addition to these factors, recent MHP investigations have also demonstrated that the crystal size can also influence the structural behavior at high pressure, i.e., nanosize effects in high pressure MHPs. Additionally, some metastable phase in bulk MHPs can also be achieved in nanoscale dimension. This fact thus inspired high pressure investigations on these nanoscale MHP materials.
2.5 Nanosize effects on high pressure MHP structures
The multiple domains in bulk MHPs possess stacking faults, twins, and defects, which not only complicate the structural assignment at high pressure but also affect the kinetics of the phase transitions. To circumvent these problems, nanosized MHPs have been utilized for high pressure investigations as “defect-free” samples without interior structural defects. Furthermore, the size effects of nanomaterials can introduce some additional interesting structural phenomena at high pressure, such as enhanced structural stability and morphology modulation.
For the pressure-induced crystalline phase transitions in nanomaterials, the critical pressures could be slightly higher than those in their bulk counterpart. With the size decreasing from bulk to ∼10 nm diameter nanocrystals, the transition pressures of MAPbBr3 are increased by ∼0.3 GPa and ∼0.7 GPa for the first and second phase transitions, respectively.98 The increased surface energy of nanosized MAPbBr3 enhances the energy barrier between the structures such that the structural stability is improved at high pressure.99–101 However, the size-dependent increase of the transition pressure is not obvious in nano-MHPs. In the absence of interior defects, different transition sequences could be achieved in nano-MHPs. For example, the transition path of FAPbI3 changes from cubic → orthorhombic → orthorhombic/cubic (bulk materials) to cubic → cubic → amorphous (19.0 diameter nanocube) with size reduction.102 The second and third phase transitions to more distorted structures are not observed in nano-MHPs. A similar phenomenon can also be observed in nano-MAPbI3.103
Another factor that may affect the crystalline structural responses of MHPs is the assembly of nanocrystals. Colloidal CsPbBr3 nanocrystals (orthorhombic phase nanocubes 11.7 nm in diameter) undergo an isostructural phase transition at 1.2 GPa.104 However, for the assembled CsPbBr3 superlattice structures (orthorhombic phase with little cubic phase, nanocubes 10 nm in diameter), this phase transition is replaced by structural distortion to the tetragonal phase at 5.1 GPa.105 The stability of orthorhombic CsPbBr3 is inferred to be altered in its superlattice structure. Additionally, the recovered phase of colloidal CsPbBr3 is orthorhombic, which is different from the recovered cubic phase in superlattice CsPbBr3. The underlying structural origins of these special phenomena still require further investigation.
Morphology modulation is a unique and attractive high pressure effect on nano-MHPs. Pressure treatment of MAPbBr3 to different peak pressures leads to different morphologies of the recovered sample (Fig. 9a).98 The original dispersive MAPbBr3 nanocrystals agglomerate into clusters after 0.75 GPa pressurization and comminute into ribbon-like nanoslices after 2.23 GPa treatment. Moreover, after high pressure compression to 6.5 and 11 GPa, the morphology of quenched MAPbBr3 nanocrystals transforms to imperfect nanoplates and homogeneous crystals, respectively. Such intriguing phenomena arise from the transition mechanism of MAPbBr3. Through the phase transition, the PbBr6− octahedra are tilted in opposite directions, which promotes the rupture of Pb–Br bonds and drives the spontaneous comminution of nanocrystals (Fig. 9b). Further structure amorphization above 6.5 GPa is responsible for the sintering and recrystallization of comminuted nanocrystals. In addition, Nagaoka et al. also observed high pressure effects on the CsPbBr3 superlattice morphology. The cubic assemblies of CsPbBr3 transform to lamellar nanoplates after 17.5 GPa treatment, resulting from the nonhydrostatic pressure conditions during compression.105
 Fig. 9  (a) Comminution and recrystallization of MAPbBr3 nanocrystals at high pressure. (b) Mechanism of MAPbBr3 deformation and comminution of nanocrystals into nanoslices. All panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
High pressure is an efficient tool to engineer the structures of MHPs, from 3D to 0D and from bulk to nanosized systems. On the one hand, numerous novel MHP structures are generated at high pressure. On the other hand, the underlying structural nature and properties of MHPs are revealed under compression. In addition to structure engineering, property engineering is another essential effect of high pressure application on MHPs, and these simultaneous modulations in high pressure MHPs offer some new strategies for the further design, synthesis and application of MHPs.
3. Property engineering of MHPs
The optoelectronic characteristics of MHP absorbers fundamentally determine the PCE of solar cells. Unlike in traditional semiconductor absorbers, photoexcitation in MHPs generates excitons instead of free carriers because of their higher electron–hole binding energy than thermal energy.106 The ultimate function of absorbers in solar cells is to produce a photovoltage-driven electrical current, which involves the sequential creation, transport and collection of charge carriers. For MHP absorbers, their electronic structures determine the spectral width of the solar absorption and the efficiency of photoexcitation, while the transport of charge carriers is significantly affected by the electrical properties of MHPs, such as the resistance and ion migration.
High pressure optoelectronic engineering of MHPs is realized through direct structural modulation. Some unique and intriguing insights into the intrinsic structure–property relationships in MHPs have been realized, which are of particular importance for the further development of MHP devices. In this review, the high pressure property engineering of MHPs is categorized into three parts: electronic band structure, electrical property and photocurrent engineering.
3.1 Electronic band structures: light absorption
The first step of solar energy conversion is light absorption, which is directly determined by the intrinsic electronic band structure of absorbers. During compression, the decreased atomic distances can change the electron distribution within the system and promote orbital interactions to accordingly alter the band structures. In high pressure studies, in situ optical measurements of photoluminescence and absorption spectra are combined with first-principles calculations to track and understand the band structure evolution of MHPs. Additionally, based on PXRD/SCXRD results, crystalline and band structure relationships are deduced at high pressure. High pressure effects on the MHP band structures involve modulation of the band gap energy, band distribution and band gap. In this section, we will review several examples showing these high pressure effects.
(1) Band gap energy (Eg). In MHP solar cells, the PCEs of the devices are significantly affected by the range of light absorption. According to Shockley–Queisser theory, the optimal Eg of absorbers is 1.34 eV, which offers the best solar absorption width and the 33.7% power conversion limit of single junction semiconductor-based solar cells.107 Nevertheless, the Eg values of MHPs are commonly greater than this ideal value of 1.34 eV. In traditional chemical methods, the substitutions of X− and B2+ ions in ABX3 MHPs enable band gap modulation; however, other detrimental properties are incurred, for instance, a shorter carrier lifetime.108 Thus, to achieve broader absorption of the solar spectrum and better photovoltaic performance, high pressure was recently proposed to modulate the Eg of MHPs to obtain a deep understanding of the structural origin of these variations. For ABX3 MHPs, the Eg parameter is determined by the orbital coupling between B and X ions. Both pressure-induced structural contractions with bond length shrinkage and phase transitions with octahedral tilting can regulate the coupling effects between ions and adjust the Eg value of MHPs.
Wang et al. demonstrated that high pressure band gap narrowing and broadening of MAPbBr3 are associated with Pb–Br bond contraction and breaking of long–range-order structures, respectively.69 To further explore the structural mechanism of band gap engineering, Kong et al. and Szafrański et al. systematically studied the band gap responses and associated structure mechanisms of MAPbI3 at high pressure (Fig. 10a).72,77 With increasing pressure to 0.3 GPa, the band gap of tetragonal MAPbI3 undergoes a 0.03 eV redshift (from 1.537 eV to 1.507 eV), followed by a “blue jump” during the phase transition.72 Upon further compression, the Eg value is slightly decreased up to the second phase transition pressure at ∼2.5 GPa and abruptly increases again up to ∼4 GPa.77 Based on the structural evolution of MAPbI3 (as mentioned in Section 2.1), the mechanism of such complex Eg behavior is inferred to be as follows. First, MAPbI3 adopts a direct band gap in which the VBM and CBM are determined by Br 4p and Pb 6p orbitals, respectively, without the contribution of MA cations. Below ∼0.3 GPa, Pb–I bond shortening is the dominant structural behavior, and the Pb–I approaching promote the orbital coupling between them, thus raising the VBM and narrowing the band gap. Then, during the phase transition, octahedral tilting is accompanied by decreased Pb–I–Pb bond angles and reduced Pb s and I p orbital coupling such that the band gap exhibits a discontinuous “blue jump” at the transition pressure. Finally, with the structural disorder between 2.5 and ∼4.0 GPa, the Pb–I orbital coupling is suppressed, leading to further band gap broadening. Above 6.0 GPa, the sufficient overlap of band edges in condensed MAPbI3 results in a rapidly decreased band gap value and even band gap closure at ∼60 GPa.109 The exact physical and electronic mechanisms of such phenomena remain to be elucidated.
 Fig. 10  (a) Pressure dependence of the optical energy gap of 3D MHPs of MAPbI3 and corresponding structure organs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77 (left) and ref. 72 (right). Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Pressure-dependent bandgap evolutions of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnX3n+1 and MAPbI3 (n = ∞). The band gap shows a decreasing trend as n increases. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. (c) Pressure dependence of the optical energy gap of (PEA)2PbBr4. The illustration shows the band gap at 1 atm. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. (d) Band gap evolution of the Cs2AgBiBr6 crystal at high pressure. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
The desirable initial Eg reductions in MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 only exist in a narrow pressure range (below ∼0.4 GPa) and have a small magnitude (∼0.03 eV) owing to the structural instability at high pressure. To achieve the optimal band gap energy of 1.34 eV, the typical MHPs of FAPbI3 have been chosen for high pressure studies. FAPbI3 has a relatively small band gap value (1.49 eV) at ambient conditions and minimized PbI64− octahedral tilting during high pressure transitions. Liu et al. observed continuous band gap narrowing in high pressure FAPbI3, in which the band gap energy reaches the ideal value of 1.34 eV at 2.1 GPa.80 The possible isostructural phase transition (without structure tilting) at 0.5 GPa leads to the continuous evolution of the band gap value. As the band gap energy decreases, the carrier lifetime of FAPbI3 is prolonged from 125 ns to 284 ns up to 1.7 GPa. The narrowed band gap introduces shallower defect-related trap states at high pressure, which is of considerable importance for the photovoltaic properties of MHPs. Then, the following question arises: how can we promote the initial narrowing of the band gap, thus optimizing Eg to the ideal vale of 1.34 eV?
The Eg value of typical MHPs is larger than the ideal value. High pressure can only narrow the band gap during initial compression without destruction of the structures. Phase transitions with structural distortion and octahedral tilting under high pressure cause undesirable band gap broadening under mild compression. A reasonable inference is that the more stable the structures of inorganic and nanosized MHPs are, the more obvious the initial Eg decrease. Band gap narrowing in these materials is indeed observed over a wider pressure range. For example, the Eg of Cs3Bi2I9 keeps decreasing from 2.06 eV to 1.12 eV up to 12 GPa without the influence of phase transitions.84 However, the rigid structure of these materials limits the contraction of chemical bonds. The Eg values of CsPbBr3 and the nanosized CsPbI3 and CsPb2Br5 MHPs are only decreased by ∼0.04 eV before the phase transitions at ∼1 GPa.84,110–112 However, long-term band gap narrowing is unexpectedly observed in 2D hybrid MHPs owing to their anisotropic structure. The dramatic layer-to-layer compression promotes significant overlap between element orbitals and enhances the coupling of the electron density function wave, which can raise the VBM to narrow the band gap.
As for the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnX3n+1 systems, the Eg of (BA)2PbI4 (n = 1) monotonically decreases after an increase of ∼0.09 eV from 1 atm to 0.55 GPa.93 This slight band gap broadening arises from the intrinsic lattice distortion within the ambient structure. The continuous band gap narrowing (2.38 eV to ∼1.7 eV) in (BA)2PbI4 is maintained to the critical pressure as high as ∼8.0 GPa, above which high atomic distortion and amorphization are observed. The pressure range and magnitude of the Eg decrease in (BA)2PbI4 are obviously broader and higher than those in 3D MHPs. Additionally, for high-n 2D MHPs, the higher degrees of structural freedom introduce lower phase transition and distortion pressures. The pressure inflection point between band gap narrowing and broadening gradually decreases with increasing n parameter (Fig. 10b). Furthermore, when the interlayer BA+ cations are replaced by other more complex organic cations, such as C6H5C2H4NH3+ (PEA+), the more flexible interlayer structure may introduce more sensitive and persistent band gap modulation at high pressure. Zhang et al. reported complex band gap engineering of (PEA)2PbBr4 as a function of pressure (Fig. 10c).113 At ambient pressure, the VBM and CBM of (PEA)2PbBr4 is determined by the Pb s and Br p states. Its 2.96 eV band gap value is too large for photovoltaic applications. With increasing pressure, an unprecedented Eg decrease of ∼0.5 eV is observed up to 12 GPa, resulting from the enhanced orbital overlap during the dramatic contraction of the organic cation layers. Between ∼12 and ∼15 GPa, distortion of Pb–Br inorganic layers causes a slight increase in the band gap. Upon further compression, the cooperative effects between interlayer bond contraction and lattice distortion lead to a second band gap narrowing at a moderate rate.
Although the band gap of MHPs can be optimized with increasing pressure, how to retain the ideal high pressure band gap value after releasing the pressure is still an open question. Several reports have focused on the band gap irreversibility in specific MHP systems, which indicates the possibility of pressure-induced band gap narrowing for applications. For example, after releasing pressure to ambient conditions, the Eg of a quenched sample of FAPbI3 is 42 meV lower than that before compression.80 This inspiring phenomenon arises from the structural plasticity of FAPbI3, in which the recovered structure adopts nonreversible lattice shrinkage with smaller lattice parameters. The band gap of the 2D hybrid MHPs of (GA)(MA)2Pb2I7 is also narrowed from 2.00 eV to 1.79 eV after pressure treatment with lattice parameter variation. The irreversible lattice compression could be associated with the incomplete recrystallization process during decompression. In addition, the preserved structure amorphization is another impact factor for the irreversible band gap. The retained amorphization in the quenched double MHP of Cs2AgBiBr6 brings about a ∼8.2% narrowed band gap after releasing the pressure (Fig. 10d).89
Based on the modulation of the bond length, bond angle and structure periodicity, delicate band gap tuning is realized at high pressure, promoting Eg to close to the ideal value of 1.34 eV. Such effects are crucial for improving the photovoltaic properties of MHP absorbers in solar cell devices. Furthermore, the band gap narrowing retained after high pressure treatment introduces great advantage for the further application of MHPs and proves that pressure is an alternative tool to develop rational MHP materials with superior properties.
(2) Band distribution and band gap type. The band distribution and band gap type are two important factors that determine the efficiency of exciton excitation. For MHPs, the band gap structures are greatly influenced by the nature of the inorganic octahedra. Pressure-induced lattice contraction is capable of promoting orbital overlap between elements and accordingly increasing the band dispersion. Ma et al. reported high pressure distortion effects on the band structures of the 0D MHP of nanosized Cs4PbBr6.114 Across the high pressure phase transition, structure distortion and symmetry breaking of PbBr64− octahedra introduce excited state structural reorganization, leading to the splitting of the excitonic peak in the absorption spectra. First-principles calculations indicate that in the presence of lattice distortion at high pressure, the electronic band structure becomes more distorted with stronger electron–phonon coupling and larger binding energy of self-trapped excitons. The splitting of the excited state increases the concentration of self-trapped states and improves the radiative recombination, leading to a persistent increase in the photoluminescence intensity (Fig. 11a and b). Although such a phenomenon is not desirable for photovoltaic applications in solar cells, it is of fundamental importance for light-emitting applications of MHPs.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) Configuration coordinate model of emission for the Cs4PbBr6 NCs at 1 atm and 4 GPa, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. (c) PDS data with an exponential Urbach tail (orange) and indirect (blue) and direct (green) bandgap. (d) Schematics of band structure, showing direct and indirect transitions and their change with pressure. (c and d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the band structure distortion, the positions of the VBM and CBM can also be varied by high pressure, directly affecting the band gap type of MHPs. MAPbI3 is generally considered a direct band gap semiconductor. However, Wang et al. noted that the long minority carrier lifetime and Urbach tail in the absorption spectrum of MAPbI3 are typical characteristics of indirect semiconductors.115 At high pressure, framework distortion and strong spin–orbit coupling in MAPbI3 introduce Rashba splitting of the conduction band. The external force reduces the electric field of Pb atoms and flattens the valence band with a large density of states, thus promoting the indirect-to-direct transition (Fig. 11c and d). A direct band gap is beneficial to the efficient excitation of excitons in MHPs. Such an indirect-to-direct band structure transition in high pressure MHP structures opens a new path to develop MHP materials with superior properties.
3.2 Electrical properties: charge carrier transport
After creating excitons, the primary function of MHP absorbers is to transport charge carriers, and the intrinsic electrical properties of MHPs are the fundamental features that affect their photovoltaic characteristics. The electrical properties of MHPs, such as the ion migration behavior and resistance, are sensitive to external conditions. These factors also greatly affect the long-term stability and PCE of photovoltaic devices.116,117 High pressure MHP studies on these electrical features are expected to reveal the underlying structure–property relationships. In current high pressure MHP studies, the in situ detection of electrical properties is performed via the sophisticated experimental techniques of the four-point probe method and alternating-current (AC) impedance spectroscopy. The four-point probe method is used to measure the bulk resistance (Rb) of materials, and AC impedance spectroscopy offers additional electronic information on the detailed electronic resistance (Re), ionic resistance (Ri), etc.
In MHP photovoltaic devices, the macroscopic property of the bulk resistance, which includes the total resistance of ion and electron migration, is the main and synergistic factor that characterizes the conductivity of MHPs. Decreasing the bulk resistance of MHPs is essential to improve the quality and performance of absorber layers in solar cells. Generally, the decreased atomic distance under high pressure is capable of promoting the conduction of inorganic semiconductors and even of metallizing the systems to low-temperature superconductors.95 The Rb parameters of MHPs exhibit different responses in different pressure ranges due to the complex structural behavior during contraction (Fig. 12a).
 Fig. 12  (a) Electrical resistance of the α- and δ-phases of FAPbI3 as a function of pressure. The α-phase of FAPbI3 exhibits the perovskite structure, and the δ-phase exhibits the nonperovskite structure. Adapted from ref. 81. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Arrhenius plot of the temperature dependence of the conductivity in (MA)PbI3 at 50 and 62 GPa. Adapted from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) The pressure-dependent resistance of MAPbBr3. Adapted from ref. 119. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Under slight compression, the Rb in MHPs first decreases, such as in the hybrid MHPs of MAPbX3,69,70 FAPbX3 (Fig. 12a)81 and MASnX3 (ref. 88) and inorganic MHP of CsPbBr3.118 This phenomenon arises from the increased density of the sample, as well as from the enhanced orbital overlap with broader VB and CB and smaller carrier effective masses, during the structural contraction. Under mild pressure conditions, an obvious increase in the bulk resistance appears, followed by a plateau region, as a result of octahedral tilting and structural distortion and amorphization during phase transitions. The detected maximum resistivities of MAPbBr3 and MASnI3 are ∼5 and ∼6 orders of magnitude higher than the ambient value.69,88 Under further compression, the MHP systems of Cs3Bi2I9, MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 exhibit dramatic reductions in the bulk resistance as a result of the sufficient structural contraction with significant orbital overlap. With sufficient compression, the MHPs can even be metallized. For example, the conductivity of MAPbI3 adopts semiconductor characteristics at 50 GPa, showing decreased resistance with increasing temperature.109 However, at 62 GPa, MAPbI3 is metallized, with higher resistance at higher temperatures (Fig. 12b). Such metallization is also observed in Cs3Bi2I9, but the critical metallization pressure of Cs3Bi2I9 (28 GPa) is obviously lower than that of MAPbI3.95
To obtain more detailed conductive properties, high pressure AC impedance spectroscopy has also been performed on MHPs. Yan et al. explored the high pressure evolution of the electrical properties and ionic-electronic transition of MAPbBr3 (Fig. 12c).119 Below 0.4 GPa, with bond shrinkage, Re and Ri gradually decrease, resulting from band gap narrowing for electronic excitation and decreasing hopping distance for ion migration, respectively. Above 0.4 GPa, the inorganic octahedra are tilted and disordered during the phase transitions, and the interstitial spaces become sufficiently small. The corresponding band gap broadening and closure of hopping channels leads to decreases of Re and Ri, respectively. In addition, below 3.3 GPa, Ri is nearly identical to Rb, and Re becomes significantly larger than Ri and Rb, indicating the predominant role of ionic conduction in this pressure range. Upon further compression, the main process changes to electronic conduction with larger Ri and smaller Re and Rb.
The ionic-to-electronic migration transition in MAPbBr3 is a unique phenomenon in current high pressure hybrid MHP research. With the replacement of halide ions, ionic conduction is not observed in MAPbI3 owing to the longer hopping distance and larger radius of I− ions.103 Additionally, with the larger organic cations in FAPbBr3, the migration of FA ions is limited, resulting from the enhanced hydrogen bonding between FA+ and the inorganic framework.118 Electronic conduction is the predominant process in FAPbBr3 at high pressure. Nevertheless, if the cations are substituted by the smaller inorganic cations of Cs+, mixed ionic-electronic conduction is observed below 2.3 GPa, followed by pure electronic conduction up to 2.9 GPa.120 These observations together demonstrate that ionic conduction is not ubiquitous in the high pressure phase of MHPs. Additionally, the ion migration properties of MHP absorbers can be adjusted by applying an external stress or introducing internal lattice distortion within the structures.
3.3 Photocurrent: ultimate function of MHPs
The photocurrent parameter reflects the combined light harvesting and charge carrier ability of MHPs, which is their ultimate function in photovoltaic devices. As mentioned above, the structural contraction of ambient phase MHPs can be accompanied by a narrowed band gap and a decreased resistivity. These optimized properties are expected to enhance the photoresponsiveness of MHPs at high pressure.
The photocurrents of MAPbBr3 (Fig. 13a and c), FAPbBr3 and CsPbBr3 (Fig. 13b) are obviously enhanced at high pressure.69,119,120 The sharp peaks in their photocurrent signals arise from the mixed electronic-ionic conduction nature of the materials. When the samples are exposed to light, numerous excitons are simultaneously generated, exhibited as the sharp increase in the photocurrent. However, with the gradual migration of electrons and ions, a new electric field is formed due to the accumulation of photoexcited ions at the contacts of the electrodes. To balance this built-in field, the photocurrent has to be gradually decreased at every moment of light irradiation. When the ionic conduction disappears at high pressure, such as in CsPbBr3 at 2.3 GPa, the sharp peaks in the photocurrent also vanish. Such sharp peaks and subtle variations in the photocurrents are not detected with the four-point probe experimental technique.69 The four-point probe technique allows for the detection of additional photocurrent responses at higher pressure ranges. The photocurrent of MAPbBr3 keeps decreasing up to 30 GPa as a result of structural amorphization, which suggests the potential application value of disordered crystalline MAPbBr3 as photovoltaic materials (Fig. 13c).69 Additionally, upon repeated pressurization, the enhanced structural stability in the second compression–decompression cycle contributes to the improved photovoltaic properties of FASnI3 at both 0.7 GPa and 24.6 GPa.88
 Fig. 13  High pressure photocurrent measurements of (a) MAPbBr3 and (b) CsPbBr3 with Mo film electrodes. (c) Photocurrent detection of MAPbBr3 with the four-point probe technique at high pressure. (a) is adapted from ref. 119. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) is reproduced from ref. 120. Copyright 2019 AIP Publishing. (c) is adapted from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
To date, based on similar experimental methods of integrated Mo film electrodes, the highest photocurrent value has been observed in FAPbBr3, which is 10 orders and 3 orders of magnitude higher than those in MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3, respectively.118,119 Such unique advantages of FAPbBr3 may depend on its more stable structural nature and superior light absorption ability and ionic migration properties. Further explorations of the photovoltaic responses of MHPs are still needed to acquire more detailed information.
4. Summary, outlook and challenges
High pressure application offers plenty of new MHP structures with superior and novel structural, optical and electrical properties. The current studies on MHPs are still in their infancy, and many limitations and challenges exist in the explorations of MHPs.
First, the MHP systems studied at high pressure should be extended. To date, most high pressure studies on MHPs are still focused on 3D ABX3 and bulk materials. These systems must be extended to lower dimensional and nanosized MHPs to obtain more high pressure MHP information. Dimension here not only refers to the structural dimension of inorganic networks but also involves the morphology dimension of nanomaterials, such as nanoplates and quantum dots. The quantum confinement in lower dimensional MHPs may bring about some additional intriguing responses at high pressure and provide more opportunities for MHP applications. Additionally, through comprehensive high pressure investigations, a universal law for the prediction of high pressure MHPs is expected to be obtained.
Second, the structural information of high pressure MHPs should be more accurately determined. The high pressure transition path of MHPs strongly depends on the sample loading methods and pressure conditions. Hydrostatic, quasi-hydrostatic and nonhydrostatic pressure conditions result in different transition sequences and critical pressures of high pressure MHPs. Therefore, in current high pressure MHP studies, many deviations and ambiguous experimental results have been obtained by different groups. To verify the structural behavior and structure–property relationships, more accurate and detailed experiments should be performed on MHPs. The structure information must be detected through combined experimental methods of PXRD, SCXRD, neutron scattering and pair distribution function (PDF) measurements, as well as Raman vibrational and infrared vibrational spectroscopy. An in-depth understanding of the structural responses is essential for the further design and synthesis of MHPs with targeted structures and properties.
Finally, harvest the high pressure structure with promising properties to ambient conditions. The retainment of high pressure structures has only been realized in a few systems. A method to maintain the optimized high pressure properties, such as the narrowed band gap, prolonged carrier lifetime and decreased resistance, under ambient conditions must be found. One possible method is controlling the peak pressure of the experiment such that irreversible amorphization can be realized by applying a sufficient external force. Another possible solution is applying flexible and elastic organic cations in hybrid MHPs, which can help maintain the contracted high pressure structure under ambient conditions.
In summary, this review aims to comprehensively highlight the high pressure effects on MHPs in terms of both structure and property engineering. High pressure explorations not only reveal the underlying transition mechanism and structure–property relationships in MHPs but also provide the possibilities of further development and exploitation of MHPs. We envision that high pressure MHP studies will be able to stimulate ambient explorations of MHPs, enabling the further development of their photovoltaic and other properties.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grants 11604141 and 51772142), Science and Technology Cooperation Project between Chinese and Australian Governments (Grants 2017YFE0132300), Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (Grant JCYJ20170412152528921, JCYJ20160530190842589 and KQTD2016053019134356), Development and Reform Commission of Shenzhen Municipality (Novel Nanomaterial Discipline Construction Plan). CHESS at Cornell University was supported by the National Science Foundation award DMR-0936384.
References
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E, 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Konstantakou and T. Stergiopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11518–11549 RSC .
T. T. Ngo and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1099–1108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 310–350 RSC .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-w. Park and S. I. Seok, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1805337 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Best Research-Cell Efficiencies chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html Search PubMed.
Y. Zhou, J. Chen, O. M. Bakr and H.-T. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6589–6613 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shamsi, A. S. Urban, M. Imran, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3296–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16048 CrossRef CAS .
V. Adinolfi, W. Peng, G. Walters, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1700764 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .
V. D'Innocenzo, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17730–17733 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Smith, B. A. Connor and H. I. Karunadasa, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3104–3139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-K. Mao, B. Chen, J. Chen, K. Li, J.-F. Lin, W. Yang and H. Zheng, Matter Radiat. Extremes, 2016, 1, 59–75 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Lv and Y. Ma, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17005–17020 CrossRef CAS .
V. Schettino and R. Bini, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 1951–1965 RSC .
B. Chen, J.-F. Lin, J. Chen, H. Zhang and Q. Zeng, MRS Bull., 2016, 41, 473–478 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, J. Guo, Y. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Pan, H. Zhang, Y. Xia and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1605005,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201605005 .
J.-M. Yang, Y. Luo, Q. Bao, Y.-Q. Li and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801351–1801375 CrossRef .
M. I. Saidaminov, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Misra, C. Bat-El, L. Iagher and L. Etgar, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3712–3721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, C. Zhou, Y. Tian, T. Siegrist and B. Ma, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 54–62 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2791–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .
H. Hu, B. Dong and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11436–11449 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, C.-S. Zha, Q. Xue, R. T. Downs, R.-G. Duan, R. Caracas and X. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3303–3307 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, C. C. Stoumpos, N. Zhou, F. Hao, C. Malliakas, C.-Y. Yeh, T. J. Marks, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. P. H. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15379–15385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Z. Song and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1803792 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, L. Nienhaus, R. C. Kurchin, S. S. Shin, S. Wieghold, N. T. Putri Hartono, M. Layurova, N. D. Klein, J. R. Poindexter, A. Polizzotti, S. Sun, M. G. Bawendi and T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3734–3742 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, A. L. Abdelhady and L. Manna, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2326–2337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Y. Wu, H. Lu, C. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Bai, L. Yang, W. W. Yu, Q. Dai and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 517–526 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Jin, J. Zhang, D. Bai, H. Bian, K. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Wang and S. F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7145–7154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Wang and B. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1612–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bai, Y. Hu, Y. Hu, T. Qiu, X. Miao and S. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 184, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, A. Krenselewski, S. I. Baik, D. N. Seidman and R. P. H. Chang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 710–724 RSC .
W. Gao, C. Ran, J. Xi, B. Jiao, W. Zhang, M. Wu, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 1696–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Zakharov and E. V. Boldyreva, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 10–22 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Schliehe, T. Wang, Y. Nagaoka, Y. C. Cao, W. A. Bassett, H. Wu, H. Fan and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14484–14487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Mao, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 466–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Li, F. Wang, R. Liu, Y. Mao, Z. Liu, X. Li, K. Yang, T. Cui and B. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 955–962 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cai, J. Li, H. Sun, P. Zhao, F. Yu, L. Zhang, D. Yu, Y. Tian and B. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 727, 1014–1019 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kraus, A. Ravasio, M. Gauthier, D. O. Gericke, J. Vorberger, S. Frydrych, J. Helfrich, L. B. Fletcher, G. Schaumann, B. Nagler, B. Barbrel, B. Bachmann, E. J. Gamboa, S. Göde, E. Granados, G. Gregori, H. J. Lee, P. Neumayer, W. Schumaker, T. Döppner, R. W. Falcone, S. H. Glenzer and M. Roth, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10970–10975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Bassett, High Pressure Res., 2009, 29, 163–186 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jayaraman, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1983, 55, 65–108 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Mao, P. M. Bell, J. W. Shaner and D. J. Steinberg, J. Appl. Phys., 1978, 49, 3276–3283 CrossRef CAS .
S. Klotz, J. C. Chervin, P. Munsch and G. L. Marchand, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 075413 CrossRef .
M. Szafrański and A. Katrusiak, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2496–2506 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Glazer, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1972, 28, 3384–3392 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Swainson, M. G. Tucker, D. J. Wilson, B. Winkler and V. Milman, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2401–2405 CrossRef CAS .
U. Schwarz, F. Wagner, K. Syassen and H. Hillebrecht, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 12545–12548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsuishi, T. Suzuki, S. Onari, E. Gregoryanz, R. J. Hemley and H. K. Mao, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2001, 223, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin and H. I. Karunadasa, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1549–1555 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Lü, W. G. Yang, Q. X. Jia and H. W. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6764–6776 RSC .
P. Postorino and L. Malavasi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2613–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Kong, W. Yang and H.-k. Mao, Mater. Today, 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2019.02.016 .
Y. Wang, X. Lü, W. Yang, T. Wen, L. Yang, X. Ren, L. Wang, Z. Lin and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11144–11149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, C. M. Beavers, J. Voss, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 201–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Capitani, C. Marini, S. Caramazza, P. Dore, A. Pisanu, L. Malavasi, L. Nataf, F. Baudelet, J. B. Brubach, P. Roy and P. Postorino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 28125–28131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, G. Liu, J. Gong, Q. Hu, R. D. Schaller, P. Dera, D. Zhang, Z. Liu, W. Yang, K. Zhu, Y. Tang, C. Wang, S.-H. Wei, T. Xu and H.-k. Mao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8910–8915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, W. Cai, T. Bi, N. Zarifi, T. Terpstra, C. Zhang, Z. V. Verdeny, E. Zurek and S. Deemyad, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3457–3465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Wang, R. Liu, Y. Qiao, J. Cui, B. Song, B. Liu and B. Zou,  2015, arXiv:1509.03717.
F. Capitani, C. Marini, S. Caramazza, P. Postorino, G. Garbarino, M. Hanfland, A. Pisanu, P. Quadrelli and L. Malavasi, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 185901–185906 CrossRef .
S. Jiang, Y. Fang, R. Li, H. Xiao, J. Crowley, C. Wang, T. J. White, W. A. Goddard III, Z. Wang, T. Baikie and J. Fang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6540–6544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Szafrański and A. Katrusiak, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3458–3466 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Francisco-López, B. Charles, O. J. Weber, M. I. Alonso, M. Garriga, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. T. Weller and A. R. Goñi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 22073–22082 CrossRef .
L. Wang, K. Wang and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2556–2562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Kong, J. Gong, W. Yang, H.-k. Mao, Q. Hu, Z. Liu, R. D. Schaller, D. Zhang and T. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604208–1604215 CrossRef .
P. Wang, J. Guan, D. T. K. Galeschuk, Y. Yao, C. F. He, S. Jiang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Jin, C. Jin and Y. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, Z. Deng, Y. Wu, F. Wei, F. Halis Isikgor, F. Brivio, M. W. Gaultois, J. Ouyang, P. D. Bristowe, A. K. Cheetham and G. Kieslich, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7537–7540 RSC .
S. Jiang, Y. Luan, J. I. Jang, T. Baikie, X. Huang, R. Li, F. O. Saouma, Z. Wang, T. J. White and J. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13952–13957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Q. Zeng and K. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3752–3758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yuan, S. Qin, X. Wu, H. R. Ding and A. H. Lu, Phase Transitions, 2018, 91, 38–47 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, K. Sun and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18809–18828 RSC .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lü, Y. Wang, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Hu, X. Guo, H. Chen, L. Yang, J. S. Smith, W. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Xu, M. G. Kanatzidis and Q. Jia, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8663–8668 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Wang, W. Pan, W. Yang, B. Zou, J. Tang and Z. Quan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15969–15973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, H. Huang, Z. Chen, X. Huang, K. Deng, S. Luo, Z. Wang, X. Yu and Z. Quan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800712–1800716 CrossRef .
T. Yin, B. Liu, J. Yan, Y. Fang, M. Chen, W. K. Chong, S. Jiang, J.-L. Kuo, J. Fang, P. Liang, S. Wei, K. P. Loh, T. C. Sum, T. J. White and Z. X. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1235–1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, L. Kong, P. Guo, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Cai, D. J. Gosztola, H.-k. Mao, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. D. Schaller, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2518–2524 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Gong, L. Kong, R. D. Schaller, Q. Hu, Z. Liu, S. Yan, W. Yang, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis, H.-k. Mao and T. Xu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8076–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Yin, Z. Chen, K. Deng, S. Luo, B. Zou, Z. Wang, J. Tang and Z. Quan, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 1621–1626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Liu, L. Wang, C. Liu, K. Wang and B. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11213–11217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Bounos, M. Karnachoriti, A. G. Kontos, C. C. Stoumpos, L. Tsetseris, A. Kaltzoglou, X. Guo, X. Lü, Y. S. Raptis, M. G. Kanatzidis and P. Falaras, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 24004–24013 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yuan, S. Huang, J. Niu, S. Qin, X. Wu, H. Ding and A. Lu, Solid State Commun., 2018, 275, 68–72 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yin, Y. Fang, W. K. Chong, K. T. Ming, S. Jiang, X. Li, J.-L. Kuo, J. Fang, T. C. Sum, T. J. White, J. Yan and Z. X. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705017 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. D. Wen, R. Hoffmann, J. S. Son, R. Li, C. C. Fang, D. M. Smilgies and T. Hyeon, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 17119–17124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, B. Liu, L. Wang, D. Li, R. Liu, B. Zou, T. Cui, G. Zou, Y. Meng, H.-k. Mao, Z. Liu, J. Liu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 309–314 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tolbert and A. Alivisatos, Science, 1994, 265, 373–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, T. Cai, M. Que, J.-P. Song, B. M. Rubenstein, Z. Wang and O. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4199–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ou, J. Yan, C. Xiao, W. Shen, C. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Han, Y. Ma and C. Gao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11426–11431 RSC .
G. Xiao, Y. Cao, G. Qi, L. Wang, C. Liu, Z. Ma, X. Yang, Y. Sui, W. Zheng and B. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10087–10094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nagaoka, K. Hills-Kimball, R. Tan, R. Li, Z. Wang and O. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606666 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2283–2288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15007–15022 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4330–4333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, G. Qi, C. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Ma, K. Wang, F. Du, G. Xiao and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 9332–9338 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Beimborn, L. M. G. Hall, P. Tongying, G. Dukovic and J. M. Weber, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 11024–11030 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, F. Li, G. Qi, L. Wang, C. Liu, K. Wang, G. Xiao and B. Zou, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 820–825 RSC .
L. Zhang, L. Wu, K. Wang and B. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 1801628 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, Z. Liu, S. Lu, L. Wang, X. Feng, D. Yang, K. Wang, G. Xiao, L. Zhang, S. A. T. Redfern and B. Zou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4506–4513 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, B. Daiber, J. M. Frost, S. A. Mann, E. C. Garnett, A. Walsh and B. Ehrler, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 509–515 RSC .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130–13137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, H. Lu, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501803 CrossRef .
T. Ou, X. Ma, H. Yan, W. Shen, H. Liu, Y. Han, X. Liu, C. Liu, Y. Ma and C. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 262105–262109 CrossRef .
H. Yan, T. Ou, H. Jiao, T. Wang, Q. Wang, C. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Han, Y. Ma and C. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2944–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ou, C. Liu, H. Yan, Y. Han, Q. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Ma and C. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 062105–062109 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Zewei Quan	Zewei Quan is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry at Southern University of Science and Technology in Shenzhen, China. He obtained his PhD in inorganic chemistry from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (with Prof. Jun Lin) in 2009. After that, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow and later a research scientist at the State University of New York at Binghamton with Prof. Jiye Fang (2009–2012). He then joined Los Alamos National Laboratory as Oppenheimer Fellow (2012–2015). His current research interests include solution-phase synthesis, self-assembly, and high-pressure behavior of nanoparticles and their applications.

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Some typical crystal structures of MHPs under ambient conditions. 3D MHP structures with (a) cubic, (b) orthorhombic and (c) tetragonal symmetry. (d) Crystal structures of double MHP variants with cubic symmetry. 2D MHP structures of (e and f) Ruddlesden–Popper structures with the formula (A′A)n+1BnX3n+1, A′An−1BnX3n+1 (n is the number of inorganic layers, with 1 ≤ n ≤ ∞), (g) A3B2X9, and (h) AB2X5. 0D structures of MHP variants: (i) dimer octahedral structure of A3B2X9 and (j and k) isolated octahedral structures of A2BX6 and A4BX6.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of perovskite solar cells with and without 2% CsPbBr3. Adapted from ref. 43. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b and c) J–V curves and humidity stability tests of a (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 device. The inset shows the corresponding crystal structures. Reproduced from ref. 44. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) The CsPbBr3–CsPb2Br5 composite film fabrication process and the phase transformation mechanism. J–V characteristics of the device under both reverse and forward scan directions. Reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) J–V curves of assembled Cs3Bi2I9 solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Configuration of DAC equipment. (b) Ruby fluorescence for pressure measurement. (c) The pressure-transmitting media commonly used in high pressure experiments. (d) Integration of commonly used optical and electronic techniques with DAC.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) High pressure transition sequences of typical 3D MHPs. (b) Schematic of different A, B, and X combinations in 3D MHPs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Some typical structures of MHPs at high pressure with (a) tetragonal, (b and d) cubic, and (c, e and f) orthorhombic crystal systems.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) Rietveld refinements of diffraction patterns collected at 0.6 GPa and 4.5 GPa. The inset shows the corresponding crystal structure. (c and d) Evolution of lattice constants and lattice volume at high pressure. (e) Lengths of Bi–Br and Ag–Br bonds as a function of pressure. All panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Selected diffraction signals of XRD peaks of BA2PbI4 at high pressure. (b) Schematic illustrations of three crystal structures of BA2PbI4 under high pressure. (c) High pressure diffraction signals of MA3Bi2I9. (d) High pressure evolution of lattice parameters of MA3Bi2I9. (e) Crystal structures throughout the phase transitions of MA3Bi2I9. (a and b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c–e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a–c) High pressure XRD patterns of Cs3Bi2I9 and corresponding lattice parameter evolution as a function of pressure. (d) Inorganic framework of [Bi2I9]3− bioctahedra, illustrating the Bi–I bond and the Bi–I–Bi angle. All panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Comminution and recrystallization of MAPbBr3 nanocrystals at high pressure. (b) Mechanism of MAPbBr3 deformation and comminution of nanocrystals into nanoslices. All panels are reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Pressure dependence of the optical energy gap of 3D MHPs of MAPbI3 and corresponding structure organs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77 (left) and ref. 72 (right). Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Pressure-dependent bandgap evolutions of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnX3n+1 and MAPbI3 (n = ∞). The band gap shows a decreasing trend as n increases. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. (c) Pressure dependence of the optical energy gap of (PEA)2PbBr4. The illustration shows the band gap at 1 atm. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. (d) Band gap evolution of the Cs2AgBiBr6 crystal at high pressure. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) Configuration coordinate model of emission for the Cs4PbBr6 NCs at 1 atm and 4 GPa, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. (c) PDS data with an exponential Urbach tail (orange) and indirect (blue) and direct (green) bandgap. (d) Schematics of band structure, showing direct and indirect transitions and their change with pressure. (c and d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Electrical resistance of the α- and δ-phases of FAPbI3 as a function of pressure. The α-phase of FAPbI3 exhibits the perovskite structure, and the δ-phase exhibits the nonperovskite structure. Adapted from ref. 81. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Arrhenius plot of the temperature dependence of the conductivity in (MA)PbI3 at 50 and 62 GPa. Adapted from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) The pressure-dependent resistance of MAPbBr3. Adapted from ref. 119. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  High pressure photocurrent measurements of (a) MAPbBr3 and (b) CsPbBr3 with Mo film electrodes. (c) Photocurrent detection of MAPbBr3 with the four-point probe technique at high pressure. (a) is adapted from ref. 119. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) is reproduced from ref. 120. Copyright 2019 AIP Publishing. (c) is adapted from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
