Nanostructured metal phosphides: from controllable synthesis to sustainable catalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00323B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00323B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7539-7586Nanostructured metal phosphides: from controllable synthesis to sustainable catalysis

        
          
            Shao-Hai 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ming-Yu 
            Qi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zi-Rong 
            Tang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yi-Jun 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *
      College of Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, New Campus, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350116, P. R. China. E-mail: yjxu@fzu.edu.cn;  Web: http://xugroup.fzu.edu.cn
Received 
      31st March 2021
    First published on 18th May 2021AbstractMetal phosphides (MPs) with unique and desirable physicochemical properties provide promising potential in practical applications, such as the catalysis, gas/humidity sensor, environmental remediation, and energy storage fields, especially for transition metal phosphides (TMPs) and MPs consisting of group IIIA and IVA metal elements. Most studies, however, on the synthesis of MP nanomaterials still face intractable challenges, encompassing the need for a more thorough understanding of the growth mechanism, strategies for large-scale synthesis of targeted high-quality MPs, and practical achievement of functional applications. This review aims at providing a comprehensive update on the controllable synthetic strategies for MPs from various metal sources. Additionally, different passivation strategies for engineering the structural and electronic properties of MP nanostructures are scrutinized. Then, we showcase the implementable applications of MP-based materials in emerging sustainable catalytic fields including electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, mild thermocatalysis, and related hybrid systems. Finally, we offer a rational perspective on future opportunities and remaining challenges for the development of MPs in the materials science and sustainable catalysis fields.
Shao-Hai Li
Shao-Hai Li received his PhD degree in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at College of Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His research interests focus on the synthesis of composite-based nanostructure catalysts for applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis and related interdisciplinary sustainable chemistry.
Yi-Jun Xu
Yi-Jun Xu is currently a full professor working at Fuzhou University, P. R. China. He received his PhD degree from Cardiff University in 2006. From 2007 to 2009, he was a postdoctoral research fellow at the Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry and his research group works in the area of heterogeneous photoredox catalysis, mainly focusing on the design of composite-based catalysts, the fundamental studies of catalyst structures and catalytic reaction mechanisms, and exploring their versatile redox catalytic applications.
1. Introduction
The development of eco-friendly and renewable energy storage and conversion techniques takes responsibility for achieving sustainable development of human society, aiming at improving the energy utilization efficiency and remediating environmental issues.1–6 Utilizing renewable energy to drive catalytic reactions has been widely recognized as a sustainable strategy by academic and industrial research groups. In this context, the reasonable design and synthesis of cost-effective and high-quality catalysts with enhanced activity, tunable selectivity, and superior stability is the central nexus to establish advanced and sustainable energy systems for the chemical industry and academia. The consensus is that nanomaterials have been demonstrated to show extraordinary properties and enhanced catalytic performance with optimized atomic utilization efficiency compared to their bulk counterparts due to the distinctive quantum-induced properties.7,8 Recent innovations in the field of synthetic nanotechnology have promoted the rapid development of artificially designed nanostructures, which make it feasible to select highly efficient catalysts toward overcoming the energy barrier. Among the state-of-the-art commercial catalysts are still the traditional noble metals, such as Pt, Au, Pd, and Ru, with prohibitive cost and low natural abundance, which is undesirable for sustainable energy-related applications in the future. Toward this end, many studies have focused on the development of cost-effective and naturally abundant metal-based alternatives with versatility, superior catalytic performance, and mechanical sturdiness, such as alloys,9,10 metal chalcogenides,11–13 borides,14,15 carbides,16,17 nitrides,18,19 and so on. Despite the promise, there is still enormous impetus and room for the exploitation of new alternative metal-based catalysts.
Natural phosphide minerals on the early Earth may have predominantly occurred in the form of iron meteorites.20 The discovery of artificial metal phosphides (MPs) can be traced back to the 18th century, but their magic power wasn’t unveiled until the 1960s, owing to the underdeveloped synthetic chemistry.21 Thus far, MPs have been developed in earnest as promising candidates with sizes from clusters to nanoparticles (NPs) among the family of metal-based materials for energy conversion and storage applications, as evidenced by the proof that the number of papers and citations has increased exponentially in the period of 2005–2020 (Fig. 1a). Meanwhile, to increase the atom utilization, ‘alloy’ treatment of noble metals via phosphorization (named phosphating) treatment is a promising strategy for cost-effective applications. Nevertheless, the precisely controllable design of specific function-oriented MP nanostructures with tunable compositions, sizes, and morphology constraints is highly desirable but still challenging. Although some excellent reviews have briefly mentioned the preparation strategies of MPs,15,22–30 they are mainly categorized by the exploitative phosphorus sources based on the established energy-related application fields. Also, the existing reviews predominantly focus on the conventional phase synthetic strategies of transition metal phosphides (TMPs) classified by inorganic and organic phosphorus sources. As advanced synthesis principles and experimental setups are rapidly developed, the boundary of preparation between TMPs and MPs consisting of group IIIA (13) and IVA (14) metal elements becomes faint and the enormous emerging feasible and large-scale strategies are insufficiently discussed in previous reviews. Therefore, it is of timely great significance to scrutinize the judicious synthetic strategies from the viewpoint of the metal precursors, which will provide a broader platform for the synthesis and further functional target applications of MPs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Year-wise number of publications and citations (the inset) on metal phosphides from 2005–2020 (data obtained from Clarivate Analytics). (b) Metal and non-metal elements in the periodic table used for the synthesis of (doped) metal phosphides for catalytic applications. 
In particular, the significant progress of advanced synthetic and passivation strategies for ameliorating the activity and stability of MP-based catalysts and innovative sustainable catalytic techniques since 2017 have not been updated from a whole scenario. As the research field of MPs is rapidly evolving, the study of emerging catalytic applications has drawn great attention. Their application purview has expanded to mild photocatalysis and thermocatalysis, exhibiting promising prospects. Recently, influential technical and theoretical breakthroughs have been made in cutting-edge hybrid applications, such as photoelectrocatalysis, plasmon-enhanced electrocatalysis, photobiosynthesis, photovoltaic–electrolysis, and photothermocatalysis. Thus, it is highly desirable to present a timely critical overview of current advances of controllable synthesis of MP-based materials and their applications in diverse sustainable catalysis.
Herein, in this review, particular emphasis is placed on the recently developed synthetic strategies for TMPs and MPs consisting of group IIIA (13) and IVA (14) metal elements in the periodic table (Fig. 1b). To avoid repetition, we mainly limit our discussion with respect to the classification of metal precursors for the synthesis of MPs through various synthetic strategies and concisely summarize the phosphorus sources widely exploited in the reported literature. Moreover, passivation strategies for modulating the intrinsic properties and improving the catalytic activity and stability of MP-based materials are introduced including morphology and component engineering, surface reconstruction, and theoretical simulations. Next, this review aims to highlight the recent progress of MPs in the fields of emerging electrocatalysis, burgeoning photocatalysis, mild thermocatalysis, and interdisciplinary hybrid applications. Eventually, we cast a personal perspective on the current status and prospects in this field, which is anticipated to inspire further sparkling ideas for the development of MP-based materials for advanced function-oriented applications in the rapidly expanding area and beyond.
2. Strategic fabrication and passivation of metal phosphides
Engineering MPs with well-established structure–property relationships is extremely crucial to their catalytic applications. However, the rational design and preparation of MPs with the required nanostructures have not been well achieved because of the immature crystallization phase transformation mechanism, and therefore the nucleation and crystal growth processes cannot be oriented. Generally, the synthesis and design of nanostructured MPs are based on the phosphorization reaction of metal precursors. In the early time, most of the synthesis processes of MPs were performed under harsh experimental conditions (high temperature or/and high pressure), which thus greatly hinders their development and applications. With the rapid development of material nanoscience and engineering, abundant studies on metal precursors have provided a fundamental basis for the controllable synthesis of MP nanostructures with intriguing properties using diversified single-phase or multi-phase approaches in the past decade. Herein, this section is mainly focused on reviewing the multifarious metal precursors used to synthesize MPs with special emphasis on recently developed synthesis and passivation strategies (Fig. 2). Besides, some emerging organic and inorganic phosphorus sources are concisely discussed as well. Table 1 gives the various synthetic strategies of MPs with merits and demerits based on the phase status of the metal and/or phosphorus sources in the reported literature.
 Fig. 2  Metal and phosphorus sources used to synthesize metal phosphides and related developed passivation strategies toward the exploitation of renewable resources. 
Table 1 Comparison of various phase strategies investigated for the synthesis of nanostructured metal phosphides




Phases
Methods
Advantages
Limitations
Ref.




Liquid/liquid–solid/liquid–gas–solid
Electrochemical deposition
(i) Simple synthesis process; (ii) controllable size and morphology.
(i) Low yield; (ii) generating amounts of waste liquid.

31–40



Electroless deposition

41–45



Photochemical deposition

46–48



Sonochemical method

49, 50



Hydro/solvothermal synthesis

51–62



Vapor-phase hydrothermal method

63



Self-catalytic wet chemical method

64–66



Hot-injection method
(i) High-yield; (ii) controllable synthesis.
(i) Harsh reaction conditions; (ii) generating amounts of waste liquid.

67–76



Microfluidic synthesis
(i) High-yield; (ii) controllable synthesis.
(i) High cost and complicated processes; (ii) generating amounts of waste liquid.

77, 78



Microwave liquid phase method
(i) High-yield; (ii) simple synthesis process.
(i) Generating amounts of waste liquid; (ii) poor size and morphology control.

79, 80



Solid/solid–solid/gas–solid
Solid-state thermal treatment
(i) High-yield; (ii) simple synthesis process; (iii) propitious for various metal and phosphorus precursor mixtures.
(i) Poor size and morphology control; (ii) low purity product.

81–92



Ball-milling/manually grinding

93–98



Temperature-programmed reduction

99–106



Joule thermal shock

107



Arc melting

108–110



Microwave treatment

111, 112



Chemical vapor deposition
(i) High purity and crystallinity; (ii) controllable size and morphology.
(i) High cost and complicated processes; (ii) harsh reaction conditions.

113



Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition

114, 115



Hydrogen plasma

116



Plasma-assisted atomic layer deposition

117



Magnetron sputtering method

118



Pulsed laser deposition

119



Molecular-beam epitaxial growth chemical vapor deposition

120–129





2.1 Metal sources

2.1.1 Free metal ions. 
In homogenous metal ion solutions, concise synthesis of MPs can be achieved by selecting a suitable phosphorus source via diversified liquid phase methods. Photochemical deposition reactions, involving the absorption of photon energy and an electron-driven reduction reaction, have been investigated for the in situ growth of MPs on the surface of a photo-excited semiconductor since the work by Kraeutler and Bard in 1978.130 Using Co2+ ions, Liu et al. prepared amorphous Co–P alloy modified ZnIn2S4 composite samples.47 A pure argon or nitrogen purge is generally necessary to remove O2 before the illumination reaction. By contrast, electrodeposition, as another typical solution-based electron-driven synthetic technology, is positioned to operably synthesize MP nanomaterials through an electric circuit in metal ion-containing solutions, featuring mild and controllable experimental conditions, which is generally operated under constant (current or voltage) or pulsed mode. For example, self-supported porous CoP films can be electrodeposited on the gas–liquid–solid phase interface induced by in situ generated hydrogen gas (H2) bubbles as soft-templates.31 However, this method is generally limited to conductive substrates and the products are poorly ordered. Different from electrochemical deposition, electroless deposition does not require auxiliary electricity to drive the deposition reaction. Currently, the disputed growth mechanism can be mainly distinguished into intermediate reduction processes and mixed potential theory.131 As a typical example, spontaneous electroless NiCuP plating occurred on a low carbon steel substrate in a plating solution containing metal ions and NaH2PO2.41 It is noted that contamination from the dissolved metal substrates could potentially occur in the deposited MP layer.
Hydro/solvothermal synthesis strategies are typically performed in aqueous or non-aqueous solutions in sealed setups beyond the boiling point temperature of solvents, during which the solubility and reactivity of the reactants are greatly increased. For instance, nickel phosphide can be fabricated on different substrates using Ni2+ ions with red phosphorous via a facile hydrothermal treatment method.52,62 Likewise, using ethylenediamine with an N-chelating ligand as an organic solvent, a phosphorization process using yellow phosphorus can be controllably realized.132 In a modified strategy, H2PO2− as a phosphorus source can cooperate with Ni2+ ions for the formation of Ni2P induced by sodium borohydride (NaBH4) in ethylenediamine solvent.133
As is known, NaBH4 can spontaneously reduce some metal cations to generate the corresponding metal borides under ambient conditions, while sodium hypophosphite (NaH2PO2) can stably coexist with metal cations. Under the generated heat and intermediates, Ren et al. successfully fabricated Fe–Ni–P–B–O hollow nanocages via a self-catalytic wet chemical reaction process of metal cations (Fe2+ and Ni2+) with NaBH4 and NaH2PO2 under continuous oxygen gas (O2) bubbling.65 The released H2 bubbles can form gas–liquid interfaces as soft-templates during the synthesis process while the bubbled O2 can stabilize the resultant products. Similarly, Gupta and coauthors prepared amorphous cobalt-phosphide–boride NPs through the inclusion of NaBH4 into Co2+ ions with NaH2PO2 solution under vigorous stirring.66
Compared to the batch synthesis strategy, the modular microfluidic reactor technique with precise control of temperature and pressure provides access to a wide selection of precursors, solvents, and ligand systems, offering quick mixing, rapid heating, and mass transfer toward the continuous production of MPs with excellent safety and reproducibility.77 Recently, a well-designed 3D-printed flow cell was applied to prepare NixPy through the electrodeposition of Ni2+ ions on a 12 cm2 NF electrode.78 The critical parameters during the synthesis procedure, including the deposition time and electrolyte flow rate, were strategically tuned, assuring high-quality and reproducibility.


2.1.2 Coordinated metal ions. 
The direct thermal treatment,134–137 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),138–141 and atomic layer deposition (ALD)117 strategies have been widely exploited for the synthesis of MPs using metal salt precursor crystals or ions adsorbed on various substrates. For instance, using sodium chloride/potassium chloride (NaCl/KCl) as a hard-template has aroused considerable interest for the preparation of porous two-dimensional (2D) TMP nanomaterials, owing to its high abundance, environmentally friendly nature, and easy-to-remove features.85,142,143 For instance, porous Co/CoxMy (M = P, N) nanosheets (NSs) were successfully prepared using NaCl as a template via the thermal treatment of Co2+ ions (Fig. 3a).143 Prior to growth, recrystallization of the commercial inorganic salt is needed to reduce the crystal size. NaCl salt as an orientation agent provides an inert planar substrate for guiding the growth of few-layer Co/CoxMy nanostructures. In addition, by direct utilization of inorganic metal-based crystals, Zhang et al. synthesized ultrafine MoP NPs anchored on 2D carbon/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) using (NH4)6Mo7O24 as a metal precursor in an Ar/H2 flow.144 Similarly, Liu et al. prepared Ru–Ru2P NPs on P-doped carbon (PC) via a high-pressure solid phase reaction using NaH2PO2 and RuCl3 as phosphorus and metal sources with carbon black (XC72) as the support (Fig. 3b).145 An analogous strategy has been extended to fabricating other noble metal-based phosphides, such as the conversion of IrCl4 into IrP2.146
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the Co/CoxMy catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (b) Schematic representation of the synthetic process of the Ru–Ru2P/PC catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic routes of amorphous and crystalline CoP by the molecular SSP approach. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic of the synthesis processes of the metallogel precursor. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of cobalt phosphide/PG composites. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process from Cu/PTA-MOPF to Cu3P/CNS composites. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (g) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of bimetallic MOF-derived phosphides. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (h) Schematic illustration of the preparation of hollow porous NiCoFeP NCs. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. 
Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) with low cost and non-cytotoxicity are emerging as a solvent for the controlled synthesis of nanomaterials, which are regarded as a new class of ionic liquid analogues, owing to the similar characteristics and properties.147 Recently, Zhao et al. firstly fabricated high-entropy metal phosphides (HEMPs) using five mixed halide salts and tetrabutylphosphonium chloride as metal and phosphorus precursors via the direct thermal treatment of DESs, which were induced by hydrogen-bond interactions with the presence of ethylene glycol as a hydrogen bond donor.148
The hot-injection strategy is widely applied in the synthesis of uniform MP NPs under severely oxygen-free conditions, which generally aligns with the LaMer model as the growth mechanism.149 The hot-injection method integrated with the Schlenk line technique has recently been developed. For instance, one-dimensional (1D) Fe2P was synthesized by Liu et al. through a joint strategy using Fe-based acetylacetonate salt as an organic metal complex precursor.150 In addition, some nanohybrids can be synthesized by a one-pot in situ thermal decomposition reaction of metal acetylacetonate and tri-noctylphosphine (TOP) with exotic substrates in an oleylamine solution.151,152 In the work of Li and coworkers, atomically dispersed ruthenium site doped nickel phosphide NPs using metal acetylacetonates with a proper ratio were prepared via the hot-injection method, which provided an ideal model for investigating the relationship of the active sites and catalytic mechanism in doped MPs at the atomic level.153 Yang's group reported the large-scale synthesis of gallium phosphide (GaP) NWs based on a unique solution–liquid–solid growth mechanism via the hot injection method.76 Ga nanodroplets were first in situ generated by thermal decomposition of triethylgallium as the metal precursor, which subsequently promoted the growth of GaP NWs. The synthetic conditions are also critical for the synthesis of high-quality GaP NWs, including the precursor ratio, concentration, and stirring. Meanwhile, to obtain pure GaP NWs, the Ga nanodroplets on the top need to be further removed by acid etching. Apart from the widely used fast injection mode, constant injection using a syringe pump has also been used for the controlled synthesis of nanostructured MPs.154 However, these synthetic reactions can only be performed in high boiling point organic solvents owing to the high decomposition temperature of water-insoluble organic phosphorus sources.
Amorphous and crystalline CoP NPs were separately prepared by Beltrán-Suito and coworkers through the hot-injection and pyrolysis routes using the designed diketiminato Co(I) cyclo-P4 complex (Fig. 3c).90 Other organometallic complexes are also used for the growth of MP nanomaterials, such as ferrocene,155 tris(triphenylphosphine)ruthenium(II) chloride,91 and the like. For instance, heavy-metal-free InP nanowires (NWs) can be constructed via the metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) method as a variant of CVD using trimethylindium as a metal precursor and phosphine (PH3) as a phosphorus precursor.120,123,156 The advantage of the MOCVD process is the low reaction temperature due to the thermal instability of organometallic compounds, as compared with the conventional CVD techniques using inorganic metal compounds.
Moreover, high-frequency sound waves can induce the formation of chemical bonds through acoustic cavitation. The collapse of generated high-energy bubbles results in local high temperature and pressure.157 Unfortunately, only a few amorphous or hollow Fe-based MPs have been prepared by a sonochemical method using the Fe(CO)5 complex as a precursor,49 although the oxide layer easily formed under the synthesis conditions. Furthermore, using phosphaethynolate anions as the coordination sites and phosphorus source, FeP NPs were fabricated through an electrophoretic deposition method on nickel foam (NF) using the [(LHFe)2(μ-η3:η3-P3)] complex by applying a potential difference of 10 V in a mixture of iodine and acetone.158 It is found that the M–P bonds in the complex contributed to lowering the formation barrier.
Metal ions can interact with some organic phosphorus sources for the formation of unique structural metallic complex gels as precursors of MPs. For example, using self-templated metallogel precursors containing Zn/M (M = Co, Fe, and Ni) bimetallic clusters and guanosine monophosphate (GMP) as nitrogen/phosphorus chelate ligands, Guo et al. presented a direct and general solid-phase thermal treatment strategy for synthesizing TMP NPs within N,P dual-doped carbon quasi-aerogels (NPCA) (Fig. 3d).159 During the processes, it is found that the Zn ions simultaneously assist the carbonization and activation of TMP@NPCA. Similarly, a supramolecular gel precursor can be synthesized via synergetic hydrogen bonding and coordination-driven assembly processes (Fig. 3e), involving polyethylene glycol monocetylether (Brij 58), CoCl2, graphene oxide, and phytic acid (PA).160 Three kinds of cobalt-based phosphides, including CoP, CoP–Co2P, and Co2P, encapsulated by P-doped carbon and P-doped graphene nanohybrids can be prepared through the controllable thermal treatment of the supramolecular gels under different temperatures in an Ar/H2 atmosphere.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) with periodically interconnected metal nodes and organic ligands in the three-dimensional (3D) framework have received enormous interest for a variety of application prospects, such as gas storage and separation, energy storage, catalysis, and sensing.161 As a meteoric rise, a plethora of metal ion nodes in MOFs have been investigated by various groups for the synthesis of MPs and their derivatives, such as Fe-based MOFs,162,163 Co-based MOFs,164–168 Ni-based MOFs,169–171 bimetallic-based MOFs,172–179 and so on. For instance, Lu et al. reported the preparation of CoNiP nanoboxes (NBs) using CoNi-MOF as the metal precursor, which was synthesized via ion exchange processes through gradually etching the Co-MOF precursor using Ni2+ ions under solvothermal treatment.180 As a rule of thumb, the pre-carbonization of organic ligands around metal sites facilitates the uniform dispersion of derived metal precursor particles in the carbon matrix with large surface area and hierarchical pore structures. However, a second-step of phosphorization treatment is generally required, as most developed MOF nanostructures do not contain phosphorus sources and simultaneously the produced gas (H2O, CO, CO2, etc.) will affect the phosphorization process. In this respect, organic phosphorus ligands have been applied to construct metal–organophosphine frameworks (MOPFs).181 For instance, Kong et al. developed a MOPF template strategy to construct TMP@C in an eco-friendly manner without using additional phosphorus sources.182 The Cu/PTA-MOPF NS precursors were synthesized with 1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphaadamantane (PTA) ligands and Cu(NO3)2, which were transformed into carbon-confined Cu3P NPs by the following direct annealing treatment (Fig. 3f). Later, employing a similar strategy, this group successfully prepared carbon microcuboid supported phosphorus-coordinated single atom copper with a high loading content (26.3 wt%).183 In a different study, Wang et al. prepared a bimetallic FeNiP/C composite via the thermal treatment of Fe-etching [Ni2(TPO)4/3(dabco)]·guest (BMM-10) as a template without the introduction of other phosphorous sources in an Ar atmosphere (Fig. 3g).184 The original precursor was constructed through the self-assembly of tris-(4-carboxylphenyl)phosphine oxide (H3TPO), Ni ions, and 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]-octane (dabco). Under supercritical conditions, the Fe3+ etching reconstructed the MOFs from the crystalline to the amorphous structure via the attack of PO bonds in the ligands.
Prussian blue (PB) and Prussian blue analogs (PBAs) with a variety of compositions and morphologies, as a subclass of MOFs, have been reckoned as appealing precursors to prepare a wealth of inherited morphology TMP nanomaterials. In general, PBAs are designed with the formula of Mx[My(CN)6], where M represents transition metal cations (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Mn, etc.), including monometallic,185,186 bimetallic,187–196 and trimetallic types.197,198 In principle, the interaction strength between the metal ion and cyano ligand affects the phosphorization degree of the precursor, which maneuvers the structural stability as well during the transformation.199 Lou's group demonstrated a template-engaging strategy to construct porous carbon-coated nickel phosphide (Ni5P4 and Ni2P) nanoplates using Ni–Ni PBA nanoplates as metal precursors.200 Recently, Guo and coworkers fabricated hollow porous heterometallic phosphide nanocubes (NCs) through CVD phosphorization of NiCoFe PBA NCs (Fig. 3h).201 The resultant NiCoFeP NPs with a small amount of carbon exhibited high activities for electrocatalytic overall water splitting owing to the increased electrical conductivity and abundant exposed active sites. Besides, many organic–inorganic hybrid nanostructures have also been developed as precursors of MPs, where organic molecules exhibit strong coordination ability with metal ions, such as citric acid,202 hexamethylenetetramine,203 glycolate,204–208 aniline,209 and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA).210


2.1.3 Metal hydroxides. 
Metal hydroxide nanostructures are easily prepared in the alkaline solution phase using metal ions and their morphology and composition are tunable, which enables broader application in nanomaterial synthesis. In the literature, established procedures based on in situ post-treatment strategies are also available to prepare some metal hydroxide precursors, such as metal ions released from a metal substrate,211 KOH treated metal phosphate nanoarrays,212 and electrochemical oxidation of metal oxides.213 A myriad of metal hydroxide precursors have become ideal building blocks in the synthetic procedure of TMPs, such as Ni(OH)2,214–216 Co(OH)2,217–221 FeOOH,222,223 Cu(OH)2,224,225 and Zn(OH)2226 on various substrates (NF, graphene, carbon fiber cloth (CFC)/carbon cloth (CC)/carbon fibers (CFs), copper foil, MXenes, etc.).
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are ionic lamellar compounds consisting of positively charged metallic layers with charge-compensating anions and solvation molecules in the interlayer regions. LDH nanomaterials have been widely developed as precursors of bimetallic phosphides, such as Ni–Co,227–233 Ni–Fe,234–236 Ni–Mn,237 Co–Fe,238–240 Co–Cu,241 Co–W,242 Co–Sn,243 and so on. For instance, Li and coworkers synthesized ultrathin NiFeP NSs merged on 3D sponge-like strutted graphene (SG) by sequential hydrothermal and phosphorization treatments (Fig. 4a).236 Moreover, taking advantage of the differences between metal ions, such as acid–base characteristics, some Al-based LDHs can be used as templates via alkaline treatment to prepare porous single metallic phosphides with abundant exposed active sites.244 In the past years, a series of fluorion, carbonate, and acetate ion intercalated single or double metal hydroxides were utilized for the synthesis of MPs.245–252 For example, Ni–Co based carbonate hydroxide hierarchical nanostructures as precursors were first pre-fabricated by hydrothermal treatment using urea, and then bimetallic phosphides were synthesized through a CVD phosphorization strategy using NaH2PO2 as the phosphorous source. The bimetallic phosphide well retained the morphology, indicating the stability of the hierarchical structure.253 Nevertheless, to establish an eco-efficient synthesis routine, P-containing anion intercalated LDH precursors are promising without introducing other phosphorus sources.254
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of the NiFeP/SG porous monolithic electrode. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) Straightforward route to metal and derived metal phosphide, oxide, and sulfide NPs encapsulated by graphene shells. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (c) Formation mechanism of hollow mixed phosphide (Ni, Cu)2P NPs. Reproduced from ref. 277 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic illustration of the construction of hierarchical Ni–Co–P hollow nanobricks. Reproduced from ref. 312 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (e) Schematic procedure of the synthesis of S:Co2P NPs on a conductive support. Reproduced from ref. 323 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (f) Illustration of the preparation of Cu3P using CuCl as a precursor. Reproduced from ref. 334 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (g) Schematic description of the synthesis of InP via ion-exchange balance and annealing treatment. Reproduced from ref. 336 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 


2.1.4 Metal/metal oxide/metal phosphate. 
As one of the pioneering research fields in modern nanoscience, to date, significant progress has been achieved in the fabrication of metal nanostructures with controlled compositions and morphologies. Recently, a cornucopia of nanostructured single metals have been applied for the synthesis of MPs, such as Fe,93,255 Co,256–258 Ni,51,87,259–262 Mo,86,263 Zn,95,264 Pt,69 Ru,64 V,265 Sn,94,266 Ge,81,92,267etc. For instance, Choi and coworkers presented an in situ CVD synthesis of CoP NPs with a narrow diameter distribution through the direct post-treatment of graphene encapsulated metal Co NPs as metal precursors using red phosphorus (Fig. 4b).268 Meanwhile, some bulk MPs can be fabricated via the direct thermal treatment of pure metal with red phosphorus in an ampoule under vacuum conditions or an inert atmosphere or the chemical vapor transport (CVT) technique, such as Nb269 and Mn.270,271 However, further exfoliation treatment is needed to induce the formation of the corresponding MP nanostructures. Phosphorization treatment has also been demonstrated as an effective strategy to realize MPs with hollow nanostructure based on the Kirkendall effect. As a proof of concept, Yin and coworkers prepared hollow PdP2 nanocrystals via a repeatable Kirkendall cavitation process.272 The existing unbalanced diffusion flux endowed Pd metal with a hollow structure, which was verified by atomistic simulation studies.
The advance in the design and preparation of metal alloys has also allowed the concise control of the sizes, shapes, and compositions of MPs.96,273–276 For instance, a crystalline bimetallic phosphide was intentionally prepared by Nguyen et al. using core–shell copper–nickel NPs and white phosphorus in toluene via a solution based-solid-state method.277 The hollow single-crystalline (Ni, Cu)2P NPs were formed alongside single-component Cu NPs due to the effects of the competing diffusion and crystallization processes, which were in a phase isostructural to pure Ni2P (Fig. 4c). Xiao et al. demonstrated a generic approach to fabricate a series of ultrathin bimetallic phosphide NSs (CoMP, M = Ni, Mn, Cu, Zn) using ultrathin CoM-ZIF derived CoM NSs via ion-assisted solvothermal treatment followed by low-temperature phosphorization treatment. The porous bimetallic phosphide NSs possessed a homogeneous composition and a tunable Co/M atom ratio. Density functional theory (DFT) calculation results indicated that the secondary metal element was homogeneously dispersed in the CoP lattice to optimize the electronic structure and thus lower the reaction energy barrier for the OER.278 Recently, a metal alloy of cluster dimensions has been used to fabricate ultrafine bimetallic nanocrystals supported on carbon nanofibers through phosphorization treatment.279 Occasionally, a concentration gradient of P would be achieved for the transformation of some metal alloys to TMPs owing to the diffusion limitation.280
Moreover, metal oxides with superior thermal stability as direct precursors are widely investigated for the preparation of functional MP NPs, including single-metal oxides (Ni-based,281 Co-based,282–289 Fe-based,290–299 Mo-based,300–304etc.) and bimetal oxides (Ni–Co-based,305–307 Ni–Mo-based,308 Co–Fe-based,309 Co–Cu-based,310 Mo–W-based,311etc.), which are mainly derived from the aforementioned types of metal-based precursors. For example, Lou's group reported the synthesis of hollow Ni–Co–P hierarchical nanobricks using Ag2WO4 as a growth template by sequential etching, calcination, and phosphorization treatments (Fig. 4d).312 Likewise, the same group constructed a multi-shell metal oxyphosphide structure using a mixed-metal oxide template.313 The main barrier of converting metal oxides to phosphides could be dependent on the electronegativity of the metal atoms.314 Besides, some perovskite oxides and specially-structured metal oxides such as polyoxometalate,315,316 molybdate,317 niobate,318 and rhenate319 are promising for further investigation of MPs with unique geometric and electronic structures. Furthermore, inorganic metal phosphates with the integration of metals and precursors have been frequently developed for the synthesis of MPs under reducing conditions via temperature-programmed reduction.99,320–322 For example, Anjum and coauthors reported the synthesis of S-doped cobalt phosphide (Co2P) through thermal treatment of a cobalt phosphate precursor in an H2 atmosphere (Fig. 4e).323 Most recently, Sheng and coworkers developed an in situ TPR-infrared spectroscopy apparatus to unveil the mechanism of the reduction of metal phosphates to MPs via the analysis of the gas flows.324 They found that PH3 was generated from the disproportionation reaction processes of intermediates (phosphites and/or hypophosphites). PH3 was then involved in the formation of MPs accompanied by the competitive by-product Pn+.


2.1.5 Other metal sources. 
Besides the aforementioned metal sources, to date, the direct phosphorization treatment of metal sulfides,325–328 metal selenides,329–332 and other metal compounds has been commonly developed for the preparation of MPs. For instance, Luo et al. fabricated a Mo-doped nickel sulfide/phosphide hierarchical heterostructure (Mo–Ni3S2/NixPy) on NF through the partial phosphorization of Mo–Ni3S2 clusters.333 In another investigation, Hao et al. demonstrated the fabrication of copper phosphide (Cu3P) sheets on NF via the phosphorization of CuCl sheets as precursors for electrocatalytic overall water dissociation (Fig. 4f).334 Similarly, a NiF2/Ni2P hybrid was constructed using NiF2 NSs as precursors.335 Moreover, Koh and coworkers demonstrated the successful synthesis of InP nanoplatelets through a control of the cation ion-exchange balance strategy using Cu3−xP nanoplatelets as a metal precursor template (Fig. 4g).336 Based on this modeling reaction, they found that the cation solvation and desolvation mechanism in various ligand mixtures is beneficial for the understanding of the nanoscale Kirkendall effect.
Based on the multifarious synthetic strategies, a series of hierarchically structured precursors have been controllably prepared for the synthesis of polymetallic MPs, such as LDH/metal oxide,337,338 metal carbonate hydroxide/metal oxide,339 MOF/metal oxide,340 mixed metal oxides,341 metal hydroxide/PBA,342 metal hydroxide/metal complex,343,344 mixed metal complexes,345 and so on. As an interesting example, 3D hierarchical NiCoP nanorod-on-nanosheet arrays were prepared via a facile solvothermal and phosphorization approach for electrocatalytic overall water splitting.346 The morphology control of the precursor was dependent on the amount of NH4F during the synthesis process. For group IIIA (13) and IVA (14) metal-based MPs, the direct growth or foreign atom substitution through metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) or CVD strategies have been widely developed using bulk MP powder or clusters.347–350 In addition, complicated and expensive physical deposition processes have also been developed using bulk MPs as starting sources, such as the magnetron sputtering method118 and pulsed laser deposition.119

2.2 Phosphorus sources
In this section, we briefly summarize the typical phosphorus sources used in the literature, which are distinguished into inorganic and organic types. Firstly, inorganic PH3 gas is extensively used in various strategies for the synthesis of MPs.113,120,128 However, PH3 gas is highly toxic and lethal for humans at a few ppm, and was first detected in wastewater by Dévai et al. in 1988.351 Generally, excessive hot PH3 flow (tail gas) during the gas–solid reaction process using inorganic sodium hypophosphite (NaH2PO2 or NaH2PO2·H2O) is routinely post-treated by copper sulfate or sodium hypochlorite solution.352,353 How to effectively tailor the derived materials (such as Cu or CuxP) as potential catalysts and/or recycle the derived phosphorous acid or phosphoric acid as a resource for new chemicals deserves further in-depth study.354 A trace of free PH3 gas emitted into the atmosphere through a ventilation system undergoes photochemical oxidation processes back into the natural ecosystem in the form of phosphate ions or phosphoric acid.355
White phosphorus as the most reactive allotrope of phosphorus has been employed by various groups for the synthesis of MPs.356–358 Due to the flammable and explosive properties, it is noted that the utilization of white phosphorus in the preparation processes of MPs should be operated strictly and cautiously.277,359 In recent years, the alternative use of other elemental phosphorus sources has been more applicable, including red phosphorous,56,95,360–363 and black phosphorus.57,364 In most cases, the high energy ball-milling method based on a mechano-chemical reaction paves the way for the large-scale production of MPs using black phosphorus transformed from red phosphorus under an inert atmosphere, during which the in situ generated electron transfer and heating affect can break and reconstruct the chemical bonds of the precursors.365 Currently, it is still difficult to control the purity, size, and crystallinity of the MP products in ball-milling processes, during which the setup parameters are crucial, such as the ball-to-material mass ratio, ball diameter, rotation speed, and milling time. The group of Feng reported a general topochemical strategy to prepare 2D TMPs (Co2P, Ni12P5, and CoxFe2−xP) using phosphorene as the phosphorous precursor and template in a Teflon lined autoclave.366 Likewise, Wang and coworkers reported in-plane black phosphorus/dicobalt phosphide heterostructures via a facile solvothermal method.367 The reduction of Co2+ involved anhydrous and oxygen-free conditions, in which the defects/edges of the BP NSs induced the selective growth of Co2P. Li et al. found that metastable amorphous CoFe oxide on BP NSs as the phosphorus source can be electrochemically converted into CoFe phosphide under a reduction potential.368
Inorganic phosphoric acid and phosphates as phosphorus sources are widely used in solid-state reduction reactions to fabricate MPs. Generally, the phosphates (Na3PO4·12H2O,84 H3PO3/H3PO4,103,369,370 NH4H2PO4,85,371–373 [(NH4)2HPO4],301,374,375 H3PMo12O40·nH2O,376etc.) and metal salts were mixed homogenously through milling or stir-evaporation strategies, following by reduction in an H2/Ar or other reduction atmosphere at high temperature. For instance, Cao et al. synthesized a pine-needle-like nickel–copper–phosphorus electrocatalyst by a facile electrodeposition method using NaH2PO4·H2O as the phosphorus source.34 In addition, some other inorganic phosphorus sources have also been applied to fabricate MP nanomaterials. For example, Shao et al. synthesized Ni–Co nitride phosphide NWs for the OER through in situ blending of ammonium hexafluorophosphate (NH4PF6) as the phosphorus source into metal precursor NWs followed by calcination in an NH3 atmosphere.377 Using a GaP compound effusion cell as a phosphorus source under an ultra-high vacuum to control the concentration of P-based derivatives, Bedoya-Pinto et al. successfully prepared single-crystalline NbP and TaP thin films on MgO substrates through a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) strategy.378 Additionally, when dissolved in concentrated HCl, some commercial inorganic MPs, such as Ca3P2 and Zn3P2, can effectively liberate PH3 to drive the phosphorization processes as well.379,380 Furthermore, some intermediates derived from inorganic phosphorus sources are sometimes used for the synthesis of MPs. For instance, the phosphorization of Cu@C was achieved by the reactive P species from metal magnesium induced reduction of phosphorus trichloride (PCl3) in an autoclave at 300 °C.381
Recent organophosphorus precursors used for the preparation of ultrafine MPs have been extensively developed (Fig. 5), such as TOP,309,382,383 trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO),107 hexamethylphosphorous triamide (HMPT),67,384 tris(diethylamino)phosphine (DMAP),385–388 tris(trimethylsilyl)phosphine (TMSP) and its derivatives,389 triphenylphosphine (TPP),89,390 tetrabutylphosphonium chloride (TBPC),79 and triphenyl phosphite (TPPO),391 in which P-moieties are included to directly or indirectly interact with the metal precursors. Different from TOP and TOPO, requiring high reaction temperatures, organophosphites (P(OR)3) with aliphatic or aromatic group (R) substituents can preferentially maneuver the controllable phase synthesis and reaction mechanism of MPs based on fine-tuning the chemical reactivity (precursor decomposition and ion diffusion rates).392 Additionally, Mundy and coworkers broadened the scope of aminophosphine precursor chemistry based on the method developed for InP to the synthesis of zinc, cobalt, nickel, and cadmium phosphide, which were fabricated through thermolysis of the appropriate MX2 (M = Zn, Co, Ni, Cd; X = Cl, Br, I) salts with DMAP in a long chain primary amine.393 Zhang et al. reported a facile microwave liquid-phase approach for fabricating nanostructured Ni2P and Ni12P5 using TBPC as the phosphorus source and reaction medium.79 During the synthesis process, microwaves as ultra-high frequency electromagnetic waves provided a homogeneous heating effect by the mechanism of polarization, which can address the issue of the thermal gradient effect existing in other heating methods and possess the capabilities of time and temperature programming, allowing efficiency and operability.
 Fig. 5  The chemical structures, the oxidation state of phosphorus, and full names with acronyms of typically used organic phosphorus sources. The corresponding data of the melting point (MP, °C), boiling point (BP, °C), and physical state at 20 °C and 101.3 kPa were obtained from https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. 
Relying on electrostatic chelation with metal ions, organic phosphoric acid, resins, and polymers have recently emerged as promising phosphorus sources to prepare MP precursors, such as PA with rich phosphate groups,91,112,394–402 guanosine monophosphate,159 1-hydroxyethylidenediphosphonic acid (HEDP),403,404 phenylphosphonic acid (PPA),405 melamine phosphate,406 ionic liquids (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate ([BMIM]·PF6)),407 and phosphorus-containing resins or polymers.408,409 Moreover, organic phosphorus sources in nature are generally contained in some plants or microorganisms, such as bio-based bean sprouts,410 spirulina,411 animal blood,412 saccharomycetes,413–416 and streptococcus thermophiles,417 which have been applied for the preparation of MPs and related hybrid composites. It is noted that some metal impurities may exist in commercial metal or phosphorus sources and the corresponding derivates could be active during catalytic processes.418
2.3 Adaptive morphology and structure
In general, a uniform chemical environment is an important prerequisite for topographic control of MPs at the nanoscale. Compared with solid-phase reactions, it is relatively easier to control the product morphology of the products through liquid- and gas-phase reactions. The properties and catalytic performance of advanced MP nanostructures are correlated closely with geometric dimensional diversity, including the particle size and facets, pores, and morphological structure. Particularly, hierarchical structures at the multiscale are amenable to mass transfer and exposing catalytically active sites.419 Moreover, amorphous MP electrocatalysts generally possess superior performance owing to the abundant defects and exposed unsaturated atoms while the high-crystalline structure can prolong the lifetime of (photogenerated) charge carriers and facilitate their bulk and surface transfer. Meanwhile, wet-chemistry methods, such as NaBH4-assisted reduction, hot-injection, and electro-induced methods, have been developed for the synthesis of amorphous MP nanomaterials.64,65,90,420 For instance, crystalline@amorphous heterostructured Pd–P nanoplates (c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P) were successfully synthesized via a cation exchange method using Cu3−xP nanoplates as templates (Fig. 6a).421 The structural characterizations demonstrated that the afforded nanoplate possessed an amorphous shell and a crystalline core with the same elemental components (Fig. 6b–f), which exhibited superior activity to commercial Pt/C toward electrocatalytic ethanol oxidation.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P nanoplates. (b) TEM image of a c-Pd7P3@a-Pd–P nanoplate. The inset is the corresponding SAED pattern. (c–e) HRTEM images taken from the selected regions in (b). The insets are the corresponding FFT patterns. (f) HAADF-STEM image of a c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P nanoplate and corresponding elemental mapping. (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 421 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (g) SEM image of ultrathin Ni(OH)2 NSs. (h) AFM image of the Ni(OH)2 NSs. (i) SEM image of N-FG. (j and k) SEM and AFM images of the NP–FG composite. (l) TEM image of NP–FG (inset, SAED pattern). (m) Schematic illustration showing the FGR-assisted stress transfer mechanism during the phosphorization process. (g–m) Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (n) Schematic diagram of the process to synthesize CoFePx NPs in c-wood channels using a current pulse. (o) The evolution of the median temperature as a function of time (inset: optical and thermal images of the heated sample taken at 0.35 s). (p) SEM image of the CoFePx NPs on the wall of c-wood. (q) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding elemental mapping of a typical CoFePx nanoparticle. (n–q) Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
As is known, during the phase transformation process, the structures of the precursors are prone to aggregation or sintering owing to the lattice strain originating from heteroatom (e.g., phosphorus) substitution. The confinement effect has been successfully applied in the morphology control of nanomaterials including MPs to tackle the instability of nanostructures.422 Recently, our group reported the successful growth of ultrathin Ni2P NSs with exposed (001) facets via a facile CVD strategy using ultrathin Ni(OH)2 NSs as metal precursors on single-layer functionalized graphene.214 The ultrathin 2D geometrical structure was well retained during the material phase transformation processes (Fig. 6g–l). We found that the single-layer functionalized graphene with residual oxygen-containing groups and large lateral size contributed to the release of lattice strain during the phosphorization of the ultrathin Ni(OH)2 NS precursors (Fig. 6m). Moreover, Chen and coauthors demonstrated that a graphene aerogel acting as a carbon matrix provides abundant channels and avoids the aggregation of catalyst NPs. For comparison, the particle size of blank Bi–CoP became several micrometers with serious aggregation in the absence of graphene, indicating that graphene confines the growth of Bi–CoP.423
The flash Joule heating strategy possesses great potential for the scale-up synthesis of nanomaterials by tuning the applied voltage, switching duration, and reaction atmosphere.424,425 As a typical example, Yang et al. utilized the difference of the metal vapor pressure between Fe and Co to synthesize core–shell CoFePx–Fe NPs via a one-step Joule heating technique (Fig. 6n).107 The wood was primarily pretreated at 750 °C in CO2 for introducing surface defects to adsorb metal ions. Then, the wood was rapidly heated to over 1200 K within 0.1 s and maintained at 1200–1400 K for 0.5 s before quenching, which was recorded based on a gray-body model (Fig. 6o). Ultrafine CoFePx NPs were uniformly anchored on the wall of the carbon substrate (Fig. 6p). High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) elemental mapping results underpinned the core–shell NPs with the shell composed of only the Fe element (Fig. 6q). They found that the Fe shell layer greatly enhanced the durability without hampering the activity of the CoFePx catalyst owing to the geometric effect.
2.4 Component engineering
Most single MPs have a limit in their intrinsic activity. The chemical composition of MPs can be effectively engineered by doping with one or more heteroatoms, which can efficiently tune their structural and electronic properties to meet activity-oriented requirements. Both cation and anion substituents (doping) along with dual-doping have been shown to improve the electrocatalytic activity and durability. In addition, it is essential to scrutinize the surface restructuring behaviors of MPs under catalytic conditions for a better understanding of the doping effects. For instance, the effect of Fe substitution for Co atoms in CoP NPs is positive in the acidic HER but negative for alkaline conditions.

2.4.1 Metal cation tuning. 
It has been recently shown that hetero-metal cation doping can induce lattice distortion and charge redistribution due to the overlapping d-bands for an optimized energy barrier.426–430 For instance, Xiong et al. studied the intrinsic effect of 3d-orbital metal (V, Mn, Ni, Cr, and Zn) doping in FeCoP nanoarrays on the surface electronic structure and the HER performance.431 They found that the neighbor-activating mechanism during the HER was mainly driven by the electronegativity difference. When the electronegativity of a doped metal element was smaller than the host metal element, it would transfer the electron to such neighboring host metal atoms. Wu et al. demonstrated a facile two-step strategy to prepare porous ternary Ni0.1Co0.9P NSs anchored onto conductive CF as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for enhanced overall water splitting in a neutral-pH electrolyte.432 It is found that suitably modulating Ni in CoP offered a favorable surface electronic structure and coordination nature. Analogously, the electrocatalytic activity of MoxCo1−xP showcased a typical volcano-like tendency with increasing Mo/Co ratio. DFT calculations revealed that the introduction of Mo optimized the free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) on the electrocatalyst surface. However, Mo doping generated copious lattice boundaries and then damaged the intrinsic crystal structure, which hindered the conductivity of the catalyst.
Especially, Yoo et al. recently demonstrated that electron-deficient titanium single-atoms on the surface of Ti–MoP NPs were the active sites for the HER instead of conventional P atoms and enhanced the stability under reaction and storage conditions as compared to that of pure MoP.433 Moreover, V-doped NiCoP NSs with P vacancies were prepared in a tubular plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) system through a combination of thermal and plasma treatments.434 Notably, the P vacancies induced by plasma treatment enhanced the V doping effect for increasing the number of active sites and regulating the electron density. Recently, rare earth element doping (Er, Nd, Ce, La, and Gd), especially for the erbium (Er) element, can effectively decrease the thickness of 2D CoP, providing more active sites for electrocatalytic water dissociation.221 In particular, the ultrathin morphology and modulated electronic structure of Er-doped CoP result in superior performance. DFT calculations demonstrated that the Er-doped CoP catalyst possessed a smaller overpotential and ΔGH*. Furthermore, p-metal element doping such as with aluminum (Al) can also induce the modulation of the electronic structure of TMPs through the formation of peculiar covalent Al–P bonds.435


2.4.2 Non-metal anion tuning. 
Owing to the difference in electronegativity with the parent element (2.19 for P), the insertion of non-metal anions (B, N, O, F, S, As, and Se) is also beneficial for enhancing the intrinsic properties by regulating the electronic structures. Of note, the fluorine atom with the highest electronegativity (χ = 3.98) in the periodic table has been limitedly used to modulate the electron configuration of MPs for the HER because of the inherent toxicity. In the meanwhile, recent studies reveal that fluorine doping can simultaneously induce the production of P vacancies as abundant catalytically active sites.436,437 Moreover, multi-heteroatom doping generally exhibits superior activity and stability than the single-heteroatom doping counterpart, despite the fact that the catalytic mechanism becomes more complex.438 In all cases, the development of a facile and controllable doping strategy is still the key to realize satisfactory performance.
Boron doping. 
The electron-deficient B element (χ = 2.04) with unique properties has been used as a way to tune the electronic and chemical properties of MP materials. For instance, Chen et al. reported a boron-modulated CoP electrocatalyst anchored on carbon nanotubes (B-CoP/CNT) via the gas–solid method for an efficient HER over a wide pH range (Fig. 7a).439 The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping indicated that the formation of B dopants rather than borides existed in the B-CoP/CNT hybrid (Fig. 7b and c). The obtained HER performance of B-CoP/CNT surpassed that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst in both neutral and alkaline electrolytes at large current density (>100 mA cm−2). The low-electronegativity B dopant induced a local electronic reconfiguration and atomic arrangement, thus enhancing the electron delocalization capacity of Co atoms with high electrical conductivity, and optimizing ΔGH* and H2 desorption. In addition, Chunduri et al. synthesized a ternary amorphous Co–P–B electrocatalyst,66 whereby the optimal Co–P–B achieved significant improvement of the HER and OER activity, as compared to those of the Co–B and Co–P counterparts. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy results verified that the B atom lost electrons to the Co atom while the P atom gained electrons from the Co atom in Co–P–B. DFT studies further confirmed that the modulated electron density of Co sites and the formation of surface CoOOH species contributed to the improved performance. Moreover, Wu et al. reported phosphorous doped Co–Fe–B (Co–Fe–B–P) nanochains via a facile wet chemical synthesis and phosphorization treatment.440 The synergetic effect between Co–Fe–B and doped-P led to enhanced HER and OER performance, while the 1D chain-like nanostructure endowed Co–Fe–B–P with abundant exposed active sites for overall water splitting.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the B-CoP/CNT hybrid. (b) HRTEM image and (c) elemental mapping of the B-CoP/CNT hybrid. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 439 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of N-CoP2 NWs. (e) SEM image of N-CoP2 NWs on CC. (f) XRD patterns of CoP2 and N-CoP2 NWs and the corresponding magnification. (g) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mapping of a single N-CoP2 nanowire. (h) Atomic resolution HAADF image and the strain tensor mapping and the line profile analysis for N-CoP2, respectively. (i) WT-EXAFS spectra of N-CoP2. (d–i) Reproduced from ref. 441 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020. (j) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of NiCoPO/NC NSs and NiCoPO/NC nanocages. (k) HAADF-STEM image of NiCoPO/NC NSs and (l) the corresponding elemental mapping. (j–l) Reproduced from ref. 447 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (m) Schematic illustration of the formation process of S:CoP NPs. (n) TEM image and (o–q) HRTEM images and the corresponding FFT patterns of S:CoP NPs. (m–q) Reproduced from ref. 454 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 
Nitrogen and arsenic doping. 
The N element is located next to the P element in the same main group, and its electronegativity is larger than that of P (χ = 3.04). As such, electron-rich N element doping into MPs could effectively modulate the lattice distortion and local electronic structures. As a typical example, Cai et al. reported a general N-induced lattice contraction strategy via thermal treatment in an NH3 atmosphere for boosting the HER performance of P-rich CoP2 NWs (Fig. 7d and e).441 X-Ray diffraction (XRD), EDX mapping, HRTEM, tensor values using geometric-phase analysis, and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) analyses jointly demonstrated that the N atom is doped into the structure of CoP2 NWs, which can manipulate the electronic and coordination structures of the CoP2 NWs (Fig. 7f–i). Theoretical analysis further demonstrated that the N–P interaction could increase the overlap of the atomic wave function and modify the hydrogen atom adsorption strength.
It has been recently shown that a single-step transformation from metal precursors to N-doped MPs can be realized. For instance, Men et al. directly synthesized N-doped Co2P nanorod arrays grown on CC through the phosphorization of a Co(OH)F/CC precursor using NaH2PO2 as a phosphorus source under an NH3 flow.442 Similarly, the same group synthesized N-doped Co2P via simultaneous phosphorization and nitridation of the Co(OH)F/CC precursor using NaH2PO2 and ammonium bicarbonate as P and N sources, respectively.443 Theoretical calculations suggested that the N doping tailored the electronic structure of Co2P, thus leading to optimized adsorption free energies of water (ΔGH2O*) and ΔGH* for water splitting. Moreover, Fan et al. prepared trimetallic Ni–V–Fe electrocatalysts on a NiFe foam via N2–PH3 plasma-enabled simultaneous N and P dual doping.114 The synergism of the exposed rich active sites on the formed heterointerfaces, the modulated electronic structure, and the increased conductivity promoted the activity and stability of the resultant Ni–V–Fe phospho-nitrides.
Investigations on arsenic (As) (χ = 2.01) doped MPs have also been carried out. The self-catalyzed vertical growth of segmented GaAsP–GaAsP core–shell NWs can be realized using Ga droplets and a Ga beam with a P/(P + As) flux via a solid-source MBE strategy on Si(111) substrates.122 By altering the droplet surface energy of Ga using a Be flux, self-catalyzed horizontal NWs can be obtained.444 Compared with the MOCVD technique, MBE growth has recently emerged as a feasible strategy for high-quality phosphide alloys grown in a single epitaxial process, during which phase separation effects along with hydrogen and carbon contamination at high growth temperature can be minimized.
Oxygen doping. 
Oxygen (χ = 3.44) doping in a controllable fashion is still controversial to some extent because the surface of MPs is unstable and easily oxidized in the synthesis and storage stages. The decomposed oxygen-containing species of precursors generally play a vital role in the O-doping processes under moderate reduction conditions.445 For example, Ma et al. demonstrated that the O-doping content in CoP can be well-controlled via adjusting the phosphorization treatment time of Co(OH)2, which resulted in the modulation of exposed active sites and electron/ion conductivity of CoP for the HER.446 In another example, Wang and coauthors prepared O-incorporated nickel–cobalt phosphide (NiCoPO) on nitrogen-doped carbon (NC) via the phosphorization of Ni–Co layered double hydroxide/2-methylimidazole as precursors (Fig. 7j).447 The TEM image and EDX mapping analysis verified the successful O-doping without damaging the unique 2D nanostructure (Fig. 7k and l). The as-prepared NiCoPO/NC composite afforded an overpotential of 300 mV at a 10 mA cm−2 current density and long-term stability for the OER, comparable to the commercial RuO2 electrocatalyst. Besides, Zhang et al. demonstrated the moderate introduction of O atoms into nanosized TMPs (MoP and CoP) by the pyrolysis of PA with rich phosphate group cross-linked metal compounds. The substituted O atoms can increase the density of states (DOS) across the Fermi level of the metal atoms neighboring the O atoms, thus promoting electron transfer to active sites. Additionally, a shift of the electron localization to the P sites resulted from the O-induced elongation of the M–P bond lengths, facilitating the production of active species for electrocatalytic water splitting.448 In a similar vein, Deng et al. firstly reported fast intercalation of O atoms into MoP via electrochemical anodic activation at positive potentials in acidic media.449
Sulfur and selenium doping. 
To enhance the intrinsic catalytic activity of TMPs, compounding with p-block chalcogen elements such as S (χ = 2.58) and Se (χ = 2.55) has been proposed as well.450,451 Typically, metal hydroxides or metals as precursors mixed with red phosphorus and S powder were directly heated in a quartz tube under vacuum conditions. Other combinations of phosphorus sources and S sources have also been developed through different synthetic strategies. For example, S–Ni5P4/CP was synthesized by utilizing NaH2PO2·H2O and S powder as phosphorus and S sources via the CVD method to simultaneously treat the Ni(OH)2·0.75H2O precursor.452 Similarly, NaH2PO2·H2O and thiourea derived PH3 and H2S were applied for the formation of Zn–Ni–P–S NSs during the phosphorization and sulfurization processes.453 In addition, an (NH4)2MoS4 and NaH2PO2 mixture as a precursor was used for the synthesis of MoS2−xPx, which was annealed at 400 °C under an N2/H2 (20%/80%) atmosphere.101 Recently, Anjum et al. prepared S-doped CoP NPs via a thiourea-phosphate-assisted solvothermal route followed by calcination in an H2 flow (Fig. 7m).454 The as-prepared S:CoP NPs exhibited nonuniform size with a diameter range of 3–15 nm under a high reduction temperature (Fig. 7n). Besides, S:CoP@CC showed enlarged lattice spacings owing to the S-doping while the product still possessed high crystallinity (Fig. 7o–q). The authors found that S-doping modulated the electronic structure of CoP and then improved the charge-transfer kinetics for the HER.
Moreover, both the single-step sulfurization of MPs and phosphorization of S-doped metal precursors can achieve the targeted S doping.455–457 Meanwhile, the behavior of S doping is controllable based on the experimental conditions to some extent.458 Furthermore, there is a compact correlation between the anion-doping order and the properties of the metal phosphosulfide. For instance, Li et al. demonstrated that the P element was introduced into MoS2 without phase segregation, while the S element doped into the MoP structure showed dominance on the surface.459 Besides, both the Mo and P elements in MoS2|P and MoP|S were protected from being oxidized after the introduction of the S element, which accounted for the enhanced catalytic stability.
Similar to S doping, the selenium (Se) doping behavior in MPs can be effectively manipulated by adjusting the experimental parameters based on gas–solid phase strategies.460,461 Otherwise, phase separation to form a heterostructure with abundant interfaces will occur during the one-step phosphoselenization process.203,462 Unlike S doping, it is still a fascinating yet challenging task to controllably prepare doped MPs without phase separation using metal selenides or tellurides as precursors. For instance, a hybrid Ni2P–NiSe2 heterostructure was obtained by the phosphorization of NiSe2 NS arrays.463 Additionally, it should be noted that some 2D layered MPX3 (M = Fe, Co, Ni; X = S, Se) NSs can be also synthesized via similar synthesis strategies.215,464–472 However, only M–X and P–X bonds exist in the crystal structure of the types of products instead of M–P bonds, which are generally named metal thiophosphites or phosphorus trichalcogenides.473,474
Controlling the phosphorization degree. 
Phosphorus can form stable MP compounds (MxPy) with almost every metal element in the periodic table. According to the atom ratio (x/y), MPs could be typically classified into three types: (a) metal-rich phosphides (x/y > 1), (b) monophosphides (x/y = 1), and (c) phosphorus-rich phosphides (x/y < 1). Many metals (e.g. Ti, Ta, Mo, and W) form as many as 5 or 6 phosphides and nickel phosphides have at least 8 compositional forms (Ni3P, Ni5P2, Ni12P5, Ni2P, Ni5P4, NiP, NiP2, and NiP3) and many nonstoichiometric forms.475 Generally, the reaction parameters have a great effect on the resultant products including the types of metal or phosphorus precursors owing to the difference in the enthalpy of formation,91,214,344 phosphorization time,476,477 phosphorus-containing ion, gas pressure or flow rate,210,360 reaction temperature,478,479 and so on. Time-evolution experiments are feasible to elucidate the growth mechanism of MPs and beyond in the literature. For instance, Chen et al. demonstrated the formation process of Fe2P/NPC via pyrolyzing a ground precursor mixture at different temperatures.480 It is observed that the ZnO phase disappeared and the phase of phosphate (Zn0.7Fe0.3)3(PO4)2 appeared at 800 °C. With an increase in temperature, the unstable (Zn0.7Fe0.3)3(PO4)2 decomposed into the Fe2P phase and Zn vapor. Moreover, Guo and coauthors reported a dual-ligand synergistic modulation tactic to improve the durability of Ni–Co–P at the atomic-scale by partially substituting a P ligand into a nickel–cobalt hydroxide precursor via the control of the mass ratio of the precursor and NaH2PO2.481
For the conventional CVD strategy, using two separate porcelain boats with phosphorus sources and precursors (or separately positioned in one boat), the carrier gas flow rate directly determines the concentration of PH3 or other reactants around the metal-based precursors, which dominates the phosphorization degree. As a typical example, Zhao et al. demonstrated the existence of competition between phosphorization and phosphorylation using excess NaH2PO2 as a phosphorus source at a low N2 flow rate.482 In addition, with the direct thermal treatment of excess NaH2PO2·H2O in a closed reactor, high-pressure PH3 is generated, which contributed to the formation of phosphorus vacancies in the MPs.483 It is noted that the decomposed gas species of the precursor may stymie the PH3 diffusion process, especially for solid-phase reactions, thus leading to a low phosphorization degree.214,484 Furthermore, the structures of the precursors also affected the phosphorization degree. Wang et al. recently substantiated that a carbon layer around metal NPs can effectively restraint phosphorization as compared to the unprotected ones.202
Based on the difference in bond strength of M–X (X = metal or non-metal) or spatial structures in the precursors, it potentially facilitates the synthesis of hierarchical MP-based nanostructures with abundant interfaces.485–487 For instance, a Ni2P@FePOx nanostructure was successfully prepared based on NiFe-LDH NSs on the NF precursor. It is found that the iron species was transformed into iron phosphate rather than iron phosphide. The authors presumed that the high affinity of Fe3+ towards O atoms may hinder the substitution of O atoms by P atoms.488 However, it is noteworthy that the effect of interfacial gradient phosphorus doping on the activity performance is generally ignored in previous literature. In this regard, when the phosphorization conditions are deliberately controlled, the phosphorus doping of metal-based precursors occurs rather than the formation of the corresponding MP products, such as P–TiO2,489 P–WO3,490 P–CdS,491 P–Ni3S2,492 P–Co9S8,493 P–WSe2,494 P–CoTe2,495 and P–PtNi alloys.496 For instance, for thermal treatment with NaH2PO2 generally with a relatively low ratio (P:M) and/or calcination temperature, phosphorus atom doping into the lattice of (defective) metal oxides can be controllably realized.497–499 Most recently, it is notable that atomically dispersed P on the surface of single-crystal Mo2C or P-doped Mo2C can be prepared through pressurized PH3-assisted thermal treatment.500 It is worth pointing out that the P doping behavior needs to be explicitly discerned from the formation of amorphous MPs in the final products.

2.5 Surface reconstruction

2.5.1 
            In situ reconfiguration. 
Owing to the intrinsic electron transfer from metal atoms to phosphorus atoms in MPs, the electron-rich phosphorus atoms can spontaneously interact with O2, forming superficial phosphate or phosphite species along with some oxidized metal species.501,502 The degree of surface oxidation of the as-prepared MPs depends largely on the treatment conditions and the exposure/storage environment and time. To address the issue, Wang's group investigated the surface oxidation under ambient conditions and restructuring over cation and anion substituted CoP NPs under HER and OER conditions.503 They found that the Fe substituents in Fe0.5Co0.5P were more easily oxidized than pristine Co in the air; the remaining Fe–OH species were stable under HER conditions in alkaline electrolyte. The S substituents in CoP0.5S0.5 were less oxidized than pristine P in the air; the remaining sulfate-like species on the surface can enhance the activity for the OER. Through applying comprehensive post-reaction analysis of both the electrode and electrolyte, the MPs dissolved stoichiometrically in acid and the surface phosphide component degraded to hydroxides owing to the oxophilicity of metal atoms under alkaline stability testing.504,505 Using Fe-doped cobalt phosphides as a model, Chen's group demonstrated the real active phases for overall water electrolysis by means of in situ spatially coherent transmitted XRD and Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 8a–c).506 They found that the Fe dopants retained the phosphide phase during the HER while the Fe-doped cobalt phosphide rapidly converted into active-site confined oxyhydroxide to execute the OER. In other work, they further revealed that the phase stability of nickel phosphide as a model during the OER is correlated with the type of metal–metal (Ni–Ni) bonding interactions.507 It is noted that the definitive corrosion mechanisms of different MPs are generally dependent on the surface states, which are closely correlated with the synthesis and/or passivation strategies. In this regard, how to regulate MPs to maintain long-term chemical and thermodynamic stability deserves to be intensively explored. On the other hand, Su et al. developed an in situ electrochemical regulation strategy to effectively reconstruct the surface of CoP NSs in alkaline media.508 They found the evolution and reconstruction of the surface structure of CoP into Co(OH)x species formed on its surface, which largely increased the ability of water dissociation, thus boosting the HER kinetics. Moreover, using the phenomenon of slight leaching of P of MPs, Miao et al. synthesized FePi/NiFeP using a weak electrochemical activation protocol at a marginal positive potential to achieve the surface optimization and evolution of O-abundant nickel–iron phosphides.509 Interestingly, the recent work of Xia and coworkers demonstrated a general microorganism (sulfate reducing bacteria) corrosion strategy to reconstruct some TMP-based electrocatalysts for the OER.510 The enhanced performance could be put down to the in situ growth of metal sulfides on the surface of TMPs while the definite mechanisms deserve further investigation.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the phase transformations of cobalt-based phosphides in alkaline solution during the HER and OER. Blue, orange, red, tin, and pink balls represent cobalt, iron, oxygen, phosphor, and hydrogen atoms, respectively. (b) In situ XRD patterns and Raman investigations of cobalt-based phosphides during the HER and OER, respectively. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 506 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (d) Electron density difference and free energy diagrams on MoP and N–MoP under (e) alkaline and (f) acidic conditions, respectively. (g) Schematic illustration of the (N2 or Ar) plasma-treated MoP/CC for the HER. (d–g) Reproduced from ref. 300 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. 


2.5.2 Post-treatments. 
The post-treatment process is known as an effective strategy to enhance the catalytic activity and stability of catalysts. Generally, the raw MP-based nanomaterials are pre-treated in degassed diluted acid (0.5 M H2SO4 or HCl) for a period to remove the oxidized surface layer and other impurities.386 For instance, Wang and coworkers synthesized an amorphous Ni–Fe–P material on NF by an electroless plating method.42 With the extension of the etching time in diluted HCl, nanoporous structures were aggregated due to the formation of vacancies, which resulted in a 3D nanoporous structure. In addition, free-standing nanoporous MPs with tunable pore sizes and catalytic activities have been synthesized by preferentially dissolving the less stable metal phase from the MP alloy via the linear sweep voltammetry technique.511 Recently, Su and coauthors prepared a series of InP NWs with varied in situ HCl etching through suppressing radial growth, which imposed a significant effect on the dynamics of photo-generated charge carriers and optical properties.512
Moreover, plasma technology can produce high-energy reactive species for etching the surface of MP catalysts, thus leading to the formation of more edges, vacancies, and defects.513,514 For example, Chen et al. engineered the surface of nanostructured MoP through plasma treatment under an N2 atmosphere for the alkaline HER.300 They found that N doping into MoP enriched the Mo–P active species and induced electron localization near N doped sites (Fig. 8d). The heteroatom doping optimized the binding of reaction intermediates for efficient electrocatalytic water splitting (Fig. 8e–g). The resultant N–MoP/CC showed superior performance compared with those of the Ar plasma treated and untreated counterparts. Compared with the complicated plasma treatment strategy, Yuan et al. developed a facile and cost-effective method to induce P vacancies in metal phosphides via direct immersion treatment in an aqueous solution containing NaBH4.515 The phosphate species in situ generated by filling P vacancies with O atoms can propel the reaction dynamics of the OER.515
Recently, Xu et al. prepared irregular CoMoP2 particle-like shapes with abundant rough edges under high pressure.516 The high-pressure reorganization induced the generation of active Co sites with a Co(OH)2 layer on the surface and regulated the electronic conductivity of CoMoP2. Furthermore, a superaerophobic catalytic surface can be constructed via thermal treatment, which was proved effective to remove gas bubbles on the electrode surface, thus facilitating the catalytic processes.212,517 Lim et al. demonstrated that ammonium sulfide-based surface passivation (thermal treatment) made nanoporous gallium indium phosphide (GaInP2) simultaneously reduce reflection and suppress the kinetics of corrosion and surface recombination of photogenerated carriers.125 Zhang and coworkers demonstrated that thermal treatment endowed mixed Co2P/MPx NRs (M = Fe, Ni, Mn, Cu) with promoted interfacial diffusion in an H2/N2 gas environment, realizing solid-solution multimetallic CoMPx NRs on a support.518 This general synthetic strategy can effectively eliminate the influence of other variables such as size and shape in the study of the catalytic mechanism.


2.5.3 Surface strain engineering. 
Strain engineering for nanomaterials has attracted great interest as an effective strategy for tailoring the electronic structure and catalytic properties through modulating the distance between surface atoms or lattice distortion in recent years.519,520 The hitherto developed strategies including lattice mismatch, heteroatom substitution, and a strained substrate can effectively induce lattice strain.155,521 It has been proposed that the construction of core–shell structures or solid solution alloy interfaces can modulate the strain. For instance, Duan et al. synthesized strained nickel phosphide on a nickel sulfide/NF support.522 The substantial compressive strain resulted in the downshift of the d-band center of the Ni–P bonds and weakened the adsorption of hydrogen species, which facilitated ameliorated catalytic performance. Likewise, Ni2P clusters inlayed in CoP NSs were fabricated by Zhang and coworkers.523 They found that the extensive interfacial regions lowered the hydrogen bonding energy, owing to the lattice mismatch.
Lattice mismatch is also leveraged to improve the electrochemical stability. In recent work, Cu3P–Co2P composites were employed as electrocatalysts by Liu and coworkers for water splitting under alkaline conditions.524 It is demonstrated that the quasi-layer structure of Co2P and the polarized plane of Cu3P endowed the composites with numerous interfaces and active sites, which substantially promoted the intrinsic charge transfer and then boosted the catalytic activity. Meanwhile, they found that Cu3P reduced the lattice mismatch between Co2P and NF, which enhanced the stability of the Cu3P–Co2P composite as well. However, it is noteworthy that strain usually coexists with other structural factors, such as vacancies and defects, which would complicate the elaboration of the strain–activity relationship. Therefore, it is urgent to precisely control the strain-inducing procedure for decoupling the multiple effects for catalytic performance.


2.5.4 Ligand effect. 
Oxidized species generally experience restructuration depending on the electric potential and electrolyte. In this respect, molecular species on the surface have been demonstrated as a labile ligand to facilitate water splitting through varying the coordination or chelating modes, such as phosphate,525,526 ethylene glycol,219 oleate,527 and the like. For instance, MacLeod et al. recently demonstrated the attachment of conjugated phosphonic acid to the surface of a GaInP2 electrode via a solvothermal method,528 which improved the band edge alignment toward unbiased photoelectrochemical water splitting. Similarly, Tappan et al. synthesized crystalline N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC)-stabilized Cu3−xP nanocrystals through a high-temperature metathesis reaction.529 It is found that the NHC ligands on the surface of Cu3−xP contributed to enhancing the electrocatalytic H2 evolving ability, which was superior to the analogous oleylamine-capped Cu3−xP nanocrystals. Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the NHC ligands minimized the electrostatic interactions between Cu3−xP and H+, thus facilitating the HER. In a different study, Feng et al. constructed polyaniline nanodot (PANI ND)-decorated CoP hybrid NWs anchored on CFs for the electrocatalytic HER.220 They found that the PANI NDs can effectively capture H+ to form protonated amine groups, which had a higher positive charge density than that of hydronium ions. PANI/CoP/CF showed superior HER activity with outstanding durability by weakening the shackles of hydrogen ions on the surfaces of the catalyst. Additionally, Wang et al. reported a facile method to prepare ionic liquid-assisted passivated MoP by the combination of grinding and electrochemical activation treatment. The experimental results suggested that the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate can break the oxidized outer layer of MoP and prevent possible oxidization during grinding.530
Moreover, Yu et al. investigated zero-dimensional (0D) all-inorganic sulfide-capped InP and InP/ZnS quantum dots (QDs).531 The excitonic features remained constant in the absorption spectra after ligand exchange treatment (Fig. 9a). The resultant InP/ZnS QDs delivered turnover number (TON) values up to 128000 per QD with an internal quantum yield of 31% at 525 nm for H2 evolution, which was superior to other ligand passivated counterparts (Fig. 9b and c). Spectroscopic and photoelectrochemical characterizations demonstrated that the inorganic sulfide ligands on the surface of the QDs can extract the interior holes rapidly, followed by the reaction with ascorbic acid (H2A) due to the low physical and electronic barriers (Fig. 9d–f). The small crystal size and outstanding hole capture ability synergistically led to efficient charge separation, thus leading to enhanced performance. To further investigate the interaction mechanism between ZnS and InP, Lian et al. systematically demonstrated the effect of a ZnS passivation shell on the dynamics of photogenerated carriers or excitons in InP QDs by ultrafast transient absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopies.532 They found that the ZnS shell introduced significant electron trap passivation, thus leading to an enhanced PL quantum efficiency and exciton lifetimes.
 Fig. 9  (a) Absorption spectra and PL spectra of InP/ZnS QDs before and after ligand exchange. The HER performance for InP/ZnS QDs capped with (b) different organic ligands and (c) different inorganic ligands. (d) Transient photocurrent, (e) EPR and (f) SPV spectra for InP/ZnS QDs capped with different ligands under simulated sunlight illumination. (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 531 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (g) HRTEM and (h) the corresponding filtered images of the NiPS3/Ni2P heterostructures. (i) Polarization curves of the NiPS3/Ni2P electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. (j) Schematic illustration of the lattice matching and (k) distribution of charge density difference between NiPS3 and Ni2P at the interface. (g–k) Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 


2.5.5 Multicomponent heterostructure (interface engineering). 
Heterostructured catalysts are hybrid materials containing abundant interfaces between their constituents, which take advantage of the strong electronic coupling and highly hybridized projected density of states for endowing the hybrid catalyst with a synergistic effect for appreciable potential and superior performance. For instance, Xu et al. demonstrated a cost-effective strategy to prepare an efficient water-oxidation electrocatalyst via the modification of a self-supported Ni5P4–Ni2P catalyst with metal Al.533 They found that the high-surface active area due to the leaching of Al is conductive to the OER under alkaline conditions. Meanwhile, hybrid nanocatalysts with different binding energy potentially facilitate different fundamental reaction steps of a reaction. Benefiting from the well-matched lattice parameters, epitaxy of 2D nickel thiophosphate (NiPS3) NSs with in-grown dinickel phosphide (Ni2P) was recently achieved by Liang et al. via an in situ hydro-desulfuration strategy (Fig. 9g and h).215 The as-made NiPS3/Ni2P heterostructures achieved 50 mA cm−2 at a lower bias of 1.65 V for overall water splitting (Fig. 9i). DFT calculations demonstrated that the heterostructure significantly decreased the kinetic energy barrier for hydrogen adsorption and facilitated efficient electron transfer owing to the formation of a built-in electric field at the epitaxial NiPS3/Ni2P interfaces (Fig. 9j and k). Additionally, hierarchical MP-based nanostructures have also been extensively explored for accelerating the reaction dynamics because of their exotic structural merits.534
Support and interface effects can efficiently accelerate the reaction kinetics due to their strong modulation ability toward chemisorption of reaction intermediates on the catalyst surface.535 In recent work by Wang and coworkers,536 the coupling of CeO2 with Cu3P resulted in a redistribution of systematic charge density through the electron transfer from conductive Cu3P to CeO2, reducing the energy barriers of the initial water dissociation step and subsequent H2 generation. It is demonstrated that the conductive substrates with high electroconductivity and large specific surface area impart the immobilized MP-based catalysts with high site density per unit. Miao et al. reported a core–shell structured catalyst composed of a Ni2P NP core wrapped by an ultrathin phosphorous doped carbon shell on a graphene network.537 Theoretical analysis and experimental results suggested that the synergetic effect of strong interfacial electronic interactions, the phosphorus dopant and neighboring carbon in the shell was responsible for the improved electrochemical activity. Furthermore, a multi-component heterostructure can regulate the absorption ability of photons and the photogenerated carrier transfer in MP-based photocatalytic reaction systems, as discussed in Section 3.2. It is noted that the aforementioned experimental strategies are not mutually exclusive in the design and synthesis of advanced MP nanostructures to realize favorable catalytic performance.

2.6 Theoretical simulations
Theoretical studies of the Gibbs free energy diagram, DOS, band gap structure, electronic distribution, light absorption, charge carrier mobility, and reaction pathways (active sites) are performed to understand in depth the mechanism of reactions and provide a solid foundation to rationally evaluate, predict and screen MP catalysts in the future.538–540 DFT as a typical theoretical method of first-principles calculations has been widely applied for investigating reaction mechanisms because of the mutual balance of accuracy and cost-efficiency. For instance, the electrocatalytic HER activity is closely related to ΔGH* as an activity descriptor. Hydrogen adsorption might occur via a consecutive or simultaneous adsorption process.541 The consecutive hydrogen adsorption mode led to a lower reaction energy barrier in comparison to the simultaneous mode, indicating that the Volmer step favorably followed the consecutive adsorption mechanism over the Ni2P catalyst surface. Using swarm-intelligence structure search calculations, Zheng et al. identified a series of stable and active monolayer Fe–P based nanomaterials (i.e. FeP, FeP2, FeP3, and FeP4) for the HER.542 Thereinto, the FeP3 monolayer with proper electronic structure induced superior HER performance in both the pristine and strained states, which could be promising for a practical HER. Moreover, recent theoretical calculations revealed that a semiconductor-to-metal transition and improved conductivity of the GeP3 electrode can be realized through the intercalation of ions (Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, and Al3+).543 As another typical paradigm, Jalil and coworkers predicted a new phase of a phosphorene-like InP3 (P-InP3) monolayer for the HER.544 The P-InP3 monolayer had a direct band gap of 0.53 eV with anisotropic carrier mobility, whereas the bilayer and trilayer ones were metallic. In particular, the P-InP3 monolayer showed high HER activity comparable to Pt and 1T′-MoS2. Furthermore, Landers et al. unveiled the relationship between the HER and CO2 reduction on TMPs via a combination of theory and experiment.545 Computational insights based on ab initio simulations indicated that the HER was thermodynamically favored over the CO2 reduction reaction for nine selected MPs, owing to the smaller limiting potentials. In all cases, the inclusion of theoretical work in the design of advanced MP materials represents a considerable favor for the catalysis community, and collaborative work between experimental and computational researchers will generate a leap in progress and theory.
3. Metal phosphides for catalytic applications
Excessive exploitation of non-renewable fossil fuels aggravates the energy shortage and triggers ecological unbalance. Inspired by natural biological processes, there is an intensive search for methods of conversion of renewable sources (solar electricity, and small natural molecules, such as water, CO2, O2, and N2, and natural products as the primary chemical feedstocks) into fuels, pharmaceuticals, and other value-added sources in an efficient and controllable manner, which is critical to meet the unrelenting energy and material demands and construct a sustainable society. MPs have been previously employed as novel highly active hydrotreating catalysts for energy-intensive hydrodesulfurization (HDS) of oil and chemicals.546,547 In recent years, from electron- to photon- and mild thermal-driven chemical process, MPs have been widely applied in a wide variety of sustainable catalytic reactions other than water splitting, including the CO2 reduction reaction (CRR) and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), as well as many important organic synthesis reactions toward circular chemistry. This section will predominantly summarize and evaluate the recent breakthroughs of MPs in the sustainable catalysis field in four aspects (Fig. 10): burgeoning electrocatalytic applications, photocatalytic applications, mild-thermocatalytic applications, and hybrid technological applications.
 Fig. 10  The valorization of renewable resources or man-made waste over metal phosphides for sustainable catalytic applications. 
3.1 Burgeoning electrocatalytic applications

3.1.1 Bifunctional electrocatalysts. 
Electrosynthesis has gained enormous momentum due to the use of electric energy as a sustainable alternative for traditional chemical redox equivalents, thereby avoiding the formation of stoichiometric waste products. Typically, electrochemical water splitting possesses the ability to produce H2 and O2 gases in a renewable manner. Many recently developed TMP-based electrocatalysts have exhibited superior activity and stability better than the commercial catalysts such as Pt/C and IrO2.548,549 Promisingly, TMPs have been exploited as bifunctional electrocatalysts for efficient overall water splitting.550 The interested reader for the related topic of electrocatalytic overall water splitting or related half-reactions over TMPs could consult earlier pertinent reviews.24,27,28 More broadly, the OER on the anodic electrode is extended to other energy storage and conversion applications. Nevertheless, this reaction involves four proton-coupled electron transfer processes, leading to it being the decisive step and thus a high overpotential.551 To circumvent the sluggish OER half-reaction, the exploitation of other coupled oxidation reactions with a low onset oxidation potential is urgently needed to facilitate the HER. Recently, Zhao et al. synthesized ultrathin bifunctional Rh2P NSs with atomic thickness by direct phosphating treatment of ultrathin metal Rh NSs for a hydrazine oxidation reaction (HzOR) boosted HER.552 The introduction of P atoms contributed to reducing the ΔG values of dehydrogenation of N2H3ads and H* owing to electronic effects. The as-fabricated symmetric Rh2P NS‖Rh2P NS electrolyzer required only 0.377 V to drive the coupling reaction, reaching a 10 mA cm−2 current density. In another example, Yang et al. explored a porous bifunctional carbon-encapsulated MoO2–FeP (MoO2–FeP@C) nanospindle electrocatalyst for an efficient biomass electrooxidation reaction and HER (Fig. 11a).553 After the phosphorization treatment, the spindle-like structure of the precursor was well maintained and the composite showed intimate interfacial contact between FeP and MoO2 (Fig. 11b and c). In an H-type cell, the MoO2–FeP@C composite delivered HER activity with a small overpotential of 103 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, while the conversion of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural was almost 100% and the selectivity for the 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) product reached 98.6% (Fig. 11d–f). DFT studies indicated that electron redistribution occurs from MoO2 to FeP, leading to the electron-rich state of FeP and the hole-rich state of MoO2 (Fig. 11g). Similarly, Huang and coworkers reported a general semi-dehydrogenation of tetrahydroisoquinoline reaction to replace the sluggish OER for an enhanced HER over a Ni2P NS electrode (Fig. 11h–j).281 The two-electrode electrolyzer composed of Ni2P electrodes produced H2 with long-term stability and higher faradaic efficiencies (FEs) than those of overall water splitting. The high yield of value-added dihydroisoquinoline products was ascribed to the in situ generated NiII/NiIII species on the surface of the Ni2P electrode as effective active centers. Moreover, Co3FePx@NF as a “carbohydrate” catalyst in coupling reactions was developed by Miao and coworkers.554 The group found that using the carbohydrate oxidation reaction to replace the OER can reduce the energy consumption for effective H2 production due to its more favorable thermodynamics.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the MoO2–FeP@C composite. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images (inset: the FFT image) of the as-obtained MoO2–FeP@C hybrid. (d) Photo of MoO2–FeP@C used in an H-type cell. (e) Polarization curves of the FeP@C, MoO2@C, and MoO2–FeP@C composites, and Pt/C for the alkaline HER. (f) Polarization curves of the FeP@C, MoO2@C, and MoO2–FeP@C composites for the HMF EOR. (g) Interfacial electron density difference plot between MoO2 and FeP. (a–g) Reproduced from ref. 553 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (h) Electrocatalytic semi-dehydrogenation of THIQs 1 in water coupled with the HER. (i) Proposed process of the semi-dehydrogenation reaction over a Ni2P anode. (j) Substrate scope of the selective semi-dehydrogenation of THIQs over the Ni2P anode. (h–j) Reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 


3.1.2 Reduction reactions. 
To date, MPs have also emerged as high-performance nanostructures for novel electrocatalytic reduction reactions due to the metallic characteristic and abundant active sites. For instance, Sun's group firstly reported an FeP nanoarray on titanium (Ti) mesh (FeP NA/TM) for electrocatalytic CO2 valorization to alcohols with high selectivity, enabling CO2-neutral carbon management.555 Theoretical studies revealed that the synergetic effect between two adjacent Fe atoms promoted the adsorption and activation of CO2 molecules toward CH3OH on the selected FeP(211) surface, thus enhancing the electrocatalytic performance. Recently, Sargent's group reported S passivated-InP colloidal quantum dots for CO2 reduction to formate with a FE of 93% and a partial current density of 930 mA cm−2, reaching a potential industrial activity level.556 They found that exposed surface indium metal atoms functioned as adsorption and reduction sites for the CO2 reduction reaction, while S sites dissociated water and provided the protons. Moreover, the high selectivity for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO has been investigated over other designed TMPs, such as AgP2 and Sn4P3.72,567 A typical example is ultrasmall AgP2 NPs, which were successfully obtained via a hot-injection strategy (Fig. 12a).72 Compared with the blank Ag counterparts, the introduction of P into Ag significantly enhanced the catalytic performance for CO2 reduction (Fig. 12b). The operando extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) results suggested that the phosphorus atom stabilized the configuration of the Ag atom, which intrinsically determined the catalytic activity and selectivity (Fig. 12c). DFT calculations indicated that phosphorus alloying enhanced the hydrogen adsorption energy and thus the adsorbed H atom further favored the selective process of CO production over Ag sites, retarding the competitive H2 evolution reaction (Fig. 12d and e). Promisingly, the ratio of syngas was tunable by controlling the applied potentials, furnishing the primary requirements of Fischer–Tropsch chemistry for various targeted products (Fig. 12f). The detection of CO2 reduction products generally requires a combination of multiple analytical methods such as gas chromatography, ion chromatography, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and liquid chromatography. However, in the early work on the analysis of products, limited by the experimental conditions, it is a challenging task to accurately detect all products at the same time, especially for the multi-carbon products, which may potentially affect the study of the structure–activity relationship. For example, NixPy materials are generally perceived as superior HER catalysts.545 However, Calvinho et al. found that by adjusting the atom ratio of nickel to phosphorus in the NixPy catalysts, highly selective preparation of electrocatalytic multi-carbon products (methylglyoxal and 2,3-furandiol) can be achieved over the Ni2P electrocatalyst.558
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of as-prepared AgP2 NPs. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of different Ag and AgP2 samples. (c) In situ EXAFS spectra of AgP2 NPs after 30 min at the specified potential. Calculated free energy for the (d) H2 and (e) CO evolution reactions. (f) Schematic diagram of selective conversion of CO2 and H2O-to-syngas on AgP2(211). (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM image of the Ru2P–rGO composite. (i) NH3 yields and Faraday efficiencies of Ru2P–rGO/CP. (j) Recycling tests of Ru2P–rGO/CP at −0.05 V. (k) Bader charge results of the optimized Ru2P–rGO geometries before (left) and after (right) N2 adsorption. Calculated energy profiles of Ru2P–rGO for the NRR: (l) distal and (m) alternating mechanisms. (g–m) Reproduced from ref. 559 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
Ammonia (NH3), a green energy vector of N2 from the atmosphere, has played a pivotal role in sustaining all life forms. Currently, the commercial production of NH3 is predominantly based on the conventional Haber–Bosch process under high pressures and temperatures, which is extremely energy-consuming. Electrochemical nitrogen fixation via renewable energy technologies is promising for both biology and industry because it can convert water and N2 into NH3 under ambient conditions.568 For example, Sun's group recently reported a composite of Ru2P NPs and rGO for artificial electrochemical N2 fixation with excellent selectivity and stability under ambient conditions (Fig. 12g and h).559 The hybrid achieved an efficient NH3 yield of 32.8 mg h−1 mgCat.−1 with a Faraday efficiency (FE) of 13.04% and long-term durability in acid conditions (Fig. 12i and j). The optimized geometries combined with the Bader charge results indicated the charge redistribution before and after N2 molecule adsorption. DFT calculations revealed that the N2 molecule favorably adsorbed on two Ru atoms and the Ru2P–rGO hybrid can efficiently catalyze N2 conversion with a low energy barrier (Fig. 12k–m). In a similar fashion, the Cu3P–rGO system obtained comparable performance of N2 reduction.560 Su et al. developed small RhPx NPs anchored on an N,P co-doped carbon (NPC) framework for an efficient NRR.479 Interestingly, the catalytic activity of RhPx can be tuned by altering the content of P atoms via the control of the annealing temperature. The optimal Rh2P@NPC showed a high NH3 yield of 37.6 μg h−1 mgCat.−1 with a FE of 7.64%. DFT calculations demonstrated that the introduction of P atoms reduced the reaction energy barrier and facilitated the intermediate process. Additionally, Zhang et al. synthesized CoP NP-embedded carbon nanotubes (CoP/CN) using ZIF-67 as a template via a pyrolysis-phosphorization approach for the NRR under ambient conditions.569 The as-synthesized CoP/CN delivered a large NH3 yield of 48.9 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 with a FE of 8.7%, which was significantly superior to the Co/CN counterpart. Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the N2 molecule favorably adsorbed on three unsaturated coordinated Co atoms followed by an associative distal hydrogenation process on the CoP(112) plane. Furthermore, Li and coworkers synthesized ultrasmall PtP2 nanocrystals for the continuous production of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) via the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).561 The resultant PtP2 electrocatalyst delivered near unity selectivity at 0.27 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) with near zero-overpotential. Compared with pure Pt metal, the inclusion of phosphorus atoms promoted the hydrogenation pathway of OOH* with suppression of the dissociative pathway.


3.1.3 Oxidation reactions. 
The electrocatalytic oxidation reaction process has been recognized as one of the most promising candidates for producing value-added chemicals. For instance, ultrafine Pt NPs over the petaloid Fe2P surface were constructed for boosting the alcohol oxidation reaction (AOR).570 A strong electronic interaction existed due to the metal–support effect between Fe2P and Pt, which was underpinned by the defects and rigid structure of Fe2P. The electron-rich states can weaken the adsorption of poisoning CO intermediates on the Pt surface. Moreover, the petaloid structure facilitated a high dispersion degree of Pt NPs, and efficient mass and charge transfer during the alcohol oxidation reaction. Similarly, Bao et al. reported that core–shell PtRu alloy@FeP heterostructures with abundant interfaces manifested enhanced catalytic activity for alcohol electrooxidation and high anti-CO poisoning ability in comparison with the commercial and home-made PtRu/C counterparts.222 During the reaction, the shell of PtRu alloy with electron-rich states could weaken the CO–metal bonding energy. Besides, the FeP species activated water to produce oxygen-containing species that were beneficial to CO oxidation.
Moreover, Wang's group synthesized novel well-dispersed Pd NP/Ni5P4 NS on NF by the combination of red phosphorous phosphorization with a simple electrochemical deposition technique.562 The obtained 3D framework with a large electrochemically active surface exhibited much superior activity toward the glucose oxidation reaction with a value of 180.5 ± 3.07 mA cm−2. The control experiments indicated the Pd rather than Ni5P4 species as the main active sites while the 3D Ni5P4 promoted the catalytic efficiency of Pd for glucose oxidation owing to the metallic nature and fast mass transfer. Recently, a two-electrode system integrating electrochemical syngas synthesis on a ZnxCd1−xS-amine cathode with the selective semi-oxidation of tetrahydroisoquinoline at a Ni2P anode was constructed.571 The system obtained a ratio of syngas (CO/H2) of about 0.7 and nearly total conversion of tetrahydroisoquinoline to dihydroisoquinoline. Furthermore, the study of the anodic hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) over TMPs is still limited, which is paramount for the development of alkaline electrolyzers and fuel cells. However, the current efficient catalysts are predominantly based on noble metal-based phosphides.572


3.1.4 Other electrochemical applications. 
Amino aromatic compounds are a class of versatile and valuable feedstocks for drug and chemical synthesis and material design and modification. For example, Chong et al. reported a facile potential-controlled selective electrosynthesis of valuable aromatics over a CoP NS cathode.563 In the reaction processes, the tuned intermediates were charged by the applied potentials and H2O or D2O acted as a hydrogen source to deuterate amino aromatics. The selectivity was credited to the favorable adsorption of the –NO2 group on the electron-deficient CoP. Similarly, Zhang et al. demonstrated gram-scale selective semi-hydrogenation (deuteration) of alkynes via an adsorbed atomic hydrogen (H*ads) addition pathway over a Pd–P alloy cathode.564 They found that P-doping promoted the preferential adsorption of alkynes and the production of H*ads from water, leading to the enhanced performance. Recently, Liu and coworkers fabricated crystalline CoP NS array/Ti plate electrodes for dehalogenation of florfenicol (FLO).565 The resultant C–CoP/Ti electrode delivered 97.4% dehalogenation of FLO in 0.5 h. The high-quality crystalline structure promoted atomic hydrogen generation, and the hierarchical arrays provided affluent active sites and accelerated the mass transport and electron transfer.
Electrochemical advanced oxidation processes are appealing technologies for the direct elimination of organic contaminants involving oxidizing species, such as HO˙, SO4˙− and Cl˙.573 For instance, Feng et al. demonstrated that iron doping can induce aggravating electron transfer from Co atoms to P atoms in Fe1−xCoxP/NF to enhance the electrooxidation capability,566 which favorably produced M(HO˙) instead of O2 for the removal of organic pollutant tetracycline. Furthermore, Huo et al. firstly developed a novel 3D Cu3P NW-assisted copper mesh electrode for the water purification process.574 The established electroporation-disinfection cell equipped with Cu3P–Cu electrodes achieved complete bacterial inactivation (>6.0log removal; no live bacteria in the effluent) with a low voltage of 1 V and a high flux (2.0 m3 h−1 m−2) in 12 h. The low-voltage electroporation effect of Cu3P NWs enabled effective bacterial inactivation. Table 2 summarizes representative electrocatalytic applications over MP-based systems.
Table 2 Summary of the electrocatalytic performance over representative MP-based reaction systems




Catalysts
Applications
Electrode
Mass loading (mg cm−2)
Electrolyte
Scan rate (mV s−1)
Activities
Ref.




rGO: Reduced graphene oxide; In-PC: indium-doped porous carbon; FE: faradaic efficiency; THIQs: tetrahydroisoquinolines; DHIQs: dihydroisoquinolines; FLO: florfenicol; GCE: glassy carbon electrode; GDE: gas diffusion electrode; NF: nickel foam; CP: carbon paper.




Rh2P
Hydrazine oxidation reaction boosted HER
GCE
0.114
0.5 M H2SO4 with 50 mM N2H4
5
10 mA cm−2 at an electrolysis voltage of 0.377 V

552



MoO2–FeP@C
Biomass electrooxidation reaction boosted HER
NF
1.9
1.0 M KOH with
5
10 mA cm−2 at an electrolysis voltage of 1.486 V

553



10 mM 5-hydroxymethylfurfural


Ni2P
Semi-dehydrogenation of THIQ boosted HER
NF
—
1.0 M KOH with 0.5 mmol THIQs
5
DHIQ FE: about 96%

281



Co3FePx
Carbohydrate oxidation reaction boosted HER
NF
5.9
1.0 M KOH with 0.1 M carbohydrate
5
10 mA cm−2 at an electrolysis voltage of 1.35 V

554



FeP
CO2 reduction
Ti mesh
1.2
0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte
2
CH3OH FE: about 80.2%

555



InP
CO2 reduction
GDE
0.04
3 M KOH
50
Formate FE: 93%

556



MoP@In–PC
CO2 reduction
CP
1.0
30 wt% [Bmim]PF6, 65 wt% MeCN, and 5 wt% H2O
20
Formate FE: 96.5%

557



AgP2
CO2 reduction
GCE
0.5
0.5 M KHCO3
5
CO FE: 82%

72



Ni2P
CO2 reduction
Aluminium
—
0.5 M KHCO3 with 0.5 M phosphate buffer solution
0.5
2,3-Furandiol FE: 71% at 0.00 V vs. RHE

558



Ru2P–rGO
N2 fixation
CP
0.1
0.1 M HCl
—
NH3 FE:13.04% at −0.05 V vs. RHE

559



Cu3P–rGO
N2 fixation
CP
0.1
0.1 M HCl
—
NH3 FE: 10.11% at −0.45 V vs. RHE

560



Rh2P@NPC
N2 fixation
CP
0.2
0.1 M Na2SO4
—
NH3 FE: 7.64% at −0.05 V vs. RHE

479



PtP2
O2 reduction
GCE
0.2
0.1 M HClO4
10
H2O2 production: 2.26 mmol h−1 cm−2

561



PtRu@FeP
Alcohol fuel oxidation
GCE
—
0.5 M H2SO4 with 1 M CH3OH
50
Peak current density: 75 mA cm−2

222



PdNP/Ni–P
Glucose oxidation
NF
—
0.1 M KOH with 0.1 M glucose
50
180.5 ± 3.07 mA cm−2

562



CoP
Nitroarene reduction
NF
—
1.0 M KOH
5
Azoxybenzene FEs: ∼99% at from −0.65 to −0.95 V

563



Pd–P
Semi-hydrogenation of alkynes
CP
2.0
1 M KOH with 0.2 mmol of alkynes
10
4-Aminostyrene FE: 78% at −0.8 V vs. Hg/HgO

564



CoP
Dehalogenation of halogenated antibiotic FLO
Ti plate
1.05
0.1 M Na2SO4 with florfenicol 20 mg L−1
50
FLO dehalogenation efficiency: 97.4% in 30 min at −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl

565



Fe0.53Co0.47P
Electrooxidation of organic pollutants
NF
3.8
0.05 M Na2SO4 with 70 mg L−1 tetracycline hydrochloride
5
94% of tetracycline removed in 60 min

566






3.2 Photocatalytic applications
Solar energy-driven chemical reactions have attracted tremendous attention in recent years since the seminal work by Fujishima and Honda in 1972.575 In principle, when a photon possesses equal or larger energy than the band gap of a semiconductor, the absorbed photon induces the transition of an electron from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), generating an electron–hole charge pair. Then, the charge carriers undergo bulk and surface migration processes, eventually interacting with the adsorbed molecules on the surface.576 So far, MPs have been exploited as photocatalysts and cocatalysts for various photocatalytic redox reactions, benefiting from the intrinsic semiconductor or metallic properties.

3.2.1 As photocatalysts. 
MPs consisting of metal elements in the IIIA (13) and IVA (14) groups possess desirable properties, including high electron mobilities and superior optical absorption owing to the narrow band gap transitions.76,577,578 For instance, Sato and Arai constructed a novel biomimetic Z-scheme system by conjugating the InP/Ru-complex with a TiO2/Pt hybrid for stable photochemical reduction of CO2 into HCOOH in an aqueous medium under simulated light irradiation (Fig. 13a–c).579 The selectivity for the HCOOH product over the Z-scheme system was >70% and the energy conversion efficiency from solar to chemical reached about 0.03–0.04%, which approached that of a natural plant. Recently, using the depletion layer model combined with surface photovoltage spectroscopy measurements over a Ni2P modified p-GaP composite, Osterloh et al. demonstrated why p-type semiconductors afforded low photocatalytic activity compared to n-type semiconductors for the HER.97 This finding contributed to the development of p-type and tandem photocatalysts for the solar-driven HER. In general, transition metal-based phosphide catalysts are metallic or have low band gaps.580 The carrier recombination is too quick to effectively trigger any catalytic reaction. In this respect, Cu3P-based core–shell heterostructures were constructed through a facile solvothermal method.58 In the proposed p–n junction, the existing internal electric field between n-type CdS nanorods (NRs) and p-type Cu3P significantly facilitated charge separation and transfer, thus enhancing the H2 evolution rate in water. However, for the explicit origin of the activity, the role of Cu3P as an active site (cocatalyst) deserves to be further considered. Similarly, Wang and coauthors recently constructed a highly unbalanced charge distribution over a NiCoP/TiO2 sensitized heterostructure for the hydrolysis of NH3BH3 under visible light irradiation.581 They found that optimizing the band structure ensured a directional electron flow from NiCoP to TiO2 while the Ni2P or CoP counterpart cannot form a similar structure.
 Fig. 13  (a) The photocatalytic activity of HCOOH evolution over the InP/[MCE]s with no external electrical bias. (b) Photocatalytic HCOOH formation over InP/[MCE2-A + MCE4] conjugated with TiO2/Pt as a function of irradiation time. (c) Schematic diagram of CO2 reduction over the designed Z-scheme system. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 579 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. (d) DRS spectra and (e) photocatalytic H2 generation activity of S-CN, Fe2P/S-CN, Co2P/S-CN, and Ni2P/S-CN. (f) The free-energy diagrams for the HER of S-CN, Fe2P/S-CN, Co2P/S-CN, and Ni2P/S-CN. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 587 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (g) HAADF-STEM image of CoPSA–CdS. (h) Co k3-weighted FT spectra in R space. (i) Atomic geometry model of CoPSA–CdS. (j) The comparison of the FA dehydrogenation activity over different catalyst samples. The inset is the photocatalytic mechanism of FA dehydrogenation and the HER. (k) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mapping of CoPSA–CdS after the reaction. (g–k) Reproduced from ref. 594 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. 


3.2.2 As a cocatalyst. Reduction reactions. 
Inspired by the superior properties for electrochemical water splitting, TMPs as noble metal-free cocatalysts in semiconductor photocatalytic systems have shown a promoting role in the catalytic activity and stability based on main aspects including enhancing photon absorption, facilitating charge transfer, providing active sites, lowering the reaction energy barrier, and strengthening the mechanical properties. Metal-free graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), a conjugated polymer with a large π-conjugated structure, has garnered ever-growing interest as a promising photocatalyst due to its merits of earth-abundant elements, high stability, and tuned electronic band structure. Integrating TMPs (Ni2P,62,582,583 FeP,294 RhPx,584 CoP,585 and MoP586 as cocatalysts) with g-C3N4 into hierarchical nanostructures has been developed for solar water splitting system. For example, Wen et al. developed a Ni2P NP decorated g-C3N4 composite catalyst for the photocatalytic HER, exhibiting a superior H2 production rate of 2849.5 μmol g−1 h−1 with robust durability.582 The excellent photocatalytic activity was mainly attributed to the ultrafine Ni2P cocatalyst particle size exposing abundant catalytically active sites and the intimate interfaces with g-C3N4 inducing efficient charge separation and migration. In another example, Sun et al. demonstrated the effect of TMPs with different metal elements (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) on photocatalytic H2 generation over S-doped g-C3N4.587 They found that the phosphide cocatalysts in reaction systems can enhance the electrical conductivity, broaden the spectrum absorption range, and facilitate the charge separation and transportation efficiency, thus reducing the energy barrier for the HER (Fig. 13d–f). Recently, crystalline MOFs as photocatalysts were investigated but they are in their infancy for enhanced H2 production with the integration of TMPs, which can facilitate photo-induced link-to-cluster charge transfer and accelerate the reaction dynamics.588
Metal chalcogenides as promising inorganic semiconductor platforms have been widely studied owing to their desirable energy band gap and suitable energy level positions.589 However, the inefficient photoinduced carrier separation results in low solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency and concomitant photocorrosion, which hinders practical photocatalytic applications.46 Recently, Xie's group demonstrated the critical role of non-noble cobalt phosphide (Co2P) in the photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction using CdS as a model photocatalyst.590 Transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy, trap-state PL lifetime spectroscopy, and theoretical calculation results revealed that efficient photogenerated electron transfer occurred from CdS to the Co2P cocatalyst. They found that the electron injection from CdS to Co2P induced the efficient Fermi-level upshifting of the Co2P cocatalyst, driving the photocatalytic H2 evolution. Besides, this synergetic strategy has been further extended to chalcogenide-based solid solution systems. As a typical example, Qiu and coauthors constructed a hybrid of CdxZn1−xSe nanotubes and CoP NPs via facile mechanical mixing treatment for seawater splitting,591 which delivered a high H2 evolution efficiency of 45.1 mmol h−1 g−1 with a quantum yield of 11.8% at 520 nm. The tunable energy band of CdxZn1−xSe facilitated photogenerated electron transfer to CoP by the interfacial chemical bonds.
Due to the merits of high stability, low toxicity, and high gravimetric hydrogen content, formic acid as an important hydrogen storage material can be produced from a CO2 neutral cycle, which is promising for H2 evolution as a proton source.592,593 Guo's group synthesized atomically dispersed Co–P3 species on CdS NRs (CoPSA–CdS) for photocatalytic H2 evolution via formic acid splitting.594 The Co and P elements were uniformly distributed on the CdS NRs, and no obvious Co or CoP aggregation was found, which was illustrated by HAADF-STEM, XAFS characterization, and first-principles simulation (Fig. 13g–i). The resultant CoPSA–CdS showed 50-fold higher activity than the S-coordinated Co counterpart, and superior activity to noble metal (Ru-, Rh-, Pd-, or Pt-) NP loaded CdS NRs (Fig. 13j). They found that CoPSA had a unique electron-rich feature in the hybrid, greatly accelerating the carrier separation efficiency and achieving better dissociative adsorption and activation of formic acid (inset of Fig. 13j). The CoPSA–CdS catalyst retained structural and componential stability after a 24 h test (Fig. 13k). Furthermore, Ni2P as a cocatalyst with suitable band edges has been exploited for the photocatalytic N2 reduction reaction.595 Ye et al. demonstrated the fixation of N2 using Ni2P decorated Cd0.5Zn0.5S solid solution with high photocatalytic activity and stability.596 However, the improper VB position of Cd0.5Zn0.5S led to the oxidation of the NH3 product. Besides, product detection using 15N isotopic tracing seems indispensable to investigate the origin of the activity.
Until now, in the drive toward sustainable chemistry, TMPs as cocatalysts have been investigated in other metal-free and organic–inorganic hybrid semiconductor-based photosystems. For example, Yuan and coauthors synthesized a Co2P/black phosphorus heterostructure via in situ hydrothermal growth of a Co2P cocatalyst onto the edges of black phosphorus NSs for photocatalytic H2 generation. The interfacial Co–P bonds facilitated photogenerated charge transfer, resulting in enhanced photocatalytic performance.57 In another example, Xiang's group reported an organic–inorganic hybrid for stable and efficient photocatalytic H2 generation from seawater, in which carbon-encapsulated nickel phosphide (CNi2P) as a cocatalyst was loaded on a conjugated organic polymer (COP).597 The resultant composite attained a distinct photocatalytic H2 production rate of 2.5 mmol g−1 h−1 (λ ≥ 400 nm) and excellent stability after 16 intermittent cycles. Experimental and theoretical calculation results demonstrated that the carbon layer around Ni2P not only strengthened the π–π interaction with the COPs but also facilitated electron transfer from COP to the surface of the CNi2P cocatalyst, thus leading to outstanding activity and stability. Currently, the design and synthesis of robust TMPs for efficient splitting of natural seawater rather than buffered or simulated seawater is daunting yet valuable.598,599 In the recent work of Cai and coworkers,48 a CoP cocatalyst was in situ photodeposited on the methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (MAPbI3) as an organic–inorganic semiconductor, which was applied in the H2 evolution reaction via splitting of hydroiodic acid (HI). In comparison with pristine MAPbI3, MAPbI3/CoP exhibited significantly enhanced stability due to the efficient charge transfer and interfacial reaction dynamics.
Generally, sacrificial reagents are required for efficient consumption of photogenerated holes during the HER, which potentially increases the system cost and retards the utilization of holes. An ideal strategy is to construct a dual-function photoelectrode system that is composed of the HER and an organic oxidation reaction. Exhilaratingly, Reisner's group successfully demonstrated an inexpensive carbon nitride/nickel phosphide (CNx|Ni2P) composite for the photoreforming of poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) and poly(lactic acid) (PLA) into H2 fuel and kinds of value-added organic chemicals under alkaline aqueous conditions.134 They found that ultrafine Ni2P NPs promoted the charge separation and catalytic processes over CNx, with robust photostability (Fig. 14a and b). Remarkably, CNx|Ni2P also exhibited generality for the valorization of nonrecyclable waste with low biodegradability, such as microplastics (polyester microfibers) and food-contaminated plastic, while maintaining the conversion efficiency (Fig. 14c). The Ni2P NPs on CNx enhanced the light scattering and facilitated charge separation and transfer for the splitting of plastic waste (Fig. 14d–f). Admittedly, the transformation of more recalcitrant plastic contamination or mixed plastic waste streams still requires long-term research efforts in the future. In this aspect, a hybrid of photocatalysis and other treatment technologies may supply sustainable solutions for the valorization of plastic waste.606 Similarly, Chao et al. demonstrated efficient and atom economic methanol dehydrogenation–acetalization into H2 and 1,1-dimethoxymethane (DMM) over CdS/Ni2P hybrids under visible light irradiation.600 The optimal catalyst reached a DMM production rate of 188.42 mmol g−1 h−1 with a selectivity of 82.93%.
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of the CNx|Ni2P composite (the inset shows the typical lattice spacing of Ni2P). (b) Long-term photoreforming of model molecules (PET and PLA). (c) Photoreforming of nonrecyclable polyester microfibers, a PET bottle, and an oil-coated PET bottle. (d) Diffuse-reflectance UV-vis and (e) photoluminescence emission spectra of CNx and CNx|Ni2P. (f) Schematic illustration of the polymer photoreforming mechanism over CNx|Ni2P. (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. (g) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the NiCoOP–NP@MHCF catalyst: (I) phosphorization and (II) thermal annealing in N2. (h) SEM image of Ni/Co–PS–PAN fibers. (i) SEM and (j) TEM images of NiCoOP–NP@Cx fibers. (k) SEM and (l) TEM images of NiCoOP–NP@MHCF. (m) The activity of CO and H2 evolution over NiCoOP–NP@MHCF as a function of reaction time. (n) The wavelength-dependent activity over the Ru-photosensitized NiCoOP–NP@MHCF system along with the absorption spectrum of Ru. (n) Schematic diagram of the Ru sensitized CO2 reduction process over the NiCoOP–NP@MHCF cocatalyst. (g–o) Reproduced from ref. 601 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
Light-driven dye-sensitized TMP reactions as another effective strategy to utilize solar energy have been ingeniously investigated. Photosensitizers, such as polypyridine-based transition metal complexes or organic dyes with long-lived excited states, can produce active electrons for driving reduction reactions under light irradiation. Recently, nickel cobalt oxyphosphide anchored on the walls of multichannel hollow carbon fibers (MHCFs) was fabricated by Wang et al. for CO2 photoreduction (Fig. 14g–l).601 The unique multichannel hollow nanostructure effectively promoted mass/charge transfer and improved the CO2 adsorption. Meanwhile, using Ru(bpy)32+ (denoted as Ru) as a photosensitizer gave optimal metal oxyphosphide exposed abundant active sites, manifesting enhanced catalytic efficiency for CO2 reduction (Fig. 14m–o). Fu et al. demonstrated CoP-based carbonaceous materials mixed with a Ru-based photosensitizer as catalytic systems used for efficient CO2 transformation to CO under visible-light irradiation.602 The as-prepared hybrid catalysts CoP/rGO showed excellent catalytic activities in CO2 reduction to CO, with a value of 47330 μmol g−1 in the first 2 h of reaction, with bulk CoP and CoP/CNT for comparison. The improved CO-generating rate was attributed to the strong interactions between CoP and the carbon-support materials, abundant P defects on the CoP surface, and partially adsorbed H2O molecules on the catalyst surface. Furthermore, our group reported the graphene-supported ultrathin Ni2P NSs as cocatalysts for Eosin Y (dye) sensitized H2 evolution using triethanolamine (TEOA) as a sacrificial agent.214 The optimal performance was 2.26 mmol g−1 h−1 under visible light irradiation, which was ascribed to the synergism of abundant exposed active sites and improved conductivity and dispersibility in the system.
Oxidation reactions. 
In addition to the aforementioned studies on reduction reactions, as another important role, TMPs have been well-established for the photocatalytic OER and environmental remediation as cocatalysts. For example, Dong et al. investigated CoP NPs embedded in nitrogen and carbon matrices (CoP/NC) as cocatalysts for water oxidation using Ru as a photosensitizer and S2O82− as a sacrificial electron acceptor.604 The optimal reaction system delivered an O2 evolution rate of 901.5 mmol h−1 g−1 with a quantum yield of 61.5%. Similar to the electrocatalytic OER, an amorphous CoOx layer in situ formed on the CoP/NC surface during the reaction, which facilitated electron transport effectively. Recently, Liu's group demonstrated that the inclusion of FeP and trace Fe2+ in the heterogeneous Fenton reaction improved the rapid reduction of Fe(III), resulting in efficient H2O2 decomposition and MB degradation over a wide pH range, which has immense implications for environmental remediation.299 As another typical example, Cu3P acting as an electron mediator facilitated the intermediate formation of sulfate and other radicals for the degradation of antibiotic sulfamethoxazole. The synergistic effect of Cu3P and solar irradiation facilitated the production of persulfate activators in ultrapure or wastewater.605
Currently, only one of the two single half-reactions may take place in some MP-based photocatalytic systems, which only uses photoexcited electrons or holes, leading to charge imbalance and recombination. Thus, this situation necessitates the solar community to design and construct targeted systems capable of the directional utilization of well-separated holes and electrons with a sufficiently long lifetime to drive the overall reactions in a single system. Besides, subject to the development level of characterization technology and reaction devices, the proposed reaction mechanisms in most of the reported studies generally focused on the three basic photochemical processes are still unambiguous, especially for multicomponent MP-based systems. Moreover, harsh reaction conditions, such as more test cycles or longer reaction time, are required for the in-depth study of structural stability. Table 3 summarizes representative photocatalytic applications over MP-based systems.
Table 3 Summary of the photocatalytic performance over representative MP-based reaction systems




Photocatalysts
Cocatalysts
Applications
Light sources
Sacrificial agents
Activities (μmol g−1 h−1); AQY (%)
Ref.





a The calculated value; GR: graphene; NC: nitrogen and carbon matrices; BCN: boron-doped carbon nitride; COP: covalent organic polymer; MB: methylene blue; SMX: sulfamethoxazole; H2A: ascorbic acid; NaHA: sodium ascorbate; AQY: apparent quantum yield.





p-GaP
Ni2P
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
0.05 M KI
H2:270a

97



InP
Ni
H2 evolution
LED light; 525 nm
0.2 M H2A/NaHA
H2: 202; 8.9 (525 nm)

531



p-Cu3P/n-CdS
—
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
1.25 M Na2S with 1.75 M Na2SO3
H2: 200; 25.0 (450 nm)

58



g-C3N4
Ni2P
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA (10 v/v%)
H2: 2849.5; 18.8 (420 nm)

582



g-C3N4
MoP
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
TEOA (10 v/v%)
H2: 3868; 21.6 (405 nm)

586



CdS
NiCoP
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Lactic acid (10 v/v%)
H2: 80800; 45.0 (420 nm)

482



CdS@CuS
NixP
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
0.1 M Na2S/Na2SO3
H2: 18160; 13.1 (420 nm)

46



CdxZn1−xSe
CoP NPS
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; AM 1.5
1.25 M Na2S with 1.75 M Na2SO3
H2: 45100; 11.8 (520 nm)

591



UiO-66-NH2
Ni2P
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 380 nm
Triethylamine (3 v/v%)
H2: 409.1

588



COP
Ni2P
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
0.2 M Na2SO3/Na2S
H2: 2500; 2.5 (400 nm)

597



MAPbI3
CoP
H2 evolution
150 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
HI solution
H2: 2087.5

48



Black phosphorus
Co2P
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
0.1 M Na2S/Na2SO3
H2: 202; 2.4 (420 nm)

57



Fluorescein-based dye
CoP
H2 evolution
500 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA (5 v/v%)
H2: 12100a

252



Eosin Y (dye)
Ni2P/GR
H2 evolution
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA (10 v/v%)
H2: 2258

214



P-Doped g-C3N4
NiCoP
Overall water splitting
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
—
H2: 239.3; H2O2: 239.3a

141



CdS
Ni2P
Methanol dehydrogenation
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Methanol
H2: 188420; DMM: 188420

600



CdS
Co–P3
Formic acid dehydrogenation
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Formic acid (20 v/v%)
H2: 34309000a

594



CNx
Ni2P
Photoreforming of plastic waste
Solar simulator; AM 1.5
Plastic waste
H2: 46; mixed organic products

134



InP
Ru complex
CO2 reduction
Solar simulator; AM 1.5
10 mM NaHCO3
TON: HCOOH: >17 at 24 h

579



[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2
NiCoOP
CO2 reduction
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
TEOA (16.7 v/v%)
CO: 166000a

601



[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2
CoP/GR
CO2 reduction
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
TEOA (25 v/v%)
CO: 47330

602



BCN
Ni2P
N2 fixation
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm
—
NH3: 0.6a




Cd0.5Zn0.5S
Ni2P
N2 fixation
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
—
NH3: 254; 4.3 (420 nm)

596



p-GaP
—
N2 fixation
300 W Xe lamp; simulated sunlight
—
NH3: 100 (μmol cm−2 h−1)

603



[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2
CoP/NC
O2 evolution
LED light; 460 nm
1.2 g L−1 Na2S2O8a
O2: 901500

604



—
FeP
MB degradation
Natural light
0.255 g L−1 H2O2
95.74% of MB (100 ppm) degraded in 0.5 min

299



—
Cu3P
SMX degradation
100 W Xe lamp; solar light
0.1 g L−1 Na2S2O8
0.5 mg L−1 SMX completely degraded in 15 min

605






3.3 Mild thermocatalytic applications

3.3.1 Hydrogenation reactions and organic pollution degradation. 
TMP nanomaterials have demonstrated their power as alternatives to widely used sulfides due to their high activity for hydrodesulfurization (HDS) of petroleum feedstocks.607,608 However, the traditional thermocatalytic reactions consume a lot of energy, which is contrary to the concept of sustainable development. Accordingly, the application of TMPs for mild selective thermocatalytic reactions has garnered great attention as important biorefinery technologies.609 As a typical example, Song et al. developed ultrafine Ni2P NPs dispersed on an N,P-codoped carbon support to efficiently synthesize alkynyl thioethers through cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) of terminal alkynes and thiols under mild conditions.610 Among the reaction processes, thiol rapidly underwent oxidative addition over Ni2P NPs to form the intermediates at 50 °C using air as an oxidant. Pyridinic N on the carbon substrate as the basic sites facilitated the activation of terminal alkynes via hydrogen bonding interactions.
Besides, Wu and coworkers reported the successful synthesis of noble metal-based MPs on SiO2 substrates by a temperature-programmed reduction method for the hydrodechlorination (HDC) of 4-chlorophenol.106 The as-prepared Pd3P0.95, Rh2P, and PtP2 catalysts exhibited higher HDC rates than their corresponding pure noble metal catalysts at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. They found that the P species can prohibit the sorption of Cl ions on the surface, which induced the fast deactivation of untreated metal counterparts. Considering that the MP catalyst still becomes inactive eventually despite exhibiting satisfactory stability under lab-test conditions, how to regenerate it after a long-term catalytic reaction close to practical application requirements or to effectively recycle it as a source is worthy of further study.
The reversible process of adsorption/desorption of hydrogen has been identified as the promoter for facilitating similar hydrotreating processes over TMPs. For example, Chen and coauthors reported the fabrication of several Al2O3 supported nickel phosphides (NixPy) with high dispersion using NiAl-LDHs as precursors (Fig. 15a–d). The as-prepared catalysts were used for hydrogenation of phenylacetylene, which afforded superior activity, selectivity, and stability at 100 °C (Fig. 15e–g).261 The experimental and DFT calculation results confirmed that the isolation effect of Ni sites by P atoms increasing the Ni–Ni bond length modulated the adsorption state of the alkene intermediate. In addition, the reduced electron density of Ni sites decreased the desorption energy of the alkene, owing to the electron transfer from Ni to P. Similarly, Mitsudome and coworkers reported that the prepared nano-Co2P can efficiently promote the hydrogenation of nitriles including aliphatic-, aromatic-, and multi-nitriles to the corresponding amines under a 1 bar H2 atmosphere.611 Owing to the modulation of the d-electron density of Co atoms, the air-stable metallic nano-Co2P delivered a TON exceeding 58000 in 1 h for the hydrogenation of valeronitrile. Currently, the conversion of electricity to heat based on the heating effect of resistance is the mainstream form of low-temperature heat supply sources. Therefore, the exploitation of innovative heat sources using simple devices to drive mild thermocatalytic reactions also deserves incessant efforts, such as solar heat and industrial waste heat. Furthermore, Zhu and coworkers recently developed a yolk–shell nanoreactor consisting of CoP and nitrogen-doped graphene for bisphenol A degradation.612 In advanced oxidation processes, CoP efficiently activated peroxymonosulfate to produce oxidant SO4˙− and showcased superior recycling properties under thermal treatment. This unique structure endowed the catalysts with high adsorption capacity and a confinement effect, which promoted the utilization efficiency of the SO4˙− radical.
 Fig. 15  TEM images of (a) Ni/Al2O3, (b) Ni12P5/Al2O3, (c) Ni2P/Al2O3, and (d) NiP2/Al2O3. (e and f) Catalytic conversion and selectivity for the hydrogenation of phenylacetylene to styrene over the as-prepared catalysts as a function of reaction time, respectively: (a) Ni/Al2O3, (b) Ni12P5/Al2O3, (c) Ni2P/Al2O3, (d) NiP2/Al2O3, and (e) Ni2P/γ-Al2O3 prepared by the direct impregnation method. (g) The cycling stability of the Ni2P/Al2O3 catalyst. (a–g) Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. (h) TEM and (i) HRTEM images of the obtained Ni2P NPs. (j) H2 evolution rate as a function of temperature in the hydrolysis of AB using the Ni2P (0.054 mmol) catalyst in water. Inset: The Arrhenius plot. (k) Recycling of the Ni2P catalyst in water, with the addition of fresh AB to the reaction system in each cycle. (h–k) Reproduced from ref. 616 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015. 


3.3.2 Splitting of hydrogen storage materials (SHSM). 
Among various chemical hydrogen storage materials, hydrides, such as NaBH4 and ammonia borane (AB), are promising chemicals benefiting from their high hydrogen gravimetric storage capacity, non-toxicity, and stable chemical properties.613,614 The property of partial charge transfer from the metal to phosphorus can modulate the electronic structure of MPs and thus reduce the reaction energy barrier for the dehydrogenation of the hydrogen storage material. For example, rugae-like Ni2P–CoP arrays on NF were fabricated by two-step electrodeposition and phosphorization treatments.615 Compared to the CoP counterpart, the optimal catalyst with lower Ea, owing to the modulated electronic structure with the introduction of Ni species, achieved an H2 generation rate of 4323.0 mL min−1 g−1 and excellent stability for NaBH4 hydrolysis. Notably, AB with hydrogen content (19.6 wt%) has been intensively studied as compared to NaBH4. As a typical example, Peng et al. demonstrated nanostructured Ni2P NPs as a catalyst toward hydrolysis of AB under ambient conditions.616 The Ni2P NPs exhibited an average particle size of less than 12 nm with agglomeration, which were single crystals with exposed (111) planes (Fig. 15h and i). Ea was 44.6 kJ mol−1 calculated based on the Arrhenius formula for the AB hydrolysis reaction in the range 273–323 K, which was comparable to those for Ru-based bimetallic catalysts (Fig. 15j). After the seventh cycle, the catalyst still showed good stability with a slightly decreased hydrogen-generating rate, in an ambient atmosphere at 298 K, possibly owing to agglomeration (Fig. 15k).
Moreover, various substrates with porous and large active areas are applied to interact with MPs for enhancing the rate of the AB hydrolysis reaction. For instance, Qu et al. prepared NiCoP NPs on ZIF-67 derived O-doped porous carbon for the hydrolysis of AB at 298 K.617 Owing to the multicomponent synergy, the as-made composite attained superior H2 evolution activity with a TOF value of 95.24 mol molcat−1 min−1 in NaOH solution. In addition, taking advantage of the strong metal–support interaction, Rakap et al. prepared NiCoP NPs supported on a Pd-activated TiO2 substrate for efficient H2 release from AB aqueous solution.45 Maximum H2 generation rates of 60 and 400 mL min−1 gcatalyst−1 were obtained at 25 and 55 °C, respectively. Furthermore, the MP catalysts with intrinsic magnetic properties can be conveniently separated from the suspension solution by an applied external magnet instead of using conventional filtration and centrifugation methods.619 However, the recycling of these hydrogen storage materials has been a major bottleneck for restricting practical applications.620
Polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysers (PEMEs) are promising for the widespread commercialization of production of H2 and O2, which are spatially separated by a proton exchange membrane to transfer protons.621 However, gas crossover as a drawback could lead to a low product yield while engendering an explosive gas mixture in the PEME.622 A decoupled electrolysis cell has proven to offer a feasible solution to realize gas product production and separation in overall water electrolysis. Thereinto, the evolved hydrogen can pair with a mediator to form an electron-coupled proton buffer (ECPB) system. Then, the spontaneous release of H2 gas can occur over proper catalysts in a separate reactor without energy input under mild conditions.623 For instance, MacDonald et al. reported efficient H2 evolution from reduced polyoxometalates as ECPBs over Ni5P4 and Ni2P, which was produced from reduced and protonated silicotungstic acid in the cathodic chamber of the electrolyzer.618 Currently, this coupling system is still complicated, requiring additional pumps and flow systems to balance the reaction rates of different units as well as the compatibility of the mediator and electrocatalytic reaction systems. Table 4 summarizes representative thermocatalytic applications over MP-based systems.
Table 4 Summary of the mild thermocatalytic performance over representative MP-based reaction systems




Thermocatalysts
Support
Applications
Reaction temperature (°C)
Reaction pressure (kPa)
Activities
Ref.





a The calculated value; conversion abbreviated as con.; selectivity abbreviated as sel.; OPC: oxygen doped porous carbon; BPA: bisphenol A.





Pd3P0.95
SiO2
Hydrodechlorination reaction
25
101.325
4-Chlorophenol: 8.16 μmol molPd−1 min−1a

106



NixPy
Al2O3
Hydrogenation reaction
100
303.975
Phenylacetylene: con. of 98.6%; sel. of 88.2% in 3 h

261



(CePO4)/Co2P
—
Hydrogenation reaction
90
405.300
Biomass levulinic acid: con. of 98.2%; sel. of 100% in 1.5 h

609



Co2P
Hydrotalcite
Hydrogenation reaction
130
101.325
Nitriles: yield 81–90%

611



Ni2P
N,P-Codoped carbon
Cross-dehydrogenative coupling reaction
50
101.325
Alkynyl thioethers: yield 71–93%

610



Ni2P–CoP
NF
Splitting of hydrogen storage material (NaBH4)
25
101.325
H2 evolution: 28.6 mol molcat−1 min−1a

615



Ni2P
—
Splitting of hydrogen storage material (AB)
25
101.325
H2 evolution: 40.4 mol molcat−1 min−1

616



Ni0.66Co0.19P0.15
OPC
Splitting of hydrogen storage material (AB)
25
101.325
H2 evolution: 95.2 mol molcat−1 min−1

617



Ni2P
Silica gel
Splitting of hydrogen storage material (silicotungstic acid)
25
101.325
H2 evolution: 2324.2 mol molcat−1 min−1a

618



CoP
N-Doped porous carbon
Bisphenol A degradation
25
101.325
BPA degradation efficiency: 18.96 min−1

612






3.4 Hybrid technological applications
Along with the rapid development in the catalytic fields described above, MPs have also shown exhilarating performances and merits in hybrid catalytic applications, such as photoelectrocatalysis, photovoltaic–electrolysis, plasmon-mediated electrocatalysis, photothermal catalysis, and photobiosynthesis. Besides, in the single electrochemical field, various technologies can be joined together using MPs as multifunctional electrode materials, such as coupling of a fuel cell and electrolysis for H2 evolution.406 The important challenge for developing hybrid catalytic systems is access to synergistic interactions with each component and operation in identical reaction conditions. In general, photocatalysis suffers from low efficiency using light energy as renewable source power in nature and requires undesirable sacrificial redox donors to ensure a sufficient concentration of active species. Meanwhile, electrochemical synthesis needs high applied potentials and consumes tremendous electricity. As a fusion, photoelectrochemical catalysis has sparked tremendous attention, which could harvest light energy to drive electrochemical processes.624,625 For example, Standing and coworkers realized the heteroepitaxy of a high-quality GaP NW film by the MOVPE method.626 By combining a Ti/Au layer subsequently coated with Pt, the obtained photocathode exhibited high current densities for the HER under AM 1.5G light illumination in HClO4 solution. However, the system was still faced with the issue of stability, which can be potentially improved by introducing a stable passivation layer, such as Al2O3 or TiO2.627,628 Recently, Pishgar et al. studied the corrosion mechanism between n- and p-type GaP anodes. By means of the in situ UV-vis absorption technique, they monitored the changes of the Ga and P concentration in acid solution as a function of time.629 The difference over the two types of GaP anodes was mainly ascribed to the anisotropic crystal etching and the inherent band energetics.
Benefitting from the salient activity and stability for electrocatalytic applications, the integration of TMP catalysts with classical photoelectrodes for photoelectrocatalytic applications has been exploited as well. As an example in photoelectrocatalytic water dissociation, Lewis's group fabricated a transmissive earth-abundant CoP HER film catalyst (40–120 nm in thickness) as a precious metal-free crystalline H2-evolving photocathode via electrodeposition (Fig. 16a and b).257 The as-prepared transparent CoP films manifested up to 90% optical transmission in the visible region, which resulted in a 3-fold photocurrent density increase of the Si photocathode for the HER (Fig. 16c). The photocurrent density at a representative Si(100)/CoP photocathode increased by 200% and remained stable for 12 h under simulated sunlight when exposed to 0.5 M H2SO4 (aq). Li et al. reported a promising NiFeP alloy decorated n-type Si array photoanode (NiFeP/n-Si) prepared via an electroless deposition strategy for the light-driven OER.630 The as-obtained NiFeP/n-Si photoanode delivered a photocurrent density of 15.5 mA cm−2 achieved at 1.23 V vs. RHE under 1 sun illumination. The kinetic results demonstrated that the NiFeP NPs on the n-Si photoanode significantly decreased the interfacial charge recombination and acted as active sites for water oxidation. Similarly, Schipper et al. prepared FeMnP layer coated TiO2 arrays via a single-source MOCVD strategy for the photoelectrochemical OER.631 The resultant core–shell photoanode obtained a photocurrent density of 1.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE under 1 sun irradiation. The formation of an intimate interfacial junction contributed to the hole transfer between TiO2 and the active FeMnP derived metal oxyhydroxide for O2 evolution.
 Fig. 16  (a) Diagram of the designed CoP–Si device structure and (b) corresponding AFM image of the electrode surface. (c) The PEC activity of the CoP–Si electrode. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (d) TEM images, model, and EDX line profile of partially covered Au/Pt/Ni2P heterostructures. (e) Linear scan voltammetry curves of the Au/Pt/Ni2P heterostructure (inset showing the j–v curves for “partially covered” and Au/Pt (4 wt% Pt) with chopped light illumination). (f) The proposed electron transfer mechanism for the photoanodic HER. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 634 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (g) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of NMF-NMFP for overall water splitting. (h) I–V curves of tandem perovskite solar cells under AM 1.5G illumination in a two-electrode configuration. (i) The operating current density and calculated STH efficiency of the PV–EC system (inset showing the setup model). (g–i) Reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
Bocarsly's group reported the selective reduction of CO2 to methanol using a p-type GaP based photoelectrochemical single cell. The optimal value of quantum efficiency ΦMeOH was observed to be 44% at −0.5 V vs. saturated calomel electrode under 365 nm illumination.632 Although a carbon rod was used as the counter electrode, it is still unavoidable that the products of CO2 reduction were oxidized. With increasing O2 concentration, the O2 reduction process also occurred in a single compartment reactor, deteriorating the performance of CO2 reduction.636 Most recently, the work of Ozin et al. demonstrated metal phosphides (Ni12P5 and Co2P) on silica as efficient photothermal catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation to CO with high activity, stability, and near-unity selectivity.633 Besides, the hydrogenation activity showed a significant improvement under different temperatures with the assistance of light irradiation. They found that the superior performance of Ni12P5 was attributed to the weak multi-coordinate bonding to CO resulting from the ensemble effect of P and the panchromatic spectrum absorption ability.
The energetic hot charge carriers induced by the localized surface plasmon resonance effect can promote electrocatalytic reactions over TMPs as real active sites when cooperating with plasmonic nanostructures. Park's group has recently synthesized Ni2P NPs on Au NRs via the phosphorization treatment of Pt-catalyzed quasi-epitaxial growth of Ni NPs for plasmon-driven electrocatalytic water splitting.634 The activity of the resultant Au/Pt/Ni2P composites was dependent on the spatial configuration (Fig. 16d and e). The Ni2P structural motif was beneficial to manipulating hot-electron transfer in the Au/Pt/Ni2P hybrid during surface plasmon decay (Fig. 16f). In particular, it is non-trivial to distinguish plasmon effects from thermal effects, owing to the ability of plasmonic nanomaterials to act as local “hot spots”, thus promoting the catalytic activity.
Inspired by the natural photosynthetic mechanism, the concept of integrated devices has been considered as one of the most effective ways to directly convert renewable energy into chemical fuels by means of the strengths of different applied technologies. Typically, using only sunlight and water as precursors, an integrated device, consisting of a photovoltaic (PV) cell and two electrocatalyst electrodes, can efficiently produce molecular H2 and O2,637 where the PV cell directly converts solar energy into electricity with a tunable power output. For instance, Yong's group reported a photovoltaic–electrocatalysis (PV–EC) system for overall water splitting including earth-abundant NiMoFe with the corresponding phosphorized product NiMoFeP as complementary electrocatalysts and perovskite solar cells (Fig. 16g).275 The operating current of the designed PV–EC system in operation was determined by the intersection of two I–V curves, as shown in Fig. 16h, and it obtained a high solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of 12.3% (Fig. 16i). In addition to acting as a cocatalyst in the PV–EC system, similar to perovskite and silicon solar cells, InGaP-based triple-junction solar cells with sufficient photovoltage and high photocurrent density can drive robust electrocatalysts for seawater splitting with a 17.9% STH efficiency.638 As electrolyzer technologies developed, this configuration has been extended to other molecule conversion applications, such as CO2 reduction.639 Thus, InGaP-based solar cells are promising to steer the aforementioned electrocatalytic systems using MPs as catalysts. To effectively circumvent the intermittent and fluctuating output of renewable solar energy, the inclusion of an energy storage module (ESM) as a relay can mitigate this incompatibility between solar energy or other forms of renewable sources and water electrolyzers.640 Besides, luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) as an unheeded practical device are composed of inexpensive fluorescent particle-embedded polymeric materials. The LSC slab inherits the ability to effectively absorb, down-shift, and concentrate solar photons, which has been applied as a complementary light-harvesting antenna for accelerating the performance of PV–EC tandem systems.641 Along this line, LSC–photocatalysis/PEC systems could potentially mitigate natural light irradiation limitations, thus further unleashing the potential of solar energy-driven catalytic reactions.
Combining inorganic nanomaterials with the metabolic networks of living cells also provides an exciting opportunity for creating integrated catalytic systems toward the production of a renewable source.642 For instance, Guo et al. designed an efficient and modular inorganic–biological hybrid via the assembly of polyphenol functionalized InP NPs onto the surface of genetically engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae) yeast for the production of shikimic acid (SA) (Fig. 17a).635 Enhanced shikimic acid production kinetics over the S. cerevisiae–InP hybrids (20–200 nm) occurred throughout the illumination period (Fig. 17b), indicating that photoexcited InP modulates the metabolic flux in S. cerevisiae toward the desired SA pathway (Fig. 17c). It is found that the illuminated InP NPs transferred electrons to S. cerevisiae yeast for the cytosolic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) regeneration of redox cofactors, which facilitated potential accumulation of intermediates following the SA pathway (Fig. 17d). Currently, the synergetic reaction rate is still much lower than that of targeted industrial requirements. Therefore, developing more efficient synergetic catalytic systems is highly desired and important in the future. Table 5 summarizes representative hybrid catalytic applications over MP-based systems.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of the assembled hybrid of S. cerevisiae and InP. (b) SA production profiles in light and dark conditions. (c) Diagram of metabolic flux redistributions under light irradiation. (d) The proposed metabolic engineering scheme of the S. cerevisiae–InP hybrid under light illumination. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 635 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2018. 
Table 5 Summary of representative interdisciplinary applications over representative MP-based systems




Catalytic systems
Applications
Reaction conditions
Activities
Ref.





a The calculated value; Ti-PH: Ti-doped porous hematite.





p-GaP/Ti/Au/Pt
PEC water reduction
1.0 M HClO4; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 50 mV s−1
10.9 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE

626



Cubic-NiP2:TiN:Si
PEC water reduction
0.5 M H2SO4; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 10 mV s−1
35.9 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE

625



CoP-n + p Si
PEC water reduction
0.5 M H2SO4; 150 W Xe arc lamp; scan rate of 10 mV s−1
19.8 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE

257



NiFeP/n-Si
PEC water oxidation
1.0 M KOH; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 50 mV s−1
15.5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

630



FTO/TiO2/FeMnP
PEC water oxidation
1.0 M KOH; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 10 mV s−1
1.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE

631



p-GaP
PEC CO2 reduction
0.1 M acetate buffer containing 10 mM pyridine; 200 W Hg-Xe arc lamp;
Methanol production: FE 88–100% at −0.4 V vs. SCE

632



Ni12P5/SiO2
PTC CO2 reduction
P(H2) 20.684 kPa; P(CO2) 103.421 kPa; 300 W Xe lamp; local temperature 401 °C (no external heating)a
CO production: 960 μmol g−1 h−1; selectivity: near 100%

633



FTO/Au/Pt/Ni2P
Plasmon-driven EC water oxidation
0.2 M KOH; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 20 mV s−1
19.0 mA cm−2 at 2.0 V vs. RHE

634



NiMoFeP/NF
PV–EC overall water splitting
1.0 M KOH; two perovskite solar cells in series; scan rate of 5 mV s−1
Solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 12.3%

275




S. cerevisiae–InP
Photobiocatalytic 3-dehydroshikimic acid reduction
LED white light; 30 °C;
Shikimic acid production: 48.5 ± 2.1 mg L−1 in 72 h

635





4. Conclusions and future prospects
The development of functional nanomaterials with economic competitiveness is of unambiguous importance for sustainable energy-related applications and beyond. Benefiting from their unique structure and fantastic redox amphoteric characteristics, the past years have witnessed tremendous advances in the field of MPs: from controllable synthesis to versatile sustainable catalytic utilization. This review systematically overviews the versatile synthesis and optimization strategies of the MP family, making it possible to develop new production technologies applicable in industry. Owing to their multifunctionality and novel features, the utility of advanced MP nanomaterials for eco-friendly catalytic applications has been comprehensively discussed, including emerging electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, mild thermocatalysis, and interdisciplinary applications, which are promising to better maneuver the principles of green chemistry in comparison with traditional catalytic processes.643 Despite the previous encouraging and impressive achievements, there are still multiple identified opportunities and challenges for progress in the optimized design and engineering of MPs for catalytic applications as detailed below.
From the outset, a better understanding of the synthesis–structure–function relation at the nanoscale or even atomic scale can contribute to the rational design of high-performing catalysts. Currently, the controllable regulation of the crystal phase, morphology, and components is still in the infant stage and the specific formation mechanism remains unclear, most of which comes from hypotheses in previous research and more or less relies on manual trial and error. Some types of MPs in the periodic table and related crystal structures have not been experimentally explored yet, especially for rare-earth metal elements with 4f electron configurations. Besides, it is still a daunting challenge to synthesize MPs in cluster-dimensions644 or phosphorus-coordinated metal atoms in an electron-rich state,183,645–647 facing the trade-off between high atom utilization efficiency and intrinsic instability. Moreover, how to prepare high-quality MP catalysts with simplicity and economic viability on a large scale remains an open question towards commercialization. Further constructing fine-tuned heterogenization between MPs and other components is also significant to synergistically achieve extraordinary properties and performance in much broader catalytic systems and potential industrial applications. In recent years, advanced computational simulation (prediction) techniques have been under intense scrutiny as the key development for accelerating the process of optimizing material synthesis and in-depth understanding of the synthesis mechanism.648,649 However, for some complicated models, continuum approximations or simplifications are still involved in the DFT calculations or screening processes to circumvent the production of large data sets, which potentially are far from convergent, producing apparent deviations.
Second, most intrinsic structures of MPs (especially for TMPs) are air-sensitive under ambient conditions due to the oxophilicity. In the meanwhile, corrosion and passivation (dephosphorization) phenomena commonly occur during the reaction processes accompanied by dynamic surface reconstruction. Consequently, the complexity of surfaces, often being nonstoichiometric and possessing defects, doping, oxidized species, and ligands spanning different scales, leads to challenges for the definitive understanding of realistic catalytic reaction mechanisms. Single in situ/operando characterization, as a space- or time-resolved technique, is based on unique species identification, thus facing the difficulty of the identification of the real active nanostructures at the atomic level including structural factors (strain, crystallinity, roughness, and so on). Considering the complex local environment and the reversibility of active species and intermediates, integration of incisive multi-techniques with high time-scale resolution pursued by scientists to in situ characterize catalytic processes at the atomic scale could provide powerful evidence to disseminate the real contributors of long-duration catalytic performance. Meanwhile, the design of advanced operando cells is required to solve the gap between characterization and test conditions. Moreover, microkinetic modeling or time-dependent theory simulation algorithms need to be simultaneously developed for overcoming the limitation that only selected key intermediates and electronic structures are calculated under ideal simulation conditions like an ultra-high vacuum.
Lastly, the introduction of revolutionary technology from the outset for sustainability generally hinges on the technology readiness level (TRL) scale.650 To battle with the dominant fossil fuels and expedite the transition, the state-of-the-art efficiency and stability of developed sustainable catalysis technologies are expected to be promoted at a holistic level, which are far from industrial requirements owing to energy dissipation. For instance, the production of C2+ fuels from CO2 with high selectivity and durability at an industrially relevant current density remains a great challenge. In particular, it is imperative for the scientific community to allow better sharing of results and facilitate future decision-making via agreeing on a series of operational metrics. Therefore, the integration of diverse fields for exploiting cost-effective methodologies through large/pilot-scale techno-economic studies is extremely important, which may lead to the acquisition of supporting fundamental knowledge for promoting the relentless search for emerging and robust MP nanomaterials and practical devices with long-term stability. Moreover, the synergetic effect induced by interdisciplinary cooperation, such as photothermal,651 thermoelectric,652 and photoelectric, may open new possibilities for practical catalytic applications. The topological states of some TMPs could impart intriguing physical properties, such as ferroelectricity and ultra-high electrical conductivity, for promising catalytic applications.263,653
To be rational and keep optimistic, through sustained and concerted research efforts in this exciting and flourishing field, it is highly anticipated that the application of MPs to practical catalytic processes may eventually be achieved.
Acronyms and abbreviations

0DZero-dimensional
1DOne-dimensional
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
ABAmmonia borane
AORAlcohol oxidation reaction
CBConduction band
CC/CF/CFCCarbon cloth/carbon fiber/carbon fiber cloth
CRRCO2 reduction reaction
COPConjugated organic polymer
DESsDeep eutectic solvents
DFTDensity functional theory
DMAPTris(diethylamino)phosphine
DOSDensity of states

E
a
Activation energy
ESMEnergy storage module
FEFaraday efficiency
GMPGuanosine monophosphate
HDCHydrodechlorination
HDOHydrodeoxygenation
HDSHydrodesulfurization
HEDP1-Hydroxyethylidenediphosphonic acid
HEMPsHigh-entropy metal phosphides
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HMPTHexamethylphosphorous triamide
HORHydrogen oxidation reaction
HzORHydrazine oxidation reaction
LALevulinic acid
LSCLuminescent solar concentrator
MBEMolecular beam epitaxy
MPsMetal phosphides
MOFsMetal–organic frameworks
MOPFMetal–organophosphine framework
MOVPEMetal–organic vapor phase epitaxy
NADPHNicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NBsNanoboxes
NCsNanocubes
NDsNanodots
NFNickle foam
NPsNanoparticles
NRRNitrogen reduction reaction
NRsNanorods
NSsNanosheets
NWsNanowires
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
OVOxygen vacancy
PAPhytic acid
PBAPrussian blue analogs
PEMEPolymer electrolyte membrane electrolyser
PPAPhenylphosphonic acid
RHEReversible hydrogen electrode
SAShikimic acid
SHEStandard hydrogen electrode
SHSMSplitting of hydrogen storage materials
STHSolar-to-hydrogen
TBPTributylphosphine
TBPCTetrabutylphosphonium chloride
TEOATriethanolamine
TMPsTransition metal phosphides
TMSPTris(trimethylsilyl)phosphine
TONTurnover number
TOPTrioctylphosphine
TOPOTrioctylphosphine oxide
TPPTriphenylphosphine
UORUrea oxidation reaction
UV-visUltraviolet-visible
VBValence band

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22072023, 21872029,U1463204, 21173045), the Natural Science Foundation (NSF) of Fujian Province (2017J07002, 2019J0106), the Program for National Science and Technology Innovation Leading Talents (00387072), the 1st Program of Fujian Province for Top Creative Young Talents, and the Program for Leading Talents in Fujian Universities.
References
A. M. Appel, J. E. Bercaw, A. B. Bocarsly, H. Dobbek, D. L. DuBois, M. Dupuis, J. G. Ferry, E. Fujita, R. Hille, P. J. A. Kenis, C. A. Kerfeld, R. H. Morris, C. H. F. Peden, A. R. Portis, S. W. Ragsdale, T. B. Rauchfuss, J. N. H. Reek, L. C. Seefeldt, R. K. Thauer and G. L. Waldrop, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6621–6658 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu and A. Patra, Chem. Rev., 2016, 117, 712–757 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rossin and M. Peruzzini, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 8848–8872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu and E. A. Carter, Chem. Rev., 2018, 119, 6631–6669 CrossRef .
A. D. Maynard, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1005–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Giannakakis, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and E. C. H. Sykes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 237–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Shao, P. Wang and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806419 CrossRef .
S. Bertolazzi, M. Gobbi, Y. Zhao, C. Backes and P. Samorì, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6845–6888 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, M. K. Patel, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1906481 CrossRef .
S. Carenco, D. Portehault, C. Boissière, N. Mézailles and C. Sanchez, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 7981–8065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hantanasirisakul and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804779 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kuang, W. Huang, C. Hegde, W. Fang, X. Y. Tan, J. Ma, C. Liu and Q. Yan, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 32–53 RSC .
B. Gao, X. Li, K. Ding, C. Huang, Q. Li, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14–37 RSC .
N. Han, P. Liu, J. Jiang, L. Ai, Z. Shao and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19912–19933 RSC .
M. A. Pasek and D. S. Lauretta, Astrobiology, 2005, 5, 515–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Von Schnering and W. Hoenle, Chem. Rev., 1988, 88, 243–273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600087 CrossRef .
K. N. Dinh, Q. Liang, C.-F. Du, J. Zhao, A. I. Y. Tok, H. Mao and Q. Yan, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 99–121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
Y. Pei, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, W. Smith, P. Dong, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. f. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23220–23243 RSC .
H. Du, R.-M. Kong, X. Guo, F. Qu and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21617–21624 RSC .
P. Xiao, W. Chen and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500985 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, B. Kong, D. Zhao, H. Wang and C. Selomulya, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 26–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6017–6044 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Dong and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902104 CrossRef .
X. Yu, M. Wang, X. Gong, Z. Guo, Z. Wang and S. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802445 CrossRef .
S. Oh, H. Kim, Y. Kwon, M. Kim, E. Cho and H. Kwon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18272–18277 RSC .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6251–6254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cao, Z. Xue, J. Niu, J. Qin, M. Sawangphruk, X. Zhang and R. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35224–35233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J. Kim, H. Kim and S. H. Ahn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30774–30785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, C. Tang, S. Lu, Z. Zou, S. Gu, Y. Zhang and C. M. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12408–12411 RSC .
K. Xiong, Y. Gao, J. Chen, Y. Shen and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 611–614 RSC .
P. A. Kempler, H. J. Fu, Z. P. Ifkovits, K. M. Papadantonakis and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 11, 14–20 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Guo, H. Chen, H. Tian, S. Ouyang, J. Wang and J. Lv, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4990–4993 RSC .
Z.-p. Lu and L. Sepunaru, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 363, 137167 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Wang, Y.-X. Zheng, M.-L. Jia, L.-S. Yuan, C. Peng and W.-H. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 8449–8458 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, K. Sun, T. Yu, X. Liu, G. Wang, L. Jiang and G. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2518–2523 RSC .
H. Sun, X. Xu, Z. Yan, X. Chen, L. Jiao, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22062–22069 RSC .
D. Sun, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9621–9628 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rakap, E. E. Kalu and S. Özkar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 254–261 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Li, M.-Y. Qi, J.-Y. Li, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117934 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, M. Wang, Y. He, X. Wang and W. Su, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19100–19106 RSC .
C. Cai, Y. Teng, J.-H. Wu, J.-Y. Li, H.-Y. Chen, J.-H. Chen and D.-B. Kuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001478 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Hu, Y. Li, J. P. Liu, Y. Y. Zhang, G. Bao, B. Buchine and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 343–347 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Sweet and D. J. Casadonte Jr, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2001, 8, 97–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Cao, M. Guo, H. Wang, M. Saunders, Y. Xiang, S. P. Jiang and S. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19048–19055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, D. Yang, Y. Bao, X. Yu and L. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2019, 434, 226754 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Han, G. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 899–908 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Xiong, G. Liu, C. Zhao, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 254, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, P. Sun, W. He, B. Teng and X. Xu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 688–697 RSC .
T. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Jin, A. Sviripa, J. Liang, J. Han, Y. Huang, Q. Li and G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25378–25384 RSC .
Y.-J. Yuan, Z.-K. Shen, S. Song, J. Guan, L. Bao, L. Pei, Y. Su, S. Wu, W. Bai, Z.-T. Yu, Z. Ji and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7801–7807 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Q. Yue, J. Li, J. Xu, H. Zheng and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10243–10247 RSC .
H. Xu, J. Wei, K. Zhang, Y. Shiraishi and Y. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29647–29655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Regmi, A. Roy, L. A. King, D. A. Cullen, H. M. Meyer, G. A. Goenaga, T. A. Zawodzinski, N. Labbé and S. C. Chmely, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9369–9377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. He, J. Zhu, L. Xu and J. Tong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, Y. Zhao, J. Luo, S. Jiang, C. Sun and S. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1908797 CrossRef .
M. Jin, X. Zhang, M. Han, H. Wang, G. Wang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5936–5942 RSC .
L. Guo, F. Luo, F. Guo, Q. Zhang, K. Qu, Z. Yang and W. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7623–7626 RSC .
H. Ren, X. Sun, C. Du, J. Zhao, D. Liu, W. Fang, S. Kumar, R. Chua, S. Meng, P. Kidkhunthod, L. Song, S. Li, M. Srinivasan and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12969–12979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chunduri, S. Gupta, O. Bapat, A. Bhide, R. Fernandes, M. K. Patel, V. Bambole, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Levy, J. R. Bertram, K. A. Eller, A. Chatterjee and P. Nagpal, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11414–11418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, A. C. Johnston-Peck and J. B. Tracy, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4462–4467 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, W. Bi, K. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Zheng and M. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8205–8211 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, Y. Zhao, Y. Du, Y. Chen, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703489 CrossRef .
T. Sun, Y. Wang, W. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Dai, Z. Liu, B. N. Shivananju, Y. Zhang, K. Fu, B. Shabbir, W. Ma, S. Li and Q. Bao, Small, 2017, 13, e1701881 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, P. Wen, D. S. Itanze, Z. D. Hood, X. Ma, M. Kim, S. Adhikari, C. Lu, C. Dun, M. Chi, Y. Qiu and S. M. Geyer, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thomas, K. Sandeep, S. M. Somasundaran and K. G. Thomas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2368–2375 CrossRef CAS .
L.-A. Stern, L. Feng, F. Song and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2347–2351 RSC .
T. J. Trentler, K. M. Hickman, S. C. Goel, A. M. Viano, P. C. Gibbons and W. E. Buhro, Science, 1995, 270, 1791–1794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, C. Liu and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19306–19309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Baek, P. M. Allen, M. G. Bawendi and K. F. Jensen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 627–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Marquez-Montes, K. Kawashima, Y. J. Son, J. Weeks, H.-H. Sun, H. Celio, V. H. Ramos Sanchez and C. Mullins, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7736–7749 RSC .
C. Zhang, B. Xin, Z. Xi, B. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Li and J. Hao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1468–1477 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Meganathan, T. Huang, H. Fang, J. Mao and G. Sun, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 2599–2607 RSC .
K. Doyeon, K. Park, F. Shojaei, T. T. Debela, I. S. Kwon, I. H. Kwak, J. Seo, J. P. Ahn, J. Park and H. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16526–16532 RSC .
X. Zhang, T. Yu, C. Li, S. Wang and X. Tao, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2015, 641, 1545–1549 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mark, J. Wang, K. Wu, J. G. Lo, S. Lee and K. Kovnir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11976–11983 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, M. Wu, J. Zheng, Z.-G. Chen, W. Zhang, J. Luo, C. Jin, O. Sheng, C. Liang, Y. Gan, Y. Xia, J. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Nai and X. Tao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809051 CrossRef .
Q. Feng, L. Zeng, J. Xu, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhiliang, Y. Wang, X.-Z. Yuan, H. Li and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227048 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Lv, Z. L. Feng, Q. N. Xu, X. Gao, J. Z. Ma, L. Y. Kong, P. Richard, Y. B. Huang, V. N. Strocov, C. Fang, H. M. Weng, Y. G. Shi, T. Qian and H. Ding, Nature, 2017, 546, 627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Laursen, R. B. Wexler, M. J. Whitaker, E. J. Izett, K. U. D. Calvinho, S. Hwang, R. Rucker, H. Wang, J. Li, E. Garfunkel, M. Greenblatt, A. M. Rappe and G. C. Dismukes, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4408–4419 CrossRef CAS .
L. Niu, F. Liu, Q. Zeng, X. Zhu, Y. Wang, P. Yu, J. Shi, J. Lin, J. Zhou, Q. Fu, W. Zhou, T. Yu, X. Liu and Z. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 596–603 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, C. Li, S. Dong, X. Ge, P. Zhang, X. Miao, Z. Zhang, C. Wang and L. Yin, Small, 2019, 15, e1900001 CrossRef .
M. Driess, R. Beltran Suito and P. M. Menezes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15749–15756 RSC .
Y. Qin, Y. Li, F. Chu, Y. Bu, Y. Kong, Y. Tao, X. Zhou, H. Yu, J. Yu and L. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7828–7831 RSC .
H. Shen, Z. Ma, B. Yang, B. Guo, Y. Lyu, P. Wang, H. Yang, Q. Li, H. Wang, Z. Liu and A. Nie, J. Power Sources, 2019, 433, 126682 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, B. Yan, H. Fan, C. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Cheng, Z. Li, G. Jia, S. An and X. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22364–22370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Gómez-Cámer, M. Arnaiz, T. Rojo and J. Ajuria, J. Power Sources, 2019, 434, 226695 CrossRef .
W. Li, J. Liao, X. Li, L. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, Z. Guo and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903638 CrossRef .
K.-H. Kim, W.-S. Kim and S.-H. Hong, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13494–13501 RSC .
Z. Zhao, E. J. Willard, J. R. Dominguez, Z. Wu and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18020–18029 RSC .
W. Li, X. Li, J. Liao, B. Zhao, L. Zhang, L. Huang, G. Liu, Z. Guo and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2286–2297 RSC .
R. Zhang, P. A. Russo, M. Feist, P. Amsalem, N. Koch and N. Pinna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14013–14022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Yao, C. Huang, P. Shi and Q. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12513–12519 RSC .
C.-J. Chen, V. Veeramani, Y.-H. Wu, A. Jena, L.-C. Yin, H. Chang, S.-F. Hu and R.-S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 263, 118259 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, L. Cao, C. Li, G. Zhao, T. Zhu, W. Hu, W. Sun and Y. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37635–37643 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Wang, C. Ye, H. Liu, M.-W. Xu and S. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1963–1967 CrossRef CAS .
J. Horáček, U. Akhmetzyanova, L. Skuhrovcová, Z. Tišler and H. de Paz Carmona, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 263, 118328 CrossRef .
M. Duyar, C. Tsai, J. L. Snider, J. A. Singh, A. Gallo, J. S. Yoo, A. J. Medford, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Kibsgaard, S. Bent, J. K. Nørskov and T. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15045–15050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, T. Pan, Y. Chai, S. Ge, Y. Ju, T. Li, K. Liu, L. Lan, A. C. K. Yip and M. Zhang, J. Catal., 2018, 366, 80–90 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, M. Cui, N. Li, Z. Liu, S. Hwang, H. Xie, X. Wang, Y. Kuang, M. Jiao, D. Su and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, H. Wang, P. Liu, C. Cheng, F. Zhu, A. Hirata and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2951–2955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, M. Peng, J. Lan, Y. Zhao, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, J. Liu and Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21069–21078 RSC .
W. Xu, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. D. Cui, X. J. Yang and A. Inoue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5574–5579 RSC .
F.-X. Bu, W. Chen, M. F. Aly Aboud, I. Shakir, J. Gu and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14526–14535 RSC .
W. Han, X. Li, B. Liu, L. Li, H. Tang, Y. Li, C. Lu and X. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9279–9282 RSC .
Y. Zhong, X. Xia, S. Deng, D. Xie, S. Shen, K. Zhang, W. Guo, X. Wang and J. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1805165 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fan, W. Chen, G. Chen, J. Huang, C. Song, Y. Du, C. Li and K. Ostrikov, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118440 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, A. N. Gandi, D. H. Anjum, X. Wang, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7718–7725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, M. Qin, J. Guan, L. Wang, H. Guo, X. Li, Y. Wang, R. Prins and Y. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6052–6054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Wehrspohn, H. Zhang, D. J. Hagen, X. Li, A. Graff, F. Heyroth, B. Fuhrmann, I. Kostanovskiy, S. L. Schweizer, F. Caddeo, A. W. Maijenburg and S. Parkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17172–17176 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Yoon, H. J. Doerr, C. V. Deshpandey and R. F. Bunshah, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 3513–3517 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iribarren, R. Castro-Rodríguez, L. Ponce-Cabrera and J. L. Peña, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 510, 134–137 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, X. Yuan, X. Zhang, Q. Gao, B. Zhao, L. Li, M. Lockrey, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish and P. Caroff, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7261–7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. De Luca, C. Fasolato, M. A. Verheijen, Y. Ren, M. Y. Swinkels, S. Kölling, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, R. Rurali, X. Cartoixà and I. Zardo, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4702–4711 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Fonseka, A. V. Velichko, Y. Zhang, J. A. Gott, G. D. Davis, R. Beanland, H. Liu, D. J. Mowbray and A. M. Sanchez, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4158–4165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Butson, P. R. Narangari, M. Lysevych, J. Wong-Leung, Y. Wan, S. K. Karuturi, H. H. Tan and C. Jagadish, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25236–25242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lancaster, R. Mow, J. Liu, Q. Cheek, M. M. MacInnes, M. M. Al-Jassim, T. G. Deutsch, J. L. Young and S. Maldonado, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25115–25122 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lim, J. L. Young, J. F. Geisz, D. J. Friedman, T. G. Deutsch and J. Yoon, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3388 CrossRef .
M. Alqahtani, S. Sathasivam, F. Cui, L. Steier, X. Xia, C. S. Blackman, E. Kim, H. Shin, M. Benamara, Y. Mazur, G. J. Salamo, I. P. Parkin, H. Liu and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8550–8558 RSC .
I. Lucci, S. Charbonnier, M. Vallet, P. Turban, Y. Léger, T. Rohel, N. Bertru, A. Létoublon, J.-B. Rodriguez, L. Cerutti, E. Tournié, A. Ponchet, G. Patriarche, L. Pedesseau and C. Cornet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801585 CrossRef .
H. Gao, W. Sun, Q. Sun, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish and J. Zou, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3782–3788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. McCarty, X. Yang, L. J. DePue Anderson and R. A. Jones, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13496–13503 RSC .
B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4317–4318 CrossRef CAS .

          S. S. Djokić and P. L. Cavallotti, in Electrodeposition: Theory and Practice, ed. S. S. Djokic, Springer, New York, New York, NY,  2010, vol. 6, pp. 251–289 Search PubMed .
Y. Xie, H. L. Su, X. F. Qian, X. M. Liu and Y. T. Qian, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 149, 88–91 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Li, M. Liu, T. Miao, X. Ye, S. Meng, S. Chen and X. Fu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 241–249 CrossRef .
T. Uekert, H. Kasap and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15201–15210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, J. Dong, Y. Huang, W. Ran, J. Chen and L. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12751–12758 RSC .
T. Sun, S. Zhang, L. Xu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12101–12104 RSC .
C. Retna Raj, S. Chakrabartty and B. K. Barman, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4399–4402 RSC .
N. Li, Y. Ding, J. Wu, Z. Zhao, X. Li, Y.-Z. Zheng, M. Huang and X. Tao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22297–22306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Z. Qin, B. McElhenny, F. Zhang, S. Chen, J. Bao, Z. M. Wang, H.-Z. Song and Z. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21488–21495 RSC .
M. H. Suliman, A. Adam, M. N. Siddiqui, Z. H. Yamani and M. Qamar, Carbon, 2019, 144, 764–771 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xue, Y. Si, M. Wang, M. Liu and L. Guo, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 823–831 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, H. Jin, Z. Liang, L. Huang, Y. Lu, H. Yu, Z. Hu, J. Wu, B. Y. Xia, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6844–6849 RSC .
J. Chen, C. Fan, X. Hu, C. Wang, Z. Huang, G. Fu, J.-M. Lee and Y. Tang, Small, 2019, 15, e1901518 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Yang, Q. Dong, H. Geng, Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, W. Wang, C. C. Li and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26258–26263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z. Li, J. Li, J. Xiong, S. Zhou, J. Liang, W. Cai, C. Wang, Z. Yang and H. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5621–5625 RSC .
W.-L. Yu, J.-Q. Chi and B. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2195–2204 RSC .
E. L. Smith, A. P. Abbott and K. S. Ryder, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11060–11082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, Z. Xue, W. Chen, Y. Wang and T. Mu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2038–2042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. LaMer and R. H. Dinegar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 4847–4854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Zhen, Y. Wang, J. Liu, L. Jin, T. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. Song, C. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Yang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2407–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, W. Hu, D. Liu, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13087–13094 RSC .
Y. Pan, N. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, Y. Li, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 297, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, K. Sun, S. Liu, W.-C. Cheong, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Pan, Y. Cheng, Z. Zhuang, X. Wei, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, B. Koo, K. Y. Yoon, Y. Hwang, M. Kang, J.-G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8433–8440 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Q. Yang, J. Rao, C. Fu, S.-C. Liou, G. Auffermann, Y. Sun and C. Felser, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907791 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Gibson, B. van
Kasteren, B. Tekcan, Y. Cui, D. van Dam, J. E. M. Haverkort, E. P. A. M. Bakkers and M. E. Reimer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, B. W. Zeiger and K. S. Suslick, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2555–2567 RSC .
M. Driess, V. Forstner, C. Panda, S. Yao, P. M. Menezes, S. Mebs, E. M. Zolnhofer, M. Miehlich, T. Szilvasi, A. K. Nanjundan, M. Haumann, K. Meyer and H. Gruetzmacher, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8590–8597 RSC .
H. Guo, Q. Feng, K. Xu, J. Xu, J. Zhu, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903660 CrossRef .
J. Yang, D. Guo, S. Zhao, Y. Lin, R. Yang, D. Xu, N. Shi, X. Zhang, L. Lu, Y.-Q. Lan, J. Bao and M. Han, Small, 2019, 15, e1804546 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lei, Y. Xue, W. Chen, W. Qiu, Y. Zhang, S. Horike and L. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801587 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. V. Lim, S. Huang, M. Ding, D. Kong, Y. Pei, T. Xu, Y. Shi, X. Li and H. Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4341–4351 RSC .
Y. Yao, N. Mahmood, L. Pan, G.-Q. Shen, R. Zhang, R. Gao, F. E. Aleem, X. Yuan, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21327–21334 RSC .
H. Xu, H. Jia, B. Fei, Y. Ha, H. Li, Y. Guo, M. Liu and R. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 268, 118404 CrossRef .
J.-G. Li, K. Xie, H. Sun, Z. Li, X. Ao, Z. Chen, K. K. Ostrikov, C. Wang and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36649–36657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, Y. Chen, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3824–3831 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tabassum, W. Guo, W. Meng, A. Mahmood, R. Zhao, Q. Wang and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601671 CrossRef .
H. Liu, J. Guan, S. Yang, Y. Yu, R. Shao, Z. Zhang, M. Dou, F. Wang and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, P. Dai, Y. Wang, X. Gu, L. Li, L. Cao and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11642–11650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Xia, F. Zhang and Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39151–39160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Qi and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 72–81 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118053 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Y. Zhang, Y.-Z. Lin, K. Wang and F.-T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28918–28927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Liao and G. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, J. Li, X. Cai, Y. Zhao, L. Pan, Q. Cao, D. Wang and Y. Du, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19774–19780 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Liang and Z. Zhuang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 1267–1273 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Liu, J.-Q. Xie, H. Ye, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, Z. Wang, X. Long, Y. An, H. Lin, Z. Xing, M. Ma and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22530–22538 RSC .
F. Li, Y. Bu, Z. Lv, J. Mahmood, G.-F. Han, I. Ahmad, G. Kim, Q. Zhong and J.-B. Baek, Small, 2017, 13, 1701167 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lu, Y. Deng, S. Lu, Y. Liu, J.-P. Lang, X. Cao and H. Gu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21259–21265 RSC .
J. Dong, X. Han, Y. Liu, H. Li and Y. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13722–13733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kong, H. Song and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801489 CrossRef .
Y. Li, M. Kong, J. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000400 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Chai, J. Ding, L. Zhong, Y. Du, T.-T. Li, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 745–753 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, J. Wang, X. Teng, T. J. Meyer and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 412–419 CrossRef .
H. Gao, F. Yang, Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Hao, S. Zhang, H. Zheng, J. Chen, H. Liu and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5373–5379 Search PubMed .
S. Ibraheem, S. Chen, J. Li, W. Li, X. Gao, Q. Wang and Z. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 699–705 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, W. Zhang, D. Zhou, H. Tian, D. Su, C. Wang, D. Stockdale, F. Kang, B. Li and G. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4731–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hao, W. Yang, Z. Zhang and J. Tang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11055–11062 RSC .
L.-M. Cao, Y.-W. Hu, S.-F. Tang, A. Iljin, J.-W. Wang, Z.-M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800949 CrossRef .
R. Lin, H. Lei, D. Ruan, K. Jiang, X. Yu, Z. Wang, W. Mai and H. Yan, Nano Energy, 2018, 56, 82–91 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, Y. Wang, R. Chen, C. Chen, H. Yang, J. Ma, Y. Li and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 403, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lian, H. Sun, X. Wang, P. Qi, Q. Mu, Y. Chen, J. Ye, X. Zhao, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 464–474 RSC .
Y. Ge, P. Dong, S. R. Craig, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800484 CrossRef .
L. Han, T. Yu, W. Lei, W. Liu, K. Feng, Y. Ding, G. Jiang, P. Xu and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16568–16572 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Dong, X. F. Lu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3348–3355 RSC .
B. He, C. Xu, Y. Tang, Y. Qian, H.-K. Liu, Q. Hao and Z. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24964–24972 RSC .
X. Wei, Y. Zhang, H. He, L. Peng, S. Xiao, S. Yao and P. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10896–10899 RSC .
R. Martínez-Garcia, M. Knobel and E. Reguera, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7296–7303 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Yu, Y. Feng, B. Guan, X. W. Lou and U. Paik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1246–1250 RSC .
Y. Guo, J. Tang, Z. Wang, Y. Sugahara and Y. Yamauchi, Small, 2018, 14, e1802442 CrossRef .
X. Wang, W. Ma, Z. Xu, H. Wang, W. Fan, X. Zong and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 500–509 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, J. Wang, Z. Wu, W. Jin and Y. Ji, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20144–20150 RSC .
G. Zhang, F. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Li, X. Jin, Y. Li, M. Wu, X. Kang, T. Hu, X. Wang and W. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6939–6945 RSC .
X. Liu, S. Deng, D. Xiao, M. Gong, J. Liang, T. Zhao, T. Shen and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42233–42242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, W. Cai, X. Li, X.-Y. Yu and Z. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14371–14374 RSC .
Q. Liu, Z. Hu, Y. Liang, L. Li, C. Zou, H. Jin, S. Wang, H. Lu, Q. Gu, S. Chou, Y. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 5159–5164 CrossRef .
F.-X. Ma, C.-Y. Xu, F. Lyu, B. Song, S.-C. Sun, Y. Y. Li, J. Lu and L. Zhen, Adv. Sci., 2018, 6, 1801490 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pi, C. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Song, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, B. Gao, J. Fu, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 263, 118358 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, L. Yang, H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, D. Cao, C. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Jiang and L. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1048–1054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Deng, L. Zhou, Z. Jiang and Z.-J. Jiang, J. Catal., 2019, 373, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, Z.-Y. Yu, X.-L. Zhang, Y.-R. Zheng, Y. Duan, Q. Gao, R. Wu, B. Sun, M.-R. Gao, G. Wang and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7537–7543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Liu, X. Zhang, F. Yan, C. Zhu and Y.-J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22412–22419 RSC .
S.-H. Li, N. Zhang, X. Xie, R. Luque and Y.-J. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13082–13085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, L. Zhong, C. Du, Y. Luo, J. Zhao, Y. Zheng, J. Xu, J. Ma, C. Liu, S. Li and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7975–7984 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Zhen, Y. Wang, J. Liu, L. Jin, T. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, N. Yin, R. Niu, S. Song, L. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5093–5101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Ye, J.-X. Feng and G.-R. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7962–7969 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, F. Liao, W. Shen, L. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. Li and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18977–18982 RSC .
J. Li, H. Liu, W. Gou, M. Zhang, Z. Xia, S. Zhang, C.-R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2298–2304 RSC .
J.-X. Feng, S.-Y. Tong, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5118–5126 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, B. Wang, J. Bi, D. Fang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5769–5778 RSC .
Y. Bao, F. Wang, X. Gu and L. Feng, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18866–18873 RSC .
X. Xu, X. Tian, Z. Zhong, L. Kang and J. Yao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 424, 42–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, A. Lin, W. Li, J. Jin, Y. Sun, J. Yang and Z. Wen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902989 CrossRef .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9577–9581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. T. Mai, T. C. Lam, Q. B. Bui and H. T. Nhac-Vu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2021, 133, 111024 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, L. Cai, Y. Wang, Z. Lin, Y. Zuo, M. Wang and Y. Chai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706008 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, A. Wu, X. Wang, C. Tian, R. An and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17905–17914 RSC .
L. Jiayuan, Y. Ming, Z. Xuemei, H. Zheng-Qing, X. Zhaoming, C. Chun-Ran, M. Yuanyuan and Q. Yongquan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6785–6796 CrossRef .
J.-G. Li, Y. Gu, H. Sun, L. Lv, Z. Li, X. Ao, X. Xue, G. Hong and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19959–19968 RSC .
J.-J. Lv, S. Wu, M. Qiao, L.-L. Li and J.-J. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 434–440 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jing, X. Song, K. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Y. Liu, B. Dong, F. Dong, S. Zhao, H.-C. Yao and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1697–1708 RSC .
H. J. Song, H. Yoon, B. Ju, G.-H. Lee and D.-W. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802319 CrossRef .
S. Li, M. Hua, Y. Yang, W. Huang, X. Lin, L. Ci, J. Lou and P. Si, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17386–17399 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Zou, H. Liu, S. Chen, X. Wang, H. Zhang, X. She and D. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 813–822 CrossRef CAS .
R.-Q. Li, B.-L. Wang, T. Gao, R. Zhang, C. Xu, X. Jiang, J. Zeng, Y. Bando, P. Hu, Y. Li and X.-B. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 870–876 CrossRef CAS .
J. Balamurugan, T. T. Nguyen, V. Aravindan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Nano Energy, 2019, 69, 104432 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, X. F. Lu, J. Nai, S.-Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900576 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li and H. C. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46825–46838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, G. Chen, X. Liu, N. Zhang, S. Liang, R. Ma and G. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9212–9215 RSC .
L. Yan, B. Zhang, J. Zhu, S. Zhao, Y. Li, B. Zhang, J. Jiang, X. Ji, H. Zhang and P. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14271–14279 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Chen, B. Yu, Z. Wang, H. Wang, B. Sun, W. Li, D. Yang and W. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, e1902613 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ren, Z. Ren, Q. Li, W. Wen, X. Li, Y. Chen, L. Xie, L. Zhang, D. Zhu, B. Gao, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900091 CrossRef .
Y. Zeng, Y. Wang, G. Huang, C. Chen, L. Huang, R. Chen and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1465–1468 RSC .
N. C. S. Selvam, J. Lee, G. H. Choi, M. J. Oh, S. Xu, B. Lim and P. J. Yoo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27383–27393 RSC .
Y. Li, S. Guo, T. Jin, Y. Wang, F. Cheng and L. Jiao, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103821 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, H. Gao, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Lin and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14939–14948 RSC .
H. Chen, S. Jiang, B. Xu, C. Huang, Y. Hu, Y. Qin, M. He and H. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6241–6249 RSC .
Z. Shen, M. Cao, Z. Zhang, J. Pu, C. Zhong, J. Li, H. Ma, F. Li, J. Zhu, F. Pan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1906661 CrossRef .
Z. Du, N. Jannatun, D. Yu, J. Ren, W. Huang and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 23070–23079 RSC .
M. Chen, W. Li, W. Ma, P. Qi, W. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Lu and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1678–1686 RSC .
J. Tian, N. Cheng, Q. Liu, W. Xing and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5493–5497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dong, X. Zhang, P. Wang, H.-S. Chen and P. Yang, Carbon, 2019, 149, 222–233 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, S. Xu, Y. Li, H. Yan and S. Xu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 19253–19258 RSC .
X. Li, W. Liu, M. Zhang, Y. Zhong, Z. Weng, Y. Mi, Y. Zhou, M. Li, J. J. Cha, Z. Tang, H. Jiang, X. Li and H. Wang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2057–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou and L.-Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 6, 2139–2147 RSC .
T. R. Hellstern, J. D. Benck, J. Kibsgaard, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501758 CrossRef .
L. Chai, Z. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Zhang, T.-T. Li, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Li, X. Zhao, Y. Liu, C.-W. Nan and L.-Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901510 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, H. Qin, L. Diao, N. Zhao, C. Shi, E. Liu and C. He, J. Catal., 2019, 377, 582–588 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. Li, J. Zhou, S. Zhang, D. Rao, S. He, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5756–5765 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, F. Yu, J. Sun, R. He, S. Chen, C.-W. Chu and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 5607–5611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kumar, Y. Sun, M. Nicklas, S. J. Watzman, O. Young, I. Leermakers, J. Hornung, J. Klotz, J. Gooth, K. Manna, V. Süβ, S. N. Guin, T. Förster, M. Schmidt, L. Muechler, B. Yan, P. Werner, W. Schnelle, U. Zeitler, J. Wosnitza, S. S. P. Parkin, C. Felser and C. Shekhar, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2475 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, J. Yu, J. Wen, J. Liao, Z. Ye, B. Zhao, X. Li, H. Zhang, M. Liu and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16785–16792 RSC .
S. Kaushik, K. Matsumoto, Y. Sato and R. Hagiwara, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 102, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verma, P. N. Didwal, H.-S. Ki, G. Cao and C.-J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26976–26984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, A. Nie, Y. Chang, Y. Cheng, F. Wen, J. Xiang, L. Li, Z. Liu and Y. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19409–19416 RSC .
D. S. Choi, C. Kim, J. Lim, S.-H. Cho, G. Y. Lee, H. J. Lee, J. W. Choi, H. Kim, I.-D. Kim and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1805023 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Xu, H. M. Weng, B. Q. Lv, C. E. Matt, J. Park, F. Bisti, V. N. Strocov, D. Gawryluk, E. Pomjakushina, K. Conder, N. C. Plumb, M. Radovic, G. Autès, O. V. Yazyev, Z. Fang, X. Dai, T. Qian, J. Mesot, H. Ding and M. Shi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yu, S. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Li, J. Qiao, N. Jia, B. Han, S.-Q. Xia and X. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2010–2018 CrossRef CAS .
G. Long, H. Henck, M. Gibertini, D. Dumcenco, Z. Wang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, E. Giannini and A. F. Morpurgo, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2452–2459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tianou, W. Wang, X. Yang, Z. Cao, Q. Kuang, Z. Wang, Z. Shan, M. Jin and Y. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1261 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Li, D. Rakov, W. Zhang and P. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8199–8202 RSC .
L. Yu, J. Zhang, Y. Dang, J. He, Z. Tobin, P. Kerns, Y. Dou, Y. Jiang, Y. He and S. L. Suib, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 6919–6928 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baek, G.-W. Kim, T. Park and K. Yong, Small, 2019, 15, 1905501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ji, H. Jin, H. Xia, X. Luo, J. Zhu, Z. Pu and S. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 727–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-M. Nguyen, M. Bahri, S. Dreyfuss, S. Moldovan, A. Miche, C. Méthivier, O. Ersen, N. Mézailles and S. Carenco, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6124–6134 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, C.-T. He, S. Zhao, J. Li, W. Lin, Z. Yuan, Q. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Dai and D. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 893–899 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Xu, J. Li, B. Wei, Y. Ding, I. Amorim, R. Thomas, S. M. Thalluri, Y. Liu, G. Yu and L. Liu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10612–10621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Niu, Z. Yang, A. Kara, Q. Wang, M. Wang, M. Gu, Z. Feng, Y. Du and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3110–3118 RSC .
C. Huang, Y. Huang, C. Liu, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12014–12017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, X. Ding, C. Wang, Z. Feng, L. Xu, X. Gao, Y. Zhai and D. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13694–13701 RSC .
B. Luo, R. Song, J. Geng, X. Liu, D. Jing, M. Wang and C. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117819 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Li, I. Amorim, B. Zhang, D. Xiong, N. Zhang, S. M. Thalluri, J. P. S. Sousa and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20646–20652 RSC .
S. C. Shit, P. Koley, B. Joseph, C. Marini, L. Nakka, J. Tardio and J. Mondal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24140–24153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, G. Cheng, M. Sun, Z. Wu, G. Liu, D. Su, B. Lan, S. Mai, L. Chen and L. Yu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17084–17092 RSC .
Z. Lingxia, H. Wangwang, S. Xuwei, Z. Huajun and F. Xiaosheng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800515 CrossRef .
H. Li, X. Zhao, H. Liu, S. Chen, X. Yang, C. Lv, H. Zhang, X. She and D. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, e1802824 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-C. Hou, Q.-Q. Chen, K. Li, C.-J. Wang, C.-Y. Peng, R. Shi and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8277–8283 RSC .
Q. Tan, W. Zhao, K. Han, P. Li, W. Wang, D. He, Z. Liu, Q. Yu, M. Qin and X. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15673–15682 RSC .
M. Liu, L. Yang, T. Liu, Y. Tang, S. Luo, C. Liu and Y. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8608–8615 RSC .
Z. Peng, X. Qiu, Y. Yu, D. Jiang, H. Wang, G. Cai, X. Zhang and Z. Dong, Carbon, 2019, 152, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, H. Gao, J. Hao, S. Zhang, P. Li, Y. Liu, J. Chen and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808291 CrossRef .
D. Zeng, T. Zhou, W.-J. Ong, M. Wu, X. Duan, W. Xu, Y. Chen, Y.-A. Zhu and D.-L. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5651–5660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xijun, L. Jun, L. Zhengbo, W. Zhuosen, H. Renzong, L. Jiangwen, O. Liuzhang and Z. Min, Small, 2018, 14, e1800793 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Wu, Z.-G. Wu, G. Cui, F. Xie, X.-D. Guo and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9341–9344 RSC .
C. Ma, Z. Fu, C. Deng, X. Liao, Y.-S. He, Z.-F. Ma and H. C. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11348–11351 RSC .
M. Mohiuddin, A. Zavabeti, F. Haque, A. Mahmood, R. Datta, N. Syed, M. W. Khan, A. Jannat, K. Messalea, B. Zhang, G. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Z. Ou and N. Mahmood, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2789–2797 RSC .
C. Ma, S. Feng, J. Zhou, R. Chen, Y. Wei, H. Liu and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118015 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, W. Zhang, J. Zeng, L. He, D. Li and Q. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118441 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, L. Fan, Y. Zhang, N. Liu, N. Zhang and K. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7129–7134 RSC .
F. Li, G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, Y. Lu, J. Xu, Y. Bu, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14139–14143 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H. Li, B. Cao, J. Jiang, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801527 CrossRef .
J. Yang, F. Zhang, X. Wang, D. He, G. Wu, Q. Yang, X. Hong, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12854–12858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. H. Hoa, D. T. Tran, H. T. Le, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 253, 235–245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, L. Yang, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4131–4137 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lv, X. Li, C. Yang, X. Ding, Y. Zhang, Y.-Z. Zheng, S. Li, X. Sun and X. Tao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910830 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wen, G.-X. Cao, M.-H. Chen, Y.-P. Qiu, L.-Y. Gan and P. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mendoza-Garcia, H. Zhu, Y. Yu, Q. Li, L. Zhou, D. Su, M. J. Kramer and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9642–9645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, Y. Pei, P. Zhuang, H. Chu, Y. Cao, W. Smith, P. Dong, J. Shen, M. Ye and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2019, 15, e1904681 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-D. Wang, Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, W.-J. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, W.-X. Zhang, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1468–1475 RSC .
E. Hu, Y. Feng, J. Nai, D. Zhao, Y. Hu and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 872–880 RSC .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2386–2389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Muthuswamy and S. L. Brock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15849–15851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, Y. Zhong, H. A. Tahini, Z. Shao and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3361–3392 RSC .
Y.-Y. Ma, C.-X. Wu, X.-J. Feng, H.-Q. Tan, L.-K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z.-H. Kang, E.-B. Wang and Y.-G. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 788–798 RSC .
Z. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Hu, H. Yin, G. Cao, H. Wen, J. Wang and P. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 444, 227311 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Z. Xu, W. Chen, G. Chen, J. Huang, C. Song, K. Zheng, Z. Zhang, X. Hu, H.-S. Choi and K. Ostrikov, Small, 2020, 16, e2004843 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sun, Y. Wang, L. Fang, X. Yang, W. Fu, D. Tian, Z. Huang, J. Li, H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117851 CrossRef CAS .
A. Parra-Puerto, K. L. Ng, K. Fahy, A. E. Goode, M. P. Ryan and A. Kucernak, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11515–11529 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, W. Duan, X. Yi, Z. Lei, G. Li and C. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2019, 435, 226770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gopalakrishnan, S. Pandey and K. K. Rangan, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2113–2116 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. R. Anjum, M. D. Bhatt, M. H. Lee and J. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8861–8870 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sheng, X. Li, R. Prins, C. Liu, Q. Hao and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11180–11183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, J. Zheng, T. Chen, G. Ma and W. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 763, 538–545 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, X. Ban, Q. Wang, K. Cheng, K. Zhu, K. Ye, G. Wang, D. Cao and J. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24374–24388 RSC .
Y. Tan, M. Luo, P. Liu, C. Cheng, J. Han, K. Watanabe and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3880–3888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Q. Fu, L. Zhang, C. W. Wang, L. R. Zheng, P. F. Liu and H. G. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2021–2029 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Yan, J. Cao, C. Qu, X. Zheng, J. Feng and J. Qi, J. Power Sources, 2020, 445, 227294 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tao, Y. Gong and J. Lin, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Z. Pu, W. Li, J. Zhu, C. Zhang, Y. Zhao and S. Mu, J. Catal., 2019, 377, 600–608 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, T. Xu, J. Cao, S. Guo, Z. Zhong and J. Feng, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6204–6210 RSC .
X. Luo, P. Ji, P. Wang, R. Cheng, D. Chen, C. Lin, J. Zhang, J. He, Z. Shi, N. Li, S. Xiao and S. Mu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903891 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinhui, Y. Wenshu, H. Zhipeng and Z. Chi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600236 CrossRef .
H. Liu, Z. Liu and L. Feng, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16017–16025 RSC .
S. Koh, W. D. Kim, W. K. Bae, Y. K. Lee and D. C. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1990–2001 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, N. Heng, X. Wang, J. He and Y. Zhao, J. Catal., 2019, 374, 51–59 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, S. Zhang, J. Sun, L. Yu, X. Qian, R. Hu, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2018, 56, 109–117 CrossRef .
X. Huang, X. Xu, X. Luan and D. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2019, 68, 104332 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Z. Liu, H. Zhao, H. Huang, H. Jiao and Y. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18720–18727 RSC .
D. Yang, W. Hou, Y. Lu, W. Zhang and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12837–12845 RSC .
Q. Quan, Z. Lai, Y. Bao, X. Bu, Y. Meng, W. Wang, T. Takahashi, T. Hosomi, K. Nagashima, T. Yanagida, C. Liu, J. Lu and J. C. Ho, Small, 2021, 17, e2006860 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xi, G. Yan, Z. Lang, Y. Ma, H. Tan, H. Zhu, Y. Wang and Y. Li, Small, 2018, 14, e1802204 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Cao, Y. Cheng, M. Hu, P. Jing, Z. Ma, B. Liu, R. Gao and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906316 CrossRef CAS .
C.-N. Lv, L. Zhang, X.-H. Huang, Y.-X. Zhu, X. Zhang, J.-S. Hu and S.-Y. Lu, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 103995 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Wang, W. Hua, M. Li, H. Liu, M. Shao and B. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41237–41245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cordoba, X. Zeng, D. Wolf, A. Lubk, E. Barrigón, M. T. Borgström and K. L. Kavanagh, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3490–3497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Yin, M. Han, Z.-x. Yang, C. Lan, L. Liu, Y. Wang, N. Han, L. Shen, X. Wu and J. C. Ho, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10410–10418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Hughes, J. L. Stein, M. R. Friedfeld, B. M. Cossairt and D. R. Gamelin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14198–14207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Gary, M. W. Terban, S. J. L. Billinge and B. M. Cossairt, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1432–1441 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dévai, L. Felföldy, I. Wittner and S. Plósz, Nature, 1988, 333, 343–345 CrossRef .
Y. Li, C. Pu and X. Peng, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 941–958 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Fluck, The Chemistry of Phosphine, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1973 Search PubMed .
S.-m. Chang, Y.-y. Hsu and T.-s. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2005–2013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, J. a. Liu, Y. Zhuang and G. Dietmar, Sci. China, Ser. B: Chem., 2000, 43, 162–168 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Budnikova, D. I. Tazeev, B. A. Trofimov and O. G. Sinyashin, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 700–702 CrossRef CAS .
M.-P. Bichat, T. Politova, H. Pfeiffer, F. Tancret, L. Monconduit, J.-L. Pascal, T. Brousse and F. Favier, J. Power Sources, 2004, 136, 80–87 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carenco, I. Resa, X. Le Goff, P. Le Floch and N. Mézailles, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2568–2570 RSC .
S. Carenco, Y. Hu, I. Florea, O. Ersen, C. Boissière, N. Mézailles and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4134–4145 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Alsabban, X. Yang, W. Wahyudi, J.-H. Fu, M. N. Hedhili, J. Ming, C.-W. Yang, M. A. Nadeem, H. Idriss, Z. Lai, L.-J. Li, V. Tung and K.-W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20752–20761 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yu, W. Chen, H. Wang, H. Pan and D. H. C. Chua, Nano Energy, 2018, 55, 193–202 CrossRef .
J. Duan, S. Deng, W. Wu, X. Li, H. Fu, Y. Huang and W. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12415–12420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ledendecker, S. Krick Calderón, C. Papp, H.-P. Steinrück, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 12538–12542 CrossRef .
H.-P. Lin, K.-T. Chen, C.-B. Chang and H.-Y. Tuan, J. Power Sources, 2020, 465, 228262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xue, H. Zhang, S. Fricke, M. Lüther, Z. Yang, A. Meng, W. Bremser and Z. Li, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1723–1729 RSC .
S. Yang, G. Chen, A. G. Ricciardulli, P. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Shi, J. Ma, J. Zhang, P. Blom and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 465–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, D. Liu, H. Huang, N. Yang, B. Yu, M. Wen, X. Wang, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2600–2604 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, X. Li, L. Xiao, L. Zhou, Q. Xu, J. Weng and J. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21106–21113 CrossRef PubMed .
M. E. Witzke, A. Almithn, C. L. Coonrod, M. D. Triezenberg, D. D. Hibbitts and D. W. Flaherty, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16671–16684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hassina, G. Wenhan, M. Wei, M. Asif, Z. Ruo, W. Qingfei and Z. Ruqiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601671 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, X.-L. Wu, Z. Peng, J. Wang, S. Gan, Y. Zhang, D. Han and L. Niu, Small, 2019, 15, e1902491 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Luo, Y. Xing, S. Wang, W. Zhang, F. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706085 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiao, X. Liu, B. Wang, G. Wang, X. Wang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2047–2065 RSC .
R. Ge, J. Huo, T. Liao, Y. Liu, M. Zhu, Y. Li, J. Zhang and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kondori, M. Esmaeilirad, A. Baskin, B. Song, J. Wei, W. Chen, C. U. Segre, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, D. Prendergast and M. Asadi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900516 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, K. Sun, W.-C. Cheong, L. Zheng, C. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Cao, K. Wu, Y. Pan, Z. Zhuang, B. Hu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8982–8990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shao, J. Sun, N. Guo, F. He, K. Huang, F. Tian and Q. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 422, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bedoya-Pinto, A. K. Pandeya, D. Liu, H. Deniz, K. Chang, H. Tan, H. Han, J. Jena, I. Kostanovskiy and S. S. P. Parkin, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4405–4413 CrossRef .
F. Zan and J. Ren, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1794–1799 RSC .
D. Li, L. Peng, Z. Zhang, Z. Shi, R. Xie, M.-Y. Han and W. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3599–3602 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, S. Yang, B. Sun, P. Yang, J. Zheng and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1975–1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Li, P. Wen, T. B. Williams, S. Adhikari, C. Dun, C. Lu, D. Itanze, L. Jiang, D. L. Carroll, G. L. Donati, P. M. Lundin, Y. Qiu and S. M. Geyer, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705796 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Lv, B. Chen, Q. Zhou, L. Wang, Q. Zheng, C. Che and C. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 13153–13156 RSC .
X. Yu, J. Liu, J. Li, Z. Luo, Y. Zuo, C. Xing, J. Llorca, D. Nasiou, J. Arbiol, K. Pan, T. Kleinhanns, Y. Xie and A. Cabot, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105116 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Tessier, D. Dupont, K. De Nolf, J. De Roo and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4893–4898 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Delley, Z. Wu, M. E. Mundy, D. Ung, B. M. Cossairt, H. Wang and J. M. Mayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15390–15402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, S. Ding, W. Zhuang, D. Wu, P. Liu, X. Qu, H. Liu, H. Yang, Z. Wu, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005303 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Tessier, K. De Nolf, D. Dupont, D. Sinnaeve, J. De Roo and Z. Hens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5923–5929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, D. Li and F. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, e2002454 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mora-Tamez, G. Barim, C. Downes, E. M. Williamson, S. E. Habas and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1552–1560 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Yu, R. Du, C. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. Llorca, J. Arbiol, Y. Wang, M. Meyns and A. Cabot, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117846 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Andaraarachchi, M. J. Thompson, M. A. White, H.-J. Fan and J. Vela, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8021–8031 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Mundy, D. Ung, N. L. Lai, E. P. Jahrman, G. T. Seidler and B. M. Cossairt, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5373–5379 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheng, Z. Wang, C. Chen and K. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8026–8034 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boppella, J. Park, W. Yang, J. Tan and J. Moon, Carbon, 2020, 156, 529–537 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin, H. Jang, L. Chen, G. Nam, X. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801478 CrossRef .
J. Gao, J. Wang, L. Zhou, X. Cai, D. Zhan, M. Hou and L. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10364–10372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fang, Y. Wang, X. Yang, H. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2019, 370, 404–411 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liang, C. Lian, Q. Xu, M. Liu, H. Liu, H. Jiang and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 268, 118417 CrossRef .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6009 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 292–299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Z. Pu, H. Jin, Z. Zhang, J. Liu and S. Mu, J. Catal., 2020, 383, 244–253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, D. Wang, S. Wan, H. Liu, C. Wang and X. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, e1900550 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-T. Ren, L. Chen, D.-D. Yang and Z.-Y. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 263, 118352 CrossRef .
Q. Mo, W. Zhang, L. He, X. Yu and Q. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 244, 620–627 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Qian, Z. Li, Y. Zhu and G. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb4197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Lv, F. Jing, K. Chi and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 223–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Q. He, Y. Liu, J. Key, S. Nie, M. Wu and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16999–17007 RSC .
X. Liu, F. Liu, J. Yu, G. Xiong, L. Zhao, Y. Sang, S. Zuo, J. Zhang, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Lee, J.-H. Jang, I. Jang, Y. S. Kang, S. Jang, K. Y. Lee, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, Small, 2019, 15, e1902090 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, F. Feng, K. Wang, S. Li, X. Huang, L. Gong, L. Ma and R. Li, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, H. Liu, X. Hu, G. Lv, Y. Zheng, F. He, D. Ma, Q. Liu, Y. Lu and W. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11321–11330 RSC .
G. Li, J. Wang, J. Yu, H. Liu, Q. Cao, J. Du, L. Zhao, J. Jia, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118147 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, J. Yu, J. Jia, L. Yang, L. Zhao, W. Zhou and H. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801332 CrossRef .
J. Yu, G. Li, H. Liu, L. Zhao, A. Wang, Z. Liu, H. Li, H. Liu, Y. Hu and W. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901154 CrossRef .
T.-Q. Zhang, J. Liu, L.-B. Huang, X.-D. Zhang, Y.-G. Sun, X.-C. Liu, D.-S. Bin, X. Chen, A.-M. Cao, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11248–11253 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, C. Qian, X. Wan, W. Zhang, H. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Yang, S. Lin, Q. Kong and T. Fan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4374–4382 RSC .
X. Long, Z. Li, G. Gao, P. Sun, J. Wang, B. Zhang, J. Zhong, Z. Jiang and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4074 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hou, L. Zou, Y. Wang and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21360–21366 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, M. Zhou, Y. Shen, L. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Li, X. Bo, Z. Wang and C. Zhao, J. Catal., 2019, 373, 180–189 CrossRef CAS .
P.-F. Yin, M. Zhou, J. Chen, C. Tan, G. Liu, Q. Ma, Q. Yun, X. Zhang, H. Cheng, Q. Lu, B. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Huang, D. Hu, J. Wang, Q. Liu, Z. Luo, Z. Liu, Y. Ge, X.-J. Wu, X.-W. Du and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000482 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Q. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Li, L. Fan, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Small, 2018, 14, e1802755 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, B. Ni, J. Chen, J. Hu and W. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22507–22513 RSC .
D. X. Luong, K. V. Bets, W. A. Algozeeb, M. G. Stanford, C. Kittrell, W. Chen, R. V. Salvatierra, M. Ren, E. A. McHugh, P. A. Advincula, Z. Wang, M. Bhatt, H. Guo, V. Mancevski, R. Shahsavari, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2020, 577, 647–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, Z. Huang, P. Xie, S. D. Lacey, R. J. Jacob, H. Xie, F. Chen, A. Nie, T. Pu, M. Rehwoldt, D. Yu, M. R. Zachariah, C. Wang, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Li and L. Hu, Science, 2018, 359, 1489–1494 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wen, J. Yu, C. Xing, D. Liu, X. Lyu, W. Cai and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4198–4203 RSC .
M. Qu, Y. Jiang, M. Yang, S. Liu, Q. Guo, W. Shen, M. Li and R. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118324 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, L. Xia, S. Zhu, F. Qu and F. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2894–2897 RSC .
J. Bang, M. Lim, W. Lee, G. Bang, W. Lee, Y. Park, Y. Kwon, Y. Jung and S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 10463–10471 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, F. Du, H. He, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, T. Li, G.-L. Li, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14842–14848 RSC .
L. Xiong, B. Wang, H. Cai, L. Wang, T. Yang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 8, 1184–1192 RSC .
S.-H. Yu, R. Wu, B. Xiao, Q. Gao, Y. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. Zhu and M.-R. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15445–15449 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Jang, K. Im, H. Shin, K.-S. Lee, H. Kim, J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Lin, J. Cao, S. Guo, X. Zheng, J. C. Feng and J. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24486–24492 RSC .
J. L. Lado, X. Wang, E. Paz, E. Carbó-Argibay, N. Guldris, C. Rodríguez-Abreu, L. Liu, K. Kovnir and Y. V. Kolen’ko, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6503–6508 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhang, Y.-R. Zhu, Y. Chen, S.-Y. Dou, X.-Y. Chen, B. Dong, B.-Y. Guo, D.-P. Liu, C.-G. Liu and Y.-M. Chai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125831 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Y. Sun, X. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, C. Li and H. J. Fan, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 736–743 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. R. Anjum and J. S. Lee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3030–3038 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Wu, P. Yu, Y. Wang, F. Xiao, S. Chen, S. Du, Y. Xie, Y. Wu and Z. Ren, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4154–4160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, D. Nie, M. Song, T. Jiao, G. Fu and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7506–7512 RSC .
J. Cai, Y. Song, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, Y. Xie, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaw8113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Men, P. Li, J. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3744–3752 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Men, P. Li, F. Yang, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 253, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, A. M. Sanchez, M. Aagesen, H. A. Fonseka, S. Huo and H. Liu, Nano Today, 2020, 34, 100921 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8738–8745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, G. Zhou, Z. Liu, L. Xu, D. Sun and Y. Tang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 14733–14738 RSC .
C. Wang, W. Chen, D. Yuan, S. Qian, D. Cai, J. Jiang and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104453 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14686–14693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, Z. Liu, A. Wang, D. Sun, Y. Chen, L. Yang, J. Pang, H. Li, H. Li, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 338–347 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, M. A. R. Anjum, M. Lee, B. J. Lee and J. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1809151 CrossRef .
J. Sun, M. Ren, L. Yu, Z. Yang, L. Xie, F. Tian, Y. Yu, Z. Ren, S. Chen and H. Zhou, Small, 2019, 15, e1804272 CrossRef .
J. Chang, K. Li, Z. Wu, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26303–26311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lei, S. Ge, Y.-H. Tan, J. Li, Z. Wang, P. Liu, C. Feng and B. Xiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24908–24918 RSC .
M. A. R. Anjum, M. S. Okyay, M. Kim, M. H. Lee, N. Park and J. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 286–295 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, B. Zhang, J. Zhu, Z. Liu, H. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22453–22462 RSC .
Y. Huang, X. Song, J. Deng, C. Zha, W. Huang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 656–661 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, T. Jiang, Z. Fu, N. Cheng, X. Zhang, K. Zhu, H. Xue, W. Wang, J. Tian and P. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105347 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, C. Feng, T. Liao, S. Hu, H. Wu and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 2225–2233 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, X. H. Wang, Y. Nie, B. X. Tao, Y. X. Yang, W. H. Guo, J. Zhang, Z. Cai, Y. Ling, W. Liu, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, J. Catal., 2020, 382, 228–236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhuo, M. Cabán-Acevedo, H. Liang, L. Samad, Q. Ding, Y. Fu, M. Li and S. Jin, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6355–6361 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chu, C.-J. Chang, Y. Zhu, S.-C. Lin, C.-W. Tung, T.-L. Chen and H. M. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14247–14255 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Huang, Y. Yao and L. Jiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119584 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, T. Gong, J. Zhang, X. Zheng, J. Mao, H. Liu, Y. Li and Q. Hao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118245 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, Y. Zheng, C. Du, Y. Luo, J. Zhang, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700304 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, D. Xu, C. Su, W. Tang, H. Ju, J. Zhang and B. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2019, 56, 810–813 RSC .
J. Liu, X. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Ge, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Fang, F. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Song, S. Xu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14383–14391 RSC .
R. N. Jenjeti, R. Kumar and S. Sampath, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14545–14551 RSC .
K. Kim, S. Y. Lim, J. Kim, J.-U. Lee, S. Lee, P. Kim, K. Park, S. Son, C.-H. Park, J.-G. Park and H. Cheong, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 041001 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 29, 1805975 CrossRef .
J. Yu, W.-J. Li, H. Zhang, F. Zhou, R. Li, C.-Y. Xu, L. Zhou, H. Zhong and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, L. Chang, Y. Zhang, S. Mou, T. Wang, Y. Luo, Z. Wang and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9721–9725 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, F. Li, Q. Xue, Y. Zhang, S. Yin and Y. Chen, Small, 2019, 15, e1903500 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-z. Du, X.-z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Hu, M. I. B. Utama, C. K. Gan, Q. Xiong and C. Kloc, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1738–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, Z. Sofer, D. Sedmidubský, Š. Huber, A. Y. S. Eng and M. Pumera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12563–12573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Schlesinger, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4267–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, M. Li, Y. Li, H. Dong, D. Sun, X. Liu, L. Xu, Z. Tian and Y. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1905252 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, R. Lyu, W. Lv, H. Li, W. Jiang, J. Li, S. Gu, G. Zhou, Z. Huang, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1904991 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Wu, Y. Gu, Y. Xie, C. Tian, H. Yan, D. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Cai and H. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25986–25995 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, H. Zhao, W. Fu, W. Tian, X. Yang, H. Zhang, F. Ling and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118589 CrossRef .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Dong, X. Liu, L. Long, S. Wang, C. Liu, S. Dong and J. Jia, Carbon, 2019, 158, 885–892 CrossRef .
D. Guo, Y. Zhang, W. Sun, D. Chu, B. Li, L. Tan, H. Ma, H. Pang, X. Wang and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41580–41587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Lu, L. Chen, X. Wei, J. Zhu and Y. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 46073–46083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen, C. A. Ortíz-Ledón, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8181–8186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fu, Y. Gu, A. Wu, Y. Jiao, H. Zheng, X. Wang, Y. Xie, L. Wang and C. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 6673–6681 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ge, W. Zhang, J. Tu, T. Xia, S. Chen and G. Xie, Small, 2020, 16, e2001856 CrossRef .
M.-Y. Wu, P.-F. Da, T. Zhang, J. Mao, H. Liu and T. Ling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17896–17902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, K. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Pan, Z. Liu, D. Cao, Y. Song, S. Liu and C. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
F.-S. Zhang, J.-W. Wang, J. Luo, R. Liu, Z. Zhang, C.-T. He and T.-B. Lu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 9, 1375–1384 RSC .
Q. Gan, H. He, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, N. Qin, S. Gu, Z. Li, W. Luo and Z. Lu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9247–9258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Dai, M. Zhang, Y.-T. Liu, J. Yu and B. Ding, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 12937–12940 RSC .
R. Shi, H.-F. Ye, F. Liang, Z. Wang, K. Li, Y. Weng, Z. Lin, W.-F. Fu, C.-M. Che and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705941 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Qin, B. Zhang, Y. Pan, X. Wang, L. Diao, J. Chen, J. Wu, E. Liu, J. Sha, L. Ma and N. Zhao, J. Catal., 2020, 381, 493–500 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, L. Cai, Y. Wang, X. Guo, S. Ma, Y. Zhu, Y. H. Tsang, Z. Zheng, R. Zheng and Y. Chai, Small, 2019, 15, e1904507 CrossRef PubMed .
W. T. Kang, I. M. Lee, S. Yun, Y. I. Song, K. Kim, D.-H. Kim, Y. S. Shin, K. Lee, J. Heo, Y.-M. Kim, Y. H. Lee and W. J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11397–11402 RSC .
Q. Wang, K. Cui, J. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Yang, X. Zhou, G. Ma, Z. Yang, Z. Lei and S. Ren, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9171–9177 RSC .
P. Wang, Q. Shao, J. Guo, L. Bu and X. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3144–3149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, J. Berry-Gair, W. Li, G. Guan, M. Yang, J. Li, F. Lai, F. Corà, K. Holt, D. J. L. Brett, G. He and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhuang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, Z. Li, M. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, D. Yang, Z. Zhu and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14664–14670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, Z. Wang, X. Huang, Y. Qin, H. Yang, X. Ren, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 5097–5103 RSC .
Y. Wang, W. Fu, Y. Wang, W. Tian, H. Zhang and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23791–23799 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, H. Baydoun, C. N. Verani and S. L. Brock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4006–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qian, S. Cui, D. Jiang, L. Zhang and P. Du, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704075 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, L. Huang, H. Liu and H. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2956–2961 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Gao, E. J. M. Hensen and J. P. Hofmann, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Q. Gan, X. Li, Y. Zhong and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 2848–2853 CrossRef CAS .
S.-F. Hung, Y. Zhu, G.-Q. Tzeng, H.-C. Chen, C.-S. Hsu, Y.-F. Liao, H. Ishii, N. Hiraoka and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2813–2820 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Y.-R. Lu, C.-S. Hsu, H. Xue, T.-S. Chan, N.-T. Suen and H. M. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8071–8074 RSC .
B. Y. Xia, L. Su, X. Cui, T. He, L. Zeng, T. Han, Y. Song and K. Qi, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2019–2024 RSC .
M. Miao, R. Hou, R. Qi, Y. Yan, L. Q. Gong, K. Qi, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18925–18931 RSC .
H. Yang, L. Gong, H. Wang, C. Dong, J. Wang, K. Qi, H. Liu, X. Guo and B. Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, H. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Shen, C. Cheng, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2257–2261 RSC .
X. Su, X. Zeng, H. Nemec, X. Zou, W. Zhang, M. Borgström and A. Yartsev, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18550–18558 RSC .
S. Li, Z. Geng, X. Wang, X. Ren, J. Liu, X. Hou, Y. Sun, W. Zhang, K. Huang and S. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2602–2605 RSC .
D. Gao, I. Zegkinoglou, N. J. Divins, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, P. Grosse and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4825–4831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yuan, J. Bai, L. Zhang, X. Chen and L. Ren, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 284, 119693 CrossRef .
S. Xu, X. Gao, A. Deshmukh, J. Zhou, N. Chen, W. Peng, Y. Gong, Z. Yao, K. D. Finkelstein, B. Wan, F. Gao, M. Wang, M. Chen and H. Gou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2001–2007 RSC .
B. Liu, C. Wu, G. Chen, W. Chen, L. Peng, Y. Yao, Z. Wei, H. Zhu, T. Han, D. Tang and M. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2019, 429, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. Li, Z. Zhang, S. Li, M. Cui, L. Ma, H. Zhou, D. Su and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8490–8497 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Zeng, W. Gao, T. Maxson, D. Raciti, M. Giroux, X. Pan, C. Wang and J. Greeley, Science, 2019, 363, 870–874 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xia and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3265–3278 RSC .
J. Zhu, S. Li, M. Xiao, X. Zhao, G. Li, Z. Bai, M. Li, Y. Hu, R. Feng, W. Liu, R. Gao, D. Su, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105212 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen and C. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30029–30034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Wei, Y. Liu, G. Y. Wang, Y. Cui, A. Dong, S. Xu, Q. Jiang and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26177–26186 RSC .
L. Liu, L. Ge, Y. Sun, B. Jiang, Y. Cheng, L. Xu, F. Liao, Z. Kang and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6394–6400 RSC .
A. Dutta and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 144–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhu, L. Wang, M. Qiao and J. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7159–7162 RSC .
J. D. Leger, M. R. Friedfeld, R. A. Beck, J. D. Gaynor, A. Petrone, X. Li, B. M. Cossairt and M. Khalil, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. MacLeod, K. X. Steirer, J. L. Young, U. Koldemir, A. Sellinger, J. A. Turner, T. G. Deutsch and D. C. Olson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11346–11350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Tappan, K. Chen, H. Lu, S. M. Sharada and R. L. Brutchey, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16394–16401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, K. Du, W. Liu, Z. Zhu, Y. Shao and M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4368–4373 RSC .
S. Yu, X.-B. Fan, X. Wang, J. Li, Q. Zhang, A. Xia, S. Wei, L.-Z. Wu, Y. Zhou and G. R. Patzke, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4009 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, Y. Yang, A. L. Kaledin, S. He, T. Jin, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 5779–5789 RSC .
J. Xu, J. P. S. Sousa, N. E. Mordvinova, J. D. Costa, D. Y. Petrovykh, K. Kovnir, O. I. Lebedev and Y. V. Kolen’ko, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2595–2600 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, W. Zhou, S. Gao, R. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. Cheng, T. Qiu, B. Zhu, C. Qu, W. Guo, Q. Wang and R. Zou, Small, 2020, 16, e1905075 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Q. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1808167 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Du, Z. Liu, H. Wang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2213–2217 RSC .
B. Y. Xia, M. Miao, R. Hou, Z. Liang, R. Qi, T. He, Y. Yan, K. Qi, H. Liu and G. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24107–24113 RSC .
Y. Jing, Y. Ma, Y. Li and T. Heine, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1833–1838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. D. Benck, J. K. Norskov, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3022–3029 RSC .
L.-P. Feng, A. Li, P.-C. Wang and Z.-T. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 24359–24367 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Moon, J.-H. Jang, E.-G. Kim, Y.-H. Chung, S. J. Yoo and Y.-K. Lee, J. Catal., 2015, 326, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, T. Yu, J. Lin, H. Lou, H. Xu and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25665–25671 RSC .
X. Deng, X. Chen, Y. Huang, B. Xiao and H. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4721–4728 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jalil, Z. Zhuo, Z. Sun, F. Wu, C. Wang and X. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 8, 1307–1314 RSC .
A. T. Landers, M. Fields, D. A. Torelli, J. Xiao, T. R. Hellstern, S. A. Francis, C. Tsai, J. Kibsgaard, N. S. Lewis, K. Chan, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1450–1457 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Jang and Y.-K. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Phillips, S. J. Sawhill, R. Self and M. E. Bussell, J. Catal., 2002, 207, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
F. Luo, Q. Zhang, X. Yu, S. Xiao, Y. Ling, H. Hu, L. Guo, Z. Yang, L. Huang, W. Cai and H. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14862–14867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pu, J. Zhao, I. S. Amiinu, W. Li, M. Wang, D. He and S. Mu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 952–957 RSC .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Y. Huang, J. Sun, F. Qin, J. Bao, W. A. Goddard, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2551 CrossRef PubMed .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Y. Zhao, N. Jia, X.-R. Wu, F.-M. Li, P. Chen, P.-J. Jin, S. Yin and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118880 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Y. Jiao, H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, X. Dong, D. Guo, C. Tian and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, X. Teng, R. Zhang, P. Guo, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, H. Wang, X. Sun and L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 263, 118109 CrossRef .
L. Ji, L. Li, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, S. Mou, T. Wu, Q. Liu, B. Li, X. Zhu, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 758–762 CrossRef .
I. Grigioni, L. K. Sagar, Y. C. Li, G. Lee, Y. Yan, K. Bertens, R. K. Miao, X. Wang, J. Abed, D. H. Won, F. P. García de Arquer, A. H. Ip, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 79–84 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, L. Lu, Q. Zhu, C. Wu, D. Yang, C. Chen and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2427–2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. U. D. Calvinho, A. B. Laursen, K. M. K. Yap, T. A. Goetjen, S. Hwang, N. Murali, B. Mejia-Sosa, A. Lubarski, K. M. Teeluck, E. S. Hall, E. Garfunkel, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2550–2559 RSC .
R. Zhao, C. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, P. Wei, L. Ji, Y. Guo, S. Gao, Y. Luo, Z. Wang and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 77–81 RSC .
R. Zhao, Q. Geng, L. Chang, P. Wei, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, S. Lu, Z. Wang and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9328–9331 RSC .
H. Li, P. Wen, D. S. Itanze, Z. D. Hood, S. Adhikari, C. Lu, X. Ma, C. Dun, L. Jiang, D. L. Carroll, Y. Qiu and S. M. Geyer, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Z. Ma, J. Li, Z. Zhang, B. Tang and X. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 511, 355–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chong, C. Liu, Y. Huang, C. Huang and B. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 285–295 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Liu, C. Wang, S. Lu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21170–21175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Han, J. Yuan, C. Liu, D. Wang, T. Liu, M. Liu, J. Luo, A. Wang and J. C. Crittenden, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 11932–11940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, J. Yu, L. Tang, G. Zeng, W. Tang, J. Wang, T. Luo, B. Peng, B. Song, L. Wang and C. Liang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 13878–13887 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, W. Guo, C. Chen, Q. Zhu, J. Ma, H.-H. Wu, D. Yang, G. Yang, X. Sun and B. Han, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6804–6808 RSC .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H.-L. Du, D. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, W. Gong, Y. Lv, H. Wang, M. Han, G. Wang, T. Shi and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12376–12379 RSC .
F. Wang, B. Fang, X. Yu and L. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9496–9503 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meng, C. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18908–18912 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pu, T. Liu, W. Zhao, X. Shi, Y. Liu, G. Zhang, W. Hu, S. Sun and S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11737–11744 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Hodges, E. L. Cates and J.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 642–650 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Huo, J.-F. Zhou, Y. Wu, Y. Wu, H. Liu, N. Liu, H.-Y. Hu and X. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18813–18820 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
L. Buzzetti, G. E. M. Crisenza and P. Melchiorre, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3730–3747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grinblat, M. P. Nielsen, P. Dichtl, Y. Li, R. F. Oulton and S. A. Maier, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lin, H. Zhang, X.-L. Cheng and Y. Miyamoto, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 035438 CrossRef .
S. Sato, T. Arai, T. Morikawa, K. Uemura, T. M. Suzuki, H. Tanaka and T. Kajino, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15240–15243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sharon and G. Tamizhmani, J. Mater. Sci., 1986, 21, 2193–2201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, G. Shen, Y. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 260, 118183 CrossRef .
P. Wen, K. Zhao, H. Li, J. Li, J. Li, Q. Ma, S. M. Geyer, L. Jiang and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2995–3004 RSC .
A. Indra, A. Acharjya, P. W. Menezes, C. Merschjann, D. Hollmann, M. Schwarze, M. Aktas, A. Friedrich, S. Lochbrunner, A. Thomas and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1653–1657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, M. Xiao, S. Yu, H. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Sun, G. Chen and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 458–462 CrossRef .
Y. Zeng, Y. Xia, W. Song and S. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25908–25914 RSC .
C. Cheng, S. Zong, J. Shi, F. Xue, Y. Zhang, X. Guan, B. Zheng, J. Deng and L. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118620 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, M. Zhu, X. Lv, Y. Liu, C. Shi, Y. Dai, A. Wang and T. Majima, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 330–336 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Jiang, K. Sun, M. Liu, J. Pei, D. Li, C. Ding and K. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22749–22755 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Weng, M.-Y. Qi, C. Han, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4642–4687 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bi, L. Zhang, Z. Sun, X. Li, T. Jin, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4253–4257 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 897–900 RSC .
D. Mellmann, P. Sponholz, H. Junge and M. Beller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3954–3988 RSC .
S. Cao, Y. Chen, H. Wang, J. Chen, X. Shi, H. Li, P. Cheng, X. Liu, M. Liu and L. Piao, Joule, 2018, 2, 549–557 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, Q. Zhang, Z. Xu, Q. Shang, L. Wang, Y. Chao, Y. Li, H. Chen, F. Lv, Q. Zhang, L. Gu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1904249 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, K. Chishiro, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 734–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, C. Han, Z. Ma, Y. Leng, J. Li, X. Ji, D. Bi, H. Xie and Z. Huang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 307, 311–318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and Z. Xiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41313–41320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, L. Wu, S. Song, B. McElhenny, F. Zhang, S. Chen and Z. Ren, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2681–2689 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, L. Yu, F. Zhang, B. McElhenny, D. Luo, A. Karim, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chao, J. Lai, Y. Yang, P. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Z. Mu, S. Li, J. Zheng, Z. Zhu and Y. Tan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 3372–3378 RSC .
Y. Wang, S. Wang and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17236–17240 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-C. Fu, R.-C. Xu, J. T. Moore, F. Liang, X.-C. Nie, C. Mi, J. Mo, Y. Xu, Q.-Q. Xu, Z. Yang, Z.-S. Lin and W.-F. Fu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4273–4278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Dickson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 8007–8009 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, T. Tian, C. Xu, K. Ma, W. Sun and Y. Ding, J. Catal., 2020, 382, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alexopoulou, A. Petala, Z. Frontistis, C. Drivas, S. Kennou, D. I. Kondarides and D. Mantzavinos, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 178–187 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Li, S. Liu, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 594–607 RSC .
X. Zhou, X. Li, R. Prins, A. Wang, L. Wang, S. Liu and Q. Sheng, J. Catal., 2020, 383, 331–342 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 343–352 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Feng, X.-C. Li, H. Qian, Y.-F. Zhang, D.-H. Zhang, D. Zhao, S. g. Hong and N. Zhang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 1743–1756 RSC .
T. Song, P. Ren, J. Xiao, Y. Yuan and Y. Yang, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 651–656 RSC .
T. Mitsudome, M. Sheng, A. Nakata, J. Yamasaki, T. Mizugaki and K. Jitsukawa, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 6682–6689 RSC .
C. Zhu, S. Zhao, Z. Fan, H. Wu, F. Liu, Z. Chen and A. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, F. Cheng, J. Liang and J. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 1411–1417 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Hess, G. K. Schenter, M. R. Hartman, L. L. Daemen, T. Proffen, S. M. Kathmann, C. J. Mundy, M. Hartl, D. J. Heldebrant, A. C. Stowe and T. Autrey, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 5723–5735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, B. Wang, D. Yang, Z. Wan, P. Yan, J. Tian, T. T. Isimjan and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118584 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Peng, L. Kang, S. Cao, Y. Chen, Z.-S. Lin and W.-F. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15725–15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qu, R. Jiang, Q. Li, F. Zeng, X. Zheng, Z. Xu, C. Chen and J. Peng, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 850–860 RSC .
L. MacDonald, J. C. McGlynn, N. Irvine, I. Alshibane, L. G. Bloor, B. Rausch, J. S. J. Hargreaves and L. Cronin, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1782–1787 RSC .
W. Wang, Z. Dai, R. Jiang, Q. Li, X. Zheng, W. Liu, Z. Luo, Z. Xu and J. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 43854–43863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Staubitz, A. P. M. Robertson and I. Manners, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4079–4124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. King, M. A. Hubert, C. Capuano, J. Manco, N. Danilovic, E. Valle, T. R. Hellstern, K. Ayers and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1071–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Inaba, T. Kinumoto, M. Kiriake, R. Umebayashi, A. Tasaka and Z. Ogumi, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5746–5753 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Science, 2014, 345, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jiang, Q. Yue, S. Tang, L. Zhang, L. Zhu and P. Du, J. Catal., 2018, 366, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hwang, S. H. Porter, A. B. Laursen, H. Yang, M. Li, V. Manichev, K. U. D. Calvinho, V. Amarasinghe, M. Greenblatt, E. Garfunkel and G. C. Dismukes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2400–2411 RSC .
A. Standing, S. Assali, L. Gao, M. A. Verheijen, D. van Dam, Y. Cui, P. H. L. Notten, J. E. M. Haverkort and E. P. A. M. Bakkers, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .
S. Pishgar, J. Strain, S. Gulati, G. Sumanasekera, G. Gupta and J. Spurgeon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25377–25388 RSC .
F. Li, Y. Li, Q. Zhuo, D. Zhou, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhao, X. Wu, Y. Shan and L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11479–11488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Schipper, Z. Zhao, A. P. Leitner, L. Xie, F. Qin, M. K. Alam, S. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Ren, Z. Wang, J. Bao and K. H. Whitmire, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4051–4059 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Barton, D. M. Rampulla and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6342–6344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Xu, P. N. Duchesne, L. Wang, A. Tavasoli, A. A. Jelle, M. Xia, J.-F. Liao, D.-B. Kuang and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mondal, H. Lee, H. Kim and J. Y. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1908239 CrossRef .
J. Guo, M. Suástegui, K. K. Sakimoto, V. M. Moody, G. Xiao, D. G. Nocera and N. S. Joshi, Science, 2018, 362, 813–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Arai, S. Sato and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1998–2002 RSC .
D. Chen, Z. Pu, R. Lu, P. Ji, P. Wang, J. Zhu, C. Lin, H.-W. Li, X. Zhou, Z. Hu, F. Xia, J. Wu and S. Mu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000814 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Hsu, J. Miao, L. Zhang, J. Gao, H. Wang, H. Tao, S.-F. Hung, A. Vasileff, S. Z. Qiao and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707261 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Mi, Y. Qiu, Y. Liu, X. Peng, M. Hu, S. Zhao, H. Cao, L. Zhuo, H. Li, J. Ren, X. Liu and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. Li, Z. Tian and J. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 228762 CrossRef CAS .
G. Panzeri, E. Tatsi, G. Griffini and L. Magagnin, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1665–1671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Burgener, S. Luo, R. McLean, T. E. Miller and T. J. Erb, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 186–192 CrossRef .
P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 301–312 RSC .
J. Xu, T. Liu, J. Li, B. Li, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, D. Xiong, I. Amorim, W. Li and L. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1819–1827 RSC .
S. Guo, P. Zhou, N. Li, Y. Chao, W. Zhang, F. Lv, K. Wang, W. Yang and P. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14184–14188 CrossRef .
Q. He, D. Tian, H. Jiang, D. Cao, S. Wei, D. Liu, P. Song, Y. Lin and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shang, Z. Zhao, J. Pei, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, A. Li, J. Dong, P. An, L. Zheng and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22607–22612 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tran and Z. W. Ulissi, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Buchner, K. J. Stepputat, A. W. Zimmermann and R. Schomäcker, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 6957–6969 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jin, Y. Li, J. Wang, F. Meng, S. Cao, B. He, S. Jia, Y. Wang, Z. Li and X. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, e1903847 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, P.-F. Liu, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, W.-X. Zhou, G. Xie and B. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19923–19932 RSC .
X.-K. Wei, G. Bihlmayer, X. Zhou, W. Feng, Y. V. Kolen'ko, D. Xiong, L. Liu, S. Blügel and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2003479 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Shao-Hai Li
	Shao-Hai Li received his PhD degree in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at College of Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His research interests focus on the synthesis of composite-based nanostructure catalysts for applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis and related interdisciplinary sustainable chemistry.

Yi-Jun Xu
	Yi-Jun Xu is currently a full professor working at Fuzhou University, P. R. China. He received his PhD degree from Cardiff University in 2006. From 2007 to 2009, he was a postdoctoral research fellow at the Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry and his research group works in the area of heterogeneous photoredox catalysis, mainly focusing on the design of composite-based catalysts, the fundamental studies of catalyst structures and catalytic reaction mechanisms, and exploring their versatile redox catalytic applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Year-wise number of publications and citations (the inset) on metal phosphides from 2005–2020 (data obtained from Clarivate Analytics). (b) Metal and non-metal elements in the periodic table used for the synthesis of (doped) metal phosphides for catalytic applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Metal and phosphorus sources used to synthesize metal phosphides and related developed passivation strategies toward the exploitation of renewable resources.	 

Liquid/liquid–solid/liquid–gas–solid	Electrochemical deposition	(i) Simple synthesis process; (ii) controllable size and morphology.	(i) Low yield; (ii) generating amounts of waste liquid.	
31–40

Electroless deposition	
41–45

Photochemical deposition	
46–48

Sonochemical method	
49, 50

Hydro/solvothermal synthesis	
51–62

Vapor-phase hydrothermal method	
63

Self-catalytic wet chemical method	
64–66

Hot-injection method	(i) High-yield; (ii) controllable synthesis.	(i) Harsh reaction conditions; (ii) generating amounts of waste liquid.	
67–76

Microfluidic synthesis	(i) High-yield; (ii) controllable synthesis.	(i) High cost and complicated processes; (ii) generating amounts of waste liquid.	
77, 78

Microwave liquid phase method	(i) High-yield; (ii) simple synthesis process.	(i) Generating amounts of waste liquid; (ii) poor size and morphology control.	
79, 80

Solid/solid–solid/gas–solid	Solid-state thermal treatment	(i) High-yield; (ii) simple synthesis process; (iii) propitious for various metal and phosphorus precursor mixtures.	(i) Poor size and morphology control; (ii) low purity product.	
81–92

Ball-milling/manually grinding	
93–98

Temperature-programmed reduction	
99–106

Joule thermal shock	
107

Arc melting	
108–110

Microwave treatment	
111, 112

Chemical vapor deposition	(i) High purity and crystallinity; (ii) controllable size and morphology.	(i) High cost and complicated processes; (ii) harsh reaction conditions.	
113

Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition	
114, 115

Hydrogen plasma	
116

Plasma-assisted atomic layer deposition	
117

Magnetron sputtering method	
118

Pulsed laser deposition	
119

Molecular-beam epitaxial growth chemical vapor deposition	
120–129


 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the Co/CoxMy catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (b) Schematic representation of the synthetic process of the Ru–Ru2P/PC catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic routes of amorphous and crystalline CoP by the molecular SSP approach. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic of the synthesis processes of the metallogel precursor. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of cobalt phosphide/PG composites. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process from Cu/PTA-MOPF to Cu3P/CNS composites. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (g) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of bimetallic MOF-derived phosphides. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (h) Schematic illustration of the preparation of hollow porous NiCoFeP NCs. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of the NiFeP/SG porous monolithic electrode. Reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) Straightforward route to metal and derived metal phosphide, oxide, and sulfide NPs encapsulated by graphene shells. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (c) Formation mechanism of hollow mixed phosphide (Ni, Cu)2P NPs. Reproduced from ref. 277 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic illustration of the construction of hierarchical Ni–Co–P hollow nanobricks. Reproduced from ref. 312 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (e) Schematic procedure of the synthesis of S:Co2P NPs on a conductive support. Reproduced from ref. 323 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (f) Illustration of the preparation of Cu3P using CuCl as a precursor. Reproduced from ref. 334 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (g) Schematic description of the synthesis of InP via ion-exchange balance and annealing treatment. Reproduced from ref. 336 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 5  The chemical structures, the oxidation state of phosphorus, and full names with acronyms of typically used organic phosphorus sources. The corresponding data of the melting point (MP, °C), boiling point (BP, °C), and physical state at 20 °C and 101.3 kPa were obtained from https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P nanoplates. (b) TEM image of a c-Pd7P3@a-Pd–P nanoplate. The inset is the corresponding SAED pattern. (c–e) HRTEM images taken from the selected regions in (b). The insets are the corresponding FFT patterns. (f) HAADF-STEM image of a c-Pd–P@a-Pd–P nanoplate and corresponding elemental mapping. (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 421 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (g) SEM image of ultrathin Ni(OH)2 NSs. (h) AFM image of the Ni(OH)2 NSs. (i) SEM image of N-FG. (j and k) SEM and AFM images of the NP–FG composite. (l) TEM image of NP–FG (inset, SAED pattern). (m) Schematic illustration showing the FGR-assisted stress transfer mechanism during the phosphorization process. (g–m) Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (n) Schematic diagram of the process to synthesize CoFePx NPs in c-wood channels using a current pulse. (o) The evolution of the median temperature as a function of time (inset: optical and thermal images of the heated sample taken at 0.35 s). (p) SEM image of the CoFePx NPs on the wall of c-wood. (q) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding elemental mapping of a typical CoFePx nanoparticle. (n–q) Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the B-CoP/CNT hybrid. (b) HRTEM image and (c) elemental mapping of the B-CoP/CNT hybrid. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 439 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of N-CoP2 NWs. (e) SEM image of N-CoP2 NWs on CC. (f) XRD patterns of CoP2 and N-CoP2 NWs and the corresponding magnification. (g) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mapping of a single N-CoP2 nanowire. (h) Atomic resolution HAADF image and the strain tensor mapping and the line profile analysis for N-CoP2, respectively. (i) WT-EXAFS spectra of N-CoP2. (d–i) Reproduced from ref. 441 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020. (j) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of NiCoPO/NC NSs and NiCoPO/NC nanocages. (k) HAADF-STEM image of NiCoPO/NC NSs and (l) the corresponding elemental mapping. (j–l) Reproduced from ref. 447 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (m) Schematic illustration of the formation process of S:CoP NPs. (n) TEM image and (o–q) HRTEM images and the corresponding FFT patterns of S:CoP NPs. (m–q) Reproduced from ref. 454 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the phase transformations of cobalt-based phosphides in alkaline solution during the HER and OER. Blue, orange, red, tin, and pink balls represent cobalt, iron, oxygen, phosphor, and hydrogen atoms, respectively. (b) In situ XRD patterns and Raman investigations of cobalt-based phosphides during the HER and OER, respectively. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 506 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (d) Electron density difference and free energy diagrams on MoP and N–MoP under (e) alkaline and (f) acidic conditions, respectively. (g) Schematic illustration of the (N2 or Ar) plasma-treated MoP/CC for the HER. (d–g) Reproduced from ref. 300 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Absorption spectra and PL spectra of InP/ZnS QDs before and after ligand exchange. The HER performance for InP/ZnS QDs capped with (b) different organic ligands and (c) different inorganic ligands. (d) Transient photocurrent, (e) EPR and (f) SPV spectra for InP/ZnS QDs capped with different ligands under simulated sunlight illumination. (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 531 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. (g) HRTEM and (h) the corresponding filtered images of the NiPS3/Ni2P heterostructures. (i) Polarization curves of the NiPS3/Ni2P electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. (j) Schematic illustration of the lattice matching and (k) distribution of charge density difference between NiPS3 and Ni2P at the interface. (g–k) Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  The valorization of renewable resources or man-made waste over metal phosphides for sustainable catalytic applications.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the MoO2–FeP@C composite. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images (inset: the FFT image) of the as-obtained MoO2–FeP@C hybrid. (d) Photo of MoO2–FeP@C used in an H-type cell. (e) Polarization curves of the FeP@C, MoO2@C, and MoO2–FeP@C composites, and Pt/C for the alkaline HER. (f) Polarization curves of the FeP@C, MoO2@C, and MoO2–FeP@C composites for the HMF EOR. (g) Interfacial electron density difference plot between MoO2 and FeP. (a–g) Reproduced from ref. 553 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (h) Electrocatalytic semi-dehydrogenation of THIQs 1 in water coupled with the HER. (i) Proposed process of the semi-dehydrogenation reaction over a Ni2P anode. (j) Substrate scope of the selective semi-dehydrogenation of THIQs over the Ni2P anode. (h–j) Reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of as-prepared AgP2 NPs. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of different Ag and AgP2 samples. (c) In situ EXAFS spectra of AgP2 NPs after 30 min at the specified potential. Calculated free energy for the (d) H2 and (e) CO evolution reactions. (f) Schematic diagram of selective conversion of CO2 and H2O-to-syngas on AgP2(211). (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. (g) TEM and (h) HRTEM image of the Ru2P–rGO composite. (i) NH3 yields and Faraday efficiencies of Ru2P–rGO/CP. (j) Recycling tests of Ru2P–rGO/CP at −0.05 V. (k) Bader charge results of the optimized Ru2P–rGO geometries before (left) and after (right) N2 adsorption. Calculated energy profiles of Ru2P–rGO for the NRR: (l) distal and (m) alternating mechanisms. (g–m) Reproduced from ref. 559 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 


Rh2P	Hydrazine oxidation reaction boosted HER	GCE	0.114	0.5 M H2SO4 with 50 mM N2H4	5	10 mA cm−2 at an electrolysis voltage of 0.377 V	
552

MoO2–FeP@C	Biomass electrooxidation reaction boosted HER	NF	1.9	1.0 M KOH with	5	10 mA cm−2 at an electrolysis voltage of 1.486 V	
553

10 mM 5-hydroxymethylfurfural
Ni2P	Semi-dehydrogenation of THIQ boosted HER	NF	—	1.0 M KOH with 0.5 mmol THIQs	5	DHIQ FE: about 96%	
281

Co3FePx	Carbohydrate oxidation reaction boosted HER	NF	5.9	1.0 M KOH with 0.1 M carbohydrate	5	10 mA cm−2 at an electrolysis voltage of 1.35 V	
554

FeP	CO2 reduction	Ti mesh	1.2	0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte	2	CH3OH FE: about 80.2%	
555

InP	CO2 reduction	GDE	0.04	3 M KOH	50	Formate FE: 93%	
556

MoP@In–PC	CO2 reduction	CP	1.0	30 wt% [Bmim]PF6, 65 wt% MeCN, and 5 wt% H2O	20	Formate FE: 96.5%	
557

AgP2	CO2 reduction	GCE	0.5	0.5 M KHCO3	5	CO FE: 82%	
72

Ni2P	CO2 reduction	Aluminium	—	0.5 M KHCO3 with 0.5 M phosphate buffer solution	0.5	2,3-Furandiol FE: 71% at 0.00 V vs. RHE	
558

Ru2P–rGO	N2 fixation	CP	0.1	0.1 M HCl	—	NH3 FE:13.04% at −0.05 V vs. RHE	
559

Cu3P–rGO	N2 fixation	CP	0.1	0.1 M HCl	—	NH3 FE: 10.11% at −0.45 V vs. RHE	
560

Rh2P@NPC	N2 fixation	CP	0.2	0.1 M Na2SO4	—	NH3 FE: 7.64% at −0.05 V vs. RHE	
479

PtP2	O2 reduction	GCE	0.2	0.1 M HClO4	10	H2O2 production: 2.26 mmol h−1 cm−2	
561

PtRu@FeP	Alcohol fuel oxidation	GCE	—	0.5 M H2SO4 with 1 M CH3OH	50	Peak current density: 75 mA cm−2	
222

PdNP/Ni–P	Glucose oxidation	NF	—	0.1 M KOH with 0.1 M glucose	50	180.5 ± 3.07 mA cm−2	
562

CoP	Nitroarene reduction	NF	—	1.0 M KOH	5	Azoxybenzene FEs: ∼99% at from −0.65 to −0.95 V	
563

Pd–P	Semi-hydrogenation of alkynes	CP	2.0	1 M KOH with 0.2 mmol of alkynes	10	4-Aminostyrene FE: 78% at −0.8 V vs. Hg/HgO	
564

CoP	Dehalogenation of halogenated antibiotic FLO	Ti plate	1.05	0.1 M Na2SO4 with florfenicol 20 mg L−1	50	FLO dehalogenation efficiency: 97.4% in 30 min at −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
565

Fe0.53Co0.47P	Electrooxidation of organic pollutants	NF	3.8	0.05 M Na2SO4 with 70 mg L−1 tetracycline hydrochloride	5	94% of tetracycline removed in 60 min	
566


 	Fig. 13  (a) The photocatalytic activity of HCOOH evolution over the InP/[MCE]s with no external electrical bias. (b) Photocatalytic HCOOH formation over InP/[MCE2-A + MCE4] conjugated with TiO2/Pt as a function of irradiation time. (c) Schematic diagram of CO2 reduction over the designed Z-scheme system. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 579 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. (d) DRS spectra and (e) photocatalytic H2 generation activity of S-CN, Fe2P/S-CN, Co2P/S-CN, and Ni2P/S-CN. (f) The free-energy diagrams for the HER of S-CN, Fe2P/S-CN, Co2P/S-CN, and Ni2P/S-CN. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 587 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (g) HAADF-STEM image of CoPSA–CdS. (h) Co k3-weighted FT spectra in R space. (i) Atomic geometry model of CoPSA–CdS. (j) The comparison of the FA dehydrogenation activity over different catalyst samples. The inset is the photocatalytic mechanism of FA dehydrogenation and the HER. (k) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mapping of CoPSA–CdS after the reaction. (g–k) Reproduced from ref. 594 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of the CNx|Ni2P composite (the inset shows the typical lattice spacing of Ni2P). (b) Long-term photoreforming of model molecules (PET and PLA). (c) Photoreforming of nonrecyclable polyester microfibers, a PET bottle, and an oil-coated PET bottle. (d) Diffuse-reflectance UV-vis and (e) photoluminescence emission spectra of CNx and CNx|Ni2P. (f) Schematic illustration of the polymer photoreforming mechanism over CNx|Ni2P. (a–f) Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2011. (g) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the NiCoOP–NP@MHCF catalyst: (I) phosphorization and (II) thermal annealing in N2. (h) SEM image of Ni/Co–PS–PAN fibers. (i) SEM and (j) TEM images of NiCoOP–NP@Cx fibers. (k) SEM and (l) TEM images of NiCoOP–NP@MHCF. (m) The activity of CO and H2 evolution over NiCoOP–NP@MHCF as a function of reaction time. (n) The wavelength-dependent activity over the Ru-photosensitized NiCoOP–NP@MHCF system along with the absorption spectrum of Ru. (n) Schematic diagram of the Ru sensitized CO2 reduction process over the NiCoOP–NP@MHCF cocatalyst. (g–o) Reproduced from ref. 601 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 


p-GaP	Ni2P	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	0.05 M KI	H2:270a	
97

InP	Ni	H2 evolution	LED light; 525 nm	0.2 M H2A/NaHA	H2: 202; 8.9 (525 nm)	
531

p-Cu3P/n-CdS	—	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	1.25 M Na2S with 1.75 M Na2SO3	H2: 200; 25.0 (450 nm)	
58

g-C3N4	Ni2P	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA (10 v/v%)	H2: 2849.5; 18.8 (420 nm)	
582

g-C3N4	MoP	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	TEOA (10 v/v%)	H2: 3868; 21.6 (405 nm)	
586

CdS	NiCoP	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Lactic acid (10 v/v%)	H2: 80800; 45.0 (420 nm)	
482

CdS@CuS	NixP	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	0.1 M Na2S/Na2SO3	H2: 18160; 13.1 (420 nm)	
46

CdxZn1−xSe	CoP NPS	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; AM 1.5	1.25 M Na2S with 1.75 M Na2SO3	H2: 45100; 11.8 (520 nm)	
591

UiO-66-NH2	Ni2P	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 380 nm	Triethylamine (3 v/v%)	H2: 409.1	
588

COP	Ni2P	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	0.2 M Na2SO3/Na2S	H2: 2500; 2.5 (400 nm)	
597

MAPbI3	CoP	H2 evolution	150 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	HI solution	H2: 2087.5	
48

Black phosphorus	Co2P	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	0.1 M Na2S/Na2SO3	H2: 202; 2.4 (420 nm)	
57

Fluorescein-based dye	CoP	H2 evolution	500 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA (5 v/v%)	H2: 12100a	
252

Eosin Y (dye)	Ni2P/GR	H2 evolution	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA (10 v/v%)	H2: 2258	
214

P-Doped g-C3N4	NiCoP	Overall water splitting	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	—	H2: 239.3; H2O2: 239.3a	
141

CdS	Ni2P	Methanol dehydrogenation	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Methanol	H2: 188420; DMM: 188420	
600

CdS	Co–P3	Formic acid dehydrogenation	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Formic acid (20 v/v%)	H2: 34309000a	
594

CNx	Ni2P	Photoreforming of plastic waste	Solar simulator; AM 1.5	Plastic waste	H2: 46; mixed organic products	
134

InP	Ru complex	CO2 reduction	Solar simulator; AM 1.5	10 mM NaHCO3	TON: HCOOH: >17 at 24 h	
579

[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2	NiCoOP	CO2 reduction	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	TEOA (16.7 v/v%)	CO: 166000a	
601

[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2	CoP/GR	CO2 reduction	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	TEOA (25 v/v%)	CO: 47330	
602

BCN	Ni2P	N2 fixation	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm	—	NH3: 0.6a	

Cd0.5Zn0.5S	Ni2P	N2 fixation	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	—	NH3: 254; 4.3 (420 nm)	
596

p-GaP	—	N2 fixation	300 W Xe lamp; simulated sunlight	—	NH3: 100 (μmol cm−2 h−1)	
603

[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2	CoP/NC	O2 evolution	LED light; 460 nm	1.2 g L−1 Na2S2O8a	O2: 901500	
604

—	FeP	MB degradation	Natural light	0.255 g L−1 H2O2	95.74% of MB (100 ppm) degraded in 0.5 min	
299

—	Cu3P	SMX degradation	100 W Xe lamp; solar light	0.1 g L−1 Na2S2O8	0.5 mg L−1 SMX completely degraded in 15 min	
605


 	Fig. 15  TEM images of (a) Ni/Al2O3, (b) Ni12P5/Al2O3, (c) Ni2P/Al2O3, and (d) NiP2/Al2O3. (e and f) Catalytic conversion and selectivity for the hydrogenation of phenylacetylene to styrene over the as-prepared catalysts as a function of reaction time, respectively: (a) Ni/Al2O3, (b) Ni12P5/Al2O3, (c) Ni2P/Al2O3, (d) NiP2/Al2O3, and (e) Ni2P/γ-Al2O3 prepared by the direct impregnation method. (g) The cycling stability of the Ni2P/Al2O3 catalyst. (a–g) Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. (h) TEM and (i) HRTEM images of the obtained Ni2P NPs. (j) H2 evolution rate as a function of temperature in the hydrolysis of AB using the Ni2P (0.054 mmol) catalyst in water. Inset: The Arrhenius plot. (k) Recycling of the Ni2P catalyst in water, with the addition of fresh AB to the reaction system in each cycle. (h–k) Reproduced from ref. 616 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2015.	 


Pd3P0.95	SiO2	Hydrodechlorination reaction	25	101.325	4-Chlorophenol: 8.16 μmol molPd−1 min−1a	
106

NixPy	Al2O3	Hydrogenation reaction	100	303.975	Phenylacetylene: con. of 98.6%; sel. of 88.2% in 3 h	
261

(CePO4)/Co2P	—	Hydrogenation reaction	90	405.300	Biomass levulinic acid: con. of 98.2%; sel. of 100% in 1.5 h	
609

Co2P	Hydrotalcite	Hydrogenation reaction	130	101.325	Nitriles: yield 81–90%	
611

Ni2P	N,P-Codoped carbon	Cross-dehydrogenative coupling reaction	50	101.325	Alkynyl thioethers: yield 71–93%	
610

Ni2P–CoP	NF	Splitting of hydrogen storage material (NaBH4)	25	101.325	H2 evolution: 28.6 mol molcat−1 min−1a	
615

Ni2P	—	Splitting of hydrogen storage material (AB)	25	101.325	H2 evolution: 40.4 mol molcat−1 min−1	
616

Ni0.66Co0.19P0.15	OPC	Splitting of hydrogen storage material (AB)	25	101.325	H2 evolution: 95.2 mol molcat−1 min−1	
617

Ni2P	Silica gel	Splitting of hydrogen storage material (silicotungstic acid)	25	101.325	H2 evolution: 2324.2 mol molcat−1 min−1a	
618

CoP	N-Doped porous carbon	Bisphenol A degradation	25	101.325	BPA degradation efficiency: 18.96 min−1	
612


 	Fig. 16  (a) Diagram of the designed CoP–Si device structure and (b) corresponding AFM image of the electrode surface. (c) The PEC activity of the CoP–Si electrode. (a–c) Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016. (d) TEM images, model, and EDX line profile of partially covered Au/Pt/Ni2P heterostructures. (e) Linear scan voltammetry curves of the Au/Pt/Ni2P heterostructure (inset showing the j–v curves for “partially covered” and Au/Pt (4 wt% Pt) with chopped light illumination). (f) The proposed electron transfer mechanism for the photoanodic HER. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 634 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. (g) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of NMF-NMFP for overall water splitting. (h) I–V curves of tandem perovskite solar cells under AM 1.5G illumination in a two-electrode configuration. (i) The operating current density and calculated STH efficiency of the PV–EC system (inset showing the setup model). (g–i) Reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of the assembled hybrid of S. cerevisiae and InP. (b) SA production profiles in light and dark conditions. (c) Diagram of metabolic flux redistributions under light irradiation. (d) The proposed metabolic engineering scheme of the S. cerevisiae–InP hybrid under light illumination. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 635 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2018.	 


p-GaP/Ti/Au/Pt	PEC water reduction	1.0 M HClO4; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 50 mV s−1	10.9 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE	
626

Cubic-NiP2:TiN:Si	PEC water reduction	0.5 M H2SO4; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 10 mV s−1	35.9 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE	
625

CoP-n + p Si	PEC water reduction	0.5 M H2SO4; 150 W Xe arc lamp; scan rate of 10 mV s−1	19.8 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE	
257

NiFeP/n-Si	PEC water oxidation	1.0 M KOH; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 50 mV s−1	15.5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
630

FTO/TiO2/FeMnP	PEC water oxidation	1.0 M KOH; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 10 mV s−1	1.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE	
631

p-GaP	PEC CO2 reduction	0.1 M acetate buffer containing 10 mM pyridine; 200 W Hg-Xe arc lamp;	Methanol production: FE 88–100% at −0.4 V vs. SCE	
632

Ni12P5/SiO2	PTC CO2 reduction	P(H2) 20.684 kPa; P(CO2) 103.421 kPa; 300 W Xe lamp; local temperature 401 °C (no external heating)a	CO production: 960 μmol g−1 h−1; selectivity: near 100%	
633

FTO/Au/Pt/Ni2P	Plasmon-driven EC water oxidation	0.2 M KOH; AM 1.5G illumination; scan rate of 20 mV s−1	19.0 mA cm−2 at 2.0 V vs. RHE	
634

NiMoFeP/NF	PV–EC overall water splitting	1.0 M KOH; two perovskite solar cells in series; scan rate of 5 mV s−1	Solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 12.3%	
275


S. cerevisiae–InP	Photobiocatalytic 3-dehydroshikimic acid reduction	LED white light; 30 °C;	Shikimic acid production: 48.5 ± 2.1 mg L−1 in 72 h	
635

0D	Zero-dimensional
1D	One-dimensional
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
AB	Ammonia borane
AOR	Alcohol oxidation reaction
CB	Conduction band
CC/CF/CFC	Carbon cloth/carbon fiber/carbon fiber cloth
CRR	CO2 reduction reaction
COP	Conjugated organic polymer
DESs	Deep eutectic solvents
DFT	Density functional theory
DMAP	Tris(diethylamino)phosphine
DOS	Density of states

E
a
	Activation energy
ESM	Energy storage module
FE	Faraday efficiency
GMP	Guanosine monophosphate
HDC	Hydrodechlorination
HDO	Hydrodeoxygenation
HDS	Hydrodesulfurization
HEDP	1-Hydroxyethylidenediphosphonic acid
HEMPs	High-entropy metal phosphides
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HMPT	Hexamethylphosphorous triamide
HOR	Hydrogen oxidation reaction
HzOR	Hydrazine oxidation reaction
LA	Levulinic acid
LSC	Luminescent solar concentrator
MBE	Molecular beam epitaxy
MPs	Metal phosphides
MOFs	Metal–organic frameworks
MOPF	Metal–organophosphine framework
MOVPE	Metal–organic vapor phase epitaxy
NADPH	Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NBs	Nanoboxes
NCs	Nanocubes
NDs	Nanodots
NF	Nickle foam
NPs	Nanoparticles
NRR	Nitrogen reduction reaction
NRs	Nanorods
NSs	Nanosheets
NWs	Nanowires
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
OV	Oxygen vacancy
PA	Phytic acid
PBA	Prussian blue analogs
PEME	Polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyser
PPA	Phenylphosphonic acid
RHE	Reversible hydrogen electrode
SA	Shikimic acid
SHE	Standard hydrogen electrode
SHSM	Splitting of hydrogen storage materials
STH	Solar-to-hydrogen
TBP	Tributylphosphine
TBPC	Tetrabutylphosphonium chloride
TEOA	Triethanolamine
TMPs	Transition metal phosphides
TMSP	Tris(trimethylsilyl)phosphine
TON	Turnover number
TOP	Trioctylphosphine
TOPO	Trioctylphosphine oxide
TPP	Triphenylphosphine
UOR	Urea oxidation reaction
UV-vis	Ultraviolet-visible
VB	Valence band

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
