Different characteristics of InGaN/GaN multiple quantum well heterostructures grown on m - and r -planes of a single n -GaN nanowire using metalorgani ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC32212B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32212B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2692-2701Different characteristics of InGaN/GaN multiple quantum well heterostructures grown on m- and r-planes of a single n-GaN nanowire using metalorganic chemical vapor deposition

        
          
            Yong-Ho 
            Ra
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rangaswamy 
            Navamathavan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            San 
            Kang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Cheul-Ro 
            Lee
          
        
      *
      Semiconductor Materials Process Laboratory, School of Advanced Materials Engineering, Engineering College, Research Center for Advanced Materials Development (RCAMD), Chonbuk National University, Deokjin-dong 664-14, Jeonju 561-756, South Korea. E-mail: crlee7@jbnu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-63-270-2305;   Tel: +82-63-270-2304
Received 
      11th November 2013
    , Accepted 30th January 2014First published on 30th January 2014AbstractThe growth behavior of coaxial nonpolar (m-plane) and semipolar (r-plane) oriented multiple quantum well (MQW) heterostructures simultaneously deposited under the same experimental conditions on core n-GaN nanowires (NWs) were investigated in this study. The core–shell-type InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN heterostructure NWs were grown on Si(111) substrates via the metalorganic chemical vapor deposition technique. We characterized these MQW NW heterostructures and discussed the comparative analyses of the formation of m-plane and r-plane oriented NW structures. Temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) measurements showed a distinct InGaN well structure emission wavelength at the m- and r-plane regions owing to the variation of the In composition. Further, the polarization-induced effects of the MQW NW structure were investigated by using power-dependent cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements. The non-radiative recombination located at the defective interface between the m- and r-planes was correlated with the CL mapping image profile and was also evidenced by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) observations. This investigation addresses the understanding of the formation of nonpolar and semipolar oriented MQW NWs and offers insightful details of the structural and optoelectronic characterization of these core–shell NWs.
Introduction
GaN-based semiconductor nanostructures have been intensively studied in recent years because of their huge potential in various applications from high-efficiency solid-state lighting and photovoltaics to high-power and high-temperature electronics.1–6 One-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanomaterials form the basis for new technologies as well as drive the evolution of existing ones. The synthesis of nanomaterials constitutes a crucial aspect of nanoscience and technology. Several strategies have been employed for the synthesis of nanomaterials of different dimensionalities. Among the vast varieties of nanomaterials that have been developed, 1D nanomaterials with inherently large specific surface areas and continuous transport paths for charge carriers are useful for energy harvesting and conversion applications, which are mostly associated with surface reactions and carrier transport. When the diameter of a material is reduced below a critical value, the additional advantages of 1D nanomaterials, such as surface band bending, enhanced photoconductivity or even ballistic transport may appear, which further enhance their carrier transport properties and hence result in the high efficiency of device functionalities.7–11
Recently, GaN nanowire (NW)-based core–shell structures have gained significant attention due to their potential use in various optoelectronic devices.12–16 NW arrays aligned parallel to the c-axis support large-area active layers on the nonpolar sidewalls. In addition, strain can be more easily relaxed through a high surface-to-volume ratio without the generation of any crystal defects. However, the conventional c-axis direction-based GaN devices have always suffered from internal electric field effects which cause spatial separation of the electron and hole wave functions, resulting in restricted carrier recombination efficiency. The core–shell structures have significant benefits including a large active surface area, enhanced light extraction efficiency, greater carrier confinement, and a reduction of detrimental polarization effects. The latter benefit arises as p–n junctions can be realized on nonpolar and semipolar surfaces. In LEDs, the carrier-induced screening by the polarization-induced electric fields presents a blue-shift in the peak emission wavelength with the increasing injection current.17 To eliminate these polarization effects in InGaN/GaN MQWs, several groups have tried to fabricate LEDs grown on nonpolar planes such as the (10-10) m-plane or the (11-20) a-plane.18–22 Another approach to reduce polarization effects is to use the inclined planes with respect to the c-direction, that is, semipolar planes such as (10-1-1), (11-22), (10-1-3) and (20-21).23,24 Additionally, semi- and nonpolar-oriented GaN-based heterostructures were grown on the r-plane and a-plane-oriented sapphire substrates to effectively improve the carrier recombination efficiency and to reduce polarization effects.25,26 Besides circumventing the polarization effects, the LEDs grown on the nonpolar and semipolar planes also emit polarized light due to optical gain anisotropy.27–29 Although some previous work has reported the fabrication of NW LEDs based on the radial or longitudinal orientation of MQW heterostructures,12–16,30–33 the growth and formation of the polar direction and subsequent optical characterization is rarely reported. In fact, comparative investigations based on the formation of m-plane (nonpolar) and r-plane (semipolar) oriented GaN/InGaN MQW structures simultaneously grown under the same experimental conditions have not been explored so far. This study addresses the in-depth optical characteristics and structural formation mechanism of the core–shell NW structures. Such a study is consequently more useful for understanding the formation of nonpolar and semipolar oriented MQW NWs and offers insightful details on the structural and optoelectronic characterization of these core–shell NWs.
Herein, we attempt to report a comprehensive investigation on the growth of m-plane and r-plane oriented core–shell InGaN/GaN MQW heterostructure NWs on Si(111) substrates using the metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) technique. We adapted the same experimental growth conditions for both the m- and r-planes. The morphological and optical characteristics of the resultant heterostructure MQW NWs were systematically analyzed. The comparative investigation of the structural formation and the optoelectronic behavior of the m- and r-planes was discussed. We estimated the In compositional difference at the m- and r-plane regions of the MQW NWs, which were simultaneously grown under the same experimental conditions and were directly confirmed by this study on the basis of power-dependent cathodoluminescence (CL) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) investigations. Further, the polarization-induced effects on the m-plane and r-plane-oriented MQW NWs were precisely analyzed.
Experimental section
Vertically aligned m- and r-plane-oriented core–shell GaN/InGaN MQW NWs were grown on Si(111) substrates by using MOCVD with a horizontal quartz reactor. Initially, a thin layer of Au with a thickness of 10 nm was deposited on the Si(111) substrates, followed by the pre-deposition of trimethylgallium (TMGa) which was performed at 600 °C for 30 s. Next, an annealing process was performed to form AuxGay alloy droplets for the NW nucleation seeds at 650 °C for 10 min. Afterwards, the Si-doped n-type core GaN NWs were grown on the Si(111) substrates by using the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) method at a growth temperature of 950 °C. Finally, InGaN/GaN MQW NW shell structures were subsequently grown on the core n-GaN NWs.34,35 The structural, morphological and optical characteristics of the resultant heterostructure MQW NWs are systematically analyzed. The surface morphology of the m- and r-plane-oriented core–shell coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NWs was analyzed using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-7400, Hitachi, Japan) with an operating voltage of 15 kV. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed using a Rigaku diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The band-edge emission of the InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NWs structures was characterized using PL measurements with the 325 nm line of a He–Cd laser as an excitation source at various temperatures. The cathodoluminescence (CL) mapping was performed with an FE-SEM system equipped with a backscattered/CL detector at different applied powers. The InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NWs were removed from the Si(111) substrate by the sonication process and then collected in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) grid. The NW samples for the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) analysis were prepared by coating Pt using the dual beam-focused ion beam (FIB, Quanta 3D FEG) technique with a resolution of 7 nm @ 30 kV and a beam current of 65 nA. The morphology of the NWs was analyzed by using a HR-TEM (JEM 2010, JEOL, Japan) imager at an operating voltage of 200 kV. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) measurements were also carried out to determine the elemental compositions in the m- and r-plane regions of the NW. Cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)-based analysis was performed to check the MQW heterostructures. Annular dark field (ADF-STEM) imaging was recorded to estimate the thickness of the barriers and wells of the MQW NW heterostructures.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of core–shell InGaN/GaN MQW NWs on the Si(111) substrate. Fig. 1a shows the shell structure of InGaN/GaN MQW NWs, which is grown on the surface of the core n-GaN NWs. If the growth of n-GaN is along the 〈0001〉 direction, the shape of the MQWs at the top portion will be hexagonal. In general, when GaN is grown on Si(111) substrates, it displays preferential growth on the c-plane, and the shape of the NWs formed here are six-prismatic structures of hexagonal close packed (HCP) type due to the influence of the substrate and energy stability of the 〈0001〉 direction in the HCP structure.36 Further, when growing the MQW layers on to the sidewalls of the GaN NWs along the 〈0001〉 direction, it results in the formation of the m-plane (1-100)-oriented HCP structure. During the final stage of growth, the top portion of the NW forms a pyramidal-shaped structure, which is r-plane (1-102)-oriented NW as shown in Fig. 1a, in order to avoid the polarity of the c-plane. Coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW NWs grown by this method induce the appearance of two kinds of polar characteristics in a single NW. A single NW simultaneously has the properties of the semipolar r-plane (1-102) and the nonpolar m-plane (1-100). On the other hand, the high aspect ratio and the small diameter of the core GaN NWs allows for the InGaN/GaN shell structure to partially relax the epitaxial strain through the purely elastic deformation of the NWs; a relaxation mode is not available via planar growth because of the absence of lateral free surfaces within the continuous layer. Because of the elastic strain relief enabled by the NW geometry, InGaN/GaN MQW shells grown on GaN cores have achieved higher indium compositions (up to x ¬ 0.38) in thick shell layers with low defect densities.34,35,37 Generally, GaN exhibits piezoelectric polarization by strain and spontaneous polarization when it is grown along the c-plane direction due to the anisotropy of the N and Ga.38 However, when the GaN is grown along the r-plane direction, the effect of polarization is reduced by half, whereas in the m-plane direction the effect of polarization is almost eliminated. These kinds of polarization effects can be directly related to the quantum confined Stark effect (QCSE), which significantly affects the efficiency of solar cells and LEDs.39–41
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram for growing coaxial InGaN/GaN/n-GaN MQW NW heterostructures on Si(111) substrates, (b) tilt-view FE-SEM image of the MQW NWs (inset shows the top view), and (c) PL spectrum of the MQW NWs (inset shows the XRD data of the NWs). 

Fig. 1b is a tilt-view FE-SEM image of the coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW NWs grown on the Si(111) substrate. As can be seen, the grown NWs are highly dense and most of them are vertically aligned on the Si(111) substrate. The inset of Fig. 1b shows a cross-sectional view of one NW which displays a hexagonal structure. This result demonstrates that it is possible to grow vertically aligned coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW NWs on the Si(111) substrate. The diameters of the NWs are in the range of 300–350 nm and their average length is about 1.8 μm. In order to investigate the optical properties of the NWs and the presence of the InGaN/GaN MQW structure, photoluminescence (PL) was measured at room temperature. It was confirmed that the MQW structures were well-formed on the GaN core NWs, which was confirmed by the InGaN and GaN peaks corresponding to the PL wavelengths of 440 and 369 nm, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1c. In addition, since there was no deep-level yellow luminescence (YL), we can infer that the MQW NWs were well-formed and were of high crystalline quality without any defects. Further, the XRD analysis in Fig. 1c revealed that the grown NW cores were preferentially oriented along the 〈0001〉 direction on the Si(111) substrate.
We measured the low-temperature PL (LT-PL) to study the optical properties of the m-plane and r-plane-oriented InGaN/GaN MQW NWs simultaneously under the same growth conditions. Fig. 2a shows the low-temperature PL spectra of InGaN/GaN MQW NWs measured at 5 to 300 K. We presented the PL data in logarithmic scale to observe the significant changes in the curves. As can be seen, there were many distinct peaks existing in the LT-PL spectra which were not observed in the RT-PL spectra. New PL peaks at 354.5, 380, 438, and 480 nm were observed in the LT-PL spectra. However, the YL peak related to deep level defects did not appear at low temperatures owing to the high crystallinity of the NWs. The near band-edge (NBE) emission peak at 354.5 nm (P1) that was similar to RT-PL was attributed to the exciton coupling of the GaN structure. The PL peak at 438 nm was attributed to the InGaN structure. As shown in Fig. 2a, there are emission peaks at 369 to 354.5 nm with an S-shaped temperature dependence behavior in their peak positions. It was noted that the MQW NW emission peaks exhibited firstly a slight blue-shift with decreasing temperature from room temperature to 170 K, then a remarkable red-shift at temperatures from 170 to 60 K and finally a blue-shift with further decrease of the temperature. This S-shaped behavior is typical for emissions from localized excitons and carriers. It is found that the redistribution of carriers within the localized states, due to the transfer between different localized states and the thermal escape of carriers from the higher energy states, leads to the occurrence of the S-shaped temperature dependence of the PL emission peaks.42 As the PL measurement temperature was decreased beyond 170 K, a new satellite peak appeared at a wavelength of 380 nm (P2), owing to the defect related emission.43–45 Meanwhile, the PL emission wavelength of InGaN was observed at 438 nm, corresponding to the measurement temperature of 5 K. The PL emissions of InGaN were gradually red-shifted with increasing temperature, and at 300 K they showed a peak wavelength of 440 nm. The peak position of the luminescence was red-shifted by about 2 nm with respect to the PL measurement temperature, which can be attributed the confinement of excitons in the InGaN well structure.46,47 In addition, a peak at 480 nm was detected in the LT-PL spectra. This emission peak was stronger at 5 K, while the peak intensity was considerably fainter at 300 K, as shown in Fig. 2a.
 Fig. 2  Temperature-dependent PL spectra of (a) InGaN/GaN/n-GaN MQW NW hetereostructures, and (b) n-GaN NWs (inset shows u-GaN NWs). 
In order to more accurately analyze the exact origin of the PL emission peaks, we performed PL measurements for undoped GaN (u-GaN) and n-GaN NWs which were grown separately under the same growth conditions, and we compared the optical properties of each NW. Fig. 2b shows the results of the LT-PL spectra of the n-GaN NWs, and the inset shows the LT-PL spectra of the u-GaN NWs in logarithmic scale. As shown in the figure, the n-GaN NWs measured at 10 K exhibited emission peaks only at 380 and 354.5 nm; the peaks at 480 and 440 nm were absent. Further, when measurement temperature was increased, the GaN emission peak from the n-GaN NWs exhibited similar PL behavior to that of the GaN NWs illustrated in Fig. 2a. From this result, we confirmed that the PL emission peak at 380 nm was solely associated with GaN due to the defect-related emission as previously reported,48–50 whereas the PL peak at 480 nm was attributed to InGaN. The PL spectra of the u-GaN NWs revealed band edge emission peaks only at around 359 nm. However, many additional peaks were detected for the n-GaN NWs. These results confirmed that the additional emission peaks at 380 nm for the n-GaN NWs were attributed to excitons bound to stacking faults. This defective peak (P2) was found to be more intense for the MQW NWs, as shown in Fig. 2a.
Further, we performed CL analysis for these NWs to better understand the optical properties. Fig. 3 shows the CL measurements of a single InGaN/GaN MQW NW. Fig. 3a shows the single InGaN/GaN MQW NW which was separated from the Si(111) substrate by sonication. The grown NW had a uniform diameter from top to bottom. In addition, the top side of the NW was pyramidal-shaped (r-plane). Fig. 3b shows the CL spectrum of a single NW. The single NW exhibited CL emission peaks at 440 and 369 nm corresponding to the InGaN and GaN structures, respectively, with an additional peak appearing at 480 nm. The CL data was in positive agreement with the PL results as shown in Fig. 2. A CL mapping image was captured for the whole single NW. Fig. 3c shows the CL mapping image of the body (m-plane) and top portion (r-plane) of the NW. As can be seen, the body of the NW exhibited uniform luminescence, whereas the pyramidal top portion showed slightly darker luminescence. In order to analyze the different luminescence behavior, we performed CL measurements individually for the m-plane and r-plane regions of a single NW. Fig. 3d shows the CL spectra of the m-plane and r-plane regions, while the insets are the respective FE-SEM images of the NW. As shown, the CL emission of the n-GaN structure appeared at 369 nm for both the m- and r-planes. However, the counterpart of the InGaN structure had distinct CL emission characteristic peaks at 440 and 480 nm, corresponding to the m- and r-plane regions, respectively. From this result, we inferred that the CL emission peak wavelength was strongly influenced by the MQW layers grown at the m- and r-plane regions. We considered the significant difference in the CL emission wavelength to be due to compositional differences in these regions. Therefore, to investigate, we performed EDX line profiles for the top (r-plane) and body (m-plane) portions of the NW. As shown in Fig. 3e, the intensity of the Ga, N, and In composition measured along the m-plane region was found to be uniformly distributed in the entire NW body. However, in the pyramidal top portion of the NW, it is notable that the intensity of Ga was reduced while the intensity of In was increased. The increase of In in the r-plane (top portion) was attributed to the red-shift (480 nm) in the CL emission spectrum. The results indicated that although the III–V ratio was kept constant, the In composition of the r-plane MQW region was higher than the In composition at the m-plane MQW region.13,33
 Fig. 3  (a) FE-SEM image of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW, (b) CL spectrum recorded along the entire coaxial NW, (c) spatially-resolved CL mapping image recorded at 440 nm, (d) spatially-revolved CL spectra of an m- and r-plane-oriented MQW NW recorded at 440 and 480 nm, respectively (their respective CL mapping images are shown in the insets), (e) EDX line profile recorded along the entire MQW NW, (f) spatially-resolved CL mapping image of an MQW NW at wavelengths of 369, 440 and 480 nm. 
To confirm the clearer CL emission properties, spatially resolved CL mapping images were captured. Fig. 3f shows the spatially resolved CL mapping images of n-GaN, m-plane InGaN and r-plane InGaN, corresponding to the wavelengths of 369 nm, 440 nm and 480 nm, respectively. The spatially resolved CL mapping recorded at the wavelength of 369 nm (n-GaN) was uniformly detected over the entire region of the NW. The CL emission was only observed for the core GaN region; hence, the diameter was reduced. The spatially resolved CL mapping image recorded at the wavelength of 440 nm (m-plane InGaN/GaN MQW region) was detected only at the body of the NW. It was confirmed that the wavelength of 440 nm was detected only by the m-plane InGaN/GaN MQW NW region. Significantly, the emission occurs along the whole length of the m-plane facets. Finally, the results of spatially resolved CL mapping recorded at the wavelength of 480 nm exhibited bright luminescence only for the top region; the body of the NW did not show any emission. From this result, we inferred that the emission at the wavelength of 480 nm was only caused by the r-plane InGaN/GaN MQW region. The results of the spatially resolved CL mapping images were in good agreement with the EDX profile data. The CL characteristics of each part of the single NW via various CL analyses were extensively studied, and we thus confirmed that the m- and r-planes grown under the same growth conditions had distinct emission properties from each other.
In order to confirm the composition-dependent CL emission and the presence of polarization-induced effects of the m-plane and r-plane MQW NWs, we examined the power-dependent CL spectrum. Fig. 4 shows the power-dependent CL spectra and the mapping image of a single MQW NW. Fig. 4a and b show the CL spectra of the m- and r-plane MQW NW measured at different excitation powers ranging from 1 to 20 μA at constant Vb = 15 kV. With increasing power the concentration of electron–hole pairs in the MQW region tended to increase. Fig. 4a shows the power-dependent CL spectra of m-plane MQW NWs. The intensity of the CL emission was increased with increasing the excitation power without showing any shift in their wavelength values (440 nm). This result provides strong evidence for the nonpolar m-plane, indicating the absence of an electric field in the well as occurs for quantum wells grown on the m-plane. The CL emission wavelength of the r-plane region was observed at 480 nm at an applied current of 1 μA; however, the CL emission showed a slight blue-shift to 475 nm at an applied current of 20 μA. The blue-shift was due to the influence of a reduced yet finite semi-polarization on the r-plane region. Screening of the polarization along the r-plane (semipolar) by the electron beam-induced charge carriers leads to the blue shift by reduced QCSE with increasing drive currents, and hence the emission wavelength changed with current.48–50 In addition, the intensity of the CL emission at a semipolar point was lower than that of the nonpolar m-plane region owing to the wave-function overlap of electron and hole pairs. The wave-function overlap at the r-plane region reduced the recombination rate of electrons and holes. Fig. 4c and d show the CL mapping images of the m- and r-plane regions respectively of an MQW NW, recorded at applied currents of 1 and 20 μA under 15 kV. The concentration of the electrons and holes at an applied current of 1 μA was low, and hence the detected CL emission was observed to be weak. On the other hand, both the m- and r-planes indicated strong and uniform CL emission in the overall region when the applied current is 20 μA, owing to the increased amount of excited electrons and holes. Furthermore, the CL emission of the m-plane region was uniform, while the CL emission of the r-plane revealed dark striped lines. The cause of these dark striped lines was presumably due to the non-radiative recombination by defects located at the r-plane region. Due to this, the CL emission intensity of the r-plane was lower than that of the m-plane region. The origin of non-radiative recombination due to the defect levels at the r-plane regime will be discussed through detailed HR-TEM analysis. The results of power-dependent CL confirmed that the body region of the MQW NW was of nonpolar (m-plane) nature, while the pyramidal-shaped top end was of semipolar (r-plane) nature.
 Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Power-dependent CL spectra of m- and r-plane oriented MQW NW, respectively, (c) and (d) CL mapping images of the m- and r-plane-oriented MQW NW corresponding to measurement powers of 1 and 20 μA, respectively. 
To analyze the structural properties of the m- and r-plane-oriented MQW NWs and the existence of coaxial MQW heterostructures grown on core n-GaN NWs, we carried out dark-field Z-contrast HR-TEM measurements. Fig. 5 shows the results of the HR-TEM analysis. The grown InGaN/GaN MQW NWs are carefully separated from the Si(111) substrate by sonication. Afterwards, the TEM sampling was performed in the 〈0001〉 direction by using the FIB system. Fig. 5a shows a low-magnification STEM image of a coaxial MQW NW recorded along the 〈2-1-10〉 zone axis. The InGaN/GaN MQW was coaxially formed uniformly as a shell structure on the core n-GaN NW from top to bottom. An entire NW can be analyzed by viewing it in the high-resolution mode. The HR-TEM image confirmed that the pyramidal-shaped top end of the MQW NW was grown along the r-plane (1-102), while the body of the NW was symmetrically grown along the m-plane (1-100). Also, there were no defects such as threading dislocations or stacking faults after viewing the bottom part of the NW. This result evidenced that that the MQW NW was grown with high crystal integrity, and without any influence from the Si substrate. A representative SAED pattern is shown in Fig. 5d, in which (0001), (01-10) and (0-11-1) diffraction spots are present. The clear SAED spots provide further evidence that the NW is a high-quality wurtzite-type crystal. The hexagonal coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW and the growth direction of the core n-GaN NW and sidewall InGaN/GaN MQWs are the c-plane of the 〈0001〉 direction and m-plane of the 〈1-100〉 direction, respectively. Fig. 5e shows the cross-sectional HR-TEM image of the m-plane-oriented InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW taken from the 〈0001〉 zone axis, demonstrating the well-defined hexagonal shape. As can be seen from the image, the MQWs are clearly seen without any defects and are equally distributed on the six nonpolar m-planes.
 Fig. 5  (a) Low-magnification HR-TEM images of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW showing semipolar and nonpolar orientations, (b) high-magnification HR-TEM image showing the MQW heterostructures, (c) ADF lattice fringes of the InGaN well structure at the r- and m-planes, (d) SAED pattern of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW, (e) cross-sectional HR-TEM image of the hexagonal shaped m-plane InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW taken from the 〈0001〉 zone axis, and (f) EDX line profile of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW measured in regions (1), (2) and (3) as marked in (b). 

Fig. 5b shows the high-magnification HR-TEM image of the m- and r-planes of an MQW NW. As can be seen, the thicknesses of the MQW at the m- and r-plane regions are significantly different from each other. The thickness of MQW structures in these regions is studied by ADF line profiles. As shown in Fig. 5c, the thickness of the InGaN well structure at the m- and r-planes is 2.5 and 2 nm, respectively, whereas the thickness of the GaN barrier structure at the m- and r-planes is 6 and 4 nm, respectively. The results show that the thickness of the r-plane MQW NW region is markedly reduced compared to that of the m-plane. This is because the growth rate of the r-plane is much lower than that of the c- and m-planes. It has been reported that the growth rate mainly depends on the surface energy and the stability of surface atoms.51,52 The MQW grown on semipolar r-planes is relatively thin compared to that of the m-plane, and possibly too thin to capture the electrons and holes for radiative recombination.40,53 Consequently, the formation of the semipolar r-plane MQW structure sidewall is too thin due to the lower growth rates at this plane. In addition, the results of the CL spectrum show that the InGaN emission wavelengths in the r-plane and m-planes are about 440 nm and 480 nm, respectively.
In order to analyze the origin of these results, we performed a selective area EDX line profile for the regions marked as (1), (2) and (3) in Fig. 5b. Fig. 5f shows the EDX line profiles of an MQW NW measured at different locations. The relative In composition in the r-plane InGaN was much higher than that of the m-plane InGaN. Also, the In composition observed at the boundary region (the interface between the m- and r-planes) was highest in the InGaN well structure. Quantitative analysis revealed that the different In compositions at the m-plane and r-plane gave rise to the different PL and CL emission peak wavelengths at 440 nm and 480 nm, respectively. We believe that the slightly increased In composition at the r-plane compared to that of the m-plane (under the same growth conditions of the m-plane and r-plane) could be attributed to the slow growth rate at the r-plane region of the MQW NW and hence the reduced thickness.54 This is because during the growth of the NW, the rate of In adatoms diffusing at the r-plane was lower than that of the m-plane region. As a result, the highest In composition at region (2) was attributed to the capturing effect of In adatoms by defects occurring at the boundary featuring different surface energies.
In order to investigate the structural characteristics of the InGaN/GaN MQW NWs, we performed HR-TEM measurements at the vertex of an MQW NW and also at the boundary region between the m- and r-planes of an MQW NW. Fig. 6a shows the STEM image recorded at the vertex of the MQW NW region. As observed from the STEM images, the formation of the MQW at the vertex region was abrupt and/or randomly formed (at the final stage of deposition). Fig. 6a1 shows the low-magnification STEM image showing the top portion of the MQW NW, in which the InGaN well structure is somewhat irregular as marked in the dotted circle. Fig. 6a2 shows the high-magnification HR-TEM image of the encircled region of the vertex region shown in Fig. 6a1. As can be seen, the lattice structures were disrupted by the presence of vacancies, dislocations and stacking faults. Fig. 6a3 shows high-magnification lattice images of various defects such as stacking faults (S.F.), point defect(P.D.)-like vacancies and/or Schottky defects, and edge and screw-related dislocations (D.L.) which were present at the vertex region of the MQW NW, and denoted as 1, 2 and 3 respectively in Fig. 6a2. The reason for the formation of such defective structures can be attributed to the variation of the In concentration at this vertex region, as discussed earlier. Such a defective MQW NW structure accounts for the dark striped CL mapping image measured in power-dependent CL, as shown in Fig. 4c and d. The above result is also in good agreement with the LT-PL data (Fig. 2), in which the extra PL peak (P2) at 380 nm wavelength appeared more intense for the MQW NW compared to that of n-GaN, owing to the defective state in these regions. Consequently, it is the cause of the greater efficiency droop in the r-plane region by virtue of a reduction in the electron–hole pair recombination rate.
 Fig. 6  (a1) High-magnification HR-TEM image showing the r-plane oriented MQW NW structure, (a2) lattice image of the r-plane MQW structure and (a3) magnified areas (denoted 1, 2, and 3) of the lattice image of the r-plane MQW structure showing the defective regions. (b1) High-magnification HR-TEM image showing the interface region between the m- and r-planes of the MQW NW, (b2) lattice image of the interface region between the m- and r-planes of the MQW NW, and (b3) magnified area (denoted 4, 5, and 6) of the lattice images. 
Further, in order to investigate the crystalline behavior and the high In composition at the interface between the m-plane and r-plane of the MQW NW, we recorded a HR-TEM image at this region. Fig. 6b1 shows the low-magnification STEM image, showing the interface region of the m- and r-planes in which the InGaN well structure was observed to be bulged, as marked in the dotted rectangular box. Fig. 6b2 shows the high-magnification HR-TEM image of the MQW NW at the interface of the m- and r-planes. This image clearly illustrates the growth direction of the InGaN/GaN MQW structure in the m- and r-planes. Fig. 6b3 shows the high-magnification HR-TEM lattice images of the regions marked as 4, 5 and 6 in Fig. 6b2. As can be seen, there were no defective structures observed below and above the boundary regions of the m- and r-planes. Therefore, we confirmed that the m- and r-planes were grown with a highly crystalline nature (regions 4 and 6). However, there existed many defects only at the boundary regions of the two planes (region 5). As can be seen in Fig. 6b3, many SFs existed at the interfacial region. The occurrence of a defective interfacial region was due to the different surface energies of the adatoms at the m- and r-planes entering with different migration and diffusion rates at the interface. Consequently, the adatoms encountered at the boundary layer adjacent to the two planes could lead to unstable crystallization and/or nucleation. This unstable crystallization was attributed to the generation of the defective interfacial layer at the MQW NW. At the same time, the structural crystallization can be correlated to the high In concentration directly evidenced by the EDX line profile, as shown in Fig. 5f. This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that the migration energy of In adatoms was different for the m-plane and r-plane. As a consequence, when the In adatoms were approaching the boundary region, there existed an unbalanced surface energy which resulted in the formation of a defective interfacial layer. Due to this effect, we also believe that the In composition in the boundary region increased, and the thickness of the InGaN wells was observed to be slightly thicker than that of the m- and r-plane regions. The observed HR-TEM images were consistent with the results of the LT-PL spectra, CL and CL mapping images. The crystalline characteristics of the coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW NWs analyzed by extensive investigations in this study revealed that the defective interfacial layer between the m- and r-planes was simultaneously grown on the core n-GaN under the same growth conditions.
Conclusions
In summary, we investigated the growth behavior of m- and r-plane-oriented coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NWs which were simultaneously grown under the same experimental conditions on a Si(111) substrate. The resultant MQW NWs had diameters within the range of 300–350 nm, and an average length of about 1.8 μm. PL and CL data clearly revealed the existence of two characteristic wavelength peaks for the InGaN structure at 440 and 480 nm, corresponding to m- and r-plane regions, respectively, which was attributed to the In compositional difference at the two regions. HR-TEM images confirmed the presence of the defective region at the interface between the m- and r-planes owing to the different drift velocities of the In adatoms at the interfacial region. The defective interfacial layers were directly observed from the dark striped lines via CL mapping image profiling through non-radiative recombination. Further, the higher In composition at the r-plane (compared to that of the m-plane under the same growth conditions) can be attributed to the slow growth rate at the r-plane region of the MQW NWs. The thickness of the InGaN well structure at the m- and r-planes is 2.5 and 2 nm, respectively, whereas the thickness of the GaN barrier structure at the m- and r-planes is 6 and 4 nm, respectively, owing to the slower growth rate of the MQW structures at the r-plane compared to that at the m-plane. This study demonstrates the formation of nonpolar and semipolar-oriented MQW heterostructures on core n-GaN NWs and provides insightful details of the structural and optoelectronic characterization of these core–shell NWs.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), a grant funded by the Korea Government (MEST) (BRL. no. 2010-0019626) and by the Basic Research of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (NRL. R0A-2008-000-0031-0) of Korean Government (MOEHRD). This research was also financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST) and National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) through the Human Resource Training Project for Regional Innovation.
References
F. Qian, Y. Li, S. Gradecak, D. Wang, C. J. Barrelet and C. M. Leiber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1975–1976 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Kim, Y. H. Cho, H. Lee, S. I. Kim, S. R. Ryu, D. Y. Kim, T. W. Kang and K. S. Chung, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1059–1062 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Kempa, R. W. Day, S. K. Kim, H. G. Park and C. M. Leiber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 719–733 CAS .
W. Guo, M. Zhang, A. Banerjee and P. Bhattacharya, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3355–3359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hahn, Z. Zhang, A. Fu, C. H. Wu, Y. J. Hwang, D. J. Gargas and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3970–3976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Kempa, J. F. Cahoon, S. K. Kim, R. W. Day, D. C. Bell, H. G. Park and C. M. Leiber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 1407–1412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhuang, C. Z. Ning and A. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 13–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Razavieh, S. Mehrotra, N. Singh, G. Klimeck, D. Janes and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1549–1554 CAS .
B. Su, Y. Wu and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7832–7856 RSC .
R. S. Devan, R. A. Patil, J. H. Lin and Y. R. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3326–3370 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Liang, S. Liu and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3925–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qian, M. Brewster, S. K. Lim, Y. Ling, C. Greene, O. Laboutin, J. W. Johnson, S. Gradecak, Y. Cao and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3344–3350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Riley, S. Padalkar, Q. Li, P. Lu, D. D. Koleske, J. J. Wierer, G. T. Wang and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4317–4325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Koester, J. S. Hwang, D. Salomon, X. Chen, C. Bougerol, J. P. Barnes, D. L. S. Dang, L. Rigutti, A. L. Bugallo, G. Jacopin, M. Tchernycheva, C. Durand and J. Eymery, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4839–4845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Howell, S. Padalkar, K. H. Yoon, Q. Li, S. S. Koleske, J. J. Wierer, G. T. Wang and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5123–5128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Poliani, M. R. Wagner, J. S. Reparaz, M. Mandl, M. Strassburg, X. Kong, A. Trampert, C. M. S. Torres, A. Hoffmann and J. Maultzsch, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3205–3212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Waltereit, O. Brandt, A. Trampert, H. T. Grahn, J. Menniger, M. Ramsteiner, M. Reiche and K. H. Ploog, Nature, 2000, 406, 865–868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chakraborty, B. A. Haskell, S. Keller, J. S. Speck, S. P. DenBaars, S. Nakamura and U. K. Mishra, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L173–L175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, K. Okuno, S. Boyama, N. Nakada, S. Nitta, Y. Ushida and N. Shibata, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 041001 CrossRef .
T. Detchprohm, M. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Xia, C. Wetzel, E. A. Preble, L. Liu, T. Paskova and D. Hanser, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 241109 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Hwang, Y. G. Seo, K. H. Baik, I. S. Cho, J. H. Baek, S. Jung, T. G. Kim and M. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 071101 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Chiu, S. Y. Kuo, M. H. Lo, C. C. Ke, T. C. Wang, Y. T. Lee, H. C. Kuo, T. C. Lu and S. C. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 063105 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Masui, T. J. Baker, R. Sharma, P. M. Pattison, M. Iza, H. Zhong, S. Nakamura and S. P. DenBaars, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L904–L906 CrossRef CAS .
M. Funato, M. Ueda, Y. Kawakami, Y. Narukawa, T. Kosugi, M. Takahashi and T. Mukai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L659–L662 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Chung, Y. Lin, I. Koslow, N. Pfaff, H. Ohta, J. Ha, S. P. DenBaars and S. Nakamura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 070203 CrossRef .
N. F. Gardner, J. C. Kim, J. J. Wierer, Y. C. Shen and M. R. Krames, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 111101 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Masui, A. Chakraborty, B. A. Haskell, U. K. Mishra, J. S. Speck, S. Nakamura and S. P. DenBaars, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L1329–L1332 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sharma, P. M. Pattison, H. Masui, R. M. Farrell, T. J. Baker, B. A. Haskell, F. Wu, S. P. DenBaars, J. S. Speck and S. Nakamura, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 231110 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Masui, T. J. Baker, M. Iza, H. Zhong, S. Nakamura and S. P. DenBaars, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 113109 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Chen, G. Zhu, Y. Hu, J. W. Yu, J. Song, K. Y. Cheng, L. H. Peng, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5687–5692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Leiber, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2183–2187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. L. Boulbar, I. Girgel, C. J. Lewins, P. R. Edwards, R. W. Martin, A. Satka, D. W. E. Allsopp and P. A. Shields, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 094302 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Hao, J. Zhang, T. Jiang, L. Yang, X. Lu and Z. Lin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3654–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ra, R. Navamathavan, J. H. Park and C. R. Lee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3506–3516 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Ra, R. Navamathavan, J. H. Park and C. R. Lee, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1874–1881 RSC .
S. A. Kukushkin, A. V. Osipov, V. N. Bessolov, B. K. Medvedev, V. K. Nevolin and K. A. Tacrik, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2008, 17, 1–32 CAS .
Q. M. Li and G. T. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 181107 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Manur, F. Sacconi and A. D. Carlo, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2013, 45, 617–622 CrossRef .
J. J. Huang, K. C. Shen, W. Y. Shiao, Y. S. Chen, T. C. Liu, T. Y. Tang, C. F. Juagn and C. C. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 231902 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Yeh, Y. T. Lin, L. S. Stewart, P. D. Dapkus, R. Sarkissian, J. D. Obrien, B. Ahn and S. R. Nutt, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3257–3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Koslow, M. T. Hardy, P. S. Hsu, P. Y. Dang, F. Wu, A. Romanov, Y. R. Wu, E. C. Young, S. Nakamura, J. S. Speck and S. P. DenBaars, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 121106 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, S. J. Xu, M. H. Xie and S. Y. Tong, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, 4853–4858 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu and B. Liu, Solid-State Electron., 2009, 53, 336–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Paskov, R. Schifano, B. Monemar, T. Paskova, S. Figge and D. Hommel, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 093519 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, B. Ma, R. Miyagawa, W. Hu, M. Narukawa, H. Miyake and K. Hiramatsu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 2906–2909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lee, S. T. Kim, K. S. Kim, A. K. Viswanath, J. I. Lee and H. G. Lee, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 1999, 35, 280–285 CAS .
B. Jiang, C. Zhang, X. Wang, F. Zue, M. J. Park, J. S. Kwanm and M. Xiao, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 13478–13487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takeuchi, S. Sota, M. Katsuragawa, M. Komori, H. Takeuchi, H. Amano and I. Akasaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 36, L382–L385 CAS .
S. Sonderegger, E. Feltin, M. Merano, A. Crottini, J. F. Carlin, R. Sachot, B. Deveaud, N. Grandjean and J. D. Ganiere, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 232109 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kuroda, A. Tackeuchi and T. Sota, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 3753–3755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lundskog, U. Forsbeg, P. O. Holtz and E. Janzen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 5491–5496 CAS .
Q. Li and G. T. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 181107 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Yeh, Y. T. Lin, B. Ahn, L. S. Stewart, P. D. Dapkus and S. R. Nutt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 033119 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Zhou, J. J. Shi, M. Zhang, M. Yang, H. Zhong, X. Jiang and P. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16231–16237 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram for growing coaxial InGaN/GaN/n-GaN MQW NW heterostructures on Si(111) substrates, (b) tilt-view FE-SEM image of the MQW NWs (inset shows the top view), and (c) PL spectrum of the MQW NWs (inset shows the XRD data of the NWs).	 

 	Fig. 2  Temperature-dependent PL spectra of (a) InGaN/GaN/n-GaN MQW NW hetereostructures, and (b) n-GaN NWs (inset shows u-GaN NWs).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) FE-SEM image of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW, (b) CL spectrum recorded along the entire coaxial NW, (c) spatially-resolved CL mapping image recorded at 440 nm, (d) spatially-revolved CL spectra of an m- and r-plane-oriented MQW NW recorded at 440 and 480 nm, respectively (their respective CL mapping images are shown in the insets), (e) EDX line profile recorded along the entire MQW NW, (f) spatially-resolved CL mapping image of an MQW NW at wavelengths of 369, 440 and 480 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Power-dependent CL spectra of m- and r-plane oriented MQW NW, respectively, (c) and (d) CL mapping images of the m- and r-plane-oriented MQW NW corresponding to measurement powers of 1 and 20 μA, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Low-magnification HR-TEM images of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW showing semipolar and nonpolar orientations, (b) high-magnification HR-TEM image showing the MQW heterostructures, (c) ADF lattice fringes of the InGaN well structure at the r- and m-planes, (d) SAED pattern of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW, (e) cross-sectional HR-TEM image of the hexagonal shaped m-plane InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW taken from the 〈0001〉 zone axis, and (f) EDX line profile of a single coaxial InGaN/GaN MQW/n-GaN NW measured in regions (1), (2) and (3) as marked in (b).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a1) High-magnification HR-TEM image showing the r-plane oriented MQW NW structure, (a2) lattice image of the r-plane MQW structure and (a3) magnified areas (denoted 1, 2, and 3) of the lattice image of the r-plane MQW structure showing the defective regions. (b1) High-magnification HR-TEM image showing the interface region between the m- and r-planes of the MQW NW, (b2) lattice image of the interface region between the m- and r-planes of the MQW NW, and (b3) magnified area (denoted 4, 5, and 6) of the lattice images.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
