Progress and perspectives on pre-lithiation technologies for lithium ion capacitors  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE00807A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE00807A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2341-2362Progress and perspectives on pre-lithiation technologies for lithium ion capacitors

        
          
            Liming 
            Jin†
abc, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Shen†
*bc, 
      
        
          
            Annadanesh 
            Shellikeri
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Qinag 
            Wu
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Junsheng 
            Zheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Petru 
            Andrei
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Ji-Guang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Jim P. 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      *bcef
aClean Energy Automotive Engineering Center and School of Automotive Studies, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China
bDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida A&M University-Florida State University College of Engineering, FL 32310, USA. E-mail: cs14t@my.fsu.edu
cAero-Propulsion, Mechatronics and Energy Center, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32310, USA
dEnergy and Environment Directorate, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99354, USA
eCenter for Advanced Power Systems, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32310, USA
fDepartment of Electrical Engineering, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA. E-mail: jzheng@buffalo.edu
Received 
      12th March 2020
    , Accepted 16th June 2020First published on 16th June 2020AbstractLithium ion capacitors (LICs) can generally deliver higher energy density than supercapacitors (SCs) and have much higher power density and longer cycle life than lithium ion batteries (LIBs). Due to their great potential to bridge the gap between SCs and LIBs, LICs are becoming important electrochemical energy storage systems in the field of energy storage and conversion. Although it is generally accepted that pre-lithiation technologies are indispensable for the operation of LICs, no comprehensive overview of the existing pre-lithiation technologies has been conducted. In this progress report, we first classify LICs according to their energy storage mechanisms and discuss the multiple roles that the pre-lithiation technologies play for improving the performance of LICs. Then, we present the existing pre-lithiation methods used in LICs in detail and the current research progress is summarized. Finally, we provide a comprehensive comparison of the current pre-lithiation methods and propose the prospects and challenges of these methods from both a fundamental and a practical point of view. The broader impact of pre-lithiation technologies on next-generation LIBs is also discussed. This progress report aims at providing the fundamental knowledge necessary to researchers who are new to studying LICs and also serves as a guideline for senior researchers in the fields of LICs and LIBs for future research directions.
Liming Jin
Liming Jin is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Automotive Studies, Tongji University, China, and a visiting graduate student at Florida State University. He obtained his BS degree in the Department of Chemical and Biotical Engineering from Zhejiang University, China, in 2016. His research interest is electrochemical energy storage and conversion, especially in the fields of lithium sulfur batteries and lithium ion capacitors.
Chao Shen
Chao Shen is currently a principle research engineer at MaxPower Inc. He received his BS degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering from Fudan University, China, in 2013 and PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from Florida State University in 2018. He worked as a postdoctoral research associate at Florida State University from 2018 to 2019. His research areas are lithium air batteries, lithium sulfur batteries and lithium ion capacitors.
Ji-Guang Zhang
Dr Ji-Guang (Jason) Zhang is a Laboratory Fellow of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. He is the group leader for the PNNL's efforts in energy storage for transportation application. His research interests include the development of energy storage devices, including Li-ion batteries, Li–air batteries, and Li–S batteries.
Jim P. Zheng
Dr Jim P. Zheng is a SUNY Empire Innovation Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering of State University of New York at Buffalo. He was a Sprint Eminent Scholar Chair Professor at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of Florida State University. He is the recipient of National Academy of Inventors Fellow. His research interests include energy storage materials and devices, fuel cells, nano-sensors, photonics, and thin film growth.

Broader context
Pre-lithiation technologies are becoming increasingly significant for electrochemical energy storage, especially for lithium ion capacitors (LICs) and next generation lithium ion batteries (LIBs) using novel anode materials (i.e. Si and Sn) with low first coulombic efficiency. The functions of pre-lithiation technologies (i.e. providing lithium sources and/or mitigating lithium loss during cycling) make them capable of improving the energy density as well as cycling life of energy storage devices. So far, many studies and applications of pre-lithiation technologies have been carried out in the field of LICs while less often in the field of LIBs. Meanwhile, there does not exist a detailed review of the progress and an analysis of the future perspectives of pre-lithiation technologies, particularly for LICs. Here we select LICs as main objects to review the state-of-the-art pre-lithiation technologies and give an outlook on future research directions. We believe that this review possesses two important contributions in the field of electrochemical energy storage systems. Generally, this review can not only provide the fundamental knowledge necessary to researchers who are new in the field of LICs but also serve as a guideline for senior researchers for future research directions. More broadly, this review is an important reference for design of the pre-lithiation procedure in next-generation LIBs.

1. Introduction
The wide utilization of conventional energy resources such as coal and oil has negative effects on climate change and can result in global warming. In this context, the development of new renewable and clean energy systems has emerged as a world-wide important research topic and, during the last several decades, renewable energy systems such as wind and solar energy have become increasingly competitive with fossil fuel systems. However, these types of renewable energy systems are affected and limited by uncertainties given by the external conditions and therefore require energy storage devices to stabilize their output characteristics. To address these problems, a number of energy storage technologies such as flow and other electrochemical batteries, flywheels, compressed air energy storage, and thermal and pumped hydro-power energy storage have been proposed in recent years. Among these technologies, electrochemical energy storage systems, which already have a large number of applications in consumer electronics, automotive, aerospace, and stationary markets, are increasingly attractive.1–8
Secondary batteries and electrochemical supercapacitors are two primary types of devices for reversible electrochemical energy storage systems that offer high energy density, high power, and stable cyclability. Among these devices, commercial lithium ion batteries (LIBs), which are generally made of a lithium metal oxide cathode, a carbon-based anode, and a Li-salt-containing electrolyte, represent the dominant battery technology. Commercial LIBs have already achieved energy densities of 200–250 W h kg−1 at the cell level. However, the power density (<1000 W kg−1) and lifespan (<1000 cycles) are somewhat unsatisfactory.9–11 In contrast, the power density and the lifespan of current electrochemical supercapacitors (ECs), which are composed of two symmetrical porous carbon electrodes with high specific surface areas, such as activated carbon (AC), can reach over 5000 W kg−1 and over 100000 cycles, respectively. Unfortunately, the energy density of ECs is lower than 10 W h kg−1 in organic electrolyte and even lower in aqueous electrolyte.12,13 The main differences between LIBs and ECs in terms of energy density, power density, and lifespan are due to their distinct energy storage mechanisms. LIBs store and release energy electrochemically by faradaic processes, i.e. by the intercalation/deintercalation or conversion processes where lithium ions are injected/extracted into/from electrode materials (anode and cathode). The faradaic processes are capable of accommodating abundant charges but exhibit poor reaction kinetics and durability due to the low lithium ion diffusion efficiency and internal strain in the electrode materials. On the contrary, ECs store and release charges through non-faradaic processes, in particular by adsorption and desorption of ions on the surface of porous materials, which are much faster and more reversible processes than in the case of faradaic processes. However, the charge storage capacity is directly limited by the available surface of porous materials. Therefore, neither LIBs nor ECs can meet all the demands for high energy density, high power density, and excellent cyclability required in many applications.
Recently, hybrid lithium ion supercapacitors, also called lithium ion capacitors (LICs), have emerged as an advanced type of hybrid electrochemical energy storage system to meet the above requirements at the same time.3,12,14–26 These capacitors consist of a LIB-type electrode and an EC-type electrode in a Li-salt-containing electrolyte and include many of the features of LIBs and ECs. During charge and discharge, the cathode and the anode undergo physical (adsorption/desorption) and chemical (intercalation/de-intercalation or conversion) processes, respectively, that store and release energy. Due to the combination of the two energy storage mechanisms in a single configuration, LICs exhibit several advantages, including: (i) higher cell capacity and energy density than ECs, (ii) higher power density than LIBs, (iii) large operating temperatures ranging from −20 to 70 °C, and (iv) lower self-discharge characteristics than ECs.18 For these reasons, LICs provide a trade-off between LIBs and ECs, and have attracted great interest as promising candidates for high energy and power applications in recent years.
In the past several years, there have been tremendous efforts to improve the energy density, power density, and lifespan of LICs by modifying the cathode materials, the anode materials, and the electrolytes, and using pre-lithiation or other technologies. However, LICs still face several bottlenecks to achieve wide commercialization: (i) the reaction kinetics and stability of the anode are still not comparable to those of the cathode due to the different reaction mechanisms, which results in unsatisfactory power density and lifespan when assembling full cells; (ii) there is no significant research progress on modifying the properties of the electrolyte and the energy density of LICs still suffers from limitations (lower than 30 W h kg−1) due to the low ion concentration in the electrolyte; and (iii) the demanding requirements (including the lithium sources and/or environmental conditions) for pre-lithiation treatment prevent the large-scale processing of LIC electrodes, which impedes the successful commercialization of LIC devices.
To summarize the research progress of LICs and provide an outlook on future directions to address the bottlenecks, to date, several reviews with different research focuses have been reported, including cathode materials, anode materials, and the electrode matching principles in LICs.3,12,14–25 Aravindan and co-workers summarized insertion-type electrodes for nonaqueous LICs.16 Wang and co-workers reviewed the progress of pseudocapacitive anodes in nonaqueous LICs.18 Han and co-workers analyzed scientific problems, material development, and key technologies for nonaqueous LICs.27 Our group also reviewed the electrode materials, the electrolyte, and the current challenges in nonaqueous LICs.23 These reviews have summarized different components of LICs such as the electrode and electrolyte. However, pre-lithiation technologies for LICs, which is a crucial technology to bridge fundamental research and industry application, were merely briefly mentioned in these reviews.26 So far, there does not exist a detailed review of the progress and an analysis of the future perspectives of pre-lithiation technologies in LICs.
In this article, we systemically review the progress of pre-lithiation technologies involving the fundamental research and practical application of LICs. First, we classify the definition of LICs according to their energy storage mechanisms, which was seldom discussed in detail in previous reviews, and then discuss the multiple roles pre-lithiation technologies play for improving the performance of LICs. Next, we summarize the progress of pre-lithiation technologies currently used in LICs, and analyze the advantages and drawbacks of various pre-lithiation technologies. Finally, we provide an outlook on the potential pre-lithiation technologies applicable to LICs from the fundamental point of view and the future research directions of practical pre-lithiation technologies for LICs. Moreover, the broader impact of pre-lithiation technologies on next-generation LIBs and different requirements of pre-lithiation for LICs and LIBs are also discussed. This progress report aims at providing the fundamental knowledge necessary to researchers who are new to LICs and also serves as a guideline for senior researchers in the fields of LICs and LIBs for future research directions.
2. Lithium ion capacitors
2.1 The basic classifications of LICs
As introduced above, an LIC is a hybrid device with multiple energy storage mechanisms, composed of a LIB-type electrode (electrochemical intercalation or conversion) and an EC-type electrode (physical adsorption), operating in a Li-salt-containing organic electrolyte. In the literature, the concept of a LIC is somewhat ambiguous due to the fact that various devices were termed “lithium ion capacitors” regardless of their cathode and anode with different mechanism combinations.15,19,23,25,26 Herein, the concept of a LIC is defined to describe the four types of hybrid configurations presented in Fig. 1, which are specifically based on the different structures and energy storage mechanisms of the cathode and anode.
 Fig. 1  The structures and corresponding potential profiles of four typical energy storage systems commonly termed “lithium ion capacitors”: (a) battery-type cathode and capacitive anode; (b) capacitive cathode and battery-type anode; (c) capacitive cathode and pre-lithiated battery-type anode; and (d) hybrid cathode (capacitive and battery-type cathode) and pre-lithiated anode. 
a. Electrochemical intercalation (+)||physical adsorption (−). This hybrid configuration consists of a LIB-type cathode and an EC-type anode, such as LiFePO4 (+)||AC (−), Li2MnO4(+)||AC (−), etc.,28–36 in which the cathode and anode undergo chemical intercalation and physical adsorption processes respectively. The voltage profile of this system exhibits an approximately linear relationship with the capacity as shown in Fig. 1a, similar to the characteristics of ECs. During the charge process, the lithium ions are extracted from the cathode into the electrolyte and, at the same time, the lithium ions in the electrolyte are adsorbed onto the anode, keeping the ion concentration in the electrolyte constant, i.e. the electrolyte plays the role of a lithium ion carrier instead of an active material in this system. Therefore, the key factor limiting the capacity of this type of LIC is the relatively low voltage output and poor cycling stability that results from the high working potential lower limit of the anode caused by the high specific surface area of the porous carbon. Once the porous carbon potential exceeds the lower voltage limit, the severe solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) associated with the high specific surface area will grow rapidly resulting in poor cycling stability. For example, the working potential of AC as an anode should be generally higher than 2.0 V and, therefore, the output working voltage (<2.0 V) and thus the energy density of this type of LIC are much lower compared to other types of LIC.
b. Physical adsorption (+)||electrochemical intercalation or pseudocapacitive mechanism (−). This hybrid configuration is generally composed of an EC-type cathode and a LIB-type anode, for instance, AC (+)||Li4Ti5O12 (−) or AC (+)||Nb2O5 (−),37–50 in which the cathode undergoes a physical adsorption process and the anode undergoes a chemical intercalation or pseudocapacitive process. The voltage profile of these systems is also approximately linear, as shown in Fig. 1b. The most promising anode materials for this system are Li4Ti5O12 and pseudocapacitive anode materials (i.e. Nb2O5, VN, V2O5, TiC, etc.), which always deliver a relatively high discharge plateau (>1.0 V) but much better high-rate performance and cyclability than commercial carbon materials (i.e. graphite, hard carbon, soft carbon, etc.) to ensure high power density and long lifespan when pairing with an AC cathode. However, the evolutions of the anion and cation concentrations in the electrolyte are significantly different with continuously changing voltages. During the charge process, the anions in the electrolyte adsorb onto the cathode and the lithium ions are injected into the anode simultaneously. In this process, the electrolyte is the charge carrier and simultaneously an important active material, and therefore the electrolyte concentration decreases gradually with increasing voltage, which indicates that the capacity of this type of LIC is not determined only by the nature of the electrodes (including the potential and capacity) but also by the initial ion concentration of the electrolyte. During the discharge process, the ion transport mechanism is reversed and the ion concentration in the electrolyte recovers gradually. Therefore, similar to the case of EC devices, the energy density of this type of LIC device has a theoretical maximum limitation as demonstrated in our previous reports,52i.e. the energy density based on the weight of the electrode materials and electrolyte cannot exceed approximately 30 W h kg−1, for an ion concentration of the electrolyte of 1 M.
c. Physical adsorption (+)||pre-lithiated electrochemical intercalation or conversion (−). The electrode structure of this type of LIC is identical to type b LIC devices, the only difference being that the anode is pre-lithiated before cycling. Examples of such cells are AC (+)||pre-lithiated hard carbon (−), biomass derived AC (+)||pre-lithiated Li2TiSiO5 (−), etc..51–62 The ion transport mechanism is more complex in this type of cell because there are two types of transport phenomena that take place during charge and discharge, as shown in Fig. 1c. For instance, during the charge process, when the LIC operates from the open circuit voltage (OCV) to the maximum voltage, the anions in the electrolyte are adsorbed onto the cathode surface and the lithium ions are injected into the anode, in the same way as in the case of type b LIC devices. During this process the concentration of the electrolyte is also decreasing continuously. When the cell voltage increases from the lowest voltage to the OCV, the lithium ions desorb from the cathode and diffuse into the electrolyte, while the lithium ions continue to be injected from the electrolyte into the anode, therefore keeping the overall electrolyte concentration constant. In comparison with type b LICs, the anode pre-lithiation treatment results in an additional charge and discharge process, which enables the LIC devices to have higher voltage output and then higher energy density and larger power density, thus making this type of LIC the most promising systems.63
d. Physical adsorption + electrochemical intercalation (+)||electrochemical intercalation or conversion (−). This hybrid configuration is a combination of the type c LIC devices and LIBs, and is made of a hybrid cathode composed of both an LIB-type and an EC-type cathode material, and a pre-lithiated LIB-type anode, such as AC + LiFePO4 (+)||pre-lithiated hard carbon (−), AC + NMC (+)||pre-lithiated hard carbon (−), etc.32–36,64–74 The introduction of battery-type materials into the cathode will increase the energy density of the system, but inevitably will sacrifice the power density and cycling lifespan to some extent. The voltage profile of this type of hybrid configuration is no longer linear with respect to the capacity, as shown in Fig. 1d, so it cannot be strictly ascribed to a capacitor type. Therefore, this type of hybrid configuration will not be discussed in this progress report.
In this section, we have clearly defined four types of LIC systems and their working corresponding mechanisms, which was seldom discussed in detail in previous LIC reviews, to clarify the concept of “lithium ion capacitors” for future researchers. In relation to their different working mechanisms, the dominant characteristics of these LIC systems available as products including the voltage range, energy density, power density and cycling lifespan have also been summarized in Table 1. Note that there are not any product parameters for the Type a LIC devices available, which resulted from unstable electrochemical stability of AC for the anode due to the large specific surface area for severe SEI formation. Among all products, type c LIC devices deliver a higher voltage than type b due to the decreased potential of the anode by pre-lithiation treatment, and consequently the corresponding energy density (E = 1/2CV2) and power density (P = E/t) of type c LIC devices are also higher than type b. Type d LIC devices exhibit higher energy than type c LIC devices by sacrificing the power density and cycling lifespan, which are the most important parameters for power-based electrochemical energy storage devices. Therefore, type c LIC devices represent the most typical and dominant devices and achieve a trade-off between power density, energy density, and lifespan, mainly benefiting from the pre-lithiation treatment in this system. In this progress report, we will therefore focus our discussion on type c LIC devices (all the LICs we mention below refer to type c LIC devices without a special definition), in particular on the roles and research progress of the pre-lithiation technologies in this type of LIC.
Table 1 The dominant characteristics for type b, c, and d LIC systems including the voltage range, energy density, power density and cycling lifespan




Company
Type
Voltage (V)
Energy density
Power density
Cycle life




Nippon Chemi-con Corp.
b
1.4–2.8
9.1 W h L−1
4700 W L−1
—


Nippon Chemi-con Corp.
b
1.4–2.8
13 W h L−1
3400 W L−1
—


JM Energy Cooperation
c
2.2–3.8
10 W h kg−1 (20 W h L−1)
14000 W kg−1 (27000 W L−1)
1000000


TAIYO YUDEN
c
2.2–3.8
15 W h kg−1
—
100000


Advanced Capacitor Technologies, Inc.
c
2.0–4.0
15 W h kg−1
—
—


NEC Tokin
c
2.2–3.8
8 W h kg−1






General Capacitor
c
2.2–3.8
18 W h kg−1 (32 W h L−1)
8000 W kg−1 (15000 W L−1)
200000


General Capacitor
d
2.2–3.8
45 W h kg−1 (90 W h L−1)
5000 W kg−1 (9000 W L−1)
50000


JM Energy Cooperation
d
2.2–3.8
24 W h kg−1 (40 W h L−1)
4000 W kg−1 (6000 W L−1)
300000




2.2 The energy storage principles of LICs
As discussed above, LICs undergo a two-step ion transport mechanism, the first below the OCV and the second over the OCV. During these steps, both the anions and the cations play important roles simultaneously, but the diffusion process of the anions is ignored in most literature, which impedes the full understanding of the energy storage mechanism. In this report, in order to illustrate the energy storage principles of LICs clearly, the various electrochemical processes occurring inside the different components of the cell (such as the cathode, electrolyte, anode, and lithium source) at various stages during cycling will be carefully discussed and coupled with in situ NMR results reported by our group.75

Fig. 2a and b are schematic graphs of typical charge–discharge voltage profiles and in situ NMR results of an AC (+)//pre-lithiated hard carbon (HC) (−) system, respectively. During the first charge process from the OCV to the maximum voltage (I–II), the PF6− ions diffuse from the electrolyte towards the cathode and the Li+ ions intercalate into the anode simultaneously. During this time, the Li+ ion concentration in the anode increases, while the ion concentration in the electrolyte slightly decreases. When the cell is discharged from the maximum voltage to the OCV (II–III), the PF6− ions desorb from the cathode and the Li+ ions de-intercalate from the anode into the electrolyte, during which the Li+ ion concentration in the anode decreases, while the ion concentration of the electrolyte recovers to the original state. When the voltage decreases from the OCV to the minimum voltage (III–IV), the Li+ ion concentration in the anode continues to decrease due to the pre-lithiation treatment of the anode, while the Li+ ion concentration in the cathode increases rapidly. The final charge process from the minimum voltage to the OCV (IV–V) is simply a reverse of the discharge process from the OCV to the lowest voltage. In general, the charge and discharge processes can be generally divided into two parts: the electrolyte consumption part (above the OCV) and the Li+ ion diffusion part (below the OCV), in which the capacities are supplied by the electrolyte and by the pre-lithiated Li+ ions, respectively. This entire theoretical analysis is illustrated using in situ NMR, the results of which agree well with the analysis. The change trends of the intercalation peaks (2.5–5.5 ppm) and the double layer peaks (∼0.6 ppm and ∼−2.75 ppm) with the continuously changing voltage are consistent with the analysis, as shown in Fig. 2b. The intercalation and double layer peaks are further deconvoluted from the pristine NMR spectra graphs in order to evaluate the Li+ ion concentration semi-quantitatively, as shown in Fig. 2c and d. As expected, the intercalation peak area decreases when the voltage is varying from the maximum value to the minimum value, indicating that the Li+ ions de-intercalate from the anode. At the same time, the double layer peak area is relatively small and constant at voltages over the OCV, indicating that there are no Li+ ions adsorbing on the cathode, and then increases when the voltage is reduced from the OCV to the minimum value, showing that the Li+ ions are adsorbing onto the cathode gradually. The charge–discharge curve coupled with the in situ NMR measurements unambiguously demonstrates the ion transport in LIC systems.
 Fig. 2  Energy storage mechanisms in lithium ion capacitors. (a) The charge and discharge profiles of the cathode and anode of LICs and the corresponding ion diffusion processes; (b) in situ NMR spectra of the AC//HC system for several cycles; (c and d) 7Li peak shifts and the integrated shift areas (which are proportional to the local concentration of Li ions) for the double layer and intercalation regions as a function of the depth of charge and discharge during cycle 1, 2, and 11. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
In this section, we have combined theoretical analysis and experimental results to illustrate the entire ion diffusion principles in LIC systems. From the energy storage mechanism point of view, there are two important aspects that should be pointed out: (1) the anions (PF6−, etc.) originating from the electrolyte are the crucial charge carriers in the whole charge and discharge process when the voltages are above the OCV, which is ignored in most literature; and (2), moreover, pre-lithiation technologies are essential to enable charge and discharge at voltages lower than the OCV, at which the pre-lithiated anode continues to supply the Li+ ions for the system.
3. The multiple roles of the pre-lithiation process
In Section 2, we have demonstrated that pre-lithiation technologies inevitably result in additional charge and discharge processes at voltages lower than the OCV as seen in Fig. 2a. These additional processes are beneficial for enhancing the energy density of LIC devices. Besides this important contribution, in this section, all the major roles pre-lithiation plays in LIC systems will be explicated.
3.1 Mitigating the initial lithium loss
The anodes of LICs are typical LIB-type anode materials, which always exhibit a lithium loss during the first cycle due to irreversible electrochemical processes and/or SEI formation, in particular when the anode potential is lower than 1 V. During recent years, in order to improve the energy density, power density, and lifespan of LIC systems, a variety of novel anode materials with low discharge potential, high capacity, and excellent high-rate and cycling performance were proposed. A summary of these materials, including Si, SnO2, Li2TiSiO5, and various carbon-based compounds, is shown in Table 2.41,42,77–100 These advanced materials were selected due to their one or several desirable electrochemical characteristics for LICs but they often deliver relatively low first cycle coulombic efficiency (CE) as shown in Fig. 3a, in which the scattered points are the calculated CEs of typical anode materials presented in Table 2. In LIC systems, the irreversible capacity loss of the anode consumes the Li+ ions, directly resulting in poor energy density and lifespan theoretically. Pre-lithiation technologies are usually conducted before cycling to mitigate the initial lithium loss and result in stable charge and discharge during the following cycles. For instance, the AC//HC systems after the pre-lithiation process exhibit much better cycling stability as shown in Fig. 4a. The pre-lithiation process enables formation of a stable SEI with a complex chemical process on the surface of HC (Fig. 5a1). More detailed results in Fig. 4a2 and a3 reveal that the AC//HC system without pre-lithiation treatment displays low coulombic efficiency (<80%), indicating that some Li ions are consumed with cycling, and thus poor cycling stability lower than 30 cycles. This example gives strong evidence that the pre-lithiation treatment has a positive effect on the coulombic efficiency and lifespan for LIC systems.
Table 2 The summary of typical anode materials with different energy storage mechanisms for lithium ion capacitors




Anode materials
Voltage range (V)
Energy storage mechanism
First discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
First charge capacity (mA h g−1)
First coulombic efficiency (%)
Ref.




Nb2O5@C
1.0–3.0
Intercalation
253
174
68.8

76



Amorphous carbon
0.01–3.0
Intercalation
1438
579
40.3

87



3D VN–RGO
0.01–3.0
Intercalation
∼810
640
79.1

42



ANCS
0.02–3.0
Intercalation
2032
1091
53.7

94



Co3ZnC
0.01–3.0
Intercalation
1200
800
66.7

95



A-N-GS
0.01–3.0
Intercalation
407
395
97.1

96



Li3VO4/N-doped carbon
0.2–3.0
Intercalation
529
413
78.1

41



Nb2CTx
0.01–3.0
Intercalation
650
410
63.1

98



0.1-BNC
0.02–3.0
Intercalation
∼2400
1130
47.1

99



BiVO4 nanorods
0.01–3.0
Intercalation
1730
1177
68.0

100



Ti3C2Tx/CNTs
0.05–3.0
Intercalation
1673
489
29.2

77



Nb4N5/rGO
0.01–3.0
Intercalation
812.5
569.9
70.1

78



HG-TNO-3
0.8–3.0
Intercalation
370
323
87.3

79



3D porous TiC
0.005–3.0
Intercalation
851
505
59.3

80



ZnMn2O4-G
0.01–3.0
Conversion
1750
1049.5
59.9

81



MnFe2O4
0.01–3.0
Conversion
1237
1138
92.0

82



Mn3O4/3D-graphene
0.01–3.0
Conversion
718.4
377.8
52.6

83



SnO2-rGO
0.002–2.0
Conversion
1920
950
49.5

84



CNF@CoNi2S4
0.005–3.0
Conversion
∼720
∼550
76.4

85



MoO2-CNT
1.1–2.8
Conversion
145
130
89.7

86



MoO2 nanosheets
1.0–3.0
Conversion
243
200
82.3

88



Fe3O4–G
0.03–3.0
Conversion
1200
850
70.8

89



TiSb2
0.05–1.5
Conversion
1140.8
490.5
43.0

90



LTSO/C
0.1–3.0
Conversion
470
265.9
56.6

97



CoO-rGO
0.05–3.0
Conversion
2780
1674
60.2

91







Si/Cu bilayer fabric
0.01–1.5
Alloy
2800
2744
98

92



Sn–C
0.01–3.0
Alloy
1850
1081
58.4

93





 Fig. 3  The role of pre-lithiation technologies in LICs. (a) The summary of the first coulombic efficiency of typical anode materials with different energy storage mechanisms in LICs; (b) the enlarged potential swings of the cathode achieved by pre-lithiation technologies; (c) the decreased potential of the anode achieved by pre-lithiation technologies; and (d) the optimal potential range selection for matching the anode and cathode electrodes. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Example AC//HC systems with or without pre-lithiation treatment: (a1) the effect of the pre-lithiation degree on the coulombic efficiency of the system; (a2) the effect of the pre-lithiation degree on the cycling stability; and (a3) the effect of the pre-lithiation degree on the internal resistance. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. (b) The charge and discharge profiles of AC//LMCMB systems with or without pre-lithiation treatment: (b1) the system without the pre-lithiation process; (b2) the system with a low pre-lithiation degree; and (b3) the system with a high pre-lithiation degree. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. 
 Fig. 5  (a) The effect of the pre-lithiation process on the anode potentials in AC//HC systems: (a1) the relationship between the anode potential and the pre-lithiation degree; (a2) the cathode and anode potential profiles in a LIC without a pre-lithiation process; and (a3) the cathode and anode potential profiles in a LIC with a pre-lithiation process. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. (b) The electrode matching approach for AC//HC systems: (b1) the reaction mechanisms of HC at different potentials; and (b2) the electrode matching parameter determination. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. 
3.2 Providing a lithium source for a large potential variation window of the cathode

Fig. 3b displays the ideal potential profiles of the cathode and anode, showing the increase of the capacity resulting from the pre-lithiation treatment. As discussed above, the LICs without pre-lithiation follow a single step mechanism during charge and discharge; for instance, during charge, the anions adsorb onto the cathode and the Li ions intercalate into the anode simultaneously. The pre-lithiation treatment introduces an additional charge and discharge mechanism so that the available potential window and, consequently, the energy density are increased considerably. In our previous studies, we estimated that LIC systems without pre-lithiation have a theoretical energy density of at most 30 W h kg−1 when the ion concentration in the electrolyte is 1 M.52 It is remarkable that the additional charge and discharge processes that result from pre-lithiation increase the theoretical energy density up to 94.5 W h kg−1 for the same ion concentration, which is a big breakthrough for LIC systems. As an experimental case in Fig. 4b, these systems composed of AC as the cathode and mesocarbon microbeads (LMCMB) with different pre-lithiation degrees as the anode exhibit distinct voltage profiles. Consistent with our analysis, the cathode in the system without pre-lithiation exhibits a potential profile of 3.5–4.2 V (Fig. 4b1), and the potential ranges are widened to 2.6–4.2 V and even 2.1–4.2 V as shown in Fig. 4b2 and b3. Correspondingly, the capacities of the systems with pre-lithiation treatment are also enlarged exhibited by the time scale.51,57,59,63 These examples strongly demonstrate that pre-lithiation is capable of providing lithium sources for a large potential variation window of the cathode, resulting in wider operating voltages and then higher energy densities for LIC systems.
3.3 Lowering the anode potential to increase the terminal voltage

Fig. 3c shows the potential profile of the anode and the voltage profile of the LIC systems as a function of capacity. In general, the anode materials display an initial high operating potential at 2.0–3.0 V in a Li-depleted state. When combining the cathode with the anode, the output voltage of the LIC is relatively low. After pre-lithiation, the potential of the anode can be adjusted to a relatively low value by controlling the pre-lithiation degree. As a result, the LIC system is capable of delivering a high voltage output, which results in a high energy density, as shown in Fig. 3c. A series of experiments have been carried out in the literature using AC (+)//pre-lithiated HC (−) in order to illustrate the effects of the pre-lithiation on the voltage output. Fig. 5a shows the effect of pre-lithiation treatment on the anode potential published by our group. As analysed above, the potential of the anode can be adjusted by controlling the pre-lithiation degree as shown in Fig. 5a1. After assembling the LIC full cell, the anode after pre-lithiation exhibits much lower potential profiles, which would result in a high voltage and energy density output (Fig. 5a2 and a3). These results are also partially illustrated in Fig. 4b.51,69,101,102
3.4 Adjusting the optimal operating potential of the anode
The last role of the pre-lithiation process is important during electrode matching (Fig. 3d). In general, due to the imbalanced energy storage mechanisms of the cathode and anode, the anode always exhibits lower reaction kinetics and cycling stability in comparison with the cathode, which inevitably leads to poor power density and lifespan for the LIC. To address this issue, our group has recently proposed a general electrode matching approach for the fabrication of LICs, first by analysing the discharge process and the kinetics of the anode at different potentials using in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).54,103,104 After that, the anode is coupled with the cathode by selecting an anode with an optimal window of operating potentials in order to maximize the power density and cycling lifespan. For example, taking AC (+)||pre-lithiated HC (−) as a case study, the HC exhibits distinct electrochemical performance in four stages from 3.0 V to 0.01 V as shown in Fig. 5b1. After analysing the electrochemical performance at various potentials using in situ EIS, it was concluded that it was optimum that the pre-lithiation results in an anode potential range of 0.1–0.7 V to match with the AC (Fig. 5b2). In this example, the final LIC had an energy density of 30 W h kg−1, a power density of 1500 W kg−1, and a cycling lifespan of 5000 times.
In this section, we have carefully reviewed the contributions of pre-lithiation technologies for anode, cathode, and system configurations, which reflects the important roles and essentiality of pre-lithiation for LIC systems. Moreover, the original mechanism in each specific case is analysed and demonstrated by several examples in the literature to provide a comprehensive understanding.
4. Pre-lithiation methods
We have systemically introduced the definition of a LIC and the importance of pre-lithiation technologies for LIC systems in the above sections. In Section 4, we will focus on a review of the current proposed pre-lithiation technologies and analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of each pre-lithiation technology. Until now, other than several attempts to use lithium ions from a highly concentrated electrolyte,153,154 most of the pre-lithiation methods are applied to either the anode or cathode of the LIC. Based on various characteristics of the proposed pre-lithiation technologies, including the position, lithium source, and functional mechanism, these pre-lithiation technologies are classified into four categories in this section.
4.1 
          Ex situ electrochemical (EEC) method
In the case of the EEC method, the pre-lithiation is usually conducted by pre-assembling a half cell with lithium metal as the counter electrode, as shown in Fig. 6a. The cell is cycled several times to reach a required lithiation level by a given pre-defined cycle number, cycle time, or potential. After that, the pre-lithiated electrode is re-utilized to assemble a LIC with a fresh cathode. In general, two requirements need to be met: (i) the entire pre-lithiation process should be conducted at a relatively low rate (e.g. 0.05C) to ensure the complete electrochemical reaction and the accurate control of the pre-lithiation level; and (ii) sufficient cycles are necessary to stabilize the cell and eliminate side reactions including formation of the SEI and other irreversible electrochemical processes. The first application of this method in LICs was reported by Aida et al.,105 as shown in Fig. 7a. The specific capacity per total volume of the cathode and anode was improved by a factor of about two by pre-cycling the anode. Since then, the EEC method remains the most widely used method for research purposes, especially in laboratory studies. Various anode materials such as graphite,106–108 MCMB,101,102,109 hard carbon,55,59,110 soft carbon,111 LTO,106,112 graphene,21,113,114 and metal oxide115,116 have been reported in the fabrication of high-performance LICs using this method. Note that instead of assembling a half cell with a lithium metal counter electrode, Kumagai et al.117 used the EEC method with a LIB cathode (e.g. LiFePO4) as the lithium source. However, the lithiation level in this approach is not as precisely defined as that obtained using lithium metal. Therefore, we believe that it is preferable to use lithium metal as demonstrated by most other research studies in the literature.
 Fig. 6  Schematic graphs of four types of typical pre-lithiation methods: (a) ex situ electrochemical method (EEC); (b) in situ electrochemical method (IEC); (c) in situ short circuit method (ISC); and (d) cathode pre-lithiation method. 
 Fig. 7  Experimental examples of the EEC and IEC methods. (a1) The battery structure for the EEC method with four electrodes; and the charge and discharge potential profiles (a2) without pre-lithiation and (a3) after pre-lithiation. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from IOP Publishing. (b1) The detailed pouch cell structure and (b2) assembled pouch cell of IEC; and the relationship of the capacity (b3) and (b4) voltage change with the pre-lithiation capacity. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from IOP Publishing. 
Primarily, the EEC method has several typical advantages, which enables its extensive application in laboratory studies. First, the method is capable of pre-lithiating the anode in a well-controlled manner, i.e. the lithiation level can be controlled easily and accurately by setting either the cut-off voltage of anode materials with no voltage plateau or capacity for those with a stable plateau. Secondly, the SEI layer formed while applying the EEC method is relatively uniform and stable. However, most importantly, the main drawback of this method is that an additional step to re-assemble the pre-lithiated negative electrode into the LIC cell is required, which inevitably increases the complexity and the cost of this method. In addition, the anodes can be slightly damaged during the re-assembly process, resulting in degraded performance.118 These drawbacks considerably affect the feasibility of this method in large-scale production settings.
4.2 
          In situ electrochemical (IEC) method
In order to avoid the re-assembly process, an alternative method, denoted as the IEC method, was proposed by JM Energy Corp. (Japan) and applied to LICs. In this method, the auxiliary lithium is pre-set in the system when fabricating the LIC devices, as shown in Fig. 4b. The pre-lithiation process is done by short-circuiting the anode and lithium electrodes with an external circuit. After the complete consumption of the auxiliary lithium, the LIC formed by the graphite intercalation compound and the AC cathode can be cycled. The desired pre-lithiation level is controlled by the amount of lithium metal preset in the cell, while the pre-lithiation rate and duration can be varied by adjusting the external load resistance. During the pre-lithiation process, the lithium metal loses electrons to dissolve and form lithium ions in the electrolyte, and the lithium ions in the electrolyte diffuse from the first electrode close to the Li electrode to more distant electrodes.119 Therefore, this method requires porous current collectors, which are essential to enable the lithium ion transport. In addition, this pre-lithiation method is time-consuming.
The design of the porous current collector and the lithiation time are the key parameters for efficiently pre-lithiating the anode. As seen in Fig. 7b, Tsuda et al. optimized the above process by introducing porous graphite anodes with an open area of 1%, yielding a much higher rate of lithiation compared with electrodes that were prepared by simply coating a graphite layer on porous current collectors.119 Later, they applied additional through-holes on both anodes and cathodes, which further enhanced the ion diffusion efficiency.120 A similar approach for anode lithiation was used by Sun et al., who constructed an LIC pouch cell, in which the single layer structure enables the use of common current collectors.69
As mentioned above, the IEC method eliminates the re-assembly process, which increases the expenditure and possibly degrades the mechanical stability of the cell. The IEC method maintains a uniform and stable SEI layer due to a similar electrochemical process. In addition, the pre-lithiation level and pre-lithiation rate are readily adjustable, which is beneficial to develop high performance anodes. However, the major disadvantages of this method are the high cost due to the usage of expensive porous current collectors and low efficiency associated with the long lithiation time, which severely hinder its usage in practical applications.
4.3 
          In situ short circuit (ISC) method
In recent years, our group has developed another approach for pre-lithiation by placing the anode in direct contact with the lithium sources in the presence of the electrolyte, and by applying an appropriate amount of mechanical pressure as shown in Fig. 4c, in which the lithium no longer exists as a third electrode and the usage of porous current collectors is eliminated. Due to the direct contact between the lithium source and the anode, the electrons are able to pass from the lithium metal to the carbon anode and initiate a continuous pre-lithiation process upon soaking with the electrolyte. The different electrochemical processes that take place during pre-lithiation are illustrated in Fig. 8a. First, the lithium source starts to ionize and releases electrons at the surface of the lithium metal (Process A). Then the produced lithium ions undergo solvation into the electrolyte due to the presence of solvent molecules (Process B). The reduction of the electrolyte salt and solvent occurs once the anode attains the onset potential necessary to deposit the reduction products on the carbon surface and form the SEI layer. This SEI layer is insulating electronically and interrupts the reduction of the electrolyte but is highly ionically conductive to provide lithium ion pathways for further intercalation into the bulk of the anode. The generated solvated Li+ ions diffuse through the electrolyte, migrating toward the surface of the SEI, where they are de-solvated (Process C). This process is followed by an intercalation reaction that consumes one electron from the anode electrode (Process D).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the in situ short circuit (ISC) method. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from IOP Publishing. The NMR spectra of the pre-lithiation of graphite using coated (b) lithium metal powder and (c) lithium metal foil. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. 
The above pre-lithiation mechanism has also been demonstrated by solid state NMR technologies.121 As shown in Fig. 8b and c, when using either coated lithium metal powder or lithium metal foil as the pre-lithiation agent for graphite, two signals centered at 240–250 ppm (metallic lithium species) and within the region of 25–45 ppm representing intercalated lithium atoms in LiCx can be detected in the corresponding 7Li NMR spectra. The lithium metal signal decreases over time but it is compensated by an increase of the signal due to the LiCx species. The use of coated lithium metal powder can further facilitate the pre-lithiation process and the reaction kinetics.
The ISC method does not require the use of porous current collectors by performing the in situ pre-lithiation of each electrode. By taking advantage of the low standard redox potential of lithium metal (−3.04 V vs. SHE), the strong driving force of the pre-lithiation process (i.e. the potential difference between the lithium source and anode) results in high efficiency. However, the whole or at least parts of the electrode manufacturing process must be carried out under dry room conditions and the processing of Li sources brings potential safety concerns. In addition, the ISC method involves a short circuit process followed by severe heat overflow, which could possibly result in thick SEI layer formation and thermal runaway. The applied mechanical pressure between the lithium source and the anode could also possibly damage the electrodes at the beginning of the pre-lithiation process.
So far, the ISC method has been utilized by industrial companies such as General Capacitors.72,122 Meanwhile, our group has conducted extensive pre-lithiation studies using the ISC method using various lithium sources.51,57,58,64,65,73–75,123–132 In the following sections, several possible lithium sources that can be used in the ISC method are summarized and compared, which is illustrated in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Photos of various lithium sources used in the in situ short circuit (ISC) method: (a) SLMP; (b) thick lithium strips; (c) thin lithium film, and (d) thin lithium film with holes. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from IOP Publishing. 

4.3.1 Stabilized lithium metal powder. 
Stabilized lithium metal powder (SLMP), a commercial product from the FMC Corporation (USA), is a special lithium source that can be safely handled in a dry-air atmosphere. The improved dry-air stability of SLMP is attributed to a protective layer of Li2CO3 around the Li particles.133 When used as the lithium source, SLMP was first spread on the electrode surface followed by applying mechanical pressure to break the protective layer, as shown in Fig. 9a. The concept of using SLMP to either compensate the irreversible capacity or to produce a fully lithiated anode was proposed by Jarvis et al. as early as in 2005.134 Our group utilized SLMP as a lithium source for pre-lithiation of AC||HC LIC51 starting in 2012. The LIC devices built using SLMP had a specific energy of 25 W h kg−1 based on the total weight of the active material, electrolyte, separator, and current collectors, and were able to deliver over 60% of the maximum energy at a discharge C-rate of 44C. Alternatively, Marinaro et al. proposed to create suspensions of SLMP in toluene to enable the homogeneous distribution of lithium on the electrode surface with the help of an airbrush in a glove box environment.135
The loading effect of SLMP was later extensively studied by our group, showing that sufficient SLMP loadings on the anode can reduce the IR drop during cell operation and extra SLMP loading can improve the cyclability by preventing the SEI layer from undergoing HF etching.124,131,132 The excellent benefit of using SLMP to overcome the initial capacity loss has been demonstrated by many other groups as well.133,135–137
Using SLMP has the following benefits: (i) using SLMP with a large specific surface area, homogeneous distribution, and high Li utilization rate can significantly magnify the ionization rate in Process A in Fig. 6a for high-efficiency pre-lithiation; (ii) using SLMP with a small particle size of 10–30 μm can control the pre-lithiation degree more accurately and enable smooth integration into the electrode; and (iii) SLMP has a better chemical stability than other lithium products and can be safely handled for long periods of time and in a wide temperature range from 25 to 55 °C, in a dry-air atmosphere (e.g., in a dry room), which displays strong potential for industrial applications. At the same time, SLMP suffers from several drawbacks: (i) SLMP itself is considerably more expensive than lithium metal foil; (ii) SLMP has a relatively low purity (∼98%), which can result in severe self-discharge of the device; and (iii) during the first charging process, the non-Li materials in SLMP and the thermal runaway could induce severe side reactions, generating gaseous products such as N2, CO, and CO2.138


4.3.2 Lithium strips/foil. 
Inspired by the earlier work of Kulova et al. who proposed a method to pre-lithiate graphite anodes139 and Konno et al. who pre-lithiated a Si–C–O glass-like compound and exfoliated graphite,140 our group proposed to utilize more cost-friendly thick lithium strips and thin lithium foil as alternative lithium sources to address some of the issues with SLMP. The lithium strips and foil with higher purity over 99.9% are capable of suppressing self-discharge effects, effectively lowering the manufacturing cost and improving the safety of LICs due to the relatively slow pre-lithiation rates.
When fabricated using lithium strips as the lithium source, the LICs had a specific energy of 14 W h kg−1, an energy density of 28 W h L−1, a maximum specific power of 6 kW kg−1, and a power density of 12 kW L−1.126 As a drawback, the thick lithium strips require extremely long pre-lithiation times in comparison with SLMP, which largely decreases the efficiency of pre-lithiation, as shown in Fig. 9b. In addition, it is rather difficult to keep a continuous electronic conductive pathway and stable lithium source/electrolyte interface, and it requires a relatively high mechanical pressure to keep a good contact between the lithium strips and the anode, which might lead to mechanical damage of the electrode.
Thin lithium foil exhibits medium pre-lithiation rates compared to the other types of lithium sources, as shown in Fig. 9c–d. Our group has analyzed the pre-lithiation process using five different lithium foils as Li sources: a continuous 20 μm Li film, a continuous 15 μm Li film, a 15 μm Li film with 25 tiny holes per 25 cm2, and a 15 μm Li film with 9 holes per 25 cm2.122 A 200 F LIC device was made to illustrate the power and energy output characteristics obtained using the different films. We found that the LIC with the 20 μm Li film exhibited the best electrochemical performance and had the highest capacitance (26.9 F) and energy and power densities (41.65 W h L−1 and 16.2 kW L−1, respectively, based on the active layers). A similar procedure was used to pre-lithiate MWCNT/graphite,141 a graphite electrode,142 and a carbon onion electrode143 with positive results. As a downside, ultra-thin lithium metal foil is relatively soft and sticky for readily manufacturing and handling and also more expensive than thick lithium foil, which drastically increases the production costs.
The effect of different Li sources has been studied by Shellikeri et al., who thoroughly investigated the efficiency of the ISC method for pre-lithiating graphite and hard carbon anodes using four Li-source structures, as seen in Fig. 9.123 The results show that the type of Li-source structure can potentially affect the SEI properties, cycle life, and the electrode processing cost. Pre-lithiation using foil strips resulted in the lowest anode potential vs. Li/Li+ among the four Li-source structures tested over 24 hours of the electrolyte soaking period. In the first 10 minutes of electrolyte soaking, the pre-lithiation using SLMP was the fastest to reach a low lithiation potential among the four loaded sources; however, the lithiation rate slowed down over the next 24 hours. Somewhat surprisingly, the introduction of small holes in the Li foil sheet did not have a significant influence in enhancing the lithiation rate.

4.4 Cathode pre-lithiation method
Besides anode pre-lithiation, it is also desirable to pre-lithiate the cathode by mixing a cathode additive with the AC-based cathode. In this configuration, during the first charge, the lithium sources release lithium ions into the LIC systems and the lithium ions in the electrolyte intercalate into the anode to achieve pre-lithiation, as shown in Fig. 6d. The lithium sources that remain after charging constitute “dead” materials in the cathode in the following cycles, so that the released lithium ions can stay stable in LIC systems during cell operation. Ideally, the lithium sources should meet several requirements: (i) they should align with the working potential range of the LIC system; (ii) they should be compatible with industrial standard processing techniques and allow for handling in an ambient atmosphere; (iii) they should exhibit a high volumetric and gravimetric capacity to enable effective pre-lithiation; and (iv) they should work only during the first charge process to promote the insertion of lithium cations into the anode which do not convert back in the following discharge process. Note that to meet requirement (iv), the pre-lithiation of additives can be divided into two types as shown in Fig. 10:144 for type 1 the additives will only be re-lithiated at potentials lower than AC's lower operation limit; for type 2 the re-lithiation process of additives is substantially irreversible.
 Fig. 10  The theoretical requirements of cathode additives for pre-lithiation. Based on the charge and discharge profiles of the cathode and anode, the additives in the cathode as lithium sources can be divided into two types. Type 1: re-lithiation at lower potentials than AC's lower operation limit potential; and type 2: re-lithiation being substantially irreversible. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. 
Since this concept was first proposed using lithium molybdate (Li2MoO3) with a high total capacity of 270 mA h g−1 as the lithium source,145 a variety of materials have been proposed afterwards, as shown in Table 3. Unfortunately, none of these materials can meet all the requirements of ideal lithium sources for cathode pre-lithiation simultaneously. For example, Li5FeO4 has a large irreversible specific capacity of 578 mA h g−1 but an extremely high charge potential (>4.7 V), which is over the stable voltage window of LICs and results in severe performance degradation.146 Recently, Jezowski et al. synthesized a sacrificial organic lithium salt, namely 3,4-dihydroxybenzonitrile dilithium salt (Li2DHBN), which is mixed with AC in the cathode.147 During the first charge process, Li2DHBN changes to soluble 3,4-dioxobenzonitrile (DOBN) in the electrolyte, irreversibly providing Li cations to the graphite anode to achieve pre-lithiation. This novel organic sacrificial material brings no dead mass in the cathode, while dissolved DOBN production into the electrolyte would bring extra weight in the electrolyte. Its operation voltage is relatively high (close to 3.5 V); however, the irreversible capacity is still low. Therefore, developing an ideal lithium source meeting all the requirements for this concept remains vital but challenging.
Table 3 The summary of lithium sources extracted from sacrificial cathode materials for lithium ion capacitors






First charge capacity (mA h g−1)
First discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
Irreversible capacity (mA h g−1)
Charge potential vs. Li/Li+
Requirement not meta
Estimated capacity retention based on a practical system
Ref.





a (i) The lithium metal sources are replaced by lithium compound sources, which alleviates the safety concern of pre-lithiation; (ii) the lithium sources are added into the cathode directly when preparing the electrode, which is technologically feasible and needs minimum modification of the processing line; and (iii) the pre-lithiation is conducted based on a moderate electrochemical process, which can form a stable SEI.





Li2MoO3
267
85
182
4.7
(i), (iii)
71.43%

145



Li2RuO3
231
220
11
4.7
(i), (iii), (iv)
12.67%

148



Li5FeO4
678
110
568
4.7
(i), (ii)
89.78%

146



Li0.65Ni1.35O2
120
20
100
4.2
(iii)
57.47%

149



Li6CoO4
∼500
∼100
400
4.3
(iii)
85.47%

150



Li2CuO2
342
31
331
4
(iii)
82.67%

144



Li2S
∼600
∼200
400
4
(ii), (iii)
85.47%

151



Li2DHBN
365
∼0
365
<3.5
(iii)
84.16%

147





In general, cathode pre-lithiation is even more desirable than anode pre-lithiation because (i) the lithium metal sources are replaced by lithium compound sources, which alleviates the safety concern of pre-lithiation; (ii) the lithium sources are added into the cathode directly when preparing the electrode, which is technologically feasible and needs minimum modification of the processing line; and (iii) the pre-lithiation is conducted based on a moderate electrochemical process, which can form a stable SEI. However, a bottleneck of this method is that the dead materials remaining in the cathode increase the total weight of LICs and thus decrease the energy density of the LICs.
In order to illustrate the last statement, one can estimate the influence of the dead materials in the cathode on the energy density of LICs analytically. For this purpose, let us consider a practical LIC pouch cell AC (+)||pre-lithiated HC (−), in which the weight of the cell consists of 15.0% AC, 18.0% HC, 2.0% Li source, 35.0% electrolyte, and 30.0% extra dead materials. The capacity of the anode was selected about six times higher than that of the cathode to achieve a better power density and cycle life. The energy density of this configuration can be calculated as:  
If we change the Li foil to Li compounds, the weight of the Li sources should be several times higher than the weight of the lithium metal sources due to their low specific capacity in comparison with Li foil (3860 mA h g−1). By assuming that the weight of the other components in this configuration does not change from the previous case, the energy density after changing the Li source can be estimated as:  
Based on the above formula, the energy density retention of LIC systems using Li compounds instead of lithium metal can be calculated as shown in Table 3.145–151 For instance, when the irreversible capacity of the Li compound is 100 mA h g−1 for Li0.65Ni1.35O2 or 568 mA h g−1 for Li5FeO4, the energy density retention is 57.47% and 89.78%, respectively. Once the specific capacity of the Li compound reaches 1000 mA h g−1, the energy density retention is equal to 94.70%, which could be acceptable for LIC systems. In other words, since in practical LIC designs the capacity of the anode should be sufficiently higher than that of the cathode, the utilization of Li compounds will inevitably decrease the energy densities of LIC systems. The energy density loss will be acceptable only if the capacity of the Li compounds is sufficiently high. Therefore, it is still desirable to develop new advanced Li compounds with high specific capacity.
4.5 Comparison of different pre-lithiation methods
The above different pre-lithiation methods have been compared directly in several papers.152–156 The self-discharge behavior associated with the pre-lithiated anode, which is reflected as a positive drift of the anode potential during cell operation, was studied by Sivakkumare et al., who investigated three different pre-lithiation methods: (i) short circuiting the Li and graphite electrodes externally, (ii) using an appropriate resistor to short circuit the electrodes externally, and (iii) by galvanostatic charging at C/20.152 They found that methods (i) or (iii) cannot efficiently prevent the self-discharge of pre-lithiated graphite anodes, probably because of the failure to form a uniform SEI. The pre-lithiated graphite electrode from method (ii) exhibited a slower self-discharge rate and a prolonged cycle performance compared with the electrodes obtained using the other two methods, but the lithiation took nearly 11 days, which is much longer than in the case of the other two methods. From their study, it can be concluded that the pre-lithiation technology and the formation of the SEI layer had a great influence on the quality of the pre-lithiated graphite anode, which, in turn, influences the cyclability and self-discharge of the LIC.
Kim et al. systematically compared the efficiency of internal short (IS), electrochemical (EC) and external short circuit (ESC) methods for pre-lithiation.155 It was found that due to the difference in potential between graphite and Li (almost zero for the case of IS), the IS method exhibits a remarkably larger capacitance, higher CE, and longer cyclability. However, the comparison was conducted for only 30 min of pre-lithiation. Similarly, Park et al. used in situ synchrotron wide-angle X-ray scattering to examine three different pre-lithiation methods, i.e., direct contact (DC), electrochemical (EC), and external short circuit (ESC), up to 60 min of pre-lithiation, while an extreme excess of lithium metal was used in the experimental setup. A similar conclusion was drawn in that the DC method provides much faster phase transformation than the other two methods for the same lithiation time. However, the full lithiation by direct contact of Li can take up to days and the pre-lithiation shows a rather non-linear variation with time.123,126 Therefore, the conclusion derived from the above studies does not necessarily reflect the pre-lithiation kinetics in the entire process. These studies shed light upon the correlation between the electrochemical performance and the type of pre-lithiation method to some extent; however, a more thorough analysis is still needed to comprehensively investigate the effect of this pre-lithiation method on the electrode physical properties, pre-lithiation times, and the pre-lithiation anode potentials of LICs.
Here in Fig. 11 and Table 4, we have summarized the main characteristics of the above mentioned pre-lithiation methods for LICs including scalability, cost, safety, controllability, environmental requirements and efficiency. The EEC method has poor scalability but high controllability and is relatively safe, which makes this method unsuitable for practical applications but appropriate for laboratory studies. The IEC and ISC methods are utilized often in LICs and have practical advantages over the other two methods when used in commercial applications. The main disadvantages of IEC are the low efficiency and high cost. The most promising lithium source for the ISC method seems to be a thin lithium film.
 Fig. 11  Comparison of the scalability, efficiency, cost, safety, controllability, environmental requirements, and the resulting energy density of the full cell for different types of pre-lithiation methods: (a) IEC and cathode pre-lithiation technologies; and (b) comparison of using various lithium sources in the ISC pre-lithiation method. 
Table 4 The detailed characterization comparisons of typical pre-lithiation methods for lithium ion capacitors




Characteristics
EEC
IEC
ISC
Cathode prelithiation method


SLMP
Lithium film
Lithium strip




Scalability
− The complex two-step process enables no potential for up-scaling
− This method is easy for practical application by pre-setting the lithium when fabricating the cell
− SLMP is easy to coat onto the anode for practical application
− The lithium film is capable of being coated onto the anode directly
− The lithium strip is still possibly scalable by coating the lithium strip onto the anode
− It is quite easy to achieve scalability by adding the lithium source into the cathode


Cost
− Two-step process inevitably brings extra expenditure
− The usage of a holed current collector is of an extremely high price for practical production
− SLMP is of an extremely high price for practical application
− The price of lithium film is between SLMP and the lithium strip, but it goes extremely high for ultrathin lithium foam
− The price of the lithium strip is low for practical application
− The cost is determined by the price of the lithium source. There is still no ideal lithium source candidate for evaluation


Safety
− All the procedures must be finished in a glove box with excellent safety
− Only one piece of lithium foil is used when fabricating the cell with good safety
− SLMP will bring severe safety issues due to its small particle size and high specific surface area
− The stability of the lithium film is between SLMP and the lithium strip
− The stability of the lithium strip is pretty good when operating in a dry room
− The safety is better than EES, IEC and ISC, because no metal lithium exists


Controllability
− The pre-lithiation level is well controlled by the potential or capacity for an anode with or without a discharge plateau respectively
− It is not possible to accurately control the weight of pre-set lithium in the cell, because the lithium distributions are not uniform due to the various distances between the anode and lithium source
− Due to the small particle size, it is convenient to control the pre-lithiation level by adjusting the usage of SLMP
− The pre-lithiation is easy to control by adjusting the area of the lithium film and the process can be also controlled by punching holes in the lithium film
− The lithium strip is relatively difficult to control accurately due to its thickness
− The controllability is pretty good by adjusting the weight of the lithium source in the cathode when preparing the cathode electrodes


Condition requirements
− A glove box is necessary due to the re-assembly process
− A dry room is necessary for cell fabrication due to the usage of metal lithium
− A dry room is necessary for coating SLMP onto the anode and cell fabrication
− A dry room is necessary for coating the lithium film onto the anode and cell fabrication
− A dry room is necessary for coating the lithium strip onto the anode and cell fabrication
− There are no additional condition requirements


Efficiency
− The efficiency is extremely low due to the re-assembly process
− The efficiency is relatively low due to the long time for ion diffusion
− The efficiency is pretty good because the coating of SLMP can be controlled automatically by the machine and the pre-lithiation kinetics is very fast
− The efficiency is still good and the reaction kinetics between the anode and lithium strip is fast due to the large contact surface area
− The efficiency is relatively low due to the thickness of the lithium strip, but it is still higher than IEC due to the short ion diffusion distance
− The efficiency is pretty good because it can be controlled by external circuit with adjustable current density


Energy density of the full cell
− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight
− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight
− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight
− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight
− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight
− The energy density will be sacrificed inevitably due to the dead material after pre-lithiation




5. Perspectives
In this article, we systemically review the progress of pre-lithiation technologies involving fundamental research and practical application of LICs. The definition of LICs was firstly clarified based on different energy storage mechanisms, which was seldom discussed in detail in previous reviews. The multiple roles the pre-lithiation technologies play for improving the performance of LICs were also analyzed and discussed. The progress of pre-lithiation technologies currently used in LICs as well as the advantages and drawbacks of various pre-lithiation technologies was reviewed and summarized. Considering the abovementioned progress of pre-lithiation technologies, we expect that the possible future research and development of pre-lithiation technologies needs to focus on multiple aspects. From a fundamental point of view:
• The correlation of the electrochemical performance and energy storage mechanism with different pre-lithiation technologies needs to be carefully studied. Combined experimental characterization and theoretical modeling work is needed to shed light upon the structure integrity, SEI formation, and Li+ ion distribution in pre-lithiated electrodes with different pre-lithiation methods.
• Special attention should be given to the characterization and control of the SEI after the pre-lithiation process. This interphase plays a pivotal role in the electrochemical stability of LIC devices over long-term cycles.
• The Li+ ion diffusion mechanism and limiting factors for pre-lithiation kinetics need to be better understood in order to optimize the pre-lithiation conditions.
• The pre-lithiation methods that have been used for the pre-lithiation of LIBs but not LICs, such as chemical lithiation,157–160 lithiated anode additives,161,162 and sacrificial salts,163 need to be further explored and their potential in the pre-lithiation of LIC systems needs to be analyzed.
• Finally, more effort on new material development is needed to explore potential candidates for cathode and electrolyte additives.
From a practical point of view, seeking a better Li source for pre-lithiation is critical for the large-scale development of current practical pre-lithiation technologies. In the industry, there have been extensive efforts to pursue the commercialization of pre-lithiation techniques: besides JM Energy Corporation (Japan), companies like Asahi Kasei Corporation (Japan) or Subaru (Japan), FDK Lithium Ion Capacitor Co., Ltd (Japan), Taiyo Yuden Co., Ltd (Japan), and Ling Rong New Energy Technology Co., Ltd (China) have vigorously researched the pre-lithiation of LICs,27,164–166 in which SLMP and Li foil are exclusively used as Li sources. Li powders with reduced reactivity, higher purity, and lower cost remain in urgent need. Ultra-thin Li foil as an alternative Li source for pre-lithiation can address many issues with SLMP, while its current high price limits its industrial application. In the future, the ultra-thin Li foil technique may replace SLMP in providing the optimum Li source for pre-lithiation if the large-scale manufacturing of ultra-thin Li foil becomes possible at low-cost.
Finally, we need to emphasize that the importance of pre-lithiation is by no means limited to the LIC application. Indeed, the pre-lithiation technologies presented in this progress report will find extensive applications in various energy storage devices, particularly in next-generation LIBs with advanced electrode active materials. It is well-known that the active lithium loss in LIBs is attributed to lithium consuming parasitic reactions such as the formation of the SEI on the anode and other irreversible reactions. Because of the large volume variation of alloy and conversion type materials (e.g. Si and Sn) during lithiation and delithiation, the loss of the active material becomes even more serious and limits the wide usage of these materials in high capacity and high-power applications. Therefore, the use of pre-lithiation for compensating the lithium loss is becoming increasingly critical for developing high energy density LIBs.
The research effort for pre-lithiation technologies for LICs and LIBs can be undoubtedly synergetic. The fruitful research and development of pre-lithiation technologies in the LIC field will certainly encourage the broad application and enable the potential commercialization breakthrough of advanced electrode active materials for LIBs. However, there are some differences which should be pointed out:
• The objectives to utilize pre-lithiation technologies for LICs and LIBs are not always identical. The roles of pre-lithiation for LIBs mainly focus on the mitigation of irreversible Li+ loss for stable cyclability, such as SEI formation, an irreversible electrochemical process during the first several cycles, which means that pre-lithiation technologies only play partial roles in comparison with the roles proposed in the LIC field.
• Based on these considerations, all the pre-lithiation methods proposed in LICs should be possibly useful in the field of next generation LIBs. However, the lithiation degree for LIBs should be much lower and the conditions to achieve pre-lithiation should be systemically optimized.
• Moreover, different from current pre-lithiation methods on a practical level (i.e. IEC and ISC), the most promising method for next generation LIBs could be cathode pre-lithiation due to the low lithium source requirement, which would simplify operational procedures with lower costs.
• More high-efficiency and reliable pre-lithiation technologies from the fundamental or practical points of view should be developed in regards to different LIB systems, which should be of great significance for the practical progress of next generation LIBs.
In conclusion, LICs have attracted much attention in recent years and are gradually approaching large-scale commercialization. In this progress report, we clarify the definition and reaction principles of LICs for future studies and review the progress of pre-lithiation technologies, which are one of the most challenging bottlenecks for practical applications. We believe that this progress report can provide the fundamental knowledge necessary to researchers who are new to LICs and also serve as a guideline for senior researchers in the field of LICs for future research directions. Moreover, we hope that this progress report can provide insights for the development of pre-lithiation technologies for next generation LIBs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work is supported by the Office of Naval Research under contract No. N00014-17-1-2650, Army Research Laboratory under contract No. W911NF-15-2-0103, National Science Foundation of China, Grant No. 511777140, and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory under contract No. 212964.
References
M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P. L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1 CrossRef .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Albertus, S. Babinec, S. Litzelman and A. Newman, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 16 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Chen and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1 Search PubMed .
A. Jagadale, X. Zhou, R. Xiong, D. P. Dubal, J. Xu and S. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 314 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777 RSC .
G. Li, Z. Chen and J. Lu, Chem, 2018, 4, 3 CAS .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater, 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ruiz, A. Pfrang, A. Kriston, N. Omar, P. Van den Bossche and L. Boon-Brett, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1427 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schipper and D. Aurbach, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2016, 52, 1095 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123 CrossRef CAS .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189 CrossRef .
K. Naoi, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 825 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, S. Ishimoto, J. I. Miyamoto and W. Naoi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9363 RSC .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y. S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, W. Hu, E. Paek and D. Mitlin, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Zhu, D. Chao, Q. Yan and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702093 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Han, H. Li, R. Shi, L. Xu, J. Li, F. Kang and B. Li, Energy Environ. Mater., 2018, 1, 75 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gu, Y. E. Zhu, J. Yang, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, H. Chang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. I. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, J. Zheng, H. Zhang, L. Jin, D. Yang, H. Lv, C. Shen, A. Shellikeri, Y. Zheng, R. Gong, J. P. Zheng and C. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1705670 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1 Search PubMed .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yao, Y. Zhao, F. A. Castro and L. Mai, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 771–778 CrossRef CAS .
P. Han, G. Xu, X. Han, J. Zhao, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1 Search PubMed .
J. Li, X. Zhang, R. Peng, Y. Huang, L. Guo and Y. Qi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 54866 RSC .
K. Karthikeyan, S. Amaresh, V. Aravindan, H. Kim, K. S. Kang and Y. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 707 RSC .
K. Karthikeyan, V. Aravindan, S. B. Lee, I. C. Jang, H. H. Lim, G. J. Park, M. Yoshio and Y. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3761 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krause, P. Kossyrev, M. Oljaca, S. Passerini, M. Winter and A. Balducci, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8836 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yoon, H. J. Bang, J. Prakash and Y. K. Sun, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 110, 222 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arun, A. Jain, V. Aravindan, S. Jayaraman, W. Chui Ling, M. P. Srinivasan and S. Madhavi, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 69 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brandt, A. Balducci, U. Rodehorst, S. Menne, M. Winter and A. Bhaskar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1139 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, C. V. Rao and B. Rambabu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 116, 532 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Cheng and Y. Xia, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A433 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, Q. Liang, Y. Lei, X. Yu, C. Han, W. Shen, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dsoke, B. Fuchs, E. Gucciardi and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 385 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hemmati, G. Li, X. Wang, Y. Ding, Y. Pei, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 118 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Deng, T. Y. Lei, W. H. Zhu, L. Xiao and J. P. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704330 CrossRef .
L. Shen, H. Lv, S. Chen, P. Kopold, P. A. van Aken, X. Wu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700142 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wang, J. Lang, P. Zhang, Z. Lin and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2270 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, C. Lu, X. Zhang, B. Wan, H. Liu, M. Xia, H. Gou, G. Xin, J. Lian and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 46 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, S. Ishimoto, Y. Isobe and S. Aoyagi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6250 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, K. Y. Park, M. Y. Cho, M. H. Kim, J. Hong, S. K. Jung, K. C. Roh and K. Kang, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 125 CrossRef .
C. Jiang, J. Zhao, H. Wu, Z. Zou and R. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 135 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, X. Wang, L. Shen, H. Li, J. Wang, P. Nie, J. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 70, 84 Search PubMed .
B. G. Lee, S. H. Lee, J. R. Yoon and H. J. Ahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 263, 555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Sun, X. Kang, Y. Zhang, C. Xu and Y. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A820 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, H. Li, X. Lu, L. Wu, J. Jiang, S. Jiang, J. Wang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1516 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Cao and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 180 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, J. Gao, X. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Pi, S. Wu and Y. Qin, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 626 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sivakkumar, J. Y. Nerkar and A. G. Pandolfo, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, R. Gong, W. Zhang, Y. Xiang, J. Zheng, Z. Xiang, C. Zhang, Y. Xia and J. P. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8234 RSC .
O. Bolufawi, A. Shellikeri and J. P. Zheng, Batteries, 2019, 5, 74 CrossRef .
W. Cao, Y. Li, B. Fitch, J. Shih, T. Doung and J. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 841 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Cao and J. P. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1572 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, J. Zheng, D. Adams, T. Doung and J. P. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A2087 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Zhang, W. Liu, K. Wang, C. Li, Z. Li and Y. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 158 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. Guo, X. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yan and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 339 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, P. Han, J. Yao, S. Zhang, X. Cao, J. Xiong, J. Zhang and G. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 603 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sivakkumar, A. S. Milev and A. G. Pandolfo, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9700 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A500 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zheng, L. Zhang, A. Shellikeri, W. Cao, Q. Wu and J. P. Zheng, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hagen, W. J. Cao, A. Shellikeri, D. Adams, X. J. Chen, W. Brandt, S. R. Yturriaga, Q. Wu, J. A. Read, T. R. Jow and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 212 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Zhang, B. Huang, H. Zhang, D. Zhang and Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 361 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Y. Huai, Z. Lin, J. Suo and Z. Deng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A1026 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Z. Deng, J. Suo and Z. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, N. Xu, K. Wang and Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 318 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shellikeri, S. Yturriaga, J. S. Zheng, W. Cao, J. A. Read, T. R. Jow and J. P. Zheng, ECS Trans., 2017, 77, 3 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, R. Gong, N. Qin, L. Jin, J. Zheng, Q. Wu and J. P. Zheng, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 845, 84 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, X. J. Chen, A. Shellikeri, T. Du, M. Hagen, J. P. Zheng and W. J. Cao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A2774 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, J. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. Shellikeri, S. Yturriaga, R. Gong, J. Huang and J. P. Zheng, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 51 CrossRef .
A. Shellikeri, S. Yturriaga, J. S. Zheng, W. Cao, M. Hagen, J. A. Read, T. R. Jow and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2018, 392, 285 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shellikeri, I. Hung, Z. Gan and J. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6314 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lim, C. Jo, H. Kim, M. H. Kim, Y. Mun, J. Chun, Y. Ye, J. Hwang, K. S. Ha, K. C. Roh, S. Yoon and J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7497 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, G. Cao, S. Yi, X. Zhang, C. Li, X. Sun, K. Wang and Y. Ma, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5906 RSC .
S. Li, T. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Wei, G. Li, D. H. L. Ng, J. Lian, J. Qiu, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Ma and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, J. Chen, X. Gong, J. Wang and P. S. Lee, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 406 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Ang, Y. Zhang, H. T. Tan, Y. Zhang, Y. Guo, J.
B. Franklin, X. L. Wu, M. Srinivasan, H. J. Fan and Q. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3082 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, J. Chen, M. Cui, G. Cai, J. Wang, P. Cui, X. Gong and P. S. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1602893 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. V. Lee, E. Peng, M. Li, X. Huang and J. M. Xue, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Q. Q. Ren, S. W. Zhang, B. S. Yin, L. F. Que, L. Zhao, X. L. Sui, F. Da Yu, X. Li, D. M. Gu and Z. B. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 1485 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ajuria, M. Arnaiz, C. Botas, D. Carriazo, R. Mysyk, T. Rojo, A. V. Talyzin and E. Goikolea, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 422 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jagadale, X. Zhou, D. Blaisdell and S. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fleischmann, M. Zeiger, A. Quade, A. Kruth and V. Presser, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. V. Lee, X. Huang, T. L. Tan and J. M. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, H. E. Wang, J. Cao, W. Cai and J. Sui, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10723 RSC .
S. Zhang, C. Li, X. Zhang, X. Sun, K. Wang and Y. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arnaiz, J. L. Gómez-Cámer, F. Mijangos, T. Rojo, E. Goikolea and J. Ajuria, Batter. Supercaps, 2019, 2, 153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Li, X. Sun, J. Liu, K. Wang and Y. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18085 CrossRef .
C. M. Lai, T. L. Kao and H. Y. Tuan, J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 261 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, J. Gao, Y. Zhu, X. Pi, L. Wang, X. Liu and Y. Qin, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sun, X. Liu, H. Bin Wu, L. Wang, J. Gao, H. Li and Y. Lu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, T. Chen, L. Wang, L. Ma, Y. Hu, R. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Wang, W. Yan, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 246 CrossRef .
R. Wang, Q. Zhao, W. Zheng, Z. Ren, X. Hu, J. Li, L. Lu, N. Hu, J. Molenda, X. Liu and C. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19909 RSC .
S. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Bian, D. Jin, Y. Zhang and L. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Byeon, A. M. Glushenkov, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, B. W. Byles, B. Blake, K. L. Van Aken, S. Kota, E. Pomerantseva, J. W. Lee, Y. Chen and Y. Gogotsi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 686 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xia, H. Yang, M. Wang, M. Yang, Q. Guo, L. Wan, H. Xia and Y. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701336 CrossRef .
D. P. Dubal, K. Jayaramulu, R. Zboril, R. A. Fischer and P. Gomez-Romero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6096 RSC .
J. Zhang, H. Wu, J. Wang, J. Shi and Z. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Shi and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 22 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, X. Guo, R. Gong, J. Zheng, Z. Xiang, C. Zhang and J. P. Zheng, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 409 CrossRef .
L. Jin, X. Guo, C. Shen, N. Qin, J. Zheng, Q. Wu, C. Zhang and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2019, 441, 227211 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aida, K. Yamada and M. Morita, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, 534 CrossRef .
T. Rauhala, J. Leis, T. Kallio and K. Vuorilehto, J. Power Sources, 2016, 331, 156 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 394 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Jiang, P. Nie, S. Y. Dong, Y. T. Wu and X. G. Zhang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2017, 33, 780 CAS .
Z. Shi, J. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Shi and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 476 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Zhang, K. Wang, N. Xu and Y. Ma, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2015, 19, 2501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schroeder, M. Winter, S. Passerini and A. Balducci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1240 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, X. Sun, F. Zhao, X. Jin, X. Zhang, K. Wang, K. Huang and Y. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 236, 443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. Tang, F. Qin, J. Yuan, K. Zhang, J. Li, D. Zhu and L. Qin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13601 RSC .
J. J. Ren, L. W. Su, X. Qin, M. Yang, J. P. Wei, Z. Zhou and P. W. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 108 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Deng, C. Zhan, R. Lv, Z. Huang and F. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 76 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sennu, V. Aravindan and Y. S. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 324, 26 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumagai, T. Ishikawa and N. Sawa, J. Energy Storage, 2015, 2, 1 CrossRef .
M. Li, Z. Chen, T. Wu and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1 Search PubMed .
T. Tsuda, N. Ando, N. Mitsuhashi, T. Tanabe, K. Itagaki, N. Soma, S. Nakamura, N. Hayashi and F. Matsumoto, ECS Trans., 2017, 77, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuda, N. Ando, Y. Haruki, T. Tanabe, T. Gunji, K. Itagaki, N. Soma, S. Nakamura, N. Hayashi and F. Matsumoto, ECS Trans., 2018, 85, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
F. Holtstiege, R. Schmuch, M. Winter, G. Brunklaus and T. Placke, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, W. J. Cao and J. P. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A2164 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shellikeri, V. Watson, D. Adams, E. E. Kalu, J. A. Read, T. R. Jow, J. S. P. S. Zheng and J. S. P. S. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A3914 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, Y. Li, B. Fitch, J. Shih, T. Doung and J. P. Zheng, ECS Trans., 2015, 64, 67 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shellikeri, V. G. Watson, D. L. Adams, E. E. Kalu, J. A. Read, T. R. Jow and J. P. Zheng, ECS Trans., 2017, 77, 293 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Cao, J. F. Luo, J. Yan, X. J. Chen, W. Brandt, M. Warfield, D. Lewis, S. R. Yturriaga, D. G. Moye and J. P. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A93 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Cao, J. Shih, J. P. Zheng and T. Doung, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cappetto, W. J. Cao, J. F. Luo, M. Hagen, D. Adams, A. Shelikeri, K. Xu and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Boltersdorf, S. A. Delp, J. Yan, B. Cao, J. P. Zheng, T. R. Jow and J. A. Read, J. Power Sources, 2018, 373, 20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hagen, J. Yan, W. J. Cao, X. J. Chen, A. Shellikeri, T. Du, J. A. Read, T. R. Jow and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2019, 433, 126689 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, W. J. Cao, R. Liang and J. P. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1480 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Cao, M. Greenleaf, Y. X. Li, D. Adams, M. Hagen, T. Doung and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 600 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiang, L. Wang, G. Liu and A. M. Minor, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A415 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Jarvis, M. J. Lain, Y. Gao and M. Yakovleva, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marinaro, M. Weinberger and M. Wohlfahrt-mehrens, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 99 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Sun, W. Chen, X. Li, J. Wang, H. Hu, G. Liang, Y. Huang and C. Wei, Sci., Technol. Adv. Appl. Supercapacitors, IntechOpen,  2019, p. 13 Search PubMed .
K. W. Nam, S. B. Ma, W. S. Yoon, X. Q. Yang and K. B. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1166 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, Y. S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1 Search PubMed .
T. L. Kulova and A. M. Skundin, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2003, 8, 59 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konno, T. Morishita, C. Wan, T. Kasashima, H. Habazaki and M. Inagaki, Carbon N. Y., 2007, 45, 477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cai, X. Sun, W. Chen, Z. Qiu, L. Chen, X. Li, J. Wang, Z. Liu and Y. Nie, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 749 CrossRef CAS .
J. Libich, J. Vondrak, M. Sedlarikova, J. Maca and O. Cech, Surf. Eng. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 53, 597 CrossRef .
A. Reza, S. W. Chen, R. Rajagopalan, C. Randall, A. R. Aref, S. W. Chen, R. Rajagopalan and C. Randall, Carbon N. Y., 2019, 152, 89 CrossRef .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 343, 322 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, Y. Lim, J.-H. J. J.-H. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, J. Cho and J.-H. J. J.-H. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1002 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, Y.-G. Lim, S. M. Hwang, J. H. Kim, J.-S. Kim, S. X. Dou, J. Cho and Y.-J. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jeżowski, O. Crosnier, E. Deunf, P. Poizot, F. Béguin and T. Brousse, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 167 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-S. Park, Y.-G. Lim, J.-W. Park, J.-S. Kim, J.-W. Lee, J. H. Kim, S. X. Dou and Y.-J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11471 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jeżowski, K. Fic, O. Crosnier, T. Brousse and F. Béguin, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 440 CrossRef .
Y.-G. Lim, D. Kim, J.-M. Lim, J.-S. Kim, J. Yu, Y.-J. Kim, D. Byun, M. Cho, K. Cho and M. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12377 RSC .
Y. Zhan, H. Yu, L. Ben, Y. Chen and X. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 255, 212 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. R. Sivakkumar and A. G. G. Pandolfo, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 65, 280 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gourdin, P. H. Smith, T. Jiang, T. N. Tran and D. Qu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 688, 103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, W. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xu, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2014, 50, 1050 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, F. Xu, J. H. Lee, C. Jung, S. M. Hong, Q. M. Zhang and C. M. Koo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10029 RSC .
H. Park, M. Kim, F. Xu, C. Jung, S. Man and C. Min, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 68 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Scott, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1506 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tabuchi, H. Yasuda and M. Yamachi, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 507 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. Sun, A. Pei, G. Zhou, K. Yan, Y. Liu, D. Lin and Y. Cui, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 275–281 CrossRef .
Y. Shen, J. Zhang, Y. Pu, H. Wang, B. Wang, J. Qian, Y. Cao, F. Zhong, X. Ai and H. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1717 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, F. Du, W. Pan, G. Chen, C. Wang and Y. Wei, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 504 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takeda, J. Yang and N. Imanishi, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 152–153, 35 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shanmukaraj, S. Grugeon, S. Laruelle, G. Douglade, J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1344 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Tasaki, N. Ando, M. Nagai, A. Shirakami, K. Matsui and Y. Hato, Lithium Ion Capacitor, US7733629B2,  2006 Search PubMed .

          S. Tasaki, M. Nagai and N. Ando, Lithium Metal Foil for Battery or Capacitor, US8685117B2,  2014 Search PubMed .

          M. Mizukami, K. Nansaka and N. Ando, Method for Producing Electric Storage Device, and Electric Storage Device, US9093228B2,  2015 Search PubMed .

Footnote† L. M. Jin and C. Shen contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Liming Jin
	Liming Jin is currently a PhD candidate at the School of Automotive Studies, Tongji University, China, and a visiting graduate student at Florida State University. He obtained his BS degree in the Department of Chemical and Biotical Engineering from Zhejiang University, China, in 2016. His research interest is electrochemical energy storage and conversion, especially in the fields of lithium sulfur batteries and lithium ion capacitors.

Chao Shen
	Chao Shen is currently a principle research engineer at MaxPower Inc. He received his BS degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering from Fudan University, China, in 2013 and PhD degree in Electrical Engineering from Florida State University in 2018. He worked as a postdoctoral research associate at Florida State University from 2018 to 2019. His research areas are lithium air batteries, lithium sulfur batteries and lithium ion capacitors.

Ji-Guang Zhang
	Dr Ji-Guang (Jason) Zhang is a Laboratory Fellow of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. He is the group leader for the PNNL's efforts in energy storage for transportation application. His research interests include the development of energy storage devices, including Li-ion batteries, Li–air batteries, and Li–S batteries.

Jim P. Zheng
	Dr Jim P. Zheng is a SUNY Empire Innovation Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering of State University of New York at Buffalo. He was a Sprint Eminent Scholar Chair Professor at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of Florida State University. He is the recipient of National Academy of Inventors Fellow. His research interests include energy storage materials and devices, fuel cells, nano-sensors, photonics, and thin film growth.

Broader context
Pre-lithiation technologies are becoming increasingly significant for electrochemical energy storage, especially for lithium ion capacitors (LICs) and next generation lithium ion batteries (LIBs) using novel anode materials (i.e. Si and Sn) with low first coulombic efficiency. The functions of pre-lithiation technologies (i.e. providing lithium sources and/or mitigating lithium loss during cycling) make them capable of improving the energy density as well as cycling life of energy storage devices. So far, many studies and applications of pre-lithiation technologies have been carried out in the field of LICs while less often in the field of LIBs. Meanwhile, there does not exist a detailed review of the progress and an analysis of the future perspectives of pre-lithiation technologies, particularly for LICs. Here we select LICs as main objects to review the state-of-the-art pre-lithiation technologies and give an outlook on future research directions. We believe that this review possesses two important contributions in the field of electrochemical energy storage systems. Generally, this review can not only provide the fundamental knowledge necessary to researchers who are new in the field of LICs but also serve as a guideline for senior researchers for future research directions. More broadly, this review is an important reference for design of the pre-lithiation procedure in next-generation LIBs.


 	Fig. 1  The structures and corresponding potential profiles of four typical energy storage systems commonly termed “lithium ion capacitors”: (a) battery-type cathode and capacitive anode; (b) capacitive cathode and battery-type anode; (c) capacitive cathode and pre-lithiated battery-type anode; and (d) hybrid cathode (capacitive and battery-type cathode) and pre-lithiated anode.	 

Nippon Chemi-con Corp.	b	1.4–2.8	9.1 W h L−1	4700 W L−1	—
Nippon Chemi-con Corp.	b	1.4–2.8	13 W h L−1	3400 W L−1	—
JM Energy Cooperation	c	2.2–3.8	10 W h kg−1 (20 W h L−1)	14000 W kg−1 (27000 W L−1)	1000000
TAIYO YUDEN	c	2.2–3.8	15 W h kg−1	—	100000
Advanced Capacitor Technologies, Inc.	c	2.0–4.0	15 W h kg−1	—	—
NEC Tokin	c	2.2–3.8	8 W h kg−1	
	

General Capacitor	c	2.2–3.8	18 W h kg−1 (32 W h L−1)	8000 W kg−1 (15000 W L−1)	200000
General Capacitor	d	2.2–3.8	45 W h kg−1 (90 W h L−1)	5000 W kg−1 (9000 W L−1)	50000
JM Energy Cooperation	d	2.2–3.8	24 W h kg−1 (40 W h L−1)	4000 W kg−1 (6000 W L−1)	300000

 	Fig. 2  Energy storage mechanisms in lithium ion capacitors. (a) The charge and discharge profiles of the cathode and anode of LICs and the corresponding ion diffusion processes; (b) in situ NMR spectra of the AC//HC system for several cycles; (c and d) 7Li peak shifts and the integrated shift areas (which are proportional to the local concentration of Li ions) for the double layer and intercalation regions as a function of the depth of charge and discharge during cycle 1, 2, and 11. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

Nb2O5@C	1.0–3.0	Intercalation	253	174	68.8	
76

Amorphous carbon	0.01–3.0	Intercalation	1438	579	40.3	
87

3D VN–RGO	0.01–3.0	Intercalation	∼810	640	79.1	
42

ANCS	0.02–3.0	Intercalation	2032	1091	53.7	
94

Co3ZnC	0.01–3.0	Intercalation	1200	800	66.7	
95

A-N-GS	0.01–3.0	Intercalation	407	395	97.1	
96

Li3VO4/N-doped carbon	0.2–3.0	Intercalation	529	413	78.1	
41

Nb2CTx	0.01–3.0	Intercalation	650	410	63.1	
98

0.1-BNC	0.02–3.0	Intercalation	∼2400	1130	47.1	
99

BiVO4 nanorods	0.01–3.0	Intercalation	1730	1177	68.0	
100

Ti3C2Tx/CNTs	0.05–3.0	Intercalation	1673	489	29.2	
77

Nb4N5/rGO	0.01–3.0	Intercalation	812.5	569.9	70.1	
78

HG-TNO-3	0.8–3.0	Intercalation	370	323	87.3	
79

3D porous TiC	0.005–3.0	Intercalation	851	505	59.3	
80

ZnMn2O4-G	0.01–3.0	Conversion	1750	1049.5	59.9	
81

MnFe2O4	0.01–3.0	Conversion	1237	1138	92.0	
82

Mn3O4/3D-graphene	0.01–3.0	Conversion	718.4	377.8	52.6	
83

SnO2-rGO	0.002–2.0	Conversion	1920	950	49.5	
84

CNF@CoNi2S4	0.005–3.0	Conversion	∼720	∼550	76.4	
85

MoO2-CNT	1.1–2.8	Conversion	145	130	89.7	
86

MoO2 nanosheets	1.0–3.0	Conversion	243	200	82.3	
88

Fe3O4–G	0.03–3.0	Conversion	1200	850	70.8	
89

TiSb2	0.05–1.5	Conversion	1140.8	490.5	43.0	
90

LTSO/C	0.1–3.0	Conversion	470	265.9	56.6	
97

CoO-rGO	0.05–3.0	Conversion	2780	1674	60.2	
91



Si/Cu bilayer fabric	0.01–1.5	Alloy	2800	2744	98	
92

Sn–C	0.01–3.0	Alloy	1850	1081	58.4	
93


 	Fig. 3  The role of pre-lithiation technologies in LICs. (a) The summary of the first coulombic efficiency of typical anode materials with different energy storage mechanisms in LICs; (b) the enlarged potential swings of the cathode achieved by pre-lithiation technologies; (c) the decreased potential of the anode achieved by pre-lithiation technologies; and (d) the optimal potential range selection for matching the anode and cathode electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Example AC//HC systems with or without pre-lithiation treatment: (a1) the effect of the pre-lithiation degree on the coulombic efficiency of the system; (a2) the effect of the pre-lithiation degree on the cycling stability; and (a3) the effect of the pre-lithiation degree on the internal resistance. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. (b) The charge and discharge profiles of AC//LMCMB systems with or without pre-lithiation treatment: (b1) the system without the pre-lithiation process; (b2) the system with a low pre-lithiation degree; and (b3) the system with a high pre-lithiation degree. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The effect of the pre-lithiation process on the anode potentials in AC//HC systems: (a1) the relationship between the anode potential and the pre-lithiation degree; (a2) the cathode and anode potential profiles in a LIC without a pre-lithiation process; and (a3) the cathode and anode potential profiles in a LIC with a pre-lithiation process. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier Ltd. (b) The electrode matching approach for AC//HC systems: (b1) the reaction mechanisms of HC at different potentials; and (b2) the electrode matching parameter determination. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic graphs of four types of typical pre-lithiation methods: (a) ex situ electrochemical method (EEC); (b) in situ electrochemical method (IEC); (c) in situ short circuit method (ISC); and (d) cathode pre-lithiation method.	 

 	Fig. 7  Experimental examples of the EEC and IEC methods. (a1) The battery structure for the EEC method with four electrodes; and the charge and discharge potential profiles (a2) without pre-lithiation and (a3) after pre-lithiation. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from IOP Publishing. (b1) The detailed pouch cell structure and (b2) assembled pouch cell of IEC; and the relationship of the capacity (b3) and (b4) voltage change with the pre-lithiation capacity. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the in situ short circuit (ISC) method. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from IOP Publishing. The NMR spectra of the pre-lithiation of graphite using coated (b) lithium metal powder and (c) lithium metal foil. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photos of various lithium sources used in the in situ short circuit (ISC) method: (a) SLMP; (b) thick lithium strips; (c) thin lithium film, and (d) thin lithium film with holes. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 10  The theoretical requirements of cathode additives for pre-lithiation. Based on the charge and discharge profiles of the cathode and anode, the additives in the cathode as lithium sources can be divided into two types. Type 1: re-lithiation at lower potentials than AC's lower operation limit potential; and type 2: re-lithiation being substantially irreversible. Reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from Elsevier Ltd.	 


Li2MoO3	267	85	182	4.7	(i), (iii)	71.43%	
145

Li2RuO3	231	220	11	4.7	(i), (iii), (iv)	12.67%	
148

Li5FeO4	678	110	568	4.7	(i), (ii)	89.78%	
146

Li0.65Ni1.35O2	120	20	100	4.2	(iii)	57.47%	
149

Li6CoO4	∼500	∼100	400	4.3	(iii)	85.47%	
150

Li2CuO2	342	31	331	4	(iii)	82.67%	
144

Li2S	∼600	∼200	400	4	(ii), (iii)	85.47%	
151

Li2DHBN	365	∼0	365	<3.5	(iii)	84.16%	
147


 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 11  Comparison of the scalability, efficiency, cost, safety, controllability, environmental requirements, and the resulting energy density of the full cell for different types of pre-lithiation methods: (a) IEC and cathode pre-lithiation technologies; and (b) comparison of using various lithium sources in the ISC pre-lithiation method.	 


Scalability	− The complex two-step process enables no potential for up-scaling	− This method is easy for practical application by pre-setting the lithium when fabricating the cell	− SLMP is easy to coat onto the anode for practical application	− The lithium film is capable of being coated onto the anode directly	− The lithium strip is still possibly scalable by coating the lithium strip onto the anode	− It is quite easy to achieve scalability by adding the lithium source into the cathode
Cost	− Two-step process inevitably brings extra expenditure	− The usage of a holed current collector is of an extremely high price for practical production	− SLMP is of an extremely high price for practical application	− The price of lithium film is between SLMP and the lithium strip, but it goes extremely high for ultrathin lithium foam	− The price of the lithium strip is low for practical application	− The cost is determined by the price of the lithium source. There is still no ideal lithium source candidate for evaluation
Safety	− All the procedures must be finished in a glove box with excellent safety	− Only one piece of lithium foil is used when fabricating the cell with good safety	− SLMP will bring severe safety issues due to its small particle size and high specific surface area	− The stability of the lithium film is between SLMP and the lithium strip	− The stability of the lithium strip is pretty good when operating in a dry room	− The safety is better than EES, IEC and ISC, because no metal lithium exists
Controllability	− The pre-lithiation level is well controlled by the potential or capacity for an anode with or without a discharge plateau respectively	− It is not possible to accurately control the weight of pre-set lithium in the cell, because the lithium distributions are not uniform due to the various distances between the anode and lithium source	− Due to the small particle size, it is convenient to control the pre-lithiation level by adjusting the usage of SLMP	− The pre-lithiation is easy to control by adjusting the area of the lithium film and the process can be also controlled by punching holes in the lithium film	− The lithium strip is relatively difficult to control accurately due to its thickness	− The controllability is pretty good by adjusting the weight of the lithium source in the cathode when preparing the cathode electrodes
Condition requirements	− A glove box is necessary due to the re-assembly process	− A dry room is necessary for cell fabrication due to the usage of metal lithium	− A dry room is necessary for coating SLMP onto the anode and cell fabrication	− A dry room is necessary for coating the lithium film onto the anode and cell fabrication	− A dry room is necessary for coating the lithium strip onto the anode and cell fabrication	− There are no additional condition requirements
Efficiency	− The efficiency is extremely low due to the re-assembly process	− The efficiency is relatively low due to the long time for ion diffusion	− The efficiency is pretty good because the coating of SLMP can be controlled automatically by the machine and the pre-lithiation kinetics is very fast	− The efficiency is still good and the reaction kinetics between the anode and lithium strip is fast due to the large contact surface area	− The efficiency is relatively low due to the thickness of the lithium strip, but it is still higher than IEC due to the short ion diffusion distance	− The efficiency is pretty good because it can be controlled by external circuit with adjustable current density
Energy density of the full cell	− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight	− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight	− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight	− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight	− Metal lithium as lithium sources with no extra weight	− The energy density will be sacrificed inevitably due to the dead material after pre-lithiation
Footnote
† L. M. Jin and C. Shen contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
