Recent advances of near infrared inorganic fluorescent probes for biomedical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TB01430C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TB01430C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 7856-7879Recent advances of near infrared inorganic fluorescent probes for biomedical applications

        
          
            Fan 
            Yang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qingzhe 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shengyun 
            Huang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dongling 
            Ma
          
          
        
      *
      Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique, Centre Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, 1650 Boul. Lionel-Boulet, Varennes, Québec J3X 1S2, Canada. E-mail: ma@emt.inrs.ca
Received 
      5th June 2020
    , Accepted 29th July 2020First published on 29th July 2020AbstractNear infrared (NIR)-excitable and NIR-emitting probes have fuelled advances in biomedical applications owing to their power in enabling deep tissue imaging, offering high image contrast and reducing phototoxicity. There are essentially three NIR biological windows, i.e., 700–950 nm (NIR I), 1000–1350 nm (NIR II) and 1550–1870 nm (NIR III). Recently emerging optical probes that can be excited by an 800 nm laser and emit in the NIR II or III windows, denoted as NIR I-to-NIR II/III, are particularly attractive. That is because the longer wavelengths in the NIR II and NIR III windows offer deeper penetration and higher signal to noise ratio than those in the NIR I window. NIR imaging has indeed become a quickly evolving field and, simultaneously, stimulated the further development of new classes of NIR I-to-NIR II/III inorganic fluorescent probes, which include PbS, Ag2S-based quantum dots (QDs) and rare earth (RE) doped NPs (RENPs) that possess quite diverse optical properties and follow different emission mechanisms. This review summarizes the recent progress on material merits, synthetic routes, the rational choice of excitation in the NIR I window, NIR II/III emission optimization, and surface modification of aforementioned fluorescent probes. We also introduce the latest notable accomplishments enabled by these probes in fluorescence imaging, lifetime-based multiplexed imaging and photothermal therapy (PTT), together with a critical discussion of forthcoming challenges and perspectives for clinic use.
Fan Yang
Dr Fan Yang received his PhD in 2019 from INRS under the supervision of Profs. Dongling Ma and Fiorenzo Vetrone at INRS, and Prof. Xinyu Liu at University of Toronto. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Stanford University under the mentorship of Prof. Guosong Hong. His research interests include the development of multifunctional nanoplatforms based on superparamagnetic nanoparticles, near-infrared excited quantum dots and lanthanide-doped nanomaterials, and their applications in cancer diagnostics and therapeutics.
Qingzhe Zhang
Dr Qingzhe Zhang is currently a postdoctoral fellow at INRS-EMT, Canada. He earned his PhD in materials science from INRS in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Dongling Ma and Prof. Mohamed Chaker. He was awarded a 4-year pursuing PhD degree scholarship from the China Scholarship Council, the Doctoral Research Award from le Fonds de recherche du Québec-Nature et technologies (FRQNT), and FRQNT's Louis-Berlinguet New Research Star Award. His current research interests include developing advanced functional nanomaterials for applications in heterogeneous catalysis, including plasmon and upconversion enhanced photocatalytic water purification and water splitting.
Shengyun Huang
Shengyun Huang received his BS and MS in materials science and engineering from Shandong University and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, respectively. Since 2015, he has been a PhD candidate at the Center Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, INRS. His research interests are mainly focused on the development of various metal nanowires in transparent conductors for suspended particle device and electrochromic device applications.
Dongling Ma
Prof. Dongling Ma is a Canada Research Chair in Advanced Functional Nanocomposites and a full professor at Center of Energy, Materials and Telecommunications, INRS. She received her PhD degree in materials science and engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (USA) in 2004. She was awarded Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council Visiting Fellowships and worked at National Research Council of Canada from 2004 to 2006. Her main research interest consists in the development of various nanomaterials (e.g., semiconductor quantum dots, transition metal catalytic nanoparticles, plasmonic nanostructures) and different types of nanohybrids for applications in energy, catalysis and biomedical sectors.
1. Introduction
The development of optical technology has attracted increasing interest in biomedical applications (bio-applications) from in vitro and in vivo diagnosis to in vivo imaging and therapy, owing to its unique characteristics including non-invasiveness, and high flexibility and precision. In the past few decades, a variety of molecular imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) have been developed for clinic use.1,2 However, tomographic imaging techniques using X-ray (CT) and nuclear medicine (PET and SPECT) suffer from harmful ionizing radiation.3 Besides, all of these techniques are time-consuming, which usually need minutes to hours to finish one imaging scan.2 Thus, these techniques are limited in the real-time monitoring of an ongoing therapy. Different from the above imaging tools, photon-induced fluorescence imaging involves a relatively simple imaging hardware and exhibits non-ionizing and non-invasive features. More importantly, it has a capability of monitoring multiple independent biomarkers simultaneously through specific color labelling and of revealing the dynamic therapeutic interactions between drug molecules and tumors in real time. However, fluorescence imaging based on the conventional organic dyes emitting in the visible range remains quite limited in practical applications due to its poor tissue penetration capability. In order to achieve deep-tissue fluorescence imaging, two strategies have mainly been adopted: (i) designing new imaging instrumentation with high resolution, including confocal microscopy,4 multiphoton microscopy,5 optical coherence tomography and fluorescence-mediated tomography;6 and (ii) engineering new fluorescence imaging probes with high quantum yield (QY) and deep tissue penetration capability. In this review, we will focus on the recent advances of fluorescent probes with promising optical properties. Improving the ability of fluorescent probes in deep-tissue in vivo fluorescence imaging requires a comprehensive understanding on the optical properties of tissues, as well as the interaction between photons and tissues. They together determine the depth of the fluorescence imaging that will allow to resolve the 3D structure of tissues or organs with a high signal-to-noise ratio. Generally, when the excitation and emission lights travel through the tissue, four types of light–tissue interactions including photon reflection, scattering, absorption and tissue autofluorescence will occur (Fig. 1a). The reflection at the tissue interface usually does not result in serious signal loss while the light attenuation (the sum of absorption and scattering) by the inhomogeneous tissue substance is mainly responsible for shortening light penetration depth.7 It is known that the light attenuation is wavelength-dependent in tissues and fluids (Fig. 1b), that is, the longer wavelength the less attenuation.8 The last process, tissue autofluorescence, originates from the endogenous fluorophore molecules in the vital tissues/organs and bodily fluids that can be excited by laser or light-emitting diode sources, leading to a terrible background noise of fluorescence imaging. Some well-reported examples of such endogenous fluorophores are reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (with an emission centered at 460 nm),9 heterocyclic flavins (emitting in the broad range of 500–600 nm),9 and lipofuscin (with fluorescence in the 450–650 nm range).10 Recent studies have indicated that the longer wavelength in the NIR region can exponentially reduce the level of autofluorescence, which enables the fluorescence imaging with minimal interference from the biological backgrounds, especially for imaging organs such as the liver that has abundant endogenous fluorophore.11–13 As a result, the use of conventional molecular dyes, which often require ultraviolet (UV) light excitation and typically emit in the visible range, results in severe attenuation and autofluorescence in the tissues and organs, thus dramatically limiting the penetration depth and imaging clarity. Fortunately, the main tissues/organs and fluids exhibit a relatively low attenuation in the so-called NIR biological windows (NIR I: 700–950 nm; NIR II: 1000–1350 nm; NIR III: 1550–1870 nm), where the water overtone absorption peak at ∼1450 nm is excluded.14–16 Additionally, the autofluorescence manifests a significant reduction when imaging in the NIR biological windows, dropping to undetectable levels beyond 1500 nm.11,12 Thus, light in the NIR windows allows deeper tissue penetration (Fig. 1c) and offers a higher signal-to-noise ratio than the UV/visible lights, due to lower photon absorption, scattering and autofluorescence in these windows.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of light–tissue interaction. (b) First (NIR I), second (NIR II), and third (NIR III) optical windows in some biological tissues and fluids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The schematic illustration of the penetration depth of the NIR II/III light. 
 Fig. 2  Absorption (a) and PL (b) of PbS QDs prepared under different conditions (i.e., different synthesis temperatures), PbCl2/S ratios, and reaction time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of PbS/CdS QDs prepared by SILAR, c-ALD and cation exchange. (d) Inverted temperature gradients in microwave heating versus oil-bath heating: difference in the temperature profiles (finite element modeling) after 1 min of microwave irradiation (left) and treatment in an oil bath (right). Microwave irradiation raises the temperature of the whole volume simultaneously (bulk heating) whereas in the oil-heated tube, the reaction mixture in contact with the vessel wall is heated first. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2004, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (e) TEM image of PbS/CdS core/shell QDs synthesized via microwave heating with reaction time of 30 s at 100 °C. (f) PL spectra of the parent PbS QDs and of the PbS/CdS QDs synthesized by microwave-assisted cation exchange at different reaction times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Spectral range of emission of different PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs. Three different emission spectra from different PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs (blue, QDs emitting at 930 nm; green, QDs emitting at 1270 nm; red, QDs emitting at 1450 nm). The black line shows the extinction coefficient (comprising both absorption and scattering contributions) of biological tissues for the spectral range under consideration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (h) Schematic illustration of the surface modification procedures for PbS@CdS QDs, which lead to the formation of PbS@CdS@F-127 NPs, PbS@CdS@SiO2–PEG NPs, and PbS@CdS@SiO2@F-127 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
To date, not a few fluorescent probes with their emissions lying in the NIR I, NIR II or NIR III windows have been reported, including quantum dots (QDs), organic dyes and rare earth (RE)-doped nanoparticles (NPs) (RENPs). Among them, at present only two NIR I emitting dyes: indocyanine green (ICG, emission at ∼810 nm under 790 nm excitation) and methylene blue (MB, emission at ∼690 nm under 665 nm excitation) were approved by FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration) for retinal angiography,17 cardiac and hepatic function testing18 and intraoperative imaging-guided surgery.19,20 Although fluorescence imaging within the NIR I region is far superior to imaging at visible wavelengths, recent work has demonstrated great improvement in imaging quality when fluorescent probes emitting within the NIR II or NIR III windows are used. The longer wavelengths in the NIR II and NIR III windows allow imaging deeper than one centimetre in depth that cannot be achieved by the probes in the NIR I region. Therefore, NIR II and NIR III fluorescent probes offer notable benefits when compared to their NIR I counterpart, such as higher spatial resolution and deeper penetration due to the reduction in scattering at longer wavelengths. Moreover, excitation wavelength is another key parameter for realizing deep-tissue imaging with high spatial resolution. Previous studies have demonstrated that light with a wavelength of around 800 nm was highly advantageous over 980 nm light commonly used for exciting upconverting NPs, due to the reduced absorption and scattering as well as the decreased overheating effect which may cause potential damage to the tissues. On the other hand, traditional cameras based on silicon detectors have the longest detectable wavelengths ranging from 900–1000 nm, excluding the possibility of imaging in the NIR II and III windows. While with the commercialization of affordable InGaAs cameras that possess high sensitivity and resolution in the spectral response range of 900–1700 nm, fluorescence imaging utilizing NIR II and III fluorescent probes has become more and more accessible.21 Thus far, the development of NIR InGaAs cameras clearly facilitates the research of NIR II and III fluorescent probes. Taken all together, it is worthwhile to highlight the feasibility and benefits of using 800 nm-excited NIR I-to-NIR II/III fluorescent nanoprobes for bioimaging. In some cases, the excitation light of 800 nm not only causes fluorescence by photon-to-photon conversion, but also simultaneously generates heat through non-radiative transitions, i.e., photothermal effect, which can be used to kill cancer cells.
In this review, we provide a summary of the latest advances that have been made for 800 nm-excited, NIR I-to-NIR II/III PbS, Ag2S-based QDs, RENPs and their bio-applications, as summarized in Table 1. It is structured in five sections. We start with the fundamental introduction in the first section, and then in the second section we describe different synthetic routes, intrinsic optical properties, core/shell passivation, and surface modification of PbS and Ag2S-based QDs. The third section summarizes the synthesis, the rational choice of RE for achieving NIR I-to-NIR II/III fluorescence, and strategies for enhancing NIR I-to-NIR II/III fluorescence of RENPs. In the fourth section, we introduce the most recent progress in the bio-applications of these NIR I-to-NIR II/III optical probes for fluorescence imaging, lifetime-based multiplexed imaging and photothermal therapy (PTT). Finally, we conclude this review with a brief summary as well as challenges and perspectives for the future clinical practice.
Table 1 Summary of recently reported NIR I-to-NIR II/III fluorescent probes, their optical properties, surface modification and bio-applications




Fluorescent probes
Optical characteristics (λex/λem)
QY
Surface modification
Bio-applications
Ref.




QY: quantum yield; N/A: not applicable; MPA: mercaptopropionic acid; PEG: polyethylene glycol; mPEG-amine: methoxypolyethylene glycol amine; 8-arm PEG-amine: eight-arm polyethylene glycol amine; ATII: angiotensin II peptide; DOTA: 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acid; FSHβ: follicle-stimulating hormone; DSPE-mPEG: PEGylated phospholipid; PNIPAM: poly(N-isopropylacrylamide); Nd3+ and Er3+ doped RENPs: β-NaGdF4/Na(Gd,Yb)F4:Er/NaYF4:Yb/NaNdF4:Yb; PMAO: poly(maleic anhydride-alt-1-octadicene); α-CD: alpha-cyclodextrin; PEI: polyethylenimine; core–multishell RENPs: β-phase NaGdF4@NaGdF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4:Yb@NaNdF4:Yb RENPs; GI: gastrointestinal; SASNs (NIR II): self-assembled supernanoparticles consisting of Fe3O4 NPs and PbS/CdS QDs; PVP: polyvinylpyrrolidone.




PbS/CdS/ZnS
808 nm/930 nm, 1270 nm, 1450 nm
N/A
MPA

In vivo NIR II bioimaging/fluorescent nanothermometer

22



PbS/CdS/ZnS
808 nm/1220 nm
20%
MPA

In vivo NIR II bioimaging

23



PbS/CdS/ZnS
808 nm/1270 nm
N/A
MPA
Temperature self-monitored PTT

24



PbS
808 nm/∼1300 nm
17.3%
Ribonuclease-A

In vivo NIR II bioimaging

25



PbS
808 nm/1310 nm
N/A
β-Lactoglobulin

In vivo NIR II flap perfusion imaging

26



PbS@CdS@SiO2
785 nm/1155 nm
5.79%
Pluronic F-127

In vivo NIR II whole-body imaging/brain microscopic imaging/in vivo GI tract imaging

27



PbS
808 nm/1205 nm
N/A
Agrin

In vivo NIR II peripheral nerves imaging

28



PbS/CdS
808 nm/1600 nm
2.2–22%
mPEG-amine + 8-arm PEG-amine

In vivo NIR III bioimaging/real-time vascular imaging/3D tumor confocal imaging

29



PbS/CdS
808 nm/∼1600 nm
2–20%
mPEG-amine + 8-arm PEG-amine
NIR III murine hindlimb vascular imaging

30



Ag2S
808 nm/∼1150 nm
N/A
ATII
NIR II cardiovascular tissue imaging

31



Ag2S
808 nm/∼1200 nm
15.5%
Tat peptide

In vivo NIR II stem cells tracking imaging

32



Ag2S
808 nm/∼1200 nm
N/A
Tat peptide

In vivo NIR II stem cells tracking imaging

33



Ag2S
808 nm/∼1150 nm
N/A
Alendronate
Bone-targeted NIR II fluorescence images

34



Ag2S
808 nm/∼1120 nm
∼1.12%
PEG-folate

In vivo NIR II bioimaging/photoacoustic imaging/chemo-photothermal therapy

35



Gd–DOTA–Ag2S
808 nm/1200 nm
∼15%
DOTA
Dual-mode T1-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging

36



LiLuF4:Nd/LiLuF4
803 nm/∼1050 nm and 1330 nm
32%
PEG

In vivo NIR II bioimaging

37



LaF3:Nd3+
808 nm/∼1050 nm
N/A
Ligand-free

In vivo NIR II bioimaging

38



NaGdF4:5%Nd3+@NaGdF4
800 nm/∼1060 nm
>20%
Phosphopeptide

In vivo NIR II tumor targeted imaging

39



NaGdF4:5%Nd3+@NaGdF4
808 nm/∼1060 nm
N/A
DNA and FSHβ peptide
NIR II imaging guided metastatic ovarian cancer resection

40



NaYF4:Nd3+/NaYF4
808 nm/1064 nm and 1345 nm
8.2%
DSPE-mPEG
High-affinity NIR II skeletal imaging

41



NaGdF4:Nd3+
808 nm/1060 nm
N/A
PNIPAM
Autofluorescence-free NIR II imaging

42



Nd3+ and Er3+ doped RENPs
800 nm/1525 nm
N/A
DSPE-PEG2000-COOH

In vivo NIR III bioimaging

43



GdF3:Nd3+
808 nm/1064 nm and 1330 nm
10.7 ± 1.6%
PMAO
Dual-mode T1-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging

44



NaHoF4:Nd3+
785 nm/1525 nm
1.7%
α-CD
Dual-mode T2-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging

45



NaDyF4:Nd3+
808 nm/∼1050 nm
∼19.4%
Gallic acid
Dual-mode T2-weighted MR/NIR II tumor imaging/PTT

46



Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Nd3+
806 nm/∼1060 nm, 1340 nm
N/A
PEI
Dual-mode T2-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging

47



Nd3+:Ba0.3Lu0.7F2.7
810 nm/∼1056 nm and ∼1325 nm,
N/A
Ligand-free
Bimodal CT and NIR II fluorescence imaging

48



NaYF4:Yb,Nd/CaF2
808 nm/980 and 1350 nm
N/A
Poly(acrylic acid)
Lifetime-based in vivo multiplexed imaging

49



Core–multishell RENPs
808 nm/1525 nm
N/A
Antibody ER, PR, HER2
Lifetime-based in vivo multiplexed imaging of tumor biomarkers

50



NdVO4
808 nm/1060 nm and 1300 nm
N/A
Ligand-free
NIR II fluorescence imaging/PTT

51



Core/satellite Nd3+-doped RENPs
808 nm/1060 nm
N/A
Polydopamine
PTT

52



NaNdF4
808 nm/1058 nm and 1332 nm
N/A
Prussian blue
PTT

53



NaErF4@NaYF4@NaNdF4
808 nm/1060 nm and 1525 nm
N/A
Prussian blue
NIR II/NIR III fluorescence imaging/PTT

54



SASNs (NIR II)
806 nm/1260 nm
N/A
PVP
Dual-mode (magnetothermal and photothermal) heating

55





2. PbS and Ag2S-based QDs emitting in the NIR II/III windows
In the last decade, significant efforts have been devoted to the NIR QDs, with respect to traditional Cd-based visible QDs. With the absorption of a photon of energy higher than the band gap of NIR QDs, an electron is excited from the valence band to conduction band and leaves a hole in the valence band. Then the electron relaxes back to the valence band and recombines with the hole radiatively, which is accompanied with NIR photon emission. The NIR QDs with smaller energy band gaps exhibit potential applications in solar cells, photodetectors and biomedicines.56 With the larger penetration depth and minimal tissue absorption in the NIR II/III regions, various NIR II/III-emitting QDs like PbS and PbSe (group IV–VI semiconductor),57,58 Ag2S and Ag2Se (group I–VI semiconductor),59,60 InAs and InP (group III–V semiconductor),61,62 CuInS and CuInSe (group I–VI ternary semiconductor)63,64 have been reported for bio-applications. In this section, we mainly focus on the NIR II/III-emitting PbS and Ag2S-based QDs, which are the most commonly used fluorescent probes for bio-applications.
2.1 Synthesis and properties of PbS-based QDs
PbS is a semiconductor with a narrow direct band gap of 0.41 eV at room temperature (RT). With the relatively large exciton Bohr radius of 18 nm, the band gap of PbS can be readily engineered in a wide range, by tuning the particle size, with resultant fluorescence emissions in the NIR region of 825–1750 nm. The larger Bohr radius also endows PbS QDs more notable quantum confinement effect even at larger particle sizes, as compared to other QDs, e.g. CdSe (the Bohr radius: ∼5.4 nm), CdS (the Bohr radius: ∼2.5 nm) and Ag2S (the Bohr radius: ∼2.2 nm). In general, PbS QDs are synthesized in solution by wet chemical method.65 It is noteworthy that although PbS QDs can be synthesized in an aqueous solution, such synthesized PbS QDs usually have a wide size distribution and numerous surface defects, resulting in relatively low QYs.66 The additional post-synthesis size-selective process is required to further improve the PbS QDs’ quality.66 Therefore, in this review, we focus on the synthesis of PbS QDs in an organic solvent by the organometallic route. Among various organometallic approaches, the well-known “hot-injection” method, which involves the injection of sulfur source into lead organometallic precursors at an elevated temperature, is considered as one of the most efficient low-cost approaches to obtain high-quality PbS QDs.67 It is because during the hot-injection process the nucleation and growth stages of QDs are effectively separated by quickly tuning and controlling the temperature, which is thus able to yield QDs with a narrow size distribution, even without the size selection process.67,68
The initial work on colloidal PbS QDs synthesis by the hot-injection of bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide [(TMS)2S] into lead oleate was reported by Hines et al. in 2003.69 The PbS QDs show the first-excitonic absorption peaks in the range of 800–1800 nm, a narrow size dispersion of 15–20% and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of emission peaks of about 100 meV without any post size selection. However, the highly hazardous chemical (TMS)2S was employed in the reaction and its moisture-sensitive property made this synthesis complicated and difficult for large-scale industrial production. Another relatively green route on PbS QDs synthesis was subsequently achieved by Ozin et al.,70 who replaced the (TMS)2S by elemental sulfur to produce high-quality PbS QDs with the FWHM of emission peaks as low as ca. 52 meV. But the synthetic reaction requires a highly viscous solution of lead precursors, which cannot be easily manipulated under certain circumstances. Motivated by these previous studies, our group has successfully synthesized PbS QDs in a “nonviscous” solventless oleylamine system at mild-constant-temperature.71 By optimizing the reaction temperature, time, molar ratio of Pb/S and capping ligands, the obtained PbS QDs exhibit tunable absorption and emission peaks from ∼1240 to 1450 nm with a small FWHM of 58 meV (Fig. 2a and b).
To further expand tunable fluorescence range of PbS QDs, Hens et al.72 slightly modified Ozin's PbCl2–S route by incorporating tri-n-octylphosphine (TOP) to the reaction, which could change the growth kinetics by reducing the reactivity of sulfur precursor. This method produced PbS QDs in a broader size regime (3–10 nm) with the first excitonic absorption peak spanning from 925 to 2100 nm. However, TOP is also toxic and needs to be operated in a glove box due to its air-sensitive property. Recently, by using thiourea derivatives as sulfur source, Owen et al.73 achieved a breakthrough in synthesizing PbS QDs with absorption peaks spanning from 850 to 1800 nm on multigram scales. Although this method could yield PbS QDs with highly reproducible control over the final size due to the tunable kinetics of thiourea, the complex procedures were required to synthesize the thiourea derivatives. Our group introduced tributylphosphine (TBP) into the PbCl2–S route to produce PbS QDs with the first excitonic absorption peak wavelength as short as 705 nm.74 The TBP was found to not only act as a passivation ligand, but also boost the lead transformation from PbCl2 to reactive Pb(OH)Cl that participated in the nucleation process to produce ultrasmall QDs. In addition to the aforementioned organic ligands, Acar et al.75 added 1-dodecanethiol (DDT) into the PbCl2–S route for PbS QDs synthesis, which led to the PbS QDs as small as 2.4 nm in diameter with an emission peak at 834 nm and an absorption peak at 695 nm. The addition of DDT enhanced the solubility of sulfur in oleylamine and moreover, DDT bound to the QDs surface during the growth stage, thereby reducing the final size.
PbS QDs could also be synthesized by other methods. For example, in collaboration with El Khakani et al. we explored pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method to synthesize ligand-free PbS QDs, which demonstrated a high potential for optoelectronic applications.76–78 In our work, the laser beam with high pulsed supplies of energy was focused on a rotating PbS target, which generated PbS QDs directly deposited on the substrate in a controlled manner. DeMello et al.79 reported the controlled and reproducible synthesis of monodispersed PbS QDs emitting in the range of 765–1600 nm without any post processing by a droplet-based microfluidic platform. In their synthesis, the capillary reactor generated stable droplets for the fast mixing of lead and sulfur precursor solutions, followed by flowing to a tube immersed in an oil bath for heating treatment. Meanwhile, the fluorescence of synthesized PbS QDs could be monitored in real-time through a homemade fiber-based fluorescence spectrometer, which facilitated the rapid screening of the experimental parameters to obtain high-quality QDs.
Even with a large number of organic ligands bound on the surface, colloidal PbS QDs are not sufficiently stable in the presence of oxygen and under ambient light. As early as 1997 the strategy of core/shell structure engineering was proved to be an effective way to improve the chemical, thermal and photo-stability of QDs and significantly enhance QY as well.80 After coating with a robust inorganic shell, the core PbS QDs can be better passivated compared with the uncoated ones, which thus largely eliminates the impact from the surrounding environment. Meanwhile, the shell can reduce the surface dangling bonds or electron/hole traps, further enhancing the fluorescence property.81 A few groups, including our group, tried to grow a passivating inorganic shell of a larger band gap over PbS QDs.82–85
Successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) is an extremely efficient shell coating technique invented by Peng et al. to grow a passivating shell of ZnS over CdSe.86 The SILAR technique utilizes successive additions of metal cationic and chalcogen anionic precursors into the reaction mixture containing core QDs to grow a semiconductor shell in a layer-by-layer manner (Fig. 2c). In order to avoid the homogenous nucleation of the shell material in solution and the uncontrolled ripening of core QDs, the growth temperature for SILAR is normally lower than that used for the core synthesis.81 Therefore, the most attractive feature of SILAR is the precise control of shell thickness as well as the suppression of the separate nucleation of the shell material in solution. In 2008, Dubertret et al.87 reported CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs with a 5 nm thick crystalline CdS shell by SILAR. It was found that the blinking probability decreased monotonically with the increased shell thickness. The thick shell can effectively isolate the excited carriers from the core QDs and the surrounding environment. Similarly, the giant CdSe/CdS QDs prepared using the SILAR method were also developed by Hollingsworth's group.88 These giant core/shell QDs did not exhibit any blinking behavior and photobleaching under continuous laser excitation over repeated long time periods. Bawendi et al.89 modified the SILAR method to form high-quality CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs with a relatively thin CdS shell (∼2.4nm, ∼7 monolayers), which showed significantly suppressed blinking and a close to unity QY. Later the same principle of epitaxial shell growth with SILAR was applied by Zhao et al.90 to grow a passivating CdS shell on PbS QDs. With the precise control of stoichiometry between the Cd and S during the growth, giant PbS/CdS QDs were obtained. The thick CdS shell could largely inhibit the surface oxidation and the formation of surface traps of the PbS core, thanks to better surface passivation and isolation from the surrounding environment. Interestingly, the giant PbS/CdS QDs via SILAR allow to control the single/double emission, which might be related to the presence of an energy barrier that was caused by the modification of interfacial structure between the core and shell in the giant QDs system.90–92
Recently, Talapin et al.93 proposed the concept of colloidal atomic layer deposition (c-ALD) to grow a CdS layer on colloidal wurtzite and zinc blende CdSe nanocrystals. In both cases, the growth of CdS shell resulted in a red shift of excitonic transitions due to the delocalization of the electron wave function into the outer CdS shell and QY increased similarly to that achieved by the SILAR process. Nonetheless, unlike SILAR, c-ALD is based on the half-reaction coupled to the sequential phase transfer of nanocrystals and organic precursors between immiscible nonpolar and polar phases (Fig. 2c). The phase transfer process can remove excess molecular precursors and avoid the accumulation of byproducts during the reaction, thereby allowing precise deposition of a single atomic layer per cycle. Another important advantage of c-ALD is that the experiments are carried out at RT in air, which makes the c-ALD process easy to manipulate. Hens et al.94 extended c-ALD to grow a CdS shell around PbS core QDs, which exhibited similar charge carrier delocalization in the CdS shell, with a minor red spectral shift of core PbS QDs. Opposite to Talapin's results, CdS shell growth gradually decreased the QY compared to initial PbS core QDs. This suggests that the fluorescence quenching is mainly induced by the incorporated defects at the PbS/CdS interface during the c-ALD process. Bawendi et al.95 reported similar results with c-ALD growth of CdS shells on PbS QDs. Interestingly, they found the QY of PbS/CdS QDs can be retained by the addition of excessive Cd(OA)2 at the end of the growth.
The synthesis of core/shell PbS/CdS QDs by both SILAR and c-ALD is highly time-consuming. Cation exchange as another simple method has been widely used to synthesize high-quality core/shell PbS/CdS QDs. In this approach, the introduced cationic precursor gradually replaces the core cations while the anion sublattice remains basically undisturbed (Fig. 2c). Thus, the PbS core shrinks due to the CdS shell growth but overall size of the QDs remains essentially constant after cation exchange. The concept of cation exchange for preparing heterostructured NPs was first introduced by Alivisatos et al.96 In their report, CdSe QDs were converted to Ag2Se QDs of the same size and shape in the presence of excess silver ions. Interestingly, when they added cadmium ions into the formed Ag2Se NCs, the Ag2Se NCs were transformed back to CdSe NCs via the reversible cation exchange process. Hollingsworth et al.57 applied the similar principle for obtaining the NIR core/shell PbSe/CdSe and PbS/CdS QDs. However, instead of a complete cation exchange between cadmium and lead ions, a partial cation exchange occurred which might result from the use of less active cadmium precursor. The core/shell structure of both cases was confirmed by the blue shift of emission spectra, which suggested that the lead in the PbS QDs was partially replaced by cadmium during cation exchange. In addition, compared with the bare core QDs, both types of core/shell QDs exhibited enhanced QY and stability under ambient light and atmosphere due to the better surface passivation provided by the outer shell. Our group followed the same principle to develop a two-step cation exchange process for preparing core/shell PbS/CdS QDs with various shell thickness.85 Firstly, a thin CdS shell was grown onto the PbS cores at a low temperature of 100 °C to prohibit the Ostwald ripening of cores. A thick CdS shell was then formed at a much higher temperature of 200 °C via the deeper cation exchange of lead with cadmium. We found that the formation of the first thin CdS shell was important for the synthesis of tunable shell thickness PbS/CdS QDs with narrow size distribution since it could effectively prohibit the Ostwald ripening process that causes size broadening. The TEM and EDX analysis confirmed the formation of CdS shell rather than ternary alloy of PbxCd1−xS. When the CdS shell reached a certain thickness (1.8 nm), the PbS/CdS QDs showed interesting double emissions: one from the PbS core in the NIR range and the other from the intrinsic emission of the CdS shell in the visible range. By carefully choosing the core PbS QDs and optimizing the reaction for shell growth, the emission wavelength can be turned from 850 to over 1600 nm. Due to the surface passivation of CdS shell, the QY of PbS/CdS QDs increased to as high as 67% with the optimal shell thickness of 0.7 nm, which almost doubled that of the initial shell-free PbS QDs. Meanwhile, the CdS shell largely enhanced the photostability and thermal stability of PbS/CdS QDs, which were demonstrated by the long-time continuous UV illumination and heat treatment. Even after these PbS/CdS QDs were transferred into water by amphiphilic polymers, the excellent photostability and colloidal stability were reserved.97,98
In recent years, microwave-assisted heating synthesis has become a modern technique for producing different NPs with narrow size distribution and defined properties.99 Compared with the traditional oil bath heating (Fig. 2d), microwave heating is more efficient since the reactive polar molecules are heated internally by directly absorbing microwave energy. In contrast, traditional oil bath heating is relatively slow and inefficient, and could lead to the temperature gradient of the reaction system and thus the structural heterogeneity of obtained NPs.100 Moreover, the microwave method could dramatically reduce the reaction time, typically from several hours with an oil bath to minutes or even seconds.100 Our group has successfully developed a reproducible and controllable microwave-assisted cation exchange method to synthesize high-quality PbS/CdS core/shell QDs (Fig. 2e).58,82,83,101 The emission spectra of PbS/CdS QDs can be tuned in the range of 1300–1600 nm (Fig. 2f), with the highest QY achieved at 57% that was ∼1.4 times higher than that of the QDs prepared by conventional oil bath. The enhanced fluorescence was due to the delicate growth manner of CdS shell during cation exchange associated with the uniform heating character of the microwave approach. In addition, due to the efficient heating effect by microwave, the high-quality PbS/CdS QDs can be prepared less than 60 seconds, which is much shorter compared with oil bath heating that normally takes several hours. We also found that the microwave-assisted synthesis can be easily scaled up, suggesting its high potential for mass production. Although cation exchange is a simple method to achieve core/shell QDs with high QYs, shell growth strongly increases the heterogeneity of core/shell QDs, i.e. the size and shape of the remaining core, and position of core in the formed core/shell QDs.102 In addition, lead replaced by cadmium was reported to be a self-limiting process and complete conversion is normally difficult to achieve, which results in limited thickness of the CdS shell even with excessive cadmium precursor or long reaction time.103
The bio-applications of PbS-based QDs were limited due to the presence of the heavy metals, such as Pb and Cd. To address this issue, surface coating with biocompatible materials is required, which can effectively inhibit the leakage of the toxic heavy metal ions. Moreover, the QDs synthesized in an organic phase are passivated by hydrophobic organic ligands, such as OA and OLA, which makes them not suitable for bio-applications that require high solubility in aqueous biological media. Therefore, the surface modification of PbS-based QDs with ligands of the hydrophilic nature is essential for their bio-applications. On the other hand, the surface modification with some biocompatible polymers allows for the elongated blood circulation of QDs and also provides a base for further conjugation of functional groups toward specific targeted diagnosis or therapy, thus improving the therapeutic efficiency and reducing the toxicity to the healthy tissues or organs.104,105 Numerous works have reported the surface modification of visible emitting Cd-based QDs and the main strategies can be divided into ligand exchange and the formation of an additional layer, such as silica.106,107 The surface modifications for NIR II/III PbS-based QDs essentially follow the similar approaches. We will introduce below the recent progress on the surface modification of PbS-based QDs. For example, Sargent et al.108 firstly reported the surface modification of PbS QDs by replacing oleate capping ligands with (1-mercaptoundec11-yl)tetra(ethylene glycol) (MTPEG). Such formed water soluble PbS QDs exhibited good colloidal stability in buffer for about five days. The interesting observation from this process was that the emission peak shifted towards longer wavelength probably due to the QDs growth during the ligand exchange process. Following the ligand exchange strategy, Winnik et al.109 completed the surface modification of PbS QDs by poly(acrylic acid). The ligand exchange was accompanied by a slight blue shift in the QDs’ emission peak, which was consistent with the reduction in the particle size. Mu et al.110 reported PbS QDs coated with silica. The resultant emission peak showed a blue shift after silica coating since the PbS QDs were etched during the silica coating process. In addition to silica coating, our group has successfully grown a ZnS shell around PbS/CdS QDs in the NIR I/II/III windows (Fig. 2g) via one-pot microwave-assisted synthesis.22,23 The outer ZnS shell could enhance the biocompatibility by shielding the heavy metals of the QDs from the organism and the MPA capping ligand endows the QDs water dispersibility for bio-applications. It is known that PEG coating leads to excellent stability and biocompatibility in physiological media. Our group has also transferred PbS and PbS/CdS QDs into PBS buffer by using amphiphilic polymer poly(maleic anhydride)-alt-1-octadecene-co-poly(ethylene glycol) (PMAO–PEG).97 The polymer coating preserved the QY of PbS/CdS QDs as high as 30% and simultaneously enabled a high photostability under continuous UV irradiation. Similarly, Veggel et al.111 modified PbS QDs with PMAO–PEG, followed by crosslinking with bis(hexamethylene)triamine (BHMT) to avoid the detachment of the polymer from the QDs’ surface. The crosslinked polymer (PMAO–PEG–BHMT) resulted in excellent colloidal stability and photostability, which was evidenced by the emission profile of the QDs after seven months storage. Dai et al.29 also reported PbS/CdS QDs modified with a mixture of linear PEG and branched eight-arm PEG to increase the biocompatibility for in vivo bioimaging. Apart from PEG, Qian et al.27 encapsulated hydrophobic PbS/CdS QDs by a dual-layer coating of silica and FDA-approved polymer Pluronic F-127 (F-127). The results demonstrated F-127 was more biocompatible and cost-effective than PEG coating.
2.2 Synthesis and properties of Ag2S-based QDs
Despite the excellent NIR fluorescence properties and various strategies applied to prevent the leakage of the heavy metal(s), there remains a concern regarding the toxicity of PbS-based QDs, and thus their suitability for bio-applications. To overcome this issue, many groups in parallel made efforts to engineer QDs that can simultaneously possess good biocompatibility and NIR emission properties. The most promising alternative is Ag2S QDs, which exhibit lower toxicity and bright NIR emission. Thus, the research work regarding the use of Ag2S QDs in bio-applications is rapidly increased recent years. At this point we would like to emphasize that, strictly speaking, silver is also a heavy metal. But the research community of biomaterials does not consider it as a highly toxic heavy metal, unlike Pb, Cd, As and Hg.
Ag2S has three different crystal structures: α-Ag2S existing at temperature below 178 °C, body-centered cubic phase β-Ag2S existing in the temperature range of 178–600 °C and face-centered high-temperature cubic phase γ-Ag2S stable above 600 °C.112 Among them, monoclinic α-Ag2S with a narrow band gap (Eg = 1.1 eV) has been most explored for bio-applications due to their good chemical stability and optical properties. Same as the PbS QDs described in the previous section, Ag2S QDs are usually synthesized by wet chemical method. The Ag2S QDs can be directly produced in an aqueous phase, in which the Ag+ from AgNO3 solution reacts with S2− from Na2S solution in the presence of a capping agent, such as MPA,113 glutathione (GSH)114 and bovine serum albumin (BSA).115 Numerous works have reported the synthesis of Ag2S QDs in water media.113–115 However, the relatively low synthetic temperature (normally at RT) and dissolved oxygen in water make the aqueous phase synthesis challenging to obtain high-quality Ag2S QDs with high QYs. High temperature synthesis can be done in an organic phase, which can facilitate the rapid formation of Ag2S nuclei. Meanwhile, the synthesis under inert gas protection minimizes the oxygen-associated defects in Ag2S QDs. The organic phase synthesis has indeed become the most effective method to prepare size-controlled Ag2S QDs with excellent optical properties. So we will focus on the organic phase synthesis of Ag2S QDs in the following.
Wang et al.60 firstly reported the synthesis of monoclinic Ag2S QDs via pyrolysis of silver diethyldithiocarbamate [Ag(DDTC)] in the mixture of OA, ODE and octadecylamine (ODA) at 200 °C. The Ag2S QDs had an average size of 10 nm with high monodispersity and fluorescence emission peak at 1058 nm in the NIR II window under excitation of 785 nm. Subsequently, by using the same method except for replacing the mixture of OA, ODE and ODA by DDT, Wang et al.116 synthesized DDT-capped Ag2S QDs with their emission tunable in the range of 975–1175 nm. Meanwhile, they found that the emission wavelength of Ag2S QDs did not shift to longer wavelengths with increasing particle size when the size was over 5.4 nm.117 The reason was still not clear. Additionally, they replaced the DDT ligands with dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) by ligand exchange, followed by PEGylation to endow the Ag2S QDs outstanding biocompatibility, which was proven by long-term in vivo biodistribution and toxicity evaluation in mice.118 Pan et al.119 also reported emission-tunable Ag2S QDs spanning 690 to 1227 nm using a two-step seed-mediated growth method. In their synthesis, small Ag2S seeds were firstly prepared by rapid injection of (TMS)2S into a mixture of silver acetate (AgAc), myristic acid (MA), 1-octylamine (OTA), and ODE at a given temperature. In the second step, seed-mediated growth, the Ag precursor (AgNO3 and OTA dissolved in toluene) and S precursor (sulfur dissolved in toluene) were dropwise added into Ag2S seeds dispersion until they grow to the desired size. Robinson et al.120 developed a large-scale synthetic method for producing monodisperse Ag2S QDs by simply mixing AgCl and (NH4)2S in OLA solution at RT. However, this technique is limited to preparing small size Ag2S QDs with an emission peak around 940 nm due to the low reaction temperature. In order to improving the QY of Ag2S QDs, Chen et al.121 coated a robust ZnS shell on the Ag2S QDs by dropwise adding Zn(Ac)2 dissolved in OLA. As a result, the emission intensity of Ag2S QDs was significantly enhanced, with the QY increased from 0.02% to 3.8%.
3. NIR I-to-NIR II/III rare earth (RE) doped NPs (RENPs)
As a new generation of NIR I-to-NIR II/III probes, RENPs with advantages of low photobleaching, no photoblinking, narrow emission band widths and low toxicity have raised increasing interest for bio-applications. Basically, RENPs consist of an inorganic host matrix and doped RE ions acting as an activator or a sensitizer (Fig. 3a).122 The ideal inorganic host matrix needs to be optically transparent and has low lattice phonon energy to suppress the non-radiative losses, thus enhancing the radiative transitions. The host matrix based on fluoride materials with low phonon energy, such as LaF3,38 SrF2,12 NaGdF4,123 NaYF4,47 and LiYF4,124 which enables bright emissions through minimization of non-radiative losses has been reported for preparing NIR I-to-NIR II/III probes. Recently, Jaque et al.125 comparatively analyzed the role of host in seven NIR-emitting Nd-doped NPs including LaF3:Nd3+, SrF2:Nd3+, NaGdF4:Nd3+, NaYF4:Nd3+, KYF4:Nd3+, GdVO4:Nd3+ and Nd:YAG. The results revealed the significant variations of the fluorescence properties from system to system, which highlighted the importance of choosing appropriate host materials for specific bio-applications. For example, GdVO4:Nd3+ NPs were identified as an optimum NIR probe for in vivo imaging in the NIR I window since they presented high 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 emission at around 890 nm; while NaYF4:Nd3+ NPs showed the highest 4F3/2 → 4I13/2 (1330 nm) branching ratio which are suitable for autofluorescence-free imaging in the NIR II window.125 So the host materials may interact with the RE fluorescent center in such a manner that facilitates the desired emission while avoiding other emissions not of interest. On the other hand, the rational choice of different RE ions as sensitizers or activators is another important prerequisite for realizing efficient NIR II/III emissions. Fig. 3b provides an overview of the NIR absorption and emission of those RE ions that have been identified as most relevant for the NIR II/III emission up to now.126 It can be seen that Nd3+, Yb3+ and Er3+ demonstrated large absorption cross-sections in the NIR I region, which enables them to act as efficient sensitizers. Meanwhile, several RE ions including Nd3+, Ho3+, Pr3+, Tm3+ and Er3+ featuring ladder-like energy levels are extensively studied as activators emitting in the NIR II/III windows.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs composed of a crystalline host and RE dopant ions embedded in the host lattice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Absorption spectra of Nd3+, Yb3+, and Er3+ in NIR I and NIR II region (solid line) and NIR II emission spectra from Nd3+, Ho3+, Pr3+, Tm3+, and Er3+ (solid line with color shade). Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) The UC emission intensities of the Nd-sensitized sample (violet line, 16 mg mL−1, excited by a 4 W cm−2, 800 nm diode laser) and the Yb-sensitized sample (orange line, 25 mg mL−1, excited by a 4 W cm−2, 980 nm diode laser) as a function of penetration depth in water. The concentrations of the Nd-sensitized sample and the Yb-sensitized sample were adjusted to gain the same initial emission intensity. (d) Temperature-distribution image recorded after 7 min irradiation (Sp1: 980 nm; Sp2: 800 nm; 20 W cm−2). Inset: Time-resolved temperature curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Proposed energy transfer mechanisms for emissions in the NIR II region. (e) Intrinsic emissions from Nd3+ and Er3+, (f) Nd3+–Yb3+–RE3+ system (RE = Ho3+, Pr3+, Tm3+, or Er3+). (g) Schematic illustration of the main strategies for enhancing NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs. 
In order to achieve NIR-to-NIR emission, traditional RENPs based on the upconverting mechanism were co-doped with Yb3+–Tm3+ or Yb3+–Er3+ pairs (red dashed rectangle in Fig. 3f). In both cases, Yb3+ acts as the sensitizer, which absorbs 980 nm light (2F7/2 → 2F5/2) and then transfers the energy to Tm3+ or Er3+, resulting in emissions of 802 nm (Tm3+: 3H4 → 3H6), 670 nm (Er3+: 4F9/2 → 4I15/2) and 808 nm (Er3+: 4I9/2 → 4I15/2) that fall into the NIR I window, as denoted by green arrows in Fig. 3f. This is a typical anti-Stokes upconversion (UC) process, which involves the higher energy photon emission after the absorption of two or more lower energy photons. Since the light with wavelengths over 1000 nm exhibits deeper penetration than that in the NIR I window, ongoing researches are focused on the RENPs that emit in the NIR II/III windows. The generation of NIR II/III light can also be accomplished by the above mentioned Yb3+–Tm3+ or Yb3+–Er3+ pairs via the downshifting (DS) process, where emitted photons have lower energy than absorbed ones.127,128 Emissions at longer wavelengths of 1475 nm (Tm3+: 3H4 → 3F4) or 1525 nm (Er3+: 4I13/2 → 4I15/2) in the NIR II/III windows, as denoted by black arrows in Fig. 3f, were observed under an excitation of 980 nm. The DS fluorescence can also be achieved by the Yb3+–Ho3+ and Yb3+–Pr3+ pairs for the emissions at 1155 nm (Ho3+: 5I6 → 5I8) and 1289 nm (Pr3+: 1G4 → 3H5) in the NIR II window (black arrows in Fig. 3f). The DS process has been proven to be highly beneficial compared with UC due to the advantage of a higher conversion efficiency.129 Alivisatos et al.127 reported that the QY of NIR-to-NIR DS process can be modulated to as high as 18% for sub-30 nm NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ NPs with inert NaLuF4 shells, which is unachievable by UC.
As stated above, Yb3+ with the excellent absorption cross-section at 980 nm is most commonly used to sensitize RENPs. In the race for the development of NIR-to-NIR probes, Nd3+ is gaining increasing attention as a sensitizer due to its larger absorption cross-section at ∼800 nm and higher QY compared with Yb3+. The previous study has proved that the energy attenuation of an 800 nm laser was 60% weaker than that of a 980 nm laser passing through water (Fig. 3c), suggesting the higher penetration ability of the 800 nm laser for deep-tissue imaging.43,130 In addition, it is known that the water absorption of 980 nm light is relatively high, which leads to the overheating effect on tissues (Fig. 3d).130 By replacing the 980 nm laser with 800 nm one, the potential photodamage to the tissue can be minimized. Therefore, the use of the 800 nm instead of 980 nm laser is highly advantageous for NIR I-to-NIR II/III fluorescent probes. Generally, NIR I-to-NIR II/III can be realized by two DS mechanisms under the 800 nm laser excitation: (i) intrinsic NIR II emissions at 1060 nm (4F3 → 4I11/2) and 1330 nm (4F3 → 4I13/2) from single doped Nd3+ (Fig. 3e) or NIR III emission at 1525 nm (Er3+: 4I13/2 → 4I15/2) from single doped Er3+ (Fig. 3e) after the absorption of 800 nm light. However, the low absorption coefficient of Er3+ at 800 nm results in poor NIR II emission efficiency;131 (ii) Nd3+ as sensitizer to transfer absorbed energy to bridged Yb3+ and further downshift to RE activators (RE = Ho3+, Pr3+, Tm3+ or Er3+) as mentioned in Yb3+–RE pairs above to emit in the NIR II/III windows (Fig. 3f).
The fluorescence properties of NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs, such as excitation/emission wavelength, lifetime and QY, depend not only on the host matrix and doped sensitizer-activator pairs, but also on their morphology, size, crystallinity and lattice defects that are directly related to synthetic protocols. Choosing appropriate and efficient synthetic methods is crucial to obtain RENPs with properties matching the need for specific bio-applications. To date, there are a variety of chemical synthetic approaches, including thermal decomposition,132,133 coprecipitation,50,134 hydro(solvo)-thermal synthesis12,47,135 for NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs. As the most effective method to synthesize high-quality NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs, thermal decomposition method involves the preparation of RE-trifluoroacetate precursor and subsequent decomposition of the precursor in a mixed organic solvent with a high boiling point, such as OA or OLA in ODE. But the synthetic procedure is complicated and time-consuming. As such, the coprecipitation method was developed, which includes the dissolving of RE chloride or acetate in the mixture of OA and ODE, followed by reaction with NaOH and NH4F as sodium and fluoride sources at an elevated temperature. Compared with the coprecipitation method, hydro(solvo)-thermal synthesis is another facile, low-cost and user-friendly method to prepare NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs in a Teflon-lined autoclave with reaction temperature above the boiling point of the solvent. Since the synthetic method for NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs is quite similar to that of UCNPs, except for the replacement of doped RE ions, readers may refer to those recently published review papers on the synthesis of UCNPs for detailed information.136,137
Despite significant progress on the synthesis of NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs in the past decade, they still suffer from low QY, largely due to surface defects and the relatively low extinction coefficients of RE dopants. To this end, four main strategies (Fig. 3g) have been adopted to enhance the NIR II/III emission in recent years: (i) host lattice manipulation. The crystal field of photonic nanocrystals is altered to be partially asymmetrical by introducing various doping ions to disturb the coordination environment in the lattice. The asymmetrical structure change further promotes the intermixing of the 4f energy levels of RE ions with high electronic configuration, thereby increasing the fluorescence efficiency. For example, the doping of Li+,138 Ce3+,138 and Y3+,139 has validated the enhancement of the NIR II emission of Nd3+ due to the induced crystal field distortion; (ii) surface passivation. This strategy involves the epitaxial growth of an inert shell on the RENPs. The shell layer can minimize the non-radiative transition induced by lattice defects on the surface of the core NP and simultaneously create spatial isolation of the core NP from surrounding environment. For example, Prasad et al.123 reported that the NIR fluorescence of NaGdF4:Nd3+ increased 1.82 times due to the better passivation of Nd3+ on the surface of the core after growing a ∼2 nm thick NaGdF4 shell. The NIR II fluorescence enhancement was also found in LaF3:Nd3+/LaF3,140 LiLuF4:Nd3+/LiLuF4,37 α-NaYF4:Nd3+/α-NaYF4141 and β-NaYF4:Nd3+/NaYF441 core/shell nanostructures due to the reduction of non-radiative loss that was confirmed by the increased lifetime in both cases. Apart from the inert shell, an active shell has also been explored for enhancing the NIR II/III emission. The active shell incorporated with a reasonable concentration of RE not only plays the same role as an inert shell, but also facilitates the energy transfer from light source to the core, thus leading to a higher QY. But the active layer meanwhile raises the issue of the detrimental quenching effect by the energy back transfer from the activators to the 4IJ of Nd3+sensitizers. To suppress the deleterious cross relaxation process and harvest the maximum of 800 nm light, generally, a transition shell was simultaneously introduced with the active shell to separate the activators from Nd3+ ions in a multi-shell nanostructure. For instance, Zhang et al.43 fabricated a β-NaGdF4/Na(Gd,Yb)F4:Er3+/NaYF4:Yb3+/NaNdF4:Yb3+ multi-shell NPs as an efficient 800 nm (NIR I) to 1525 nm (NIR III) probe for in vivo bioimaging. In this case, the optimum composition of the outer active shell resulted in more efficient 1525 nm emission than that with an inert shell. Up to now, this strategy has been widely used for designing various NIR II/III RENPs, such as NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+,Nd3+@NaGdF4:Nd3+,142 NaNdF4@NaYF4@1%Nd3+:NaYF4,135 NaYF4:Yb3+/X3+@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Nd3+ (X = null, Er, Ho, Tm, or Pr),134 NaYF4:20%Yb3+,2%Er3+/NaYF4:10%Yb3+,10%Nd3+/NaYF4:20%Nd3+;52 (iii) surface-plasmon coupling. Surface plasmons propagated along the metallic surface create a strong localized electromagnetic field. So plasmonic metal nanostructures can serve as effective optic nano-antennas to enhance the absorption of the sensitizer of coupled RENPs for boosting the efficiency of the photon conversion process.143 Several groups have coupled Au- or Ag-containing plasmonic nanostructures with UCNPs and achieved plasmonic promoted UC.144–146 For instance, Song et al.147 directly deposited Nd3+ doped NPs on the plasmonic Au film. The results demonstrated the enhancement of DS at 1060 nm due to the enhanced excitation field of the Au film; and (iv) dye sensitization. The typically used Nd3+ sensitizer for NIR II/III RENPs has an absorption band at 800 nm with a relatively narrower absorption cross-section compared with those of organic dye molecules, which significantly decreases the NIR emission efficiency. In order to address this issue, Prasad et al.134 introduced a broadband organic dye, ICG, whose emission spectrum has a significant overlap with the absorption of Nd3+, onto the surface of NaYF4:Yb3+/X3+@NaYbF4@NaYF4:Nd3+ (X = null, Er, Ho, Tm, or Pr) NPs. In this organic–inorganic hybrid system, ICG not only increases the NIR II emission of RENPs by ∼4 times, but also provides a tunable excitation wavelength from 700 to 860 nm that facilitates the use of RENPs for deep tissue imaging in the NIR II window.
Prior to bio-applications of RENPs, surface modification is a crucial step for enhancing their biocompatibility, chemical stability and dispersibility in physiological conditions. Recently, various strategies for surface modification of UCNPs, e.g. silica coating, ligand exchange, ligand oxidation and ligand interaction, have been summarized in comprehensive review papers by, for instance, Lim et al.149 and Shi et al.150 Due to the similarity of RENPs with UNCPs aforementioned, we will only underline the most recent achievements on RENPs as follows. For example, in a study by Li et al.,124 a hydrophilic ethylenediaminetetra(methylene phosphonicacid) (EDTMP) was grafted on the surface of LiYF4:Nd3+ NPs to render them water dispersible and lessen the cytotoxicity, as well as preserve their fluorescence QY. Zhang et al.39 reported Nd3+ doped NPs modified with phosphopeptides. It was found that the phosphorylation of specific side serine of the arginine–glycine–aspartic acid significantly increased the affinity to Gd atoms of the NPs. The surface modification allows the NPs to target NIR II in vivo imaging in tumor-bearing mice with reduced toxicity. Li et al.151 reported NaYF4:Nd3+@NaLuF4 coated with polydopamine by a reverse microemulsion method. The polydopamine not only endows the RENPs with excellent colloidal stability and biocompatibility, but also maximizes their photothermal conversion efficiency (PCE) with modulated shell thickness from ∼1.5 to ∼18 nm.
4. Biomedical applications
Nowadays, fluorescent probes are playing a more and more important role in biomedical research and clinical practice. The above mentioned NIR I-to-NIR II/III inorganic fluorescent probes possess unique optical properties making them particularly suitable for bio-applications. In this section, we will give a brief introduction of recent research progress on the utilization of 800 nm-excited, NIR I-to-NIR II/III PbS, Ag2S-based QDs and RENPs for fluorescence imaging, lifetime-based multiplexed imaging and PTT.
4.1 Fluorescence imaging
Fluorescence imaging, which uses fluorescent probes as labels, is an important tool for visualizing the cellular, tissue or organ structures and monitoring the internal dynamic processes in living organisms before, during and after medical treatment. During the last decade, PbS QDs have attracted increasing attention as fluorescent probes due to their intriguing NIR emission properties. For example, our group has prepared water-dispersible PbS/CdS/ZnS core/shell/shell QDs emitting in NIR I/II/III through a rapid microwave-assisted synthetic method.22,23 All these QDs exhibited excellent colloidal stability and photostability as well as negligible toxicity arising from the growth of an outer robust ZnS shell and surface functionalization with MPA ligands. The outstanding NIR fluorescence of PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs allowed us to acquire bright imaging with QDs concentration one order of magnitude lower than that of RENPs as probes. Our results demonstrated that the PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs with an emission wavelength at 1270 nm in the NIR II window provided the largest tissue penetration property compared with their counterpart operating in the NIR I and III windows. By using NIR II PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs as fluorescent probes (Fig. 4a), the QD biodistribution could be observed and it was found that they were mainly accumulated in the liver and lungs after 1 min intravenous injection. In addition, after 25 days postinjection, the organ analysis results showed that no QDs were found any more, which revealed the complete elimination of the QDs and further supported the minimal noticeable toxicity obtained from in vitro MTT assay. Finally, we explored their potential use as deeply penetrating fluorescent nanothermometers with high sensitivity. Similarly, Chen et al.25 reported ribonuclease-A encapsulated PbS QDs which emit in the NIR II window. The QDs enabled bright in vivo fluorescence imaging with excellent contrast at a low threshold dosage of QDs (∼1 μg per mouse). Later, they applied PbS QDs for real-time flap perfusion assessment of blood flow anomalies in a rat model.26 The high stability and deep-tissue penetration property of PbS QDs facilitated the more accurate evaluation of flap perfusion compared with clinically used ICG. In order to explore more functions of fluorescence imaging by PbS QDs, Qian et al.27 extended the use of PbS/CdS QDs in the NIR II window for noninvasive real-time fluorescence microscopic imaging of mouse brain. The 3D mouse brain imaging with imaging depth of 950 μm could clearly reveal the major blood vessels and small capillaries in the pia mater, which hold great potentials for high-contrast and deep tissue brain angiography to diagnose cerebrovascular diseases. Moreover, the NIR II fluorescence imaging of gastrointestinal tract in mice by PbS/CdS QDs was also realized at a rather low dosage.27 Hao et al.28 exhibited a novel in vivo and in situ real-time imaging of peripheral nerves system based on NIR II emitting PbS QDs functionalized with motor neuron-derived protein (Agrin). Due to the potential binding sites on Agrin, the QDs could directly recognize peripheral nerves for targeted fluorescence imaging in a nude mouse model. The above work regarding PbS-based QDs mainly focused on NIR I/II windows.
 Fig. 4  (a) Optical (left), fluorescence (center), and merged (right) in vivo images of a mouse taken 1 min after injection of the QD solution in the bloodstream. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) PCA for differentiation of arterial and venous components. (c) A zoomed in image of a subregion in the hind limb. (d) High-magnification (10× objective), wide-field fluorescence imaging (∼1600 nm emission, 808 nm excitation) of a xenograft MC38 tumor on a mouse after tail vein intravenous (i.v.) injection of PEG-CSQDs. (Scale bar: 1 mm.) (e–h) Wide-field fluorescence imaging (1× objective) at different time points after injection. (Scale bar: 10 mm.) (i) A schematic drawing illustrating in vivo confocal imaging of the mouse through the skin. (j–m) In vivo layer-by-layer fluorescence confocal imaging of tumor vessels over an area (2500 × 2500 μm) after an i.v. injection of PEG-CSQDs; z = 0 is defined as the position when NIR III signal started to show up in tumor. (Scale bar: 500 μm) Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. (n) TEM images of Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Nd3+. (o) Ex vivo imaging of chicken breast samples of different thickness (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 mm) under excitation of the 806 nm laser with a series of optical long-pass filters (830, 980, and 1200 nm) in the emission path. (p) In vivo T2-weighted transversal cross-section MR images of nude mouse bearing a tumor acquired at pre-injection and 30 min intratumoral post-injection of Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Nd3+ NPs at 1.5 mg kg−1. The position of the tumor is marked by red dash circles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Recently, Dai et al.29 explored core/shell PbS/CdS QDs emitting at ∼1600 nm with QY of 2.2–22% in fluorescence imaging in the NIR III window. The real-time fast imaging of the QDs (Fig. 4b and c) could enable the hemodynamic tracking of blood flow in individual vessels and resolve the closely adjacent femoral artery and vein inside the hind limb. Meanwhile, the fluorescence tumor imaging (Fig. 4d–h) demonstrated that the QDs gradually leaked from the vessels and accumulated to brightly lighten up the whole tumors. Finally, in order to obtain high-resolution imaging of tumor blood vessel information, e.g. vessel density, lengths, morphology and branching ratios, they performed 3D confocal imaging of tumor (Fig. 4i–m). The confocal imaging clearly showed the tumor vasculatures from the surface to the interior (z from 0 to 720 μm) and the internal sparse vessels indicated the cell necrosis inside the tumor. So the PbS/CdS QDs could be potentially used for deep-tissue tumor detection in the NIR III window. Since single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) emitting in the NIR II window have been reported to provide higher spatial resolution in vasculature imaging than conventional microscopic CT (μCT),152 in Dai's another work,30 the PbS/CdS QDs were systematically compared with SWNTs. The results showed that the QDs had better fluorescence imaging clarity and resolution than SWNTs. Also, the QDs could achieve higher spatial resolution in fluorescence imaging of murine hindlimb vasculature than μCT. Consequently, the QDs were successfully applied in mice for the detection of vascular perfusion recovery in peripheral arterial disease.
The potential toxicity of Pb or Cd-based QDs has been a continuous concern for fluorescence imaging. Ag2S QDs, which are considered much safer than PbS-based QDs, have become a research focus of NIR fluorescence imaging. For example, Jaque et al.31 reported angiotensin II peptide (ATII)-functionalized Ag2S QDs in the NIR II window for accurate fluorescence imaging of damaged cardiovascular tissue in vivo. The fluorescence imaging demonstrated that the ATII-Ag2S QDs could effectively bind to the damaged tissue due to their interaction with the upregulated angiotensin II receptor type I (AT1R). As a consequence, they were capable of clearly identifying the occluded artery and evaluating the damage level induced in the myocardium due to ischemia events with different durations. The ATII-Ag2S QDs appear to be very promising towards accurate diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases. Recently, stem cell therapeutics are extensively investigated as a potentially effective treatment method for cardiac repair,153 bone regeneration154 and hepatic pathologies.155 However, after transplantation into live animal models, the migration behavior, viability and functionality of stem cells cannot be easily monitored due to the complex microenvironment.32 Thus, the development of fluorescent probes for tracking transplanted stem cells is required for eventually realizing successful therapeutics. Wang et al.32 reported Tat peptide-conjugated Ag2S QDs in the NIR II window for dynamically tracking human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in vivo. The fluorescence imaging revealed that the heparin-facilitated translocation of hMSCs from lung to liver could be monitored up to 14 days and the accumulation of hMSCs in liver contributed to the therapy of liver failure. Subsequently, they developed a dual-labeling strategy to locate and quantify all the transplanted mouse MSCs (mMSCs) based on NIR II fluorescence of Ag2S QDs and endogenous red bioluminescence (BLI) of red-emitting luciferase (RfLuc).33 The Ag2S QDs enabled the observation of the distribution of all mMSCs in vivo while the BLI could only quantify the living mMSCs that solely expressed RfLuc after transplantation. Thus, the whole-body distribution and survival or proliferation of living mMSCs after intravenous transplantation could be directly visualized with the use of the Ag2S QDs, which was difficult to achieve by BLI alone or through MR imaging. Apart from fluorescence imaging, Wang et al.34 engineered multifunctional Ag2S QDs-based nanoplatform for chemotherapy and osteolysis inhibition in an orthotopic bone tumor model. The nanoplatform consisted of Ag2S QDs, antitumor drug doxorubicin (DOX) and clinical bisphosphonate drug alendronate (Ald) for preventing osteolysis and alleviating pain. Due to the deep-tissue penetration property of Ag2S QDs in the NIR window, the bone metastasis and therapeutic effect of Ag2S QDs-based nanoplatform were clearly visualized in situ, which is favorable for the treatment of bone-associated diseases.
In addition to PbS and Ag2S-based QDs, NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs have also been extensively investigated in recent years. As we mentioned above, the NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs are mainly based on single Nd3+ or Nd3+-sensitized DS systems. The first demonstration of in vivo NIR I-to-NIR II fluorescence imaging through using NdF3/SiO2 NPs was reported by Wang et al.156 in 2008. Their animal studies revealed that the detection depth could reach 1 cm with a small dose of NdF3/SiO2 NPs. Subsequently, Prasad et al.123 prepared core/shell structured NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaGdF4 NPs. Due to the better surface passivation from the inert shell, the absolute QY of NIR I-to-NIR II fluorescence could reach as high as 40% in organic solvent and half of the QY could be preserved even after transfer into aqueous phase. Their excellent fluorescent property enabled bright NIR I-to-NIR II fluorescence imaging both in vitro and in vivo. Similarly, Yan et al.37 reported NIR I-to-NIR II LiLuF4:Nd/LiLuF4 RENPs with an absolute QY as high as 32%. With the high intensity emission in the NIR II window, a 21-day long-term distribution of the RENPs in mouse was clearly tracked. The final results showed that the RENPs were excreted through the intestines. It is worth mentioning that in this case the fluorescence imaging was based on the sum of the two emission transitions of Nd3+: 1060 nm (4F3 → 4I11/2) and 1330 nm (4F3 → 4I13/2). Jaque et al.38 synthesized LaF3:Nd3+ NPs and systematically compared each emission transition in terms of intensity, penetration depth and subtissue optical dispersion by fluorescence imaging. The results indicated that the emission transition of 1060 nm (4F3 → 4I11/2) was superior to that of 1330 nm (4F3 → 4I13/2) for bioimaging. Therefore, the 1060 nm from emission transition of Nd3+ in NIR II has been commonly applied for bioimaging due to the higher emission efficiency. By utilizing the emission peak at 1060 nm, Zhang et al.39 presented peptides-modified Nd3+-doped RENPs for highly sensitive NIR I-to-NIR II tumor targeted imaging. Afterwards, they modified Nd3+-doped RENPs with DNA and targeting peptides for metastatic ovarian cancer in another work.40 Due to the stable tumor retention period resulting from the specific targeting, they applied RENPs for the precise image-guided resection surgery of ovarian tumor. Recently, Cheng et al.41 found that DSPE-mPEG coated NaYF4:Nd3+/NaYF4 NPs had inherent affinity to the bone even without any targeting ligands, which renders them a radiation-free imaging alternative to X-ray/CT for skeletal-related disease diagnosis. However, a big concern for the utilization of 1060 nm emission of aforementioned single Nd3+-doped RENPs is tissue autofluorescence, which limits the resolution of fluorescence imaging. To eliminate the endogenous tissue autofluorescence, two strategies have been explored for increasing the signal-to-noise ratio of fluorescence imaging: (i) a time-gated imaging by introducing longer lifetime (in the μs–ms range) probe with respect to short-lived endogenous fluorophores (in the ps–ns range) from the tissues.157 Jaque et al.42 reported a time-gated animal imaging system by integrating a pulse trigger delayer between the excitation laser and NIR camera. When the NaGdF4:Nd3+ NPs with long lifetimes of ∼100 μs were administrated into mouse, the autofluorescence-free imaging was acquired with the operation of time delays as short as 1 μs; and (ii) red shifting the emission wavelength through involving other RE3+ activators. As we discussed above, the NIR III region benefits from suppressed light scattering and low water absorption and is thus advantageous for fluorescence imaging with deep-tissue penetration property and high contrast. However, the aforementioned probes based on single Nd3+ doped RENPs DS systems cannot fulfill this requirement; other activators emitting at the longer wavelength are required. Zhang et al.43 reported Nd3+ and Er3+ co-doped RENPs. The longer emission at 1525 nm (Er3+: 4I13/2 → 4I15/2) allowed obtaining of higher fluorescence signal in stomach of nude mice than that of 1060 nm (Nd3+: 4F3 → 4I11/2).
Apart from the single-modal NIR fluorescence imaging, multimodal imaging system based on NIR probes has gradually gained research interest in recent years. Multimodal imaging integrates at least one of other biomedical imaging modalities, such as MR imaging, CT, PET and photoacoustic imaging (PA), with fluorescence imaging into one nanoplatform. The integrated nanoplatform is designed to circumvent the limitations of each single modality, thus allowing improved diagnostic accuracy and efficiency. Among various multimodal imaging probes, the dual-mode MR/fluorescence imaging has been widely studied. RENPs based on paramagnetic RE3+, such as Gd3+,158 Ho3+,159 and Dy3+,160 have been proven as efficient contrast agents for MR imaging modality. Therefore, the doping of these paramagnetic RE3+ into NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs can achieve dual-mode MR/NIR I-to-NIR II fluorescence imaging. For example, Mimun et al.44 demonstrated the utilization of GdF3:Nd3+ NPs in NIR fluorescence imaging and T1-weighted contrast agents for MR imaging. Lin et al.45 reported paramagnetic NaHoF4:Nd3+ nanoplates that were successfully applied for the NIR fluorescence/T2-weighted MR bimodal imaging of nude mice. Zhou et al.46 presented multifunctional NaDyF4 doped with different amount of Nd3+ for NIR II and T2-weighted imaging. In addition to the above mentioned dual-mode MR/fluorescence imaging from RENPs themselves, the MR imaging modality can be also realized by introducing other magnetic or superparamagnetic components. For example, our group developed a biocompatible core/shell/shell sandwich structured Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Nd3+ nanoplatform (Fig. 4n).47 This nanoplatform exhibited excellent NIR I-to-NIR II fluorescent properties, which was confirmed by the detected fluorescent signal through a tissue as thick as 13 mm (Fig. 4o). On the other hand, the superparamagnetic property resulting from the Fe3O4 core made it suitable for T2-weighted MR imaging (Fig. 4p). Therefore, this nanoplatform can potentially serve as a dual-mode MR/NIR I-to-NIR II fluorescent probe for cancer diagnosis. By incorporating a clinically used Gd-based MR imaging contrast agent (Gd-DOTA), Wang et al.36 prepared a dual-mode Gd–DOTA–Ag2S nanoprobe, which could clearly detect the brain tumor (U87MG) in a mouse through T1-weighted MR imaging, followed by the intraoperative resection of tumor under the guidance of deep-tissue penetrated NIR II fluorescence imaging. Apart from dual-mode MR/fluorescence imaging, Lu3+ and Ho3+ possessing high X-ray absorption coefficients endow Lu3+ and Ho3+ doped RENPs with high contrast performance for CT. For instance, Becerro et al.48 reported Nd3+-doped Ba0.3Lu0.7F2.7 NPs, which can be used for bimodal CT and fluorescence imaging.
To date, most of the work regarding NIR fluorescence imaging consists in the NIR I and NIR II windows. Apparently, the fluorescence imaging could be further improved if the emission of more nanoprobes can be extended into the NIR III window. Meanwhile, switching the currently used 800 nm laser to a longer wavelength laser in the NIR II window, such as a 1060 nm laser, would be beneficial for pushing the limit of fluorescence imaging in clarity and penetration depth.161 Clearly, constructing multimodal imaging probes is another promising strategy to improve diagnostic accuracy and efficiency in the future.
4.2 Lifetime-based multiplexed imaging
Unlike multimodal imaging integrating two or more imaging modalities into one imaging session, multiplexed imaging acquires multiple signals of the same kind during the detection. It facilitates the establishment of accurate dosimetry and largely enhances the diagnostic sensitivity. To date, the research of fluorescence imaging based on NIR nanoprobes was primarily focused on longer wavelengths to improve fluorescence signal with deeper-tissue penetration property and higher contrast. Multiplexed fluorescence imaging using two or more different-color emission probes to simultaneously test different analytes has been achieved in vivo.162 However, it remains challenging to discriminate the complex tissue structure from deep tissue imaging due to the inhomogeneous signal attenuation in biological matter. Very recently, the use of multiplexed imaging probes in the time domain (lifetime-based multiplexed imaging), instead of steady-state spectral domain, has been successfully implemented to address the above issue in vivo.
Jaque et al.49 reported NaYF4:Yb,Nd/CaF2 core/shell NPs with tunable fluorescence lifetime for in vivo multiplexed imaging in the NIR II window (Fig. 5a–c). The setup (Fig. 5a) includes an electronic delay circuit to adapt the elapsed time between the pulsed laser and NIR InGaAs camera in the time range of 10 μs–3 ms, which is similar to the time-gated fluorescence imaging setup for removing the autofluorescence mentioned above. However, this setup has a custom-made time domain analysis software to resolve a series of fluorescence images obtained with different time delays, thus providing lifetime imaging. The lifetime of NaYF4:Yb,Nd/CaF2 NPs can be turned in the range of 1.4–0.2 ms through the variation of doped Nd3+ concentration. In order to acquire multiplexed imaging in vivo, NaYF4:Yb,Nd/CaF2 NPs with two different lifetimes were administrated into mice through oral administration and intravenous injection, respectively. The fluorescence lifetime image (Fig. 5c) shows the obviously different biodistribution of NPs after oral and intravenous administration. The NPs with longer lifetime by intravenous injection accumulated at the liver in the upper part of the abdomen while the oral-administrated NPs presenting shorter lifetime gathered in a small area, the location and shape of which indicated it was the stomach. By contrast, the steady-state fluorescence imaging (Fig. 5b) only exhibited the signal generated from the abdomen of the mouse, but failed to locate the exact position of NPs in different organs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental set up used for the acquisition of in vivo lifetime images: image acquisition is synchronized with the excitation pulse. Analysis of fluorescence images acquired with different time delays in respect to laser pulse leads to lifetime images that allows for in vivo multiplexing in the time domain. The fluorescence images obtained for different time delays as well as the lifetime image included as an example correspond to real measurements performed on a mouse with two subcutaneous injections of NaYF4:Yb,Nd@CaF2 NPs with neodymium contents of x = 0.3 and x = 0.5 with fluorescence lifetimes of τ1 = 0.7 ms and τ2 = 0.4 ms, respectively. In vivo multiplexed lifetime imaging: (b) intensity-based infrared image of a mouse after oral and intravenous injection of NaY0.9−xYb0.1NdxF4@CaF2 NPs with a Nd3+ content of x = 0.3 and 0.2, respectively. (c) Lifetime-based image of same mouse as in (b). The different location of the two types of NPs is evidenced. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Pseudocolour-mapped lifetime images of the Er nanoparticles contained in centrifuge tubes acquired by the time-resolved NIR II imaging system. All nanoparticles were dispersed in cyclohexane at ∼0.46 mM molar concentration. Numbers accompanying each sample indicate mean ± coefficient of variation (CV) of the measured luminescence lifetime, taken from pixels corresponding to each tube in the lifetime images. (e) Lifetime-resolved images for the MCF-7 and BT-474 tumors are decomposed into the three lifetime channels, represented by the red, green and blue monochromatic image sets. Biomarker expression patterns are calculated by integrating the intensities of each components, normalized by the total intensity over the entire tumor area. In vitro western blot (f) and ex vivo immunohistochemistry assay (g) results and calculated biomarker expression patterns of the two tumor subtypes IVM: in vivo multiplexing; WB: western blot; IHC: immunohistochemistry. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
The above multiplexed imaging was achieved in the NIR II window. Zhang et al.50 reported multiplexed imaging based on β-phase NaGdF4@NaGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+@NaNdF4:Yb3+ RENPs with emission centered at 1525 nm (Er3+: 4I13/2 → 4I15/2) in the NIR III window through efficient Nd3+–Yb3+–Er3+ energy transfer. The sophistically engineered RENPs consist of an inert core, an activation layer co-doped with Yb3+ and Er3+, an energy relay layer doped with Yb3+ only, and an outer absorption layer co-doped with Nd3+ and Yb3+. Hence, the lifetime of the RENPs can be turned through two strategies: (i) the longer lifetime could be obtained by increasing the thickness of the energy relay layer to prolong the average process from absorption to emission; (ii) at a certain thickness of energy relay layer, the shorter lifetime could be generated by increasing the Er3+ concentration due to the acceleration of the conversion of stored energy to fluorescence emission. By tuning the above parameters, the lifetime of the RENPs could be varied in a wide range from 0.0445 to 7.21 ms (Fig. 5d). Subsequently, they applied the multiplexed imaging technique based on the RENPs for the diagnosis of breast cancer cells of MCF-7 and BT-474 in vivo. Before intravenous injection of RENPs, three RENPs with different lifetimes were conjugated with primary antibodies against three routinely examined biomarkers: oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), for the above two types of cancer cells. The multiplexed imaging (Fig. 5e) by simultaneously resolving three lifetime components enabled the quantification of biomarker expression of the tumor subtypes, which is correlated well with the conventional western blot (WB) (Fig. 5f) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) (Fig. 5g) tests for the identification of cancer subtypes. Notably, multiplexed imaging realized simultaneous quantification of multiple biomarkers of tumor so as to minimize the uncertainty caused by the artificial sample processing during WB and IHC tests. In addition, compared with IHC, it can significantly reduce the time, cost and labor for the complicated diagnosis of tumor subtypes.
These results highlight the potential use of lifetime based NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes for multiplexed imaging in vivo for accurate quantitative diagnosis, which cannot be achieved in the spectral domain-based fluorescence imaging. However, there are very few works regarding lifetime based nanoprobes for multiplexed imaging. Clearly, the presented work raised high expectation towards the design of diagnostic tools based on multiplexed imaging with NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes.
4.3 Photothermal therapy
PTT, which relies on generating heat above 43 °C from the NPs-mediated absorption of NIR light to kill cancer cells, has attracted growing interest for cancer treatment. Compared with traditional chemotherapy and radiation therapy, it has many advantages, such as non-invasion, high specificity and low cost. A large number of NPs have been employed as photothermal agents, including gold nanorods, carbon nanomaterials, transition metal sulfides and oxides.163 Recently, NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes, such as Nd3+-doped NPs and PbS QDs, have been reported to produce heat originating from the non-radiative multiphonon relaxation process from Nd3+ emitting energy level or the excited states of semiconductor QDs. Compared with other photothermal NPs, the NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes can not only serve as photothermal agents, but also exhibit additional function, deep-tissue fluorescence imaging, which makes them more promising for bio-applications.
As mentioned before, Nd3+-doped RENPs have a high absorption coefficient at 800 nm resulting from Nd3+ excitation (4I9/2 → 4F5/2), which matches well with an 800 nm excitation laser. So Nd3+-doped RENPs can efficiently absorb 800 nm light and produce heat for PTT. For example, Jaque et al.51 reported ultrasmall stoichiometric NdVO4 NPs synthesized by completely substituting constituent Yb3+ ions by Nd3+ without any deterioration on the structural properties. The 100 mol% concentration of Nd3+ ions would largely increase the absorption cross section of RENPs, which leads to super high PCE of 72.1% at an excitation wavelength of 808 nm. The potential ability of NdVO4 NPs for PTT was demonstrated in an animal model.
Normally, the temperature increase during PTT treatment is monitored by means of thermographic imaging. However, this technique only enables the detection of the surface temperature, which may be different from intratumor temperature. Even under identical irradiation conditions, parameters, such as the distribution and number of fluorescent NPs and different vascular environment of the tumor, will affect the actual temperature at the tumor site. On the other hand, if the temperature inside tumor rises too high, it may cause damage to the surrounding healthy tissues. Therefore, the more accurate tool to monitor the intratumor temperature is highly desired for PTT. It has been demonstrated that the fluorescent NPs, such as PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs22 and Nd3+-doped LaF3,164 provided temperature-dependent emission band.165 By carefully integrating this additional function, the fluorescent NPs can act as both photothermal agents and in situ nanothermometers. For example, in collaboration with Jaque et al.24 we demonstrated temperature self-monitored PTT based on PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs emitting in the NIR II window. In order to obtain real-time temperature feedback during the PTT treatment, the NIR emission of PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs was measured with a NIR camera capable of monitoring the intratumor temperature while the surface temperature was acquired by a thermographic camera simultaneously (Fig. 6a). Both the fluorescence and thermographic images (Fig. 6b–e) indicated the tumor heating induced by the PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs under 808 nm laser excitation. Although both surface and intratumor temperature exhibited the same increasing trend, the actual values were quite different (Fig. 6f). This result revealed that the accuracy of temperature based on the fluorescence variation was much more reliable than that obtained from thermographic imaging. The temperature-controlled PTT treatment was successfully implemented on the mice bearing tumors (Fig. 6g and h), which could avoid the excessive or insufficient damage on tumors induced by inaccurate surface temperature. This work highlighted the importance of real-time intratumor temperature feedback that allowed for a dynamic adjustment of PTT conditions with the maximum efficiency.
 Fig. 6  (a) PTT with real-time temperature feedback. Schematic representation of the treatment procedure: after intratumoral injection of 60 μL of a 5 mg mL−1 dispersion of PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs in PBS, the mice were irradiated with an 808 nm laser at different power densities, while the emission of the QDs was continuously monitored with an InGaAs camera. Additionally, the surface temperature was monitored during the procedure using a thermographic camera. (b–e) Thermographic and fluorescence images of the mouse treated with an 808 nm power density of 1.7 W cm−2 before and at the end of the 4 min long irradiation. The location of the tumor injected with QDs is indicated in the four images with a dotted circle. (f) Intratumoral temperature and skin surface temperature measured during the photothermal treatment of a tumor under irradiation at 1.7 W cm−2 with an 808 nm laser. The data were collected using the temperature-sensitive fluorescence of the QDs and a thermographic camera, respectively. The dashed lines represent guides for the eyes. (g) Representative mouse with one tumor in each flank (dashed circles), anaesthetized and ready for the treatment. (h) Top: Evolution of a total control tumor. Bottom: After the QDs + laser (1.7 W cm−2) treatment, the tumor dramatically disappeared and the wound produced as a consequence (left) was completely healed 22 d later (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (i) Comparison of temperature increases of Nd NPs, PB, and NdNP@PB (0.5 mg mL−1) illuminated by an 808 nm laser (0.6 W cm−2). (j) Tumor growth curves in mice from different groups after various treatments (n = 5 per group). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (k) TEM images of SASNs (NIR II) at different magnifications. (l) Scheme of the setup for the combined magnetothermal and photothermal experiments. (m) Optical image of pork tissue used for ex vivo dual-mode heating and their thermal images at 3 min post-injection of SASNs (NIR II) under three types of modulations (laser at 3.3 W cm−2, AMF at 7 kA m−1, and dual-mode). The injection point of the SASNs (NIR II) is denoted by a red circle. The blue circle indicates a location free of SASNs (NIR II) (non-injection spot), and the laser was focused on that spot without AMF in the control experiment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In general, a high PCE could be obtained with increased Nd3+ concentration as a consequence of enhancement in the absorption cross section.51 However, the heavy Nd3+ doping results in the fluorescence quenching, thus largely reducing the fluorescence QY. In order to increase the PCE, some latest strategies have been proposed while preserving the fluorescence QY. For instance, since polydopamine as the main component of melanin has been proven as an effective PTT agent in vivo, Zhang et al.52 prepared Nd3+-doped RENPs and decorated them with polydopamine to form multifunctional core/satellite nanoplatforms. The polydopamine in these nanoplatforms not only endowed these NPs biocompatibility due to its natural feature, but also helped achieve the higher PCE than bare RENPs. Tan et al.53 fabricated core–shell NaNdF4 nanocomplexes (NdNP@PB) by surface coating of another inorganic photothermal agent, Prussian blue (PB). PB has been approved for clinic use by FDA in various bio-applications owing to its excellent biocompatibility. After coating with PB, the PCE of NdNP@PB was greatly enhanced compared with NdNP or PB alone (Fig. 6i). The results of PTT on tumor-bearing mice revealed that the tumor growth was significantly inhibited after the treatment (Fig. 6j). Similarly, Chen et al.54 also reported PB-coated NaErF4@NaYF4@NaNdF4 core/shell/shell NPs, providing a high PCE of ∼50.5%. Recently, our group developed self-assembled supernanoparticles consisting of superparamagnetic Fe3O4 NPs and fluorescent PbS/CdS QDs in the NIR II window [SASNs (NIR II)] (Fig. 6k).55 SASNs (NIR II) could act as probes for deep-tissue bimodal MR/fluorescence in vivo imaging, while simultaneously possessing the dual capability to serve as both photothermal and magnetothermal agents. When SASNs (NIR II) were exposed to the alternating magnetic field (AMF) and NIR laser for dual-mode (magnetothermal and photothermal) heating (Fig. 6l), the thermal energy transfer efficiency was amplified 7-fold compared to magnetic heating alone. The pork tissue ex vivo experiments (Fig. 6m) demonstrated that the temperature increase in the dual-mode heating was obviously higher than that of magnetothermal or photothermal heating solely. This result suggested that the dual-mode heating was an effective approach to enhance the heating efficiency for in vivo thermal therapy.
In addition to the above strategies for enhancing the PCE, the synergistic chemo-photothermal therapy which integrates chemotherapy and PTT is another important strategy to improve therapeutic efficacy on cancer. Furthermore, the thermal effect generated by PTT can stimulate the drug release in the tumor site, resulting in a light-responsive drug release behavior. For example, our group has reported a magnetic-fluorescent nanoplatform built form large-pore mesoporous silica, in which NIR II PbS/CdS QDs and superparamagnetic Fe3O4 NPs were embedded inside.166 Owing to the unique mesoporous structure, DOX was readily loaded into them. Therefore, our nanoplatform exhibited not only a synergistic effect from the integrated (magnetothermal and photothermal) heating mode, but also NIR/AMF-responsive drug release to achieve a high treatment effect. Similarly, Chen et al.35 developed a multifunctional probe, in which Ag2S QDs with emission at 1120 nm were coated by mesoporous silica and further functionalized with folate (FA)-coupled PEG. The multifunctional probe showed excellent biocompatibility and targeted therapeutic effect due to the high expression of FA receptor on tumors. After loading with DOX, the multifunctional probe presented NIR-responsive drug release, thus achieving synergistic chemo-photothermal therapy. The final in vivo experiments demonstrated that the chemo-photothermal therapy was better than that of chemotherapy/PTT alone.
Although PTT based on NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes exhibits great potential for cancer therapy, the search for novel NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes with high PCE and simultaneously other theranostic modalities could open a new avenue towards cancer treatment. In addition, it is worth noting that the intensity of the 800 nm laser used for PTT should be within the safe range to avoid excessive damage to surrounding tissues, which underlines the self-monitored temperature feature of NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
NIR light in the three biological windows (700–950 nm, 1000–1350 nm and 1550–1870 nm) has clearly proven to be superior to the commonly used UV-vis light in deep-tissue fluorescence imaging, based on the progress of the most recently conducted biomedical researches. Among them, particular focus has been further shifted to the more attractive NIR II and NIR III windows due to the reduced scattering and autofluorescence at longer wavelengths as well as the commercialization of affordable NIR-detection camera when compared to the NIR I window. Here, we review the most recent advances of 800 nm-excited NIR I-to-NIR II/III inorganic fluorescent nanoprobes, including PbS-based QDs, Ag2S QDs and RENPs. Their synthesis strategies, intrinsic optical properties, fluorescence mechanisms, fluorescence efficiency optimization, surface modification as well as bio-applications in recent years on fluorescence imaging, lifetime-base multiplexed imaging and PTT are systematically presented and discussed in this review. We hope this review offers a timely and comprehensive understanding of NIR I-to-NIR II/III inorganic fluorescent nanoprobes and their bio-applications. Although the achievement made by NIR I-to-NIR II/III fluorescent nanoprobes in biomedical research has addressed the limitation of deep-tissue imaging to a certain extent, the actual implementation for practical clinical use still requires continuous efforts. Herein, we would like to highlight some research directions in this highly promising field for future clinic translation:
(i) The first is related to the fluorescence intensity enhancement for the deeper penetration. The reported NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs in some cases exhibit QYs as high as 30–40% in organic phase and the high QY is mainly owing to the characteristic DS mechanism. In order to preserve the QY in the aqueous phase, the RENPs need to undergo several complicated multi-shell constructions before water transfer. Even though half of the QY can be maintained, this strategy unavoidably results in the total particle size more than 50 nm, which is not favorable for some bio-applications. Thus, it is crucial to engineer new synthetic routes to prepare highly efficient NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs with an ultrasmall (sub-10 nm) size. On the other hand, although the reported QYs of Ag2S QDs in the literatures were higher than 10% in water phase, the measurements in most cases were based on the NIR-emitting dyes as references, which may result in inaccurate values. Interestingly, Juárez et al.167 measured the absolute QY of commercial PEG-coated Ag2S QDs by an integrating sphere, which exhibited a value lower than 1%. Thus, the development of new synthetic approaches, from the ligand chemistry to the better surface passivation and further to the post-treatment techniques, is highly demanded for minimizing the non-radiative recombination probabilities of Ag2S QDs. Regarding water soluble PbS-based QDs, they usually present high QY (>20%). But still, there is a large room for the further improvement through the rational strategies, same as Ag2S QDs.
(ii) In order to realize highly specific and sensitive theranostics, the NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes should be conjugated with specific targeted functional groups. In previous researches, visible-emitting nanoprobes were functionalized with targeting substances, e.g., peptide, DNA or antibody, through various chemical and biological linking design. The results revealed that the surface functional groups would effectively help the nanoprobes find the disease tissues or tumor sites by specific recognition. Subsequently, under the excitation source, the accumulation of nanoprobes at desired place would produce fluorescence signal, which could largely avoid the signal interference from other healthy tissues or organs in a non-specific manner, thus improving the diagnostic sensitivity. On the other hand, the accumulation of nanoprobes for the treatment in the focused small area potentially prevented the injury to the surrounding healthy tissues so as to reduce the side effects. Following this trend, it is highly desired to link the targeted functional groups to NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes for realizing the accurate biomedical treatment.
(iii) The toxicity is the significant concern of the NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes. Many studies involving RENPs, PbS-based and Ag2S QDs present no obvious toxicity in vitro by MTT assay. However, more systematic, in vivo, long-term toxicity studies are needed in different animal models before clinic use. The toxicity of the NPs is associated with their physicochemical properties, such as element composition, particle size and surface functionalization, and can vary depending on their actual bioenvironments. To date, our understanding of toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics of nanoprobes at biomolecular and cellular levels and in animals for different time periods is still insufficient. Particularly, the degradation and breakdown of PbS-based QDs, which contain heavy metals (e.g., Pb and Cd), with time may induce the release of heavy metals, resulting in chronic toxicity effects. Therefore, the comprehensive long-term biosafety evaluations of NIR I-to-NIR II/III nanoprobes in vivo, including pharmacokinetics studies, biodistribution of NPs, interaction with the immune system, physical appearance and body weight of mouse, Haemotoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining images of major organs and tumors and excretion pathway from the body should be conducted before any clinic trials.
(iv) Although PTT based on 800 nm-excited NIR I-to NIR II/III nanoprobes has exhibited great potential for cancer treatment, it is not applicable to tumors located in distant organs due to the limit of NIR light tissue penetration. As we mentioned before, the magnetothermal heating treatment could be integrated with PTT to address the drawbacks of PTT and enhance the heating efficiency. In addition to magnetothermal heating, the integration of PTT with other complementary NPs-related therapies, such as chemotherapy, photodynamic therapy and immunotherapy, could offer a high efficiency treatment for cancer.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Fonds de Recherche du Québec – Nature et technologies (FRQNT) is greatly appreciated. F. Y., Q. Z. and S. H. are grateful to the financial support from the Merit Scholarship Program for Foreign Students from the Ministère de I’Éducation, du Loisir et du Sport du Québec.
References
V. Filippou and C. Tsoumpas, Med. Phys., 2018, 45, e740–e760 CrossRef PubMed .
P. N. Leigh, A. Simmons, S. Williams, V. Williams, M. Turner and D. Brooks, Amyotrophic Lateral Scler. Other Mot. Neuron Disord., 2002, 3, S75–S80 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Goetz, E. Breton, P. Choquet, V. Israel-Jost and A. Constantinesco, J. Nucl. Med., 2008, 49, 88–93 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-A. Conchello and J. W. Lichtman, Nat. Methods, 2005, 2, 920–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. E. Hoover and J. A. Squier, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 93–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Fujimoto, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1361–1367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Bashkatov, E. A. Genina and V. V. Tuchin, J. Innovative Opt. Health Sci., 2011, 4, 9–38 CrossRef .
G. Palczewska, Z. Dong, M. Golczak, J. J. Hunter, D. R. Williams, N. S. Alexander and K. Palczewski, Nat. Med., 2014, 20, 785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. Viegas, T. Martins, F. Seco and A. Do Carmo, Eur. J. Histochem., 2007, 59–66 CAS .
G. Hong, A. L. Antaris and H. Dai, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 1–22 CrossRef .
I. Villa, A. Vedda, I. X. Cantarelli, M. Pedroni, F. Piccinelli, M. Bettinelli, A. Speghini, M. Quintanilla, F. Vetrone, U. Rocha, C. Jacinto, E. Carrasco, F. S. Rodríguez, Á. Juarranz, B. Rosal, D. H. Ortgies, P. H. Gonzalez, J. G. Solé and D. J. García, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 649–665 CrossRef .
B. del Rosal, I. Villa, D. Jaque and F. Sanz-Rodríguez, J. Biophotonics, 2016, 9, 1059–1067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hemmer, A. Benayas, F. Legare and F. Vetrone, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 168–184 RSC .
E. Hemmer, P. Acosta-Mora, J. Méndez-Ramos and S. Fischer, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4365–4392 RSC .

          B. Wozniak and J. Dera, Light absorption in sea water, Springer,  2007 Search PubMed .
B. Phillips, S. Holzmer, L. Turco, M. Mirzaie, E. Mause, A. Mause, A. Person, S. Leslie, D. Cornell and M. Wagner, Eur. J. Trauma Emerg. Surg., 2017, 43, 763–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tanaka, F. Y. Chen, R. Flaumenhaft, G. J. Graham, R. G. Laurence and J. V. Frangioni, J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg., 2009, 138, 133–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. van der Vorst, B. E. Schaafsma, M. Hutteman, F. P. Verbeek, G. J. Liefers, H. H. Hartgrink, V. T. Smit, C. W. Löwik, C. J. van de Velde and J. V. Frangioni, Cancer, 2013, 119, 3411–3418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. R. Tummers, A. Schepers, J. F. Hamming, J. Kievit, J. V. Frangioni, C. J. van de Velde and A. L. Vahrmeijer, Surgery, 2015, 158, 1323–1330 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Hansen and D. S. Malchow, Int. Soc. Opt. Photonics, 2008, 6939, 69390I Search PubMed .
A. Benayas, F. Ren, E. Carrasco, V. Marzal, B. del Rosal, B. A. Gonfa, Á. Juarranz, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, D. Jaque, J. García-Solé, D. Ma and F. Vetrone, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6650–6659 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ren, B. del Rosal, S. Y. An, F. Yang, E. Carrasco, A. Benayas, J. K. Oh, D. Jaque, Á. J. de la Fuente and F. Vetrone, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2017, 34, 1600242 CrossRef .
B. del Rosal, E. Carrasco, F. Ren, A. Benayas, F. Vetrone, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, D. Ma, Á. Juarranz and D. Jaque, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6060–6068 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kong, J. Chen, H. Fang, G. Heath, Y. Wo, W. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Guo, S. D. Evans and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3041–3050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, J. Chen, Y. Wo, Y. Li, S. Chen, Y. Zhang and W. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2016, 103, 256–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zebibula, N. Alifu, L. Xia, C. Sun, X. Yu, D. Xue, L. Liu, G. Li and J. Qian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703451 CrossRef .
Z. Feng, Y. Yang, J. Zhang, K. Wang, Y. Li, H. Xu, Z. Wang, E. Biskup, S. Dong and X. Yang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 3059–3068 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. Yue, R. Cui, Z. Ma, H. Wan, F. Wang, S. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Y. Kuang and Y. Zhong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 201806153 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, M. Zhang, J. Yue, C. Alcazar, Y. Zhong, T. C. Doyle, H. Dai and N. F. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803417 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Ortgies, Á. L. García-Villalón, M. Granado, S. Amor, E. M. Rodríguez, H. D. Santos, J. Yao, J. Rubio-Retama and D. Jaque, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 749–757 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, F. Tian, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Li and Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2481–2488 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, S. Lin, D. Huang, Y. Zhang, C. Li, M. Wang and Q. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702679 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, F. Hu, K. Zhao and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605754 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Song, C. Li, X. Q. Yang, J. An, K. Cheng, Y. Xuan, X. M. Shi, M. J. Gao, X. L. Song and Y. D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4808–4820 RSC .
C. Li, L. Cao, Y. Zhang, P. Yi, M. Wang, B. Tan, Z. Deng, D. Wu and Q. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 4517–4525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. S. Qin, P. Z. Zhang, L. D. Sun, S. Shi, N. X. Chen, H. Dong, X. Y. Zheng, L. M. Li and C. H. Yan, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4660–4664 RSC .
U. Rocha, K. U. Kumar, C. Jacinto, I. Villa, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, M. del Carmen Iglesias de la Cruz, A. Juarranz, E. Carrasco, F. C. J. M. van Veggel, E. Bovero, J. G. Solé and D. Jaque, Small, 2014, 10, 1141–1154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yao, P. Wang, R. Wang, L. Zhou, A. M. El-Toni, Y. Lu, X. Li and F. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 1930–1936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Y. Fan, L. Lu, L. Liu, L. Fan, M. Zhao, Y. Xie, C. Xu and F. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
S. He, S. Chen, D. Li, Y. Wu, X. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Song, L. Liu, J. Qu and Z. Cheng, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2985–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Del Rosal, D. H. Ortgies, N. Fernández, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, D. Jaque and E. M. Rodríguez, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12086–12090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Mimun, G. Ajithkumar, M. Pokhrel, B. G. Yust, Z. G. Elliott, F. Pedraza, A. Dhanale, L. Tang, A. L. Lin and V. P. Dravid, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 5702–5710 RSC .
Y. Feng, Q. Xiao, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Li, C. Li, Q. Wang, L. Shi and H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 504–510 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Fan, Q. Guo, A. Jiang, X. Du and J. Zhou, Theranostics, 2017, 7, 4217 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, A. Skripka, A. Benayas, X. Dong, S. H. Hong, F. Ren, J. K. Oh, X. Liu, F. Vetrone and D. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706235 CrossRef .
D. González-Mancebo, A. I. Becerro, E. Cantelar, F. Cussó, A. Briat, D. Boyer and M. Ocaña, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 6580–6587 RSC .
D. H. Ortgies, M. Tan, E. C. Ximendes, B. Del Rosal, J. Hu, L. Xu, X. Wang, E. Martín Rodríguez, C. Jacinto and N. Fernandez, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4362–4368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, P. Wang, Y. Lu, R. Wang, L. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Li, J. A. Piper and F. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 941–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. del Rosal, A. Pérez-Delgado, E. Carrasco, D. J. Jovanović, M. D. Dramićanin, G. Dražić, Á. J. de la Fuente, F. Sanz-Rodriguez and D. Jaque, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 782–789 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, J. Liu, D. Liu, J. Li, F. Wang, L. Li, Y. Wang, S. Song and H. Zhang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3434–3446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, W. Hu, H. Zhao, X. Miao, Y. Guan, W. Cai, Z. Zeng, Q. Fan and T. T. Y. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 8624–8628 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Li, F. Li, X. Han and G. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22079–22088 RSC .
F. Yang, A. Skripka, M. S. Tabatabaei, S. H. Hong, F. Ren, A. Benayas, J. K. Oh, S. Martel, X. Liu, F. Vetrone and D. Ma, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 408–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pichaandi and F. C. van Veggel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263, 138–150 CrossRef .
J. M. Pietryga, D. J. Werder, D. J. Williams, J. L. Casson, R. D. Schaller, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4879–4885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ren, S. A. Lindley, H. Zhao, L. Tan, B. A. Gonfa, Y. C. Pu, F. Yang, X. Liu, F. Vidal, J. Z. Zhang, F. Vetrone and D. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31828–31835 RSC .
C. N. Zhu, P. Jiang, Z. L. Zhang, D. L. Zhu, Z. Q. Tian and D. W. Pang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1186–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, B. Xu, T. Fu, M. Cai, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1470–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guzelian, J. B. Katari, A. V. Kadavanich, U. Banin, K. Hamad, E. Juban, A. Alivisatos, R. Wolters, C. Arnold and J. Heath, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 7212–7219 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guzelian, U. Banin, A. Kadavanich, X. Peng and A. Alivisatos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 1432–1434 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cassette, T. Pons, C. Bouet, M. Helle, L. Bezdetnaya, F. Marchal and B. Dubertret, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6117–6124 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xie, M. Rutherford and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5691–5697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Liu, F. Ren, F. Yang and D. Ma, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 320–321, 153–180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Hu and T. Zhu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. de Mello Donegá, P. Liljeroth and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Small, 2005, 1, 1152–1162 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cademartiri, J. Bertolotti, R. Sapienza, D. S. Wiersma, G. von Freymann and G. A. Ozin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 671–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, M. Chaker and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6497–6504 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, Y. Justo, B. De Geyter, K. Haustraete, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2004–2012 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Hendricks, M. P. Campos, G. T. Cleveland, I. Jen-La Plante and J. S. Owen, Science, 2015, 348, 1226–1230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, Y. Zhou, F. Ren, D. Benetti, F. Yang, H. Zhao, F. Rosei, M. Chaker and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10250–10260 RSC .
E. G. Durmusoglu, Y. Turker and H. Y. Acar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12407–12415 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ka, D. Ma and M. A. El Khakani, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 2269–2274 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ka, B. Gonfa, V. Le Borgne, D. Ma and M. A. El Khakani, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4042–4050 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ka, V. Le Borgne, D. Ma and M. A. El Khakani, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6288 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lignos, L. Protesescu, S. Stavrakis, L. Piveteau, M. J. Speirs, M. A. Loi, M. V. Kovalenko and A. J. deMello, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2975–2982 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao and F. Rosei, Chem, 2017, 3, 229–258 CAS .
F. Ren, H. Zhao, F. Vetrone and D. Ma, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7800–7804 RSC .
L. Tan, F. Yang, M. R. Kim, P. Li, D. T. Gangadharan, J. Margot, R. Izquierdo, M. Chaker and D. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26257–26267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Gonfa, M. R. Kim, P. Zheng, S. Cushing, Q. Qiao, N. Wu, M. A. El Khakani and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13071–13080 RSC .
H. Zhao, M. Chaker, N. Wu and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8898–8904 RSC .
J. J. Li, Y. A. Wang, W. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12567–12575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mahler, P. Spinicelli, S. Buil, X. Quelin, J.-P. Hermier and B. Dubertret, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 659–664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Werder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Chen, J. Zhao, V. P. Chauhan, J. Cui, C. Wong, D. K. Harris, H. Wei, H.-S. Han, D. Fukumura and R. K. Jain, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 445–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, G. Sirigu, A. Parisini, A. Camellini, G. Nicotra, F. Rosei, V. Morandi, M. Zavelani-Rossi and A. Vomiero, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4217–4226 RSC .
H. Zhao, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Small, 2015, 11, 5741–5746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jin, G. Sirigu, X. Tong, A. Camellini, A. Parisini, G. Nicotra, C. Spinella, H. Zhao, S. Sun and V. Morandi, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 531–541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ithurria and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18585–18590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Sagar, W. Walravens, Q. Zhao, A. Vantomme, P. Geiregat and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6953–6959 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nasilowski, L. Nienhaus, S. N. Bertram and M. G. Bawendi, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 869–872 RSC .
D. H. Son, S. M. Hughes, Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 306, 1009–1012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, D. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Chaker and D. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5301–5303 RSC .
H. Zhao, M. Chaker and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17483–17491 RSC .
C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6250–6284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. Kappe and D. Dallinger, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2006, 5, 51–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, F. Yang, S. Zhou, N. Bao, Z. Xu, M. Chaker and D. Ma, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 118879 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lambert, B. D. Geyter, I. Moreels and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 778–780 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, L.-C. Lin, W. Buijs, T. J. Vlugt and M. A. Van Huis, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
C. L. Ventola, Pharm. Ther., 2012, 37, 512 Search PubMed .
J. S. Suk, Q. Xu, N. Kim, J. Hanes and L. M. Ensign, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 99, 28–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Oh, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8433–8445 RSC .
J. D. Schiffman and R. G. Balakrishna, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 1191–1214 CrossRef .
S. Hinds, S. Myrskog, L. Levina, G. Koleilat, J. Yang, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7218–7219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lin, K. Fritz, G. Guerin, G. R. Bardajee, S. Hinds, V. Sukhovatkin, E. H. Sargent, G. D. Scholes and M. A. Winnik, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8215–8219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, J. Qian, F. Cai, S. He, S. Han and Y. Mu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 245701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pichaandi, K. A. Abel, N. J. Johnson and F. C. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2035–2044 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, J. Lifante, E. Ximendes, H. D. Santos, D. Ruiz, B. H. Juárez, I. Z. Gutiérrez, V. T. Vera, J. R. Retama and E. M. Rodríguez, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19251–19264 RSC .
I. Hocaoglu, M. N. Cizmeciyan, R. Erdem, C. Ozen, A. Kurt, A. Sennaroglu and H. Y. Acar, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14674–14681 RSC .
L. Tan, A. Wan and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11163–11171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and X.-P. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3324–3326 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Li, X. Chen and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4918–4923 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. Hong, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, F. Li, H. Dai and Q. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3695–3702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Hong, W. He, K. Zhou, K. Yang, F. Li, G. Chen, Z. Liu and H. Dai, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 3639–3646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, Z. Q. Tian, C. N. Zhu, Z. L. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3–5 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, B.-R. Hyun, F. W. Wise and R. D. Robinson, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5856–5860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, R. Wang and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56789–56793 RSC .
Q. Zhang, F. Yang, Z. Xu, M. Chaker and D. Ma, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 579–591 RSC .
G. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, S. Liu, W. C. Law, F. Wu, M. T. Swihart, H. Ågren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2969–2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, C. Cao, W. Feng and F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 87–95 RSC .
B. Del Rosal, A. Pérez-Delgado, M. Misiak, A. Bednarkiewicz, A. S. Vanetsev, Y. Orlovskii, D. J. Jovanović, M. D. Dramićanin, U. Rocha and K. Upendra Kumar, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 143104 CrossRef .
Y. Fan and F. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801417 CrossRef .
S. Fischer, N. D. Bronstein, J. K. Swabeck, E. M. Chan and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7241–7247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Naczynski, M. C. Tan, M. Zevon, B. Wall, J. Kohl, A. Kulesa, S. Chen, C. M. Roth, R. E. Riman and P. V. Moghe, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, W. K. Chan and T. T. Y. Tan, Small, 2020, 16, 1905265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, G. Tian, Z. Gu, Y. Yang, L. Gu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2831–2837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiao, H. Zhu, D. Tu, E. Ma and X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10834–10841 CrossRef CAS .
A. Skripka, A. Benayas, R. Marin, P. Canton, E. Hemmer and F. Vetrone, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3079–3085 RSC .
A. Skripka, V. Karabanovas, G. Jarockyte, R. Marin, V. Tam, M. Cerruti, R. Rotomskis and F. Vetrone, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807105 CrossRef .
W. Shao, G. Chen, A. Kuzmin, H. L. Kutscher, A. Pliss, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16192–16195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Marciniak, A. Pilch, S. Arabasz, D. Jin and A. Bednarkiewicz, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8288–8297 RSC .
J. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Feng, Y. Sun and F. Li, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 395–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, S. R. Du, X. Y. Zheng, G. M. Lyu, L. D. Sun, L. D. Li, P. Z. Zhang, C. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10725–10815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Ji, W. Xu, Y. Fu, H. Cao, Q. He and J. Cheng, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 175, 108129 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Yu, J. P. Shi, J. L. Li, P. H. Li and H. W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 1238–1243 RSC .
X. Cui, J. She, C. Gao, K. Cui, C. Hou, W. Wei and B. Peng, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 494, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang and Q. M. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 376–378 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, X. Xu, M. Hu, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Yang and L. Meng, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1050–1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Wu, A. García-Etxarri, A. Salleo and J. A. Dionne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4020–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Paudel, L. Zhong, K. Bayat, M. F. Baroughi, S. Smith, C. Lin, C. Jiang, M. T. Berry and P. S. May, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19028–19036 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sudheendra, V. Ortalan, S. Dey, N. D. Browning and I. M. Kennedy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2987–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luu, A. Hor, J. Fisher, R. B. Anderson, S. Liu, T. S. Luk, H. P. Paudel, M. Farrokh Baroughi, P. S. May and S. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3251–3257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Ma, Z. Chai, J. Qiu and Z. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8535–8544 RSC .
F. Wang, D. Banerjee, Y. Liu, X. Chen and X. Liu, Analyst, 2010, 135, 1839–1854 RSC .
A. Bagheri, H. Arandiyan, C. Boyer and M. Lim, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500437 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, C. Li and Z. Shi, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600029 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dai, D. Yang, D. Yu, C. Cao, Q. Wang, S. Xie, L. Shen, W. Feng and F. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26674–26683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, J. C. Lee, J. T. Robinson, U. Raaz, L. Xie, N. F. Huang, J. P. Cooke and H. Dai, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Parekkadan and J. M. Milwid, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2010, 12, 87–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Dupont, K. Sharma, H. Y. Stevens, J. D. Boerckel, A. J. García and R. E. Guldberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 3305–3310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Banas, T. Teratani, Y. Yamamoto, M. Tokuhara, F. Takeshita, M. Osaki, M. Kawamata, T. Kato, H. Okochi and T. Ochiya, Stem Cells, 2008, 26, 2705–2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Yu, L. D. Chen, M. Li, M. Y. Xie, L. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4118–4123 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sarder, D. Maji and S. Achilefu, Bioconjugate Chem., 2015, 26, 963–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Johnson, W. Oakden, G. J. Stanisz, R. Scott Prosser and F. C. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3714–3722 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Blasiak, A. J. Marenco, S. Trudel, B. Tomanek and F. C. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3060–3072 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Das, N. J. Johnson, J. Cramen, B. Blasiak, P. Latta, B. Tomanek and F. C. van Veggel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 524–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Levy, C. A. Tajon, T. S. Bischof, J. Iafrati, A. Fernandez-Bravo, D. J. Garfield, M. Chamanzar, M. M. Maharbiz, V. S. Sohal and P. J. Schuck, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8423–8433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. T. Bruns, T. S. Bischof, D. K. Harris, D. Franke, Y. Shi, L. Riedemann, A. Bartelt, F. B. Jaworski, J. A. Carr and C. J. Rowlands, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 0056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Liu, J. Conde, T. Lipiński, A. Bednarkiewicz and C. C. Huang, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e295 CrossRef CAS .
E. Carrasco, B. del Rosal, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, Á. J. de la Fuente, P. H. Gonzalez, U. Rocha, K. U. Kumar, C. Jacinto, J. G. Solé and D. Jaque, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 615–626 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jaque and F. Vetrone, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4301–4326 RSC .
F. Yang, A. Skripka, M. S. Tabatabaei, S. H. Hong, F. Ren, Y. Huang, J. K. Oh, S. Martel, X. Liu, F. Vetrone and D. Ma, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3201–3210 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ruiz, M. Mizrahi, H. D. Santos, D. Jaque, C. M. Jones, J. Marqués-Hueso, C. Jacinto, F. G. Requejo, A. Torres-Pardo and J. M. González-Calbet, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9194–9200 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Fan Yang
	Dr Fan Yang received his PhD in 2019 from INRS under the supervision of Profs. Dongling Ma and Fiorenzo Vetrone at INRS, and Prof. Xinyu Liu at University of Toronto. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Stanford University under the mentorship of Prof. Guosong Hong. His research interests include the development of multifunctional nanoplatforms based on superparamagnetic nanoparticles, near-infrared excited quantum dots and lanthanide-doped nanomaterials, and their applications in cancer diagnostics and therapeutics.

Qingzhe Zhang
	Dr Qingzhe Zhang is currently a postdoctoral fellow at INRS-EMT, Canada. He earned his PhD in materials science from INRS in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Dongling Ma and Prof. Mohamed Chaker. He was awarded a 4-year pursuing PhD degree scholarship from the China Scholarship Council, the Doctoral Research Award from le Fonds de recherche du Québec-Nature et technologies (FRQNT), and FRQNT's Louis-Berlinguet New Research Star Award. His current research interests include developing advanced functional nanomaterials for applications in heterogeneous catalysis, including plasmon and upconversion enhanced photocatalytic water purification and water splitting.

Shengyun Huang
	Shengyun Huang received his BS and MS in materials science and engineering from Shandong University and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, respectively. Since 2015, he has been a PhD candidate at the Center Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, INRS. His research interests are mainly focused on the development of various metal nanowires in transparent conductors for suspended particle device and electrochromic device applications.

Dongling Ma
	Prof. Dongling Ma is a Canada Research Chair in Advanced Functional Nanocomposites and a full professor at Center of Energy, Materials and Telecommunications, INRS. She received her PhD degree in materials science and engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (USA) in 2004. She was awarded Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council Visiting Fellowships and worked at National Research Council of Canada from 2004 to 2006. Her main research interest consists in the development of various nanomaterials (e.g., semiconductor quantum dots, transition metal catalytic nanoparticles, plasmonic nanostructures) and different types of nanohybrids for applications in energy, catalysis and biomedical sectors.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of light–tissue interaction. (b) First (NIR I), second (NIR II), and third (NIR III) optical windows in some biological tissues and fluids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The schematic illustration of the penetration depth of the NIR II/III light.	 

 	Fig. 2  Absorption (a) and PL (b) of PbS QDs prepared under different conditions (i.e., different synthesis temperatures), PbCl2/S ratios, and reaction time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of PbS/CdS QDs prepared by SILAR, c-ALD and cation exchange. (d) Inverted temperature gradients in microwave heating versus oil-bath heating: difference in the temperature profiles (finite element modeling) after 1 min of microwave irradiation (left) and treatment in an oil bath (right). Microwave irradiation raises the temperature of the whole volume simultaneously (bulk heating) whereas in the oil-heated tube, the reaction mixture in contact with the vessel wall is heated first. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2004, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (e) TEM image of PbS/CdS core/shell QDs synthesized via microwave heating with reaction time of 30 s at 100 °C. (f) PL spectra of the parent PbS QDs and of the PbS/CdS QDs synthesized by microwave-assisted cation exchange at different reaction times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Spectral range of emission of different PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs. Three different emission spectra from different PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs (blue, QDs emitting at 930 nm; green, QDs emitting at 1270 nm; red, QDs emitting at 1450 nm). The black line shows the extinction coefficient (comprising both absorption and scattering contributions) of biological tissues for the spectral range under consideration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (h) Schematic illustration of the surface modification procedures for PbS@CdS QDs, which lead to the formation of PbS@CdS@F-127 NPs, PbS@CdS@SiO2–PEG NPs, and PbS@CdS@SiO2@F-127 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 


PbS/CdS/ZnS	808 nm/930 nm, 1270 nm, 1450 nm	N/A	MPA	
In vivo NIR II bioimaging/fluorescent nanothermometer	
22

PbS/CdS/ZnS	808 nm/1220 nm	20%	MPA	
In vivo NIR II bioimaging	
23

PbS/CdS/ZnS	808 nm/1270 nm	N/A	MPA	Temperature self-monitored PTT	
24

PbS	808 nm/∼1300 nm	17.3%	Ribonuclease-A	
In vivo NIR II bioimaging	
25

PbS	808 nm/1310 nm	N/A	β-Lactoglobulin	
In vivo NIR II flap perfusion imaging	
26

PbS@CdS@SiO2	785 nm/1155 nm	5.79%	Pluronic F-127	
In vivo NIR II whole-body imaging/brain microscopic imaging/in vivo GI tract imaging	
27

PbS	808 nm/1205 nm	N/A	Agrin	
In vivo NIR II peripheral nerves imaging	
28

PbS/CdS	808 nm/1600 nm	2.2–22%	mPEG-amine + 8-arm PEG-amine	
In vivo NIR III bioimaging/real-time vascular imaging/3D tumor confocal imaging	
29

PbS/CdS	808 nm/∼1600 nm	2–20%	mPEG-amine + 8-arm PEG-amine	NIR III murine hindlimb vascular imaging	
30

Ag2S	808 nm/∼1150 nm	N/A	ATII	NIR II cardiovascular tissue imaging	
31

Ag2S	808 nm/∼1200 nm	15.5%	Tat peptide	
In vivo NIR II stem cells tracking imaging	
32

Ag2S	808 nm/∼1200 nm	N/A	Tat peptide	
In vivo NIR II stem cells tracking imaging	
33

Ag2S	808 nm/∼1150 nm	N/A	Alendronate	Bone-targeted NIR II fluorescence images	
34

Ag2S	808 nm/∼1120 nm	∼1.12%	PEG-folate	
In vivo NIR II bioimaging/photoacoustic imaging/chemo-photothermal therapy	
35

Gd–DOTA–Ag2S	808 nm/1200 nm	∼15%	DOTA	Dual-mode T1-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging	
36

LiLuF4:Nd/LiLuF4	803 nm/∼1050 nm and 1330 nm	32%	PEG	
In vivo NIR II bioimaging	
37

LaF3:Nd3+	808 nm/∼1050 nm	N/A	Ligand-free	
In vivo NIR II bioimaging	
38

NaGdF4:5%Nd3+@NaGdF4	800 nm/∼1060 nm	>20%	Phosphopeptide	
In vivo NIR II tumor targeted imaging	
39

NaGdF4:5%Nd3+@NaGdF4	808 nm/∼1060 nm	N/A	DNA and FSHβ peptide	NIR II imaging guided metastatic ovarian cancer resection	
40

NaYF4:Nd3+/NaYF4	808 nm/1064 nm and 1345 nm	8.2%	DSPE-mPEG	High-affinity NIR II skeletal imaging	
41

NaGdF4:Nd3+	808 nm/1060 nm	N/A	PNIPAM	Autofluorescence-free NIR II imaging	
42

Nd3+ and Er3+ doped RENPs	800 nm/1525 nm	N/A	DSPE-PEG2000-COOH	
In vivo NIR III bioimaging	
43

GdF3:Nd3+	808 nm/1064 nm and 1330 nm	10.7 ± 1.6%	PMAO	Dual-mode T1-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging	
44

NaHoF4:Nd3+	785 nm/1525 nm	1.7%	α-CD	Dual-mode T2-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging	
45

NaDyF4:Nd3+	808 nm/∼1050 nm	∼19.4%	Gallic acid	Dual-mode T2-weighted MR/NIR II tumor imaging/PTT	
46

Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Nd3+	806 nm/∼1060 nm, 1340 nm	N/A	PEI	Dual-mode T2-weighted MR/NIR II fluorescence imaging	
47

Nd3+:Ba0.3Lu0.7F2.7	810 nm/∼1056 nm and ∼1325 nm,	N/A	Ligand-free	Bimodal CT and NIR II fluorescence imaging	
48

NaYF4:Yb,Nd/CaF2	808 nm/980 and 1350 nm	N/A	Poly(acrylic acid)	Lifetime-based in vivo multiplexed imaging	
49

Core–multishell RENPs	808 nm/1525 nm	N/A	Antibody ER, PR, HER2	Lifetime-based in vivo multiplexed imaging of tumor biomarkers	
50

NdVO4	808 nm/1060 nm and 1300 nm	N/A	Ligand-free	NIR II fluorescence imaging/PTT	
51

Core/satellite Nd3+-doped RENPs	808 nm/1060 nm	N/A	Polydopamine	PTT	
52

NaNdF4	808 nm/1058 nm and 1332 nm	N/A	Prussian blue	PTT	
53

NaErF4@NaYF4@NaNdF4	808 nm/1060 nm and 1525 nm	N/A	Prussian blue	NIR II/NIR III fluorescence imaging/PTT	
54

SASNs (NIR II)	806 nm/1260 nm	N/A	PVP	Dual-mode (magnetothermal and photothermal) heating	
55


 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs composed of a crystalline host and RE dopant ions embedded in the host lattice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Absorption spectra of Nd3+, Yb3+, and Er3+ in NIR I and NIR II region (solid line) and NIR II emission spectra from Nd3+, Ho3+, Pr3+, Tm3+, and Er3+ (solid line with color shade). Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) The UC emission intensities of the Nd-sensitized sample (violet line, 16 mg mL−1, excited by a 4 W cm−2, 800 nm diode laser) and the Yb-sensitized sample (orange line, 25 mg mL−1, excited by a 4 W cm−2, 980 nm diode laser) as a function of penetration depth in water. The concentrations of the Nd-sensitized sample and the Yb-sensitized sample were adjusted to gain the same initial emission intensity. (d) Temperature-distribution image recorded after 7 min irradiation (Sp1: 980 nm; Sp2: 800 nm; 20 W cm−2). Inset: Time-resolved temperature curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Proposed energy transfer mechanisms for emissions in the NIR II region. (e) Intrinsic emissions from Nd3+ and Er3+, (f) Nd3+–Yb3+–RE3+ system (RE = Ho3+, Pr3+, Tm3+, or Er3+). (g) Schematic illustration of the main strategies for enhancing NIR I-to-NIR II/III RENPs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Optical (left), fluorescence (center), and merged (right) in vivo images of a mouse taken 1 min after injection of the QD solution in the bloodstream. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) PCA for differentiation of arterial and venous components. (c) A zoomed in image of a subregion in the hind limb. (d) High-magnification (10× objective), wide-field fluorescence imaging (∼1600 nm emission, 808 nm excitation) of a xenograft MC38 tumor on a mouse after tail vein intravenous (i.v.) injection of PEG-CSQDs. (Scale bar: 1 mm.) (e–h) Wide-field fluorescence imaging (1× objective) at different time points after injection. (Scale bar: 10 mm.) (i) A schematic drawing illustrating in vivo confocal imaging of the mouse through the skin. (j–m) In vivo layer-by-layer fluorescence confocal imaging of tumor vessels over an area (2500 × 2500 μm) after an i.v. injection of PEG-CSQDs; z = 0 is defined as the position when NIR III signal started to show up in tumor. (Scale bar: 500 μm) Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. (n) TEM images of Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Nd3+. (o) Ex vivo imaging of chicken breast samples of different thickness (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 mm) under excitation of the 806 nm laser with a series of optical long-pass filters (830, 980, and 1200 nm) in the emission path. (p) In vivo T2-weighted transversal cross-section MR images of nude mouse bearing a tumor acquired at pre-injection and 30 min intratumoral post-injection of Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Nd3+ NPs at 1.5 mg kg−1. The position of the tumor is marked by red dash circles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental set up used for the acquisition of in vivo lifetime images: image acquisition is synchronized with the excitation pulse. Analysis of fluorescence images acquired with different time delays in respect to laser pulse leads to lifetime images that allows for in vivo multiplexing in the time domain. The fluorescence images obtained for different time delays as well as the lifetime image included as an example correspond to real measurements performed on a mouse with two subcutaneous injections of NaYF4:Yb,Nd@CaF2 NPs with neodymium contents of x = 0.3 and x = 0.5 with fluorescence lifetimes of τ1 = 0.7 ms and τ2 = 0.4 ms, respectively. In vivo multiplexed lifetime imaging: (b) intensity-based infrared image of a mouse after oral and intravenous injection of NaY0.9−xYb0.1NdxF4@CaF2 NPs with a Nd3+ content of x = 0.3 and 0.2, respectively. (c) Lifetime-based image of same mouse as in (b). The different location of the two types of NPs is evidenced. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Pseudocolour-mapped lifetime images of the Er nanoparticles contained in centrifuge tubes acquired by the time-resolved NIR II imaging system. All nanoparticles were dispersed in cyclohexane at ∼0.46 mM molar concentration. Numbers accompanying each sample indicate mean ± coefficient of variation (CV) of the measured luminescence lifetime, taken from pixels corresponding to each tube in the lifetime images. (e) Lifetime-resolved images for the MCF-7 and BT-474 tumors are decomposed into the three lifetime channels, represented by the red, green and blue monochromatic image sets. Biomarker expression patterns are calculated by integrating the intensities of each components, normalized by the total intensity over the entire tumor area. In vitro western blot (f) and ex vivo immunohistochemistry assay (g) results and calculated biomarker expression patterns of the two tumor subtypes IVM: in vivo multiplexing; WB: western blot; IHC: immunohistochemistry. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) PTT with real-time temperature feedback. Schematic representation of the treatment procedure: after intratumoral injection of 60 μL of a 5 mg mL−1 dispersion of PbS/CdS/ZnS QDs in PBS, the mice were irradiated with an 808 nm laser at different power densities, while the emission of the QDs was continuously monitored with an InGaAs camera. Additionally, the surface temperature was monitored during the procedure using a thermographic camera. (b–e) Thermographic and fluorescence images of the mouse treated with an 808 nm power density of 1.7 W cm−2 before and at the end of the 4 min long irradiation. The location of the tumor injected with QDs is indicated in the four images with a dotted circle. (f) Intratumoral temperature and skin surface temperature measured during the photothermal treatment of a tumor under irradiation at 1.7 W cm−2 with an 808 nm laser. The data were collected using the temperature-sensitive fluorescence of the QDs and a thermographic camera, respectively. The dashed lines represent guides for the eyes. (g) Representative mouse with one tumor in each flank (dashed circles), anaesthetized and ready for the treatment. (h) Top: Evolution of a total control tumor. Bottom: After the QDs + laser (1.7 W cm−2) treatment, the tumor dramatically disappeared and the wound produced as a consequence (left) was completely healed 22 d later (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (i) Comparison of temperature increases of Nd NPs, PB, and NdNP@PB (0.5 mg mL−1) illuminated by an 808 nm laser (0.6 W cm−2). (j) Tumor growth curves in mice from different groups after various treatments (n = 5 per group). Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (k) TEM images of SASNs (NIR II) at different magnifications. (l) Scheme of the setup for the combined magnetothermal and photothermal experiments. (m) Optical image of pork tissue used for ex vivo dual-mode heating and their thermal images at 3 min post-injection of SASNs (NIR II) under three types of modulations (laser at 3.3 W cm−2, AMF at 7 kA m−1, and dual-mode). The injection point of the SASNs (NIR II) is denoted by a red circle. The blue circle indicates a location free of SASNs (NIR II) (non-injection spot), and the laser was focused on that spot without AMF in the control experiment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
