Monolithically integrated, photo-rechargeable portable power sources based on miniaturized Si solar cells and printed solid-state lithium-ion batterie ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE03266D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE03266D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 931-940Monolithically integrated, photo-rechargeable portable power sources based on miniaturized Si solar cells and printed solid-state lithium-ion batteries†

        
          
            Han-Don 
            Um‡
, 
      
        
          
            Keun-Ho 
            Choi‡
, 
      
        
          
            Inchan 
            Hwang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Se-Hee 
            Kim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kwanyong 
            Seo
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Sang-Young 
            Lee
          
        
      *
      Department of Energy Engineering, School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 689-798, South Korea. E-mail: kseo@unist.ac.kr; syleek@unist.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-52-217-2948
Received 
      8th November 2016
    , Accepted 19th January 2017First published on 19th January 2017AbstractThe combination of energy generation and energy storage systems is the ultimate solution to meet the ever-increasing demand for high-energy-density power sources. Here, we demonstrate a new class of monolithically integrated, photo-rechargeable portable power sources based on miniaturized crystalline Si photovoltaics (c-Si PVs) and printed solid-state lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). A solid-state LIB with a bipolar cell configuration is fabricated directly on the aluminium electrode of a c-Si PV module through an in-series printing process, which enables the seamless architectural/electrical connection of the two different energy systems. The single-unit PV–LIB device shows exceptional electrochemical performance that lies far beyond those achievable by conventional PVs or LIBs alone: it displays fast, low-light-intensity and high-temperature photo-charging; a photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency of 7.61%; a sustainable cycling performance; and continuous discharging at an extremely high current density of 28C under sunlight illumination. This study opens a facile and scalable route for the development of single-unit, photo-rechargeable mobile high-performance batteries that are required for the future era of ubiquitous electronics.

Broader context
The rapidly approaching ubiquitous energy era, which will encompass the use of the internet of things (IOTs), wearable electronics, and electric vehicles (EVs), has pushed us to relentlessly pursue high-energy density power sources with reliable electrochemical performance and design flexibility. The combination of energy generation and energy storage systems is considered to be an ultimate solution to address the energy density issue. For example, photovoltaic (PV) cell–battery systems convert solar to electrical energy using the PVs and then store the generated electrical energy in the batteries. Therefore, the PV–battery systems can continuously operate electronic devices under light illumination whenever/wherever they are needed, which demonstrates their potential application as infinite energy sources that resolve both the energy density problem of batteries and the energy storage concerns of solar cells. Here, we demonstrate a new class of monolithically integrated, photo-rechargeable portable power sources based on miniaturized crystalline Si photovoltaics (c-Si PVs) and printed solid-state lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) as a facile and scalable system architecture to achieve the aforementioned challenging goal. The single-unit PV–LIB device suggested herein provides a remarkable improvement in electrochemical performance that lies far beyond those achievable by conventional PVs or LIBs alone, exhibiting great potential as a new photo-rechargeable portable power source that will play a pivotal role in the future era of ubiquitous smart electronics.

Introduction
The forthcoming ubiquitous and smart energy era, which will involve the widespread popularity of electric vehicles, grid-scale stationary energy storage systems, and flexible electronics in our daily lives, has led to the relentless pursuit of high-performance energy generation systems, such as photovoltaic (PV) cells, fuel cells, and other renewable energy systems, and energy storage systems, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors, and other rechargeable batteries.1–3 Enormous progress has been made in the development of both energy generation and energy storage systems; however, the individual use of each system as a power source is not sufficient for fulfilling the ever-increasing demand for high energy/power density and ubiquitous mobility.4–6
The combination of energy generation and energy storage systems has been proposed as the ultimate solution to address the formidable challenges mentioned above.4,7,8 For example, PV–battery systems first convert solar energy to electrical energy using the PV cells and then store the generated electrical energy in the batteries. Therefore, PV–battery systems can continuously operate electronic devices under light illumination whenever and wherever they are needed, which demonstrates their potential application as infinite energy sources that resolve both the energy density problems of batteries and the energy storage concerns of solar cells.4,5 Notably, the application of PV–battery systems in electric vehicles has been recommended as a promising approach to overcome issues with the driving range of the vehicles and limitations with the charging stations.4
Numerous research efforts have been devoted to developing high-performance PV–battery systems. One approach has involved the simple interconnection of two independent systems, PV and battery, through external electrical wires.4,5,8–11 However, the inevitable use of additional electrical wires/accessories results in an increase of the ohmic resistance and the complexity of the system design/dimensions. Another approach has focused on fabricating single-body-structured, photo-rechargeable electric energy storage systems, in which one electrode of the energy conversion device acts simultaneously as an electrode for the storage of electrochemical energy.7,12–27 From the perspective of system integration, most of the previously reported works have utilized dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)7,14–23 or organic solar cells.24,25 However, the low power conversion efficiency (PCE) and non-optimized modulation of these PV cells have remained significant obstacles to achieving reliable photo-charging performances. Meanwhile, only a few studies7,20,21 have focused on the adoption of LIBs as a counterpart of PVs, in comparison to PV-supercapacitor systems. Most notably, all of the PV–battery systems reported to date have used liquid electrolytes in batteries and DSSCs, thus giving rise to the deterioration of the long-term electrochemical performance of the systems, particularly for high-temperature operation, resulting in safety failures.
Here, we demonstrate a new class of monolithically integrated, portable PV–battery systems (denoted as “SiPV–LIBs”) based on miniaturized crystalline Si photovoltaics (c-Si PVs) and printed solid-state bipolar LIBs. These offer a facile and scalable system architecture to address the aforementioned long-standing challenges of photo-rechargeable power sources. To enable the seamless architectural/electrical connection of the two different energy systems, an aluminium (Al) metal electrode of the c-Si PV module is simultaneously used as a current collector of the LIB. The c-Si PV module is fabricated by interconnecting 25 units of Si mini-cells, and it shows a high output voltage of 14.1 V and a PCE of 15.8%. The solid-state LIB with a bipolar cell configuration is directly fabricated on the Al metal electrode of the c-Si PV module via an ultraviolet (UV) curing-assisted printing process. We recently reported on printed solid-state LIBs with versatile designs and their potential application as a new shape-conformable power source for flexible electronics and the Internet of Things (IOT).28–30
The single-unit SiPV–LIB device, in association with the well-designed physicochemical properties of its components, i.e., c-Si PVs and solid-state bipolar LIBs, enables the realization of an unprecedented electrochemical performance that is far beyond that achievable by conventional PVs or LIBs alone. It displays: (i) rapid photo-charging in less than 2 min with a high photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency of 7.61%; (ii) photo-charging under illumination with an extremely low intensity (∼8 mW cm−2); (iii) photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging at a high temperature of 60 °C; (iv) continuous discharging at a current density of 28C under sunlight illumination; and (v) photo-generated electrical energy that is capable of charging portable electronics, such as smartphones and MP3 players, under sunlight illumination.
Experimental
Structure and characterization of c-Si PVs
High-efficiency Si solar cells were fabricated from n-type Czochralski (Cz) Si wafers with a resistivity of ∼1–3 Ω cm and a thickness of 350 μm. The backside of each cell consisted of an interdigitated emitter and a back surface field (BSF) formed by the selective-area diffusion of boron and phosphorus; elemental doping was conducted through patterned SiO2 diffusion barriers. The heavily-doped n+ and p+ regions were formed by diffusion of phosphorous and boron using a spin-on-dopant method with P509 and B155 (Filmtronics), respectively.31 The entire surface, except for the emitter and BSF regions, was coated with a 10 nm-thick Al2O3 layer at 200 °C via atomic layer deposition (Lucida D100, NCD), and a 65 nm-thick SiNx film was deposited at 350 °C using plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PE-CVD; PEH-600, SORONA). For the metal electrodes, interdigitated grid patterns were formed at the emitter/BSF regions by photolithography, and a 500 nm-thick Al film was thermally deposited. The photovoltaic properties of the solar cells were investigated using a solar simulator (Class AAA, Oriel Sol3A, Newport) under AM 1.5G illumination. The incident flux was measured using a calibrated power meter, and double-checked using a NREL-calibrated solar cell (PV Measurements, Inc.).
Compact c-Si PV module assembly
To electrically isolate each solar cell, the backside of the as-fabricated wafer was attached with UV-curable tape (DUV 190, DS Semicon) and dicing was performed (Fig. S6a, ESI†). A transparent UV-curable film (NOA 71, Norland Products, Inc.) was drop-cast onto the front surface of the substrate (the surface without electrodes) and then fully cured by UV exposure for 30 s, which resulted in the formation of a transparent handling substrate for the PV module (Fig. S6b, ESI†). The polymer-embedded solar cells were obtained with low topological variation over a substantial portion of the array because the trenches formed between the solar cells during the dicing process were easily filled by the transparent UV-curable film. The UV-curable tape at the back of the polymer-embedded cells was detached after exposure to UV light for 5 min (Fig. S6c, ESI†). A 500 nm-thick Al film was thermally deposited through a shadow mask to interconnect the cells in series.
Design and fabrication of printed solid-state bipolar LIBs
To prepare electrode pastes, an electrolyte precursor mixture composed of UV-curable ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate (ETPTA) monomer (containing 1.0 wt% 2-hydroxy-2-methyl-1-phenyl-1-propanone (HMPP) as a photoinitiator) and a high boiling point electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate (EC)/propylene carbonate (PC) with a ratio of 1/1 v/v), where the composition ratio of ETPTA/high boiling point electrolyte was 15/85 (w/w), was mixed with electrode active materials: LiCoO2 (LCO, Umicore) for the cathode material, Li4Ti5O12 (LTO, Süd Chemie) for the anode material and carbon black conductive additives. The electrode pastes were composed of the electrode mixture (electrode active materials/carbon black with a ratio of 8/2 (w/w))/solid-state composite electrolyte (SCE) matrix precursor with a ratio of 6/4 (w/w). The LTO anode paste was printed on top of the Al metal electrode of the c-Si PV module using a stencil printing technique without any processing solvents, such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone or water, and then exposed to UV irradiation for a short time of less than 30 s. UV irradiation was performed on the sample surface using a Hg UV-lamp (Lichtzen) with an irradiation peak intensity of approximately 2000 mW cm−2. Subsequently, the SCE paste (ETPTA/1 M LiPF6 in EC/PC/Al2O3 nanoparticles (average particle size ∼300 nm) with a ratio of 7.5/42.5/50 (w/w/w)) was introduced on top of the LTO anode via the same stencil printing and UV curing process, which resulted in the formation of a thin layer SCE on the LTO anode. Then, the LCO cathode slurry was printed directly on the SCE layer/LTO anode unit and exposed to UV irradiation. After placing an Al current collector on top of the printed LCO cathode/printed SCE layer/printed LTO anode (C/S/A) assembly, a solid-state LIB unit cell was obtained. Another LIB unit cell with the same materials and composition ratio was introduced on top of the as-fabricated LIB unit cell using the same printing process, resulting in the fabrication of a bipolar stacked LIB cell (i.e., the two LIB unit cells were connected in series) on the c-Si PV module. Finally, the bipolar LIB cell was encapsulated with a ∼27 μm-thick UV-cured hydrophobic polymer (PRO-001, Novacentrix) that served as the packaging material.
Photo-electrochemical characterization of the SiPV–LIB device
The c-Si PV module of the SiPV–LIB device was illuminated using a full-sun intensity solar simulator (Class AAA, Oriel Sol3A, Newport). Simultaneously, the in situ measurement of photo-charged voltages of the LIB was conducted using a potentiostat/galvanostat (VSP classic, Bio-Logic). After the LIB was fully photo-charged, it was galvanostatically discharged over a wide range of current densities. In particular, the discharge current density was varied from 28 (14 mA cm−2) to 60C under sunlight illumination to investigate the high-rate discharge capability of the SiPV–LIB device. The thermal stability of the SiPV–LIB device was characterized by measuring the photo-charge/discharge profiles after storage for 1 hour at 25, 60, 90, and 120 °C. The low-intensity light was produced by illumination with an AM 1.5G solar simulator with various grey filters. To fabricate a monolithically integrated smartcard, the SiPV–LIB device was inserted into a pre-cut credit card. Then, electric circuits were drawn on the back of the credit card using a commercial Ag pen to connect the SiPV–LIB device with an LED lamp. The SiPV–LIB device was electrically connected with a smartphone or MP3 player and its potential application as a supplementary portable power source was explored under sunlight illumination.
Results and discussion
The architectural uniqueness of the SiPV–LIB device was investigated, with a particular focus on the monolithic integration of the c-Si PV module and LIB cell (Fig. 1a and b). The current/voltage tunable c-Si PV module (3 × 3 × 0.10 (cm/cm/cm)) was seamlessly connected with the printed solid-state bipolar LIB (3 × 3 × 0.03 (cm/cm/cm)) through an Al layer that acted as an electrical bridge, which eventually resulted in the formation of a monolithic tandem cell configuration. Due to this unitized structure, the exterior appearance of the SiPV–LIB device is quite similar to that of the c-Si PV module (Fig. S1a and b, ESI†). The monolithically integrated SiPV–LIB device is completely different from a typical PV–LIB system that is connected via electric wires (Fig. S1c, ESI†), which underscores its exceptional compactness and design simplicity as a new photo-rechargeable portable power source.
 Fig. 1  The monolithically integrated SiPV–LIB device and the electrochemical performance of the bipolar LIB. (a) Digital photograph (front) of the SiPV–LIB device featuring a monolithic tandem cell configuration. Inset shows the back of the SiPV–LIB device. (b) Schematic representation of the internal structure and operating principle of the SiPV–LIB device under sunlight illumination. (c) Schematic illustration of the printing-based stepwise fabrication of the solid-state bipolar LIB cell directly on a c-Si PV module. (d and e) Cross-sectional SEM images of the 2-stack bipolar LIB cell (d) and the seamlessly unitized interface between the bipolar LIB cell and c-Si PV module (e). (f) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of 1-stack (grey lines) and 2-stack (blue lines) LIB cells. (g) OCV profiles of the SiPV–LIB device and bare bipolar LIB cell as a function of elapsed time. (h) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the bipolar LIB cell in the SiPV–LIB device as a function of the cycle number at a constant charge/discharge current density of 1.0C/1.0C. 
The redox reaction-based operating principle of the SiPV–LIB device is conceptually depicted in Fig. 1b. Under light illumination, photocarriers such as electrons and holes are generated by the c-Si PV module. The photo-generated electrons collected by highly doped n-Si regions (n+-Si, cathode) of the c-Si PV module move via the Al layer, which exhibits a bifunctional role as both a metal electrode (negative terminal) of the c-Si PV module and a current collector (negative terminal) of the LIB, to the LIB anode while the photo-generated holes accumulate at the opposite electrode (highly doped p-Si regions, anode) of the c-Si PV module, thus enabling the PV-induced charging of the LIB system. Specifically, electrons ejected from the c-Si PV module react with lithium ions at the LIB anode (Li4Ti5O12 + xLi+ + xe− → Li(4+x)Ti5O12). Simultaneously, free electrons are released from the positive terminal of the LIB cathode (LiCoO2 → Li1−xCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−) and then flow toward the positive terminal of the anode in the c-Si PV module through the external circuit, which results in electron recombination with the accumulated holes. This operating mechanism demonstrates the light-induced generation of photocarriers in the c-Si PV module, the separation of electrons and holes at the cathode/anode of the c-Si PV module, and electron storage in the LIBs of the c-Si PV–LIB device.
Details on the fabrication procedure of the SiPV–LIB device are described below. The compact c-Si PV module was fabricated by interconnecting 25 units of c-Si mini-cells in series (the area of each cell was 0.36 cm2) to generate high voltage and power, which are designed to be electrochemically compatible with the LIB. (The fabrication and characteristics of the c-Si PV module will be further discussed in the following section). The solid-state LIB with a bipolar cell configuration was directly fabricated on the Al metal electrode of the as-prepared c-Si PV module through the UV curing-assisted printing method30 (Fig. 1c). The pastes of major LIB components (such as the anode, solid-state electrolyte, and cathode) were prepared for the printing process, and specific attention was paid to their rheological properties. (The chemical structure and composition ratio of the component pastes and their preparation procedure are described in the Experimental section.) A well-defined thixotropic fluid behaviour was observed for all component pastes prior to UV curing (Fig. S2a and b, ESI†). The anode paste (an active material mixture/electrolyte precursor mixture with a ratio of 60/40 (w/w)) was printed on top of the Al current collector and then exposed to UV irradiation for solidification. The anode paste consisted of an active material mixture of LTO/carbon black with a ratio of 80/20 (w/w) and an electrolyte precursor mixture of ETPTA monomer/1 M LiPF6 in EC/PC with a ratio of 1/1 (v/v), i.e., 15/85 (w/w). Subsequently, the solid-state electrolyte paste (an Al2O3 nanoparticle/electrolyte precursor mixture with a ratio of 50/50 (w/w), where the electrolyte precursor mixture is the same as the aforementioned precursor mixture) and cathode paste (an active material mixture/electrolyte precursor mixture with a ratio of 60/40 (w/w), where the active material mixture is LCO/carbon black with a ratio of 80/20 (w/w) and the electrolyte precursor mixture is the same as the aforementioned precursor mixture) were subjected to printing and UV curing, which resulted in the printed solid-state LIB unit cell with a total thickness of ∼110 μm (cathode + solid-state electrolyte + anode = 25 + 55 + 30 μm). The mass loadings of the cathode and anode were 3.8 mg cm−2 and 3.6 mg cm−2, respectively. FT-IR analysis (Fig. S2c, ESI†) indicated that the characteristic peaks corresponding to acrylic CC bonds (1610–1625 cm−1) of the ETPTA monomers in the cell components disappeared after UV irradiation,28,30,32 which confirms the successful UV-induced curing reaction in the LIB. Meanwhile, another LIB unit cell with the same materials and composition ratio was introduced on top of the as-fabricated LIB unit cell using the same printing procedure; this resulted in the fabrication of a bipolar stacked LIB cell (i.e., the two LIB unit cells were connected in series) on the c-Si PV module. Finally, the bipolar LIB cell was encapsulated with a UV-cured hydrophobic polymer (PRO-001, Novacentrix)33 that was used as a packaging material (thickness ∼27 μm).
The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 1d indicates that neither structural instability nor delamination was observed between the LIB cell components, which confirms the successful construction of the 2-stack bipolar LIB cell. Fig. 1e shows the seamless unitization of the bipolar LIB cell with the c-Si PV module in the SiPV–LIB device. The electrochemical performance of the LIBs in the SiPV–LIB devices was independently investigated using a potentiostat/galvanostat without light illumination. The bipolar LIB cell exhibited a normal charge/discharge behaviour, which appeared to be similar to that of the mono LIB cell (Fig. 1f). The galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the mono cell are provided in Fig. S3 (ESI†). Intriguingly, the voltage plateaus of the bipolar LIB cell were observed at 4.7 V, a value twice as high as that of the mono LIB cell (voltage plateau of 2.35 V determined by the voltage difference between the Li4Ti5O12 anode and LiCoO2 cathode3,34–36). To address a concern regarding self-discharge of the SiPV–LIB device, the open-circuit voltage (OCV) of the fully charged (i.e., 5.4 V) SiPV–LIB device was measured as a function of the elapsed time (Fig. 1g). No appreciable difference in the OCV drop was found between the LIB cell of the SiPV–LIB device and that of a bare bipolar LIB cell. The electrochemical performance of the bipolar LIB cell in the SiPV–LIB device was examined at room temperature (Fig. 1h); the bipolar LIB cell was cycled between 3.0 and 5.4 V at a constant charge/discharge current density of 1.0/1.0C. The bipolar LIB cell exhibited normal charge/discharge profiles and stable capacity retention (∼95%) after 200 cycles. Also, a good rate capability with almost 100% coulombic efficiency was observed (Fig. S4, ESI†). These results demonstrate that the printed solid-state bipolar LIB cell was unitized with the c-Si PV module without impairing its electrochemical performance.
Efficient and stable c-Si solar cells were designed with both negative and positive polarity contacts at the rear surface to minimize optical and resistive losses. The fabrication and characterization of the single c-Si solar cell are discussed in Note S1 and Fig. S5 (ESI†). The mini c-Si solar cell with a size of 0.36 cm2 exhibited an average PCE of 15.7%, and an open-circuit voltage, a short-circuit current density, and a fill factor of 562 mV, 36.7 mA cm−2, and 76.5%, respectively. To enable direct photo-charging of the bipolar LIB cell, the solar cells were interconnected in series to generate higher voltage than the bipolar LIBs (>5 V). Prior to the interconnection, the as-fabricated solar cells were electrically isolated to prevent short-circuit failures because all of the cells were fabricated in a single Si wafer and they share the same Si layer. The master Si wafer was mechanically cut to detach the as-fabricated cells. However, the assembly of compact PV modules requires complex and customized processes in which the mini-cells are elaborately transferred onto the handling substrate by a motion-controlled stamp.37–39 Here, we prepared the compact c-Si PV modules using UV-curable transparent films and tapes without utilizing additional transfer techniques (Fig. 2a). To ensure electrical isolation, the as-fabricated wafer was attached to the UV-curable tape40 and then mechanically cut by a dicing process. After cutting the wafer, the as-cut cells were embedded into the UV-curable transparent polymer,41 and then the tape was detached from the polymer-embedded cells. The details of the assembly process for the c-Si PV module are described in the Experimental section and Fig. S6 (ESI†). As shown in Fig. 2b, compact c-Si PV modules (3 × 3 × 0.10 (cm/cm/cm)) were achieved by interconnecting 25 cells with microscale gaps (widths of ∼300 μm) between the cells. The cells were interconnected with each other simply by the thermal deposition of an Al film through a shadow mask (Fig. 2c) because the microscale gaps formed during the dicing process were filled by the transparent UV-curable film to flatten the module surface. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the resulting compact c-Si PV modules were measured as a function of the number of c-Si mini-cells (Fig. S7a and Table S1, ESI†). Increasing the number of mini-cells resulted in a systematic change in the I–V curves, i.e., the voltage outputs were 1.6, 2.7, 8.3, and 14.1 V for 3, 5, 15, and 25 cells, respectively. The highest voltage (14.1 V) and power (142.6 mW) were obtained from the compact c-Si PV module with an area of 9 cm2 (25 mini-cells) (Fig. S7b, ESI†), whereas the Si solar cells with conventional dimensions required a much larger area to achieve the same voltage output. Fig. 2d shows the voltage and maximum power output of the compact c-Si PV modules as a function of the number of mini-cells. Both the voltage and the power output linearly increased with the number of mini-cells. The arrays of mini-cells could also be connected in parallel to create systems with high current. These results demonstrate that the compact c-Si PV module technique described above enabled the facile and versatile control of voltage and current, which is thus anticipated to widen its areas of potential application.
 Fig. 2  Assembly of a high-voltage compact c-Si PV module. (a) Schematic illustration of a transfer-free c-Si PV module assembly using a UV-curable polymer and adhesive tapes. (b) Digital photograph (backside) of the compact c-Si PV module showing the interconnection of 25 solar cells in series. (c) Optical microscopy image (red square region in b) showing the interconnected solar cells formed by the thermally deposited Al film. (d) Voltage (black line) and power (blue line) of the compact c-Si PV module as a function of the number of mini-cells. 
An equivalent circuit for the SiPV–LIB device upon photo-charging/discharging is schematically illustrated in Fig. 3a. To create the equivalent circuit of the SiPV–LIB device, the single diode model42 and the Rint model43 were used for the SiPV and LIB, respectively. The photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging behaviour of the SiPV–LIB device was systematically investigated, based on the understanding of this equivalent circuit. Fig. 3b shows that the LIB cell of the SiPV–LIB device was rapidly photo-charged from 3.0 to 5.4 V after only 45 s under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun), and then, without undergoing constant voltage (CV) mode, the fully charged LIB cell was galvanostatically discharged to 3 V at a discharge current rate of 1.0C (=0.5 mA cm−2) for approximately 16 min. This photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging behaviour was steadily maintained for over 100 cycles (capacity retention after 100 cycles >∼98%; Fig. 3c). Notably, no appreciable loss in the photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency (PSE) was observed after the cycling test, which demonstrates the sustainable cycling performance of the SiPV–LIB device.
 Fig. 3  Photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging behaviour of the SiPV–LIB device. (a) Equivalent circuit of the SiPV–LIB device upon photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging. (b) Photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge profiles of the SiPV–LIB device, in which the SiPV–LIB device was photo-charged from 3.0 to 5.4 V for 45 s under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun) and was galvanostatically discharged to 3 V at a discharge current rate of 1.0C (=0.5 mA cm−2). (c) Photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge cycling performance (expressed by the capacity retention (black line with hollow circle) and photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency (blue line with filled circles)) of the SiPV–LIB device under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun) and a discharge current rate of 1.0C (=0.5 mA cm−2). Inset shows photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge profiles with repeated cycling. (d) Photo-charge capacity (black line with hollow circles) and photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency (blue solid line with filled circles) of the SiPV–LIB device as a function of photo-charging time. (e) Comparison of photo-electric conversion/storage efficiencies between this work (the SiPV–LIB device) and previously reported PV–battery systems with similar single-unit architectures (organic solar cell (OPV)-supercapacitors,24 DSSC-LIBs,20 and DSSC-supercapacitors14–16,18,19,27,52). (f) Digital photograph showing the operation of the SiPV–LIB-embedded smartcard. Inset shows the overall thickness of the resulting smartcard. (g) Galvanostatic discharge rate capability of the SiPV–LIB device (after photo-charging for 120 s under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2) over a wide range of discharge current densities from 0.5 to 5.0C. (h) Photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging profiles of the SiPV–LIB devices at a fixed discharge current rate of 1.0C as a function of light intensity (8, 40, and 100 mW cm−2). 
The photo-charged capacity was examined as a function of photo-charging time (at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2) and it exhibited a linear dependence on the light illumination time (Fig. 3d). Additionally, the SiPV–LIB device was fully charged under sunlight illumination after only 2 min. The photo-charging behaviour of the SiPV–LIB device can be further discussed by considering the following equation:44 (1)where IT, Iph, Idark, I0, VT, VLIB, Rs, Rsh, RLIB, kB, and T represent the total current of the PV–battery device, the PV photocurrent, the current of the PV–battery device in a dark environment, the reverse saturation current, the total voltage of the PV–battery device, the internal voltage of the LIB, the PV series resistance, the PV shunt resistance, the internal resistance of the LIB, Boltzmann's constant, and the temperature, respectively. In general, during the photo-charging of batteries, the negative current (Idark) in eqn (1) tends to increase due to the increased voltage of the charged battery while the positive current (Iph) generated from the c-Si PV module is maintained at the same level.9 As a result, IT is reduced when the voltage of the photo-charged battery is increased. In contrast, for the SiPV–LIB device, the LIB can be steadily and rapidly photo-charged due to the SiPV module that is designed to consistently generate a higher voltage (VT) than the operating voltage (VLIB) of the LIB.
An important factor for describing the photo-induced energy conversion and storage capability of the SiPV–LIB device is the PSE, which can be quantitatively estimated by the equation shown below: (2)where I is the constant galvanostatic discharge current density of 0.5 mA cm−2, tdischarge is the discharge time, ELIB is the energy stored in the LIB, Ein is the incident solar energy, Pin is the incident light power density, tcharge is the illumination time during photo-charging, and A is the area of the PV module. As shown in Fig. 3d, the PSE of the SiPV–LIB device increased rapidly from 5% to 7.23% in a duration less than the photo-charging time of 30 s, and then it reached a saturation value of 7.61% after 60 s. More notably, this PSE value (7.61%) of the SiPV–LIB device was higher than those of previously reported PV–battery systems with similar single-unit architecture (Fig. 3e and Table S2, ESI†), which underscores its superior performance as a new photo-rechargeable power source.
To highlight and visualize the rapid photo-charging capability and the unique nature of the design described above, the SiPV–LIB device was combined with a smartcard and its electrochemical performance was examined (Fig. 3f). The SiPV–LIB device was monolithically embedded into the smartcard, and its low thickness of 0.13 cm ensured that there was no significant impact on the overall dimension and shape of the smartcard. The LIB of the SiPV–LIB device was photo-charged under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Notably, the SiPV–LIB device was capable of lighting up an LED lamp mounted in the smartcard after photo-charging was performed for only 20 s. This result demonstrates the potential for applying the SiPV–LIB device as an aesthetically unitized power source for use in future IOTs and wearable electronics.
The discharge rate capability of the SiPV–LIB device, after photo-charging had been performed for 120 s under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2, was examined over a wide range of discharge current densities between 0.5 and 5.0C (Fig. 3g). Similar to discharge behaviours of traditional LIB cells,4 the discharge capacities of the SiPV–LIB device decreased as the discharge current density increased from 0.5 to 5.0C. Intriguingly, a satisfactory level of discharge capacity was observed even at a fast discharge rate of 5.0C, which indicates that the SiPV–LIB device can be readily applied in a variety of fields including that of electric vehicles in which high operating currents are required.
The photo-induced energy conversion capability of the SiPV–LIB device was investigated to explore its versatile use under a wide range of light intensity conditions, including in an indoor environment (Fig. S8 and Table S3, ESI†). Even at an extremely low light intensity of 8 mW cm−2, which corresponds to the intensity in a dimly-lit living room,45 the output voltage of the SiPV–LIB device was observed to be over 12.0 V, which is much higher than the voltage (≤5.4 V) of the LIB. To attain quantitative information on the photo-electrochemical performance of the SiPV–LIB device, the photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge behaviour of the SiPV–LIB device at a fixed discharge current rate of 1.0C was investigated as a function of the light intensity (at 8, 40, and 100 mW cm−2). Fig. 3h shows that the SiPV–LIB device was successfully photo-charged even under a low light intensity of 8 mW cm−2 and then galvanostatically discharged for 60 min, although the lower light intensity, which yielded a lower photo-current of the SiPV module, required a longer photo-charging time. As the light intensity decreased, a slight reduction in PSE was observed due to the decreased PCE of the SiPV module under lower light intensity. Meanwhile, a lower light intensity led to a decrease in the PCE of the c-Si PV module, thus resulting in a slight reduction in the PSE of the SiPV–LIB device.
One formidable challenge that faces photo-rechargeable electric energy storage systems is their thermal instability because long-term exposure to sunlight tends to trigger heat-induced structural disruption and performance degradation of the systems. This problem becomes more pronounced in batteries or DSSCs that use liquid-state electrolytes that are vulnerable to elevated temperature conditions. After the SiPV–LIB device was placed in a hot oven for 1 h with the temperature varied from 60 to 120 °C, its dimensional change was monitored. Neither swelling nor shrinkage was observed for the Si-PV LIB device over the entire range of temperatures examined in this study (Fig. S9a, ESI†). The thermal stability of the SiPV–LIB device was further evaluated as a function of the number of photo-charge/discharge cycles under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 and a discharge current rate of 1.0C at various operating temperatures. The SiPV–LIB device showed good capacity retention (>95%) after 100 cycles at 60 °C as well as 25 and 40 °C (Fig. S9b, ESI†). This excellent thermal tolerance, which is attributed to the adoption of the crystalline Si PV module and the solid-state LIB, is a salient advantage of the SiPV–LIB device compared to previously reported photo-rechargeable electric energy storage systems that use liquid electrolytes.17,20
The discharge performance of the SiPV–LIB device was investigated in detail under sunlight illumination at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Fig. 4a shows the discharge profiles of the SiPV–LIB device as a function of discharge current density (28, 30, 48, and 60C). Amazingly, no appreciable loss in the discharge voltage of the SiPV–LIB device was observed in the measured time at the high discharge current density of 28C (Fig. 4a and Fig. S10, ESI†). In addition, the SiPV–LIB device showed a detectable discharge capacity even under the extremely fast discharge current density of 60C. However, the SiPV–LIB device placed in a dark environment showed poor discharge behaviour at rapid discharge current rates (the inset of Fig. 4a), which is commonly observed for conventional LIBs.
 Fig. 4  Discharge performance of SiPV–LIB devices under sunlight illumination at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (a) Galvanostatic discharge profiles of the SiPV–LIB device as a function of discharge current density (28, 30, 48, and 60C). Inset shows the discharge profiles of the SiPV–LIB device in the dark environment. (b) Internal resistances (Rinternal) of LIB cells in SiPV–LIB devices under sunlight illumination (red line) and in the dark environment (black line). (c) Ragone plots of SiPV–LIB devices under sunlight illumination (red line) and in the dark environment (black line). The EV target goal announced by the US Department of Energy46 is marked by the star symbol. (d) Digital photograph showing a smartphone that is being charged by the SiPV–LIB device under sunlight illumination. 
Considering that electric vehicle batteries require high discharge current densities to deliver the high power needed for operating in various driving modes,46,47 the aforementioned discharge performance of the SiPV–LIB device is highly appealing because the results shown in Fig. 4a indicate that, if new large-sized photo-rechargeable power sources with sufficient energy density could be fabricated using the concept of the SiPV–LIB device proposed herein, they might continuously operate electric vehicles with a current load below 28C under sunlight illumination.
The unusual discharge behaviour of the SiPV–LIB device is ascribed to the remarkable reduction in the internal resistance (Rinternal) of the LIB under sunlight illumination compared to that in the dark environment (Fig. 4b); here, Rinternal48 was determined using Ohm's law by measuring the difference in the initial voltage between the voltage at open-circuit and the voltage at a given current density (Fig. S11, ESI†). Driven by electrons generated by the c-Si PV module, a significant difference in the electron concentration may be developed between the c-Si PV module and the LIB cell, thereby boosting the transport of electrons from the c-Si PV module (with a high electron concentration) to the LIB (with a low electron concentration). As a result, electron migration towards the LIB could be facilitated, which results in the decrease of Rinternal. This result for the SiPV–LIB device appears similar to the transport phenomena of plasmon-induced hot electrons in metal/Si Schottky junctions where a high concentration of electrons can overcome the energy barrier to produce a current for optoelectronics.49–51 Further studies are required to better understand this unusual discharge behaviour of the SiPV–LIB device under sunlight illumination.
This exceptional galvanostatic discharge performance of the SiPV–LIB device is expected to offer remarkable advances in the Ragone plot, which depicts the relationship between energy and power densities. The volumetric/gravimetric energy and power densities of the SiPV–LIB device were determined by considering the weight/volume of the major components while the contribution of the packaging substances was excluded. Intriguingly, under sunlight illumination, the SiPV–LIB device showed significant improvements in the volumetric/gravimetric energy and power densities without altering the electrochemically active materials (Fig. 4c and Fig. S12, ESI†), which lay far beyond the results achievable with the LIBs alone (i.e., obtained in the dark environment). The target value of energy/power density required for long-range electric vehicles (operating for at least 300 miles), which was announced by the US Department of Energy,46 is also marked on the Ragone plot. Due to the noteworthy galvanostatic discharging under sunlight illumination, the SiPV–LIB device satisfied the challenging energy/power density requirements for electric vehicles. Most notably, limitless energy density was achieved at power densities below 1000 W L−1, which demonstrates the potential utilization of the SiPV–LIB device as a solar-driven infinite power source for electric vehicles. The SiPV–LIB device was connected to various portable electronics to explore its practical use. A smartphone (Fig. 4d and Movie S1a, ESI†) and a MP3 player (Movie S1b, ESI†) were successfully charged by the SiPV–LIB device under sunlight illumination. This demonstrates that the SiPV–LIB device can be used as a portable supplementary battery (one that requires no conventional battery chargers). In addition, we anticipate that integration of the SiPV–LIB device into electronic appliances can contribute to the realization of charge-less mobile electronics that operate under sunlight illumination.
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated monolithically integrated SiPV–LIB devices as a new class of photo-rechargeable portable power sources with exceptional photo-electrochemical performance and design compactness. The solid-state bipolar LIB cell was directly fabricated onto the Al electrode of a c-Si PV module (25 units of 0.36 cm2 Si cells; output voltage = 14.1 V and PCE = 15.8%) through an in-series printing process, which resulted in the development of a structurally unitized/electrically connected SiPV–LIB device with dimensions of 3 × 3 × 0.13 (cm/cm/cm). Driven by the unique device architecture and well-tailored physicochemical properties of the c-Si PV module and the LIB cell, the SiPV–LIB device exhibited unprecedented improvements in photo-charging (rapid charging in less than 2 min with a photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency of 7.61%), discharge rate capability (continuous discharging at a rapid rate of 28C), and photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge cycling performance (capacity retention >∼98% after 100 cycles) compared with conventional PVs or LIBs alone. In addition, the SiPV–LIB device showed decent photo-rechargeable electric energy storage behaviour even at a high temperature of 60 °C and an extremely low light intensity of 8 mW cm−2. More importantly, limitless energy at power densities below 1000 W L−1 was produced by the SiPV–LIB device under sunlight illumination, which highlights its potential application as a solar-driven infinite energy conversion/storage system for use in electric vehicles and portable electronics. The SiPV–LIB device presented herein shows great potential as a photo-rechargeable mobile power source that will play a pivotal role in the future era of ubiquitous electronics.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Basic Research Program (2014R1A1A1004885, 2015R1D1A1A01059726, 2015R1A2A1A01003474) and the Wearable Platform Materials Technology Center (2016R1A5A1009926) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning. This work was also supported by the Development Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) (Grant No. B6-2431).
References
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, aad4424 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su, H. Zhang, H. Cheng, B. Lu, C. Yu, C. Chuang, T. I. Kim, T. Song, K. Shigeta, S. Kang, C. Dagdeviren, I. Petrov, P. V. Braun, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1543 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Chen and L. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schmidt, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1500369 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, J. Kim, T. Y. Kim, M. S. Al Hossain, S. W. Kim and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7983–7999 CAS .
M. Yu, X. Ren, L. Ma and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, C. Bumgardner, N. Song, Y. Zhang, J. Li and X. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Gibson and N. A. Kelly, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3928–3932 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wedege, J. Azevedo, A. Khataee, A. Bentien and A. Mendes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7142–7147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Ostfeld, A. M. Gaikwad, Y. Khan and A. C. Arias, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Pandey, P. C. Deakin, R. D. Jansen-Van Vuuren, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3954–3958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, H. Wu, L. Lu, S.-F. Leung, D. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Fan, G. Shen and D. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1840–1846 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Huang, C. Li and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4093–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. P. Li, H. Lin, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 CAS .
M. A. Mahmoudzadeh, A. R. Usgaocar, J. Giorgio, D. L. Officer, G. G. Wallace and J. D. W. Madden, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3446–3452 CAS .
Z. Yang, L. Li, Y. Luo, R. He, L. Qiu, H. Lin and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 954–958 CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Wu, S. Ye, X. Cai, X. Yu, S. Hou, H. Kafafy and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805–812 CAS .
W. Guo, X. Xue, S. Wang, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2520–2523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Y. Wang, D. Tang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9271–9274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cohn, W. R. Erwin, K. Share, L. Oakes, A. S. Westover, R. E. Carter, R. Bardhan and C. L. Pint, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2727–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, H. Dong, R. Zhu, H. Li, Y. Sun, D. Xu, Q. Zhao and D. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 670–678 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wee, T. Salim, Y. M. Lam, S. G. Mhaisalkar and M. Srinivasan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 413–416 CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhao, W. Wang, H. Dong, D. Xu, G. Zou, H. Duan and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1271–1277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Chen, C.-Y. Hsu, J.-G. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-C. Wang, K.-C. Huang and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6225–6231 CrossRef CAS .
E.-H. Kil, K.-H. Choi, H.-J. Ha, S. Xu, J. A. Rogers, M. R. Kim, Y.-G. Lee, K. M. Kim, K. Y. Cho and S.-Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1395–1400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Kim, K.-H. Choi, S. J. Cho, E.-H. Kil and S.-Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4949–4955 CAS .
S.-H. Kim, K.-H. Choi, S.-J. Cho, S. Choi, S. Park and S.-Y. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5168–5177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Um, I. Hwang, N. Kim, Y. J. Yu, M. Wober, K.-H. Kim and K. Seo, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500347 CrossRef .
K.-H. Choi, J. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 CAS .
Y. L. Kong, I. A. Tamargo, H. Kim, B. N. Johnson, M. K. Gupta, T. W. Koh, H. A. Chin, D. A. Steingart, B. P. Rand and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7017–7023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yoshima, H. Munakata and K. Kanamura, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 404–408 CrossRef CAS .
N. Schweikert, R. Heinzmann, A. Eichhofer, H. Hahn and S. Indris, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 226, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ferg, R. J. Gummow, A. Dekock and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L147–L150 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Baca, K. J. Yu, J. Xiao, S. Wang, J. Yoon, J. H. Ryu, D. Stevenson, R. G. Nuzzo, A. A. Rockett, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 208–211 CAS .
Y. Yao, E. Brueckner, L. Li and R. Nuzzo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3071–3079 CAS .
J. Yoon, A. J. Baca, S. I. Park, P. Elvikis, J. B. Geddes, L. F. Li, R. H. Kim, J. L. Xiao, S. D. Wang, T. H. Kim, M. J. Motala, B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, J. A. Lewis, R. G. Nuzzo, P. M. Ferreira, Y. G. Huang, A. Rockett and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 907–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ebe, H. Seno and K. Horigome, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2003, 90, 436–441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nam, M. Song, D. H. Kim, B. Cho, H. M. Lee, J. D. Kwon, S. G. Park, K. S. Nam, Y. Jeong, S. H. Kwon, Y. C. Park, S. H. Jin, J. W. Kang, S. Jo and C. S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4788 Search PubMed .

          J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, London, UK,  2003 Search PubMed .
V. H. Johnson, J. Power Sources, 2002, 110, 321–329 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ortiz-Conde, F. J. García Sánchez and J. Muci, Solid-State Electron., 2000, 44, 1861–1864 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Butler and P. M. Biner, Environ. Behav., 1987, 19, 695–721 CrossRef .

          R. Garcia-Valle and J. A. P. Lopes, Electric Vehicle Integration into Modern Power Networks, Springer, NY, USA,  2013 Search PubMed .
K. S. Kang, Y. S. Meng, J. Breger, C. P. Grey and G. Ceder, Science, 2006, 311, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Huang, K. Huang, D. Carnahan and Y. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3339–3345 CAS .
A. Akbari and P. Berini, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 021104 CrossRef .
I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, J. Khurgin, J. Shappir and U. Levy, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2219–2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Peters, Proc. IEEE, 1967, 55, 704–705 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jost, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10776–10787 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S12. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03266d‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
The rapidly approaching ubiquitous energy era, which will encompass the use of the internet of things (IOTs), wearable electronics, and electric vehicles (EVs), has pushed us to relentlessly pursue high-energy density power sources with reliable electrochemical performance and design flexibility. The combination of energy generation and energy storage systems is considered to be an ultimate solution to address the energy density issue. For example, photovoltaic (PV) cell–battery systems convert solar to electrical energy using the PVs and then store the generated electrical energy in the batteries. Therefore, the PV–battery systems can continuously operate electronic devices under light illumination whenever/wherever they are needed, which demonstrates their potential application as infinite energy sources that resolve both the energy density problem of batteries and the energy storage concerns of solar cells. Here, we demonstrate a new class of monolithically integrated, photo-rechargeable portable power sources based on miniaturized crystalline Si photovoltaics (c-Si PVs) and printed solid-state lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) as a facile and scalable system architecture to achieve the aforementioned challenging goal. The single-unit PV–LIB device suggested herein provides a remarkable improvement in electrochemical performance that lies far beyond those achievable by conventional PVs or LIBs alone, exhibiting great potential as a new photo-rechargeable portable power source that will play a pivotal role in the future era of ubiquitous smart electronics.


 	Fig. 1  The monolithically integrated SiPV–LIB device and the electrochemical performance of the bipolar LIB. (a) Digital photograph (front) of the SiPV–LIB device featuring a monolithic tandem cell configuration. Inset shows the back of the SiPV–LIB device. (b) Schematic representation of the internal structure and operating principle of the SiPV–LIB device under sunlight illumination. (c) Schematic illustration of the printing-based stepwise fabrication of the solid-state bipolar LIB cell directly on a c-Si PV module. (d and e) Cross-sectional SEM images of the 2-stack bipolar LIB cell (d) and the seamlessly unitized interface between the bipolar LIB cell and c-Si PV module (e). (f) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of 1-stack (grey lines) and 2-stack (blue lines) LIB cells. (g) OCV profiles of the SiPV–LIB device and bare bipolar LIB cell as a function of elapsed time. (h) Galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles of the bipolar LIB cell in the SiPV–LIB device as a function of the cycle number at a constant charge/discharge current density of 1.0C/1.0C.	 

 	Fig. 2  Assembly of a high-voltage compact c-Si PV module. (a) Schematic illustration of a transfer-free c-Si PV module assembly using a UV-curable polymer and adhesive tapes. (b) Digital photograph (backside) of the compact c-Si PV module showing the interconnection of 25 solar cells in series. (c) Optical microscopy image (red square region in b) showing the interconnected solar cells formed by the thermally deposited Al film. (d) Voltage (black line) and power (blue line) of the compact c-Si PV module as a function of the number of mini-cells.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging behaviour of the SiPV–LIB device. (a) Equivalent circuit of the SiPV–LIB device upon photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging. (b) Photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge profiles of the SiPV–LIB device, in which the SiPV–LIB device was photo-charged from 3.0 to 5.4 V for 45 s under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun) and was galvanostatically discharged to 3 V at a discharge current rate of 1.0C (=0.5 mA cm−2). (c) Photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge cycling performance (expressed by the capacity retention (black line with hollow circle) and photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency (blue line with filled circles)) of the SiPV–LIB device under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (1 Sun) and a discharge current rate of 1.0C (=0.5 mA cm−2). Inset shows photo-charge/galvanostatic discharge profiles with repeated cycling. (d) Photo-charge capacity (black line with hollow circles) and photo-electric conversion/storage efficiency (blue solid line with filled circles) of the SiPV–LIB device as a function of photo-charging time. (e) Comparison of photo-electric conversion/storage efficiencies between this work (the SiPV–LIB device) and previously reported PV–battery systems with similar single-unit architectures (organic solar cell (OPV)-supercapacitors,24 DSSC-LIBs,20 and DSSC-supercapacitors14–16,18,19,27,52). (f) Digital photograph showing the operation of the SiPV–LIB-embedded smartcard. Inset shows the overall thickness of the resulting smartcard. (g) Galvanostatic discharge rate capability of the SiPV–LIB device (after photo-charging for 120 s under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2) over a wide range of discharge current densities from 0.5 to 5.0C. (h) Photo-charging/galvanostatic discharging profiles of the SiPV–LIB devices at a fixed discharge current rate of 1.0C as a function of light intensity (8, 40, and 100 mW cm−2).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Discharge performance of SiPV–LIB devices under sunlight illumination at a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. (a) Galvanostatic discharge profiles of the SiPV–LIB device as a function of discharge current density (28, 30, 48, and 60C). Inset shows the discharge profiles of the SiPV–LIB device in the dark environment. (b) Internal resistances (Rinternal) of LIB cells in SiPV–LIB devices under sunlight illumination (red line) and in the dark environment (black line). (c) Ragone plots of SiPV–LIB devices under sunlight illumination (red line) and in the dark environment (black line). The EV target goal announced by the US Department of Energy46 is marked by the star symbol. (d) Digital photograph showing a smartphone that is being charged by the SiPV–LIB device under sunlight illumination.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S12. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03266d
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
