Thermo-electrochemical cells for heat to electricity conversion: from mechanisms, materials, strategies to applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE01457B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01457B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3670-3687Thermo-electrochemical cells for heat to electricity conversion: from mechanisms, materials, strategies to applications

        
          
            Youfa 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mangwei 
            Cui
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Ling
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lukuan 
            Cheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Lei
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenzheng 
            Li
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yan 
            Huang
          
        
      *abc
aSauvage Laboratory for Smart Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China. E-mail: yanhuanglib@hit.edu.cn
bShenzhen Key Laboratory of Flexible Printed Electronics Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China
cState Key Laboratory of Advanced Welding and Joining, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, China
Received 
      6th May 2022
    , Accepted 22nd June 2022First published on 28th June 2022AbstractAbundant and ubiquitous thermal heat called low-grade heat (<150 °C) is wasted in our surroundings owing to the lack of effective and low-cost energy technologies. Thermo-electrochemical cells (TECs), mainly containing thermogalvanic cells and thermally charged capacitors, are one of the most promising candidates for heat to electricity conversion. They have been intensively investigated owing to the giant thermopower, intrinsic flexibility, low cost and good scalability. To date, great progress such as the giant thermopower (−37 mV K−1), large figure-of-merit (3.74) and high efficiency (11.1%) has been made for TECs. In addition, some functionalized TECs including flexible, stretchable, self-healable and antifreeze TECs have also been developed. However, it is still a great challenge to develop such TECs that combine high power density and efficiency as well as multifunction abilities for practical applications, particularly the thermogalvanic cells (which can continuously output electricity). Herein, we comprehensively summarized TECs from foundations to materials, strategies to engineering designs and opportunities to challenges, expecting to promote the development of TECs toward more superior performance and practicability.

Broader context
As we are limited by exhausted natural resources, energy utilization is a significant and meaningful topic for researchers. More than 60% of energy from fossil fuels is wasted to our surroundings in the form of waste heat due to lack of effective technologies. In addition, other abundant thermal resources including solar heat, geothermal energy and body heat also intensively fascinate researchers. In recent years, the emergence of thermo-electrochemical cells (TECs), including thermogalvanic cells (TGCs) and thermally charged capacitors (TCCs), has drawn intensive attention owing to their giant thermopower, which shows great potential in the field of heat to electricity conversion such as waste heat harvesting. Furthermore, with the development of quasi-solid (gels- or hydrogels-based) TECs, they could be widely used in flexible/wearable self-powered electronics and Internet of Things. However, there are still some persistent challenges that are highly desirable to overcome prior to their commercial applications. To promote the development of TECs toward more superior performance and practicability, this review comprehensively summarized TECs from foundations to materials, strategies to engineering designs and opportunities to challenges by combining recently promising progress of TECs.

1 Introduction
With the development of industry, human society has been long-term limited by both energy crisis and environmental issues, and it will become more serious in the future when these traditional fossil-fuel-based energy sources (including coal, petroleum and natural gas) are exhausted. In addition, burning these fossil fuels inevitably yields toxic by-products and greenhouse gas, resulting in serious pollution and climate issues. Therefore, technologies that can obtain energies from surroundings and be friendly to humans and the environment intrinsically fascinate researchers. In recent years, a promising energy source which is called low-grade heat (temperature lower than 150 °C) has been intensively investigated in fields of desalination,1 photothermal therapy2 and heat to electricity conversion based on the photothermal effect,1,2 Seebeck effect,3 pyroelectric effect4 and others.5 As shown in Fig. 1A, the low-grade heat is ubiquitous in our surroundings, such as solar heat, industrial waste heat, daily life waste heat and body heat. Solar heat is green, abundant and inexhaustible, showing great potential in the development of green chemistry.6,7 Industrial and daily life waste heat mainly originates from the burning of fossil fuels, and it should be noted that more than 60% of the fossil fuel energy is wasted in our surroundings in the form of waste heat, which means that a tremendous number of heat sources are available.8 Body heat is another promising heat source because a power of over 100 W can be generated from an adult.9 But until now, effective strategies to massively harvest such abundant, green and inexhaustible energies are still lacking for commercial applications in our life.
 Fig. 1  (A) Available heat sources in our surroundings. (B) Heat to electricity conversion technologies. (C) Applications of technologies referred in B. 
To this end, thermoelectric generators (TEGs) presented in Fig. 1B have been widely investigated in recent decades owing to their capability of converting heat to electricity directly,10–13 and vice versa. Compared to other energy generators, TEGs can work with no moving parts and no emissions, and continuously output power. However, traditional solid-state TEGs (also called electron-thermoelectric) mainly based on semiconductors are still inferior due to the low Seebeck coefficient of only a few hundred microvolts per Kelvin originating from electrons or holes as energy carriers, far beyond powering electronics with operating voltages at the level of volts.14,15 Furthermore, the involvement of rare elements, and expensive and toxic materials also restricts the wide harvesting of low-grade heat to electricity. Fortunately, as shown in Fig. 1B, there are two other advancing heat to electricity conversion technologies named thermogalvanic cells (TGCs)16–18 and thermally chargeable capacitors (TCCs).19,20 Since the energy carriers of TGCs and TCCs are ions in the electrolyte of cells, they are also normally called thermo-electrochemical cells (TECs).21,22 As displayed in Fig. 1C, TECs can be used as power generators and further applied in many related fields such as self-powered and flexible electronics, temperature sensors, etc.
Compared to traditional TEGs, the intensively investigated TECs are more competitive and practical as exhibited in Fig. 2. First, the thermopower (Si, equivalent to the Seebeck coefficient in TEGs) of TECs is 1–3 magnitudes higher than the Seebeck coefficient (S) of TEGs. As seen from Fig. 2A, the S value for promising TEG materials including Te,23 Bi2Te3,24 SnTe25 and PbTe26 is only in the range of 40–400 μV K−1, while the Si value for TGCs can be as high as 2–10 mV K−117,27–30 and even as large as dozens of mV K−1 for TCCs when ionic liquids or small molecule electrolytes are employed.31–35 This giant Si value for TECs makes them more suitable for power generators and thermal sensors by harvesting waste heat. Second, different from TEGs, the TECs are usually in a liquid or a quasi-solid (namely gel-based) state,17,36–39 making them more suitable for large scale manufacture. In addition, rather than rare, expensive and toxic materials, there is a vast amount of water or polymers utilized in TECs, making them abundant, inexpensive and less toxic. Furthermore, compared to gel-based TECs comprising polymer networks, these TECs display excellent flexibility and stretchability, well satisfying self-powered and flexible/wearable electronics.21,40,41
 Fig. 2  Comparisons of (A) thermopower and (B) merits between TEGs and TECs.17,23–35 
Over the recent years, significant progress has been realized in the field of TECs. For example, with chaotropic cations and highly soluble amide derivatives added into the electrolyte of a redox couple, the Si value of TGCs breaks through to −4.2 mV K−1 for a typical inorganic redox couple.17 Furthermore, by optimizing the interaction between an ion and its surroundings and regulating the humidity, both positive and negative Si values of TCCs reach state-of-the-art values of 34.5 and −37.6 mV K−1,33,35 respectively. More importantly, it can bidirectionally alter the Si value of TECs between positive and negative values,42 which is significant for configuration assembling. Also, great efforts in electrode design to improve the output performance via reaction kinetics promotion due to the large specific surface areas have been proved to be valid.43,44 With all these efforts, the Carnot-relative efficiency (ηr) of TECs has reached a delightful value of 11.1% near room temperature.45 Currently, apart from great performance improvements being achieved, functional TECs including flexible,46 stretchable,33 tough,47 antifreeze27 and self-healable48 TECs are also of significance for practical applications.
Although the TECs show significant potential in heat to electricity conversion, few papers have been published on the summary of TECs.22,40,49 Here, different from previous papers in perspectives, we aim to promote the development of TECs toward being more efficient and practical by providing comprehensive, clear and new insights. To achieve this goal, we summarized TECs from: (1) the mechanisms and assessments of TECs, (2) materials and their properties in TECs, (3) strategies for more efficient TECs, (4) engineering designs for more practical TECs, and (5) comprehensive perspectives on opportunities and challenges as well as discussion.
2 Mechanisms and materials
Currently, researchers are developing some potential materials such as redox couples, ionic liquids, polyelectrolytes, small molecule electrolytes and others for heat to electricity conversion with the mechanisms of the thermogalvanic effect or the Soret effect. In this part, these fundamentals of TECs will be summarized as follows.
2.1 Mechanisms for thermo-electrochemical cells
As mentioned above, both TEGs and TECs can convert heat to electricity, but their mechanisms are different. The former originates from the Seebeck effect of charge carriers (electrons or holes).50,51 Namely, when a temperature difference is applied to TEGs, their charge carrier will move from the hot to cold side, leading to a potential difference between the two sides. For the latter, it will be discussed in detail as below.

TGCs. 
TGCs are also called thermocells, which have been intensively investigated due to their large thermopower (1–10 mV K−1), low cost, abundance in terms of materials and large-scale fabrication.16,39,52–55 As shown in Fig. 3A, TGCs have the basic configuration of two electrodes sandwiching an electrolyte, where the electrolyte normally consists of a redox couple and water. To realize heat to electricity conversion, a temperature difference between the two electrodes is required. Here, hypothesize that the redox couple in Fig. 3A is A/B, and there are temperature-dependent reversible redox reactions between A and B as follows: A ⇌ ne− + B(1)When there is no temperature difference between the two electrodes, as presented in Fig. 3B-(i), the reactions (1) are in balance, resulting in no electricity generation to the external circuit due to the identical electron energy (EF, Fermi level) in the two electrodes.56 Once the temperature difference is established between the two electrodes, the balance of the reactions is broken, leading to the oxidation of A to B at the hot side and reduction of B to A at the cold side. At this state, as presented in Fig. 3B-(ii), the electrochemical potential (denoted as E(T0)) at the hot side increases to E(T0 + ΔT) due to the insertion of electrons. At the cold side, its initial state is maintained owing to the unchanged temperature. Thus, an open circuit voltage (VOC) can be generated at the applied temperature difference (ΔT). If an external circuit is connected to the cell at this state, electric current flow can occur (namely discharge) as displayed in Fig. 3B-(iii). Here, the generated B and A at the hot and cold side will return to the electrolyte by thermal diffusion and concentration diffusion, resulting in continuous electricity generation with the presence of temperature difference.39 Analogous to TEGs, the concept of p-type and n-type is also present in TGCs. As demonstrated in Fig. 3A, it is a typical p-type (oxidation at the hot side) TGCs with a negative thermopower. In contrast, a positive thermopower is delivered for n-type TGCs.21,57
 Fig. 3  (A) The configuration and working mechanism of TGCs. (B) Diagrams of energy changes during work. (C) Crucial parameters of TGCs. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (D) The configuration and working mechanism of TCCs. (E) Working principle (top) and the corresponding voltage and temperature gradient profiles (bottom) and (F) equivalent circuit diagram of TCCs. 


Parameters for TGCs. 
For TGCs, there are three crucial and interdependent parameters as exhibited in Fig. 3C, including thermopower (Si), effective electrical conductivity (σeff), and effective thermal conductivity (keff).39 For a reversible reaction such as (1), the Si is defined as the ratio of open circuit voltage (VOC) to temperature difference (ΔT), namely: (2)On the other hand, Si can also be comprehended from thermodynamics.21,39 It is related to the entropy difference change in the reaction: (3)where SA and SB, and A and B are partial molar entropy and Eastman entropy of species A and B, respectively; , n and F are the transport entropy of electrons in the external circuit, the number of electrons related to reaction (1), and the faradaic constant, respectively. In most cases, the Eastman entropy and  are negligible to partial molar entropy.21 Therefore, the Si for TGCs mainly depends on the entropy change (ΔSrx) of the reaction.
For effective electrical conductivity (σeff), it is more complex than for TEGs owing to involvement of redox species reaction at electrodes and mass transport in the electrolyte. In TGCs, the σeff is significantly impeded by three internal resistances including ohmic, activation, and mass transport resistances.39 The ohmic resistance is composed of electrode and electrolyte resistances. The activation resistance originates from the activation barrier of reactions at the electrodes. The mass transport resistance refers to ion diffusion and convection at the electrode–electrolyte interface and in the bulk electrolyte. Therefore, it is a common approach to evaluate σeff from the current–voltage (I–V) curve.27,45,58
Effective thermal conductivity (keff) resulting from the thermal convection and conduction of electrolytes under a temperature difference is another important parameter for TGCs.39 In particular, thermal convection cannot be ignored when a temperature gradient is present in TGCs.59,60 However, although the intrinsic thermal conduction of liquids can be measured using the transient hot-wire method,61 the suppression of keff was ignored in early studies owing to the difficulty in determination using the classical transient methods (either hot-wire or laser flash methods).39 Interestingly, the current research studies indicated that the steady-state method may be a more reliable strategy than transient methods to measure the keff of liquid TGCs.45,62 Currently, the effective strategies to suppress keff are the employment of a thermal separator63 and the development of gel-based electrolytes for TGCs due to their low thermal conductivity (0.1–0.5 W m−1 K−1),58,64,65 where the thermal convection can be effectively suppressed in such cases. To develop promising TGCs, the keff is expected to be low enough.
When it comes to energy conversion performance for TGCs, other two parameters, the temperature-insensitive maximum power density (Pmax/(ΔT)2) and Carnot-relative efficiency (ηr),39 are highly interesting. The former focuses on the output performance and the latter concentrates on the energy conversion efficiency. Formulae (4) and (5) show the relationship between these two parameters and the aforementioned parameters. (4) (5)Here A, d and Th are the cross-area of the cells, the inter-distance between the two electrodes and the temperature at the hot side. In addition, the terms Si2 × σeff and  in formulae (4) and (5) are widely called the power factor (PF) and figure-of-merit (Z), respectively. Therefore, to provide large Pmax/(ΔT)2 and ηr, high PF and Z values are required, which demand Si and σeff values as huge as possible accompanying low keff.


TCCs. 
TCCs are also called thermally charged or ionic thermoelectric supercapacitors, which are promising TECs that have been widely investigated in recent years.66–69 The currently studied TCCs are mainly hydrogels or iongels, drawing attention due to their not only large Si (dozens mV K−1) but also excellent flexibility and stretchability, a prerequisite in wearable electronics.21,70,71 As shown in Fig. 3D, the TCCs show the same configuration as TGCs, but electrodes act as both a current collector and capacitor to store and release charges.19,34,66 The heat to electricity conversion of TCCs is based on the Soret effect of ions in electrolytes.66,72 Ions migrate and accumulate at the two electrodes when a temperature difference is applied, inducing electric double layers (Fig. 3D). As illustrated in Fig. 3E, before a temperature difference (ΔT) is applied (stage i), there are no ion accumulation and voltage generation. Once the ΔT is applied (stage ii), the ions accumulate and generate voltage VOC = Si × ΔT after stabilization. If the two electrodes are connected (stage iii), the supercapacitor (electrode) is charged. The stored charge (QCh) for TCCs in this stage can be calculated by integrating the current during this time. After charging, the ΔT is withdrawn and the external circuit is disconnected (stage iv). The VOC in this stage is entirely governed by the voltage drop from the stored charges in the TCCs. Finally, it enables to discharge by connecting the TCCs to an external circuit (stage v). Fig. 3F shows the equivalent circuit of TCCs.


Parameters for TCCs. 
The parameters for TCCs are mostly the same as the aforementioned parameters for TGCs with several differences. The first is that the ion electrical conductivity (σi) of the electrolyte rather than effective electrical conductivity (σeff) is employed.33,38,73 In general, the σi is tested using electrochemical impedance.34 The second is the definition of the p/n-type. For TCCs, the p/n-type depends on the mobility of anions and cations.42 If anions move faster than cations, indicating a n-type with negative thermopower for TCCs, otherwise is a p-type with positive thermopower. The last is the parameter called energy storage (ECh), and it can be obtained from the formula:67 (6)where QCh and C are the stored charge and capacitance of the electrode materials, and VOC is the thermovoltage generated by TCCs under the temperature difference.

2.2 Promising materials for thermo-electrochemical cells
As afore-mentioned, all TECs have the same basic configuration with two electrodes sandwiching an electrolyte, meaning TECs contain electrode and electrolyte materials. But in this part, we only discuss the electrolyte materials, and the electrode materials will be discussed in Section 3.2. Irrespective of whether liquid or quasi-solid state electrolyte materials, only the ions in electrolyte are carriers for energy conversion. Electrolyte materials for TECs can be classified into redox couples, ionic liquids, polyelectrolytes and small molecule electrolytes. The former is suitable for TGCs, and the latter three are intensively investigated in TCCs.

Redox couples. 
Redox couples are a class of materials that display a temperature-dependent reversible redox reaction. Up to now, plenty of redox couples have been developed for TGCs, but only a few of them show great potential in energy conversion. Fig. 4A–C present the intensively investigated inorganic redox couples in recent years due to their large entropy change (ΔSrx) during redox reactions. For example, the typical redox couple ferro/ferricyanide Fe(CN)64−/3−74–77 shows a huge ΔSrx of −135.1 J K−1 mol−1,56 resulting in a negative Si of −1.4 mV K−1. Moreover, this Si value can be further improved to −2.9 mV K−1 and even −4.2 mV K−1 by adding additives into its aqueous electrolyte.17,56 Therefore, it has been widely utilized in TGCs for energy harvesting. Iron(II/III) (Fe2+/3+) and iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) are two other promising inorganic redox couples for TGCs, and both are n-type with a positive Si value. The disadvantage of Fe2+/3+27,78 and I−/I3−52,79,80 redox couples is their inferior Si values with only 1.0 and 0.5 mV K−1, respectively. Recently, both their Si values have been adjusted over 2.0 mV K−1 with great efforts.27,28 Interestingly, the Si value of the I−/I3− redox couple can be turned from positive to negative, which is significant in the assembly of TGCs.81 Apart from these intensively studied inorganic redox couples, other inorganic redox couples such as tin(IV/II) (Sn4+/Sn2+)46,82 and cobalt(II/III) (Co2+/Co3+)83 are also investigated due to their large Si values of 1.5 and 1.4 mV K−1, respectively. In addition to inorganic redox couples, organic redox couples presented in Fig. 4D–F are also employed with TECs for heat harvesting recently.29,30,84 Compared to inorganic redox couples, these redox couples possess a higher Si value (from −6.7 to −9.9 and 6.1 mV K−1). But their complexity in the synthesis and the process of phase transition somehow restricts their applications.
 Fig. 4  Promising materials for thermo-electrochemical cells. (A–C) Inorganic and (D–F) organic redox couples: Fe(CN)64−/3−,77 Fe3+/2+,78 I−/I3−, Q/HQ,30 PCET,84 and CP/IPA,29 respectively. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Chemical structures of typical (G) ionic liquids and (H) polyelectrolytes. (I) Small molecule electrolytes such as NaCl34 (i) and NaOH19 (ii). Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2021, Wiley. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Ionic liquids. 
This family of room-temperature molten salts with fascinating properties including negligible volatility, low flammability, high ionic mobility and a wide electrochemical window have been widely employed in solar cells,85,86 field effect transistors87,88 and Li-ion batteries.89,90 Furthermore, they also show great influence on the TE performance of conductive polymer PEDOT:PSS.91,92 In the field of TECs, ionic liquids behave as energy carriers in TCCs, which show an enormous Si value in heat to electricity conversion.32,38,93Fig. 4G exhibits the typical ionic liquids utilized in TCCs. For example, EMIM:DCA shows giant Si values of 25.4 and 34.5 mV K−1 in ionogel films,33,38 and the EMIM:BF4-included hydrogel presents a large Si value of 19.3 mV K−1.31 Due to such large Si values, ionic liquids have been widely investigated in TCCs.


Polyelectrolytes. 
Compared to ionic liquids, polyelectrolytes are less studied in heat harvesting due to their fair thermopower. The mostly investigated polyelectrolytes (Fig. 4H) in recent years are polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSS:H) and polystyrene sulfonate sodium (PSS:Na) because they can dissociate H+ or Na+ in the electrolyte. According to recent reports, Si values of 8 and 4 mV K−1 are achieved for PSS:H and PSS:Na, respectively.32,67


Small molecule electrolytes. 
Small molecule electrolytes employed in TECs are mainly salts and bases. Similar to ionic liquids, these small molecule electrolytes have great potential in heat harvesting in recent reports because of their large Si value. For example, as shown in Fig. 4I-(i), by immersing the polyacrylamide/sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (PMSC) hydrogel in NaCl solution, a large Si value of 17.1 mV K−1 is reported.34 Han and his co-workers reported a similar Si value of 17.0 mV K−1.65 They pointed out that there is 62.2% contribution to the Si value from the thermal diffusion of KCl in gelatin. Being similar to salt-based TCCs, researchers have reported a large Si value of 11.1 mV K−1 in the NaOH/polyethylene oxide (PEO) electrolyte (Fig. 4I-(ii)).19 More recently, researchers have further attempted applying this small molecule electrolyte to the cellulosic membrane and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) hydrogels, and they successfully obtained significant Si including 24 and −37.6 mV K−1,35,68 respectively.

2.3 A special mechanism and materials for thermo-electrochemical cells
Apart from the above-mentioned TGCs and TCCs, another TECs called thermally regenerative electrochemical cycles (TRECs) also display capability in the conversion of heat to electricity.94–96 But these TRECs show significant difference in both configuration and mechanism. First, as exhibited in Fig. 5A, asymmetric electrodes with negative and positive Si values are required to react with the electrolyte for energy conversion, where the electrodes in TGCs only behave as current collectors.97 Second, albeit the heat to electricity conversion for TRECs is the same as for TGCs which relate to the temperature-dependent chemical reactions, the energy conversion as presented in Fig. 5A for TRECs normally undergoes a thermal cycling with four processes: heating up, charging, cooling down and discharging.97 Namely, charging at high temperature and discharging at low temperature, or charging at low temperature and discharging at high temperature, which depend on the total thermopower (Scell) of the cell (Scell > 0 works as the former, Scell < 0 works as the latter).95 Since the charging voltage is always lower than the discharging voltage, the net work is energy output during the thermal cycling.95,97Fig. 5B shows the temperature–entropy (T–S) diagram of a TREC during its thermal cycling. Decades ago, the TREC was mainly developed for high-temperature (500–1500 °C) conversion with an efficiency of 40–50% to the Carnot limit.97 In recent years, it has been developed to low-grade heat conversion. For example, by employing solid copper hexacyanoferrate (CuHCF) and Cu/Cu2+ as positive and negative electrodes in an aqueous electrolyte, Lee and his co-workers developed a TREC with a themopower of −1.2 mV K−1 as displayed in Fig. 5C.97 In another work as presented in Fig. 5D–F, Wang and his co-workers utilized both GO/Pt and PANI as positive and negative electrodes in an Fe2+/3+ aqueous electrolyte,98 successfully fabricating a TREC with themopower as high as −5.0 mV K−1. Recently, in an interesting work as shown in Fig. 5G, a thermally charging zinc ion cell with a themopower of 12.5 mV K−1 has been proposed by heating the VO2-porous carbon cathode.99
 Fig. 5  Thermally regenerative electrochemical cycle (TREC) for heat to electricity conversion. (A) The mechanism illustration of the TREC, which undergoes a thermal cycling during operation: step 1, heating up the cell; step 2, charging at high temperature; step 3, cooling down the cell; and step 4, discharging at low temperature.97 (B) Temperature–entropy (T–S) diagram of the TREC during the thermal cycling. (C) Thermopower of the Cu/Cu2+-based TREC developed by Lee et al.97 Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (D–F) The GO/PtNPs//Fe2+,Fe3+//PANI/CP TREC proposed by Wang et al.: schematic diagram (D), heat to electricity conversion mechanism (E), and thermopower (F) of the proposed cell.98 Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (G) Zinc ion thermal charging cell assembled by Li et al.: schematic diagram (i) and thermopower (ii) of this assembled cell.99 Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group. 
3 Strategies for promising performance
Since the performance of TECs highly depends on the three interdependent parameters including thermopower (Si), effective electrical conductivity (σeff) and effective thermal conductivity (keff), amazing TECs are expected to have high σeff, giant Si and low keff, so as to realize large thermovoltage, great temperature-insensitive maximum power density (Pmax/(ΔT)2) and high Carnot-relative efficiency (ηr). Over the last few years, researchers have made great efforts in the progress of Si, but less in σeff and keff on the fact that σeff is complex with the kinetics and thermodynamics of mass transfer and chemical reaction among the electrolyte and electrodes, and keff involves complex heat transfer behavior in the electrolyte. In this section, all these will be comprehensively discussed and summarized.
3.1 Enhancement of thermopower

Redox couples. 
As mentioned in formula (3) that the thermopower (Si) of redox couples mainly depends on the entropy change (ΔSrx) of redox species during the reaction, the ΔSrx is determined by the reaction thermodynamics.39,78 Namely, ΔSrx is related to the solvation-structural entropy difference (ΔS) and the concentration ratio difference (ΔCr) between redox species,39,45,56 suggesting that improvement of either ΔS or ΔCr can efficiently boost the Si value. In general, the ΔS value of redox species can be enhanced by regulating the interactions between the redox species and their solvent surroundings with special additives as shown in Fig. 6A.39 The reoriented and complicated solvation-structure of redox species by additives thus enhances the Si value. The most successful case with this strategy was reported in Duan's work (Fig. 6B).17 On the consideration of redox species Fe(CN)64−/3− (Fig. 6B-(i)) behaving as chaotropic anions, the authors selected the chaotropic cations (Fig. 6B-(ii)) to strongly interact with the redox species (especially Fe(CN)64−) by chaotrope–chaotrope ion interaction to rearrange the solvation shells (Fig. 6B-(iii)) of the redox couple, thus improving Si from −1.4 to −2.7 mV K−1 due to the enhanced structural entropy difference. In addition, the soluble amide derivatives such as urea is also introduced to further enlarge ΔS by bonding with Fe(CN)63−. Finally, an extremely large Si value of −4.2 mV K−1 is reported in Fig. 6B-(iv). Similarly, Kim and his co-workers added methanol into the Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− aqueous electrolyte to rearrange the solvation shell of redox species, resulting in a double boosted Si value of −2.9 mV K−1 (Fig. 6C) with an increased entropy change difference.56
 Fig. 6  Strategies for large thermopower in TGCs. (A) Schematic diagram of a strategy that improves entropy difference of solvation structures between redox couples by adding specific agents for large thermopower.39 Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (B) Large thermopower results from increased solvation-structural entropy difference for an aqueous K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 thermogalvanic cell: the plane structure diagram of the cell (i), chemical structure of the employed chaotropic species (ii), the schematic solvation formation of Fe(CN)63− and Fe(CN)64− in GdmCl solution (iii), the large thermopower boosted by urea only and chaotropic species and urea together (iv).17 Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (C) Great boosted thermopower from the improved structural entropy difference of Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− reported by Kim et al.56 Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (D) The concentration ratio difference contributes to large thermopower in the K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 thermogalvanic cell: the mechanism of the concentration ratio difference boosted thermopower (i) and its corresponding thermopower (ii).45 Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (E) (NH4)2SO4 induced concentration ratio difference for a large thermopower of the Cu/Cu2+ thermogalvanic cell.36 Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (F) Thermogalvanic effect and Soret effect synergistically boost thermopower.65 Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2020, AAAS. 
Since the ΔCr value also plays a significant role in the enhancement of the Si value of redox couples, researchers have paid much attention to this strategy recently. For example, in the aqueous TGCs containing the Fe(CN)64−/3− redox couple (Fig. 6D),45 Yu and his co-workers introduced guanidinium chloride (GdmCl) into TGCs to selectively induce Fe(CN)64− crystallized at the cold side and dissolved at the hot side in time (Fig. 6D-(i)), obtaining a large ΔCr value of Fe(CN)64−/3− between the hot and cold sides. Therefore, a high Si value of −3.73 mV K−1 is reported (Fig. 6D-(ii)). Later in another work, by adding (NH4)2SO4 to result in Cu2+ being crystallized at the cold side and dissolved at the hot side, a Cu/Cu2+-based TGC with a double boosted Si value of 1.66 mV K−1 is developed (Fig. 6E).36 To generate ΔCr in redox species between the cold side and hot side, Zhou and his co-workers reported another strategy in their I−/I3−-based TGCs,28 namely, utilizing α-cyclodextrins (α-CDs) to capture I3− species at the cold side and release at the hot side. Hence, the Si value is improved from 0.86 to 2.0 mV K−1. Although ΔCr shows great potential in enhancing the Si value, it is challenging to establish a permanent ΔCr owing to its thermodynamic instability. Recently, in gel-based TECs, researchers also made significant progress in enlarging Si values. For example, with the synergistic effect of the thermogalvanic effect of the redox couple and the thermal diffusion of ions, Han and his co-workers obtained a giant Si value of 17.0 mV K−1 as shown in Fig. 6F.65 In addition, by introducing the Fe2+/3+ redox couple into the P(DMAEA-Q-co-AM) organogel, Gao and his co-workers reported a significantly enhanced Si value (2.02 mV K−1) compared to that of its aqueous TGCs (1.05 mV K−1).27


Ionic liquids and small molecule electrolytes. 
As illustrated above, the realization of heat to electricity conversion for ionic liquids and small molecule electrolytes is based on the Soret effect of ions in electrolyte.66,72 Namely, ions migrate and accumulate between the cold side and hot side under the temperature difference. Hence, the migration of ions in the electrolyte plays an important role in heat conversion.
As displayed in Fig. 7A-(i), if there is no mobility difference between anions and cations in the electrolyte, both anions and cations arrive at the cold side simultaneously. Thus no thermopower (Si) and thermovoltage are generated for TCCs. Therefore, to obtain a large Si value for giant thermovoltage generation, the intrinsic demand for TCCs is large mobility difference between anions and cations in the electrolyte.42 As shown in Fig. 7A-(ii), anions and cations accumulate at the cold and hot side, respectively, thus leading to an enormous Si value and thermovoltage for TCCs. According to the Soret effect, the migration of ions in the electrolyte can be regulated by dominating the interactions between ions and its surroundings. For example, in the bacterial cellulose (BC)-ionogels in Fig. 7B-(i), the anions DCA− are dragged not only by BC via hydrogen bonding, but also by the ion clusters formed by cations EMIM+, leading to cations moving faster than anions and a large Si value of 18 mV K−1 (Fig. 7B-(ii)).93 To regulate the migration of ionic liquid EMIM:BF4 in the hydrogel matrix, Liu and his co-workers employed sodium alginate (SA) and polyacrylamide (PAM) as networks by adding with polyethylene glycol (PEG).31 As displayed in Fig. 7C-(i), the cations EMIM+ are trapped in the hydrogel matrix by electrostatic attraction with SA and hydrogen bonding with PEG, while anions BF4− are electrostatically repulsed by SA. Thus the anions BF4− move faster than cations EMIM+ in the hydrogel matrix, resulting in a large Si value of −19.3 mV K−1 (Fig. 7C-(ii)). Furthermore, by regulating the ion–dipole interactions between ionic liquids and the gel matrix, Cheng et al. reported a huge Si value of 26.1 mV K−1.100 For small molecule electrolytes, the Si value can also be promoted by regulating their interactions with surroundings. For example, the fixation of Na+ ions in the PVA matrix by coordinating interaction with hydroxyl groups leads to OH− migration in the PVA hydrogel matrix (Fig. 7D-(i)).35 Hence, a large Si value of −19.69 mV K−1 is presented (Fig. 7D-(ii)), and it can be further enhanced to −37.6 mV K−1 by humidity controlling. With the same small molecule electrolyte NaOH as shown in Fig. 7E-(i), Li and his co-workers demonstrates a Si value of 24 mV K−1 by restricting the migration of OH− with the oxidized cellulose membrane.68
 Fig. 7  Strategies for large thermopower in TCCs. (A) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for large thermopower: without (i) or with large (ii) mobility difference between anions and cations. (B) Schematic illustration of the interaction between ions and their surroundings (i) and the corresponding thermopower (ii).93 Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (C–E) Drag effects of the matrix on thermopower: schematic illustration of drag effects on energy carriers (C-i, D-i and E-i) and the corresponding thermopower (C-ii, D-ii and E-ii).31,35,68 Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2021, AAAS. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 

3.2 Promising output performance
When it comes to practical applications, the output performance of TECs such as thermovoltage (VOC), Pmax/(ΔT)2 and ηr is more significant rather than Si, σeff and keff only. Hence, it is expected that the VOC, Pmax/(ΔT)2 and ηr of TECs are large enough to meet their applications. Moreover, when the ηr of TECs reaches 5%, they can be commercialized for heat to electricity conversion.101 Since the output performance of TECs depends on Si, σeff and keff, and the strategies for promising Si have been discussed and summarized above, the next to be discussed and summarized are strategies for high σeff and low keff. As mentioned above, the σeff involves the kinetics of mass transfer and reaction among the electrolyte, electrodes and their interfaces. Improving σeff from the electrolyte would sacrifice other two parameters due to their interdependent relationship. Therefore, strategies that improve σeff from electrode materials are highly focused to realize promising output performance.
In the early years, researchers have widely employed precious metals as electrode materials due to their great catalytic activity for minimizing charge transfer overpotential and fast electron transfer, which may play important roles in promising power including maximum power density (Pmax) and Pmax/(ΔT)2 for TECs.22Table 1 summarizes the three parameters and output performance of TECs from electrode materials and electrolyte systems. Herein, with precious metal Pt as the electrode material, Lee and co-workers reported promising Fe(CN)64−/3− TECs with large output performance (Pmax ∼ 0.54 W m−2 at ΔT ∼ 25 K, and Pmax/(ΔT)2 ∼ 0.87 mW m−2 K−2, respectively) and a fair ηr value of 0.417%.78 Furthermore, Kang et al. reported another promising Fe2+/3+ TEC with Pmax/(ΔT)2 up to 1.72 mW m−2 K−2 and ηr up to 0.53% by employing Pt as the electrode.102 Although these precious metal electrodes can exhibit good performance in TECs, their applications are still hindered due to high cost. Alternatively, the recently developed carbon-based materials including graphite, carbon nanotubes and graphene are more competitive owing to their advantages of high specific surface area, low cost and comparable electrochemical activity to these precious metal materials.43,44 For example, as shown in Table 1, with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as electrodes, the reported Fe(CN)64−/3− TECs by Baughman et al. can exhibit a Pmax/(ΔT)2 value of 0.5 mW m−2 K−2 with a high ηr of up to 1.4%.43 In another work, Chen and his co-workers realized a great output performance of Fe(CN)64−/3− TECs with Pmax/(ΔT)2 reaching 1.9 mW m−2 K−2 and ηr reaching 2.63% by compositing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as the electrode.103
Table 1 Progress of the three parameters and output performance of TECs




Electrodes
Redox

σ (S m−1)

S
i (mV K−1)

k
eff (W m−1 K−1)

P
max (W m−2)

P
max/(ΔT)2 (mW m−2 K−2)

η
r (%)
Ref.




Pt
Fe(CN)64−/3−
36.56
−1.29
0.54
0.54 (ΔT ∼ 25 K)
0.87
0.417

78



Pt
Fe2+/3+
16.1
1.76
0.503
—
1.72
0.53

102



MWCNTs
Fe(CN)64−/3−
—
−1.4
—
1.8 (ΔT ∼ 60 K)
0.5
1.4

43



SWCNTs-rGO
Fe(CN)64−/3−
—
—
—
0.338 (ΔT ∼ 31 K)
1.9
2.63

103



Pt decorated CNTs aerogel
Fe(CN)64−/3−
121
−1.43
0.57
6.6 (ΔT ∼ 51 K)
0.16
3.95

105



3D multi-structured Cu
Cu/Cu2+
—
1.66
—
3.5 (ΔT ∼ 70 K)
0.71
—

36



Graphite
Fe(CN)64−/3−
5
−4.2
0.55
—
1.1
0.79

17



Pt
I−/I3−
—
7.7
0.13
0.25 (ΔT ∼ 35 K)
0.21 × 10−3
5.2

79



Commercial carbon fabric paper
Fe(CN)64−/3−
36
−3.73
0.4
17.7 (ΔT ∼ 50 K)
—
11.1

45



Activated carbon cloth
Fe(CN)64−/3−
—
—
—
12.0
1.8
0.4

63



Pt
Fe(CN)64−/3− + NaCl
12
−1.6
0.13
0.97 (ΔT ∼ 40 K)
0.61
1.38

58





Apart from exploiting the intrinsic advantages of electrode materials, modification of electrodes is another effective strategy for promising output performance. For example, Cola et al. proposed element-doping electrode materials to design TECs.104 Kim and his co-workers designed a Pt-nanoparticle-decorated CNT aerogel sheet electrode for Fe(CN)64−/3− TECs. Due to the high electrochemical activity of Pt and high specific surface area of CNTs, the fabricated TECs displayed a high ηr value of 3.95%, but the Pmax/(ΔT)2 was as low as 0.16 mW m−2 K−2.105 To realize great output performance, researchers also combined promising electrolyte systems with the intended electrodes. As seen from Table 1, based on the concentration difference boosted thermopower of the Cu/Cu2+ aqueous electrolyte, Yu et al. designed 3D multi-structured Cu electrodes with a high specific surface to realize a high Pmax/(ΔT)2 value of 0.71 mW m−2 K−2.36 In another work, by combining the structural entropy difference enhanced thermopower of the Fe(CN)64−/3− aqueous electrolyte with highly conductive graphite electrodes, Duan et al. reported TECs with Pmax/(ΔT)2 of 1.1 mW m−2 K−2 and ηr of 0.79%.17 Furthermore, Lee and his coworkers reported a great ηr value of 5.2% for I−/I3− TECs, where this great value was not only obtained from the improved thermopower by the designed electrolyte system, but also resulted from the highly conductive Pt electrodes.79 Recently, Yu and his co-workers reported the highest ηr value of 11.1% for Fe(CN)64−/3− TECs, where the great performance of these TECs not only resulted from the concentration difference boosted thermopower, but also was attributed to the high surface area of commercial carbon fabric paper electrodes and the crystals suppressed thermal convection in the electrolyte.45
Recently, researchers also attempted strategies to improve the performance of TECs from suppressing keff. The first one is the insertion of a thermal separator into TECs, where the presence of a thermal separator can effectively retard heat convection in the electrolyte. For example, with the cotton membrane as the thermal separator, Zhang et al. fabricated Fe(CN)64−/3− TECs with a Pmax/(ΔT)2 value of 1.80 mW m−2 K−2 and an ηr value of 0.4%.63 Another one is the development of gel-based TECs owing to their ignorable heat convection. With this strategy, Wu and his co-workers developed hydrogel-based TECs with a low keff of 0.13 W m−1 K−1, leading to a high Pmax/(ΔT)2 value of 0.61 mW m−2 K−2 and an ηr value of 1.38%.58
4 Engineering designs for thermo-electrochemical cells
In addition to promoting the efficiency of single cells either from thermopower or effective electrical conductivity, another intensively investigated topic is the design of TECs. Although the aqueous TGCs show great potential in heat to electricity conversion, there are still many challenges due to the utilization of water. The two basic challenges are liquid leakage and narrow operating temperature. Therefore, researchers design non-aqueous TGCs (namely developing quasi-solid-state electrolytes) to address these dilemmas. By designing quasi-solid state electrolytes such as hydrogels and organogels, not only heat to electricity conversion is boosted, but also new functions are enabled for TECs owing to the functional polymers. Hence, the designed TECs are more suitable for practical application.
4.1 p/n-type conversion
One of the most significant engineering designs for TECs is their p/n-type conversion, namely, converting the p-type TECs to n-type, or vice versa. Although the recent thermopower (Si) of TECs can be as high as dozens of mV K−1, it is still challenging to power electronics with the working voltage at the level of volts in single TECs with small temperature difference. To output voltage at the level of volts, the feasible way is connecting plenty of single TECs in series, which demands both the p- and n-type presented. However, the most reported types are p-type TECs, while investigations on n-type TECs are still insufficient. As mentioned before, the p/n-type for TCCs relates to the migration of anions and cations in the electrolyte, where the cations faster than anions are p-type and the anions faster than cations are n-type. Therefore, the p/n-type conversion of TCCs can be realized by regulating the interactions between the ions and their surroundings.42
As shown in Fig. 8A, when anion thermodiffusion dominates in the EMIM:TFSI/PVDF-HFP polymer gel (Fig. 8A-(i)), it presents an Si value of −4 mV K−1 (n-type).106 But it changes to 14 mV K−1 (p-type) (Fig. 8A-(iii)) when PEG is doped in the polymer gel, where this doping enables cation thermodiffusion domination (Fig. 8A-(ii)) owing to the interaction between the cations and PEG. With the same polymer as a gel and ionic liquid Na:TFSI as an energy carrier, Chi and his co-workers reported a change in Si from 20 to −6 mV K−1 (namely from the p-type to n-type) by adding TPFPB into the gel, which effectively traps the migration of Na+ cations.107 In another interesting investigation, Liu et al. reported a giant and bidirectionally tunable Si value in non-aqueous ionogels by ion doping.42 In his work, the same Si value (−4 mV K−1, n-type) is reported in the EMIM:TFSI/PVDF-HFP ionogel due to the anion dominated thermodiffusion. But it is further improved to −15 mV K−1 (n-type) by adding ionic liquid Li:BF4 due to the regulated ion migration (Fig. 8B-(iii)). Namely, the addition of Li:BF4 forms ion clusters [Li(BF4)m(TFSI)n]1−m−n in the ionogel, dragging cations and promoting anion migration (Fig. 8B-(i)). Interestingly, by replacing ionic liquid Li:BF4 with EMIM:Cl, the migration of anions and cations can be changed owing to the ion cluster effect (Fig. 8B-(ii)). Thus it changes to the p-type with a Si value of 17 mV K−1 (Fig. 8B-(iii)). Furthermore, both the n- and p-type of the Si value can be enlarged to −23 to 32 mV K−1 by regulating the humidity. Compared to TCCs, only a few studies reported the p/n-type conversion in TGCs. Fig. 8C shows the only case of p/n-type conversion reported by Duan and his co-workers.81 In this work, the authors introduced the thermo-sensitive nanogels poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) to I−/I3− TGCs (Fig. 8C-(i)). Since the PNIPAM nanogels can capture I3− at the hot side by hydrophobic interaction and release I3− at the cold side by swelling (Fig. 8C-(ii)), the I−/I3− redox couple is successfully converted from the n-type (Si ∼ 0.71 mV K−1) to the p-type (Si ∼ −1.91 mV K−1) as presented in Fig. 8C-(iii). Furthermore, with 50 pairs of p/n-type I−/I3− redox couples connected in series, a thermovoltage of 1 V is obtained by harvesting body heat.
 Fig. 8  Strategies for p/n-type conversion. (A) Schematic illustration of the interaction between ions and the matrix before (i) and after (ii) the addition of PEG, the thermovoltage dependence on temperature difference with and without PEG in ionogels (iii).106 Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (B) Schematic illustration of the interaction between ions and their surroundings before (i) and after (ii) the addition of the second ionic liquid, and the thermovoltage dependence on temperature difference with and without the second ionic liquid in ionogels (iii).42 Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2022, AAAS. (C) Host–guest design: schematic of the p–n conversion mechanism (i), the hydrophilic/hydrophobic conversion of PNIPAM nanogels and the equilibrium reaction for the redox couple (ii), and the thermopower of the designed cells with different loadings of PNIPAM nanogels (iii).81 Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
4.2 Functional designs
By electrolyte material design, researchers can endow TECs with plenty of additional physicochemical properties, making them more suitable for practical applications. For example, by designing a quasi-solid state (such as an ionogel or hydrogel-based) electrolyte in TECs, not only the problem of liquid leakage can be effectively avoided, but also their operating temperature can be even widened. Recently, by developing hydrogels and ionogel-based electrolytes, researchers have made great progress in TECs. For example, by introducing ionic liquid EMIM:DCA into the designed elastomeric WPU (containing both hard and soft segments) gels, Ouyang's group developed a flexible and stretchable ionogel (Fig. 9A-(i)).33 Even on suffering from severe stretching (Fig. 9A-(ii)) and cyclic stretching (Fig. 9A-(iii)), its thermopower and ionic electrical conductivity are slightly reduced. By further optimizing the loading of ionic liquids and humidity, this ionogel can reach a high figure-of-merit (ZT value) of 1.3. Therefore, such flexible, stretchable and high-performance TECs play a significant role in the development of wearable and self-powered electronics.
 Fig. 9  Engineering designs of thermo-electrochemical cells. (A) Stretchable ionogel: Schematic diagrams of the stretchability (i), changes of thermopower and ionic conductivity of the ionogel under stretching (ii) and cyclic stretching (iii).33 Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (B) Self-healable organic–inorganic hybrid film: schematic illustration of the molecular structure and interaction among components (i), digital image illustration of the stretchability and self-healability (ii), and thermopower and ionic conductivity efficiency of the film in self-healing cycles (iii).109 Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (C) Tough and large power density hydrogel: comprehensive assessment of the designed hydrogel (i) and the power output at different stretched strains (ii).58 Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (D) Stretchable and antifreeze organohydrogel: thermovoltage and current power output at high (i and iv) and low (ii and v) temperature ambience, photographs of the organohydrogel pressed (iii) and stretched (vi) at high and low temperature ambiences, respectively.27 Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In general, devices cannot work once they are physically broken. This challenge becomes more serious when they involve inorganic materials, which are intrinsically fragile and brittle. Fortunately, this challenge can be settled with the developed quasi-solid state electrolyte owing to the utilization of self-healing polymers. Recently, by employing anionic polyelectrolyte (poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid)) (PAAMPSA), phytic acid (PA) and polyaniline (PANI), Jang and his co-workers reported self-healable and stretchable TECs.108 This self-healability is realized from both hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions among PAAMPSA, PA and PANI. Later in Malik's work (Fig. 9B-(i)), the authors added SiO2 nanoparticles into the above-mentioned ternary TECs (Fig. 9B-(ii)). The thermovoltage and ionic electrical conductivity can be fully recovered after self-healing (Fig. 9B-(iii)).109 In addition, this work reported the highest ZT value (3.74) among the current TEGs and TECs. Definitely, these developed stretchable and self-healable TECs are more suitable for practical applications when the devices inevitably suffer from an external force. In addition, Wu's group recently developed flexible and robust TECs by designing a double-network hydrogel matrix.58 As shown in Fig. 9C-(i), these designed TECs address the mechanical challenges meanwhile improve the power density. Furthermore, their out-power can be largely maintained even under stretching (Fig. 9C-(ii)). For aqueous TECs, water solvent seriously limits their operating temperature because of the evaporation or freezing of water. To deal with such a dilemma, Gao et al. proposed an organohydrogel for TECs.27 As presented in Fig. 9D, this designed organohydrogel can work effectively even at low temperature (−20 °C). Obviously, from the above cases, the functional design of the electrolyte in TECs not only shows great effects on energy conversion performance, but also plays important roles in practical applications owing to their merits of flexibility, stretchability, self-healability, wide operating temperature, and so on.
4.3 Device integration and applications
Recently, great attention has been paid to improving the efficiency and functional design of single cells. However, it is still challenging to satisfy practical applications of a single cell because of the limited thermopower and temperature difference. To generate a useful thermovoltage (>1 V) for practical applications, it is required to integrate multiple single cells in a configuration.40,53,81Fig. 10A-(i) shows two typical methods to connect single cells in series in a configuration. The top one is named Z-shaped connection, which is suitable for the p- or n-type only, and the bottom one is named Π-shaped connection, which is suitable for the p- and n-type together. Fig. 10A-(ii) shows the TECs integrating multiple single cells in a configuration, which can generate large thermovoltage for practical applications. As shown in Fig. 10B, in the developed K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 aqueous TECs, useful thermovoltage (3.4 V) and current (1.2 mA) can be generated in an integrated configuration with 50 single cells at a temperature difference of ΔT ∼ 18 K.17 More recently, the same group developed another K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 aqueous TEC that can generate large thermovoltage (3.1 V) and current (120 mA) in an integrated configuration with 20 single cells (Fig. 10C-(i)).45 With its promising output performance (Fig. 10C-(ii)), it can be applied to power LEDs and charge mobile phones (Fig. 10C-(iii) and (iv)). For TCCs, heat to electricity conversion applications are more complicated. Fig. 10D shows the conversion in the hydrogel electrolyte combining a capacitor, where the stored electrical energy originates from ion thermodiffusion in the electrolyte.34 Since ions cannot pass through the external circuit, the applications of harvesting heat to electricity for TCCs are severely limited. In addition to electricity generation, thermal sensing is another significant application for TECs. Recently, researchers have widely utilized TCCs in thermal sensing based on their giant thermopower.106,107 As shown in Fig. 10E, a thermal sensor is successfully developed for early fire alarming.110 When fire occurs, the temperature surrounding the thermal sensor increases and a thermovoltage is generated in the sensor, leading to alarm accordingly.
 Fig. 10  Device integration and applications of thermo-electrochemical cells. (A) Schematic diagram of the connection of single cells (i) and the integrated thermo-electrochemical cells (ii). (B) The application of the developed aqueous Fe(CN)64−/3−-based thermogalvanic cell: the structure (i), the output performance (ii) and applications (powering LED arrays (iii) and charging mobile phones (iv)) of the cell.17 Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (C) The thermovoltage and temperature difference change with time (i) and output performance (ii) of the aqueous Fe(CN)64−/3− thermogalvanic cell for electricity generation.45 Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (D) The developed NaCl-based thermally charged capacitors for heat to conversion by assembling with capacitors.34 Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (E) The developed ionic liquid-based thermally charged capacitors for thermal sensors.110 Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
5 Conclusions and perspectives
Over the recent hundred years, human society has been long-term disturbed by energy crisis and environmental issues, and they will even become more serious in the future. In contrast, there are tremendous energy sources that are wasted in the form of waste heat because of the limitations in technologies. Thermo-electrochemical cells (TECs), containing thermogalvanic cells (TGCs) and thermally chargeable capacitors (TCCs), have been intensively investigated over the years due to their capability of heat to electricity conversion. In TGCs, the temperature-dependent reversible redox reactions between redox couples can present giant thermopower for continuous energy conversion. Moreover, combining enhancement of entropy change with electrode optimization, their performance can be largely boosted. In TCCs, a larger thermopower than that of TGCs can be obtained due to the Soret effect of electrolytes, and the sign and magnitude of the thermopower can be regulated by optimizing their interactions with the surroundings. The functional designs of the electrolyte for TECs make them more suitable for thermal harvesting and wearable and self-powered electronics in the future. By combining advantages, disadvantages and current situations, some perspectives as shown in Fig. 11 are proposed as below for the further development of TECs.
 Fig. 11  Perspectives of the future development of TECs from opportunities, challenges and further discussion. 
5.1 Opportunities
Over the past years, TECs have made significant progress in both heat to electricity conversion and functional designs. Compared to other energy devices such as chemical batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells and so on, the TECs are competitive in the future practical applications as follows: (1) the TECs can directly convert heat to electricity, realizing the harvest of waste heat for applications and thus benefiting the development of green chemistry. Furthermore, the energy sources for TECs are abundant and inexhaustible from solar thermal, geothermal, and industrial waste heat and body heat, avoiding the consumption of fossil fuels and the utilization of toxic energy sources. (2) Being the same as the thermoelectric generators (TEGs), there are no moving parts and no emissions for TECs, which are friendly to humans and the environment. But TECs are more competitive to TEGs owing to no utilization of rare and toxic elements as well as the giant thermopower (1–3 magnitudes higher than thermoelectric materials). (3) For aqueous TECs, the utilization of water endows them with merits of low cost and mass production, which are suitable for commercialization. (4) For gel-based TECs, by designing gel electrolytes, TECs can be transparent, flexible, stretchable, self-healable and tough, which show great potential in wearable and self-powered electronics. Therefore, the TECs would be one of the most potential candidates for practical applications including waste harvesting, electricity generation, wearable and self-powered electronics, thermal sensing, etc.21,111–113
5.2 Challenges
Although the TECs show great potential in heat to electricity conversion and other applications, there are still a variety of challenges at present. One of the greatest challenges is the utilization of water in the electrolyte. Although the utilization of water makes TECs advantageous, it also brings disadvantages to their practical applications. For example, water freezes at low temperature and evaporates violently at high temperature, leading to a narrow operating temperature of TECs. Moreover, abundant waste heat (>100 °C) from industry cannot be utilized once the water evaporated at high temperature. Therefore, it is significant to widen the operating temperature for heat to electricity conversion. To solve this issue, researchers have made great efforts in past years. For example, by adding LiCl or ethylene glycol (EG) to the as-prepared hydrogel, Yang and Wang successfully reported their antifreeze hydrogels (−40 and −20 °C, respectively).114,115 Furthermore, Lou et al. reported the organogels rather than hydrogels that can even be flexible and conductive in the wide temperature range of −20 to 120 °C.116 In another work, Gao and co-workers developed an organohydrogel for TGCs, where these TGCs can even maintain the elongation at a break of more than 100% and a relatively high Pmax/(ΔT)2 of 0.012 mW m−2 K−2 at −20 °C.27 It should be mentioned that although the addition of antifreezes such as LiCl and EG can widen the operating temperature, we specifically expect it to widen to high temperatures. Furthermore, the organohydrogel-based TECs unavoidably deal with the low effective electrical conductivity (σeff) and the solubility of solutes.
The second challenge is their inferior energy conversion efficiency and power density, which are affected by thermopower (Si), effective electrical conductivity (σeff), and effective thermal conductivity (keff).39 Although the recent Si and Carnot-relative efficiency (ηr) reach −4.2 mV K−1 and 11.1% in TGCs, such studies reported are few.17,45 Furthermore, the temperature-insensitive maximum power density (Pmax/(ΔT)2) is another concern in practical applications to power electronics, which is determined by Si and σeff. Therefore, great efforts are still required to develop promising TECs. Apart from boosting Sivia the above-mentioned strategies, efforts should also be made in the improvement of σeff, where the inferior σeff (only at the level of mS cm−1, particularly in the gel-based electrolyte) has significantly obstructed the performance of TECs.27,100,107 To improve σeff without sacrificing Si and keff, researchers should investigate effective strategies from electrode optimization, where it relates the kinetics of the chemical reaction. On the suppression of keff, not only the thermal separators and gel-based TECs should be focused on, but also other strategies should be proposed to the promising TECs. Also, new redox couples with promising performance should be discovered.
The third challenge is achieving continuous power output in TCCs. As mentioned before, the heat to electricity conversion of TCCs is based on the thermodiffusion of ions in electrolytes, where these cannot pass through an external circuit to continuously output power.19,67,93 Therefore, researchers should more focus on the device assembly of TCCs to realize their continuous power generation, and it would be significant to widen their applications rather than just charge capacitors and thermal sensing.
5.3 Further discussion
Over the recent years, significant progress has been made in TECs, but there are still some troubles to the peers. The first one is the issues from the employment of polymers in gel-based TECs. When applied for wearable self-powered electronics, the toxicity and degradation of these polymers should be taken into consideration. Therefore, non-toxic and biocompatible polymers such as proteins, nucleic acids and polysaccharides should be considered first.
Furthermore, to avoid the direct contact of TECs with the human body, additional encapsulation should be employed. In addition, the effective and environmentally friendly strategies for degradation should be developed to avoid the accumulation of polymers in the environment. Furthermore, the chemical and thermal stability of redox couples is needed when the TECs work at high temperatures for a long time.
The second one is the cooling effect of TECs. Up to now, the current research on TECs is mainly focused on heat to electricity conversion, and only a few studies paid attention to the cooling effect of TGCs and no work paid attention to the cooling effect of TCCs. For example, Decker and his co-workers successfully detected the electrochemical Peltier effect of the Fe(CN)64−/3− aqueous electrolyte via photoacoustic calorimetry,117 Mckay et al. experimentally proved the generation of temperature difference (0.1 K) from the cooling effect of the Fe(CN)64−/3− aqueous electrolyte when a voltage of 500 mV was applied,118 and Yamada and co-workers reported that the refrigeration capability of the I−/I3− electrolyte could be enhanced up to 70% by adding alpha-cyclodextrin.119 Therefore, topics on the cooling effect of TECs, especially the TCCs, are waiting to develop.
The third one is the mechanism of TCCs. It is widely believed that the thermovoltage of TCCs stems directly from the ion migration across the material along the temperature gradient based on the Soret effect, leading to the ion concentration difference between the cold and hot sides.33,65,66,72 Therefore, large mobility difference is highly expected between anions and cations to achieve a giant ion concentration difference for huge thermopower. However, some researchers believe that the concentration difference between the cation and anion at the cold and hot sides is not attributed to the thermodiffusion of ions, but the shift of adsorption equilibrium caused by temperature rise.120 Namely, when the temperature difference is applied to electrodes, the adsorption equilibrium difference of ions at the cold and hot electrodes is established owing to the temperature-dependent adsorption of ions, thus to the thermovoltage further for heat to electricity conversion. In addition to the mechanism, the performance assessment of TCCs is also confused, where they have been widely evaluated with parameters such as PF and ZT. However, their heat to electricity conversion is realized by charging a capacitor. It is more reasonable to evaluate their performance from the perspective of a capacitor. Anyway, there is still no theory to systematically generalize and summarize all the published investigations on TCCs.
The last one is the performance assessment of TECs that contain both the redox couple and small molecule electrolyte in the electrolyte, as reported by Wu's and Liu's groups.58,65 As mentioned previously, the effective electrical conductivity (σeff) of TECs is a comprehensive electrical conductivity parameter that is limited by the activation, ohmic, and mass transport resistance. It is believed that the presence of salt results in higher Si and σeff, and thus to the higher ηr and Pmax/(ΔT)2. However, the part of heat to electricity conversion from the salt in the electrolyte cannot be directly output for utilization. Thus, other assessment criteria still need to be developed.
Author contributions
Writing-original draft preparation: Y. F. Liu, M. W. Cui, W. Ling and Y. Huang; writing-review and editing: Y. F. Liu, M. W. Cui, W. Ling and Y. Huang; supervision: Y. Huang. All the authors discussed and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21805063), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province for Distinguished Young Scholars (No. 2018B030306022), the Project of International Science and Technology Cooperation in Guangdong Province (No. 2020A0505100016), the Shenzhen Sauvage Nobel Laureate Laboratory for Smart Materials, and the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (No. KQTD20200820113045083).
References
L. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, Y. Zhong, S. Gong and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1771–1793 RSC .
N. Fernandes, C. F. Rodrigues, A. F. Moreira and I. J. Correia, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 2990–3020 RSC .
X. L. Shi, J. Zou and Z.-G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7399–7515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, H. Wu, C. R. Bowen and Y. Yang, Small Nano Micro, 2021, 17, 2103960 CAS .
X. Lu, P. Jiang and X. H. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Ahmadi, M. Ghazvini, M. Sadeghzadeh, M. A. Nazari and M. Ghalandari, Nano-Struct. Nano-Obj., 2019, 20, 100386 CrossRef .
D. Lau, N. Song, C. Hall, Y. Jiang, S. Lim, I. Perez-Wurfl, Z. Ouyang and A. Lennon, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 13, 22–44 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, X.-L. Shi, Y.-L. Yang and Z.-G. Chen, Mater. Today, 2021, 46, 62–108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, Q. Jiang, H. Sun, P. Liu, D. Hu, Y. Pei, W. Liu, X. Crispin, S. Fabiano and Y. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Liang, M. M. Wang, X. D. Wang, P. Peng, Z. X. Liu, G. M. Chen and G. X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111435 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Liu, X. D. Wang, S. S. Wei, H. C. Lv, J. Q. Zhou, P. Peng, H. F. Wang and G. M. Chen, CCS Chem., 2021, 3, 2404–2414 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, L. R. Liang, H. C. Lv, Y. C. Zhang and G. M. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106577 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Lv, L. R. Liang, Y. C. Zhang, L. Deng, Z. J. Chen, Z. X. Liu, H. F. Wang and G. M. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106260 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Liu, L. Yang, Z. G. Chen and J. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-G. Chen, X. Shi, L. D. Zhao and J. Zou, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 97, 283 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, B. Hu, C. Debruler, Y. Bi, Y. Zhao, B. Yuan, M. Hu, W. Wu and T. Liu, Joule, 2019, 3, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, G. Feng, B. Yu, J. Li, M. Chen, P. Yang, J. Feng, K. Liu and J. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peng, J. Q. Zhou, L. R. Liang, X. Huang, H. C. Lv, Z. X. Liu and G. M. Chen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, H. Wang, Z. Khan, J. Chen, R. Gabrielsson, M. Jonsson, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1450–1457 RSC .
A. Al-zubaidi, X. Ji and J. Yu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1457–1474 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, P. Sherrell, L. Liu, Y. Wang and J. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dupont, D. MacFarlane and J. Pringle, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6288–6302 RSC .
Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, J. Zhang, W. Ding, J. Xu, P. Liu, G. Nie, H. Mao and F. Jiang, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 1125–1133 RSC .
J. Mi, N. Lock, T. Sun, M. Christensen, M. Søndergaard, P. Hald, H. Hng, J. Ma and B. Iversen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2523–2530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, P. Ying, Z. Du, X. Liu, X. Li, T. Fang and J. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 8171–8178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, H. Bai, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Tang, X. Su, J. Wu and X. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 43134–43143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, Z. Lei, C. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104071 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10502–10507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1424–1428 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo, Y. Hoshino, F. Gao, K. Hayashi, Y. Miura, N. Kimizuka and T. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17318–17322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Q. Li, S. Wang, W. Liu, N. Fang and S. Feng, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106738 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, H. Lin and C. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600546 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, H. Cheng, H. He, S. Wang, J. Li, S. Yue, L. Zhang, Z. Du and J. Ouyang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004699 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Tian, B. Wu, W. Jia, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2021, 1 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, Q. Chen, S. Xiao, J. Feng, X. Zhang and T. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabi7233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, H. Xiao, Y. Zeng, S. Liu, D. Wu, P. Liu, J. Guo, W. Xie, J. Duan and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106795 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pu, Y. Liao, K. Chen, J. Fu, S. Zhang, L. Ge, G. Conta, S. Bouzarif, T. Cheng and X. Hu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Cheng, H. He, J. Li and J. Ouyang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2109772 CrossRef .
J. Duan, B. Yu, L. Huang, B. Hu, M. Xu, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Joule, 2021, 5, 1–12 CrossRef .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Mo, Y. Zhou, S. Li, G. Feng and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12050–12053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hasan, H. Wu and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19116–19148 RSC .
S. Liu, Y. Yang, H. Huang, J. Zheng, G. Liu, T. To and B. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabj3019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hu, B. Cola, N. Haram, J. Barisci, S. Lee, S. Stoughton, G. Wallace, C. Too, M. Thomas and A. Gestos, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 838–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta and R. Meek, Appl. Phys. A, 2020, 126, 1 CrossRef .
B. Yu, J. Duan, H. Cong, W. Xie, R. Liu, X. Zhuang, H. Wang, B. Qi, M. Xu, Z. Wang and J. Zhou, Science, 2020, 370, 342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, H. Lv, X. Shi, Z. Liu, G. Chen, Z. Chen and G. G. Sun, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2750–2760 RSC .
Z. Li, L. Deng, H. Lv, L. Liang, W. Deng, Y. Zhang and G. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104836 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H. Wang, X. Du, X. Cheng, Z. Du and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 20427–20434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, M. Hong, M. Dargusch, J. Zou and Z. Chen, Trends Chem., 2021, 3, 561–574 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi and J. He, Science, 2021, 371, 343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao and L. Zhao, Science, 2020, 367, 1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Zhuang, W. Xie, H. Jin, R. Liu, B. Yu, J. Duan, L. Huang and J. Zhou, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 25, 100737 CrossRef .
Y. Zong, H. Li, X. Li, J. Lou, Q. Ding, Z. Liu, Y. Jiang and W. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 433, 134550 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buckingham, S. Hammoud, H. Li, C. Beale, J. Sengel and L. Aldous, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3388–3399 RSC .
R. Hu, D. Xu and X. Luo, Matter, 2020, 3, 1400–1402 CrossRef .
T. Kim, J. Lee, G. Lee, H. Yoon, J. Yoon, T. Kang and Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buckingham, K. Laws, J. Sengel and L. Aldous, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 6062–6074 RSC .
Z. Lei, W. Gao and P. Wu, Joule, 2021, 5, 2211–2222 CrossRef .
A. Gunawan, H. Li, C.-H. Lin, D. A. Buttry, V. Mujica, R. A. Taylor, R. S. Prasher and P. E. Phelan, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 2014, 78, 423–434 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Quickenden and Y. Mua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3652–3659 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nagasaka and A. Nagashima, J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum., 1981, 14, 1435–1440 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kraemer and G. Chen, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2014, 85, 025108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Kim, N. Li, T. J. Kang, J. Chen, J. M. Pringle, M. Zhang, A. H. Kazim, S. Fang and C. Haines, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605652 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pu, Y. Liao, K. Chen, J. Fu, S. Zhang, L. Ge, G. Conta, S. Bouzarif, T. Cheng and X. Hu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, X. Qian, Q. Li, B. Deng, Y. Zhu, Z. Han, W. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Feng and G. Chen, Science, 2020, 368, 1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, A. Würger and X. Crispin, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 61, 88 CrossRef .
H. Wang, D. Zhao, Z. Khan, S. Puzinas, M. Jonsson, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700013 CrossRef .
T. Li, X. Zhang, S. Lacey, R. Mi, X. Zhao, F. Jiang, J. Song, Z. Liu, G. Chen and J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 608–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeong, J. Noh, M. Islam, K. Kim, A. Sohn, W. Kim and C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011016 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Tu, Q. Zhang, F. Peng, W. Zeng, M. Zhang and X. Tao, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106272 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, Q. Le, Z. Liu, Q. Qian, Y. Zhao and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 433–450 RSC .
A. Sohn and C. Yu, Mater. Today Phys., 2021, 19, 100433 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, H. Cheng, S. Yue and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10813–10821 RSC .
G. Li, D. Dong, G. Hong, L. Yan, X. Zhang and W. Song, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901403 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jeon, H. Kim, G. Shin, Y. Han, J. Kim, J. Lee, J. Lee, H. Lim and S. Ha, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2022, 2100693 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buckingham, K. Laws, H. Li, Y. Kuang and L. Aldous, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100510 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, G. Shin, J. Baek and T. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 21157–21165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, S. Hwang and H. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135651 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, J. Kang and H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131797 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, W. Yang, J. Li, W. Xie, H. Jin, R. Liu, H. Wang, X. Zhuang, B. Qi and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26119–26126 RSC .
J. Duan, B. Yu, K. Liu, J. Li, P. Yang, W. Xie, G. Xue, R. Liu, H. Wang and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, Y. Xue, L. Wang, X. Wang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3376–3380 RSC .
Y. Ikeda, Y. Cho and Y. Murakami, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 5967–5974 RSC .
B. Guo, Y. Miura and Y. Hoshino, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 32184–32192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai and J. Wang, Nature, 2019, 571, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, M. Du, J. Feng, H. Wang, Z. Xu, L. Wang, S. Zuo, C. Wang, Z. Wang and C. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 4238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lieb, V. Demontis, D. Prete, D. Ercolani, V. Zannier, L. Sorba, S. Ono, F. Beltram, B. Sacépé and F. Rossella, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1804378 CrossRef .
K. Eguchi, M. Matsushita and K. Awaga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 18823–18829 RSC .
F. Yuan, S. Chi, S. Dong, X. Zou, S. Lv, L. Bao and J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 294, 249–259 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brutti, E. Simonetti, M. De Francesco, A. Sarra, A. Paolone, O. Palumbo, S. Fantini, R. Lin, A. Falgayrat and H. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2020, 479, 228791 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Duan, Y. Du, J. Xu, C. Li, J. Liu, Y. Jia and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8138–8147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kee, H. Kim, S. Paleti, A. El Labban, M. Neophytou, A. Emwas, H. Alshareef and D. Baran, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3519–3526 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, J. Lv, G. Fan, B. Wang, Z. Mao, X. Sui and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2107105 CrossRef .
C. Cheng, S. Wang, P. Tan, Y. Dai, J. Yu, R. Cheng, S. Feng and M. Ni, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 329–336 CrossRef .
C. Gao, S. Lee and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2326–2334 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and Q. Wang, Chem. Phys. Rev., 2021, 2, 021304 CrossRef .
S. Lee, Y. Yang, H. Lee, H. Ghasemi, D. Kraemer, G. Chen and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Liu, K. Mu, K. Li, S. Wang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, C. Su and S. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4151 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Xu, L. Wu, Y. An, Y. Sun, T. Meng, H. Dou, Y. Xuan and X. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, X. He, Z. Fan and J. Ouyang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901085 CrossRef .
T. Quickenden and Y. Mua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3985 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, J. H. Lee, R. R. Palem, M. S. Suh, H. H. Lee and T. J. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 8706 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Romano, N. Li, D. Antiohos, J. M. Razal, A. Nattestad, S. Beirne, S. L. Fang, Y. S. Chen, R. Jalili, G. G. Wallace, R. Baughman and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6602–6606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Salazar, S. Kumar and B. A. Cola, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B483–B488 CrossRef CAS .
H. Im, T. Kim, H. Song, J. Choi, J. Park, R. Ovalle-Robles, H. Yang, K. Kihm, R. Baughman and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1 Search PubMed .
D. Zhao, A. Martinelli, A. Willfahrt, T. Fischer, D. Bernin, Z. Khan, M. Shahi, J. Brill, M. Jonsson and S. Fabiano, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chi, M. An, X. Qi, Y. Li, R. Zhang, G. Liu, C. Lin, H. Huang, H. Dang and B. Demir, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1 Search PubMed .
Z. Akbar, J. Jeon and S. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2915 RSC .
Y. Malik, Z. Akbar, J. Seo, S. Cho, S. Jang and J. Jeon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2103070 CrossRef .
X. Wu, N. Gao, X. Zheng, X. Tao, Y. He, Z. Liu and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27691–27699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Zhou, M. Buckingham, L. Aldous, P. Sherrell, G. Wallace, G. Ryder, S. Faisal and D. Officer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002539 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bai, Z. Wang, S. Yang, X. Cui, X. Li, Y. Yin, M. Zhang, T. Wang, S. Sang and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 37316–37322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ding, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, C. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Lu, J. He and G. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102219 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Yang, Z. Xu, J. J. Wang, L. G. Gai, X. X. Ji, H. H. Jiang and L. B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009438 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Wang, Y. Huang, B. B. Liu, Z. X. Li, J. Y. Zhang, G. S. Yang, P. Hiralal, S. Jind and H. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 41, 599–605 CrossRef .
D. Y. Lou, C. S. Wang, Z. Y. He, X. Y. Sun, J. S. Luo and J. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 8422–8425 RSC .
F. Decker, M. Fracastoro-Decker, N. Cella and H. Vargas, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 25–26 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. McKay, L. Y. Kunz and A. Majumdar, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Matoba, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, Research Square, 2021, 1–17 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, N. Gao, H. Jia and Y. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
As we are limited by exhausted natural resources, energy utilization is a significant and meaningful topic for researchers. More than 60% of energy from fossil fuels is wasted to our surroundings in the form of waste heat due to lack of effective technologies. In addition, other abundant thermal resources including solar heat, geothermal energy and body heat also intensively fascinate researchers. In recent years, the emergence of thermo-electrochemical cells (TECs), including thermogalvanic cells (TGCs) and thermally charged capacitors (TCCs), has drawn intensive attention owing to their giant thermopower, which shows great potential in the field of heat to electricity conversion such as waste heat harvesting. Furthermore, with the development of quasi-solid (gels- or hydrogels-based) TECs, they could be widely used in flexible/wearable self-powered electronics and Internet of Things. However, there are still some persistent challenges that are highly desirable to overcome prior to their commercial applications. To promote the development of TECs toward more superior performance and practicability, this review comprehensively summarized TECs from foundations to materials, strategies to engineering designs and opportunities to challenges by combining recently promising progress of TECs.


 	Fig. 1  (A) Available heat sources in our surroundings. (B) Heat to electricity conversion technologies. (C) Applications of technologies referred in B.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparisons of (A) thermopower and (B) merits between TEGs and TECs.17,23–35	 
A ⇌ ne− + B	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (A) The configuration and working mechanism of TGCs. (B) Diagrams of energy changes during work. (C) Crucial parameters of TGCs. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (D) The configuration and working mechanism of TCCs. (E) Working principle (top) and the corresponding voltage and temperature gradient profiles (bottom) and (F) equivalent circuit diagram of TCCs.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  Promising materials for thermo-electrochemical cells. (A–C) Inorganic and (D–F) organic redox couples: Fe(CN)64−/3−,77 Fe3+/2+,78 I−/I3−, Q/HQ,30 PCET,84 and CP/IPA,29 respectively. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. Chemical structures of typical (G) ionic liquids and (H) polyelectrolytes. (I) Small molecule electrolytes such as NaCl34 (i) and NaOH19 (ii). Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2021, Wiley. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Thermally regenerative electrochemical cycle (TREC) for heat to electricity conversion. (A) The mechanism illustration of the TREC, which undergoes a thermal cycling during operation: step 1, heating up the cell; step 2, charging at high temperature; step 3, cooling down the cell; and step 4, discharging at low temperature.97 (B) Temperature–entropy (T–S) diagram of the TREC during the thermal cycling. (C) Thermopower of the Cu/Cu2+-based TREC developed by Lee et al.97 Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (D–F) The GO/PtNPs//Fe2+,Fe3+//PANI/CP TREC proposed by Wang et al.: schematic diagram (D), heat to electricity conversion mechanism (E), and thermopower (F) of the proposed cell.98 Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (G) Zinc ion thermal charging cell assembled by Li et al.: schematic diagram (i) and thermopower (ii) of this assembled cell.99 Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Strategies for large thermopower in TGCs. (A) Schematic diagram of a strategy that improves entropy difference of solvation structures between redox couples by adding specific agents for large thermopower.39 Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (B) Large thermopower results from increased solvation-structural entropy difference for an aqueous K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 thermogalvanic cell: the plane structure diagram of the cell (i), chemical structure of the employed chaotropic species (ii), the schematic solvation formation of Fe(CN)63− and Fe(CN)64− in GdmCl solution (iii), the large thermopower boosted by urea only and chaotropic species and urea together (iv).17 Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (C) Great boosted thermopower from the improved structural entropy difference of Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− reported by Kim et al.56 Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (D) The concentration ratio difference contributes to large thermopower in the K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 thermogalvanic cell: the mechanism of the concentration ratio difference boosted thermopower (i) and its corresponding thermopower (ii).45 Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (E) (NH4)2SO4 induced concentration ratio difference for a large thermopower of the Cu/Cu2+ thermogalvanic cell.36 Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (F) Thermogalvanic effect and Soret effect synergistically boost thermopower.65 Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2020, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 7  Strategies for large thermopower in TCCs. (A) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for large thermopower: without (i) or with large (ii) mobility difference between anions and cations. (B) Schematic illustration of the interaction between ions and their surroundings (i) and the corresponding thermopower (ii).93 Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (C–E) Drag effects of the matrix on thermopower: schematic illustration of drag effects on energy carriers (C-i, D-i and E-i) and the corresponding thermopower (C-ii, D-ii and E-ii).31,35,68 Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2021, AAAS. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

Pt	Fe(CN)64−/3−	36.56	−1.29	0.54	0.54 (ΔT ∼ 25 K)	0.87	0.417	
78

Pt	Fe2+/3+	16.1	1.76	0.503	—	1.72	0.53	
102

MWCNTs	Fe(CN)64−/3−	—	−1.4	—	1.8 (ΔT ∼ 60 K)	0.5	1.4	
43

SWCNTs-rGO	Fe(CN)64−/3−	—	—	—	0.338 (ΔT ∼ 31 K)	1.9	2.63	
103

Pt decorated CNTs aerogel	Fe(CN)64−/3−	121	−1.43	0.57	6.6 (ΔT ∼ 51 K)	0.16	3.95	
105

3D multi-structured Cu	Cu/Cu2+	—	1.66	—	3.5 (ΔT ∼ 70 K)	0.71	—	
36

Graphite	Fe(CN)64−/3−	5	−4.2	0.55	—	1.1	0.79	
17

Pt	I−/I3−	—	7.7	0.13	0.25 (ΔT ∼ 35 K)	0.21 × 10−3	5.2	
79

Commercial carbon fabric paper	Fe(CN)64−/3−	36	−3.73	0.4	17.7 (ΔT ∼ 50 K)	—	11.1	
45

Activated carbon cloth	Fe(CN)64−/3−	—	—	—	12.0	1.8	0.4	
63

Pt	Fe(CN)64−/3− + NaCl	12	−1.6	0.13	0.97 (ΔT ∼ 40 K)	0.61	1.38	
58


 	Fig. 8  Strategies for p/n-type conversion. (A) Schematic illustration of the interaction between ions and the matrix before (i) and after (ii) the addition of PEG, the thermovoltage dependence on temperature difference with and without PEG in ionogels (iii).106 Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (B) Schematic illustration of the interaction between ions and their surroundings before (i) and after (ii) the addition of the second ionic liquid, and the thermovoltage dependence on temperature difference with and without the second ionic liquid in ionogels (iii).42 Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2022, AAAS. (C) Host–guest design: schematic of the p–n conversion mechanism (i), the hydrophilic/hydrophobic conversion of PNIPAM nanogels and the equilibrium reaction for the redox couple (ii), and the thermopower of the designed cells with different loadings of PNIPAM nanogels (iii).81 Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Engineering designs of thermo-electrochemical cells. (A) Stretchable ionogel: Schematic diagrams of the stretchability (i), changes of thermopower and ionic conductivity of the ionogel under stretching (ii) and cyclic stretching (iii).33 Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (B) Self-healable organic–inorganic hybrid film: schematic illustration of the molecular structure and interaction among components (i), digital image illustration of the stretchability and self-healability (ii), and thermopower and ionic conductivity efficiency of the film in self-healing cycles (iii).109 Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (C) Tough and large power density hydrogel: comprehensive assessment of the designed hydrogel (i) and the power output at different stretched strains (ii).58 Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (D) Stretchable and antifreeze organohydrogel: thermovoltage and current power output at high (i and iv) and low (ii and v) temperature ambience, photographs of the organohydrogel pressed (iii) and stretched (vi) at high and low temperature ambiences, respectively.27 Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  Device integration and applications of thermo-electrochemical cells. (A) Schematic diagram of the connection of single cells (i) and the integrated thermo-electrochemical cells (ii). (B) The application of the developed aqueous Fe(CN)64−/3−-based thermogalvanic cell: the structure (i), the output performance (ii) and applications (powering LED arrays (iii) and charging mobile phones (iv)) of the cell.17 Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (C) The thermovoltage and temperature difference change with time (i) and output performance (ii) of the aqueous Fe(CN)64−/3− thermogalvanic cell for electricity generation.45 Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, AAAS. (D) The developed NaCl-based thermally charged capacitors for heat to conversion by assembling with capacitors.34 Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (E) The developed ionic liquid-based thermally charged capacitors for thermal sensors.110 Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Perspectives of the future development of TECs from opportunities, challenges and further discussion.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
