Nanonet as a scaffold with targeted functionalities  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM35601E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM35601E
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24983-24991Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanonet as a scaffold with targeted functionalities

        
          
            Yanli 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            George 
            Grüner
          
          
        
      *bc
aDivision of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, 637371 Singapore. E-mail: zhaoyanli@ntu.edu.sg;  Fax: +65 6791 1961;   Tel: +65 6316 8792
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 90095 USA. E-mail: ggruner@ucla.edu;  Fax: +1 310 825 8782;   Tel: +1 310 825 8782
cCenter of Excellence for Advanced Materials Research, Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21598, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      17th August 2012
    , Accepted 12th September 2012First published on 12th September 2012AbstractA random assembly of nanoscale electrically conducting wires, a so called a nanonet, has a variety of interesting properties, which has been exploited for multiple applications. These nanowire networks can also be regarded as a “scaffold” onto which molecules and nanoscale objects can be attached for well defined functionalities. This review summarizes the strategies of the attachments onto the scaffold, the investigation of the interface between the scaffold and the functional species together with the applications in the areas of renewable energy, opto-electronics, catalysis and biotechnology. The initial work on this novel materials platform will likely followed up by development efforts so that the fundamental value propositions associated with the scaffold can be fully exploited. Initial work towards this goal is gradually emerging.Yanli ZhaoYanli Zhao is currently a Nanyang Assistant Professor and a National Research Foundation Fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his B.Sc. degree in Chemistry from Nankai University, China in 2000 and his Ph.D. degree in Physical Chemistry there in 2005 under the supervision of Professor Yu Liu. He was a postdoctoral scholar with Professor Sir Fraser Stoddart at University of California Los Angeles (October 2005 to November 2008) and subsequently at Northwestern University (January 2010 to August 2010). In between times (December 2008 to December 2009), he was a postdoctoral scholar performing research work in the group of Professor Jeffrey Zink at University of California Los Angeles. He has published over 60 papers. His current research focuses on biocompatible nanoparticles for diagnostics and therapeutics, porous materials for energy storage and catalysis, and nanocarbon-based electronics.George GrünerGeorge Grüner is a Distinguished Professor of Physics at University of California Los Angeles, and a Visiting Professor at the Center of Excellence for Advanced Materials Research, Chemistry Department, King Abdulaziz University. He received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Eotvos Lorand University in Budapest, Hungary. He was a postdoctoral associate at Imperial College London in 1972–1973. He is one of the most highly cited physicists worldwide. He has published over 400 papers and two books. He has more than 30 patent applications, and has launched and has been involved in several startup companies. His current interests focus on energy-related applications of nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
We are experiencing a paradigm change, the first sign of a new industrial revolution today. Materials that enabled the industrial revolutions of the 20th century – copper and silicon among others – were investigated, understood (using quantum mechanics, the new “tool” that emerged a Century ago) and perfected, ushering in the informative technology along the way. These materials, however, are not well suited for supporting the technology and market that are emerging in response to global needs such as sustainable energy and healthcare.1,2
We are seeing the first signs of the emergence of novel materials and materials structures that, due to their novel attributes and energy efficient and clean fabrication routes, enable a whole range of applications, and, eventually the development of new devices. Materials come in different shapes and forms, which lead to different application opportunities. As an example, silicon has three well studied and known forms: single crystal, polycrystalline and amorphous silicon – with the three forms having different properties and thus different and often competing (price versus performance) application opportunities.3,4 A silicon “nanonet” consisting of a network of electrically interconnected nanowires may be considered as the fourth form of silicon, an architecture that promises a revolution in a host of technologies and industries. Bottom-up chemistry- and biology-driven fabrications will lead to additional opportunities.
Although various nanowires can be used for building a network, one particular nanowire, a so called carbon nanotube (CNT),5–11 has been most extensively explored to capitalize on the properties on such nanonet. The concept of a carbon nanonet, and the opportunities offered by the nanonet, or scaffold itself, have been reviewed before,12,13 this review extends these opportunities into new areas, enabled by the functionalities of the materials that are attached to the scaffold.
CNTs are highly conducting and mechanically flexible wires. In addition, the nearly planar hexagonal carbon structure allows the functionalizations for the attachments of various species and nanoscale materials.14–17 The CNT nanonet has several advantages, primarily, allowing for ready interactions with the environment, and excellent electrical conductivity. In contrast to individual components, the network offers reproducibility and easy manufacturability. This review summarizes the strategies of the attachments onto the CNT nanonet-based scaffold (Fig. 1), the investigation of the interface between the scaffold and the functional species, and the applications in several areas. These applications are based on the (1) high surface area and porosity of the overall structure, (2) the electrical conducting properties of the scaffold, and (3) the particular functionalities of the species.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of CNT nanonet scaffold (rod) attached with functional elements (spherical object) on a substrate. 
2. Nanonet
Throughout of this review, a nanonet is defined as a random three-dimensional (3D) network of nanoscale wires, though in certain cases a thin network (usually on a substrate) used to elaborate the concept and explore the value proposition, will also be discussed. With a typical length of the individual CNTs of about 10 micron, a network that has a thickness well below this length scale is regarded as a two dimensional (2D) network.12,13 The percolation properties of such networks show typical 2D-type characteristics. In contrast, the network that is significantly thicker than 10 micron shows 3D properties. This distinction, however, does not alter the attributes of the scaffold that are relevant to this review. The functionalization (Fig. 2) of the scaffold is fundamentally attributed to the local properties of the individual tubes, or interfaces or joints between the tubes. A carbon nanonet has several unique properties, and some of them are due to the attributes of the individual elements, the CNTs, while others are on account of the structural properties of the random network itself.
 Fig. 2  CNT scaffold with attached functional elements. (a) The CNT scaffold.19 (b) The scaffold with attached Ag nanoparticles.17 (c) The scaffold with attached ITO particles.11 (d) Thiol-functionalized CNTs with attached Fe clusters.11 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 11 and 17. Copyrights 2010 American Chemical Society and 2010 The Electrochemical Society, respectively.) 
The nanonet can be prepared by a variety of fabrication routes: by (1) direct growth and (2) solution-based deposition technique. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a commonly used method for direct growth of carbon nanonet. CVD can grow the nanonet either randomly distributed or aligned. Direct growth onto a substrate has been explored in detail.18 As compared with such methods, solution-based deposition process has several advantages, e.g., it can be carried out at a relatively low temperature (<100 °C), and it does not require a high-vacuum system, which reduces costs significantly.19,20 Four categories for the solution-based deposition can be divided:11 (1) surfactant as dispersion aids, (2) polymers as dispersion aids, (3) direct dispersion of pristine or functionalized CNTs in organic solvents or water, and (4) other dispersion aids including DNA, protein, and starch. Using surfactant to disperse CNTs for the fabrication of the nanonet is a widely used route on account of the ability of the surfactant to individualize CNTs at high concentrations, and the ability to be rinsed off in subsequent washing process.21–24
The network is characterized by unique properties that are also essential for the functionalization and also for the various applications. They include:

High surface area/high porosity. A carbon nanonet has an enormous surface area, of between 1000 and 2000 m2 g−1. CNTs fill approximately 30% of the space, and the rest is “empty”, which is available for functional materials or components such as electrolytes to occupy.

Electrical conductance and optical transparency. The carbon nanonet is above the percolation threshold and electrically conducting. The larger the nanowire conductivity, the better the network conductance.25–27 A network consisting of such highly one dimensional (1D) nanowires also has very high transparency – approaching 100% for truly 1D nanowires. At the same time, these properties are robust, and do not depend on factors like external stress.

Mechanical robustness and flexibility. The interwoven network is robust and displays mechanical flexibility at the same time. This characteristic allows for its incorporation into devices,28–30 often with new features, such as so called “wearable electronics”. A network of nanowires has significantly greater flexibility than a film of comparable surface coverage, making the architecture eminently suited for applications requiring flexibility.

Pathways for functionalizations. The hexagonal carbon structure of CNTs allows for a range of chemical functionalization routes, which can be utilized to introduce chemical species such as porphyrines and the nanoscale species such as quantum dots onto the nanonet scaffold. At the same time, the size of the individual components, that determines the length scale of the overall structural roughness, is comparable to typical biomolecules such as proteins and enzymes, allowing conformational change-driven attachment of such biomolecules onto the scaffold.
These intrinsic attributes of the carbon nanonet, coupled with a straightforward room temperature deposition method, offer a range of applications, several of these emerged recently, and the work discussed in an earlier review by one of us.12 The network is a highly transparent and electrically conducting material, and can serve as a transparent electrode for touch screens, solar cells, and light emitting diodes.31–34 The high surface area and the high electrical conductivity enable double layer supercapacitors with high power. Electrodes for batteries or supercapacitors have also been envisioned. The network has, for a small coverage of the surface, semiconductor-like characteristics, and thus can serve as the conducting channel of field effect transistors, offering promising opportunities for printed electronics applications. One should mention at this point that survey of the literature may create the somewhat unrealistic impression that the properties of the scaffold are universally superior to that of materials used for applications in similar areas. This is likely the case for certain applications, but not for others.
The range of opportunities can vastly be enhanced through “functionalizing” the scaffold: attaching molecules, and nanoscale objects with well defined functionality. These opportunities range from enhancing the already desirable properties of the scaffold to optoelectronic devices built-in through light sensitive molecules, to energy generation and storage and to chemical and biological sensing and monitoring.
3. Functional carbon nanonet scaffold
The notion of a “scaffold” is widely used in the area of tissue engineering. Here, we use the term in a different sense – a framework onto which a well-defined functionality can be assigned through the attachment of chemical species and nanoscale materials. Such functionality, coupled with the attributes of the nanonet listed above, allows for the generations of a whole range of novel materials and devices, often for new and potentially disruptive applications.
3.1. Attaching functionality to the scaffold
Depending on the functional species, several fabrication avenues of functional scaffolds are available and have been explored. By choosing the appropriate fabrication process, one balances the ease of fabrication against performance. The overall objective is to arrive at functionalization that is evenly dispersed throughout the scaffold, has an excellent interface between the scaffold and the functional species and preserves the functionality. The simplest process, a mixing of the nanonet components, the CNTs and the functional elements in slurry may not lead to the best dispersion and the best interconnect between the different species. In contrast, direct growth of the functional units onto the scaffold may ensure excellent flow of electrical charges between the scaffold and the functional elements, but will not allow industrial scale and cost-effective fabrication. Current major methods for introducing functional species onto the scaffold include (1) co-deposition of the scaffold and functional units, (2) pre-fabrication growth of functional units onto the scaffold, (3) post-deposition of functional units onto the scaffold, and (4) chemical attachment of functional units onto the scaffold.

Co-deposition of the scaffold and functional units. Possibly, the simplest method is to co-deposit the scaffold elements and functional units onto a surface. The advantage of the method lies in its simplicity of the fabrication process. The disadvantage is the fact that the elements of the resulting structure may not be in close proximity to allow easy charge transfer between the units. Nevertheless, this remains the simplest method that can and should be first tried.
Such method has been used to fabricate electrodes combining highly conducting components, the CNTs with components of high electrochemical activity, TiO2 nanoparticles. A similar architecture, a hybrid material35 consisting of CNTs and TiO2 nanotube was recently fabricated using co-deposition using a CVD process and was found to be efficient for reversible hydrogen storage. The TiO2 nanotubes are grown on a Ti substrate, and CNTs are grown around TiO2 nanotubes with cobalt as a catalyst.

Pre-fabrication growth of functional units onto the scaffold. CNTs can be used as the initiation sites for chemical reactions that lead to nanoscale particles attached to the nanotubes. The scaffold fabricated using such nanotubes has the functionalities defined by the particular nanoparticles. CNT–V2O5 nanoparticle scaffolds have been fabricated36,37 with the aim of achieving high electrochemical capacitance together with high electrical conductivity, which are the pre-requisites for the energy storage with high energy and power. The scaffolds fabricated by using CNTs and other metal nanoparticles were also reported.38

Post-deposition of functional units onto the scaffold. In some instances, drop casting of the functional units onto the nanonet scaffold is possible. This route works for polymers,39 and even for some biological molecules such as starch. Alternatively, the functional units can be grown directly onto the scaffold, and such growth has been successfully carried out in the case of the inorganic oxide ITO (indium tin oxide).

Chemical attachment of functional units onto the scaffold. Relatively straightforward chemical modification16 of CNTs leads to the feasibility of noncovalent attachment of the functional units onto the nanonet scaffold. Although this method results in a robust attachment, the functional units may be separated by the “tethers” linked to the scaffold. Such separation may fundamentally change the charge transfer between the elements of the scaffold and the functional units, complicating the analysis. In one example, porphyrine molecules (organic molecules that play an essential role in photosynthesis) were attached40,41 to the CNT scaffold through a relatively straightforward chemical process, illustrated on Fig. 3. Similar route was employed for the attachment of quantum dots42 onto the scaffold.
 Fig. 3  Noncovalent functionalization of CNT scaffold. (a) Attachment of porphyrine derivative onto the scaffold.41 (b) Biotinylation reaction of the polymer layer on the CNT scaffold.45 (c) Schematic representation of the noncovalent bonding between surface-functionalized CdSe nanoparticles and CNT scaffold.42 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 41, 42 and 45. Copyrights 2005 John Wiley and Sons, 2008 John Wiley and Sons, and 2003 American Chemical Society, respectively.) 
3.2. Exploring the interface between the scaffold and the functional units
The interaction between the scaffold and the functional units plays a significant role in the fundamental value proposition of the devices that can be fabricated. Such interaction leads to the appropriate mechanical robustness, but, more importantly, the seamless flow of electric charge between the components is essential for the majority of the devices that have been fabricated to date.
Changes in the electrical resistance upon attaching the functional units onto the scaffold have been readily observed in a variety of cases. Such changes, however, do not shed light into the mechanism of the charge propagation between the scaffold and the functional units. Thus, studying the charge transfer between the scaffold and chemical species is important. In contrast to the resistance, a (three terminal) transistor configuration allows to separate the measurement of the mobility and number of electric changes. These parameters can be extracted from what is called the transfer characteristics of a transistor: the current–voltage response between the source and drain versus the applied gate voltage. Therefore, CNT field-effect network transistors (FETs) have been used to explore the charge transfer between the functional elements and the scaffold. Several publications have explored this concept. Electron donor and acceptor molecules have been used, such as NH3 and NO2 both in gaseous form,43,44 and dissolved in a solvent, and the change of the transistor characteristics were examined as the function of the concentration. The shift of the transistor characteristics (Fig. 4) is directly proportional to the charge transformed to the nanotubes (with the proportionality factor known), and so is the concentration of the electron donating and accepting species adsorbed on the nanotubes. This then allows the charge transfer to be evaluated, and contrasted with calculated values. The good agreement between theory and experiment supports the fundamental proposition about the charge transfer. Similar work has been done with polymers with electron donor and acceptor groups, and chemicals with different charge transfer characteristics, as expressed by the Hammett parameter.
 Fig. 4  Exploring charge transfer between the CNT scaffold and electron donor and acceptor molecules.44 (a) Characteristic changes of the CNT FETs. (b) The changes of the threshold voltage versus the concentration of the NH3 species. The full line is a fit to the surface coverage. Analysis of the results leads to a charge transfer between the donor and CNTs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2003 American Physical Society.) 
The charge transfer between the scaffold and biological species such as proteins has also been explored. As an example, streptavidin proteins were attached45 onto transistors with carbon nanotubes as the conducting channel. Imaging established the number of streptavidin molecules attached to the nanotubes, and the measured transistor response led to the charge transfer between the nanotubes and the protein. The charge transfer can also be estimated from the structure that is characterized by a number of –NH2 groups per molecule, and the modelling is in good agreement with the experiments.
Of course the functional entities, at the location where they are attached to the scaffold also act as scattering centers, and thus increase the overall resistance of the scaffold. This effect can also be measured directly through the transistor characteristics.
While the work summarized here leads to a consistent picture of the interaction between the functional species and the scaffold, one significant issue remains to be explored: the electrical properties of the scaffold are fundamentally influenced by the interface between the individual scaffold elements, the carbon nanotubes. It is expected therefore that the interacting between the junctions and the functional entities also plays a role in the charge transfer. Experiments with controlled nanotube–nanotube interfaces could resolve this issue.
4. Application opportunities
The properties of the nanonet scaffold – e.g., mechanical flexibility and electrical conductivity together with the room temperature, chemistry and biology driven fabrication allow a range of application opportunities. Functionalization of the scaffold can be used to enhance the properties of the scaffold, thus leading to enhanced value proposition in areas the scaffold itself already made a mark. The scaffolds where light sensitive molecules attached to will have applications in optoelectronics and eventually in artificial vision and light harvesting. Light sensitive molecules attached – with appropriate tailoring of the entire structure – could also lead to novel solar cells. Nanoscale particles with large electrochemical activity on the scaffold are able to be used38 for energy storage as electrodes in batteries and supercapacitors, and for catalytic reactions. Various chemicals that undergo chemical reactions in the presence of other well-defined chemicals on the scaffold can be used as chemical sensors with direct electronic readout. Attachments of biomolecules, such as single strand DNA, receptors or enzymes, could result in biological sensors.
4.1. Enhancing the performance of the scaffold
CNT scaffolds have been used primarily in two application areas: transparent and electrically conducting films, and carbon based electrical circuits. In some of the cases, while the performance is adequate for certain applications, other properties need to be improved simultaneously. Therefore, it is not surprising that functional elements have been attached onto the nanonet scaffold with the objective of improved performance.
An example of a scaffold with such improved performance as the objective is a two-component network built of a CNT scaffold to which ITO nanoparticles were attached. Both materials are extensively used as transparent conductors, and both of them have significant drawbacks. The scaffold does not have the required conductivity (for a certain optical transparency. Thicker scaffolds lead to reduced transparency, as a guide a network with thickness of about 30 nm has 90% optical transparency, see ref. 11 and 12 for example) while ITO is brittle, limiting its lifetime for certain applications such as touch screens. For the two component network composed of these two species, the two components play complementary roles: the nanotube scaffold provides mechanical robustness (together with the electrical conductivity and, for a thin film, optical transparency). The ITO network provides improved conductivity and optical transparency. As a promising application, ITO-modified transparent electrodes were fabricated34 and polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) using such film as anodes exhibit superior performance as compared with that of the CNT scaffold.
“Carbon for Electronics” has been actively pursued over the years, ever since the first fabrication of CNT based FETs.46 Initially transistors with a single nanotube as the conducting channel were fabricated and explored, but subsequently it was demonstrated that a thin scaffold – or network – can also be used as the conducting channel for an FET. Significant body of work exists in this area. The performance of such transistors has gradually been increased over times, both analog and digital circuits have been made with increased complexity and performance. While the performance is appropriate for certain applications, attributes such as the on–off ratio limit the range of application opportunities. The networks have been combined with Ag flakes and also decorated with nanoparticles.47 Silver enhances the electrical conductivity, leading to devices with improved electrical characteristics.
4.2. Scaffold with targeted functionalities
There are a host of technologies where the functionality of the materials, including the sensitivity to light, sensitivity to chemical and biological species, and catalytic activity, can be integrated with the nanonet scaffold. Combining such functionality with the electrical conductivity of the scaffold will generate novel optoelectronics, solar cells, and direct electrical readout based chemical and biological sensors.

4.2.1. Optoelectronics. 
The name “optoelectronics” refers to materials that change their electron configuration upon the irradiation with light, or change their optical properties in the presence of an electric potential. Combining functional species with an electrically conducting scaffold offers new insight into the interactions, and at the same time new application opportunities. In order to capitalize on the structure, light sensitive materials, such as porphyrine,40,41 quantum dots,42 and pyrene derivatives,48,49 were combined with CNT scaffolds. The fundamental step that enables the applications is the light induced charge transfer between the light sensitive materials and the scaffold – leading to a light induced change of the electrical conductivity of the structure. These studies have established the feasibility of photon-electron conversion between the two components of the composite in the FET devices. Various light sensitive species, including organic molecules and quantum dots are excellent candidates for such processes. The uniqueness of porphyrins and metalloporphyrins is their long-lived intermediate electronic state that is accessed upon their irradiation by visible light. This photo-excited porphyrin state initiates an electron-transfer process. A variety of studies (an example is displayed on Fig. 5) have indicated40 that a photo-induced electron transfer occurs from the porphyrin derivatives (electron donor) to the carbon-based species (electron acceptor).
 Fig. 5  Response of the porphyrine functionalized CNT nanonet to light.40 (a) Schematic representation of the porphyrine functionalized CNT FET. (b) The transistor transfer characteristics with light on and off. The shift of Isdversus gate characteristics provides evidence of light induced charge transfer between the porphyrine and CNTs. (c) The change of the electrical resistance of the functionalized CNT nanonet to light at different wavelengths, together with the optical absorption curve of porphyrine. (d) Response to a light pulse, illustrating the dynamics of the response characteristics. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.) 
In a related study,42 effective charge transfer from pyrene-functionalized CdSe (pyrene/CdSe) nanoparticles to the scaffold was explored using fluorescence experiments and by monitoring the transistor characteristics. In this case the nanonet serves as electron acceptors and the pyrene/CdSe nanoparticles act as electron donors. The magnitude of the charge transfer shows a strong dependency on the light intensity and wavelength.
In another line of work,48,49 the concept was taken one step further. The nanotube scaffold was used to form the conducting channel of transistors, and light sensitive species, pyrene-modified β-cyclodextrin (pyrenecyclodextrin) was attached onto the conducting channel. This then leads to a tunable photosensor.


4.2.2. Energy generation and storage. 
Energy generation and storage are the central elements of the so-called sustainable energy and are the determining elements of the energy generation–storage–distribution–use value chain. Now, printed or plastic solar cells are emerging – though facing significant challenges – and there is renewed emphasis on improved batteries and alternatives such as supercapacitors. Functionalized nanonets start to play a role in this area.
The initial step for a solar cell, the charge transfer between the two species upon irradiation with light has been demonstrated, as discussed above. What are needed for a solar cell are the conducting pathways that carry the electrons and holes to the two electrodes. Such architecture has been envisioned.
Unresolved issues regarding the energy and power of batteries and supercapacitors limit their applications to a certain extent,50 from batteries for cars to frequency regulation in smart grids. Both energy and power are essential, and their relative importance depends on the particular application. Carbon nanonet scaffolds have excellent properties, e.g. high surface area and high electrical conductivity, which enable the scaffolds to serve as electrodes for applications both in battery and supercapacitor. Recently, the supercapacitors based on thick films of CNT–V2O5 and CNT–TiO2 composites were reported (Fig. 6).51–53 In particular, a scaffold has been shown to have significant power density, exceeding well conventional devices that use activated carbons as electrodes.27 The structure, however, does not provide sufficient energy storage density: the so-called double layer capacitance is simply not effective for charge storage even for extremely high surface areas for carbonaceous materials.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of a representative CNT–V2O5 nanocomposite film containing 18 wt% of CNTs, and the same film etched by 1 wt% HF (inset).51 (b) A printed supercapacitor with CNT scaffold components.11 (c) Ragone plots of asymmetric supercapacitors made from a V2O5–CNT nanocomposite anode and an activated carbon cathode, a symmetric supercapacitor made from the same activated carbon, and various supercapacitor devices.53 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 11, 51 and 53. Copyrights 2010 American Chemical Society, 2011 John Wiley and Sons, and 2012 American Chemical Society, respectively.) 
Chemical energy storage is another area where a high surface area scaffold is important. While the CNT network itself has been shown to store hydrogen (note that hydrogen storage is the essential element of the hydrogen economy),54 but, due to the relatively low binding energy of H2 to carbon, only at low temperatures. By using lithium- or potassium-doped CNTs, the H2 storage capacity can be significantly increased at room temperatures under ambient pressure.55 The high H2-uptake capacity may be attributed to the special open-edged, layered structure of the CNTs made from methane, as well as the catalytic effect of alkali metals.


4.2.3. Catalysis. 
Catalytic processes underlie a wide range of applications. As a rule, porous, high surface areas are needed together with materials that display high catalytic activity. In certain applications, high electrical conductivity is also required. CNTs as catalytic supports present several advantages over conventional supports. The CNT scaffolds (a) have high thermal stability for sustainable catalysis, (b) provide high accessibility for the catalytically active phase, (c) afford the possibility of tuning the specific metal–support interactions for improving the catalytic activity and selectivity, and (d) can be easily functionalized based on the catalytic needs. CNT-based catalysts have been employed mainly for photo- and electro-catalysis. In these cases, CNTs normally serve as catalytic scaffolds where the active phase is mainly located on the external surface of the nanotubes. For example, Ru catalyst on the CNT scaffold is a highly selective Fischer–Tropsch catalyst for the formation of C10–C20 hydrocarbons,56 and is also significantly active for catalytic generation of H2 from ammonia.57 Pd nanoparticles on the CNT supports are effective catalysts for the electro-oxidation of methanol, ethanol, and glycerol.58


4.2.4. Chemical and biological sensors. 
Nanonets when properly functionalized can serve as chemical and biological sensors with – due to the electrically conducting scaffold – direct electrical readout of the presence of the analyte. While the nanonets – as any nanoscale object – are sensitive to reactive species through the high surface areas, they do not have the desired specificity. The specificity can be achieved through sensing characteristics to be built into the devices through appropriate chemistry approaches that lead to the recognition of the targeted species. At the same time, response to non-targeted gases has to be avoided through an appropriate blocking layer. Functionalized nanonet devices show a promising sensing ability towards some chemicals and gases such as NH3, NO2, CO, and O2.43 In another example, CNT scaffolds were electrochemically functionalized47 with Pt, Pd, Au, and Ag nanoparticles for sensing NO gas. Research in this area has moved towards commercialization, but issues beyond the recognition of the analyte, such as temperature and humidity dependence of the response, false positives and negatives make the transition to products difficult.
Such devices show also significant potential as biosensors for applications including cancer detection and screening.45,59,60 Sensing can be achieved by attaching antibodies and recognition molecules to the scaffold. Several novel features are essential here. The first is the detection scheme: for sensing, and in particular real time detection, the buffer can serve as the dielectric layer for both is a transistor and capacitor configuration as illustrated on Fig. 7. Ligand–receptor binding has been used to demonstrate the concept,45,61 subsequently the electronic detection of prostate specific antigen (PSA) was also established,62 with a sensitivity that allows the identification of the emergence of prostate cancer. Enzymatic reactions were also followed by the scaffold, functionalized by starch,63 and the scaffold was also combined with a cell membrane, as the first attempt to build a cell–electronics interface.64 These advances clearly establish the initial pathway for the use of bio-functionalized scaffolds in various areas of biotechnology and healthcare.
 Fig. 7  Functionalized scaffold used for the detection and monitoring of biological reactions. (a) Schematic representation of the bio-functionalization scheme together with a conventional transistor detection scheme.61 (b) The transistor with nanonet conducting channel gated through the buffer.61 (c) The capacitive detection with nanonet and one of the electrodes.62 (d) The change of the device resistance upon the introduction of a streptavidin with different concentrations.45 (e) The change of the device that has been functionalized with PSA antibodies upon PSA concentration.62 (f) Image of a nanonet–cell membrane.64 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 45, 61 and 64. Copyrights 2003 American Chemical Society, 2006 Springer, and 2005 American Chemical Society, respectively.) 

5. Conclusions
This short review summarizes the current status and potential of a rapidly emerging field based on carbon nanonet scaffold. The concept, the fundamentals of the fabrication, and the general approach have been established, and explored together with a few application opportunities. Nevertheless what have been summarized here is only some initial steps towards applications, with a significant number of issues – usually swept under the rug in publications – remaining unexplored. These include reproducibility, manufacturability, and lifetime just to mention a few.
Carbon nanotubes represent only one class of scaffolds that can be exploited. Other nanoscale wires, such as Si,65 ZnO and other oxide together with Ag nanowires,66,67 and graphene68 may present different opportunities. For example, the flat surface of graphene offers more effective functionalization routes. On the other hand, a nanotube scaffold provides a network with superior mechanical properties.
The concept of a network with targeted functionality is not unique to the random scaffold discussed in this review. Metal–organic frameworks69 can be built and examined with the same general value proposition. The approach, however, is different. In the latter, the framework elements are designed for certain functionality and structural attributes. In the case of nanonet scaffolds, the functionality is a pick-and-choose approach, capitalizing on the functionalities of nanoscale molecules and units that are attached onto the scaffold. Both approaches have advantages and disadvantages, and the main advantage of the scaffold-based approach is the readily available library of materials with already explored functionalities.
The range of applications will undoubtedly grow, and this growth will also be driven by the novel, room temperature manufacturing process, in generally referred to a “printed electronics”. 2D and 3D printing, an emerging technology area will undoubtedly make its impact in this area.
It is gratifying to see that the overall value proposition explored in this review has been recognized not only by scientists and technologists, but also by policy makers. The recent assessment by the World Economic Forum: “the increasing demand on natural resources requires unprecedented gains in efficiency. Nanostructured materials with tailored properties, designed and engineered at the molecular scale, are already showing novel and unique features that will usher in the next clean energy revolution, reduce our dependence on depleting natural resources, and increase atom-efficiency manufacturing and processing.” best expresses this sentiment. It is also clear that R/D in this area will continue to play a crucial role in fulfilling this expectation.
Acknowledgements
YLZ thanks the Singapore National Research Foundation Fellowship (NRF2009NRF-RF001-015) and Nanyang Technological University for financial supports.
Notes and references
G. F. Ray, Natl. Inst. Econ. Rev., 1980, 92, 33–52 CrossRef .

          L. A. Wagner, Materials in the Economy – Material Flows, Scarcity, and the Environment, U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1221,  2002 Search PubMed .
B. K. Teo and X. H. Sun, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1454–1532 CrossRef CAS .
V. Schmidt, J. V. Wittemann and U. Gösele, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 361–388 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1787–1800 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niyogi, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, B. Zhao, P. Bhowmik, R. Sen, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1105–1113 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, V. Sgobba and C. Ehli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 471–487 RSC .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhao and J. F. Stoddart, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1161–1171 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Grüner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5790–5844 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grüner, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3533–3539 RSC .
G. Grüner, Sci. Am., 2007, 296, 76–83 CrossRef .
S. Banerjee, T. Hemraj-Benny and S. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 17–29 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, S. Campidelli, S. Giordani, D. Bonifazi, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2214–2230 RSC .
N. Karousis, N. Tagmatarchis and D. Tasis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5366–5397 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wee, W. F. Mak, N. Phonthammachai, A. Kiebele, M. V. Reddy, B. V. R. Chowdari, G. Grüner, M. Srinivasan and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A179–A184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2513–2517 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, W. Yuan, P. Brochu, G. Grüner and Q. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 161108 CrossRef .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Islam, E. Rojas, D. M. Bergey, A. T. Johnson and A. G. Yodh, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
O. Matarredona, H. Rhoads, Z. R. Li, J. H. Harwell, L. Balzano and D. E. Resasco, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13357–13367 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Grüner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 081103 CrossRef .
M. A. Topinka, M. W. Rowell, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, M. D. McGehee, D. S. Hecht and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1866–1871 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bradley, J.-C. P. Gabriel and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1353–1355 CrossRef CAS .
E. Artukovic, M. Kaempgen, D. S. Hecht, S. Roth and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 757–760 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiebele and G. Grüner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 144104 CrossRef .
M. W. Rowell, M. A. Topinka, M. D. McGehee, H.-J. Prall, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, L. Hu and G. Grüner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233506 CrossRef .
J. Li, L. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Grüner and T. J. Marks, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2472–2477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, J. Ma, G. Grüner, G. Wee and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 264104 CrossRef .
J. Li, L. Hu, J. Liu, L. Wang, T. J. Marks and G. Grüner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 083306 CrossRef .
A. Mishra, S. Banerjee, S. K. Mohapatra, O. A. Graeve and M. Misra, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445607 CrossRef .
P. M. Ajayan, O. Stephan, P. Redlich and C. Colliex, Nature, 1995, 375, 564–567 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11552–11555 CAS .
D. Eder, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1348–1385 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moniruzzaman and K. I. Winey, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5194–5205 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, R. J. A. Ramirez, M. Briman, E. Artukovic, K. S. Chichak, J. F. Stoddart and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2031–2036 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Chichak, A. Star, M. V. P. Altoé and J. F. Stoddart, Small, 2005, 1, 452–461 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Y. L. Zhao, K. Ryu, C. Zhou, J. F. Stoddart and G. Grüner, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 939–946 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kauffman and A. Star, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6550–6570 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bradley, J.-C. P. Gabriel, M. Briman, A. Star and G. Grüner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 218301 CrossRef .
A. Star, J.-C. P. Gabriel, K. Bradley and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 459–463 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tans, A. R. M. Verschueren and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 393, 49–52 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kauffman and A. Star, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1863–1868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhao, L. Hu, J. F. Stoddart and G. Grüner, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1910–1915 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhao, L. Hu, G. Grüner and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16996–17003 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, J. Wen, Y. Zhang, M. Shen, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 791–795 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Wen and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2141–2146 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, X. Jia, Q. Xiao, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4319–4327 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Y. Fan, M. Liu, H. T. Cong, H. M. Cheng and M. S. Dresselhaus, Science, 1999, 286, 1127–1129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Wu, J. Lin and K. L. Tan, Science, 1999, 285, 91–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Kang, S. L. Zhang, Q. H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2565–2568 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Yin, Q. H. Zhang, B. Q. Xu, W.-X. Zhu, C.-F. Ng and C.-T. Au, J. Catal., 2004, 224, 384–396 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bambagioni, C. Bianchini, A. Marchionni, J. Filippi, F. Vizza, J. Teddy, P. Serp and M. Zhiani, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 241–251 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bradley, M. Briman, A. Star and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 253–256 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Chen, H. C. Choi, S. Bangsaruntip, E. Yenilmez, X. Tang, Q. Wang, Y.-L. Chang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1563–1568 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grüner, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384, 322–335 CrossRef .
M. Briman, E. Artukovic, L. Zhang, D. Chia, L. Goodglick and G. Grüner, Small, 2007, 3, 758–762 CrossRef CAS .
A. Star, V. Joshi, T.-R. Han, M. V. P. Altoé, G. Grüner and J. F. Stoddart, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 2089–2092 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bradley, A. Davis, J.-C. P. Gabriel and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 841–845 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian and C. M. Lieber, Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83, 2153–2169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Goldberger, R. Fan and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .
E. Comini and G. Sberveglieri, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1257–1283 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Yanli Zhao	Yanli Zhao is currently a Nanyang Assistant Professor and a National Research Foundation Fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his B.Sc. degree in Chemistry from Nankai University, China in 2000 and his Ph.D. degree in Physical Chemistry there in 2005 under the supervision of Professor Yu Liu. He was a postdoctoral scholar with Professor Sir Fraser Stoddart at University of California Los Angeles (October 2005 to November 2008) and subsequently at Northwestern University (January 2010 to August 2010). In between times (December 2008 to December 2009), he was a postdoctoral scholar performing research work in the group of Professor Jeffrey Zink at University of California Los Angeles. He has published over 60 papers. His current research focuses on biocompatible nanoparticles for diagnostics and therapeutics, porous materials for energy storage and catalysis, and nanocarbon-based electronics.
George Grüner	George Grüner is a Distinguished Professor of Physics at University of California Los Angeles, and a Visiting Professor at the Center of Excellence for Advanced Materials Research, Chemistry Department, King Abdulaziz University. He received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Eotvos Lorand University in Budapest, Hungary. He was a postdoctoral associate at Imperial College London in 1972–1973. He is one of the most highly cited physicists worldwide. He has published over 400 papers and two books. He has more than 30 patent applications, and has launched and has been involved in several startup companies. His current interests focus on energy-related applications of nanotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of CNT nanonet scaffold (rod) attached with functional elements (spherical object) on a substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  CNT scaffold with attached functional elements. (a) The CNT scaffold.19 (b) The scaffold with attached Ag nanoparticles.17 (c) The scaffold with attached ITO particles.11 (d) Thiol-functionalized CNTs with attached Fe clusters.11 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 11 and 17. Copyrights 2010 American Chemical Society and 2010 The Electrochemical Society, respectively.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Noncovalent functionalization of CNT scaffold. (a) Attachment of porphyrine derivative onto the scaffold.41 (b) Biotinylation reaction of the polymer layer on the CNT scaffold.45 (c) Schematic representation of the noncovalent bonding between surface-functionalized CdSe nanoparticles and CNT scaffold.42 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 41, 42 and 45. Copyrights 2005 John Wiley and Sons, 2008 John Wiley and Sons, and 2003 American Chemical Society, respectively.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Exploring charge transfer between the CNT scaffold and electron donor and acceptor molecules.44 (a) Characteristic changes of the CNT FETs. (b) The changes of the threshold voltage versus the concentration of the NH3 species. The full line is a fit to the surface coverage. Analysis of the results leads to a charge transfer between the donor and CNTs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2003 American Physical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Response of the porphyrine functionalized CNT nanonet to light.40 (a) Schematic representation of the porphyrine functionalized CNT FET. (b) The transistor transfer characteristics with light on and off. The shift of Isdversus gate characteristics provides evidence of light induced charge transfer between the porphyrine and CNTs. (c) The change of the electrical resistance of the functionalized CNT nanonet to light at different wavelengths, together with the optical absorption curve of porphyrine. (d) Response to a light pulse, illustrating the dynamics of the response characteristics. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM images of a representative CNT–V2O5 nanocomposite film containing 18 wt% of CNTs, and the same film etched by 1 wt% HF (inset).51 (b) A printed supercapacitor with CNT scaffold components.11 (c) Ragone plots of asymmetric supercapacitors made from a V2O5–CNT nanocomposite anode and an activated carbon cathode, a symmetric supercapacitor made from the same activated carbon, and various supercapacitor devices.53 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 11, 51 and 53. Copyrights 2010 American Chemical Society, 2011 John Wiley and Sons, and 2012 American Chemical Society, respectively.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Functionalized scaffold used for the detection and monitoring of biological reactions. (a) Schematic representation of the bio-functionalization scheme together with a conventional transistor detection scheme.61 (b) The transistor with nanonet conducting channel gated through the buffer.61 (c) The capacitive detection with nanonet and one of the electrodes.62 (d) The change of the device resistance upon the introduction of a streptavidin with different concentrations.45 (e) The change of the device that has been functionalized with PSA antibodies upon PSA concentration.62 (f) Image of a nanonet–cell membrane.64 (Reproduced with permissions from ref. 45, 61 and 64. Copyrights 2003 American Chemical Society, 2006 Springer, and 2005 American Chemical Society, respectively.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
